THE LIFE OF THE HOLY FATHER S. FRANCIS WRITTEN BY SAINT BONAuenture, and as it
is related by the Reverend Father Aloysius Lipomanus Bishop of Veron.

In his fourth tome of the life of Saints.

Hic vir despiciens mundum, and terrena triumphans, Diuitias caelo condidit,
ore, manu. BLESSED BE DTHE NAME OF OUR LORD.

IHS



Printed at DOVAY by LAVRENCE KELLAM. 1610.

APPROBATIO.
Haec vita S. Francisci per S. Bonauenturam olim conscripta, and nunc in
linguam Anglicam fideliter translata, digna est quae in lucem edatur, and ab
omnibus legatur. Actum Duaci Calendis Martii 1610.

Georgius Coluenerius S. Theologiae Doctor and Professor, and librorum in
Academia Duacensi Visitator and Censor.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and most worthy religious gentlman A. B. all
happynes in Christ our Lord wishes E. H.
SVch is that svveernesse, and imprisable comfort of spirit (Righe
Worshipful and pious Sir) which the readinge of Saints Lives can effect in
our souls, that I fully persuade my self that amongst the exercices
beseeminge a Catholic Christian, the readinge and perusinge his present
subject, will not be the least forcible and efficacious to induce men to
embrace virtues Path, and constantly to sustain the manifoulde afflictions
which in these our miserable times are most ordinary and frequent with Gods
best belouede servants, this little work, small in quantity, yeat rich and
precious, for the mattere it does treat of, contains the life of that most
rare and admirable Saint, S. Francis; which came to my hands by means of a
poor (yet ever honest) banished country man of mine, who vvantinge help,
and means, to publishe it, I most willingly set thereunto my helpinge hand
to further so good a work which being now perfectede, I commend unto
your self, as one selected and chosen by me, vvorthie in many respects
before others, desiringe that you vvoulde vouchsafe to undertake the
patronizinge of this my ever propens duty toward your best deserving
self; vouchsafe therefore favorably to accept of ^^y great goodvvill, though
shrovvded under the veyle of a small present, which I offer not as intendinge
thereby to requite, or equalize those many benefits of yours, for my best
endeauours will be far avvantinge from due proportion and equality, saying
that the acceptaunce hereof requires a nevve kindnese; but to renevve and
stir up in my self some memory of your respectede deserts, and according
to my povvere to shevve my vvillinge desire to gratify in what I may your
great good will, I present unto you not that vniuersalle and most admirable
troop of all Gods Saints (for that these you and others may hereafter by some
other meanse receive) but this one life in particulare, of that most blessed
man S. Francis; wherein you may be houlde (as in a glass) the full abundance
of Angelical conversation; and as in which is compendiously contained the
sum of a perfect life, I will here omit to recounte his rare virtues, his
invincible fortitude, his Admirable temperance, profound humility, patience,
longanimity, most fervent charity, immouable faith, dauntles hope, and such
like innumerable virtues, because all these will be exactly manifested unto you
in this treatis, yea such is the excelentcie of this Saint, that (beit spoken
without prejudice, or derogation to other Saints) he is thought by his
surmounting holiness, to have atchiued and purchased not the lowest seat in
everlasting joy, for vvhill the Prince of Angels, and greatest of all creatures
in natural dovvries (Lucifer him self) thinking by his arrogante pride to
have ascended, and (as the scripture says of him) to have been Similis
altissimo, Esaye 14.
like unto the highest, was thrown down headlong in to the bottomless
dongion of hell and everlasting damnation he by his most rare humility, he has
deserved to be exalted, and in throvvned in that kingdom, which he by his
contrary pride irrecouerably lost: So as in this we may see the divine
providence, and unsearchable wisdom of god allmyghty, which revvardeth all,
according to theite deserts, Luc. 1.
veryfying this saying, Deposuitpotentes de sede, and exaltauit humiles; he
has put the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble and meek,
agreing allsoe with an other place, Luc. 18.
Quise exaltat humiliabitur, and qui se humiliat exaltabitur he that exalts
himself shall be humbled, ore cast down, and he which humbles him self
shall be exalted, thus we se how he exalts his Saints, vvhill Lucifer and his
accomplices are deprived of that place, which their unjust aspiring could not
yealde them, and therefore are become an aprobry to the rest of the blessed
Angeles, and deadly enemies to mankind: seekynge always by their manifould
delusions to bring others into that desperate estate in which they know
themselves to be for ever: for as Saint Peter says. Diabolus tanquam leo
rugiens cir cuit, 1. Pet. 5.
quaerens quem deuoret. The devil like a roringe lion goes about seekinge
whom he may devour, Against whom, and whose most guilfull procedings: what
is more avaylable, and of greater force, then the virtue of Christ his vvounds
his, and al Saints merits and intercessions; under whose bannour he that
fights (as all Christian Catholics ought most constantly to do) al^though,
often tried, and assalted by spiritual foes, yet can he never be overcome, and
having patience to sustain, it will redound unto a greater crown of glory.
For if we suffer afflictiones in this world, and for the since are love of
God endure them courageously: we shall undoubtedly reap those
incomprehensible rewards: 1. Cor. 2.
Quae nec autis audiuis, nec oculus vidit, nec in cor hominis ascendit, which
neither ear has heard, nor eye has see ne nor has ascended into the heart of
man to imagine the molestatio^s, and troubles, of this present world, Romans 8.
are not condign of the glory to come (as the Apostle says) Non sunt
condignae passiones huius temporis ad suturam gloriam quae reuelabitur in
nobis, neither must we imagine that if God send afflictions upon his servants,
either temporal, or spiritual: that he vvithdravveth his love, or zeal of
our salvation: nay his scourge does presage greater love, and affection to his
tried servants: for he says, Ego quos amo arguo, and castig^. Apoc. 3.
whom I love: I chasten, therefore he often suffers our spiritual
aduersatie to try us, (as he did holy Job) not above our power to resist,
but with his grace to overcome, 1. Cor. 10.
and conquer our enemy Fidelis enim Deus est qui no^ patietur nos te^tari
supra id quod possumus, sed faciet cum tentatione prouentum. For God is
faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but
will make also with temptation issue, that we may be able to sustain, but
what should I inculcate patience and perseauerance unto such an on as your
self: saying that amongst so many servants of God you have all ready borne
your part in these afflictions; vvherevvith God is wont to try his best
beloved saruants, in so much as all ears are filled with the sound of your
valorous courage, in so stoutly enduringe the assalts of your enemy, all
conques speak of it, and all hearts stand amazed at the strangnes of your
virtuous life. Dear Sir, thrice happy are those, who sustain any affliction
in this world, for Gods sake, for our sins deserving (no doubt) much
punish net: who can not esteem it agreat, and particulare favor to be vsited
here with some mole stations: rather then to have the pains due to sin
reserved, to be in the next world, a housand times more severely punished. For
seeinge: Apoc. 21.
Nihil coinquinatum possi^ intrare in regnum coelorum. No unclean thing can
entere into the kingdom of heaven, but if any pains remain to be inflicted:
they are to be purged with that fire of purgatory, infinitely, and without
co^parision, exceedinge in heat our terrestriale fiere. Much therefore and
extremly blinded are those, who think them selves happy when they escape the
punishments of this world, little consideringe the justice of God, who leaves
not the least sin unpunished, and if the estate of such that defer those
pains until the nert world, be much to be lamented and pitied, what (alas)
and how miserable, then is the condition and estate of those who neither in
this, nor in the world to come; can satisfy for their committed crimes but
through all eternity, are to sustain the inexplicable torments of hell fire,
this I leave to the conside ration of those, who are segregated from that
soulde and unity, of the holy Catholic Church, out of the which no
salvation can be had: which most miserable condition, has now posessed the
greatest part of our dear country; for like an universal deluge, heresy
has so infected and drowned the souls therein, that they cannot lift up
their drousie eyes, to confider their desperate estate, but by vvallovvinge in
all kind of vicious behauioure, do make themselves a derision to their enemy
the deuel; a sorrowful spectacle to the wise, and thereby purchase end less
misery to themselves. The think every hour spent in the exercisse of
virtuous life, to be vainly employed, and esteem it an happinese to exceed in
vices; deridinge those, that give them occasion eithere by word, or writing,
which may induce to the service and true honor of God. and hold it a madnese,
to spend any hour in readinge, (much more in imitatinge) the heroical acts
of Saints: yea they will rather scoff, at any vvorthie, and memorable
exploite done by Gods servants (caling it a delusion of the deuell then
endeavor to consider that Saints by mortification of the flesh, and not by
pampringe, and decking their corruptible bodies, have obtained the privileges
of Gods searuants) by making themselves an habitacle of the holy ghost;
vvheras the other by doing contrary, make their corporal substance, a
mansion house of all vices. Who so therefore desires, to exterpate, and
banish from him these evils? let him first repayer to the unity of the
Catholic Church, where he may not only be pertaker of the contynuall prayers,
and devotions, done in the same, by the living here one earth, but allsoe of
the sufferrages, of the immortal, and blessed souls in heaven, who can, and
will most ceartaynly succor, and help those that trust in Gods, and there
protection: let them therefore suppose, when the find and read the life,
and acts, of any Saint, that then they have gotten an infallible directory, of
there future conversation: Amongst which I earnestly commend this of Saint
Francis, to their mature consideration, out of the which they may dravv a
compendious r^^le, to guide them in all their actions. But I will return my
speech again to your most respected and Right worshipful self: desiring
your favorable kyndnes to interpret this my over bold attempt, according
to the sincerity of my intention, and so I commit this present treatis, under
the shield of your benign acceptance, for knovving my self obliged in all
duty, to apply my best endeavors, in such sort, as may seem acceptable to
your self, acknovvledginge allsoe my self so much bound in insoluible bonds,
to vvish, and pray daily, for the most prosperous, and godly proceedings in all
things, both of your self, and your well deserving family: which together
with your self (for breuities sake) I most hartyly offer conioynedly unto
thall mighty his protection, desiring him to give you all sufficiency in
temporal respects, and superabundant increase of supernatural graces: And
lastly I request you would vouchsafe to spend some vacant hours in reading,
and admiring, this Saints perfection; and if any one reap any spiritual fruit
by this my labor, I accoumpte my pains fully revvarded: If not, my vvilling
mind remains vnvyolable: yet howsoever, let all be done to the honor and
glory of the everlasting deity, three in persons, and one in essence: next,
(before all creatures) most worthy honor and glory, to Christ his most blessed
mother, perpetual virgin, to the holy Appostles, Saint Francis, and all the
heavenly troop, unto whose intercessions, I once again perpetually commit,
this mortal perigrination of you, and yours: happily to be consummated: that
after this transitory life, you may possess together with them, eternal
joy and felicity. Amen.

Yours obliged in all duty. E. H.

THE LIFE OF THE MOST HOLY FATHER S. FRANCIS.
VVritte^, and in one Book compiled by that Famous and Learned man Saint
BONAVENTVRE, a Frear Minor, Cardinal of the holy Roman Church, Bishop of
ALBA, and the seraphicall Doctor of the Church.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of Saint Francis his conversation in secular habit.
IN the City of Assisium, there was a man called FRANCIS, whose name remains
in blessed memory: for being prevented by the sweet blessings of GOD, he was
mercifully delivered from the dangers of this present life, and filled
abundantly with the influences of Heavenly grace. For being in his youth
nourished in vanities, among the vain children of men, and being also after
some littel knowledge of Learning, deputed to the gainful trade of
Merchandise; yet by the assistance of God, neither when he was most addicted
unto pleasure, did he follow the wantonness of the flesh among lascivious
young men, no^ yet when he was most intentive to gain, did he put his
confidence in money and treasures, as covetous negotiatours are commonly wont
to do. But in his heart there was even from his infancy ingrafted a certain
singular pity, and commiseration toward the poor, which growing and
increasing together with his years, did replenishe his heart with so
bountiful an affection in that behalf, that opening his ears to the words
of the Gospel, he pnrposed with himself to give somewhat unto every one that
should ask him; espetially making demand for the ^oue of God.

But whereas on ^^^pon occasion of his troublesome business, whereunto he was
very intentive, he did contrary to his custom, neglect the request of a poor
man, that asked him alms for the love of God: he presently remembering
himself, and entering into judgment with his own heart; did speedily run
after him, bestowing his alms with much affection upon him, making
furthermore, even then a promise unto Almighty God, that from thence forward,
so long as he should have any thing in the world to give? he would never
deny to give something, to such as should beg of him for our Lords sake:
which he observing continually with an unwearied zeal of devotion, unto his
death; was thereby made worthy to obtain an abundant increase of the favor
and grace of Almighty God. For he was wont to say, after that he had perfectly
put on Christ, that even whilst he was in secular habit, he felt a great
motion in his heart, whenever he heard any word expressing the love of God.
Furthermore the mildness of his conversation, together with the sweetness of
his manners; his patience, and tractable behavior, more the^ is ordinary in
me^; and his liberality, beyond the measure of his ability; which appeared in
him in his youth, were tokens; that God had a greater abundance of blessing to
power upon him.

It fortuned once that a very simple man of Assisium (by the instruction of
God, as we have good cause to think) meeting upon a time with Saint FRANCIS,
as he passed along the City; cast off his cloak, and spread the same under
his feet; affirming that he should be worthy of all manner of reverence: the
time being now not long unto, wherein he should perform great matters: and
should be of the whole world for that cause marveilously honored. But yet
altogether ignorant was S. FRANCIS at this time of Gods determination
concerning him: as well being by the commandment of his father, distracted in
external affairs: as also, by natural corruption, carried away with
terrestrial ^^^^ters; whereby he had not as yet learned to conteplate upon the
matters of Heaven, nor had accustomed himself to taste of the sweetness of
God. And because the scourge of affliction does oftentimes give light to the
spiritual understanding, the mighty hand of our Lord did come upon him; and
the right hand of the highest wrought a perfect change within him; afflicting
his body with lingering infirmities, whereby the better to prepare his soul to
receive the precious inspirations and motions of the Holy Ghost. But having
recovered his strength, and being provided of decent apparel according to his
usual manner; he chanced to meet a certain soldier, who was in yery deed a
gentleman by birth, but poor and meanly apparelled; whose poverty he
commiserating with a syncete affection, dispoiled himself of his own apparel;
and furnished the poor soldier therewithal: that so, in one work, he might
perform a double office, of piety; both in covering the shame, of a gentleman
soldier; and in releiueing the misery of a poor distressed man.

In the night following, when he had betaken himself to his natural rest; it
pleased the goodness of God, to show unto him a great and beautiful palace,
adotned with Military weapons, insigned with the Cross of CHRIST: then
foreshewing unto him, that the mercy which he had extended toward the poor
soldier, for the love of the heavenly King; should be recompensed with an
incomparable reward. Whereupon demanding unto whom all those goodly things did
appertain; it was answered to him from above, that they should be upon him
and his souldiars; freely bestowed. A waking therefore in the morning, and
having his mind not as yet exercised in the searching of Divine mysteries;
neither yet knowing how by the forms of visible things to consider the truth
of things, invisible; he persuaded himself, that this unaccustomed vision; was
a fore token of some great prosperity, to happen unto him. So being as yet
ignorant of Gods Divine ordinance toward him, he purposed to go into Apulia,
unto a certain Earl of great liberality; hoping by service under him in the
wars to purchase a name of honor: according as the mentioned vision; unto him
seemed, to foretell. And being shortly after, entered into his journey; as he
came to the next City, he heard in the night time, our Lord in familiar manner,
thus speaking unto him. FRANCIS, who is able to do better for thee, the master
or the servant, the rich man or the poor?. To whom Saint FRANCIS making
answer, that the master; and the rich man were better able: Our Lord
presently replied; why therefore do thou leave the master, for the servant;
and the rich God, for a poor man. Then Saint FRANCIS asked, what will thou
have me, O Lord to do? And our Lord said unto him; return into thine own
country: for the vision which thon have seen, does prefigurate a spiritual
effect, which is to be, by the disposition of God, and not of man; accomplished
in thee. In the morning therefore, he speedily returned back to Assisium,
resting now full of security and joy: and making himself a pattern of
obedience, did readily expect the pleasure of our Lord. From that time foreward
he with-drewe himself from the practice of his common trafique, and devoutly
besought Almighty God, of his mercy; that he would voutsafe to show unto him,
what he ought to do. And when by much use of prayer, the flame of Heavenly
desire; began abundantly to increase in him; so that now for the love of the
Heavenly country, he contemned all earthely things, as very nothing, then did
he well perceive himself to have found, the hidden treasure; and like a well
advised merchant, purposed with the sale of all his merchandise; to purchase
this rare and precious pearl. But as yet he was ignorant how to proceed
therein: saving that it was to his spirit sugested; that the entering into
spiritual affairs, is the contempt of the world; and that the warfare of
Christ, is not otherwise to be by any man begun, than by obtaining first, the
conquest of himself.

Riding therefore one day upon the plain, Behold how his adorning the Altar^
did please god, otherwise the holy man would not have done them.
adjoining nigh to Assisium: there came in his way, a certain Leaper: upon
whose sudden aspect, he co^ceived in mind, an especial horror, and loathing.
But returning to his already resolved purpose of perfection: and considering
that he ought of necessity first, to overcome himself, if he would become the
soldier of Christ: he presently alighted down from his horse, and went to
kiss him. At what time the Leaper, reaching fotth his hand: as hoping to
receive something from him: did indeed teceiue money of him: and a kiss also
therewithal. But he being presently gotten up, upon his horse again, and
looking round about in the open field, could not epsy the Leaper there. Being
therefore replenished, with admiration and joy, he began devoutly to sing
praises unto God, purposing from this beginning: evermore to aspire unto
greater perfections.

From thenceforth he began to affect solitary places, Behold his pilgrimage to
holy places.
as best fitting unto mourning and lamentation: whereunto with redoubled
sighs, he incessantly gave over himself: until such time, that after long
instance of Prayer: he obtained of our Lord, with his inclinable ear, to hear
the same. For one day, as he was praying in a solitary place, and through
excess of fervor, wholly (in manner) absorpted up in God: Christ Jesus our
Lord, voutsafed to appear unto him: fast nailed as it were, upon the CROSS.
At the sight whereof, his soul melted within him: and the memory of the Passion
of Christ, was so efficatiously imprinted into his heart, that from that hour,
so often as he remembered the Crncifijng of Christ: he was hardly able to
abstain from sighs and tears, externally bursting out upon him: as himself
afterward, familiarly reported, drawing then nigh unto his end. For hereby the
man of God, did fulwell understand, that those words of the GOSPEL: If thou will come after me, deny thy self, and take up thy Cross and follow me:
were directly spoken unto himself. From that time did he therefore put on upon
him, the spirit of poverty; a perfect sense of humility; and a zealous
affection of inward Piety. For whereas before he could not abide the company of
such as were infected with Leaprosie, no, not so much as to see them, though
distant a good way from him: now for the love of Christ Crucified, who
according to the words of the Prophet, seemed contemptible as a Leaper: that
he might fully contemn himself: he did with a godly kind of benignity, even
toward the Leapers: perform the duties of humility, and of all manner, of
good humanity. For he visited oftentimes their houses, and liberally bestowing
his alms among them; and with great affection of charitable commiseration
disdained not to kiss their hands, and their mouths. As for poor beggars
also, it was his desire to bestow upon them, not only his goods, but himself
therewithal: sometimes putting off his own apparel; sometime vnripping the
same, and sometime, for lack of other, more convenient means, cutting it in
parts, to bestow upon the^ To poor Priests also, he gave succoure, with much
reverence and devotion, especially in the ornaments of the Altar: that he
might both be partaker of the honor given unto God: and might also supply the
wants of such: as were to exhibit the same unto him.

One time visiting the Church of Saint Peter the Apostle with religious
devotion, and beholding a great multitude of poor people, before the doors of
the Church, he being then partly moved, with the sweetness of piety: partly
allured, with the love of poverty, gave unto one of the poorest of them, his
own apparel, and covering himself with the rags of the poor man spent
that whole day joyfully in the midst of the poor: with an unwonted alacrity.
and joy of spirit: Thereby, as well to contemn all wordly glory, as also to
arise, as it were by degrees, and to clime up, to the top of Evangelical
perfection. Very vigilant he was in mortification of the flesh that so he might
externally in his body, Se how the holy Father does subdue the concupiscence of
the flesh by his mortification.
carry about the Cross of Christ: as he did internally enermore, bear the
same, in his heart. All these things did Saint Francis the servant of God, not
being yet, either in habit, or conversation, sequestered from the world.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. Of his perfect conversion unto God, and how he repaired
three Churches.
BUT because the servant of the highest, had no other teacher in these matters,
Churches were builded for to pray in. Learn that to be^d ones knees unto
images, and to pray to those whom they do represent, is a good and pious work
and se what a miracle Christ did work by this his image.
but only Christ himself, it pleased his merciefull goodness yet further to
visit him in the swetnes of his grace. For as being one day gone forth into
the field to meditate, he walked along by a Church dedicated unto Saint Damian,
which was so old and ruinous that it seemed ready to fall to the ground, by the
instinct of Gods holy spirit, he entered into the same to pray: and falling
prostrate before the image of Christ Crucified, was in his prayer replenished
with a singular consolation of spirit. And as he did with weeping eyes behold
the Cross of our Lord, he heard with his corporal ears, a voice from this
same Cross, speaking thus three times un to him: Francis, go, and repair my
House, which as thou see, is wholly destroyed. Saint Francis being then alone
in the Church trembled not a little thereat, as being much amassed at the hearing
of so wonderful a voice: and feeling in his heart the efficacy of Gods
heavenly word, He arose signeing himself with the sign of the Gross.
became as it were alienated from himself in mind. But returning afterward
to his perfect remembrance, he readily prepared himself unto obedience, wholly
disposing himself toward the performance of the commandment, concerning the
repairing of the material Church: though the more principal inte^tion
thereof, had relation unto that Church, which Christ had purchased with his
own blood: as he was afterward taught by the Holy Ghost, and did himself
reveal unto his brethren. Rising up therefore, and arming himfelf with the
sign of the Cross, he took unto him certain clothes provided for sale,
which he speedily carried unto the City of Fulligney: and there selling his
wares, and also the horse whereon he rode, the happy merchant, being well
contented departed with the price thereof in money. And so returning to
Assisium, he reuere^tly entered the church, which he was commanded to repair:
and finding a poor Priest therein, after due reverence done unto him, made
offer of his money for the reparation of the Church, and toward the relief
also of the poor: making furthermore his humble suit unto him, for license to
abide with him there for a time. The Priest well allowed of his aboade in the
place: but misdoubting his parents assent for the money, utterly refused to
accept thereof, which nevertheless the true contemner of money, casting into
one of the windows, esteemed it no better than pelf and dust.

Now whilst the servant of God was thus abiding with the forementioned Priest:
as soon as his Father got knowledge thereof, he as one much perplexed in mind,
ru^ne with great have and speed to the place. But Francis being as yet but a
young soldier in the army of Christ, when as he heard the threatenings of
them, that did perfecute him, and did also perceive their coming at hand:
being then desirous to give place to the force of their sury, betook himself
to a secret Cave, whearein closely concealing himself for a few days, he
incessantly besought our Lord with abundance of tears, that he would
vouchsafe to deliver his soul, from his persecutors hands: and that the good
purposes which he had inspired into his heart, he would also vouchsafe, to bring
to a final end and accomplishement being therefore replenished with a certain
excessive gladsomnes, he began to accuse himself of too much pusillanimity:
whervppon forsaking his cave, and casting away all manner of fear, he took
his way straight to Assisium Where being espied of the Citizens, and by the
change of his countenance observed to be wholly changed in mind, he was
thereby of them adjudged to be out of his wits: in so much as taking up the
dirt and stones of the stteete, they began to throw the same at him, as though
he had been frantique and absolutely made indeed. But the servant of God nothing
at all dismayed, or changed with so many injuries, passed on as a deaf man
amiddest them all. And When his father heard such a clamourous outcrie, he also
presently running forth, not with a mind to free him but rather to destroy
him: setting all comiseration quite aparte, drew him home to his house, where
first with words. and afterward with stripes and bonds he did in lamentable
manner torment him. But he became thereby more prompt and courageous to proceed
forward in his course begun: remembering the saying of the Gospel, Mat. 5.
that: Blessed are they that suffer persecution for instice: for theirs is the
Kingdom of heaven.

But it fell out not long after, that his Father being gone out of the Country,
his mother not allowing of her husbands severity, and being her self quite out
of hope to alter her sons inflexible constancy, dismissed him quite of his
bonds, and gave him leave to depart. Who re^dring due thanks unto Almighty
God, returned again to the place where he was before, But his Father not
finding him at his coming home, and angry with his wife, went after furiously
to the place: purposing if it were past his power to recall him, at the least
yet to drive him out of the province. Nevertheless Saint Francis receaving
strength from God came forth of his own acorde to meet his Father, all the
violence of his fury notwithstanding, affirming boldly unto him, that he did
not esteem his fetters and stripes, and furthermore protesting therewithal
that for the love of Christ he was ready joyfully to fusteyne all manner of
afflictions and evils whatsoever, Whereupon his Father being enraged as having
now no hope to recall his son, converted all his care to recover the money?
which being found at lenght in a little window, his fury was in some sort
appeased, the thrist of cove tousnes, being (as it were) by a draught of money
alayd. After this his Father, endeavored to bring his son (thus dispoyled of
his money?) before the Bishop of the City, that in his presence he might
renounce his right unto all his Fathers possessions, and might also restore
unto him all that ever he had. To the performance whereof, the true lover of
poverty showed himself both ready and willing. For coming before the Bishop,
without any delay, or lingering whatsoever, neither contradicting with words,
nor yet did he expect any to be spoken unto him: presently putting off eve^ his
garments, restored them to hisfather. At what time the holy man was found to
have a shirte of hearecloth next to his skin, Which he concealed under his
more delicate apparel. Furthermore out of an admirable fervor of spirit
casting off al his apparel, he stood all naked before the company: and
addressed his speech unto his Father, thus: Hitherto have I called you my
Father in earth, but from hence forth I shall securely say: Our Father which
art in heaven: in Whom I have reposed all my treasure: and have settled the
whole sum of my hope and confidence. The Bishop beholding all this, and
admiring such an excessive fervor of piety, in the man of God arose forth
with from where he sat: and embracing him in his arms with tears, as he
was a good and godly man, did also wrappe him in his own garment? commanding
his servantes, to give unto him something to cover his naked body. But they
gave him a poor and base mantell. which they had of a husband man, that served
the Bishop: which he accepting with great thankefullnes, did with a piece of
lime which he found in the place, mark upon it the form of the Cross with
his own hand, fashioning it, as a fit covering for a poor man crucified, and
little better than naked. Thus therefore was the servant of the highest King,
left all in nakedness, that he might follow his naked Lord crucified, whom he
so dearly loved, in this manner fortifying him self with the Cross, that he
might committ his soul to the secure harbor of salvation, by the which he
might safely escape the shippwracke of this tempestuous world.

From thence forth this contemner of the world being altogether freed from the
bonds of worldly desires: forsaking the City, did with great security and
freedom of mind, betake himself unto the secret parts of the desert: that
there in solitarines and silence, he might attend unto the mystical secrets by
Almighty God from above distilled unto him. And as this devout servant of God
passed by a certain wood singing praises unto God with great joy and
exultation: a sort of thieues came rushing out of a secret place upon him.
Who demanding of him with firce behavior, what he was, the man of God
answered with great confidence, and not without an instinct also of prophecy, I
am the preacher of the great King. But they heaping blows upon him, cast him
into a pit filled up with snow, saying unto him: Ly thou there Clown, the
preacher of God. But so soon as they were departed, Behold again his
pilgrimag to holy places.
he got him speedily out of the pit again: and being marveilousely possessed
with joy, began with a louder voice to sound forth throughout the woods, his
songs of praise unto the Creator of all. And coming to a certain religious
house thereby, he asked alms as a beggar: and received the same as one
unknown and dispysed. From thence going on along, he came to Eugubium: Where
being of an old friend of his both known and entertained, he received a poor
coat of his guifte, as one of the poor little ones of Christ. From thence,
being a lover of all manner of humility, he applied himself to the leapers: and
remained with them, serving them most diligently for the love of God. He washed
their feet, bound up their ulcers, wrung out the corruption of their soars,
and wiped away the filthiness of them. He also kissed their running botches with
admirable devotion, being now in the way shortly to become an Evangelical
Physician. By these means he obtained so great power of God, that he wrought
wonderful effects in the purging both of spyrituall and corporal diseases.

Among many of that kind, here will I now make report of one, which befeell,
when the same man of God hade afterward begun to be of greater note in the
world, there was a man in the Country of Spolerum, who had his mouth and iawe
bone miserably eaten away with an horrible disease such as no art of Physic
was able to cure: wherefore having bin to visit the Church of the Apostles to
crave the help of their meritts, S. Francis repaired three Churches with the
alms of the faithful. Therefore it is a good work and pleasing to God.
it happened that in the way of his rerurne from pilgrimage, he met with this
holy servant of God. At what time when as he would for very devotion have
kissed the footesteeps of his feet, the humble man, in no sort permitting the
same, kissed the mouth of him that would gladely have kissed his feet. But so
soon as Saint Francis, had with a marveillous piety, once with his sacred
mouth touched that horrible and loath some soar, the malice forth with of the
disease departed, and the diseased man presently attained his wished health and
recovery. Herein I know not whether more to admire, either the perfection of so
great humility, in so charitable a kiss, or the excellency of his virtue, in
so wonderful a miracle.

But let us comme to our intended purpose: this holy man Saint Francis being
firmly establishe in Christian humility, recalled again to his due obedience
to be exhibited in performance of the work from the Cross enjoined unto him,
concerning the repairing of Saint Damians Church and as a true obedient servant
he returns back to Assisium, that at the least by beginning, he might
compass so much as might suffice to perform the commandment of God. For
which cause putting aside all bashfullnes for the love of Christ crucified, he
was willingly contented to beg of them, amongst whom he was wont to live in
great abundance: offering his wearied body, now wasted much with fasting, to
the carrieng of heavy stones toward the repair of the ding. This Church
therefore being finally repaired, by the help of God and good devotion of the
Cittysens, least that his hody should after labor wax wanton co^demning
idleness, he seetled himself to the repayring of a certain other Church
dedicated to the holy Apostle S. Peter the same being distant some what further
off from the City: thereof he made rather his choice, in regard of special
devotion without of the purity of sincer faith he bare to the prince of the
Apostles. This Church being at the lenght finished: he came unto the place
called Portiuncula: wherein was a Church builded to the blessed virgin Mother of
God, but at that time decayed desolate and not regarded of any. Which the man
of God seeing, to be thus forsaken: did for the fervent devotio^ which he
carried toward this B. mother begane to make his daily residence there, for
the repayring of the same Church also. And perceiving that according to the
name thereof, which was from ancient time, called S. Mary of Angels, there
appeared oftentimes Evangelicall visions: there did he set up his rest, and
final purpose of aboade, as well for the reverence of the Angels, as for the
singular love which he bare to the Mother of Christ.

This place the holy man loved above all other places of the world. For here he
began in humility, here he proceeded in integrity, here he made his end in
felicity: this place at his death he commended to his brethren, as most dear to
the blessed virgin. Of this place cerraine devout brother did a little before
his conversion behold a vision very worthy of relation. There appeared unto him
an innumerable company of blind men, standing within the Compass of this
Church: all of them having their faces directed toward heaven, and their knees
bowed down to the ground: who strectching for the their hands on high, cried
out to God in pitiful manner, desiring him of mercy, and reinioying of their
sightes. And behold there came a great light from heaven, which spreading it
self through them all, restored unto enery one of them their perfect sightes,
and health, according as they had before desired. This is the place wheare S.
Francis by the instinct of divine revelation, began the order of the Friars
Minors. For by the appointment of Gods heave^ly providence, whereby the servant
of Christ was directed in all things, he erected three material Churchs,
before the beginning of his Order he did apply himself to the preaching of the
Gospel, that he might not only ascend, as it were by degrees, from things
sensible, unto things intelligible, and from matters of lesser moment to things
of far greater perfection: but that he might also foretell, as it were in a
mystery, by some sensible work, what he was heareafter to do. For like as the
triple building was repaired by means of that holy man, so according to the
same, form rule and doctrine by him prescribed, the Church of Christ was in
three sorts to be renewed, in a threefold triumphant army of the elect,
according as we do now see to be accomplished.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. Of the institution of his order of Religion, and of the
approbation of his Rule.
THIS singular servant of God, S. Francis, now making his abode in the Church
of the most blessed virgin Mother, and standing with continual sighs before
Her, who in her womb conceived theword, repleinished with grace and truth,
desiring with unspeakable affection, that she would vouchsafe to be come his
advocate: by the merrits of the mother of mercy, he did conceive and bring
forth, the spirit of Evangelical truth. For one day hearing Mass of the
Apostles, with great devotion: that Gospel was read wherein Christ sending
his Apostles to preach, prescribes unto them an Evangelical form of living:
to wit, that they possess no gold, nor silver, nor money in their purses, nor
Scripp for the Way, nor two coats, Math. 10.
neither yet to bear either shoes upon their feet, or a rod in their hand.
All which words, this unsained friend of Apostolical poverty, hearing,
understanding and to heedefull memory, cemmending: and feeling also in wardly
in himself, an incredible joy and contentation, This is (quoth he] the thing I
do covet, this is the same, which with all my whole heart, and soul, I
desire. His shoes did he therefore loose from his feet, his staff he laid a
side, his wallet he rejected, and money he utterly abandoned? rhus resting
contented with one only coat, refusing also his letherne belt, in stead of a
girdle he took a coarde, applieing all the diligence of his heart, how he might
most duly perform the things he had heard, and might in all things conform
himself to the exact rule of Apostolical perfection. From this time the man
of God by divine inspiration began to be a studious emulator of Evangelicall
perfection, and to invite others unto Penance with him. His speeches were in
no wise vain, neither yet such as might Minister cause of laughter, but
evermore full fraught with the power of the Holy Ghost, penetrating even into
the secret parts of the heart: by force whereof he wrought not a little
astonishment in the minds all such as heard him. He preached always peace,
unto the people, and in the beginning of his exhortation, he was wont in this
manner to salute them, saying: Our Lord give his peace unto you. For this
manner of salutation he learned of God: according as himself afterward
affirmed. And there upon it came to pass, that according to the saying of the
Prophet, himself also being inspired with the spirit of prophesy, he did
denounce peace he did preach salvation, and did with healthful admonition,
associate very many unto the true peace: even such as had binne before time
disioyned much from the favor of Christ, and had thereby straied far away
from the port of Salvation.

Now therefore when this holy servant of God did grow to be better known unto
many as well for the truth of his sincere doctrine, as of his life: certain
other man also moved by his example, began to be animated and stirred up unto
Penance, and rejected all the impediments of this world, that they might be
conjoined unto him, both in habit and life, The first of which number, was the
venerable man, Bernardus who be the special vocation of God, merited to be the
first borne of the blessed Father as well in priority of time, as in privilege
of holy conversation. For he having had experience of the holiness of the
servant of Christ, and purposing by his example perfectly to contemn the
world, demanded of him direction for the better performance of his purpose.
Which the servant of God understanding, was replenished, with great consolation
of the holy-Gost, for the conception of this his son, and said unto him, that
this council was to be sought at the hands of God. Wherefore betimes in the
morning, they entered into the Church of S. Nicolas and there after humble
prayers, exhibited the devout servant of the blessed Trinity S. Francis, three
several times opened the book of the Gospells, instantly beseeching Almighty.
God, that by a triple testimony he would wouchsafe to confirm the holy purpose
of Bernard. In the first openning therefore of the book, he lighted upon that
place, which says: If thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou have and
give unto the poor. In the second: Take nothing in the way. But in the third:
Mat. 19.21 Marc. 6.8 Ma. 16.24
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross
and follow me. This is (says the holy man) our life and Rule: and of all them
who will conioyne the^ selves to our society. So therefore, if thou willt be
perfect, and perform the things thou have heard delivered.

Not long after, it fell out, that five other men also were called by the same
spirit, whereby the number of the spiritual children of holy S. Francis, was
increased to six: among whom the third place befell unto the Holy Father
Aegidius, a man also full of Gods grace, and worthy to be held in famous
memory. For being afterward most rarely exercised, in heavenly vertus
according as the servant of God, had foretold of himself, although he were a
simple and unlearned man, yet was he exalted, unto the top of Celestial
contemplation. For continewing long time together without intermission,
intentive unto heavenly actions, he was ravished also with so frequent excess
of contemplation in God: as I my self have with mine eyes observed, that he was
esteemed rather to have led the life of Angels, then of men, though living and
couersing among men.

About the same very time unto a certain Priest of Assisium, named Syluester,
a man of honest life and conversation, our Lord vouchsafed to show a vision,
very worthy to be remembered For finding in himself, an especial loathing and
avertion from the manner and life of S. Francis and his brethren, least that he
might happily be endangered for the rashness of his judgment, thus was he visited
by the favor of Gods heavenly grace. He beheld in his sleep the whole City of
Assisium to be environed rownde with a monstrous Dragon, by reason of the
unmeasurable hugenes whereof the whole country seemed to be in danger of utter
wast and destruction. After this he might see a certain Cross of gold,
issueing forth of the mouth of S. Francis, the topp where of reached unto
heaven, and the arms to the utter most bounds of the world: at the glittering
aspect whereof, that ougly and horrible Dragon, was utterly put to flight, This
vision being three times in this manner represented unto him, he thereupon
esteeming it as the very Oracle of God, declared the same in order to the man
of God, and his brethren: and it was not long after, but himself also leaving
the world, did with such perfection adheare unto the footesteeps of Christ,
that the life by him ledd in the order, gave good credit and authority, to the
vision he had seen in the world. Upon the report and publication whereof, no
whitt was the man of God ezalted in human glory: but acknowledging the
benefits of God and the greatness of his goodness, he was more and more
encouraged to withstand the craft of the ancient enemy, and therewithal to
preach and extol the glory of the Cross of Christ.

But it befell unto him upon a day, that walking in a certain solitary place,
and there recounting with himself his years misspent: as he did in the
bitterness of his heart bewail them, the gladsome comfort of the Holy Ghost
coming then upon him, he was fully certified of the plenarie remission of all
his offenses. And being afterward rapt as it were above himself, and having
his understanding marveilously enlightened, he evide^tly perceyved, what great
matters were in time to come to be fall unto himself and his whole progeny
after him. Whereupon returning unto his brethren: Be of good comfort (quoth he)
my most dearly beloved, and rejoice in our Lord; and be in no wise either sad
or sorrowful, for that ye be but few in number, neither yet be ye desmayed
either out of mine, or your own simplicity: for so much as our Lord has
certainly revealed unto me, that he will make us increase to a great and
mighty company; and will with the sweet blessing of his heavenly grace,
multiply and augmente our noumber many and sundry ways.

At the same time also another devout man entered the religion among them,
whereby the issue of the man of God did now amounte unto seven. Then the good
Father calling all his children about him: and speaking many things unto them
of the kingdom of God, of the contempt of the world, of the denying of their
own will, and of the chasticement of the body, withal declared unto them his
purpose to send them into the four parts of the world. For now the holy
simplicity, of the holy Father, having brought forth seven children, did also
desire to beget the whole company of the faithful unto Christ our Lord, by
calling them to the mournful works of Penance. Go your ways (quoth he sweet
father to his welbeloved children) and denouncing peace unto men: preach unto
them Penance for the remission of sins. Be patie^t in tribulations, be
watchful in prayers, be unweariable in labors, be modest in your speeches; be
grave in your manners, and ever thankful for benefits received, considering
that in lieu of all these things, the goodness of God has prepared for you an
eternal Kingdom. Psalm. 54.
But they humbly prostrating themselves upon the earth before the servant of
God; did with great gladness of spirit embrace the commandment of holy
obedience. Moreover, unto every of them aparte, he said? Cast thy care upon
our Lord, and he will nourish thee. Which admonition he was ever wount to use,
so offen as he went about to induce any brother unto obedience. Then he,
forseing himself to be geven as a pattern and example unto others, and so
consequently that he ought first to perform the thing before he drew others to
imitation: taking one of his companions unto him, settled himself towatdes one
part of the world, deputing the other six by two and two together, severed in
the form of a Cross, to the other three parts of the earth. Psalm. 46.
But it was not long past, before the tender hearted Father much longing for the
presence of his dear children, and having no mean by himself to bring them
all together: did offer up his prayers unto God that he would vouchsafe to
effect his desire, Who does congregate the dispersed of Israel. And so it came
to pass, that according to his desire, without any call of man, by the only
work of God, they met all in one place together unlooked for, not without the
great admiration of them all. Having in this space of time gathered unto them,
four other men also of honest fame, who adhearing unto them: made their
number now to be twelve.

Now the servant of Christ, perceyving that the noumber of his brethren. was by
little and little daily increased. wrote for himself and them, in plain words,
a rule and form of life, wherein having laid the observance of the Holy
Gospel, for an indissoluble foundation, he had also inserted thereunto
certain other few things, such as seemed most necessary, for an uniform
manner and course of living. And desiring to have the same approved by the
Chief Pastor of the Church: be determined with that small company of simple
associates, to take his way to the Sea Apostolic, reposing all his trust in
the only direction and help of God. Who from his heavenly seat, beholding the
final end of his desire, vouchsafed by the showing of this manner of vision
unto him, to rear up the minds of his companions, otherwise not a little
astonished, out of the consideraation of their own simplicity. For, it seemed
unto him, that passing by a certain way, he beheld standing nigh unto him a
goodly Tree of stately height and loftines: which as he approached more nigh
unto it, and did stand under the same in admiration of the height thereof. he
was sodeinly by the power of God, lifted up into so great a height of the air,
that he did not only reach to the very top thereof, but did also with great
facility bow it down, from the upper most part, to the ground. This vision
the man of God understanding to be a foretokening of the favorable inclination
of the Apostolical dignity to his humble desires; was exhilerated much in
spirit therewithal: and comforting his brethren in our Lord, betook himself
to his journey with them. But when he was come to the Court of Kome, and
brought before the face of the supreme Bishop, the Vicar of Christ being the^
walking in the Palace of Laterane, in the place which is called Speculum, and
there possessed with profounde meditations, repelled the servant of Christ, as
a man unknown, not without some show also of coffeehouse. Who humbly
departing out of the doors, in the night following this manner of revelation
was by Almighty God made to the Pope himself. He saw from between his feet a
palm branch springing out of the ground, and the same to become a most
beautiful Tree. And marueiling with himself what this vision should mean:
his mind was illuminated by the work of God, that by this palm tree that
poor man was signified, whom he had the day before rejected. The next morning
therefore, he caused his servants to seek him throughout the City. Who having
found him in the Hospital of S. Antony near unto Laterane, he commanded them
forthwith to bring him before himself. Thus S. FRANCIS, being brought in
presence of the Pope, disclosed unto him the whole course of his purpose:
humbly and instantly making suit unto him. to approve the same method and rule
of living. The Vicar of Christ, Pope Innocent the third, being a man of
singular wisdom observing in the man of God. an admirable purity of a simple
mind, the constancy also of his purpose. and the fiery zeal of his holy
desire: embraced this poor one of Christ with the love of his heart, being
much inclined in mind, to yield his favorable assent to the humble petition
of this holy man. But yet deferred to ratify the requests of the poor servant
of Christ: for that his demand seemed unto some of the Cardinals, to be both
a matter of novelty, and also of difficulty, beyond the measure of man's
hability.

But it happened at that tim to be among the Cardinals, a reverend man called
Dominus Ioannes de sancto Paulo, Bishop of Sabina, a lover of all holiness,
and an especially helper of the poor servats of Christ, who inflamed with the
spirit of God, delivered his mind in the matter before the Pope and his
brethren, to this effect. If we shall says he, deny the request of this poor
man, as a matter either of novelty, or of too much difficulty, whereas he
requires none other thing, but a form of Evangelical life, to be confirmed
unto him: we have just cause to fear, least therein we do offend against the
Gospel of Christ. For whosoever shall assirme that any thing which is either
new, unreasonable, or imposible to be observed, is contained within the
observance of Eua^gelicall perfection, or within the vow which is made
thereof: he is manifestly convinced of blasphemy against Christ himself, the
very Author of the Gospel, Thus much being spoken in this behalf: the
Successor of the Apostle S. Peter, turning himself toward the servant of
Christ said unto him, Offer up thy prayers dear son, unto Christ, that by
thee he may vouchsafe to show his will unto us, to the end that it being once,
more certainly known, we may the more securely condiscende to thy godly
desires. Whereupon the servant of Almighty God, bestowing himself now wholly in
prayer, by his instant devotion obtained to know, both what himself should
exteririourly disclose, and what the Pope should inteourly conceive. For having
related a parable according as he had received the same from God, of a rich and
mighty King, that willingly married with a beautiful, though a very poor
woman, and of a noble issue begott betwixt them bearing lively resemblance of
the KING his Father, and in that respect very worthy to be nourished at the
KINGS own table: this also by way of interpretation he thereunto adjoined.
We have no cause to fear, that the Sons and heirs of the Eternal KING,
shall perish and die for hunger, who being borne of a poor Mother, by the
power of the HOLY GHOST to the image of CHRIST their KING, are also to be
gotten unto him in a poor religion by the spirit of poverty. For if the KING
of HEAVEN do promise an eternal Kingdom to them that follow him: how much
more will he provide them of things of necessity which he gives indifferently
not only to the good, but also to the wicked: This parable and the meaning
thereof, when the Vicar of Christ had diligently heard and observed, he mary
veiled greatly thereat: and knew for certain, that it was undoubtedly. Christ
himself, who covertly spoke in the man. And moreover also he avowed by the
instinct of Gods heavenly spirit, that a certain vision also which he had
about this time received from heaven, should be in this man accomplished. For
he had seen in his sleep as himself reported, the Church of Laterane, to be
in present danger, now forthwith to fall to the ground: the which a certain
poor man; of mean stature, and conte^ptible to behold, putting his own back
under it did so preserve from falling. Whereupon he thus pronovnced: verily this
is he, who by his work and doctrine. shall uphold the Church of Christ. Then
this prudent Pastor being wholly fraught with devotion inclined himself in every
degree to the desires of the servant of Christ: and bare evermore unto him a
special love and affection. Wherefore he granted his request, and promised to
grant yet more unto him, he approved his Rule, he gave him in Charge to
undertake the preaching of penance, and for all the lay brethren to that were
associate the serva^t of Christ he caused them to have little crowns made that
they might freely preach the word of God.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. Of the increase of the Order under his hand, and of the
confirmation of the Rule formerly approved
THE holy man Saint Francis, now thus supported with Gods grace, and Papal
authority, did with much confidence of mind, take his way to the vale of
Spoletum: that he might, as well by deed as by word, denounce the Gospel of
Christ. But as he debated w^ih his companions in the way, by what means they
might in all sincerity observe the Rule, by them newly undertaken, and how they
might in all manner of holiness and justice, walk before the face of God, and
further yet, how they might not only arise to greater profit in themselves, but
might also be an example and guide unto others, by long protracting this manner
of conference, the time sodeinely ouerpassed unawares. And they being now much
wearied with the long continewance of their travel, and hungry also
therwithall, were enforced to stay, in a certain solitary place of the desert.
At which very time and place they haivng no kind of means to provide
themselves, of necessary food, then did the providence of God manifest it self
in their behalf. For sodeinely a man appeared unto them, bringing bread in his
hand, which he gave unto the poor ones of Christ: and forth disappeared, being
altogether, vnknowene from whence he came, or whether he went. Here by the
poor brethren perceyving that in the company of the man of God, they where
assisted with the help of Gods heavenly protection, were better refreshed by
the gift of this divine liberality, then by the refection of their empty
bodies. And morover they were so singularly replenished with the consolation of
God that they firmly purposed, and irrevocably decreed, never for any violence
either of hunger or tribulation: to fail from the promise of holy poverty.

After this returning with this holy purpose into the vale of Spoletum they
began to dispute among themselves whether it were more expedient for the^ to
converse among men, or to betake themselves unto solitary places. But the
servant of Christ S. Francis, not presuming upon the industry either of
himself or of his brethren: determined by instancy of prayer, to seek the
good will and pleasure of God in this behalf. Being therefore enlightened by
the oracle of divine revelation, it was given him to understand, that he was
for this very purpose sent of God, that he might gain such souls unto Christ,
as the Devil endeavored to lead astray. For which cause he rather chose to
live for the general good of all, than for the private benefitte of himself
alone: being thereunto provoked by his example who being, but one vousafed to
die for all. The man of God therefore, together withal the rest of his
companions, betook himself to a certain forlorn Cottage nigh to Assisium:
Wherein they lived in much labor and needines, according to the rule of holy
poverty: desiring rather to be sustained with the food of tears, than with
the nice of curiosities of delicate fare For there they were incessantly busied
in fervent prayers proceeding rather from mental affection, tha^ outwardly
disclosed by vocal words, intending wholly to the study of devotion, because
they had not as yet any Ecclesiastical books, where in they might sing there
Canonical hours, but insteede of them; they beheld continually the book of
the Cross of Christ, and turned it over day and night; thereto instructed by
the example and speech of the holy father, who daily preached of Christ his
Cross unto them.

But being requested of his brethren to teach them how to pray, he said: when
you do pray, you shall say the Pater noster: and this also: we adore thee the O
Christ at al thy Churches, which are in the whole world, and we bless thee
because by thy holy Cross thou have redeemed the world. Moreover, he taught
them to praise our Lord in all things and out of al his creatures: Here thou
may see that faith^ to be held and confessed whsch the holy Roman Church
does hold and teach. They fell down prostrate praying at all Churches and
Crosses.
to use especial reverence also toward Priests: and principally this;
firmly to believe, and simply to confess, the purity of faith according unto
such manner and form, as the holy Roman Church does hold and teach. All
which precepts of the holy Father they on their parts in every, point
inviolably observed, and at all Churches and before all Crosses which they
could see a far of, they did humbly prostrate themselves according to the
form prescribed unto them.

But it so fell out, that the brethren long time abiding in the foresaid place:
the holy man, went forth upon a Saturday, into the City of Assisium with
purpose upon a Sunday morning early to preach (as his costome was) in the
Cathedral Church. And as the devout man of God had with drawn himself, into
a certain shroud, that stood within the Channons garden, there overpassing
the night, according to his usual manner in the prayer of God; albeit that he
were then in body absent from his children. Behold yet even about the very
point of midnight, some of the brethren being bent to sleep, and some other
of them continuing in prayer, a fiery chariote of marveilous splendoure,
entering in at the door, of the house, whirled up and down the place, one while
one way, and one while another, until it had at length, gone three several
times round about the room: upon the top whereof, might be seen to rest, a
globe of shining beams, as bright as the sun; which caused the dark some
night, for the time to seem, as clear as the day. Here with all, the
watchful were amassed, and the sleepy both waked and astonished: every of them
finding no less clearenes in their hearts, than outwardly upon their bodies, it
being effected by the power of this marvailous light, that the naked
consciences of them all were discovered one to another. For they did all of
them agreably understand, every of them seeing into each others heart, that the
holy Father being absent in body, but present in spirit, and in such appearance
transfigured: was with the beams of brightness from above enlightened and
inflamed, and out of supernatural power, in a shining and fiery Chariot, by
God represented unto them, that as true Israelites, they might follow after
him, who as an other Elias was by God ordained, to be the Chariot, 4, Reg. 2.11:
and Chariot Driver of spiritual men. And verily good cause we have to believe
that he who opened in former time, the eyes of a Boie, 4. Reg. 6.7
whereby to see the mountain filled all with horses and fiery Chariots, in
compass of Aeliseus: did now also, at the prayers of his holy Servant Saint
FRANCIS, in like manner, open the eyes of this simple company, that they might
see and behold, the wonderful works of God. But the holy man after this
returning unto his brethren, began to sift the secrets of their consciences,
to refresh their spirits upon occasion of this marveilous vision, and to
foretell many things concerning the increase of the Order. At what time
disclosing unto them many and sundry points, which far surpassed all humane
understanding: the brethren well perceived, that the spirit of our Lord, had in
so great abundance; settled it self upon this his servant Saint FRANCIS, that
it should be their safest and most certain course to imitate his life and
doctrine.

After this, S. FRANCIS, the Pastor of that little flock, being guided and
directed by the grace of God, conducted this poor number of twelve brethren,
to the Church of Saint Mary of Portiu^cula: to the end that where the order of
the Friars Minors, had by the merits of the Mother of God taken his beginning;
there also by her help, it might take increase. And in this place also, being
made a preacher of the Gospel, he went about preaching through the Cities and
towns: Not in the learned words of humane wisdom, but in the power of the
spirit, denowcing the Kingdom of God. He seemed unto all that saw him to be a
man of another world: for as he was allawayes, intentive to heaven, both in
mind and countenance, so did he seek with his whole endeavor to draw all men
thither with him. And even now about this time, Of virgins were converted by
him to embrace perpetual chastity: false it is that it is mipossible to keeps
Virgiuity.
began the vineyard of Christ to bud forth the buds of the sweet smells of
our Lord: and having brought forth the flowers of sweetness, Honor, and
Honesty, did yield a plentiful and fruitful harvest. For many, both men and
women, inflamed with the zeal of his preaching, serving our Lord in the
Chastity of wedlock, according to the form received, of the servant of God;
did bind themselves unto new laws of Penance, whose manner of living the
said servant of Christ decreed to be named The Order of the brethren of
Penance. For, as the way of penance, is one and the very same unto all such
as desire to come unto heaven, so likewise this order, S. Clare now glorified
in heaven is worthily worshipped in earth of the Church.
admitting both the Clergy and the lay pepple, Virgins, and Married folks, of
both sexes, of how great merit it is in the sight of God; it is manifest by
many miracles, which some of them have wrought, as may be known to the world.

Even now also, diverse Virgins were by him converted unto perpetual chastity,
among which Saint Clare that notable Virgin and most dear to God, was the
first plant and most beautiful blossom of all the rest: who as as pure
springing flower gave a sweet savor of holiness; and glimmered forth her
beams as a bright shining star. she being now glorified with God in heaven, is
worthily honored of the Church in earth: who being the daughter in Christ, of
the holy poor Father Saint FRANCIS, did also become the Mother of the poor:
And many not only moved with devotion, but inflamed with desire of Christian
perfection, contemning the vanity of wordly things, did follow the steeps of
Holy S. Francis. Who increasing daily more and more were quickly spreede forth
to the end of the world. For that same holy poverty, which was the only thing
they desired to carry with them, for the defray of their charges, made them
evermore ready, unto all obedience, strong in sustaining of labors, and nimble
in prosecuting their iourneis. And for so much as they possessed no earthly
thing, nothing did they love nothing, did they fear to loose: but were in
every place secure, never assailed with fear, never distracted with care,
whereby living as men in every point free from all manner of trouble of mind,
they had patience in expectance, of their morning and nightly sustenance.

Many and sundry reproaches they sustained in diverse parts of the world, as
men conte^ptible and unknown: but the love of the Gospel of Christ, had
endewed them with so perfect patience, that they sought in those places rather
to be, were they might suffer persecution in body. than where, upon observation
of their unfeigned holiness, they might have occasion to glory in the favor of
the world. And even that very penury of all things which they continually
sustained seemed unto them a superabou^dant plenty: mean while that according
to the wisemans Council. In steed of a great thing, the least did content
them. For some of the brethren coming into the infidells countries, it
happened that a certain Saracin, moved with pity, offered them money for
their necessary food: which he perceiving them to refuse, wondered not a little
thereat, seeing them notwithstauding to be both poor and needy. But at the
lenght perceiving, that having voluntarily made themselves poor for the love
of God, they would possess no money: he was thereby conjoined unto them, in so
great love and affection, that he offered to Minister unto them all things
necessary, so long as he should have in the world to give them. O inestimable
price of poverty, by the admirable force whereof, even Barbarours cruelty, was
changed into so great a sweetness of mercy, Wherefore it is a thing most
horrible and a wickedness inexcusable, for a Christian man to tread upon so
precious a pearl which an infidel Saracin held in so great a reverence.

About this time Moricus, a Religious man of the Order called Cruciferi, being
miserably afflicted in an Hospital near to Assisium, with a long and greivouse
disease, through the violent force whereof, the Physicians were in utter
despair of his recoverie: made humble request to the man of God, by a
messenger sent for purpose, with instant desire, that he would vouchsafe to
pray for him. Whereunto, the blessed Father, with a willing mind assenting,
after prayer devoutly made, taking cartaine crummes of bread into his hand, and
mingling the same with oil, taken from, out of the Lamp which burned before
the Altar of the Blessed virgin, brought it at lenght, as it were, to a
certain kind of electuary, which he sent unto the sick man, by the hands of
his brethren, saying, Beer ye this medicine unto our brother MORICVS: where by
the power of Christ, will not only restore him unto perfect health again, but
will make of him a strong and hardy warrior, and shall further adioyne him
perpetually, unto our troop and company: No sooner had this sick, man tasted
of that exquisit medecin, made and confected by the Holy Ghost his invention,
but rising up forth with, now perfectly whole and well, he obtained of God so
much strength both of body and mind, that within a little while after, entering
into the Religion of the holy man he was contended with one only slender coat,
Behold the wonderful abstinence of the holy man who for a long space tasted
neither bread nor wine and wasfed only with raw meats.
under which also he ware for long time together, a coat of maile next to his
skin, and used no other diet than raw meats, as herbs fruits and such like
other things as he gathered upon the earth: not tasting for many and soundrie
years, either of bread or wine. All which notwithstanding, he still continewed
in good health and strenght of body.

And as the merrits of the virtue of these little ones of Christ did daily more
and more increase so the sweet smell of their good opinion, spreading it self
ronde about, drew many out of diverse parts of the world, to come in person to
see the holy Father. Among whom there was a curious inventor of secular songs,
who having binne for that cause crowned by the Emperor, and called the king of
verses determined to go see this man of God, the contemner of wordly things.
And finding him preaching in a certain Monastery, at the Castle of Saint
SEVERINVS: the hand of our Lord coming then upon him, be beheld Saint FRANCIS
the preacher of the Cross of Christ, ensigned with two swords, one overthwarr
the other in the form of a Cross, the one of them stretched along from his
head to his feet, and the other, Crosse-wise along his breast, from on hand to
the other. Whereby although he knew not the contenance of the serva^t of Christ:
yet was he fully secured that this very man was he, by the admirable appearance
of so great a miracle. At the sudden aspect whereof being much amassed he
began to propose unto himself better things in his mind: and being at the
lenght compunct by the force of his words, no less than if he had bin stricken
through with the sword of the spirit, issueyng out of his mouth, utterly
contemning all secular pompes he conjoined himself in profession, with the
blessed Father. Whereupon the holy man, seeing him to be perfectly converted,
from the trouble of the world, to the peace of Christ, called him by the name
of Frater Pacificus. He afterward increasing in all holiness, before such time
as he was made provincial Minister in France for he was the first that bare
that office there merrited once, and again, to see the greek letter T. in the
forehaid of holy S. Francis: the same being distinguished with such seemly
variety of colors, as did wonderfully adorn his face and countenance. This
sign the holy man did reverence with great affection, this sign he did
commend with frequent speeches: and in his letters which he usually dispatched,
he evermore with his own hand subscribed the same: Ezech. 9.4
as if all his study were to make the sign T according to the saieing of the
Prophet upon the foreheades of them that sighed and mourned, and were
unfeignedly converted to Christ.

Now when the number of brethren, was in process of time increased; the
careful Pastor, began to call them together unto a general Chapter, then to
beholden in the place of our Lady of Portiuncula: that in the measure of divine
distribution, he might give unto every one his portion of obedience, in the
land of their poverty. Where although there were great penury, and the
brethren sometimes came together above five thousand in number: yet by the help
of Gods mercy they had sufficient food; together with health of body, and
abundance of spiritual joy. But for so much as he could not be in body
present at the provincial Chapiters, he was therefore in spirit, by the
diligent care of his government: by the instancy of prayer; and by the
efficacy, of benediction; evermore present, at them: notwithstanding that
sometimes, by the marvailous power and work of God, he did visibly appear.
For as Saint Anthony that worthy preacher, who is now a notable Confessor of
Christ, was preaching in the Chapter at Arles of the title of the Cross: Jesus
of Nazareth King of the Jews: a certain brother of approved virtue, called
Monaldus, looking, as the will of God was toward the Chapter house door;
saw with is corporal eyes the blessed Father Saint FRANCIS lifted up alofte
in the air, ad blessing his brethren with his hands stretched out as it were
in the form of a Cross. At which very time all the brethren did feel
themselves to be replenished with so great and vnvsual-a consolation of spirit,
that the inward testimony which they felt in their hearts did sufficiently
secure them of the undoubted presence of the holy Father: though afterward it
was, not only by evident signs, but also by the said holy Fathers own words,
externally confirmed. And well it may be believed that the same power of
Almighty God, which granted the devout and holy Bishop Saint Ambrose, to be
present at the in tombing of the glorious Bishop Saint Martin, to the end that
he might with devout reverence, honor the devout Bishop deceased: did also by
an especial favor, present his servant Saint Francis, at the sermon of his
true preacher Saint, Anthony: that he might approve the words of truth: those
especially, of the Cross of Christ, whereof himself was a continual bearer,
and a most faithful servant

But the Order being now great amplified and augmented, he did greatly desire,
that the form and rule thereof by Pope Innocenci^s already approved, might be
Honorius his successor, for ever be ratified and confirmed. and even then he
was by Almighty God admonished, with this manner of revelation. It seemed unto
him that he was gathering up from the earth, certain most exceeding small and
slender crummes of bread, by him to be distributed among a great many hungry
brethren of his, that stood in expectance rownde about him, And fearing to
distribute so small crummes, least perhaps they should fall out of his hands,
he heard a voice from above, saing unto him: Francis, make one have of all the
crummes, and give unto them that will eat. Unto which voice he showing
himself obedient, whosoever did not receive the distribution devoutly, or did
make light of the gift already received, were presently marked with a leaprous
infection. All which the holy man did the next morning after, relate unto his
brethren; sorrowing much, that he could not understand the mystery of the
vision But the next day following, as he persisted watchful in prayer, he
heard a voice from heaven speak unto him, Francis, the crummes which thou
saw in the night past, are the words of the Gospel, the host is the Rule,
and the leaprousie iniquity. Being therefore desirous, before he sought the
confirmation of his Rule. to reduce the same as being hitherto more largely
compiled out of sundry parts of the Gospel, unto a more compendious form and
method, according as the vision did purporte unto him: he went up with two of
his companions into a certain hill, whereunto he was by the Holy Ghost
conducted, He fasted with bread and water.
and there contenting himself with bread and water, during the time of his
fast he caused the same to be written, according to that which the spirit of
God suggested unto him, as he was yet persevering in fervent prayer. Which
being there by him, in this manner finished, and himsefe now coming down from
the montaine, he gave the same to his Vicar to keep: who within few days,
confessing himself to have lost it, by fault of negligence, the holy man went
again, the second time, into the solitary place of the desert, and presently
renewed the same again: as if he had taken the words, from out of the mouth
of God. And shortly after obtained, according to his own desire to have the
same confirmed, by the foresaid Pope HONORIVS: in the eight year of his
Popedom. Whereupon taking occasion with great fervency to persuade his
brethren a new to the observance of the rule, he avowed unto them that he had
not thereinto inserted any thing out of his own industry, but had simply and
plainly written down all and every point, eue^ in such sort as had binne from
God revealed unto him. S, Francis caused his rule to be written as he had
received by divine renelation.
Which, that it might the more manifestly appear, as being confirmed and
approved by the testimony of God himself, within few days after the signs and
Marks of our Lord Jesus were imprinted upon him, by the finger of the living
God, as it were the Bull of the chief and most supreme Bishop Christ himself
as well to the absolute confirmation of the Rule, as also to the commendation of
the Author thereof as shall be hereafter set down in convenient place, after
we shall hane declared his excellent virtues.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. Of the austerity of his life, and how the Creatures of God
gave sollace unto him.
Now when the holy servant of God Saint Francis, did perceive that many were
by his example encouraged with fervencie of spirit to carry the Cross of
Christ: himself also, like a good leader of the army of Christ was thereby
animated daily more and more: to attain unto the crown of victory, by the
exquisite perfection of most invincible virtue. For considering the sayng of
the Apostle; that, Se with what severity of disciplines the holy Father did
mortifi the concupiscence of his flesh. Se also his wonderful abstinen^.
They who are of Christ have crucified their flesh together with their vices
and concupiscenses: he to the end he might in his own body bear the armor
of the Cross, did with so great severitie of discipline, restrain his
sensual appetites; that scantly he allowed unto himself, the very things that
were necessary for the sustentation of nature Using evermore this manner of
saying; that, It could not be but marvelous hard, to fatisfie the necessities
of the body, and yet not to condiscen unto the evil inclination of sensual
desirs: for which cause, in time of health he would hardly be induced to eat of
boiled meats, or at least wise very seldom: and if he did at any time, he used
either to put ashes amonghst it, or else by mingling of water with the sa^e, to
make the meat unsavory. What shall I speak of his moderate drinking, when as
he would scarrely drink of cold water, sufficient to alay the violence of his
thrist. He ever invented new ways of more perfect abstinence, and by exercise
did daily more and more increase therein: and although he had already attained
unto the highest degree of perfection, yet some thing always he did as a new
beginner innovate? punishing, with afflictions, his fleshly concupissence.
Nevertheless, at such times as he went abroad to preach the Gospel, he did
conform himself in the quality of his meat according to the custom of the
persons that did entertain him: but, at his returning home again, then did he
strictly observe the rigor of most parsimonius abstine^ce. And so in all
respects, using austerity toward himself, courtesy toward his neighbor, and
obedience to the Gospel of Christ; he was an example of edification to others,
not only by abstaining, but even also by eating. The bare ground he used most
commonly, as a bed, for his weried body: He slept often on the bare ground.
and took his sleep oftentimes sitting, leaning his head upon a piece of
wood, or a stone: and resting always contented with one coat, he served our
Lord in cold, and nakedness.

Whetevpon. it being one time demanded of him, how he could with so thin a
garment defend himself from the extreme sharpness of the winter cold,
Behold his great austerity in his apparel
he answered with afervour of spirit. If we were inwardly touched by fervent
desire with the flame of the heavenly country, we should easily be able to
endure this eternal cold. He could not abide softnes of apparel, but
asperous clothing he much esteemed; affirming that S, John Baptist was in that
respect commended by the mouth of God himself. And therefore, if at time he
found any kind of easefulnes in such garmens as had been given unto him, he
used to wear little cords into the inner side thereof alluding unto the words of
truth, that softnes of apparel was not to besought for Cottages of the poor,
but in princes palaces For he had learned by certain experience, that the
devils are terrefied by asperitie: but by delicious niceness, more forciblely
animated to rentation. Whereupon having on night (contrary to his usual custom
a pilow of feathers at his head in regard of a special infirmity which he
sustained generally in that part, and particulerly in his eyes the devil
entering thereinto, did till the hour of Martins, wonderfully molest and
trouble him, from the study of holy prayer, until that at length calling one
of his brethren unto him, he caused the same pillow together with the devil in
it, to be carried quite a way out of his Cell. But the brother going out of the
Cell therewithal, lost the strength and use of al his members: until by the
voise of the holy father, to whom it was reveiled in spirit, his former
strength, both of heart and body was fully restored unto him again.

He observed great rigor and discipline, and stood with great heedfullnes upon
his own defense: having an especial care, for preservation of the purity of
every man. Wherefore at the beginning of his conversion, he used oftentimes,
even in the winter season, to cast himself into a watrie pit, frosen over
with ice: that so he might both perfectly overcome his domestical enemy; and
might also preserve the white garment of chastity, from the raging fire of
voluptuouse pleasure. For he thought it more tol^erable by much, and without al
comparison, for a spiritual man to sustain great cold, in his body, then to
feel never so small a kindling of carnal pleasure, within his mind. But it
happened upon a certain night, that as he was praing within his Cell, in the
deserte of Sarthianum, the ancient enemy did call him three several times by
his name, saying: Francis, Francis, Francis, who demanding of him, what he
would have, he craftelie replied in these words: There is no sinner in the
world, whom God will not pardon, upon his conversion unto him: but he that
shall kill him self with hard penance shall never find mercy at his hands.
The servant of God hearing this, had presently by revelation discovered unto
him, the whole drifte and devise of the wicked enemy: by what kind of
deceipte he went about to draw him into a slacknes in devotion, as the event
following, did evidently declare. For immediately after this, Job. 41.12
by the blaste of his mouth, Whose breath making burning coals to flame, he
was assailed with a great and grievous tentetion, of the flesh, coming then
upon him. Which so soon as this lover of chastity did we forsee, putting of
his coat, he began very feircly to beat him self with a cord, saying go
to brother Ass, thus does it beseme thee to continue, thus ought thou to
endure the scourge. Thy coat serves for Religion, it bears the badge of
holiness: for it is lawful for any one that is delighted in unlawful lust,
to intrude upon it: if any whither thou would go, then go thy ways.
Moreover also, being animated with a most wonderful fervor of spirit, The
whole purpos of this holy man was to purg his mind of all vices.
opening the door of his Cell, he went his way forth into the garden: and
there casting down his poor naked body, into the deep snow, he caught the
same in his hands, and made thereof, seven heaps: which being orderly placed
before him, thus did he then speak to his outward man: lo here (says he)
the bigger of these is thy wise, these other four, are thy two sonns, and thy
two daughters, and these two that remain, are thy servantes thy man and thy
maied, which thou ought to have to wait upon thee. Haste thee now
therefore, and see thou forslow not to cloth them al, for they are in present
danger, to die for cold. But if the manifold care, of these seven be over
molestful unto thee: then serve thine one and only Lord alone, with heedfull
diligence. The tempter forthwith perceiving himself by this means to be
subdued: departed straight away, with shame enough, and the holy man, returned
with victory into his Cell again: for while he exteriourly, afflicted his
body with the extremity, of the paineful cold, which he endured, he did so
perfectly extinguishe the heat of his inward lust, that never had he after
that time, any feeling or touch thereof again. But it chanced, that a brother
among them, attending this mean while unto prayer, did by the light of the
Moon, which then shined very bright most plainly see and discern, the whole
course of all that had been done. Which the man of God perceiving, and knowang
that he had seen what had been done in the night, related unto him also, the
manner of the tentation and straightly charged him there with all, that so long
as him self lived he should not disclose what he had seen, unto any man in
the world.

He did moreover teach, The vices of the flesh ar to be mortified and the. In
tysments there unto ought to be bridled and the external senses with great
diligence to be kept.
that in no wise it was sufficient only to mortefie the vices of the flesh, by
subduing the evil motions thereof: but that also the outward senses, by the
which, death enters into the soul, were to be keept with great care and
vigilancie in so much that the familiarity, the conference, and sight of
women, which unto many are oftentimes occasion of ruin, he commanded
carefully to be avoided: affirming that by such occasions, as well the weak
spirit is broken, as the strong also most commonly, not a little weakened. And
as hard would he say it was, for him that conversed among them, unless he
were a man of most singular and and approved honesty, to avoid the co^tagion
of them as it is, according to the words of the Scripture. to walk in the
fire, and not to burn his feet. For he himself had continually so averted
his eyes, from beholding of such manner of vanity: that as (he said sometime to
one of his companions) there was hardly that woman in the world whom he did
know by the face. For he did not think it safe, what will our heretics hers
say which never depart from the company of women none of the holy fathers ever
behaved them selves in such sort. This makes against our new Eua^gelists who
will suffer no tribulations or labors to obtain the Kingdom of heaven but
only presuming of their vain faitl led their life in pleasure and idleness.
to draw inwardly the images of those forms, into his mind: which might
either reviue the sparkles of the subdued flesh, or might else defile, the
unspotted clearenes of chaste and honest minds. Whereupon, he also affirmed,
that al manner of speech with a woman was utterly vain and frivolouse, except
only in confession, or else for cause of instruction, and yet even in these
occasions the same to be done withal brevitie, such as should be most
expedient, for her salvation, and best agreeable with her honest reputation. For
what business would he say, can a religious man have, where about to treat
with a woman, save only in enioyning holy Penance unto her, or else in giving
her council to refome her life, when she does in religious manner require it.
Out of too much security, the enemy is less avoided. And the devil if he
can get but one hair of a man's head, to be his own, he will soon make it to
grow as big as a beam.

Idleness also, he taught to be eschewed, as the very sink and common
receptacle, of al naughty thoughts: showing by his own example, that the
rebelliouse and slothful flesh, was to be kept under by cotinuall discipline,
and profitable labors. Wherefore he called his body, his brother Ass, for
that it was to carry hevie burdens, and to be beaten with many and frequent
strips: and not otherwise to be fed then with base and mean diet. If he saw
any idle or loitring person, to live upon the fruits of others men's labors,
this man he called brother fly, for that such an one doing no good him self,
but impairing the good labors of other men, makes himself vile and
abominable, to all sorts of people. Wherefore he used sometimes this manner
of saying: I will that my brethren occupy themselves, in labor and exercise:
least that being inclined to idleness, either their heart or tongue, do wander
after unlawful things. For his will and care was to have silence by his
brethren observed, according to the prescript and rule of the Gospel: which
admonishes men at al tims with all diligence to abstain from al manner of
idle words, as being to render an account thereof at the day of judgment.
Wherefore if he did find any of his brethren, to be accustomed unto idle and
vain words, he did there upon, very sharply reprehend him, affirming that
modest taciturnitie, was both a secure preservation of a pure heart, and
likewise a virtue of no small account: considering that Death and life, are
said to be in the hands of the tongue, not so much in regard of the taste, as
of the speech

But although he endeavored always to induce his brethren unto austeritie of
life: yet he approved not that strcikt kind of severitie, which proceeded not
from the bowels of devotion, neither yet was seasoned with the wholesome salt
of discretion. For, when as one of his brethren, was upon a night; through too
much extremity of abstinence, greatly vexed with famine, and could not in that
respect, take any natural rest: the good and carrefull Pastor preceiving that
one of his sheep was then in present danger of perishing, called the brother
forth with unto him, and set, him bread before him, and to the end all
bashfullnes, might be away removed: he first began to eat thereof himself, and
so with sweetness invited him, to do the like. Whereby the brother being well
encouraged, rejected shame and willingly took his meat: very much reioicing,
that by the wise and provident condiscending of the prudent Pastor he had
happily escaped the hazard of his body, and had also received, no small example
of edification, when the morning was come, the man of God calling his brethren
altogether, after relation made unto them of what had chanced in the night,
adjoined also this heedful admonition unto them. Let charity, says he, and not
meat, my brethren, be a pattern and example unto you. Furthermore he taught
them to follow iscretion as the Chariot man of al virtues, how beit not that
discretion, which the flesh does advise, but that very same, which Christ has
taught: whose most holy life, is vnd^ubredly known to be the most exact
pattern of all perfection.

And for so much as it is not possible for a man environed with the infirmity
of his fleshely body, so perfectly to follow, the vnspoted lamb of Christ
crucified for us upon the Cross, but that he shall daily gather some filthy
Dreggs of sin; upon this cause, he avowed by infallible document, that they
who do with vigilance aspire to the perfection of life, ought daily to cleance
themselves with streams of tears. For though himself had already attained
unto a wonderful purity both of heart and body: yet ceased he not with showers
of tears, continually to cleance the eyes of his mind, not much regarding the
loss of his corporal eyes. For having gotten through continual weeping,
amost daungerons imperfection in his eyes, and being for that cause by the
Physician advised, in any wise to abstain from tears, unless he would
utterly loose his sight, the holy man made answer unto him, Brother
Physician, we must not in any sort, for the love of that light, which is
common as well to flies, as to us men; in any small degree, refuse the
visitatio^ of that light, which is of everlasting continewance: considering
that it is not the spirit, which has for use of the flesh, received the
benefit of light, but contrary wise, it is the flesh, which for the use and
service of the spirit has received the same at the bountiful hand of God. And
therefore he did rather choose, to loose his corporal eiesight: than by
repressing the devotion of his spirit, to hinder those comfortable streams of
tears, whereby the inward eye is cleared, that it may by able to see God.

But being ypon a time, councelled by the Physicians, and therewithal,
instantly persuaded by his brethren; to suffer himself to be cured by a
certain kind of Cawtery: the man of God humbly assented thereunto: the rather
in that he perceived, it would as well be healthful as otherwise painful unto
him. The Surgion therefore, being sent for, came; and put his iron instrument
into the fire, to work the cure. But the servant of Christ, chearing up his
body, which was now sommewhat daunted with fear, began in this manner, as to
a frind, to speak unto the fire, saying, My brother fire, whom Almighty God
has created of a most exquisite seemelinesse, full of fotce notably
beautiful, and profitable, be favorable at this hour, be courteous now unto
me. I beseech the great and omnipotent Lord who has created thee, so to temper
the violence of thy burning heat, that burning with sweetness, I may be able
to endure thee. This prayer indeed, he made the sign of the Cross right over
against the red hot iron instrument: and so remained afterward without all
kind of fear or quailing. Then was the sparckling iron entered up to the top
within the tender flesh: and the Cautery was drawn from the very ear, to the
eye brow. In the doing whereof: what pain the holy man sustained, he himself
expressed unto his brethren, saying, Give praise unto God my brethren: for I
verily say unto you; that I have neither felt the heat of the fire, nor yet any
pain in my flesh. And turning to the Physician, he said unto him, If the flesh
be not already well concocted, put in your iron again. The Physician, then
perceaving, in so weak and feeble flesh, so invincible a power of the spirit,
admired with himself thereat: and extolled this divine miracle, faying, I tell
you plainly brethren: I have seen wonderful things to day. For the holy man
was now come unto that excellent degree of purity, that by a wonderful sweet
consent and harmony, his flesh did agree with his spirit, and his spirit did
wholly conform it self unto God, it was by a divine ordinance, brought to
pass, that the creature obeying the Creator, was miraculously subject to his
will and commandment. As may also be seen by this other exa^mple of the same
holy servant of God, who being sick one time of a most dangerouse disease, in
the Desert of S. VRBANE; and feeling then directly in himself the defect of
nature: demanded a cup of wine to be brought unto him: S. Francis making the
^igne of the Croste turned puer Water into most excilent wene.
whereupon answer being made that there was no wine, there to be had, he
required them to bring him water; which being done he blessed the same with
the sign of the Cross Immediarly thereupon, that which was before very
natural watter, was now turned into^^ost excellent wine, and that which the
poverty of the place, could not afforde the same did the purity of the hol^
men, deserve to obtain. By the taste also whereof, he so spcedily recovered
himself again, that both the newness of the rast, and the present reuewing
of his imapired health: alter ring supernaturally, both the thing tasted, and
him that was the taster thereof, did by a double testimony confirm the absolute
dispoiling of the old man, and the perfect putting one of the new.

And not only was this manner of obedience, by the creatutes of God, to his
holy servant, exhibited: but the providence also of the Creator, did every
where condescend to satisfy his will and desire. For his body being upon a time
ouer-dulled with the concurrence of many diseases together, he found in
himself a desire to hear some harmonicall kind of sound, that thereby he
might be reviued and receive more comfort of spirit: but it not beseming his
life and profession to procure it by the ministry of man, behold; the service
of Angels, was ready to accomplish, the Holy man's desire. For as he was waking
one night and meditating upon God, so dainly there sounded a Harp, of most
wonderful harmony, and of most sweet and pleasant melody. At what time, he
saw not any man: but might well perceive the passage and return of the Harper,
by the alteration of the sound of the music; as it was sometime nigher, and
sometime further from him. Wherefore, directing his spirit up to God, he was so
singularly delighted in that most sweet sou^ding music, that he did almost
think himself, to have bin in another world. This also could not be hidden
from his brethren: who did oftentims by certain and infallible tokens
perceive, that he was visited by Almighty God with so excessive and frequent
consolations, that it was not possible for him, in any sort to conceal them.

An other time also, as the man of God went to preaeh, between Lombardie and
the Marquisate of Tervisium, being then accompained with one of his brethren,
and travailing along by the River Poe, the darkness of the night suddenly
came upon them. By mean whereof, the way being subject unto many and sundry
perilouse dangers, as well in regard of the Fenns thereabouts: as also of the
River it self, the brother associate, spoke unto the holy man. saying: make
thy prayers, good Father, unto God, that we may be delivered out of these
imminent dangers. To whom the man of God answered with much hope an
confidence, in this wise: God is able no doubt (my brotherr if it stand with
the good pleasure of his sweet disposition, to dispearse the deep darkness
of this obscure night, and to vouchsafe unto us the benefit of light. Which
words he had no sooner vtteted, but by the power of God, such an abundant
light began to shine about them, that the night being dark to others, they
nevertheless did see in clear and perfect light, not only the way, but very
many things on every side about them, being by the conduct thereof, both
corporally directed, and spiritually, comforted: whereby they came safe the
last to the place of their lodging, by the passage of no small space of
ground, which they joyfully overpassed, with singing Himnes and praises, in
honor of Almighty God. See now and consider, unto how great virtue and
wounderful purity this holy man had attained; at whose beck, the fire did
temper his heat, the water did change her taste, the melody of Angels did
recreate his spirits, and whom the light of heaven, did guide and conduct in
his way: that so it may fully appear: that unto the sanctified senses of Gods
holy servant, the whole frame of the world, did readily yield, an obsequious
kind of obeisance.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. Of his humility and obedience; and of Gods favorable
condiscending. unto all his desires.
THE guardian and ornament of all virtues, humility, had in so abundant manner
replenished, this holy servant or God, that in his own reputation he was
nothing else but a wretched sinner: whereas in very deed he was a perfect
mirror, and amost gloriouse ressemblance of all manner of holiness. Upon this
ground work, he determined to build up himself, having as a wise Architecke
laid that very same foundation, which he had learnd of our Savior Christ. For
this cause he said that the son of God, did come down from the highness of
his Fathers Bosom to these our contemptible things, that being our Lord and
Master, he might as well by his own example, as by his word: teach this
excellent virtue of humility unto us. And therefore, as the true disciple of
Christ, his prayer was to seem vile and base, both in his own and other men's
eyes: remembering the same which is said, by the most superexcellent Master,
That which is high among men is abomination with God. Thereunto also adding
this saying of his own, that: Look how much a man is the sight of God, so
much he is, and no more. And therefore he held it for a very vain and foolish
thing, to be extolled with the favors of the world: rejoicing much to be
reproached, and sorrowing no less to be commended. For he had far rather
hear himself reviled and reproched, than praised: or commended, knowing that
the one might provoke him to amend, and the other might give occasion to fall.
And for that cause, oftentimes, when the people extolled in him, the meritt of
holiness he commanded one of his brethren, to utter some words of debasement
and reviling against him, in his own hearing. Which when the brother did,
although much against his will, calling him a rusticall and rude body, an
unskillful and unprofitable hireling: he was marveilously exhilerated thereat,
as well in mind, as in countinance: whereby he answered; Our Lord bless thee,
my most dear son; for thou speak the very truth, and such words, as it
best beseems Peter Bernardus son, to hear.

But to the end he might make himself abject and contemptible unto others, he
spared not his own disgrace, but in his public praaching before all the
people he would open and manifest his own defects. As having once upon
occasion of a right grievouse sickness, remitted in some forte, the rigor of
his usual abstinence, for the better recoverie of his health again, after
such time as he had somewhat better resumed his strength unto him: the true
dispiser of himself, animating himself to the reproache of his own flesh; It
is not meet, said he that I should be held for a man of abstinence, mean
while that I secretly give me self, to the pampering of my flesh. Wherefore he
raised up himself, as being wholly inflamed with the spirit of holy humility
and assembling the people together, in a street of the City of Assisium,
himself with many of his brethren, which he had brought with him, entered
solemnly into the greater Church where having a roape fastened about his neck,
he caused himself to be drawn all naked saving only of his breeches in the
open sight, and veiwe of them all, even to that very stone whereupon malefactors
at the time of their punnishment, were wont to be placed. Upon the which, he
then getting up as he could albeit that, he were both weak and affected with
a quartane Ague; yet in such extreme cold as the time did then affoarde, did
preach with great efficacy and force of mind. At which time he affirmed in
the hearing of them all, that he was in no wise to be honored as a spiritual
man, but rather to be contemned of all men as a fleshly and gluttenouse
person. Whereupon the people there assembled, wondering at so strainge a
spectacle: and being also compu^cted with devotion: because they well knew the
strictness of his austerity, did openly protest, that such manner of humility,
was rather to be admired, than in any sort to be imitared. And though this
action might rather seem to be a wonder in nature, according to the saying of
the Prophet, then otherwise a matter of example, yet was it undoubtedly, a true
pattern of perfect humility, whereby the scholar of Christ, is instructed to
contemn the glory of transitory praise, to repress the swelling pride of
arrogancy, and to reprove the falsehood of crafty dissimulation, Oftentimes he
did many things after this manner: that externally he might appear as a lost
vessel: and internally might possess the spirit of sanctification.

He studdied also to hide the guifte of his Lord and Creator in the secret
enclosure of his bress thinking it not convenient to lay open to vain glory,
that which might be unto himself, an occasion of ruin. For oftentimes being
commended of the multitudes, for a blessed and holy man he used to apply this
manner of speech unto the^ soft; I may yet have both sons and daughters do
not therefore praise, such an one as is not already secure. No man is to be
praised; whose end is uncertain. Eccl. 11.13.
And these were his words to them that peaised him. But to himself he spoke
in this sort; Oh FRANCIS, if God Almighty had bestowed so great benefits,
even upon a Thief, as he has vouchsafed unto thee; he would be no doubt more
thankful than thy self, unto him, To his brethren also he said oftentimes;
thad no man ought with an undue applause to flatter himself upon occasion of
any kind of thinghe, which is in a sinners power to do. For says he a sinner
may fast, a sinner may pray, a sinner may mourn, and lament, a sinner may also
macerate his own flesh: but this only a sinner cannot do, namely to be
faithful, to his Lord and Master. In this therefore we may have just cause to
glory, if to our Lord we render, the glory which is of right his own: if
serving him faithfully, whatsoever it is that he do give unto us; the same do
we faithfully resctibe unto him again.

But this Eva^gelicall Marcha^t, to the end he might by more occasions in
crease his gain, and might turn all the present time, to his furthermerit:
took not much delight to hold the place of a Governor, as of a subject:
neither yet desired so much to command, as to obey. Behold the great obedience
and humility in the holy Father,
And therefore resigning his office of General, he desired a gardia^, to whose
will and commandment he might in all manner of points, accomodate himself.
For he affirmed, that the fruit of holy obedience, was of so great plenty and
abundance, that unto them who submitted their necks to her yoke, no time
overpassed, with out some gainefull commodity. Wherefore his custom was, unto
such brothers, as he usually went with all, evermore to promise obedience, and
faithfully to observe the same. And thereupon ths he spoke sommetime of himself
unto his companions. Among other things which the goodness of God has of his
great bounty vouchsafed to grant unto me, this grace he has freely
bestowed upon me, that I could as diligently yield mine obedience unto a Novice
of one hours standing, if he were appointed to be my Guardian; as to one of
the most ancient, and discreetest brerhren. For the subject (says he) must
not consider his Superior as a man, but as him for whose lone he is become
subject unto him. And by how much the more contemptible he is that does
command by so much the more acceptable, is the humility of him, that does
exercise obedience.

He being one ti^e demanded who was to be judged truly obedient proposed the
similitude of a dead body for an example. Take me up (says he) a dead body,
and put it where you please: you shall neither see it strive, when it is moved;
nor murmr, when it is placed, nor yet repine, when it is displaced. But if
you set it in a chair, it looks not up alofte, but down right to the
ground: if you apparel it in purple roabes it discovers the palenesse of his
countenance, two for one, morethan it did before. Even very this (says he) is
a true pattern of obedience, who does not discern why he is moved, who
cares not where he is placed, who desires not to be changed, who being
advanced to office, retains his former humility: and who the more he is
honored, does so much the more repute himself unworthy. And for mine own
part (quoth he one time) unto his companions, I cannot think my self worthy
the name of a Friar Minor, unless that I be in this very state, which I shall
now describe unto you. See now, I go as Prelate and Chief of my brethren,
conducting them all unto the Chapter: there I preach among them, there I use
mine admonitions unto them, and in fine it is spoken with disgrace unto me.
Thou evil be fittest to rule among us, for that thou art a man unlearned harshe
in thy speaking, an Idiote, and a simple person. At length, I am cast out with
reproache, as a man contemptible and basely esteemed at every hand. I speak it
unto you truly, my brother, that unless I shall with the same chearefulnes of
countenance, with the same in ward alacrity of mind, and with the same
inviolable purpose of holiness, attend unto the hearing of these words: a
Friar minor I cannot be. And this admonition also he well adioined; In
preeminence there is a ruin, in praise a downfall; but in the humility of the
subject, is the gain of the soul. Why therefore do we follow dangers more
than gain, seeing that we have received time, to make our commodity.

And for this very cause, this perfect pattern of humility Saint Francis:
would have his brethren to be called Minors, and the Prelates of his Order, to
be termed Ministers, as well thereby to use the words of the Gospel, which
he had promised to observe, as also that his disciples, might by their very
name be continually put in mind, that they were come to learn humility, at
the Schools of their humble Master, Christ. For Jesus Christ that excellent
Master, and most exquisite teacher, of this notable virtue humi^itie; to the
end he might perfectly inform his Disciples therein, said unto them:
whosoever will be the greater among you, let him be your Minister: Math. 20.26.
and he that will be first among you, shall be your servant. And conformably
hereunto, it being demanded of him by the Bishop of Hostia, then Cardinal
Protector, and chief advancer of the Order of the Friars Minors, who afterward
according to the foreprophccieng of the holy man, being exalted to the honor of
Papal Dignity; was called Gregory the Ninth, whether it stood with his liking,
to have his brethren promoted unto Ecclesiastical Dignities: he made answer
unto him: My Lord, for this cause are my brethren called Minors, which is as
much to say, as lesser or inferior persons, that they may not presume to be
made greater. If you will have the^ to bring forth fruit in the Church of God:
then hold and conserve them, in the state of their own vocation: and permit
the^ not by any means to ascend unto Ecclesiastical governments.

And for so much as he preferred humility, as well in himself, as in them that
were under him, before all other honors besides; God therefore the lover of
humble persons, adjudged him to be worthy in that respect of far greater and
more high dignities: accordingly as it was by a vision from heaven revealed
unto one of the brethren, of spetiall virtue and devotion. For being in the
company of the man of God, and together with him praying in a certaint
solitary and aba^doned Church, with a great and fervent affection, he fell into
a tra^ce, and saw among many seats in heaven, one of more excellent dignity
than all the rest besides: the same being adorned with precious stones, and
shining also with all manner of glory. And wondering then within himself, at
the brightness of that high and eminent Throne, he began very carefully in
his thoughts to enquire, who should be so happy, as to be assumed thereunto. At
which very time he heard a voice which said unto him; This was the seat of
one of them that fell, and now it is kept for humble Francis, And afterward,
the brother returning unto himself again, followed the blessed man out of the
Church according to his wounted manner. At what time, talking, by the way as
they went, of Almighty God: the brother, not unmindful of the vision shown
unto him, very prudently demanded of him, what conceit and opinion he held of
himself. To whom the humble servant of Christ made answer: Verily I do
esteem my self the greatest sinner of the world. Whereunto the brother
repliyng that he could not with the safety of his conscience either say or
think in such wise of himself, he presently thereunto again reioined, saying:
O my brother, if Christ had showed so great mercy unto the most wicked man
alive, as he has done to me I do verily believe that he would have binne more
thankful unto Almighty God than, I have bin. Upon the hearing of the which so
admirable humility: the brother was absolutely confirmed, concerning the truth
of the vision disclosed unto him: acknowledging by testification of the holy
Gospel it self, that unto the excellency of glory, from the which the proud
is cast down: he that is truly humble is exalted.

Another time also as he was praiyng in a certain solitary Church within the
Province of Massa, at the hill Casalis; he understood by revelation of the
spirit, that there were certain holy Relics remaining there in that place:
which he the^ with grief of mind perceaving, to have binne for long together
defrauded, of the honor due unto them; commanded his brethren to translate them
in all reverent manner, unto a more convenient and semely place of abiding. But
himself being upon just occasion for a time departed from them; the children
then unmindful of the commandment of their father, neglected the merit of
holy obedience. Notwithstanding upon a certain day, when as they intended to
celebrate the holy Mysteries, having removed the upper covering of the Aultat,
they found there not without great admiration, sundry most fair and fragrant
bones, discerning them to be the same holy Relics, which no hand of man but
the power of God had brought to the place. And it was no long while after, Thou
which do contemn the relick of saints, behold what reverence the man of
God gave unto them
that the holy man of God returning back again: began diligently to enquire
whither that which himself had commanded concerning the Relics, had binne
by them accomplished. But the brethren humbly confessing their fault, in
neglecting their due obedience, deserved to obtain pardon, together with some
punnishement also therewithal. And then the holy man burst forth into these
words, Blessed, says he, be my Lord my God, who has by himself fulfilled
that which your part and duty ought to have performed. Consider now
diligently the cate of Gods divine providence, concerning this dust of ours:
and ponder also maturely in mind the excellent savor which humble Saint
Francis enioied in the eyes of God. For man refusing to obey his
commandments, Almighty God vouchsafed, to grant his desires.

Upon a certain time also coming to the City of IMOLA, he went forthwith to
the Bishop and humbly then besought him that he might with his good favor,
assemble the people unto a Sermon. Whereupon the Bishop somewhat roughly
repliyng, said, It suffices Brother that to the people under my charge, I my
self do preach, Immediately the pattern of true humility, bowing down his
head with humble reverence, departed out of the place: how be it that within
less than an hour he returned thereunto again. Wervpon the Bishop seming to
be much offended, demanded of him what he sought for at his hands, now the
second time: unto whom with no less inward humility of heart, than outward
submission of words, thus the holy man replied: my Lord, if the Father, repel
his son at one door, he must enter in again at another. By force of which
humility, the Bishop being wholly subdued, embraced him with a loving and
cheerful countenance: saying then unto him: Behold that none can preach the
word of god without leave of his superior.
From hence forth both you and your brethren may freely preach in in my
Diocese, by my license general, for so much your holy humility, has very
well deserved.

It happened that once he came to Aretium at such time as the whole City was
so miserably afflicted with civil war and dissension, that it seemed to be
thereby in present danger of utter destruction. And he being then lodged in the
suburbs saw a route of Devils alofte in the air right over the City
insulting, and also inflaming the perturbed minds of the Citizens, to mutual
arms and slaughter. But to the end he might drive away those seditious powers
of the air, he sent brother Siluester, a man of singular simplicity, and
sincerity, assigning unto him the Office of a Crier, saying: Go before the gate
of the City, and on the part of Almighty God command the Devils by virtue
of obedience, that they speedily depart Incontinently the child of true
obedience made have to perform the Fathers commandment: and having first
given praise unto Almighty God, he began with loud voice to cry before the
gate of the City, on the part of God Almighty, and by the commandment of
his servant Francis, depart ye far, away from hence all ye wicked Devils.
And presently upon these words, the City returned unto peace again: and all
the Citizens with great good agreement, renewed the laws of their former
civility. For the raging pride of the Devils, which had as it were besieged
that City, being once repelled, the wisdom of the poor, that is to say, the
humility of Saint Francis, coming then upon them, restored peace unto the
people, and preserved the City from desolation. For by the merit of that rare
and excellent virtue of humble obedience, he had obtained so powerful a
commandment over those proud and rebellious spirits, that the did both
repress their insolent arrogance, and did also repel their importunate
violence. In this manner the proud Devils do ever fly away, from the eminent
virtues of the humble: saving that sometimes the mercy of God permits them
to be buffeted of the enemy, for the better preservation of their humility,
according as Saint Paul the Apostle writes of himself, 2. Cor. 12.7.
and as Saint Francis proved by experience. For being requested by Lord LEO,
Cardinal of the Holy Cross to remain some little wile with him in the Citry,
he humbly consented thereunto, for the reverence and love he bare unto him. But
in the very first night of his entertainment his prayers being ended, and he
preparing himself to sleep, a sort of Devils issued in upon him, furiously
assailing the soldier of Christ. Aug. 18. de ciu. Deic. 18.
Whom when they had long and sorely beaten, at lenght they left him for dead.
But as soon as the fiends were gone the servant of God calling his companion,
related unto him the whole matter as it had befallen him: saying, I do verily
believe Brother that the Devils, who can do nothing, but as the providence of
God does dispose, have for this cause rushed now with so great fury upon me,
because there is no good hope to be conceived of my aboade in the Court of
Princes. For my brethren that abide in poor and forlorn places, hearing that
I am now in company with Cardinals, will peradventure imagine, that I am busied
in wordly affairs, that I am advanced with honors, and that I do abound with
pleasures. Wherefore I think it better, that he who is given as an examplevn to
others, should avoid the Court, and converse humbly among the humble in humble
places: to the end that unto them who sustain poverty, himself may give
encouragement, by sustaining the like with them. In the morning therefore they
came, and humbly excusing themselves, took their leave of the Cardinal.

For the holy man abhorred pride, as the root and of spring of all other
evils besides, no less detesting the foul vice of disobedience, which he
esteemed as her most pestilent and deformed daughter? but the humility of
penance, he did as equally approve. It fortuned once, a certain brother to be
brought before him, who having committed some offense against the law of
obedience, was therefore rightfully to be corrected, by the discipline of
justice. But the man of God, by evident tokens perceyving, that the brother was
un fainedly pennitent, for his fault of transgression: was by the love he bare
to humility, much inclined to pardone him yet least that his facility in par
doning might be unto others an occasion, in like manner to offend, he
commanded the brothers Capouche to be taken from him, and cast into the
midst of the flaming fire, to the end that all men might observe with how
great and with what mauner of revenge, the offense of disobedience ought of
right to be chasticed and corrected. But when the Caponche had bine a good
while in the fire, he commanded the same to be taken out of the fire again,
and to be delivered unto the brother, upon his humble repentance. A wonderful
marter it is to reparte. The Capouche being raked out from the midst of the
flames, bare no mark or sign of burning at all: and so it came to pass, that
wod, by this one miracle, did both approve the virtue of the holy man, and did
also commend the humility of penance. Worthily therefore is the humility of
Saint FRANCIS to be immitated and embraced, which obtained even in earth so
admirable a dignity, as to incline the will of God to his desire, to change the
affection of man: to foil by his commandment, the insolent pride of the
Devils, and with a beck to repress, the devouring names of the fire. This is
in very de^e that high and excellent virtue, which exalting them that possess
it: while it gives reverence unto all, deferveth worthily, to be honored of
all.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. Of his love of poverty, and of the marvelous supply of
his wants.
AMONG the many and fundry gifts of spiritual graces, which holy Saint FRANCIS
obtained of the bountiful giver of all things: he merited by a certain
special prerogative to aboued in the riches of simplicity, by the love of most
perfect poverty. This virtue, the holy man considering to hane binne familiar
unto the son of God, and waighing also the same to be now a days as it were
abandoned throughout the world: did so efficacioussy endeavor to espouse the
same unto himself by perpetual Charity, that for the love thereof he did not
only forsake both Father and Mother, but also did freely distribute and
disburden himself, of what ever he either had, or might in time to come be able
to have. Never was there man so desirous of gold, as he was of poverty: nor yet
more careful to keep his treasure than he to preserve this Evangelicall
Pearl. Math. 13.45.
And herein especially was his sight offended, if any thing he might observe in
the brethren, which did not tend unto poverty, in every point agreeable. And he
verily himself, with a Coat, a Cord, and a certain sseight pair of
breeches, See whata favorer and diligent lover S. Francis was of Enangelicall
poverty.
esteeming himself to be abundantly rich: rested therewithal, from his first
entrance into religion, until his very death fully satisfied and contented. He
used oftentimes with tears to call to mind, the poverty of Christ Iefus and
of his Mother: affirming that therefore this was the Queen of virtues, for
that it so singularly excelled, in the King of Kings, and in the Queen his
Mother. For being demanded of his brethren in the Chapter house, by what virtue
a man might be made most grarefull and acceptable unto Christ; opening as it
were the secretre of his heart, he made answer unto them Know ye my brethren,
that poverty is the special way of salvation, as being the nutriment of
humility: and the root of perfection; whose fruit is manifold but secrette and
unknown. For this is that hidden treasure of the feilde, which the Gospel
commends unto us: for the buieng whereof, all things are to be sold and the
things which cannot be sold, are to be despised in comparison of it. That man
(says he, who desires to attain unto the perfection of this virtue, ought
not only to renounce all worldly wisdom, but in some sort also the knowledge
of secular learning, that being desinherited of such a possession, Psalm. 70.16.
he may enter into the powers of our Lord, and may offer himself, naked into
the arms of Christ Jesus, crucified. For he can in no wise be accounted
perfectly to renownce the world, who reser vethwithin thesecrette enclosure of
his heart, the coffers of his own proper seuce and vnderst anding.

And oftentimes preaching unto his brethren of this virtue of poverty, he
usually brought to their minds this place of the Gospel, that The Foxes have
holes, and the fowls of the air have nests: Mat. 8.20.
but the soune of man has not where to lay his head For which cause he taught
his brethren, that according unto the manner of poor men, they should build
unto themselves poor and simple cottages: which nevertheless they should not
in habit as their own, but like as forrainers and pilgrims do abide in the
harbors of other men. For these he said are the laws of pilgrims: to
refresh themselves under another man's roof, to thirst after their Conntry, and
to pass along in peace. He commanded sometimes, that the houses which were
already builded, should be beaten down, or else that the brethren should be
removed from them: if at any time he perceawed ought to be in them, which by
reason either of propriety, or otherwise of costlinesse were contrary to the
poverty, by the Gospel advised. This he said to be the foundation of his
Order: which being laid and grounded first of all, the whole building of
Religion does so rest and rely upon it, that by the perpetuity thereof, it is
confirmed and by the overthrowing thereof, it also, is utterly overthrow en and
ruined.

And therefore as himself had learnt by revelation, so did he teach and
instruct his followers that the entrance into holy Religion was to be begun
from those words of the Gospel, If thou will be perfect, go, and sell all that
thou have, and give unto the poor. Wherefore he admitted none into his Order
but such as were disposseffed of all things, and retained nothing of their
own; as well in regard of the word of the holy Gospel, as also that the wealth
reserved, might be free from occasion of scandale Where upon it came to pass,
that in the Marquisate of Ancona, the true Patriarck of the poor made answer
unto a certain man that demanded to be receved into the order: if thou de
sirest to be joined to the poor ones of Christ, distribute thy goods to the
poor. Which when the man had heard, he yet went forward, and by the sinister
intisement of carnal love, relinquished his wealth to his kinsfolks referving
for the poor no whit at all. Genesis 12.10
But when the holy man, had by his own relation, understood thereof, after a
very hard and sharp reproof, he said ynto him, Go thy ways, brother fly,
for that thou have not as yet departed out of thy house and kindred: but have
given thy goods to thine own blood and allies, having defrauded the poor,
wherefore thou art un worthy to be a sociate unto the holy poor servantes of
Christ. Thou have begun from the flesh, whereby thou have laid a ruinouse
foundation, for a spiritual building. Then returned the senfuall man to his
friends, demanding of them his goods again: which having refused to give to
the poor, did him self the sooner forsake, his virtuous purpose.

At an other time also he being in the place of Sansta Maria de Portiuncula,
was then in so great distress of poverty, that there seemede to be no mean of
providing, for the exigent necessity of the number of the brethren, that
thither frequently reso rted from for rain places: whereupon the Vicar
repayring unto the man of God, and alleging unto him the penury of the
brethren, craved of him also therewithal that it might be lawful to referue
some part of the goods of the Novices that entered into religion, for
supplying the urgent wantes of the brethren as necessity should require. To
whom the holy man not being ignorant of Gods heavenly purpose; answered, God
forbid, my most dear brother, that for any man's sake we should impiously
offend against the Rule. I had rather thou should uncover the Alter of the
gloriouse Virgin when necessity does require, then to attempt any thing in
never so small a degree against the vow of poverty, or contrary to the
observance of the holy Gospel of Christ. For the Blessed Virgin will more
gratefully accept, to have her Altar uncovered, so long as the council of the
Gospel shall be observed: then to have the same adorned, and the council of
Christ neglected, when it is undertaken and promised unto him.

But it fortuned one time that the man of God passing with his companion,
through Apulia, nigh unto Barrum: did find in the way a great pursse stuffed
at it was to be thought with money. This bag the poor servant of Christ, was
by his companion admonished, and instantly also required to take up from the
ground, and to bestow the money upon the poor. Which he the holy man of God
refused to do; affirming that there would appear some stratageme of the
devil in this new found purseand adding also Moreo ver, that the brother did
not persuade him to a matter of meritte, but of sin, in councelling him to
take away and dispose, the right and interest of an other man. So they departed
from the place, and hastened onward to proceed in their journey. But the
brother could not yet be quiet, suffering him self to be deluded by a vain
Pretext of piety, whereby he molested the man of God, as though he had no care
of the necessary releiuing of the wants of the poor. At the length therefore
the humble man assented, to return to the place: how beit not to satisfy the
will of the brother, but the rather to discover the fraud and deceit of the
devil. Wherefore he rerurned to the purse together with the brother and another
young man that was in the way. And after prayer devoutly made, he commanded the
brother to take it up. Who being then amazed and trembling also for fear, did
at length begin to discern that divellish monster: yet nevertheles in regard
of the commandment of holy obedience, driving away all doubtfullnesse of
mind, he stretched our his hand to the purse. And behold a great Scrpent
iffueing out of the purse, and together therewithal instantly vanishing away,
manifestly detected unto the brother the devils fraud and deceit. The holy
man therefore, having thus discovered the Craft of the subtle enemy, gave
thereupon this caution to his companion, saying: Money. O my brother, is unto
the servants of God, none other thing than the devil, or an adder full of
poison.

After this there happened unto the holy man a wonderful matter, as he went a
long in his way upon urgent occasion, toward the city of Sienna. For it so
fell out, that in a certain great and large plain between Campilium and S.
Quiricus; there met him three poor women altogether a like, in stature age,
and countenance; presenting unto him a new, and unusual manner of salutation:
saying, Well meette Lady Poverty. Upon the hearing whereof, he being indeed a
most absolute lover of poverty was there withal replenished with a singular
and unspeakable consolation, as having nothing in himself whereby he would so
willingly have binne saluted, as by that name of poverty, which they
voluntarily and freely applied unto him But they also sodeinely disappearing
out of sight, and the brethren in company with the holy man there upon
considering, as well their wonderful likeness and resemblance, the strangeness
of their salutation and meeting, as lastly of their vanishing and disappearing:
did by good reason judge and discern, that some mystical thing was thereby
designed concerning the holy man. And verily it seemed indeed, that by those
three poor women, appearing unto him so like in countenance, saluting him so
strangely, and vanishing away so sodeinly, it was conveniently enough declared,
that the eminent beauty of Evangelical perfection, did in an equal degree, in
that holy man of God shine and cast forth her gloriouse beams, whether in
respect of chastity, or of obedience, or else of poverty: though he rather chose
to glory in the privilege of Poverty; which sometime he was wont to call his
mother, sometime his spouse, and sometime his lady and mistress In this ver^^e
he desired to exceed all others, for so much as by the ^ame he had learned, to
repute himself inferior to all men. And therefore if at any time he saw any
man to be poorer than himself he presently then rebuking himself was incirred
thereby unto the like: striving as it were by emulation of poverty, and fearing
to be by any overcome theirn For it happened that meeting a poor man in the
way, and beholding his nakedness to be very greathe conceaved much compassion
thereof in his har^e and with lamentable voice unto his companion said: The
poverty of this man, my brothet, has given great caus^ of shame unto us;
considering that we have for great riches made choice of poverty, and behold it
appears now more in him.

This devour servant of Almighty God, for the love with he bare unto holy
poverty, did much more willingly make use of the Alms which he be god from
door to door, tha^ of those which were offered freely unto him. For if he
were at my time invited by great persons, at whose tables he were to be
honored with more abundant fare^ he was ever accustomed before hand to beg
some fragments of bread at the next neighbors houses, and so being first
enriched which poverty, he afterward sat down at the table. And having
do^ne the like one day when he was invited by the Bishop of Hostia, who bare an
especial love and affection unto the poor servant of Christ; the Bishop then
complaining that he did derogate much from his honor, who being to eat in his
house, would before hand go beg for Alms; the servant of God made answer:
saying. My Lord, I have exhibited great honor unto you, mean while that I have
honored a Lord far greater than you: for our Lord God is well pleased in
poverty, and in that especially which is voluntary begging for Christ. This
regal dignity, which our Lord Jesus being made poor, has voutsafed for us to
asume to the intent that by his poverty he might enrich us and might make us
being poor in spirit to be Kings and Coheires of his heavenly Kingdom: this,
I say I will in no wise relinquish for any fee of deceitful riches, which are
granted unto us but for an houers contineuance.

Sometimes exhorting his brethren to go beg for Alms, he used these words
unto them, Go your ways now, says he, for so much as in this last hour, the
Friars Minors are lent unto the world, to the end that in them, the elect may
fulfill that work of piety, for the which they may be by the judge commended:
at what time as they shall hear that most sweet and confortable saying, Math.
25.40.
As long as you did it to one of these my least brethren, you did it to me. And
therefore he said it was a delightful thing to beg under the title of the
Friars Minors, whom the Master of Evangelicall truth, has with his own mouth
in the reward of the just, so directly signified. Upon principal feasts also,
when opportunity would serve, he used to beg: saying that in the holy poor,
that word of the Prophet was accomplished Man has eaten the bread of Angels.
Psalm. 72.25.
For that bread he said undoubtedly to be the bread of Angels, which being
asked for the love of God, and being by the holy suggestion of the blessed
Angels, for charity toward him bestowed, is so by holy poverty gathered and
collected from door to door. Whereupon it be falling him to abide upon an
Easter day in a certain Hermitage which was so far from the company of men,
that conveniently he could not beg: he then calling himself to mind of him
who appeared the same day in the form of a stranger unto his Disciples as they
went unto Emaus, Luc. 24.1.
demanded Alms therefore of his brethren, as a poor man; and a stranger.
Which when he had with humility received, he then instructed them with holy
speeches: that passing through the desert of this world, they should like
forraniers and strangers, as true Hebrews in poverty of spirit continually
celebrate the Passover of our Lord: understanding thereby his passage out of
this world unto his Father,

And for because in the asking of Alms, he was not led with desire of gain,
but with the liberty and freedom of spirit; God therefore, the Father of the
poor, see med over him to bear a special care and protection. For it
happened that the servant of God being surprised with sickness in a certain
place called Noceria, he was from thence convaied toward Assisium, by certain
solemn Messengers which the people of that City, had out of their great
devotion, sent for that purpose unto him. Who bringing with them the servant of
Christ, came to a certain poor village called Sarthianum, where as well the
time of the day, as hungar also, requiring meat they went out to provide, but
finding no meat to be bought for money, they returned empty to the place
again. To whom the holy man said: for this cause ye have found nothing,
because you trust more in your Flies: than you do in our Lord. For he called
their pieces of money, by the name of Flies. But return (said he) to the
houses, whereby you passed before, and humbly desire the Alms of the
inhabitants, offering the love of God for a reward unto them. Neither do ye out
of a false estimation hereof conceive, as of a thing either of bashfullnesse,
or baseness for you to undertake: considering that the great Alms giver has
now after sin, by his abundant goodness, granted and disposed of all
things in Alms, both to the wotthy and unworthy. Whereupon his conductours
being warfairing men, setting shame a side, and craving Alms with a willing
mind, made better market for the love of God, than for their money. For by the
divine in stinct of God, the poor inhabitants were so compunct in heart, that
they freely offered not only their goods, but themselves also therewithal.
And so it came to pass, that the same degree of want which money could not
relieve, even that did the rich poverty of Saint FRANCIS abundantly supply.

At such time as the holy man lay sick in an Ermitage nigh to Reate, a certain
Physician reforted oftentimes with timely endeavor ynto him. But the servant
of Christ not being able to give a reward unto him answereable to his pains
and labors: the most liberal God, who would not dismiss him without a
present requital, recompensed his godly industry in his poor servants
behalf, with this new and unusual benefit. For this Phifition having about
that very time newly built him a house whereupon he had bestowed, the whole
sum of all his former gains, and labors, the same by mean of a wide rifte
in the wall, reaching from the top to the bottom of the foundation, was
ready to fall to the ground. in so much as it seemed impossible by any art or
numane industry to be prevented. But he having great confidence in the meritts
of the holy man, did with great zeal of faith request the brethren, that some
thing might be given unto him, which the man of God had touched with his hands.
Having therefore at length with great instancy of entreaty obtained, some
little parcel of his hair, he put the same over night within the rift of the
wall, which he rising betimes in the morning, found to be shut and conioined
again with so strong and firm a solidity, that neither could he pull out the
Relics which he had enclosed therein, nor yet could he find any mark of the
former division. Whereby it was through the goodness of God provided that he
who diligently ministered unto the decayed body of the holy servant of God did
prevent the danger of his own dwelling house which was ready to fall to the
ground.

Another time also the man of God desiring to go unto a certain desert, where
he might more freely attend unto contemplation: for so much as he was weak and
feeble he was carried upon a certain poor man's Ass. And when as the same
poor man by reason of following the servant of Christ, and passing with him
over the mountanouse places, in the extremest heats of the year, was then so
wearried with the painfullnes and length of his journey, that he seemed to
fainte through the excesliue heat of his thirst, he instantly began to cry
after the holy man; Behold I die for thirst, unless I may be presently
refreshed by the benefit of some draught of drink. Whereupon the man of God,
incontinently alighting down from the Ass, fixed his knees upon the ground,
Praying upon his knees and lifting his hands toward heaven he obtained his
petition.
and streetching forth his arms to heaven, ceased not to pray until he
perceived himself to be heard. But his prayer being ended at length, make haste
(says he) unto the man, and go to yonder rock, for there thou shall find a
spring of lively water, which Christ has mercifully provided out of the stone,
for thee to drink. Wonderful without doubt is the favorable goodness of
Almighty God, which does so easily incline it self unto his servants desires.
The Thirsty man drank from out of the rock, of that comfortable and refreshing
water, which was by the efficacy of prayer produced, and filled his cup, out
of the most hard and flintie stone. In this place never had there binne water
seen before: neither could there any since be found; as has well appeared by
diligent inquiry and experience.

But in what wonderful manner Christ did by the merits of his poor servant,
multiply the meat in the Sea, considering that we are hereafter to set it
down in place convenie^t, thus much only it shall be sufficient in this place
to have rehearsed, Exodus 17.6.4. Reg. 4.43.
that out of a small proportion of Alms bestowed upon him he delivered the
Mariners for many days together, from the peril of famine of death: that
thereby it may be well observed, that the servant of Almighty God, even as he
was like unto Moses, in bringing water out of the Rock, so was he also like
unto Elizeus, in the multiplication of victuals. Good cause therefore it is
that all diffidence should far away depart from the servants and followers
of Christ. For if the poverty of Saint Francis: were of so plentiful
sufficiency, that by a wonderful virtue it did so far forth supply the wants
of them by whom he was helped in his need, that they wanted neither meat,
drink, nor house, when money, art; and nature did fail them, much more shall
it deserve to obtain those things which are by the accustomed order of Gods
divine providence, commonly vouchsafed and granted unto all men. If, I say, the
drienesse of the rock, have at the voice of a poor man, yielded drink
abundantly to the thirsty, then shall nothing in the world deny service unto
them, who have forsaken all things fot love of the Author of all things,

THE EIGHT CHAPTER. Os his affection of Piety: and how creatures devoied of
reason, seemed to be affected toward him.
UNFEIGNED piety, which according unto the Apostles saying, is Profitable to
all things, had so far forth penetrated and replenished the heart of S.
Francis, that the man of God seemed wholly to be subjected thereunto. Tim. 4.8.
This is that virtue, which did by force of devotion, eleuate him aloft up unto
God, which did by compassion transform him, into Christ, which by way of
condiscending, declined him to his neighbor, and which by an universal
reconcilement and accord of all things, did refigurate and again restore him,
unto the state of innocence. And allbeit that our of this piety he were
devoutly affected unto all things: yet at such time especially, as he
perceived that the souls which were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ
Jesus, were defiled with any filth of sin, he then bewailed them, with such a
tenderness of commiseration, that as a mother in Christ, he daily labored
to bring them forth again. And this was the special, cause that moved him so
much to reverence the ministers of the word of God: for that they do both
raise up seed to their brother deceased namely unto Christ, who vouchsafed
to be crucified for sinners) by working the conversion of them; and being
converted, do also govern them, with an industriouse and careful piety. This
excellent office of commiseration, he affirmed to be unto the Father of mercy
more acceptable than any sacrifice: especially when it proceeds from the
industry of perfect charity: whereby more diligent labor is employed therein
by force of example, than by course of words, by mourneful prayers, rather than
by babbling discourses. Whereupon he would say, that that Preacher was much to
be lamented as a man wholly destitute of true and perfect piety; who, either in
preaching, seeks not the health of souls, but his own private praise and
glory; or who by the naughtiness of his life, destroieth what ever he builds
up, by the truth of doctrine. Before such an one therefore, he said, that a
simple and ignorant brother was far away to be preferred, who by his own good
example, 1. Reg. 2 5.
provoke others also unto the like. And to his effect he expounded that place
of holy scripture; Until the barren have brought forth many children. For the
barren (said he) is understand to be that poor brother, whose proper office,
is not to engender children in the holy Church. But he nevertheless, shall yet
in the judgment bring forth many children: because that such as by his private
prayers he does convert unto Christ; shall then be by the Judge, unto his glory
ascribed. And She that has many children, shall be enfeebled: because the vain
and talking preacher who now glories of many children, as by mean of his own
labor and industry begotten, shall the plainly know and discern himself
not to have any right or interest in them at all. He therefore with all the
hearty affection and desires of piety, and with a burning and zealous
emulation of mind, thirsting after the salvation and good of souls, was ever
more accustomed to say, that he was as it were replenished with sweet odours
and was in a manner anointed with a most preciouse and delightful ointmente,
so often as he heard that many wear induced unto the way of truth, by the
sweet smelling fame of his holy brethren, dispersed through sundry parts of
the world. Upon the hearing of these reports his spirit not a little rejoiced:
heaping most acceptable and abundant blessings, up on all those brethren, who
either by word or deed, did induce sinners unto the lout of Christ. But he
contrariwise, whosoever, did by their euel demeanoure violate the holy stare
of Religion? did thereby incur the most greivouse sentence of his
malediction: Of thee, O my most holy Lord (said he) and of all thy blessed
court of heaven, and of me thy poor and humble servant, be the al aceursed,
who by their evil example, do confoundeand destroy that which by the holy
brethren of this order, thou have already builded, and do not cease yet to
build. And oftentimes he conceived so exceeding great sorrow and grief, upon
occasion of the scandal of weakelings, that he thought himself to have been
almost dead therewithal, had he not been vpholden by the consolation of Gods
divine clemency. But onetime especially being marveilouse much distressed with
the evil examples which he saw to begiven, and praing with a perplexed
spirit unto the father of mercy for his children: this manner of answer from
our Lord he thereunto received. Why art thou thus, thou poor and silly man
afflicted? have I in such manner of wise ordained thee to be Pastor over this my
religious order, that thou do not know me to be the principal patron and
director thereof? For this cause have I thereunto designed thee being but a
simple man: that what things I shall work in thee, be to no humane
industerie, but unto the mighty power of God, ascribed. It is I who have
called them, I also will keep them and feed them; and if some of them do at
any time fall away, I will subrogate other into their rooms again: so far
forth that if they be not yet borne, I will make them to be borne upon purpose.
And with how many assaults soever this my poor religion shall be distressed,
yet shall it ever abide in saftie, by mine especial giftand protection.

The vice of detraction also, he abhorred, as the professed enemy to the pure
fountain of grace and piety, as the venemovse sting of a ferpent, and as a
most desperate and deadly poison, avowing the same to be most abominable, in
the sight of Gods most merciful and sweet dispotion: considering that the man
of detraction is fed with the blood of souls, which he does murder with the
fowrde of his tongue. And hearing once one of the brethren to disgrace the
good name and fame of another, he turned therewithal unto his Vicar, saying:
arise, arise, discuss the matter diligently: and if you shall find the brother
accused to be innocent fail not with sharp correction to chastise the
accuser, whereby to make him an example in that behalf unto others. And sundry
times also he would aiudge that brother who had dispoiled another of his good
name and fame, to be himself deprived of his habit: and that he might not
presume to lift up his cies unto our Lord, before he had done his best
endeavor to restore that which he had uncharitably taken away, For so much
greater said he is the impiety of detractors, than of open theiues and robbers,
as the law of Christ which is fulfilled in the observanc of piety, does more
precisely oblige us to desire the well fare of our neighbors souls, than of
their bodies.

And with a wonderful tenderness of compassion, commiserating the cause of
all that were afflicted with any corporal grief or molestation, if he saw any
penury or defect in any man, he did with a notable sweetness of a most
zealous affection induce him to rely upon Christ, He had out of doubt, an
ingrafted clemency within him, which nevertheless the superinfused piety of
Christ, doubled yet more and more upon him. His mind therefore was even
melted toward the poor and feeble, and unto them whom he could not help
with his hand, he reached fotth his most hearty affection. It happened once that
a certain poor man. asking Alms with some importunity at the hands of one
of the brethren, the same brother returned an over hard and ungentle answer
unto him. Which being heard by this devout lover of the poor, he forth with
commanded the brother, to cast himself down naked, before the poor beggars
feet, in such wise acknowledging himself to be faulty, craving also the help
of his prayer, and pardon for hisoffece. Upon the humble performance whereof,
the loving father sweetly spoke thus unto him: When thou see any poor
creature, Omy brother, thou have a lively resemblance presented unto thee of
our Lord, and of his poor Mother. And like wise in the weak and feeble thou
have to consider the infirmities, which he vouchsafed to take upon him. And
when as in all poor people, himself also the most Christian poor man, did
hehold, the image and figure of Christ: unto such of that sort as he chanced
to meet, he did not only with free liberality imparte of the necessary
sustenances of life, which had binne given unto himself, but as though they
were properly their very own, did adiudg that they ought of duty to be
rendered unto them. Whervppon it fell out, that he returning once from Sienna,
did meet a poor man in the way: at what time himself upon occasion of
spetiall infirmity, had a certain kind of short cloak which he did wear
above his habit. But beholding with a tender eye the misery of that poor man,
he spoke unto his companion, saying: we ought verily brother to restore this
cloak unto this poor man, it being of right his own: for we took the same
but as lent unto vt, until we might chance to find another in greater need
thereof than our selves, But the brother considering the necessity of the good
father, did very seriously and stiffly therein withst and him, in noe wise
assenting that meanewhile he provided for others, himself should remain
disappointed. Where unto he thus replied, I hold it, said he, for a matter of
theft to be by the great Alms giver imputed unto me, if this cloak, which I
bear about me, I shall not give unto a more needy person. And therefore,
whenever any thing was given him to releive the necessity of his body, he
used to ask leave of the giuers, that he might lawfully bestow the same, upon
some poorer body than himself as he might hap to meet, He spared no manner
of thing, neither cloakes, nor habbitts, nor books, nor ornaments also of the
Altar, but gaus them all to the poor as occasion required, to perform the
office of piety. And oftentimes when as he met with poor men laden upon the
way, he undertook their burdens, upon his own weak and feeble shoulders.

And considering with aboundanr piety the beginnings of all things created, he
called even the least creatures by the name of Brother and Sister: because he
knew them to have one and the same beginning with himself. But yet unto those
creatures above all others he did bear a most sweet and entire affection,
which the Scriptures do testefie by a natural likeness to represent the
meekenes of Christ. He oftentimes redeemed lambs. which were led to be
killed: resting mindful of that mosl mild Lamb, who would be led to the
slaughter for redemption of sinners. It chanced one time that the servant of
God being lodged in the Monastery of Saint Verecundus, Isa. 53.7.
within the Bishopric of Eugubium a certain Ewe brought forth a young lamb
that very night. But a feirce and ravening Sow that came by, not sparing the
life of the poor innocent Lamb, did bite it to death with her cruel tuskes.
Upon the hearing whereof the good father being moved with a marveillous
compassion, and remembering therewithal the unspotted Lamb, lamented before
the^ all for the death of the Lamb, saieing: O woe is me, my brother Lamb,
innocent creature, representing Christ to the minds of men, cursed be that
wicked Sow which has killed thee, and let her not be meare for any, either
man or beast: A marveilouse thing it is to tell. Forthwith that brutefull Sow
began to be sick: and being punnished with three days continual pain in
her body, sustained at length the vengeance of death. But being afterward
thrown into the vale of the monastery, and lieng there long time together she
grew so hard and dry as a board, that she was no meat for any hungar starven
creature. Let the impiety of man therefore well weigh and consider with how
great punnishment it is finally to be rewarded, if the cruelty of a beast do
appear to have binne smeeten, with so terrible a kind of death. And let the
devout and faith full man, not less ponder and weigh with himself, of what
wonderful virtue and sweetness, was the piety of the sevant of God:
considering that the nature of brute beasts did in their kind applaude and
conform themselves unto him. For making his journey once near to the City of
Sienna, he found in the pastures a great heard of sheep. Which when he had
courteously saluted, according to his wonted manner, the sheep leaving their
pasture, ran all unto him: and lifting up their heads, did fix their eyes
directly upon him. So great an applause they verily made unto him, that both
the sheppheards and the brethren marveiled not a little thereat: beholding not
only the lambs of the sheep but also the Rams themselves leaping and
rejoicing in such marveilous manner about him.

Another time also at our Ladies of Portiuncula a certain sheep was presented
unto the man of God: who gratefully received the same for love of that
innocence and simplicity, which the nature thereof pretends. This sheep the
devoute man admonished, both to be attentive unto the praises of God, and also
to be wary from all manner of offense to the brethren. Whereupon the sheep,
marking, as it were, and observing, the piety of the servant of God; did very
carefully observe his rule and instruction. For hearing the brethren to sing
in the Quire, she also entered into the Church without any direction, bowing
her knees and bleating, before the Altar of the Virgin mother of the most
vnsported and innocente lamb; and that in such manner of wise as if she did
delight and rejoice to salute her. And yet moreover, when the most sacred body
of Christ, When the most sacred body of Christ was eliuated in time of Mass
a sheep did bow her knees thereat. See how brut beasts do know and reverence
there god which miserable beretickes refuse to do.
was elevated amidst the solemnities of the MASS, she also then did bend her
knees: as if that she poor reverent beast, accused the vndevoure of their
irreverence, and invited the devoute servantes of Christ unto a further
adoration of this most holy Sacrament. And one time he chanced for reverence of
that most mild lamb of God, to have in the city with him alitle lamb,
which he committed to the custody of a noble Matrone, called Madame lacoba de
septem sotiis, to be by her norished in her closette, but the lamb being
instructed as it were by the Saints, in spiritual things, did always with
inseparable diligence attend upon her, as she went to the Church, all the time
she remained there, and when she returned from thence. If it were long in the
morning before she rose, the lamb rising up, seemed to force her, as it were
with his horns, and with bleating voice to incite her, admonishing her as well
by gesture as by signs, to make have to the Church. Wherefore this lamb the
scholar of holy S. Francis, being now become a Master of devotion, was by this
noble woman kept, as worthy to be both loved and admired.

At Graecium, also upon a time, a certain young leveret was given alive, unto
the servant of God: which being set free upon the ground, whereas it might have
gone which way it wonlde: yet being by the good father called unto him, it came
forthwith running and leaping into his bosom, making much of it therefore with
great affection, he seemed to have compassion thereof, as a mother has
toward her child: and warning, it with sweet words, not again: to let it
self be taken, gave it free leave to depart. But being put oftentimes upon the
ground, and returning always into the fathers bosom again, as if it had some
secret feling, of the inward piety of his loving heart at length by the
fathers commandment it was brought by the brethren, unto some safer parts of
the desert. In like manner also, in the I Will of the Lake of Perusium alive cunnie
was taken, and brought to the man of God: which though it thought to escape
from all others besides, yet into his hands and bosom it committed it self,
with a domestical kind of security. So also as he passed once to the desert
of Graecium along by the Lake of Reate, a certain fisherman, of special
devotion presented a river foul unto him: after grateful acceptaunce whereof,
with opened hands he gave it way to depart: though nevertheless the foul
remained with him, whereupon he lifteing up his eyes, remained long in prayer,
and returning a long hour after unto himself again as it were from another
world: he sweetly the second time commanded the bird to depart and praise
our Lord. After license therefore with his blessing received, and pretending
also a certain kind of joy, as by the gesture of her body appeared, she took
her flight away. In the same lake also was brought unto him a great sishe
alive: which he saluting as his custom was by the name of brother, did forth
with return it again into the water, near to the sheep. But the fish
plaieng in the watter before the man of God, as being in a manner allured with
his love: would in no wise depart from the ship, but upon his license and
benediction formerlie obtained.

And yet also, another time, walkeng with one of the brethren, nigh unto the
Marshelandes of Venice, he found a great multitude of birds, sitting and
singing in the Thicket. Upon sight whereof, he said to his companions; Our
Sisters the birds do praise their creator: let us therefore go, into the
midst among them, and there let us sing our praises, and Canonical houers to
our Lord. And being entered into the verv midst of them all, the birds never
stirred out of their places: and for because in respect of their chirping
noise, the holy men and his brother could not hear one another in saying their
hours: he therefore turning himself to the birds, spoke thus unto them. ye
birds, my sisters, leave of your singing until we may have performed the due
praises we owe to God. The birds presently surceased all manner of noise: and
continewed all that while in silence: until the said hours and praises being
leisurely performed, they were licensed by the Saint of God to sing again. But
so soon as the man of God had given this licencevnto them, they presently
betook themselves to their former singing.

So also at s. Maria de Portiuneula, a certain Grasshopper fitting and singing
upon a figg tree, nigh unto the Cell of this holy man, and having with her
frequent voice, incited the Servant of God to divine praises, who even in small
things had learnt to admire the magnificence of the Almighty Creator: he
called her one day unto him, at what time, she, as being thereunto from heaven
instructed came flieng by and by upon his hand. To whom when he had said, Sing
my sister Grasshopper, and with thy chirping voice, praise thy Lord and Creator,
she obeieng, without any stay began to sing, never ceasing, until by the
commandment of the Father, she flewe back again to her usual place of
abiding. But there this Grasshopper remained eight days together, day by day
coming, singing, and departing, according to the Fathers commandment.
Whereupon at length the man of God said to his companions, Let us now license
our Sister Grasshopper to depart: for she has now sufficiently delighted us
with her singing, having for eight days space together stirred up our minds
therewithal, to the praise of Almighty God. And presently upon leave
obtained, the Grasshopper depared from him not coming any more to that place,
as in noe wife daring to transgress his commandment.

As once he lay sick at Sienna, a certain noble man sent him a live Pheasent
Cock, which had binne newly taken: this Cock had no sooner seen and heard the
holy man, but that he adheared unto him with so great a lovingnesse, that he
would by no means suffer himself to be disioined from him. For being
oftentimes put out of the brothers harbor, into a certain vineyarde by, to
the end that if he would he might depart, he swiftely always returned unto
the father again: as if he had all his time bin by him brought up and
nourished. But being at length bestowed upon a certain man, who was accustomed
out of devotion to visit the servant of God; the pheasant as if it had binne
grievouse unto him to be absented from the good Fathers sight, refused to take
any manner of meat. Whereas afterward being returned to the serva^t of God,
he ear his meat very greedily by outward gesture discovering his inward joy.

When he came to the desert of Aluerna, to celebrate the Lent which he observed
in honor of S. Michael the Archangel, diverse sorts of birds came flieng about
his Cell, who reioicing as it were at his coming, did with their pleasant
harmony and other tokens of mirth seem to in vite and allure the devoute
father to stay and abide with the^. Which when he well perceived, he said to
his companion: I see plainly brother it is the very will of God that we
should now stay here for a while, because our Sisters the birds do seem to
be so much comforted at our presence. And whiles he thereforefore remained in
that place a faulcon there building her nest: was joined unto him in a singular
manner of frendshippe. For with her singing and noise, she did continually in
the night time, prevent the hour whereat the holy man was accustomed to rise,
to his divine service which was a thing most acceptable unto the servant of
God: for that the so great watchfullnesse of this faulcon over him, did cause
him to shake of all sloth and slugishenes. But when the servant of Christ was
more than usually afflicted with any kind of infirmity, then did the faulcon
in some sort abstain, neither did she at those times awake him so early but
as it were instructed thereunto of God; about the break of day she gave a
gentle knock with the bell of her voice: and surely it seems, that this
reioicing of birds of many kinds, and that the singing also of the faulco^,
should be a divine foresignification: that this notable praiser and most
excellent worshipper of God, being carried aloft by the wings of contemplation
should then be there exalted: by a Seraphicall apparition.

During the time he once abode in the Ermitage of Grecium: the inhabitans in
that place, were grievously afflicted, with many and sundry evils. For not
only a multitude of ravening wolves did thereaboutes consume both men and
beasts, but a yearly and violent Tempest also of hail, did continually
destroy, the corn and vineyardes. At what time therefore as this denouncer of
Gods holy Gospel preached unto them in the midst of this their distress and
affliction, he said unto them: to the honor and praise of Almighty God, I
require you to be of good hope, that all this pestilence shall soon forsake
you, and that our Lord with his merciful eyes regarding you, will multiply
you in temporal goods, if crediting my words, you will now first of all
begin to take compassion upon your selves: whereby making a true confession
of your sins, you may bring forth the works worthy of penance. But this
again I denounce unto you, that if as vngreatefull men for such benefits, you
shall return to your vomit again: then shall your plague be renewed, your
punnishment shall be redoubled, and a greater indignation shall justly fall upon
you From that very hour the people doing penna^ce according as he exhorted
them, their miseries ceased, their dangers were all at an end: and neither the
wolves nor the hail did any more mischief among them. Nay which is more to be
admired, if the neighbors fields, were at any time endaungered with hail, so
soon as it approached unto their confines, either there it rested, or else
diverted to some other part. Thus not only the hail did cease, but the wolves
also kept the convenante of the servant of God, neither did they offer any more
contrary to the law of piety to inrage against men converted unto God, so long
as they according to their promise, did not wickedly transgress against the
laws of God Wherefore we have good cause, devoutly to think of the piety of
this blessed man: which was of so marveilouse sweetness and efficacy that it
tamed wild creatures in so much that those of the woods it made live in
howses, and made double thrice those which were of more gentle nature, it did
incline the nature of brute beasts which has binne fince the fall of man
rebellious against him, to become now obedient unto him. This verily is that
virtue which confederating all creatures with it self, Is profitable to all
things: having promise of the life that now is, and of that to come.

THE NINTH CHAPTER. Of the fervor of his Charity, and of his desire of
Martyrdom.
BUT that fervent Charity, Wherewith this friend of the spouse, Saint Francis,
was altogether inflamed, what man may be able sufficiently to express? For as
a certain fiery coal, he seemed to be wholly absorbted in the flame of Gods
love. For soddainely upon the very hearing of the love God he was forthwith
stirred up, he was in marveilouse manner affected, and wholly set on fire: as
though with the outward stroke of the voice; the inward string of the heart
were touched. And therefore to offer such manner of tributs insteede of Allmes,
he said it was a noble kind of prodigality: and those that esteemed thereof
less than of money, he held to be most foolish, confidering that the
vnprisable valewe of the only love of God, is abundantly sufficient to gain
the Kingdom of heaven: and that the love of him who loved us much, is much to
be loved and esteemed. But to the end he might be out of all things provoked
unto the love of God, he marveilously reioiced in all the works of our Lord
his hands: and by the mirrours of delightsomnesse, he raised up himself into
the lively orriginall and cause of them: For he did behold in the things that
were beautiful, him that was most beautiful of all: and by the perfections
imprinted in all things the every where prosecuted the thing beloved; making as
it were unto himself, a ladder of all things, whereby he might ascend and take
hold of him, who is altogether and wholly to be desired. For with an affection
of devotion more than had binne heard of, he tasted in every of the creatures
as it were in little Rivers, that excellent goodness of the fountain it self;
and as if he had conceaved a heavenly harmony, in the consonantes of the
virtues and actions given by God unto them, he sweetly exhorted them,
according to the manner of the prophet DAVID, unto the honor and praise of
Almighty God.

Christ Jesus crucified evermore remained as a handefull of Mirrhe within the
bosom of his mind into whom he desired to be through the fervor of most
excessive love in every part transformed. And for a prerogariue of a peculier
devotion unto him, from the feast of the Holy Epiphanie, during the space of
full forty days together, that is to say during all that time whearin Christ
remained solitary in the desert, he also be taking himself to solitary places,
and being in his Cell retired, did with wonderful strictness as well of meat
as of drinck in fastings and prayers, continually attend to the praises of God.
So fervent was that affection, wherewith he was carried unto Christ. But Christ
his well beloved, did requite him again, with so familiar a kind of love,
that it seemed unto him the servant of God, as if he had the continual
presence of his Savior before his eyes: Let the heretics he^re consider the
devotion of this Saint to our B. Lady the Mother of God in her especially after
Christ he put special confideuce her he made an advocate for himself and his
brethren.
according as he sometimes familiarly declated unto his companio^s. He burned
with an admirable fervor of al his heart and soul, toward the blessed
Sacrament of our Lord his body: woondering with an unspeakable amazement, at
that most charitable condiscending, and most condiscending charity: He did
oftentimes communicate, and that with so great devotion, that he made others
also to be devoute by his example: whilst he at the sweet tasting of the
immaculate Lamb, was as one drunck in spirit, ravished for the most part into
an ecstasy of mind. He loved the mother of our Lord Jesus Christ with an
unspeakable love: for that by her the Lord of Majesty, is be come a brother
unto us, and we by her have happily obtained mercy. In her next after Christ,
he reposed his principal confidence and her he did most especially choose, to
be the Advocatrix for himself and all his brethren. And to her honor, he did
most devoutly fast, from the feast of the holy Apostles Saint Peter and Saint
Paul until the feast of her Assumption. Unto the Angelical spiritts also,
considering them to burn with a maveilouse fire of excessive love toward
God, and of inflaming the souls of the elect therwithall, he was conioined
with an inseparable band of love: and for devotion toward them he fasted
forty days from the Assumption of the glorious virgin, attending all that
time unto continual prayer. But unto blessed Saint Michaell, the Archangell,
for that it belonged unto his office to represent the souls he was the more
devoted in an especial bond of love, the rather for the fervent zeal he bare
unto the salvatiou of all the elect. And as concerning the Saints, out of the
remembrance of all them, as out of fiery stones, he grew to be more
aboundantely inflamed in the unquenchable zeal and love of God: bearing
toward all the Apostles, and specially to Saint Peter and Saint Paul, for
the exceeding charity which they had toward Christ, a most principal and
rate devotion: and for the reverence and love of them, he dedicated unto our
Lord a peculiar Lenten observance.

This poor man of Christ had no more but two mites, his body namely and his
soul, to give unto God with liberal charity. But these two he spated not for
the love of Christ to offer up so continually, that as it were all his life
time, he sacrificed his body, by the rigor of abstinence. and his spirit by
the fervor of desire, exterioutly in the Porche of his body immolating the
burnt sacrifice, and in the temple of his soul inwardly beginning the sweet
smelling incense, of devotion. But yet for all this so was he borne alofte to
divine things by the excessive devotion of charity, that never thelesse his
affectuous benignity did dilate it self unto his Copartners in nature and
grace. For whom the singular piety of his heart had made to be a brother unto
all creatures besides him, it is no marvel if the charity of Christ did make
to be much more a brother unto creatures ennobled with the Image of their
creator, and redeemed with the blood of their maker. And therefore he
reputed not himself to be the friend of Christ unless he did cherishe the
souls, which he had redeemed. He said that nothing was to be preferred before
the welfare of souls, approvinge the same especially by this, that the only
begoten soon of God, vouchsafed for the love of them to hang upon the Cross.
And from hence proceeded his combatte in prayer, his discourse in preaching,
and his excess in giving good example. Whereupon so often, as over much
austerity was reprehended in him, he made answer that he was given for an
example unto other men, For notwithstanding that his innocent flesh, which had
now willingly and freely subjected it self to the spirit, stood no ways in
need of any scourge at all, for his own offenses; yet for examples sake he
daily renewed both pains and burdens upon himself, keeping hard ways for
other men's instruction. For he used to say, If I speak with the tongues of men
and of Angels and have not Charity, in my self, whereby to give example of
virtue unto my neighbors: I profit others but little, and my self no white at
all.

And with a fervent inflammation of charity, he did emulate the glorious
triumph of the holy Martirs: for that in them neither could the flame of love,
be extinguished, nor yet could the stability of fortitude, be any way
infeebled. Wherefore being wholly set on fire, with that perfect charity, which
casts out fear, he also desires by the flame of Martyrdom to offer
himself as a living sacrifice unto our Lord: to the end he might make
requital, according to his power. unto Christ that suffered death for us upon
the Cross, and might also provoke others by his example unto the love of God:
For in the sixth year after his conversion, burning altogether in desire of
Martyrdom, he purposed to pass the seas unto the parts of Siria, to preach
the Christian faith and penance, unto the Saracens, and other infidelles, And
being gotten aboarde into a cerraine ship, that made for those parts, by
mean of contrary winds, he was enforced to put a shore upon the coaste of
Salauonia. Where having made some time of aboade, and nor having found any
ship in all that space prepartd to pass the Seas: he thereby perceiving
himself to be disappointed of his desires, made earnest request unto certain
Mariners, even then prepared for Ancona, that for the love of God they would
take him along with them. But they obstinately refusing him, as not having
wherewith to deftay his charges: the man of God singulerly reposing upon the
goodness of our Lord, entered secretly into the ship, himself and his
companion with him. At that time fortuned to be there, a certain man, of Gods
own sending, as is to be thought, for the relief of his poor servant: who
bringing with him necessary provision of victuals, and calling unto him one of
the ship, that had the fear of God before him, delivered the same unto him,
saying, keep these things faithfully for the poor brethren, that lie secret
in the ship, and in the time of need, imparte thereof friendly unto them.
And so it came to pass that when the shippemen, laboring by sorce of the
winds for many days together, and all that time not being able to get to
land, had in the mean while exspended all their provisions yet still unto
poor Saint Francis remained, of that Alms which was by Gods appointement
reserved for him. Which nevertheiesse, though it were but very small, was yet
by Gods devine power, so marveilousely multiplied, that they making very many
days aboade upon the Sea, it abundantly supplied all their necessities even
until they came unto the very Port of Ancona. The mariners therefore
perceiving themselves by mean of the servant of God to have escaped many
dangers of death: as men who had seen the horrible dangers of the Sea. and
had also well observed the wonderful works of our Lord in the deep gave
thanks therefore unto Almighty God: who shows himself always in his friends
and servants to be marveilouse, and worthy to be beloved. But the servant of
God having now left the Sea, and beginning, to walk upon the land, casting
upon the ground, the seed of salvation, reaped thereof, fruitful handefulles
in the time of harvest.

Yet nevertheless for so much as the fruit of Martyrdom had so far forth
allured his heart, that above all the merits of virtues he longed to suffer a
preciouse death for Christ, he took his way toward Morocco, there to preach
the Gospel of Christ unto Miramolin^ and his people; if so by any means he
might attain unto the desired crown of Martyrdom. For he was borne along
with so fervent a desire thereof, that albeit he were very weak of body, he did
nevertheless outgoe his companion, in travel, and being full of speed to
bring his purpose to effect, did fly away, as it were, for very drunckenesse
and fervor of spirit. But being now already comme into Spain, by Gods sweet
disposition which reserved him for other things, there came upon him a most
grievous infirmity, whereby he was so hindered that he could in no wise
accomplish what he so much desired. The man of God therefore perceivinge that
his life in the flesh, was yet necessary for the issue which he had begotten,
albeit that he esteemed death as a gain for himself: therefore returned to
feed the sheep, which were by Almighty God, unto his care, commended.

But the burning fire of charity, more then enforcing his spirit unto
Martyrdom, he yet the third time adventured, for spreading abroad the faith
of the holy Trinity, to travel into the parts of the infideles. For in the
thirtenth year after his conversion, hastening toward the parts o^ Siria,
he constantely exposed himself unto many dangers, that he might comme to the
Souldan of Bahilon. For at that time was between the Christians and the
Sarasens a war so implacable, and the Tents also of the Armies on either
part, so closely pitched, that no way of mutual passage remained, but with
imminent danger of death. For the Sultan had given out a cruel edict: that
whosoever could bring the head of any Christian, should receive a golden crown
of Bizance for his reward. But the hardy warrior of Christ Saint Francis,
hoping that now shortly his purpose might be obtained, determined to undertake
the iourny being nothing terrefied with the fear of death, but much provoked
with the desire thereof. Werfore after prayer before hand made, he being
comforted and strenghned by the hands of our Lord, did confidently sing that
verse of the Prophette, For although I shall walk in the midst of the
shadow of death I will not fear evils because thou art with me. Taking with
him therefore a companion, Psalm. 22.4.
brother Huminatus by name, a man verily both of light and virtue, as he was
entered in his way, he met two little sheep, upon the sight whereof, the holy
man was marveilously reioiced, and said unto his companion; Be of good hope in
our Lord my brother, for in us that word of the Gospel is fulfilled: Behold I
send you as sheep in the midst of wolves. Mat. 10.16.
But being gone a little further they met with Saracene officers: who running
as very wolves inded upon the poor sheep, and feircely laieng hands upon them
the servants of God, did in very cruel and contemptible manner entreat them?
dishonoring them with reproaches, afflicting them with stripes, and binding
them in bands. Until that having binne many and soundry ways afflicted and
distressed, they were at length by Gods divine providence, brought unto the
Souldane, according to the man of Gods desire. Who being of that great Prince
demanded, from what persons, to what pursose, and in what manner, they had bin
sent; as also by what means they had so far arrived the servant of Christ.
Saint Francis, with a courageous heart made answer, that he was not sent from
man, but from God Almighty himself, to show unto him and his people the way of
salvation, and to preach unto them the Gospel of truth.

But with so great constancy of mind, with so efficacious power of the soul,
and so rare a fervor of spirit, did he preach unto the foresaid Souldan,
one only God in Trinity, and Jesus Christ the Savior of makinde: that in him
that place of the Gospel well appeered to be accomplished, Luc. 21.18.
which says, I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries
shall not be able to resist and gainesay. For the very Souldan himself
beholding in the man of God an admirable fervor of spiritte, and singular
virtue therewithal did both willingly give ear unto him, and did also the
more instantly invite him to make longer aboade with him. But the servant of
Christ enlightened with Gods divine Oracle, if thou will, said he: with thy
people be converted unto Christ: I will for his love willingly remain among
you, But if you make doubt for the faith of Christ, to refuse the law of
Mahomet, command then a very great fire to be kindled, and I together with
thy Priests will enter into the same; that yet so at least thou may well
discern, Which faith is of very right to be held, for more holy and certain.
Where unto the Souldan answered, I do not believe that any of my priests will
for defense of their faith, either expose themselves to the fire or otherwil
undertake any kind of torment. For he had seen one of his priests, a man of
special years and authority, immediately upon the hearing of those words to have
withdrawn himself out of his sight. Then said the holy man unto him, If thou will for thy self and thy people make promise unto me, tocome to the service of
Christ, if I shall without harm pass through the fire: I will enter, into the
same my self alone: and if I shall be burnt, be it imputed to my sins, but if the
mighty power of God shall protect me, acknowledge then Christ the power and
wisdom of God to be himself very God, and undoubted Lord and savior of al
mankind. But the Solda^ answered, that he durst not accept of this condition
for that he feared a sedition among the people. Nevertheless they offered unto
him many precious rewards al which the man of God, being no ways covetous of
wordly things, but altogether desirouse of the salvation of souls, did utterly
reiecte as dirt. Whereby the Souldan perceiving the holy man to be so perfect a
contemner of wordly things: and being also moved with admiration thereof,
conceyved in himself a far greater devotion toward him. And albeit that he
would not, or that perhaps he durst not receive the Christian faith, yet did he
instantly beseech the servant of Christ to accept of the forsaide gifts to be
for his souls health bestowed upon Christian poor people or to the use of
their Churches. But he for that he esche wed the burden of money, and did not
see the rote of true piety to be in the mind of the Souldan, would in no wise
be persuaded there unto. And furthermore perceiving that he did not prevail in
the converfion of that nation neither yet could attain unto his purpose
therein upon forewarning by revelation from heaven received, he made his
return unto the parts of the faithful. And so both mercifully and
marveilously it came to pass, by the clemency of God so ordaining. and by
the virtue of the holy man promerriting the same, that this friend of Christ
did for his love seek after death with all his whole desire, and could by no
means find it: whereby he might nor want the metrite of most desired
Martyrdom, but might be yet reserved, to be afterward insigned with a
singular privilege. And by that means was it also effected, that, that divine
fire did yet more perfectly escape and boil in his heart, that after wards it
might more powerfully, flame and burst out in his flesh O holy man, most truly
blessed: whose flesh although it be not cut with the sword of the Tyrant does
not yet want the similitude of the Lamb that was slain, O truly and
perfectly blessed (I say, whose life although the sword of the persecutor did
not take away, yet did he not loose the Glory of Martyrdom.

THE TENTH CHAPTER. Of his diligence and fervency in prayer.
THE holy servant of Christ Saint Francis, perceaving that in body he was as
yet a pilgrim from God, albeit that unto earthly desires, 2. Cr. 5.7.
he was already, through the charity of Christ, become altogether insensible:
1. These. ^.17.
yet to the end he might not be without the consolation of his wellbeloved,
attending unto prayer without intermission. he endeavored to offer up his
spirit before the presence of God. And prayer, Behold how necessary prater is
to a religious man.
dovbtlesse was a solace unto him, in his contemplation, mean while that in
the circuit of the heavenly mansions, he being already made a fellow Citizen
of Angels, did with fervent desire seek after his welbeloved: from whom none
other thing but the wall of his flesh did now disioyne him. This also was a
help unto him in work and labor namely that in all the things he took in
hand; distrusting his own industry, and firmly reposing upon Gods heavenly
piety, he did by the instancy thereof cast all his thought upon our Lord. He
firmly avowed that promptenesse in prayer was above all things to be desired
on the part of a religious man: and verily believing that without the same no
man might be able to prosper in the service of God, he did by all the means he
might stir up his brethren unto the diligent exercise thereof. For, walking
and setting, within doors and abroad, laboring and recreating, hewas
evermore so attentive unto prayer, that he seemed, not only for what was in him
either in heart or body, but in labor also and time, to have dedicated and
devoted all wholly thereunto, He was always heedefull, at no time negligently
to ouerpasse any visitation of the spirit. For when i^ was offered unto him,
he followed the same: and so long as our Lord vouchsafed to grant it, he
comfortably enioied the sweetness thereof: And even at such very times as he
was seriously intentive to travel, 2. Cor. 6.1.
when he found in himself any sweet motions, Gods heavenly spirit, he
suffering his brethren to go before him, did for a while make stay in the
place, and by that means converting the new inspiration unto a present
fruition, he did not receive the grace in vain.

Oftentimes he was lifted up with so great an excess of contemplation, that
being ravished above himself, and finding within him something beyond humane
sense and understanding he did not know what was exteriourly done about him.
For pasling one time through the Borough of Saint Sepulcher a Town doubtless
very populous and well replenished, he being then borne upon an Ass by reason
of the feebleness of his body, did meet a great multitude of people which
came thronging upon him for very devotion. But being by them, pulled, halled;
and detained, as also crushed, and many ways pressed, he seemed to be in all
those things insensible: and as a body devoided of life did not observe what
was done about him. In so much having now a good way passed the town, and
being freed of the multitudes, when he came unto a certain Hospital of the
Leapours, the contemplator of hevenly things returning even then as it were
from another world, demanded diligently of his company when they should come
nigh to the Bouroughe. For verily his mind being fixed in the beams of
heavenly Glory, did not discern the variety of places, and times, nor yet of
the persons, that frequently came to meet him. And the like hearevnto, the
manifold experience of his companions, has well testified, very often to have
befallen unto him. And for so much as in prayer he had fully perceaved, that
the much desired presence of the Holy Ghost, did so much the more familiarly
offer it self unto them that attend unto prayer, by how much as he did find
them to be more alienated and enstraunged, from the disturbance of worldly
things: he therefore seeking after solitary places, did in the night time
resort, by reason of prayer, into the Deferts, and Churches at that time
unfrequented. Howbiet that in those places he very many times sustained most
horrible assaults of the Devils: who sensibly entering into combatte with him,
endeavored to disturb him from the exercise of prayer. But be armed with Gods
heavenly wepons, look how much the more vehemently he was assailed by his
enemies, so much the more strong did he become in power of resistance, so much
the more ferve^t and perseverant he was in the accomplishment of his prayer.
Confidently v^sing this speachevnto Christ, Under the shadow of thy wings, do
thou protect me: Psalm. 16.8.
from the face of the wicked, who have afflicted me. But unto the D^uels he
said; spare not to work upon me, all that you are able, O ye maligna^t and
deceitful spirits, For ye can do nothing, but as the hand of God, lets
loose the reins unto you: and I for my part am ready with all willingness of
mind to sustain whatsoever he has determined to be inflicted upon me, Which
constancy of his mind, the proud Devils not being able to abide, departed
away from him, with shame and confusion.

But the man of God now remaining solitary, and undisturbed, filled the
woods, with dolorouse groans, he sprinkled his places of abode, with tears
he beat upon his breast with his hand: and having gotten as it were a secret
place of residence, he had free conference with his Lord and Master. There be
made answer for himself, before his Judge; there he made supplication, unto
his Father, there he familiarely discoursed with his beloved friend. He prays
with his hand stretched out a cross.
There also he was sometime heard by his brethren, that devoutly observed him;
with clamorous groans, to call unto Gods devine clemency in the behalf of
sinners: with loud voice also to be wail our Lord his passion, even in such
wise, as if it had then visibly bin set before him. There was he seen in the
night season, praieing with his hands stretched out a cross, his whole body
being lifted up on high from the ground; and round about environed, with a
brrght and gloriouse cloud: so that, of that marveilouse garnishing, which he
had inwardly in his mind, the admirable glorious light, wihch outwardly
appeared about his body, might be an undoubted testimony. Even there also,
according as it is approved by most evident tokens, the uncertain and hidden
points of Gods divine wisdom were discovered unto him: albeit that he did in
no sort exteriourly diuvlge them, otherwise then as his charity toward
Christ, did enforce him, and the ^rofite of his neighbor, did especially
require ^^m. For he would commonly say, that for a very mean and light hire, a
thing of inestimable praice and valewe happens oftentimes to be utterly lost:
and that he who gave the same, is easily provoked in no wise to give the like
again.

Evermore when he returned from his private prayers by the which he was almost
changed into another man; he was especially careful to conform himself unto
others; least happily that which had bin out wardly discovered, might by the
breath of humane favor, be inwardly evacuated of merit and reward. And
therefore when in some public place, he had bin at any time visited by our
Lord, he always gave some other matter of object, unto the standers by, least
that the familiar love tokens of the spouse, should be outwardely observed, and
reported abroad. As for much spitting, groaning, deep sighs, and outward
gestures, during the time he prayed amongst his brethren, he altogether
eschewed them: either because he loved to be secret, in those things, or else
because in his inward cogitatio^, he was whole borne up alofte into Cod. And
oftentimes in this sort he would speak unto his familiars, when the servant
of God, in time of prayer is visited from above, he ought forth with to say
unto him, Thou O Lord, have sent this comfort from heaven unto me a sinner and
unworthy person, and I commite the fame again unto thy custody, because I
perceive my self to be but a robber of thy divine treasure, And when he
returns from prayer, he ought to show himself as very a poor wretch and as
much a sinner, as if he had obtained no such new grace an favor at all

But it chanced upon a time when the man of God was praieng in the place of
Portiuncula that the Bishopp of Assisium came unto him to visit him, according
to his accustomed manner. Who so soon as he entered into the place, did over
bolly approach unto the Cell whearein the servant of Christ did pray, but
having knocked at the little door, and putting forward himself to enter in, no
sooner had he put in his head and seen the holy man at prayer, but being
stricken with a soddeine fear, all the parts of his body did loose their
strength, and his vety speech did also leave him. Moreover he being through
Gods divine will, by force driven out of the place, was soddainely borne back
a good way of. Whereat the Bishop being much astonished, made have to the
brethren as fast as he could: and God then restoring unto him his speech
again; in the first words he spoke, he confessed his fault.

One other time also it happened, that the Abbot of the monastery of S.
Iustine, which is within the Bishoppricke of Perusium, did meet the servaunt
of Christ. Upon whose sight, the devout Abbot did speedily alight from his
horse: as well to do, reverence unto the man of God; as also to confer with
him upon some things concerning the health and well fare of his soul. And at
length after sweet conference passed between them, the Abbot departed, humbly
desiring him, to pray for him. To whom the beloved servant of God, answered, I
will pray for you willingly. Behold the wonderful force of Saint Francis his
prayer.
So the Abbot being now gone a little way of the faithful man Saint Francis,
said unto his companion, expecte a while my brother because I desire to pay
the debt, which I have promised. But mean while that he contineued in prayer,
the Abbot sodeinely felt in himself in an unusual kind of warmeth and
swetnes, until that time altogether unknown unto him: and that in such
degree, that being brought into an ecstasy of the mind, he failed wholly from
himself into Almighty God. And so for some little space he remained: but
afterward returning into himself again, he did well perceive the efficacy
of the prayer of holy Saint Francis. For which cause he was evermore inflamed
with a greater love unto the Order, and unto many he reported this fact for a
miracle.

The holy man was always accustomed, Lo with what devotion and attention he
recites his canonical hours.
with no less reverent fear, then attentive devotion, to recite his
Canonical hours. For notwithstanding that he was troubled with the infirmity
of his eyes, of his stamacke, of his spleen and liver: yet would he not lean
against any wall or resting place while he did sing his service: but evermore
accomplished his hours, bearing himself upright, with his head uncovered, his
eyes, unremoved, and without any manner of cutting short his words and
sentences. And if at any time he were in journey, he nevertheless made stay for
the time, in no sort omitting this holy and reverent custom, for whatsoever
abundance of rain and floods, that might come upon him. For thus he would
often say. If the body do quietly eat this present food which shall with the
same become the meat of worms: with how great peace and quietness is it
then expedient for the soul to receive the food and sustenance of life.
Wherefore he did think himself greivously to offend, if at any time while he
was at prayer, he were inwardly distracted with vain fantasies. And when any
such thing had chanced to be fall; he made no spare, forthwith by confession
to purge himself thereof. Which his so singular a care, he had converted into
so usual an habit, that he was exceeding rarely troubled with such kind of
flees,

He had in one lent season, made a certain little vessel to over pass some
short moments of time, that they also, might not be lost in idleness. Which
coming once into his memory as he was saying his third hour, and having then
in some little degree distracted his mind: he was there upon so moved with
fervor of spiritte, that he consumed the same in the fire saying: I will
sacrifice it unto our Lord, whose sacrifice it has impeached. He used to
recite his psalms with so great attention of mind and spiritte, as if he had
God ever present before him: and when he chanced in them to find the name of
our Lord, he seemed even to lick his lips, for the very abou^dant delight, of
the sweetness, he tasted therein. And being also desirous with a most
especial reverence to honor the very name of our Lord, and that not only
thought, but also named and written he did sometimes persuade his brethren,
togather up all the little scrapps of paper that might any where be found,
containing the same, and them to put, in some clean and decent place, least it
might happily chance, that the sacred name written therein should be trodden
under foot. But the name of Jesus, when he did either speak it or hear it,
did inwardly so fill him with such a singular kind of exvltation, that he
thereby seemed to be altogether changed, even exteriourly, as if some
mellifluous swetenes had altered his taste, or some harmoniacall sound his
hearing.

But in the third year before his death, it came to pass, that for the
stirring up of greater devotion, he purposed to celebrate the festival memory
of the birth of the child Jesus, at the village of Graecium, withal the
greatest solemnity that possibly he could. And to the end the same might not be
imputed to levitie: he craved license of the Pope; and having obtained the
same, he caused a manger to be prepared, as also hay to be gotten, and an ox
and an Ass to be brought to the place. The brethren were called together; the
people assembled themselves, the wood adjoining was full of voices, and that
venerable night, was by mean of many clear shining lights, of loud soundinge
and harmoniacall praises, made to be, both very light some, and full of
solemnity. There stood the man of God before the manger, full of devotion,
besprinkled with tears: and overcome with joy. The holy sacrifice of the Mass
was solemnly celebrated upon the manger, and the Leuite of Christ S. FRANCIS,
did sing the Gospel. And afterward, unto the people that stood about him,
he preached of the nativity of the poor King: and ever as he named him, he did
for the very tenderness of love, call him the child of Bethlem. But in this
mean while, a certain soldier, of great virtue and creditte, called Master
John of Graecium, who having for the love of Christ forsaken the secular
warfare, was now in great familiarity conioined unto this servant of God, did
testify himself to have seen, a little child of great comeliness lieing a
sleep in that manger: whom, the Blessed Father S. Francis embracing in both
his arms, did seem to wake out of his sleep. And this vision of the devout
soldier, not only the holiness of him that beheld the same, did make to be
credible: but the very evident truth thereof, did undoubtedly approve it, and
the miracles succeding, did also confirm it. For the example of holy S.
Francis, being considered of the world, is of great force to stir up the
hearts of such as are heavy and dull in the faith of Christ, and the hay of
that manger being by the people reserved, was in marveilouse manner effectual,
for the recovery of sick Cattle, and a singular preservatiue against diverse
other pestilences. God Almighty in all things glorifieing his servaunt, and
demonstrating the efficacy of holy prayer, by manifest wonders and miracles.

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. Of his, understanding the scriptures, and of his
spiritte of prophecy.
BUT unto so great a perspicacity of mind, had the unwearied custom of
prayer, together with the continual exercise of virtues, brought this holy man
of God, that albeit he had no skill in the holy sacred scriptures by the
ordinary course of learning, yet nevertheless being enlightened with the
beams of eternal light, he did search the depth of them with a wonderful
sharpness of vnderslanding. For his conceit being pure from all manner of
blemish, did penetrate into the most hidden mysteries: and where the science of
the Doctor did stand without doors, even there was the affection of the
lover, admitted to enter in. Sometimes he did read in the holy books, and
what soever he did once take in his mind, he did most firmly imprint in his
memory: not hearing any thing in vain, with the bare present attention of his
mind, but ruminating therevppon, with an affection of continual devotion. And
being once demanded by his brethren, if he did like, that the men of learning,
who were already admitted unto the order, should still attend unto the study
of the holy scriptures, he answered: It likes me truly very well but yet so,
that following the example of Christ, of whom we may observe, that he did more
frequently pray, than read, they do in no ways omit the exercise of prayer,
nor yet do so give themselves to study, as only to know how they ought to
speak: but to practice the things they have learnd and when they have done
those things themselves, then afterward to propose them unto others to do
the like. For I would (said he) that my brethren should be disciples of the
Gospel, and that so they should profitte in the knowledge of the truth, as
that therewith all, they do also increase in the pureness of simplicity:
whereby they do not separate from the prudence of the serpent, the simplicity
of the done: which our chief master has with his own blessed mouth,
conjoined thereunto.

Being demanded at Sienna, by a certain religiouse man, who was Doctor of
divinity, concerning certain questions which were very difficult and hard to
be understood: he did with such a clearness of doctrine, discover the secretts
of Gods divine wisdom, that the same learned man, was thereat greatly amazed,
and with much admiration thereof, did say: Undoubtedly the divinity of this
holy Father, is like as it were an Eagle, borne up a lofte with the wings of
purity, and contemplation, but our knowledge, creeps below, upon the ground.
For though he were but even unskillful in the manner of speaking, yet was he so
full of heavenly knowledge, that he explicated most doubtful questions, and
produced to light many hidden and secret things. Neither is it to be held for
strange, that the holy man had from Almighty God received, the understanding of
the scriptures: seeing that by the perfect imitation of Christ, he did bear
the truth of them, lively expressed in his works: and that by the plentiful
unction of the Holy Ghost, he had the teacher of them abiding with him in his
heart.

And so singulerly also did the spirit of prophecy appear in him, that he did
not only foresee future things, but did also see into the hidden secrets of
men's hearts: and did moreover behold the things that were absent, as though they
were present, in marveilouse manner exhibiting himself, present, unto those
that were absent. For at that time when that the army of the Christians did
beseige the city of Damiata, the servant of God cha^ced to be there: not armed
with weapons, but with firmness of faith. Upon the very day therefore, when
the Christians were ready prepared to make the assault, the servaunt of
Christ, understanding so much, did fetch a most deep and hearty sight; and
therewithal said unto his companion: Our Lord has shown unto me that if the
battle be undertaken, it shall not prosperously succeed unto the Christians.
But if I shall discover the same, I shall be reputed a fool: and if I shall
conceal it, I shall not escape the grudge of mine own conscience. What do
you therefore advise to be done in this case. Unto whom his companion
answered, saying. Brother let it be of no moment unto you, to be censured by
the mouths of men: for you do not now begin, to be reputed a fool.
Discharge therefore your conscience, and fear God more than me^. Upon the
hearing of which words, out stepped the prophette; applying to the Christians
his behouefull admonitions: he did forbid them the conflict, and denounced
the event. But the truth was taken for a fable, they hardened their hearts and
would not return. See therefore? They did indeed encounter together, and join
in battle: but all the Christian forces were put to flight, and the army was
beaten back with much dishonor, and without triumph. And in such degree was
the number of the Christians diminished, which the greatness of the slaughter,
that about six thousand persons were slain and taken. Wherein it did
evidently appear that the wisdom of the poor man was not to be despised:
considering that. The soul of the just man, shall sometimes discover the
truth, more than seven sentinells, Eccl. 37.18
sitting on high to keep the watch.

Another time also after his return from beyond the Seas, he came to preach
at Celanum: and even then a certain soldier, did with great devotion, and
much instancy invite him to dinner. Whereunto the holy man assenting, did
accordingly come unto the soldiers house: all the whole family, Behold the
custom of Christians to pray before then eat.
not a little reioycinge the entrance of those poor guests. But before the
company began to eat, the devoute holy man Saint Francis, (according to his
wonted manner) stood offering his prayers and praises unto God, with his eyes
lifted up to heaven. And when his prayer was done, he familiarely called aside
his courteous Host, and spoke in this wise unto him: Lo now brother Host, at
the instancie of your earnest requests, I have entered into your house, to eat
with you. Wherefore agree now I pray you, unto my council and advise: for
hear you shall not eat, but in another place. Confess forthwith your sins,
with the perfect contrition of true repentance: If Sacramental confession had
not been necessary according to the precept of God and in use amongst the
ancient Fathers S. Francis had not commanded it to be performed of a man now
ready to day.
and let nothing remain within you so secret, but that you discover it, with
true and sincere Confession. Because our Lord will this day reward you, for
the great devotion, wherewith you have received his poor servants. The soldier
forthwith conformed himself unto the holy man's advise^ and unto one of his
companions, discovering all his sins in humble Confession: he disposed of his
house; and withal his best endeavors, prepared himself to die. But at the
length they sat them down at the Table: and when the rest began to eat,
sodeinely the host himself gave up the Ghost: being taken away with sode in
death according to the word of the man of God. And so it came to pass by the
meritte of Hospitality, that the devoute soldier Receiving a Prophette, did
(according to the word of truth) receive the reward of a Prophette: while he
giving creditt unto the prophetical forewarning of the holy man, did provide
himself against the sodeine assault of death, that being armed with the
weapons of penance, he might escape endless damnation; and might enter, into
the eternal tabernacles.

One time when the holy men lay sick at Reate a certain Prebend named Gedeon,
a loose and wordly man, keeping his bed upon occasion of a sore and grievouse
infirmity; being brought nevertheless unto him, did with tears, as well by
himself as by the standers by, instantly request him with the sign of the
holy Cross. Unto whom blested Saint Francis in this wise replied: considering
that your life has hither to binne, according to the desires of the flesh,
without fear of Gods justice and judgments; how may I make the sign of the
Cross upon you? But yet for the devout desires of your friends, I do sign you
with the sign of the Cross, in the name of our Lord. But know this for
certain, that if being delivered from this infirmity, you shall afterward
return, unto your wonted evil life again, you shall be^ure to suffer, far
more grievous punnishments: for in regard of the sin of ingratitude, S.
Francis making the sign of the Cross upon a sick man he forthwith becomes
whole.
the latter penalties are always worse than the former. Thus therefore the
sign of the Cross being made upon him, he who lay but even now contracted
before them. did forth with rise up perfectly well recovered: and bursting
forth into the praise of God, I am, says he, even now delivered. And the very
Chine bones of his back, did give a great found in the hearing of all that were
present: even as though a sort of dry sticks had binne broken by hand. But
within very small time after, this man, forgetful of Gods benefits unto him,
gave over his body unto unchaste delights. And when he was one evening at
supper in a certain Cannons house; and did there lodge for all that night
sodeinely the roof of the house fell down upon them al. But yet so that all
the rest finding mean of escape from death, only this unfortunate and wretched
man, was in that fall intercepted and slain. Thus therefore by the just
judgment of God, the last things of this man, became worse than the former;
because of the vice of ingratitude, and for his contempt of God: whereas he
ought to have binne thankful for the pardon he had already received,
considering that a crime renewed, is a double offense.

Another time also, a certain noble and very devout woman, came unto this holy
Saint, as well to explicate unto him her sorrow and grief, as also for the same
to require a remedy. For she had a very cruel husband, who also was adverse
unto her in the service of Christ. And therefore she requested the holy man to
pray for him, that God of his clemency would vouchsafe to mollify his heart.
But he understanding her case, gave answer unto her, saying, Go your wais home
in peace, and without doubt or dread, expect forthwith to find comfort at
your husbands hands. Here we may see that ever Married people may by the grace
of God live chaste y^ we find many Saints to have lived in this sorre
And this moreover he adjoined; you shall say unto him on the part of God and
me, that now is the time of Clemency, and afterward of equity. The woman
having received his blessing, forthwith returned, and finding her husband,
denounced those words unto him. And, lo, the holy Ghost immediately did fall
upon him: who making him of the old man, to become a new, did also work in
him, with mildness of heart in this manner of wise to make answer unto her.
Lady, let us attend to the service of our Lord, and let us endeavor our selves
to save our fowls. So that at the persuasion of his holy wife, they both
living together for many years a fingle life, did also both of them upon one
same day; happily depart unto our Lord. And wounderfull doubtless, was the
efficacy of Prophetical spiritte, which did abound in this holy man or God,
whereby he restored strength unto withered members, and imprinted piety in stony
harrs: albeit that no less wounderfull was the clear perspicacity of the same
spiritte, whereby he did in such wise foreknowe the final event of things to
come, that he did search even into the secrett thoughts of men's hearts, as
another Elizeus having obtained the double spiritte of Elias.

For having foretold, unto one of his familiar friends at Sienna, some
certain things which were finally to be fall unto him; and being also in way
of doubt demanded, by that learned man, whom I have already mentioned to have
had sometime conference with him, concerning the Scriptures whether he had
foretold those things which he had heard by the relation of the man to whom he
fortold them he not only affirmed himself to have reported those words inded;
but did also prophetically forwarne him of his own end; that had curiously
enquired of another man's. And to the end he might the more certainly imprinte
the same in his mind, he did by no less wonderful revelation, unfold, than
by most wholesome Concell resolve, a certain secrette scruple of his
conscience, which he the foresaid learned man, had never discovered to any man
alive. For confirmation of all which things, it came to pass, that the same
religiouse man, did so finally make his end even as the servant of Christ had
foretold him.

At such time also, as he once returned from beyond the Seas, having then in
company with him brother Leonard of Assisium, it chanced that he being much
wearied and overlaboured, did for some ^i^le while ride upon an Ass. But the
brother following mean while a foot, and being himself also not a little
weary, began, (out of some kind of humane passion) to say thus within
himself: His parents and mind played not at like game. But see, he rides,
and I, a footeman, lead his Ass. And even as he was then thinking the
foresaid words, the holy man forthwith alighted from the Ass, and said unto
him; It is not meet brother that I should ride, and you go a foot: because
you have binne more noble, and of greater power in the world than I, Hearevpon
the brother being forthwith amazed, and blushing thereat for shame, and also
acknowledging himself to be taken in a fault; did fall down at the fecte of
the holy man: and with abondance of ^^ares, manifested the naked truth of his
thought, and humbly craved pardon for the same.

A cortaine brother very devout unto God, and to his blessed servant of
Christ, did frequentely revolue this thought in his mind, that he, should be
worthy of Gods good favor, whom this holy ^an did embrace with a familiar and
in ward affection: and that he; whom he reputed as a straunges unto him, should
be by God reputed out of ^^^^umber of his elect. And being therefore of^^^^mes
troubled with the violence of this cogi^ation, he did very vehemently desire
the familiarity of the man of God, but yet not having revealed unto any man the
secret of his heart; the loving good Father called him and did sweetly speak
in this manner, unto him. My son let no cogitation trouble you, for
accompting you as most dear among my beloved, I do willingly bestow upon you,
the gift of my love and familiarity. The brother marveiling hereupon, and of
one already very devout yet new becoming much more devoute, did not only
increase in love toward the holy man, but being endewed with the grace of the
Holy Ghost, was plentifully enriched with far greater gifts.

But During the time that he once remained solitary in his Cell, upon the
mount of Alverna, one of his companions did exceedingly desire to have some
parcel of our Lord his words, briefly written with his hand. For he made
accounte thereby to escape, or at least wise more casely to bear a very
grievous tentation, not of the flesh, but of the spiritte, wherewith he was
sorely troubled. And languishing with this desire, he was not a little molested
in mind, for that be durst not through shamefastenes^e, to open the matter
unto the reverent father. But to whom no man did declare it, the spiritte of
God did vouchsafe to reveal it. For he willed the foresaid brother to bring
him inck and paper: and according unto his desire, he wrote therein with his
own hand the praises of our Lord, and last of all, concluded the same with his
benediction, saicing unto him, Take unto you this little piece of paper, and
keep the same diligently to the very day of your death. The brother gladly
receved this much desired gift and all the former tentation, forthwith
departed. The writing also was carrefully reserved. And whereas afterward,
marveilouse effects by it were wrought, it was a testimony of the virtues of
holy Saint Francis.

There was a brother, who outwardly seemed to be of great holiness, and of
very excellent co^versation: but was yet indeed very singular. For attending
evermore unto prayer, he did so exactly observe continual silence, that he was
accustomed to make his confession, not by words, but by signs. But it
fortuned one time that the holy Father, came unto the place to see this
brother, and to confer with the rest of the brethren, about him. At what time
they all commending him, and magnifieng him very much, The man of God, replied
upon them, Beware my brethren: do not extol unto me, in him the Devils
counterfeiting. For know in very truth, that it is a devilish tentation, and a
fraudulent decoite. The brethren did but hardly accep^ of this judgment: as
holding it impossible, that the false flourishes of fraud and dece^t, should
color themselves, with such notable signs of good perfection. But it was not
many days after, that he went out of religion, whereby it evidently appeared,
with what an excellent clearness, of internal sight, the man of God had
beholden the secreas of his heart. And in like manner, with infallible truth
foretelling, the cuine and fall of many that seemed to stand, as also the
conversion of many to Christ, that were as yet perverse, he seemed to have
drawn nigh to the beholding of that mirror: of eternal light; by the
marveilouse brightness whereof the sight of his mind, did behold things absent
in body, from him as if they had binne verily present before him.

For upon a time, his Vicar held a Chapter: but he in the mean while, remained
aparte in his Cell at prayer, as a mediator, between the brethren and God.
And when one of them, under some cloak and pretext of defense, did not submit
himself unto discipline, the holy man, even then, beholding the same in
spirit^e: called one of the brethren and said unto him, Brother, I have seen
the Devil sitting upon the back of that disobedient brother, and him,
straightly to hold his neck: who being spurred on wards by such a rider, and
contemning the raines of obedience, did follow the sway, of his own violent
motion. And when I did pray unto God; for the brother, sodeinely the Devil,
with shame, departed. Go therefore, and say unto him, that he do forthwith
submit his nock unto the yoke of holy obedience. He therefore being by the
Messenger admonished, and presently converted unto God, did humbly prostrate
himself, at the Vicats fete.

Another time also it chanced that two of the brethren came from a far of to
the Ermitage of Grecium to see the man of God, and to return with his
benediction, which they had now long time desired. But coming thither, and not
finding him, because he was then returned from public place to be solitary in
his Cell: they departed away, pensive and desolate. And see even as they were
in going, the holy man, whereas according to humane understanding, he could
have no knowledge either of their goeing or coming, yet nevertheless contrary
to his usual manner, came out of his Cell, and calling aloude after them,
according to their desire, did bless them with the figne of the Cross in the
name of Christ. There came two brethren upon a time from the la^d of labor:
whereof the auncentier brother gave soundry scandals unto the younger. But when
the were both come to the Father, he asked of the younger, how the brother his
companion had behaved himself toward him in the way. Who answearing surely,
well enough. The Father replied. Beware brother, least under the pretense of
humility, you make a lie: for I know, I know, but mark a while, and you shall
see. The brother marveiled very much, how he, by force of the spiritte, could
have knowledge of things that were done so far from him. But within few
days after, that other brother, who had given the scandal unto him, not
having asked pardon of the Father, nor yet having received due discipline for
the same, seting naught by his Order, did forsake his covent. In whose fall and
ruin, two things are at once to be considered: namly the uprightness of Gods
divine justice, and the singular perspicuity of his prophetical spiritte. But
in what manner of wise: by force of Gods mighty power he did exhibit himself
present unto them that were absent from him, it is evidently to be seen out of
the things before recited: if it be well recalled to mind, how he being absent
from the brethren, nevertheless appear unto them, transfigured in a fiery
Chariotte; and how also he presented himself unto them, in the form of a
Cross at the Chapter of Alres. The which we ought to believe to be done by
Gods heavenly disposition that by the marveilouse apparition, of his bodily
presence it might manifestly appear, how present and ready at hand his
spiritte was unto the light of external wisdom, which is more moveable then
all moveable things, Sap 7.24.
and reaching every wheare, by her o Wne purity, does transfuse herself
through nations into holy souls, Mat. 11.25 Psalm 70.16 Mat 16.17
and ordain^th the friends and prophetts of God. For the most bigh and
superexcellent Doctor, is accustomed to discover his hidden mysteries unto
simple persons and little ones according as first it appeared in David, that
finguler Prophert, and afterward, in the prince of the Apostles, S. Peter, and
now at length, in the poor little one of Christ Saint Francis. For these
whereas they were but simple according to the course of humane learning, wereby
the instruction of the holy Ghost, made right excellent and renowned, The on;
a Shepherd: to feed the flock, of the Sinagogue, led out of Egypt: The
other a Fisher, to replenish the net of the Church, with the manifold numbers
of believers: And this last a Merchant adventurer, to buy the pearl of
Evangelicall life, with the sale and distribution, of all that he had; for the
love of Christ.

THE TWELFETH CHAPTER. Of the efficac^ of his preaching: and of his gift in
Curing.
THE right loyal servant, and faithful minister of Christ, Saint Francis,
to the end he might both faithfully and perfectly, accomplish all the things
committed unto him, did most especially addict himself, unto those exercises of
virtue which by revelation of the holy spiritte, he knew to be most pleasing
to his beloved Lord. Upon occasion whereof, it chanced him to fall, into a
great agony of a certain kind of doubtfulnesse: which for many days
together, at his return from prayer, he did purpose unto his familiar
brethrene, to be by them determined. What council, said he, do ye give unto me
my brethrene? What do ye commend unto me? Whither that I should attend unto
prayer, or travel abroad to preach For I, little one that I am being simple
and rude of speech, have received at Gods hands a greater grace, in praying,
than in speaking. There seems also, in prayer to be a gain, and heaping up
of graces, but in preaching, a certain kind of distribution of the gifts from
heaven received: in prayer a gain, appears to be a purifiyng of the inward
affections and an uniting of them, unto the one, true and chiefest good,
together with a strengthening of virtue but in preaching a bedusting of the
spiritual feet, a distraction about many things, and a slackening In prayer
breiflly, we speak unto God, and therein also we hear him, and leading as it
were an Angelical life, we do converse among Angels: whereas in preaching, we
must condescend in many things unto men, and living according unto humane
custom among them, we must think upon humane things, we must see them, speak
of them, and hear them. But one thing is yet to be said, on the contrary
part, which seems to over balance all these things, before the face of God:
namely that the only begotten son of God, who is the very height of wisdom
it self, did come down from his Fathers bosom, for the salvation of souls,
that instructing the world, by his own example, he might preach the word of
salvation, unto men whom he was to redeem, with the price, to cleanse, with
the lauer, and to sustain, with the Cup, of his most holy and sacred blood,
not reserving any thing unto himself, which he did not liberally bestow for
our salvation. And considering that we ought to do all things, according to
the pattern of those things which we see in him, as it were upon a hight and
lofty hill: it seems more pleasing to God, that intermitting the course of
rest, I should go for the unto labor. And having in this manner, conferred
with his brethrene for many days together, he could not certainly discern,
whether of these courses, was rather to be taken, as being indeed, more truly
acceptable unto Christ. For though, by the spiritte of prophecye, he did know
wonderful things, yet of himself, he was not able clearly to resolve this
question; the singular providence of God in (...) manner of wise, disposing,
that both the meritte of preaching, should be manifested, by an Oracle, from
above, and that the humility of the servante of christ, should also be
preserved. This true Minor who had learnt great things of the most excellent
Master, was not ashamed to ask little things, of them that were indeed, lesser
than himself. For he was always accustomed with especial diligence to
enquire, by what way and by what manner of mean, he might more perfectly serve
God, according unto his good will and pleasure. This was his chiefest
philosophy, this was his chiefest desire, so long as he lived: to learn of the
wise, and of the simple, of the perfect and of the imperfect, of little ones,
and of aged persons, how he might be able, more efficaciously to aspire, unto
the very topp of perfection.

Calling therefore unto him, two of his brethren he sent them to brother
Siluester, who had before time seen the Cross issueing forth of his mouth,
and did even now, continually attend unto prayer, upon the hill above
Assisium: requiring him to seek Gods divine answer concerning this doubt,
and accordingly to send word, unto him. In like manner also, he gave in charge,
to the holy virgin S. Clare, that by someone of the purest and simplest virgins
living under her discipline, she her self also praying; with the rest of her
Sisters, should upon this point, desire to know the will of our Lord. And
marveilously doubtless, by the revelation of Gods heavenly spiritte, did this
venerable Priest, and the consecrated virgin, agree in one: namely that it was
the blessed will and pleasure of God, that the messenger of Christ should go
forth, to preach. And so accordingly, the holy man, having, at the return of
the brethren, by them received the will of our Lord, in such wise as had binne
related unto them, did forth with address himself, and without any manner of
delay, did undertake his journey. But with so great a fervor they went, to
accomplish Gods divine commandment, yea and so speedily did he run a long,
as if (the hand of our Lord being newly made upon him) he had even then put
on a new virtue from heaven.

And as he did in this sort draw night to Beuanium, he came unto a certain
place, wherein was assembled, an exceeding great multitude of birds. of
diverse sorts. Which, when the holy man of God had espied; he ran chearefully
unto the place, and did also salute them, as if they had binne partakers of
reason. But as they stood all expecting, and turning themselves unto him, so
that those which were even in the low shrubes, bowing down their heads, as he
approached unto them, did afteran unwonted manner look and gaze upon him, he
came even very close, unto them: and seriously admonished them all, to hear
the word of God. Saying, yea birds, my brethrene, you are much bound to
praise your creator, who has clothed you with feathers, and has given you
wings to fly, who has granted unto you the purity of the air, and does
govern you without your own care and trouble. And when he had spoken to this
and the like effect, the little birds, after a marveilouse manner, rejoicing,
began to stretch out their necks, to spread abroad there wings, to open their
bills, and to look attentively upon him. But he passing through the midst of
them, with a wonderful fervor of spiritte, although he touched them with his
coat, yet did not one of them all stir forth of the place until such time
as the man of God having made the sign of the Cross upon them, and given them
leave to depart with his benediction also received, they all flewe away
together. All these things were seen of his companions, that stayed for him in
the way. Unto whom the pure and simple man returning, began (for that he had
not before this time, preached unto the birds) to reprove himself, of an
ouersighte, and negligence.

And afterward at he went a long, preaching in the places, adjoining he came
to a certain town called Aluianum: where having gathered the people together,
and silence being also enjoined he could yet scantly be heard, by reason of a
number of swallows then building their nests, and making a marvoilouse
chattering noise, in the place. Unto them therefore, the man of God spoke, in
the hearing of them all: Saying, yea swallows my sisters, it is now time,
that I also do speak: for that you have spoken enough already. Harken now
therefore unto the word of God, and keep silence, until the same be ended.
But they as though they had binne capable of understanding; did so deinely
cease their noise: and moved not out of the place, until the whole Sermon was
at an end where upon all that were present, and did behold the same, being
filled with wonder and admiration, did glorify God therein. The fame of this
miracle, being spread abroad on every side, did kindle in many the devotion
of faith; and a reverence also, to this holy Saint.

For in the City of PARIS, a certain scholar of good towardliness,
attending diligently unto study, among other his companiens, and being molested
with the tedious and unseasonable noise of a certain swallowe, began to say
unto those his companions; This swallowe, doubtless is one of them, which
troubled holy Francis the man of God, one time, in his Sermon, until he had
put them to silence. And turning himself to the swallowe; he confidently said,
unto her, in the name of Francis, the seruante of God, I command thee, that
presently thou come unto me, and hold thy peace. But she so soon as she heard
the name of Saint Francis, being as it were instructed, by the precepts of the
man of God, did both incontinently, cease her noise, and did also, readily
commit her self unto his hand, as to a sure and safe custody. Whereat the
scholar, being much astonished, restored her forth with to liberty, and
heard no more of her chattering.

Another time also, when the servant of God preached at Caieta; upon the sea
shore, and the people thronged upon him for very devotion to touch him; the
servant of Christ, loathing so great applause of the people, leaped himself
(...) into a little sheep, that was nigh to the shore side. But the ship, as
if it had binne some reasonable creature, and had binne with an inward
director; did without the help of any guide or Marrmer in the sight of them
all, and to the great admiration of every one: withdraw it self, a pretty way
from the land. And being now launched out (as it were) some reasonable space,
into the dept of the sea, there stood the ship immovable amiddest the
waves, meanewhile that the holy man, preached unto the people that stood
expecting upon the shore. But the Sermon being ended, when the multitude, that
had seen this Miracle, was with his benediction departed, that they might now,
no further molest him, the ship of it self, returned back to the land. Who is
there therefore, of so obstinate and impious a mind, as to contemn the
preaching, of holy Saint Francis: by whose wonderful virtue, it came to pass
that not only creatures unreasonable, should from him receive instruction, but
also, that bodies devoide of life, should serve him in his preaching as though
they had bin with life endewed.

And evermore doubtless, was present with this his setvant Saint Francis, in
all his enterprises, he who had anointed, and sent him, the spirit of our
Lord, and the very power, and wisdom of God Christ himself: to the end he
might overflowe, with words of wholesome doctrine and might illustriously
shine, with miracles of mighty power. For his speech was as a burning
penetrating the most secrette parts of the heart, and filling the minds of all
men, with admiration: in that they pretended no flourish, of humane in vention,
but sweetly savoured of the odoriferouse blasts, of divine revelation. For
being one time to preach before the Pope, and his Cardinals, by the
procurement of the Lord Cardinal of Hostia and having then committed to
memory, a certain sermon by himself studiously composed; see when as he
stood, in the presence of that assembly, to propose unto them the words of
edification, he had so clean forgotten, the whole; that he was not able to
utter, any word at all But having discovered the same, by humble
acknowledgement of the truth: and so betaken himself to invocate the grace of
the boly Ghost, he began sodeinly to abound with so effectual words, and
with so poverful a force, to move the minds of those great men, to compunction,
that it was manifestly to be discerned, that not he himself, but the spirit of
our Lord, This is the best manner of learning when a man does not only exhort
therewith words but alsa with example.
did speak within him. And for as much as, he had in real action, already
persuaded himself un to that, whereunto in words, he persuaded others he
therefore, without fear of any reproover, did confidently preach the truth.
For he had no skill merly to touch the faults of any, but to search them even
down to the bottom: nor yet could he smothe up the lives of sinners, but
strike them home, with a sharp rebuke. And with the same Constancy of mind,
he spoke unto great personnages, and others of less accounte: as also with
like alacrity and joy of spirit, he did spoke unto many, and unto few. Every
age, and every sex, made have to hear, and see, this new man, given from
heaven, unto the world. But he himself, going through diverse Countries, did
preach with great fervor and zeal: Our Lord working withal, Mark. 16.20.
and confirming the word with signs that followed. For in the force of his
name, this preacher of the truth Saint Francis, did cast our Devils, did heal
the sick, and which is more, did by the efficacy of his speech, mollify the
minds of the obstinate, unto penance, as also he restored health, both to
their souls, and bodies, as some of his works, do well approve, which shall
be for example sake, now presently, specified.

In the Cittty of Tuscanella, being devoutly entertained of a certain
soldier, and by him earnestly requested to heal his son, who had been
contracted in his members ever from his nativity, he lifting him up by the
hand, did sodeinely, so restore him to health again, that in the sight of all
men: all the parts of his body, were forthwith made sound, and the youth
himself being now perfectly whole and strong, presently rose. up, walking,
leaping and praising God. S. Franc is with the sign of the Cross restores
one sick of the paulsey to his former health


So also in the City of Narnium, at the instancy of the Bishop, making the
sign of the Cross, from the head to the foot, upon one that being sick of
the palsy, was destitute of the use of all his members, he thereby restored
him to perfect health.

In the Bishoppricke of Reate, a certain boy, who had binne so marveilously
swollen in his body, ever since he was but four years of age, that by no
means he could see his own thighs, being by his Mother, with tears presented
unto the holy man, so soon as he had touched him with his hands, With the
^^me sign (...) does ^ll so help a boy.
was presently whole and well.

At the City of Orta, there was another boy whose body was so drawn
together in a compass, that be bare his head with his feet, besides that
sundry of his bones were also broken: but being at the lamentable prayer of his
patents, by him, signed with the sign of the Cross, he was sodeinely
stretched our to length, and forthwith wholly delivered. With the sign of the
Cross also he health a woman which had her hand withered.


A certain woman of Eugubium, having both her hands so shrunk together and
withered, that with them she could do no manner of work, by his making the
sign of the Cross upon her, in our Lord his name, was presently brought to
so perfect use of them, that returning home by and by, she like another Saint
Peter's, mother in law, did with her own hands prepare victualles, to Minister
unto him, and his poor brethren.

He also restored fight, With the same sign he also restored sight to the blind.
unto a certain blind girlde, in the Castle of Me'vantum; by anointing her
eyes thrice with his own spittle, in the name of the Trinity,

Likewise a certain woman of the City of Nar nium, being stricken with
blindness, receaving from him the sign of the Cross, recovered thereby her
desired sight.

Again at Bononia, therewas a boy, who having one of his eyes so blenished,
that he could neither see any thing therewith, nor yet could be helped by any
remedy: yet when the servant of our Lord had made upon him, the sign of the
Cross from the head to the foot, did thereby recover, so clear a sight;
that entering afterward into the Order: of the Friars Minors: he affirmed
himself, to see more clearly of the eye, that had bine before blemished: than
of the other, which was always, sound.

In the town of Saint Geminianus the servant of God, being entertained, He
expels away the Devil with a prayer.
of acertain devoute man, whole wife was vexed with a Devil, after prayer
first made; commanded the Devil in the virtue of obedience to depart: and by
the power of God did so sodeinely chase him away, that thereby it did
manifestely appear; that against the forcible power of holyobedience, the very
perverseness of the Devils, could not make resistance.

In the City of Castellum, a raging and wicked spiritte, obsessing a certain
woman having, from the holy man, received the commandment of obedience:
departed with great fury and indignation: leaving the woman, that was before,
obsessed: now holy free, both in mind, and body.

One also of the brethren, was afflicted with such an horrible infirmity, that
it was by many affirmed, rather to be some vexation of the devil, than any
natural kind of disease. For oftentimes he was cast upon the ground, and
there tumbled up and down, foming at the mouth: having the members of his
body, sometimes contracted, sometimes drawn out at length: sometimes folded
together, sometimes writhed awrie, sometimes made stiff and hardened. And
sundry times, being stretchred out along, until he wear stiff: and having
also his feet equal with his heads he was lifted up alofte, with inevitable
danger in horrible manner, presently to fall down, to the ground again.
Upon whom thus miserably and incureably diseased, the servant of Christ, who
was full of pity, taking especial commiseration sent unto him, a morsel of
the bread, whereof himself did eat. But the taste of that bread, was of so
effectualle strength unto that distressed man; that from thence forewarde, he
felt no more trouble of that disease.

In the County of Aretium a certain, woman having binne for many days
together, in labor of childbirthe: so that she was even now in manner dead,
and wholly dispairing of all other remedy, save only of God, and the servant of
Christ even then passing through those parts on horseback, by reason of sum
infirmity, in his body, it chanced that the horse was brought back again,
through the same village, where this miserable woman was in such pitiful wise
tormented. But the men of that place, seeing the horse whereupon the holy man
had sitten, pulled of the bridle, to lay it upon the woman. At the marveilouse
touch whereof, the woman without all danger brought forth here child with
safety.

A certain man of Castrum plebis, one that was very religiouse and feared God,
had with him a Cord, where with the holy Father had binne girded. And when a
great number both of men and women inhabiting in that place, was troubled, with
diverse infirmities, he went through the houses, of them that were sick, and
dipping the Cord into water, did give unto the sick folks thereof to drink.
And so by this means, many persons, were recovered. As also, in like manner,
many diseased persons, tasting of the loaves of bread, which the holy man, had
touched; did by the operation, of Gods divine power, speedily obtain the
recovery of their health. Considering that with these, and many other
prodigiouse miracles, the messenger of Christ, was in his preaching, enobled:
men gave heedefull attentio^vnto his words, as if the very Angel of our Lord,
had spoken. For whereas there excelled in him, he prerogative of virtues, the
spiritte of prophecy, the efficacy of miracles, the Oracle of his preaching,
given from heaven, the obedience of creatures, deyoide of reason: the vehement
alteration of men's hearts, at the hearing of his words, the instruction, which
he had from the holy-Ghoste above humane learning, the authority of preaching,
granted unto uim by the Pope, notwithout divine revelation: and furthermore
the confirmation of his Rule (by the same Vicar of Christ) wherein the form of
his preaching is expressed, as also the signs of the most high King, in manner
of a seal imprinted in his body, all these things, as ten singular
testimonies, do undoubtedly manifest, unto the whole world: that the Preacher
of Christ, Saint Francis; was both venerable in office, and autenticall in
doctrine, as also admirable in holiness: and did therefore as the messenger of
God indeed: preach the Gospel of Christ.

THE THIRTENTH CHAPTER. Of his holy Stigmattes.
THIS Angelical man Saint Francis, Genes. 28.12.
was never accoustomed to be idle, from doing good but rather like to the
heavenly spiritts, in Jacobs ladder, he did, either ascend, unto God, or
descend unto his neighbor. For, the time which was granted unto him, for his
meritte, he had learnte, so prude^tly to devide, that some part, he did with
great labor bestow upon the commodity of his neighbor: and the rest, he did
dedicate, to the quiet abundance of contemplation. And therefore, when,
according to the necessity of place and time he had condescended to procure
the salvation, of other men, withdrawing himself, from the disquietnesse, of
the multitudes; he betook himself, to some secrette part, of the wilderness,
and place of rest: that, attending there more freely, unto the service of God;
if any dust had cleaved unto him, by mean of humane conversation, he might so
shake it of again. Two years, therefore, before he rendered up his soul, to
heaven; he was by direction of Gods divine, providence, after many labors,
brought, into a high place aparte, which is called the Mount of Aluerna. And
whiles he did in that place, according to his wonted manner, begin to fast
the lent, which he observed in honor of S. Michael the Archangell, enioieing
then, the sweetness of divine contemplation, more abundantly, than he had
binne a foretime, accustomed, and being set on fire, with a more burning flame,
of heavenly desires, he began, yet in a more abundant measure, to feel the
good gifts of God sent down from heaven upon him. And he verily was indeed
carried up aloft, how bent not as a curious searcher, of the Majesty of God,
so to be oppressed with his glory: but as a faithful and prudent servaunte,
seeking out the good pleasure of God, where unto, he did most earnestly desire,
by all manner of means, to conform himself. And therefore it was, by the
Oracle of God inspired into his mind, that in the opening of the book of the
Gospel, Christ would vouchsafe, to reveal, unto him, what should be most
acceptable unto God, in him, and concerning him. Having therefore, formerly be
taken himself to prayer, with much devotion, he caused, the book of the holy
Ghospells, to be taken of from the Altar, and the same, in the name of the
holy Trinity, to be opened by his companion, who also was a man of great
devotion and holiness. And considering that notwithstanding the same book,
was three times opened, yet did he always light upon the Passion of our Lord,
he therefore being full of Gods holy spiritte did well understand, that as he
had imitated Christ in the actions of his life, so ought he before his
departure out of this world, to be conformable unto him, in the afflictions and
dolours of his Pa^^sion. And albeit that by reason of the continual
austeritie, of his life formerly past, and of his continual bearing our Lord
his Cross, he was now but weak of body, yet was he nothing terrified
therewithal: but was more forcibly animated, to the sustaining of martyrdom.
For the insuperable burning love of good Jesus, had increased within him, to
lamps of fire and flames: so that many waters were notable to quench his so
prevalent Charity.

Being therefore with the Seraphicall fervor of desires borne up alofte into
God, and by the sweetness of compassion, transformed into him, who of his
surpassing charity, would vouch safe to be crucified; one morning about the
Feast of the Exaltation of the holy Cross, while he did pray upon the side of
the hill, he saw a Seraphin, with six wings all fiery and full of gloriouse
light, descending down from the top of the heavens. And as he came with a
swifte flighte, to that place of the air which was near to the man of God,
there appeared between his wings, the form of a man crucified, having his
hands and feet stretched out, in manner of a Cross, and fastened also, unto a
Cross. Two of his wings were lifted up, above his head, two were streeched
forth, to fly; and two, did cover, his whole body. At the beholding whereof he
was exceedingly amazed: and there entered his hatte, a loy, mingled with
sorrow. For he rejoiced in that gracious aspect, whereby he perceived himself
to be beholden of Christ, under the form of a Seraphim: but, the fastening to
the Cross, did pierce through his soul, with a sword of compassionate
grief. He marveilously wondered in the aspect of so strange and rare a vision:
knowing well that the infirmity of Passion, could by no means agree, with the
immortality of a Seraphicall spiritte. But in the end he herehence perceived,
our Lord revealing the same unto him, that therefore this manner of vision, was
by the providence of God, in such manner of wise, presented unto his veiwe,
that he the friend of Christ might thereby forknow, that he was wholly to be
transformed, into the likeness of Christ crucified, not by the martyr dome of
his flesh, but by the burning inflammation of his mind.

The vision therefore, disappearing, did leave behind, a wounderfull heat, in
his heart: and a no less wonderful impression of signs, in his flesh. For
presently there began to appear in his hands and feet, the signs of
nails, even in such manner as a little before he had seen them, in the
likeness of the crucified man. For his hands and feet seemed to be in the
very midst, peirced with nails: the heads of them nails appearing, in the
inner part of his hands, and the outer part of his feet but the points of
them, on the contrary sides. And the heads of the nails, in his hands and
feet, were round and black: but the points were somewhat long and wreathed,
and as it were clinched: which rising up, out of the very flesh, did stick
out higher than the rest of the flesh. His right side also, as being pierced
through with a spear, was covered over with a red skarre: which oftentimes,
casting out holy blood: did besprincle, his coat and breeches therewithal.

But the servante of Christ perceauing that those marks so plainly imprinted
in his flesh could not to be hidden from his familiar companions; and fearing
nevertheless, to publishe the secrette of our Lord, was in a great agony and
doubt of mind, whether he should utter or conceal the vision which had binne
showed unto him. Wherefore he called together some of the brethren, and speaking
unto them in general terms, he proposed his doubt before them, and required
their council and advise therein. At what time one of the brethren: Illuminatus
by name, a man also singularly illuminated by grace from heaven, perceiving
that he had seen some wonderful things, by reason that he seemed to be very
greatly astonished, did speak in this wise unto the holy man: Brother, know
it for certain that it is not only for your self, but also for others, that
the divine mysteries of God, are sometime shown unto you. Wherefore you have
just cause to fear, least if you shall conceal the thing which you have
received for the profitte and behoof of many, you be thereupon adjudged
reprehensible for the hidden Tallent. Mat. 25.26. Esaias. 24.16.
At whose words, the holy man, being greatly moved, albeit that at other times
he was wont to say; My secrette unto my self; did yet now at this time with
much fear relate the history of the foresaied vision: adding also thereunto
that he who had appeared unto him, had told him some things which he would
never open unto any man, so long as he should live. And we may very well believe
that the words of that holy Seraphin, so admirably appearing in the Cross,
were so mystical and secrette, that happily it was not lawful to utter them
unto men.

And now after that the true love of Christ, had transformed this his lover
into the same Image with himself; having accomplished his forty days fast in
the desert according to his determination; and the solemn feast of S. Michael
the Archangell being no we approached; the Angelical man S. Francis came down
from the mountain, bearing with him the form of the crucified; howebeit not
figured, in tables either of wood or stone, by the hand of the Craftesman; but
expressed in his fleshly members, by the finger of the living God. And because,
It is good to hide the secrette of the King: Tob. 12.7.
this holy man therefore being privy of the Kings secrette Council, did apply
all his best endeavor, to hide those sacred marks. But because it is the work
of God, for his own glories sake, to manifest the things which he does, our
Lord therefore himself, who had secrettely imprinted the marks, did openly
show certain miracles by mean of them: that the hidden and marveilouse force
of those stigmats might manifestly appear, by the evident testimony of signs
and wonders.

For in the Province of Reate, there reigned a very grievous plague: which did
so cruelly consume all the sheep and Oxen, that no manner of remedy could be
applied unto them. But behold, a certain devout man that feared God, was by
vision in the night time admonished, hastily to go unto the Ermitage of the
brethren: and that taking the water, wherein the servaunte of God Saint Francis
(who then remained in that place) had washed his hands and feet; he should
sprinckle the same upon all the beasts. Rising therefore early in the morning,
he came to the place: and having prively obtained this water by mean of the
companions of the holy man, he sprincled the sick sheep and Oxen,
therwithall. Now see the wonder. As soon as the sprinckling had in any small
quantity once touched the beasts, that lay before languishing upon the ground,
they presently rose up, as having now perfectly recovered their wonted
strength: and hastily went, unto their feed and pasture: as thought they had
felt no harm at all. Whereby it came to pass, that by the admirable virtue of
that water, which had but touched those sacred wounds, all manner of plague,
did utterly cease, and the pestilent disease, was driven quite away, from the
flocks.

About the foresaid mountain of Aluerna, before such time as the holy man, did
make his aboade in that place, by reason of a cloud, that rose out of the very
mountain, it self: a violent tempest of hail, did customably distroy the
fruits of the earth; but after that happy apparition, not without the great
wonder of all the inhabitants, the hail did cease. So that by the very face of
heanen, now marveilously cleared contrary to common custom, bot^ the
excellency, of that heavenly vision, and the efficacy of the stigmats, in that
place imprinted, was sufficiently tessified and declared.

It chanced also once, in the winter time, that being, in regard of the
weakness of his own body, and of the asperousnesse also of the ways,
carried upon a certain poor man's Ass, he was enforced to lodge all night
under the edge of a certain out bending rock: whereby he might in some sort
avoied the inconveniences of the snow and night which came in such manner of
wise upon him, that he could not reach to the place appointed for his lodging.
But the holy man in the mean while perceaving, that the other poor man did
murmr and (as it were) complain, by his groans, and tossing himself on
either side, as one who having but small and slender covering, could scarcely
take any rest for the extreme bitterness of the cold: and being enkindled
with the fervor of divine love, did streech out his hand and touch the man.
Marveilouse doubtless was the effect thereof. For presently at the touch of
that holy hand, which bare in it self the burning heat of the Seraphicall
stone, all manner of cold, being quite expelled, there came such an heat upon
the poor man, both inwardly and with out, as if a flame of fire, from with in
a furnace, had breathed out upon him. For presently being comforted both in
mind and in body, he slept more sweetly among the stones and the snow,
until the morning, than ever he had rested in his own bed: as ne himself
afterward did affirm. Wherefore it is manifest by most certain tokens, that
those holy signs were imprinted by his virtue and power, who by a Seraphicall
operation, does purge, illuminate, and in flame, seeing that these signs did
both purge from the plague, and with wonderful efficacy confer health,
clearenesse, and heat upon bodies; as also after his death it was demo^strated
by most evident miracles, which heareafter we will set down in their due place.

And though he endeavored withal his diligence, to hide the treasure which he
had found in the feilde; yet could it not be so concealed, but that some did
perceive and see, the holy marks of his hands and feet: notwithstanding that
he did (in manner continually) carry his hands covered, and did also, from
that time forward, wear shoes upon his feet. For they were seen even in his
life time, by sundry of his brethren: who albeit that for their singular
holiness, they were in all respects very worthy to be believed; yet utterly to
remove all scruple and doubt, laieing their hands upon the holy Ghospels, they
did by solemn oathe avowe, that so it was, and that they themselves had seen
them. Some of the Cardinals also, by reason of the familiarity which they had
with the holy man, did in like manner see those sacred stigmats: the praises
whereof they have truly inserted into Proases Himnes, and Anthemes which they
have ser forth in his honor: who as well by word, as by writing; have given
testimony unto the truth. The chief Pastor also himself. Pope Alexander,
preaching once unto the people before many of the brethren, my self also being
then present; did affirm that he had with his own eyes seen those holy
stigmats, while the Saint was yet alive. And at the time of his death, they
were seen and beheld, by more than fifty of the brethren; by the most devout
Virgin S. Clare, together with the rest of her sisters; and by secular parsons
not to be numbered. Amongst whom, many (as shall be showed in place convenient)
have both kissed them, for devotion, and have touched them with their hands,
for confitmation of their restimony.

But the wound of his side, he covered with so great carfulness that whilst
he lived, no man could come, but by stealth, to see it. For one of the
brethren, who was wont diligently to minister unto him, having out of a Godly
kind of care, upon a time persuaded him to put of his coat, to the end it
might be made clean, watching heedefully with his eye, did see the wound:
whereunto also speedily applieng three of his fingers, he did as well by sight
as by feeling, discern the quantity thereof. And by the like manner of
heedefulnesse did that brother also see it, who was at that time his Vicar.
But the brother that was his companion a man verily of marveilouse simplicity,
mean while that he touched his shoulders, which were fainte and weak, by
reason of some infirmity, putting his hand by his hood, and lefting it by
chance to fall upon the wound, did put him to great pain thereby. Wherefore
after that time, he had his breeches so made, that they reached up to his arm
pitts, to cover the wound of his side But the brethren who, for the time being,
did wash the breeches, or had his coat to make clean, because they found the
same to be made red with blood, did undoubtedly, by that evident sign, come to
the knowledge of that sacred wound: which afterward when he was dead, they
with many others besides, did in open view behold and reverence.

Now therefore thou most hardy warrior of Christ, bear thou the weapons, of
thy most invinsible Captain: where with being defended and adorned, thou shall
overcome all thine adverfaries. Bear thou the standard of the highest King:
Galat. 6.17.
at the sight whereof, all the soldiers of the Army of God, may be encouraged
Be are thou also the seal of the chief Bishop, Christ himself: whereby thy
words and deeds, may worthily be of all men accepted, as irriprehensible, and
full of authority. For now, because of the Stigmats of our Lord Jesus, which
thou bear in thy body, no man ought to be molestfull unto thee: but rather
every servaunte of Christ, is bound to be devout toward thee withal
affection. Now by these most evident signs, approved not unto two or three
wittenesses, for sufficie^cy; but unto very many, for superabundance; the
testimonies of God, being in thee, and by thee, made to to much to be believed,
do take away from Infidells, all veil and color of excuse: mean while that
by them, the beleivers are in faith established: by the confidence of hope
borne up alofte, and with the fire of Charity, inflamed. Now is in thee truly
accomplished, the first vision which thou did see: namely, that being to be
a Captain general, in the warfare of Christ; thou ought (as with fignes of
thine office) to be adorned with heavenly weapons, and with the sign of the
Cross. Now the vision of the Crucifixe, which thou did dest see in the
beginning of thy conversion, striking thee through the heart, with the sword
of compassionate grief; and the hearing also of the voice from the Cross,
proceeding as it were from the high Throane, and secrette Propitiatory of
Christ (according as thou have affirmed by thy sacred speech) are undoubtedly
belleued, to have binne most true and certain. Now is it verily believed and
avowed, that the Cross which (in the progress of thy conversion) brother
Siluester did see, in marveilouse manner proceeding out of thy mouth; and that
the swords, striking through thy bowels, in the form of a Cross, which holy
Pacificus did see: and that thy being lifted up into the air, in the manner
also of a Cross, when blessed Anthony did preach of the title of the Cross,
according as was shown, to the Angelical man Monaldus, were not things of
fantastical vision, but of heavenly revelation. And now toward the end,
whereas at once is shown unto thee, both the high and lofty similitude of a
Seraphin, and the humble form of him that was crucified, inwardly inflaming
thee, and outwardly leaving his marcks upon thee: that like as another Angel
ascending from the rising of the sun, thou might have in thy self the
sign of the living God, it does not only give unto the former visions firm
cause of creditte and belief: but receaveth also from them, undoubted
testimony of the truth. Behold now, in seven apparitions of the Cross of
Christ (in the^e and about thee) according to the order and court of times
marveilously exhibited and shown, thou art as it were by six degrees, now
happily come unto this seventh, wherein thou make thy final rest and aboade.
For the Cross of Christ, being in the very first beginning of thy conversion,
as well proposed unto thee, as on thy part also assumed, and being from thence
forth, in the whole progress of thy conversation, by thee carried, throught
the course of a most approved life, as remaining in thy self continually, and
being demonstrated unto others, for matter of example, does by so evident a
clearenesse of certain knowledge, discover thee to have accomplished the very
height of Evangelicall persection: that this so rat^ a demonstration of
Christian wisdom, figured in the dust of thy flesh, no man that is trnly
devour, may set at naught, no man that is truly faithful, may with stand, no
man that is truly humble, may lightly regard, because it is verily and truly
shown, by God himself from heaven; and is well worthy, of all good
acceptance.

THE FOVRTENTH CHAPTER. Of his Patience: and Death.
Now blessed Saint Francis, being together with Christ wholly fastened unto the
Cross, as well in flesh as in spiritte, did not only burn with a Seraphicall
love toward: God, but did also with Christ crucified, thirst after the
salvation of many. And because he was not able to go, in regard of the nails
growing and increasing in his feet, he therefore caused his overworne and
decayed body, to be carried about through Crtties, and Towns: that so he
might encourage others, to carry the Cross of Christ. And to his brethren, he
would say: Let us now brginne, my brethren, to serve our Lord God: because
hitherto we have done but little good. And now he was inflamed, with a great
desire of mind, to return unto his first ground works, of humility; as
namely to minister unto the Leapers, according as in the beginning, he had
binne wont to do: and though his feeble body, were wholly spent and consumed
with labor; yet nevertheless, to recall it, unto the former servitude. For he
purposed, under the Conduct and help of Christ, to do great matters: and
bearing within his overwearied members, a spiritte of great fervor and
fortitude; he was in hope by a new conflict to t^iumphe over his enemy. For it
is no waise possible, that either sloth or feebleness should there have any
place, where the prick of love, does urge and provoke evermore unto greater
things. But he had in his fles he, ^oe great a concord, unto his spiritte, and
so great a pomprnesse also, of obedience, there unto: that where as be did
wholly bend himself, to aspire unto all manner of holiness: yet did the
flesh, not only make no resistance, but did and eavour, to out go the
spiritte.

And that the man of God, might gain a more abundant treasure, and heap, of
merittes, al which are verily and truly consummated, in the virtue of Patience,
he began to be so heavily laden, with many sorts of infirmities, that
hardly did there remain any part of his body, that was free from the
violence of some disease. In so much that, through sundry, long and continual
sicknesses, he was finally brought to that pass, that his flesh being now
quite consumed. he was as it were nothing but skin and bones. And being
pressed in body with hard and greiuous afflictions, yet would he never reckon
of them by the name of pains, but would call them by the name of Sisters. But
being at one time, assailed with the extreme sharpness, of his sundry
infirmities, in more extraordinary manner, than he had binne at any time
before, one of the brethren, being but a simple man, said thus unto him:
Brother, make your prayer unto our Lord, to deal more mildely with you: for he
seems to hold, to heavy a hand, upon you. Whereupon, the holy man, criyng
out with a certain mourneful kind of complainte, did say unto him. Unless I
did know thee to be of a very simple purity, I would from henceforth abhor
thy company: seeing that thou have presumed, to reprehend, the divine
judgments of God, concerning me, and although he were wholly worn and wasted,
with the long continuance of his greivouse sickness, yet casting himself
down upon the earth, he hurt his feeble bones, with a hard fall. And kissing
the ground, I give thanks unto thee (said he) O Lord God, for all these my
gtiefes, and I beseech thee my Lord, to increase them, if it so please thee,
even a hundred fold: for this shall be unto me most acceptable, that thou
spare not to afflict me with pains, considering that the fullfilling of thy
holy will, is unto me a comfort, more than most plentiful and abundant.
Whereby it seemed unto the brethren, that they did behold as it were another
Job: who, as the afflictions of his flesh did increase, did himself also so
much the more increase in courage and strength of mind.

But he knew the time of his death long before and the day of his departure
being even now at hand, he said unto his brethren, that he was very presently
to put of the tabernacle of his body, according as had binne by Christ revealed
unto him. Having therefore bin for two yeates space, from the impression of his
sacred Stigmats as namely from the twentieth year after his conversion, by many
hard triyng strokes of distresfull infiemities he wed and squared out, as a
well polished stone, fit to be placed in the building of the heavenly
Jerusalem, and having also as a piece of forge work, under the hammer of
manifold tribulations, binne finally brought to perfection, he required
himself to be carried to the place of our Lady of Portiuncula, that where he
had received, the spiritte of grace, there might herender up, his spiritte of
life. And being conveied to that place, to the end he might show, by the
example of truth himself, that he held nothing in common with the world: in
that his infirmity which was so greivoufe, that it contained in it self,
wellnighe all manner of diseases: making himself all naked, he did in the
fervor of spiritre, cast himfe (...) down prostrate, upon the naked ground:
that in that very last hour, wherein the enemy had yet, power to be angry, he
might wrestle naked, with the naked, hand to hand. Thus having now
disapparelled himself, even of his poor sackcloth garment, and lieing in this
wise upon the earth, he lifted up his face to heaven, according to his wonted
manner: and intending wholly to the glory thereof, he did with his seft hand,
cover the wound of his right side, that it might not be perceaved. And he
said unto his brethren, That which is my part I have done unto you: and that
which is yours, Christ vouchsafe to show you.

Whereupon, the companions of this holy Saint, betaking themselves to tears:
as being stricken, with a marveilouse darte, of compassion, one of them, whom
the man of God, would say to be his guardian, knowing his inward desire, by
divine revelation, rose sodeinly out of his place: and taking a coat, with a
Cord and a pair of breeches, gave them unto the poor servant of Christ,
saieing: These things I do lend unto thee, as unto a poor man, receive them
therefore, as at the commandment, of holy obedience. Hereat the holy man
greatly rejoiced, and by voice of exultation, discovered the gladsomnesse of
his heart: for that he saw himself, to have preserved his faith, unto Lady
Poverty, now firm and inviolate, even to the end. And lifting up his hands
to heaven, he magnified his Christ, for that being disburdened, of all things,
he was now to go free to him. For all these things, he had done, out of the
zeal he bare to poverty, so far forth that he would not have so much as an
habitte, but such as had binne lent unto him by another man. And certainly it
was his desire, to be in all things conformable, unto Christ crucified, who
did in poverty and distress, hang naked on the Cross. Wherefore he did both
in the beginning of his conversion. make himself naked, before the Bishop,
and would now also, in the very consummation and end of his life, go naked out
of the world. And to the brethren that were assisting about him, he enjoined in
the obedience of Charity, that when they should see him to be dead, they
should suffer him for so long space afterward, to lie naked upon the
ground, as one might easily go, the length of a mile. O most Christian man
indeed, who by a perfect immitation, endeavored himself to be comfortable, in
his life time, to Christ, living; in his death, to Christ, dieing; and after
his death, to Christ also, being dead: and was made worthy, to be, with the
express similitude thereof adorned.

But; the very hour of his passage, even now approaching, he caused all the
brethren that were in that place, to be called unto him: and endeavoring
himself, with comfortable words to mittigate the grief, they conceived for
his death he did with a fatherly affection exhort them, unto to the love of
God. And of the preservation of Patience and Poverty, and of the faith also of
the Holy Roman Church, he enlarged his speech; preferring the holy Gospel,
before all other instructions. And as his brethren satte runde about him, he
reached out his hands upon them, and casting his atmes overthwart, in manner
of the Crosle (because he evermore loved that sign exceedingly) he blessed all
the Brethren, as well them that were present, as them that were absent, in the
power and name, of him that was crucified. And furthermore also, he said unto
them; Fare ye well my Children all, in the fear of our Lord, and be permanent
therein continually. And because the tentation and tribulation, that shall
herafter be, is even now at hand: blessed are they, who shall persever in these
things, which they have already undertaken. But I make haste, to go to God,
unto whose grace; I commend you all. This sweet admonition, thus concluded and
ended; the Blessed man, most dear unto God, caused the book of the holy
Gospels, to be brought unto him: and required that part of Saint John's
Gospel, John. 13. Psalm. 141.
which begins at these words: Before the festival day of Pasche, to be
read unto him. But he himself, as well as he could, bracke forth, into the
rehearefall of this Psalm, with my voice, I have cried out unto our Lord: with
my voice, I have made my prayer unto our Lord. and bringing the Psalm to the
end, the just (says he) de expect me, until thou give reward unto me. Thus
all the mysteries, being now at length, in him accomplished; that most holy
soul, being loosed from the flesh, and swallowed up, in the unsearchable
depth, of Gods heavenly brightness; the blessed man, fell a sleep in our Lord.

At what time, one of his brethren and Disciples, saw that blessed foul, in
the form of a most glittering star, to be borne aloft, upon a pure white
little cloud; and so to be carried over many waters, by a straight passage up to
Heaven: as being by the whiteness of a high degree of holiness, most brightly
shining; and being also replenished with the great plenty and abundance, of
heaven ly wisdom and grace, whereby the holy man deserved, to enter into a
place of light and peace, where he remains at rest with Christ, world
without end. The Minister also of the brethren in the land of labor, was at
that time, brother Augustine, a man doubtless very holy and just: who being
even then in his last hour, and having a good while before, quite loest his
speech, did yet in the hearing of all that were present, sodeinely cry out and
say, Expect me O Father, expect me a while, for behold I come even now with
you. The Brethren in the mean while much marveiling and enquiring, to whom
he spoke in such wise: he confidently said unto them, Do you not see our
Father Francis, who goes now to Heaven? And presently his holy soul,
partinge from his flesh, did follow the most Holy Father.

At that very time was the Bishop of Assisium gone upon Pilgrimage to the
Oratorie of Saint Michael in the Mountain Garganus, Note the words of this
holy saint at his death. Behold I learn this world and go to heaven.
to whom blessed Saint Francis appearing, in the night of his passadge, said:
Behold I leave the world, and go to Heaven. The Bishop therefore rising
betimes in the morning declared, to them that were in his company, what he had
seen: and returning to Assisium, he found for certain truth, after diligent
inquiry made, that at that very hour, wherein he had by vision, so much made
known unto him, the blessed Father, departed out of this world. And at the
hour also of the departure, of this holy man, which was about the twilight of
the night following: the Larkes, which are birds that love the light, and do
abhor the darksomnesse of the twilight, did nevertheless come in a great
multitude, upon the top of the house: and plaieng themselves a good while,
with an vnvsual kind of rejoicing, gave thereby a no less joyful than evident
testimony, of the glory, of the Saint who was wont to enuite them, unto the
praises, of Almighty God.

THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER. Of his Canonisation and of the translation of his
sacred body.
SAINT Francis therefore, the servant and frind, of the Highest; the
institutour and guider, of the Friars Minors; the professor of Poverty, the
form of Penance, the Preacher of Verity; the Mirror of Holiness, and the
sampler of all Evangelicall perfection; being prevented from above, by heavenly
grace; did come by a well ordered and due proceeding, from the lowest estate to
the highest pitche of virtue. This admirable man, as being passingly ritche in
Poverty; and highly advaunced, in Humility; prompt also and active, in
mortification, and prudent, in simplicity, and briefly of singular note and
observance, for all manner of honest conversation, whom our Lord had made to be
in his life time, wonderfully esteemed, him did he make to be in his death
incomparably more renowned. For when this blessed man departed out of the
world: his sacred spiritte, entering the house of eternity, and being made
gloriouse, with the full draught of the fontaine of life: left behind him, in
his body, ecrtaine express signs, of the future glory. That his most holy
flesh, which having binne crucified with the vices thereof, had now passed over
into a new creature, might both by a singularity of privilege, set forth the
show of our Saviors Passion; and might also by the novelty of the Miracle,
foreshew the resemblance, of his resurrection.

For in those his most happy members, there were certain nails to be seen,
which had bine wounderfully made, of his very flesh, by power devine: and were
so marveilously grown therein, that being pressed or strained on either side,
they would, as it were certain natural and hard sinwes, presently rebounde,
to the contrary part. There was also more apparently found in his body,
howbeit not inflicted nor made by hand of man, the hole of a wound in his
side, like unto the wounded side of our Savior: which did in him our Redeemer,
bring forth, the sacrament of humane redemption, and generation. And the
similitude of the nails, were black like unto iro^, but the wound of the
side, was of a red color: and being by the shriking of the flesh, brought into
a certain kind of roundenesse: it seemed to be as it were a most beautiful
rose. As for the rest of his flesh, notwithstanding that of former time it had,
as well out of infirmity as (...) out of nature declined to blackness: yet now
brightly shining with an excessive Luster of pure whiteness, it did well
resemble the exquisite beautifullnesse of the second Stole. Apoc. 7.13
Moreover the limbs and members of his body, appeared to be so soft and
tractable, to such as felt them, that they seemed to be changed, into the
tenderness of a little child: and did make show; to be graced, with certain
evident signs, of innocence. Seeing therefore, that the nails seemed to be
black, in his most pure and white flesh, and the wound of his side, to be
red, like unto a most fair and slourishing rose, it is in no sort to be
wondered at, if so delightefull and miraculous a variety, gave cause both of
joy and admiration, unto all the beholders

And true it is that the devout children, did indeed shed tears and lament,
for the taking away of so loving a Father: but yet were they replenished with
no small measure, of joy and gladesomnesse, mean while that in him, they did
most sweetly kiss, the sacred signs, of the inghest king. And the novelty of
the miracle, turned their mournful complainte into surpassing joy: and the
true understanding thereof, ravished the deep searcher of the matter, with
amazement. For a spectacle so unusual, and so notable also therewithal, was
unto all the beholders, both an establishement of faith, and a provocation of
love and affection: and to the hearers thereof, a matter of admiration, and a
stirring up of desire, to see and behold it. For the death of this good Father,
was no sooner heard of, and the fame of the miracles spreede abroad: but the
people came withal expedition flocking together to the place that with the
eyes of their flesh: they might see and view the things, which might repel al
doubt from reason, and might heap up abundance of joys, to their affections.

Very many therefore of the Citizens of Assisium were admitted, with their eyes
to behold and with their lips to kiss, those most holy Stigmats. But one of
the^ being a knight, well learned doubtless and wise whose name was Hierome, a
man also of much fame and accounte, being doubtful of these holy signs, and in
credulous, like unto Thomas, did in the presence of the brethten, and other the
Cittisens, more freely and boldly, move the nails, and did with his own
hands, touch, the hands feet, and side, of the Saint: that whilst by
feeling and touching he handled those true signs of the wounds of Christ, he
might cut of, all manner of wound of doubtfullnesse, from the heart, both of
himself and others. For which cause, even he himself among others, being
afterward made a constant witness, of this truth so certainly known, did by
oathe upon the holy Gospells, testify the same. But the brethren and Children
that had binne called to the passadge, of the blessed Father, did withal the
multitude, of the pecple assembled so religioufly employ themselves, in
dedicating unto the eivine praises of God, that night wherein the worthy
Confessor of Christ, was departed, that thereseemed to be held, noe exequies
for the dead, but rather, a blessed watch and ward of Angels,

And when morning came, the trouppes of people, Here we may see the custom of
the Catholieke Church in burryng her dead with wax candels lighted with hemnes
and spiritual Psalms.
that were gathered together, taking the boughs of trees, and a number of wax
lights, in their hands, did with Himnes and Canticles, bring the holy body, to
the City of Assisium. But passing by the Church of Saint Damian, wherein that
noble Virgin Saint Clare, now gloriouse in Heaven, did then remain enclosed
with the rest of the Virgins, and making there some stay for a while, they
offered that sacred body, ennobled and adorned, with those heavenly pearls, to
be seen and kissed: by those holy. Virgins. And coming afterward to the
City with exceeding great icy, they did withal reverence, place the precious
treasure which they brought, in the Church of Saint George. For in that place,
being but a little child, he learnt his letters: and there afterward he
preached, and there last of all be received, his first place, of rest. The
venerable Father passed out of the shippewracke of this world, in the year of
our Lords incarnation, on thousand, two hundred, twenty six, the fourth day
of October, being Saturday, in the evening; and was buried upon the Sunday.

And by the influence doubtless of Gods divine aspect; this blessed man did
forthwith begin, to shine with many and woundrous miracles: that the high
degree of his holiness, which duringe his life hear one earth, had binne
thoroughly notified unto the world, touching the mannadgement and direction of
manners, by the examples of perfect justice, might now be by miracles of
devine power, ratified and made good from Heaven, wheare he reigns with
Christ for ever, to the absolute confirmation, of all faith and true belief.
And whereas in diverse parts of the world, his gloriouse miracles, and the large
benefitts, by him obtained, had inflamed very many, unto the devotion of
Christ: and had also recited very many unto the reverence of this his Saint,
by general reports, both of words and works, it came to the chred of the
supreme Bishop, Pope Gregory, the ninth; what goeat and admirable things,
God did work and effect by his servaunt Saint Francis. Whereupon, that worthy
Pastor of the Church, knowing his marveilouse holiness, by testimony of most
credible authority, and being thereof centified, not only out of such miracles,
as he had heard to have binne done by him after his death, but out of such
also, as he himself had seen with his eyes, and felt with his hands, to be
tried by experience, in his life time: whereby he had no manner of doubt, but
that he was now glorified, by Christ, in Heaven; to the intent he might
conformably work with Christ, whose Vicar he was; did purpose, upon a good and
Godly Consideration, to make him famous, upon the earth: as being most worthy,
of all honor and reverence. And for to give more absolute and undoubted
assurance, unto all the whole world; of the glorified estate, of this most holy
man: he caused the miracles by him done, having bin formerlie found out,
drawn together in writing, and approved by convenie^t witnesses, to be
examined by such of the Cardinals, as seemed to be less favorable unto that
matter and business. After dilligent inquiry whereof, the Miracles being by
them al fully ratified and allowed, he did, by the uniform Council and assent
of his brethren, and of all the Prelates, that were then resident in his Court,
resolve and decree, to accomplish his Canonization And coming personally unto
the City of Assisium, in the year of our Lords incarnation, one thousand, two
hundred: rewentie and eight, he did on Sunday, the sixteenth of July, with
great solemnities, to long to be rehearsed, enrolle the blessed-Father, in the
Catalogue of Saints.

But in the year of our Lord, one thowfand, two hundred, and thirty, the
brethren, being assembled to a general Chapter, then celebrated and kept, at
Assisium, the body dedicated unto our Lord, was on the sieve and twentieth of
May, translated unto a goodly Church, that was built and erected, in honor of
him. And whils that sacred treasure (signed with the seal, of the most
supreme and Sovereign king) was to that place, transported, he whose Image
and likeness, he bare, did vouchsafe to work, many and sundry miracles: that
by his health working odoure, the affections of the faithful, might be drawn
to run after Christ. For it was, in very deed, Cant. 1.4.
befitting and well beseeming, that whom God having made to be in his life time
pleasing and welbeloved unto himself, had by the grace of contemplation,
translated into Paradise, like unto Enoch, Genesis 5.24. 4. Reg. 2.11.
and had by the zeal of charity, taken up into heaven in a fiery Chariot,
like unto Elias; now might those happy bones of him, flourishing among the
heavenly flowers of eternal planting; by mean of a strange and admirable
kind of blosseming, yield forth a sweet and pleasant favor, from the place,
wherein they were enshrined. And therefore as this blessed man, had binne in
his life time famous for many signs of virtues; so from the day of his
passadge, until this very present, he does in diverse of the world, by power
divine, glorifieing it self in him, most beautifully and clearly shine, with
many prodigious and notable miracles. For the blind and deaf, the dumb and
lame, the diseased of the Dropsy, and sick of the Palsy, possessed persons
and Leapars, they that have binne in shippewracke and Captivity, have by his
merrittes, found help and remedy, as also all diseases necessities and
perrills, have thereby binne relieved. Yea, and by the miraculouse restoring of
life by him, to many that have binne dead, in this blessed Saint, has binne
sufficiently notified to all faithful people, the marveilouse magnificence of
the Power of the Highest, to whom to be all honor and glory, world without end.
Amen.

THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER. Containing certain miracles done by Saint Francis,
after his death. Which because it is long, and considering that the miracles be
of diverse kinds, is therefore parted into ten divisions, according to the
several Titles of the miracles.
The first division: Of the virtue and force, of the holy Stigmatter.
BEING, to the honor of Almighty God, and to the glory of the blessed Father
Saint Francis, to write those approved miracles, which were by him done, after
his glorification in heaven: from that point, I thought it most especially
meet, to take my beginning: wheare in the efficacy of the Cross of Jesus is
shown unto us, and wherein the glory thereof, is unto us renewed. This new
man therefore Saint Francis, flourished now by mean of a new and admirable
miracles; in that he appeared to be ennobled with a singular privilege in al^
former ages not granted unto any: namely to be graced and adorned with the
Sacred Stigmattes of our Lord, and in the body of this death, to be
configurated unto the body of him, that was Crucified. Of whom, what soever
may be said by tongue of man, shall be inferior, unto his due, and worthy
praise. For the whole endeavor doubtless of the man of God, as well that which
was public, as that which was private, was altogether employed about the
Cross of our Lord. And to the end he might outwardly sign his body, with the
sign of the Cross, which was from the beginning of his conversion, imprinted
in his heart, incompassing himself, with in a very Cross, he took upon him
the habit of penance: which did plainly represent, the Image and form of a
Cross: that even as his mind had inwardly put on that Lord himself that was
crucified, so might his body also put on, the Ensigns and arms of the
Cross. And that in what sign, God Almighty had subdued, the powers of the
air: in the same, might the army of this holy man maintain the warfare of
our Lord. But from the beginning of the time wherein he first began, to serve
under the standerd of the Crucifixe, diverse mysteries of the Cross, did in
gloriouse manner appear about him: as to him that shall duly consider the
course of his life, it may be evidently and clearly known, how by mean of a
seavenfolde apparition of our Lord his Cross, he was as well in thought, as in
affection and act, wholely by the extaticall love of him transformed, into the
figure and resemblance, of him that was crucified. Worthily therefore did the
clemency of the highest King (beyond all estimation of man condiscending, unto
those that were his true lovers) design him in his body to bear the banner
of his cross, that he who had binne forearmed, with a marveilouse love of the
cross, might also be made admirable, by a marveilouse honor of the Cross. And
for the irrefrigable establishement, of this wondrous miracle, not only the
testimonies of them that have both seen and felt it, being by all manner of
means, most worthy to be believed: but also, sundry marveilouse apparitions,
and virtuous effects, shining after his death do helpfully concur, to drive
al cloudish darkesomnesse, quite away from the mind. For our most holy Lord,
of happy memory. Pope Gregory the ninth (of whom that blessed man had
prophetically foretold, that he should be raised up to the dignity, of the Sea
Apostolic) did bear in his heart, before such time, as he had enrolled that
standerd bearer of the Cross, into the Catalogue of Saints, a certain scruple
of doubt, concerning the wound of his side. But one night (according as that
happy Pastor, did himself, with tears, report) blessed Saint Francis did
with a certain kind of discontented countenance, in sleep appear, unto him:
and reproving his doubtfulnesse of heart, lifted up his right arm, discovered
his wound, and required of him a Phiolle glafle, to gather up the overflowing
blood, that issued out of his side. The chief Bishop offered him forthwith
the Phiolle, by him required: which seemed to be with the blood that came out
of his side, filled up even to the top. And from thenceforth, he began with
so great a devotion to be affected, and with so zealous an emulation to be
inflamed, unto that sacred miracle that he could by no means endure, any man
by proud contradiction, presumptuously to disgrace those illustriouse holy
signs, but he would correct him with a severe rebuke.

In like manner a certain Friar Minor, being by office a preacher, and a man
of great note for his excellent fame and virtue, although he were of the holy
Stigmattes of this blessed Saint, fully persuaded, yet seeking one time within
himself, a reason of this miracle, according to the course of humane
understanding, did begin to stagger and waver in mind, out of a scruple of
some certain kind of doubt. And where as by giving way to his own
sensuality, he did for diverse days together sustain, this manner of
conflict, Saint Francis did one night in sleep appear unto him, with his feet
all durtie, bearing show of displeasure, howebeit in humility, and of anger,
but yet with in the compass of patience. And what (said he) mean these
agonies of distruste, in thee? What mean these durtie dreggs, of doubts?
Behold my hands, and see my feet. Who then beholding his hands to be peirced
through, but not yet perceaving, the Stigmattes of his bemired feet; remove
away (said the blessed Saint) the durte from my feet, and know for certain
the places of the nails thereof. Whereupon, he taking hold of them with great
devotion, did seem to wipe of the durte, and with his hands to touch the
places of the nails. And as soon as be waked out of his sleep, weeping in
great abundance, he washed away his former affections (being in a sort durted
and defiled) no less with a stream of tears, than with public and open
confession.

In the City of Rome, a certain noble mat^one of great accounte, as well for
her virtuous cariadge and conditions, as for the glory also, of her parentage,
had chosen Saint Francis to be her patron: whose painted picture, she had in
her private closet, where she used to pray to the father, in secrette. Which
she heedefully observing, one day, whilst she was at her prayers, and
therewithal perceaving that it had not the sacred signs of the Stigmattes;
began thereat not a little both to sorrow and wonder. But it was not
marveile, though they were wanting, in the picture; being that they were, by
the Painter himself, neglected. Yet nevertheless, whilst she did for diverse
days, in great carfulnesse of mind, debate with herself, what might be the
cause of this manner of defect, behold those marveilouse signs, sodeinly one
day appeared in the picture, even in such sort, as in other picturs of the
Saint they were wont to be painted. The woman thereat conceyving sum fear,
fourthwith called unto her a devoute daughter of her own, and earnestly
enquired of her, if the picture had not binne without the Stigmattes, even
until that very time. She for her part, did affirm and swear, that of
former time; it had benwithout those sacred Stigmattes, and had them now
therein verily appearing. But because the mind of man, does oftentimes enforce
it self to fall, and does also frequently call, the truth into doubt there
entered into the woman's heart an evil kind of distrust, least hapily the
picture might have been marked with those signs even from the beginning. But
that the former miracle, If the Use of pictures had not been lawful God had
not wrought so many wonders about this picture.
might not be contemned, the power of God vouchsafed, to add thereto, a
second. For the signs forthwith disappearing, the picture was of the
privileges, thereby deprived: that by the sign ensueing, proof might be
made, of that which had gonne before.

In Catalonia also at a place called Ilerda, it chanced that a certain man
named John, who bare great devotion to blessed Saint Francis, did travel one
evening late, along by a certain way, where some desperate persons, did
secrettely lie in wait, to do a murder: howbeit not upon him, with whom they
had no enmity, but upon another that seemed to be like unto him, and was even
then also with him in company. But one of them issueinge sodeinly out of the
place of deceit, and taking him to be the man that was his enemy, did so
deathfullie begoare him, with a number of wounds, that there was no hope to be
had, for the recoverie of his life. For, at the very first stroke, he had
almost cut of his whole shoulder and arm together: and with the second blow,
which entered in at the breast somewhat under the nipple; he made such an open
gap, and rifture into the body, that the wind coming out from thence,
wouldat one time putout some six light Candells, being joined altogether.
Finding therefore by the judgment of the Physicians, that his cure was
impossible, in regard of the putrefaction of his wounds, which yielded forth
such an intolerable ste^che, that even his own wife, did exceedingly loath it;
and perceaving also that he could not have help by any humane remedies, he
wholely turned himself, with all his best devotion to crave the patronadge, of
the blessed Father Saint Francis, whom with the blessed Virgin, he had most
faithfully invocated, in the very midst of his strokes. And behold, as he
lay miserably waking in his bed, Lo where Saints are inuocated and being
innocated do help those which pray unto the^.
all solitary and full of distress, and did with mourneful lamentation,
oftentimes reiterate the name of Francis; there stood one by him in the habit
of affriar Minor, having entered, as to him it seemed, in at the window, who
calling him by his name, did say unto him; Because that in me thou have had
hope and confidence be hold our Lord will deliver thee. And being, by the
distressed creature, demanded who he was; he made answer, that he was
Francis. Whereupon drawing nighe forthwith unto him, he presently unloosed the
clothes, that bound up his wounds: and did, as he conceaved, annoint all
those wounds with a certain kind of oyntement. But so soon as ever he felt
the sweet touch, of those sacred hands, which by the force and virtue, of
the Stigmattes of our Savior, were able to give help and remedy, the
corruption being driven quite away, the flesh fully repaired, and the wounds
thoroughly healed, he was perfectly restored unto his former health and
strength. Which being done, the blessed Father departed. And he finding
himself to be healed, and bursting forth, into a gladsome voice, of the praise
of God, and of blessed Saint Francis; did presently call his wife unto him. Who
running speedily, and beholding him, now to stand upon his feet, whom she
made accounte she should have buried, in the day following; being stricken with
a great terror and amazement thereat, did sill, with her clamor and outcrie,
all the neighborhood there about. But his neighbors and frinds coming in
strait ways upon him, and goeing about to have him back again to his bed,
as one that were frantique and out of his wits; he utterly refused so to
do, showing himself to be now healed, and thoroughly recovered. Whereupon they
were all, so exceedingly astonished, that being as it were without their since
or understanding, they held it to be a fantastical thing, which they did
behold: considering, that whom they had but a little before seen, to be with
most cruel wounds butchered, and worn quite away; him did they now observe,
to be full of joy, upon the perfect recoverie of his former strength. And
therefore the said unto them: do ye in no wise fear, neither yet do ye
think it to be a vain thing which you see: because Saint Francis is but
lately departed from the place; who has by the touch of those his holy
hands, perfectly cured me, of all my wounds. Now, as the fame of this
miracle, was at le^tgh generally spread abroad, all the people repaired with
speed, unto him: and beholding in so manifest a wonder, the force of the
Stigmattes of blessed Saint Francis, they were filled thereupon both with
admiration and joy, and did also extol the standard bearer of Christ, with
many great and excellent praises. And with good cause doubtless it was, that
the blessed Father, If the Saints being now dead in flesh, do live in soul
with Christ and in the future judgment are to rise again with him how comes
it to pass that the ignorant of our days do rather with heretics call the^
dead. Luc. 10.30. Then sleeping with S. Paul.
being now dead according to the flesh, but yet living with Christ in heaven,
did both by the marveilouse apparition of his presence, and by the sweet
touch also of his holy hands, give present health and recoverie to this
poor man, thus pitifully and deadly wounded, considering that he himself
also had taken upon him the very Stigmattes and marks of him, who mercifully
dying and marveilously again a rising, has by the virtue of his own wounds,
healed all mankind, which had bin sorely wounded, and left for almost dead.

At Potentia, a City in Apulia, there was a certain man named Roger: a man
of honorabse place, and a Cannon of the great Church. Who being one time not
well at ease, and coming even then into the Church to pray, where the picture
of blessed Saint Frantis was set out with his gloriouse Stigmattes, did
begin to doubt of the high degree and nature of that miracle, as of a thing
altogether unusual and impossible. And sodeinely therefore, while, being
inwardly wounded in his mind, he thought with himself such vain and
frivolouse things; behold, in the palm of his left hand, under his glove, he
felt himself to be grievously wonded: hearing the sound of a stroke, as if
it had been of an arrowe shot out of a crosbowe. And being presently thereupon no
less pained with the wound, the^ astonished with the sound, he pulled of his
glove, from his hand: that by sight of the eye, he might fully know what he had
already perceaved, both by his feeling, and hearing. And whereas in the palm
of his hand, there had formerly ben, no sign of any stroke at al, yet now he
perceaved therein a wonde, newly made (as it were) with the stroke of an arrowe:
out of which proceeded, so great a violence of burning heat: that he seemed
ready, almost to die, for pain thereof. It is a marveilouse thing to be
spoken. There appeared not in the glove, any sign thereof at all: that unto
the secrette and hidden wound of his heart, the pain of his bodily wound,
secretly received, might duly be conformed. From that time forward therefore,
for two days space together, he cried and roared pitifully, out of the most
grievouse violence of his torment: and the lurking thought of his incredulous
heart, he discovered unto al men. He furthermore confessed, and did also
swear, that he verily and truly believed, the holy Stigmattes to have binne in
blessed Saint Francis: avow ing and protesting, Behold where this holy Saint
being inuocated does forthwith hear the prayer of him which does pray unto
him.
that all fantasies of doubt were now gone quite away, and departed. He finally
in humble manner besought the Saint of God, by those his holy Stigmattes, to
help him: and the manifold prayers of his heart, he watered and enriched, with a
plentiful stream of tears. Now see another wonder. The incredulity being
thus, utterly cast away: after the health of the mind, health also of the
body, forthwith ensued. For now all pain and grief was at an end, the
burning heat, was cooled, and of the blow it self, no mark or sign
remained. And so it came to pass, that by an evident burning of the flesh,
the secrette infirmity of the mind, should be, out of the provision of Gods
divine clemency, cured and that by recovery of the mind, perfect cure also,
and recovery of the very flesh, should be to gether therewithal obtained. The
man became afterward humble unto God, devour, and subject to the order of the
brethren, in perpetual familiarity. And the formal course and proceeding of
this miracle, being testified by the oaths of men, and autentically confirmed
by letters, signed with the Bishops seal, did come unto our understanding by
relation from him, upon certain knowledge. Let therefore no place of doubt
remain, Mat. 20.15.
concerning these holy Stigmattes, nor yet let any man's eye be naught in this
point, because God is good; as though that the vouchsafing of such a manner of
gift, were not agreeable to Gods everlasting and endless goodness. For if,
by mean of that Seraphicall love, many members should be so conjoined unto
Christ their head; that both in this warfare, they should be found worthy
of the like armor, and should also in the kingdom, be found worthy to be
advanced unto the like glory, no man of right judgment and understanding, can
say, but that this does verily appertain, unto the glory of Christ himself.

THE SECOND DIVISION. Of dead persons raised to life again,
IN the Castle of the Mountain Maranus nigh unto Beneventum, it chanced that a
certain woman, that bare unto Saint Francis, Lo here the exequies and
funerals of the dead celebrated with Priests and singing of Psalms. Behold
the Sacrament of Confesssion made to a Priest according to the institution of
the Catholic Church proved by a great miracle.
an especial great devotion, departed this present life. But in the night time,
when the Priests of the Church were assembled together, to celebrate the
exequies and vigils of the dead, with singing of the Psalms; she sodeinly in
the sight of them al, raised up here self upon her bed, and calling unto her a
Priest of the company, one namely who had binne her Godfather; did say unto
him: Oh Father I desire to make my confession. For I being dead, should have
bin committed to a straight and hard prison: for that I had not in my life time
confessed one sin, the which I will now discover unto you. But at the
intercession for me made by Saint Francis, whom during my life I served with
devour affection, it is now granted unto me, to rerurne unto my body: that
having discovered that sin, I may meritte and obtain everlasting life. And
behold in the fight of you all, so soon as I shall have uttered the same, I
shall make have unto the rest; which is promised unto me. Being therefore with
fear confessed unto the Priest, who was himself also stricken with fear and
amazement, after absolution redeaved, she quietly settled her self in her bed,
and happily departed, this life, in our Lord.

In the Castle of Pamarcum, which is situated upon the mountains of Apulia,
there was a certain young mateden, the only daughter of her Father and Mother:
who being but of tender years, and of them most tenderly beloved, was by mean
of a violent and greivouse infirmity, finally brought unto death. Whereupon
her parents, having no hope of any other succession, reputed themselves to be
in her, as it were even now already, dead. Their Kinsfolks therefore and
frinds assembling together unto the so lamentable and dolefulle a funeral,
the unhappy Mother lay all along, filled with abundance of sorrows, not to be
spoken not yet expressed: and being even swallowed up with sorrow unto death,
had no manner of observation. of what was done in the house. But in the mean
while Saint Francis appearing with one only companion, vouchsafed to visit the
defolate woman, See he we great is the power of the Saints after their death.
As also that they are to be inuocated and that the invocation of the does not
injury that invocation which is due unto God.
whom he knew to be devoute unto him: and with comfortable and compassionate
words, he spoke unto her. Do not weep, said he, for the light of thy
candle, which thou dorst bewail as exringuished; is to be by mine
intercession, restored unto thee. The woman forthwith arose up from the ground,
and manifesting unto all the company, what the Saint had said vnrohert did not
suffer the dead body to be carried out: but invocating the name of Saint
Francis, with great faith and confidence: and taking hold of her dead
danghter, lifted her up alive and well in health, in the sight of them all,
and to their exceeding wonder.

Upon a time it chanced that the brethren of Noceria, craving of a certain
man named Peter, a little carte, for their necessary use, he foolishly made
answer unto them, returning upon them reproache, in steed of the help
required: and in lie we of the alms which they craved, in honor of Saint
Francis, he thundered out blasphemy against his name. But the man presently
repented himself of his folly; being touched in his heart, with the fear of God:
least hapely his heavy reve^ge, should follow; as it failed not forthwith, to
fall upon him. For his eldest son, being out of hand taken with sickness;
did with in short space, make an end of his life. The miserable Father
therefore tumbling himself upon the ground; and never ceasing, to call upon
the holy servante of God S. Francis, did with tears cry out aloude, and say,
it is I who have sinned; it is I who have wickedly spoken: thou should have
chasticed me in mine own person. But restore now, O Saint, unto me repenting
that which thou have taken away from me, impiously blaspheming. Unto thee I do
yield my self; unto thy services, I do for ever devote mine endevoures: yea
and for the honor of thy name, I will evermore, offer up a devour sacrifice
of praise, unto Christ. It is a marveilous thing. At these very words the
youth arose: and forbidding any further mourning, he avouched that dieing he
was separated from his body, and was now thereto reduced again, by bessed
Saint Francis.

A certain Roman notaries boy of seven year old, desiring in childish
manner, to follow his mother unto S. Mark, his Church; and being by her
enforced to stay at home; did cast himself out of one of the windows of the
house: and having received thereby a deadly bruise, he ended forthwith his
life. But his mother who was not far gone from the place, hearing the sound
of the fall and suspecting the mishappe, of her beloved child, did speedily
return unto him. And finding her self suddenly bereued of her son by so
miserable a chance, began forthwith, in revenge thereof, to lay violent
hands upon her self, and with dolorouse outcries, Behold how god d^^^ confirm
by miracle even the faith by which it is believed that the Saints cane raise
the dead.
drew all the neighborhood, unto lamentation with her. But a certain
brother of the order of the minorites, called Raho, by name, coming that way
to preach, drew night unto the child: and being full of faith, spoke thus
unto the Father: do you believe that the holy man of God Saint Francis, is
able to raise your son from death, for the love which he did always bear
toward Christ, that was crucified for the restoring of life to mankind
again? Who answearing that he did both firmly believe it, and did also
faithfully confess it, and moreover that himself would for ever be a devoted
servaunte of that Saint, if by his merrittes, he might deserve to receive so
great a benefitte, at the hands of God, that brother, together with an other
brother that was in his company, did prostrate himself in prayer, exhorting
the rest that were present to do the like. Which when they had done, the
child began to gape a little, and opening his eyes, and lifting up also, his
arms, he raised up himself: and presently walked before them all in perfect
strength being by the marveilouse power of the Saint, at one time, both unto
life and health, restored.

In the City of Capua, it chanced that a certain boy, as he was playing with
other of his companions, upon the bancke of the River Vulturnus, did fall
unawares, into the bottom: and being by the swiftenes of the stream,
overwhelmed, was covered under the gravel thereof. But at the outcrie of the
rest of the children, who had binne playing with him about the River, a great
multitude of people came to the place. And as all they did both humbly and
devoutely invocate the merrittes of Saint Francis, that beholding the faith of
the parents, who were unto him much devoted, he would vouchsafe to deliver the
child, from the perrill and danger of death; a cunning and expert swimmer
standing a good way of, and hearing their clamors did come unto them: who after
long search, having at the length called upon Saint Francis, for his help,
found a plade, wherein the dead carkase of the boy was in manner of a grave
overcovered, with the sandy gravel: which, when he had dug up, and removed
away, he did with grief behold, the dead body. But the people that stood by,
albeit that they saw the youth to be perfectly voied of life: yet
nevertheless, At the invocation of Saint Francis a boy which was dead is
restored to life.
weeping and lamenting did cry out and say, O Saint Francis restore the
child unto his Father: Yea and the very Jews that were present, being moved
with a natural compassion, did also say, O Saint Francis, restore the child,
unto his Father. And sodeinely the boy rising up in perfect health, to the joy
and wonder of them all: humbly desired to be led unto the Church of Saint
Francis: that he might devoutely render thanks unto him; by whose virtue and
power, he knew himself to have binne, marveilously, reviued.

In the City of Suessa, in the street which is called, Ad Columnas, a
certain house falling sodeinly down to the ground, a young man was therein
overtaken, and imediatly slain. But the rest of the men and women that were
within, being stirred up at the sound of the fall, running about some one way,
and some another, did lift and remove the wood and stones, on every side, and
brought unto the miserable mother her dead son. But she, fetching store of
most bitter sighs, did in such manner as she could, Here at the vow which a
woman made in honor of S. Francis if he would raise her son which was slain
by the ruin of an house. her son according to her desire is raised again to
life.
with woeful voice cry out unto Saint Francis, saying: O Saint Francis, Saint
Francis, restore unto me my son again. And not only she, but all the rest
that were present, did instantly crave the help, of the blessed Father. But
the dead carckase having in it neither voice nor sense, they put it in a bed:
expecting but the next day, for the burial thereof. But the mother having full
hope and confidence in our Lord, by the merittes of his holy Saint, did make
abvow, that she would cover the Altar of blessed Saint Francis, with new
linen, if he would recall her son to life again. And behold ancute
midnighte, the youth began to gape, and yawne: and his members resuming a
natural heat, he rose up a live and well in health, bursting forth into words
of praise. And furthermore he incited those of the Clergy, and all the people
that were come to that place, with gladsomnesse and joy of mind, to render due
praises and thanks unto God, and blessed Saint Francis.

In like manner one Gerlandinus by name, a young man that was borne at Regusa,
goeing forth to the vineyarde, about the time of gathering grapes, and
standing under the wine press in the vessale that received the wine; to fill
the bottles: sodeinely a sort of exceeding great stones, being driven upon on
him by the fall of certain wood piles thereaboutes, did buise and batter his
head, to present death whereupon his father did presently make have unto him,
and dispairing of his son, as being utterly overthrowen and lost, did not go
about to help him: but under the burden, as he fell; so under the same he left
him. The laborers also of the vineyarde came running speedily unto the place,
hearing a mournful voice, of a great clamor, and joining in great sorrow
with the Father for the youth, did draw him out, being now perfectly dead
with the fall. But his Father casting himself at the feet of Jesus, did make
his humble prayers unto him, that through the merittes of Saint Francis, whose
solemn feast was even then at hand, he would vouchsafe to restore unto him his
some again. The son is raised from death to life while the Father does vow
to visit the body of B. Saint Francis
These his prayers he redoubled, and vowed offices of piety: promising,
himself with his son, (if he might be raised up from death) to visit the
body of the holy man. Now see the marveilouse effect. By and by the youth,
who had binne miserably bruised al his body over, being restored to life and
perfect strength, did joyfully rise up before them all: blaming them that
lamented for him, and therewithal avowing himself to have reobtained his
life, by the suffrages of Saint Francis.

Another dead man also he raised in Almany, whereof our Lord the Pope. Pope
Gregory, did at the time of the translation of the blessed Saint, to the great
joy of all the brethren that were assembled to the translation and general
Chapter, by his letters Apostolic, give certain knowledge, unto them. The
course of this miracle, because I do not know I have not committed to
writing: beleiving the Papal testimony, to be better than any other instrument
of asseveration, whatsoever.

THE THIRD DIVISION. Of such as he delivered from the perrill of death.
IN the Confines of the City ( of Rome) a certain noble man named Raphe did
with his devoute wife, entertain the Friars Minors, in his house: as well in
regard of hospitality, as for the love and reverence, of Saint Francis. But
that very night, the keeper of the house sleeping upon the top of a Tower,
and lieing upon a pile of wood, that was placed upon the very edge of the wall:
it chanced that the same being not well laid together: did slide of from the
place, whereby he fell upon the under rose of the house, and from thence down,
upon the ground. At the sound of which fall, the whole family being raised;
and knowledge being also had, of the house keepers fall, the master and
mistress of the house, together with the brethren, did hastily run to the
place. But he who had fallen from a lofte, was wholely possessed with so
sound a sleep, that neither at the rattling, of the double downfall: nor yet
at the noise of the family that came with clamor round about him, he did
awake. Yet being at the length enforced to wake, by the hands of them, that
haled and iogged him; he began to complain, that he had bin put out of a
sweet and quiet rest: saying that he had sweetly slept, between the arms of
Saint Francis. But being by the rest informed, of his own fall, and seeing
himself to be upon the ground who had lien on high, before with wonder and
amazement of mind, that a thing should so be done: which he had not
perceived, while it was a doing; he promised before them all, that he would
do penance, for the reverence of God and of Saint Francis.

In a town called Pophis, which is with in the parts of Campania, a certain
Priest named Thomas went to repair a mill, which belonged unto the Church. And
walking somewhat less carefully about the edge of the trough, from whence a
deep stream, Acertaine Priest is delivered from manifest danger of death by
the inuocating of Saint Francis.
did fall down with a strong and violent follow; he fell by a sodeyne chance,
into a hollow piece of wood: by motion whereof the mill was set a goeing. As
therefore he lay encompassed and restrained, within that piece of wood, and the
course of the waters ceased not to stream over his mouth, because he lay with
his face upward: not being able to speak with his tongue, he did with his
heart, lamentably call upon Saint Francis. But lieing so for a great while,
in so much that his life was dispaired of, by all his companions, they did at
length with great violence, remove the mill to the contrary side. Whereby, the
Priest being cast out of that hollow piece of wood, was tumbled, in the
channel of the water: panting and breathing for life. And even then, behoulde a
certain Friar Minor, apparelled in a pure white garment, and girt with a Rope;
taking hold of him with great sweetness, did pull him out of the river:
saieing: I am Francis, whom thou did call upon. But he, being in this ways
delivered from that daunget, was marveilously astonished, and being desirouse
to have kissed his footestepps, ra^ne carefully up and down, inquiring of his
companions. Where is he? Whither went the Saint: Which way departed he. And
the men that were with him, being full of fear, did fall down prostrate, upon
the ground, extolling the great wonders, of the high God, and the prevalent
meritts, of his humble Servant.

Certain youths of the town of Celanum, went forth upon a time to mow
grass in the meadows, where in was an old hidden well covered over at the
top with diverse kinds of green herbs, the which contained about some
four yardes depth of water, with in it. And it fortuned that as the boys did
severally run diverse ways, over the meadowe, one of them at unawares ra^ne
into the well. But as his body was even then insta^tly falling, into that
deep pit: the heedefulnes of his mind, had recourse alofte, to the help of
Saint Francis, crieing out, in that very fall, both faithfully and confidently,
o Saint Francis, help me. The rest of the boys in the mean while, A boy
being fallen into a well at the invocation of Saint Francis is drawn out of it
without harm.
turning themselves about, one, one way, and one another and not finding him,
among them, with clamor, travel, and tears, did go to seek him. And having
found at length, that he was fallen, into the well, they hastily with grief,
returned into the town, declaring the event, and craving help. But
retourning back again to the place, with great company of men, one being
let down by a rope into the well, did see the boy, sitting upon the tope of
the water, not having suffered, any manner of hurt, at all. But the boy being
pulled out of the well, did say unto them al, that were present? When I
suddenly fell down I invocated the patronadge of Saint Francis: who was
immediately present with me, even in my fall, and reaching forth his hand did
lightely take hold of me, neither did he ever leave me, until that now,
together with you, he led me out of the well again.

In the Church of Saint Francis; at Assisium, while the Bishop of Hostia
(who afterward was Pope, Alexander) did preach, before the Court of Rome, A
certain great and weighty stone: being unadvisedly left upon the pulpite,
which was both high, and all of stonne; and being over much forced, with
leaning upon it, did fall upon the head of a woman that satte thereby.
Whereupon the people about her, esteeming her to be perfectly dead; and her
head to be bruised, altogether; did cover her, with a garment of her own; that
after the end of the Sermon, she might be had out of the Church, as a
lamentable Coarse, to be prepared for burial. But she faithfully commended her
self unto Saint Francis, before whose Altar She lay. And behold, as soon as
the Sermon was done, the woman rose up before them all, so well in health;
that there appeared in her, no sign of any hurt at all, yea, and which is more
to be admired: whereas she hade binne for long time together, even until that
very hour afflicted, with a continual pain in her head; she was from that
time forward, quite and clean delivered, from all molestation of that disease
according as her self avowed afterward.

At Cornetum, in a place of the brethren, whether diverse devout persons, one
time resorted to the casting of a bell; a certain young boy of eighte years
oulde, whose name was Bartholomewe, brought some kind of present, unto the
laboring brethren. At what time, sodeinly a great and vehement wind? shaking
the whole house, did with so violent a force, throw down the door of the gate
(which was both very great, and exceeding heavy) upon the boy, that, with the
greatness of the weight, he was verily thought, to have binne crushed; to
death. For he was so wholly covered and buried (as it were) therevnder, that no
part of him, could outwardly be seen. They therefore that were present, did al
of them run together, calling for the mighty help of Saint Francis. Behold
more miseracles done by in vocating the holy Father S. Francis.
And his Father also, who for the numnesse of his members, by reason of
sorrow, was not able to move himself, out of the place, did yet by inward
vows, and outewarde voice, offer his son to Saint Francis, Well: they at the
length removed that deadely waighte, from over the boy. And behoulde, he, whom
they thought to have bin dead, did, as one awaked out of a steep, in
cheareful manner appear before them, having no manner of show, of any hurt,
about him. He therefore, as soon as he was fowerteene years old, became a
Friar minor, growing afterward to be a learned man, and a famous preacher,
in the order.

The men of Lentinum, had hewn an exceeding great stone, out of the
mountain, the which was to be put under an alter of a Church of S. Francis,
that was shortly to be consectated. But where as (well nighe) forty men
indeauoured often times to put it into a carte, it fell at the length upon a
certain man, and covered him in manner of a grave. Where upon, the men being
confused in mind, and not knowing what to do, the greater part of them
departed away, without hope of help. But ten of the men, that remained
behind, invocating S. Francis, with mourneful voice, and desiring him not to
suffer a man, so horribly to dye in his service, taking at length good heart
unto them, did with so great a facillitie, remove the stone, that no man might
doubt, but that the power of Saint Francis, was present amongst them. The man
finally rose up strong and sound, in all his members: and more over he
obtained; the clear and perfect sight, of his eyes, which had bin before,
duskish and obcured: that so all men might be given to understand, of how
efficacious and preualent power, the merittes of S. Francis be, even in
desperate and hopeless accide^ts.

The very like happened at Saint Severines, in the Marquisate of Ancona. For,
as a great stone being brought from Constantnople, unto a Church of S.
Francis, was drawn along, by the strength of many men, it fell most terribly,
upon one of them, that drew it. And whereas it was generally believed, that he
was not only dead, but was also broken and crushed to pieces: by the help of
Saint Francis, who lifted up the stone, he casting of the weight thereof, did
leap up safe and sound, without any hurt at all.

One Bartholomewe also, a Citizen of Caieta, laboring not a little, in the
building of a certain Church of Saint Francis by mean of a certain beam
that having binne but slightly set, did fall and light upon his neck, was
therewithal grievously bruised. Whereupon, being even now ready to die, he as
he was a faithful and Godly person, craved of one of the brethren, his voyage
provision. The which for so much as it was not in the brothers power, so
sodeinely to bring unto him, he therefore considering that he was thought to
be, in very present danger of death: used unto him the word of Saint
Augustine, saying believe and thou have eaten. But in the night following Saint
Francis, with eleven brothers in his company appeared unto him: and bearing a
little Lamb upon his breast, did come unto his bed side, calling him by his
name, and saying unto him, Bartholomewe, do not fear because the enemy, who
would have hindered thee in my service, shall not prevail against thee. Lo,
here is the Lamb, which thou did crave, to have been given unto thee; whom
also, in regard of thy good desire, thou have received: by whose power thou
shall obtain, the perfect welfare, both of thy soul, and body. And so drawing
his hand, along over the wounds; he willed him to return, unto the work he
had taken in hand. Who rising up therefore, very timely in the morning; and
presenting himself sound and well, before them that had left him, even at
deaths door, did bring upon them, both wonder and amazement. And
furthermore, he stirred up their minds, unto the reverence and love, of the
blessed Father, as well by his own example, as by the miracle of the Saint.

A certain man also of the town of Ceperanum, named Nicholas, did fall one
day into the hands of his merciless enemies: who in the fencenesse of their
savadge cruelty, heaping wounds after wounds, in great store upon him, did in
so excessive a degree exercise their fury; upon the miserable man, that they
took him either to be dead outright, Here one whichdoth in vocate the Saint is
delivered from danger of death.
or at the least to be upon the very point of death. But the same Nicholas;
when he received the first blows, did with a loud voice call upon Saint
Francis, saying: O Saint Francis, defend me, O S. Francis, help me. And this
voice, diverse heard a great way of, although they were not able to relieve him.
But heing carried home at length, al begoared, in his own blood, he
cousidentllie avouched, that he should not see death by mean of those wounds:
nor yet that he did even then feel, any pain of them: for that Saint Francis,
had succored him, and had obtained of God, for him, time to do penance in.
Which the evente ensuing, confirmed. For being washed from the blood, he was
forthwith (beiond al humane hope) clarely delivered.

Also a certain noble man's son, in the town of Saint Geminianus, being taken
with a grievouse sickness, and past hope, of any better recoverie was finally
brought, unto the very exigent and point of death. For a stream of blood
issued forth of his eyes, as it is commonly seen to do, out of a vain, in the
arm. And by other undoubted tokens also, of death approaching, as appeared, in
the other parts of his body, he was of al men judged, and reputed for a dead
man. As also, being in regard, of the weakness of his spirit and strength
deprived of the use of his sense and motion, he seemed to be already departed.
His parents therefore and frinds, being gathered together (as the custom is)
in way of lamentation: and thinking of noe other thing, but of his burial, his
Father, yet conceaving hope in our Lord ran speedily unto the Church of Saint
Francis: which was built in the same town: and hanging a girdle about his
neck, did withal humility, prostrate himself, upon the earth, and so,
making his vows, and multiplying his prayers, Here we may see the Saints to
assiste as patrons before our Lord Jesus Christ those which are devout unto them
did with sightes and groans, obtain of Christ, to have Saint Francis, to be
his Patron. He therefore returning, straight ways unto his son, and
finding, him to be restored, to health again: changed his former. Mourning,
into joy, and exultation.

The very like also our Lord vouchsafed, by the merittes of his Saint, to work
upon a certain girl of a village named Thamaret, in Cathalonia, and upon
another of Ancona: who both of them being by the violence of their sickness,
in present danger of death, and Saint Francis, S. Francis being faith fully
invocated does forthwith restore health to two which were sick.
being of their parents faithfully invocated, in their behalf were presently
restored, to perfect health.

A certain Clarke named Mathewe, dwelling in the street called Albus, having
drunken, a deadly poison, was so grievously oppressed, therewithal, that
being no ways able to speak, he looked for nothing, but the end of his life.
And even then, a Priest that was present, admonishing him, to make his
confession, was not able, to extorte from him, so much as a word. But he in
his heart, humbly besought, our Savior Christ that by the merittes of Saint
Francis, he would vouchsafe to deliver him, from the jaws of death And as
soon, as having received strength from God he had with faithful devotion;
uttered the name of S. Francis, vomiting up the poison (as was testified, by
them that were present) he rendered thanks unto him, by whom he had binne
delivered.

THE FOVRTH DIVISION. Of persons, that were saved from shippewracke
CERTAIN Mariners being sum ten miles distant from the Haven of Barulum,
and in great danger of the Sea, by reason of a tempest, that increased, more
and more, upon them, and and being now in doubt of their lives, did cast down
their anchor. But the spiritte of storms, making the Sea, yet more
outragiously to swell, their Cables therewithal were broken, and their anchors
lost, whereby they wandered upon the Sea, by an uncertain and unequal course.
But yet at length, the Sea, being by Gods providence, brought to a Calm, they
bent their whole endeavors, to recover their anchors, whose Cables lay
flotting, above the water. And not being able, by their own strength and
industry, to accomplish their desires, invocating the help of many of the
Saints and bestowing also therewithal much labor and pain; they could not
yet in a whole days space, recover one. But one Mariner among the rest, whose
name was Perfectus, though in his conditions he were very imperfect; did in a
kind of scoffing manner, say thus unto his companions; Lo, you have already
invocated, the help of all the saints, and there is not one (as you see) who
has releived, our needs. Let us now therefore call upon this same Francis,
who is a new petty faint if hapely he can co^vey himself into the bottom of
the waters, and restore our anchors, unto us. Hereunto, the rest of them, all
agreed: howbeit not in scoffing manner, but truly and sincerely consenting,
Here the heretic may see how certain Mariners making a vow to S.
Francis are hard of the Saint why then do they scoff at vows. Behold here
a (...) grimag^ vndert^^^ in honor of Saint Francis.
unto the persuasion of Perfestus: and blaming his reproachful word, they
established with the Saint, a voluntary and unfeigned vow. Whereupon
immediately, even in a very moment, without any manner of help at al, the
anchors did swim upon the waters; as though the nature of iron, had bin
changed into the lightness of a piece of wood.

A certain traveller, being sick and weak in body, by reason of the evil
consequences, of a sharp ague, which he had but a little before sustained; did
come in a certain ship, from the parts beyond the Seas. But this man did
bear an exceeding great devotion, toward Saint Francis, whom he had chosen
to be his advocate, with the King of Heaven. And being not yet perfectly free
from the disease, whereas he was one time distressed, with a very great
thirste, not having now any water left to drink, he began with a loud
voice, to say; Go confidently: and draw me a cup of water because Saint
Francis, has already filled my little vessel, with water. It is a wonder,
verily. They found the vessel indeed, filled up with water, which had binne
before, left voied, and empty. But upon another day, when the ship was
almost covered with waves, in a sodeine tempest, and was so tossed and beaten
with violent storms, that they did all of them stand in present fear of
shippewracke, the same sick man, began with a sodeine cry, to call upon them
all that were in the ship, saying: Arise every one and go to meet Saint
Fraucis, who is coming toward us: For behold, he is here present to save
us. And so with a great voice, and also with tears falling down upon his
face, he did his reverence. And presently, at the sight of the Saint, the
sick man resumed his former health, and the calm of the Sea, forthwith
ensewed.

Brother James of Reate, passing over a certain River, with some other of his
brethren, in a little Bark, so soon as those his brethren, were landed upon
the shore, did last of all prepare himself, to come forth. But that little
boat, being by misfortune, beaten back, the Governor thereof, was forced to
swim, and the brother was plunged, into the bottom, of the water. The
brethren therefore that stood on land, did with affectuous prayers, call upon
Saint Francis: with tears and sighs beseaching him, to succor his child, in
this distress. But the overwhelmed brother, not being able to speak with his
mouth, did yet in such sort as he could, from the bottom of that huge and
mighty gulf, cry out in heart, and crave the help, of his pitiful and
compassionate Father. And by help of the presence, of the blessed Father, he
walked along the deep, as if it had bin, upon the dry land: and taking hold,
of the drowned Bark, did bring it with him, unto the shore. It is a marveilous
thing, to speak. His garments were not so much as wette: nor yet did any drop
of water take hold upon his Coat. Behold a Wonderful thing which does
follow at the invocation of Saint Francis. S. Francis being inuocated does
deliver many from danger of drowninge.


A brother named Bonauenture, sailing with two men in his company, over a
certain lake, by reason of the vessel, which was partly broken: and of the
surges of the water, that came pouring therinto, abundantly, was with the
ship, and the rest that were in it, swallowed up, into the bottom of that
deep water. But they having (with great hope and confidence) out of that lake
of misery, invocated the merciful Father Saint Francis, the vessel, though
full of water, sodeinely sailed above the water. And did by the guide and
conduct of the holy Saint, bring them with safety, unto the shore. So also
another brother of Esculum, being fallen under water, in a River, was by the
meritts of Saint Francis, delivered. And in the lake of Reate, certain men and
women, being in the like perril, did, at the invocation of the name of Saint
Francis, safely escape, out of the dau^gerouse shippewracke of many waters.

Certain Mariners of Ancona, being tossed with a perilouse tempest, perceaved
themselves to be in present danger, of drowing. But as they, in this desperate
case of their lives, humbly called upon Saint Francis, See how great things
the B. Saint does effect after his death.
a great light appeared upon the Sea: and together with that light a calm
was from Heaven vouchsafed, as if the blessed man had bin able, by a
marveilouse power, to command the winds, and the Sea. With how great and
wondrouse Miracles, the blessed Father both was, and yet is, made famous upon
the Sea, and how often he has there, given help, unto such as were void of
hope, I think it impossible, to rehearse particulerly. Neither is it to be
wondered at, if he now raignening in Heaven, have power granted unto him, over
the waters, unto whom, conversing in this our mortality, every living
creature, being confirmed unto the original, of his creation, did yealde, a
marveilouse kind of service.

THE FIFTH DIVISION. Of persons delivered out of bonds and imprisonement.
IT chanced in Romania, that a Grecian being servant unto a certain man, was
unjustly accused of theft: whom for that cause, the Lord of the land
commanded, One Which was captive being commended by vow to S. Francis is
Forthwith miraculously delivered.
to be kept in a straighte prison and heavily laden, with irons. But the lady
of the house, having compassion upon her servant, whom she undoubtedly
believed to be innocent of the crime, whereof he was accused, made instant
request unto her husband, for his deliverance. But whereas he, out of the
obstinate hardenesse of his heart, refused to consent unto her. The lady made
her humble recourse, unto S. Francis, unto his piety by her petition commending
the Innocent. Whereupon the helper of the distressed, was present forthwith, and
mercifully visited, the poor man that was cast in prison. He unloosed his
bands, he broke up the prison, and taking the Innocent man by the hand, he
led him forth, and said unto him: I am he unto whom, thy Lady has devoutly
commended thee. And whereas he was stricken, with a great fear, in his mind,
and wandered about, to find away of passadge down, from the top of that
steep rock, he sodeinely finding himself to be (by the power of him, that
had enlarged him) upon the plain ground, returned unto his Lady. And relating
unto her in order, the truth of the miracle, he yet further inflamed the
devoute Lady, unto the love of Christ, and to the reverence of his servant,
Saint Francis.

In a place called Massa S. Petri, there was a poor man, that ought a piece of
money, unto a certain soldier, who though he were so exceeding poor that he
had not wherwithal, to pay him, yet being one day, sodeinely surprised, by his
creditor, did humbly beseach him, to have compassion upon him, craving a time
of respite, for the love of Saint Fancis. But the proud warrior; despised the
petitions that were offered unto him, and as a vain and idle thing, lightely
esteemed, the love of the Saint. For making a perverse and preposterous
answer unto him, I will (said he) shut thee up, in such a place, and I will
mure thee up in such a manner of prison, that neither Saint Francis, nor any
body else shall be able to help thee. And he put his word in practice. For he
found out an obscure and dark prison, whereinto he cast the man with fetters
upon him. But a little after, came Saint Francis: who breaking up the prison,
and riving the fetters a sunder, did bring the man harmless home to his own
again. And so the mighty power of Saint Francis, having disappointed the
proud soldier; delivered the Captive from harm, who had committed himself
unto him: yea and did, by an admirable miracle change, the contumacie of that
soulder, into mildenes and good conformity.

In like manner one Albertus Aretium, being kept in hard and cruel bands,
for certain debts that were unjustly demanded of him; did humbly commend his
innocence, unto Saint Francis. For he did love the Order, of the Friars
Minors, exceedingly: Consider these things thou which say that Saints can
do nothing after their death.
and did reverence Saint Francis, among all the Saints, with an especial
affection. But his Creditor said, with a blasphemouse mouth unto him; that
neither Saint Francis, nor God himself could be able; to deliver him out of
his hands. Thus therefore, upon the Vigill of Saint Francis, it came to pass;
that whereas this prisoner had eaten nothing all that day, but had given his
diette unto another poor man, for the love of the Saint; in the night
following, Saint Francis, appeared unto him, as he lay awake, at whose
entrance in his fetters were loosed from his feet, and his chains fell down
from his hands; the doors also were opened of themselves, the tables fell
down in the place, and the man departing free, returned home to his own. And
from thenceforthe, he fulfilled his vow; observing to fast, the vigil of Saint
Francis: and over adding unto the taper of wax, which he accustomed yearly to
offer; an ounce: of increase in sign of his increasing devotion.

When Pope Gregory the ninthe, sat in the seat of Saint Peter, one Peter also
by name, an inhabitant of the City called Alisia, being accused of heresy,
was taken at Rome: and was by the commandment of the same supreme Bishop,
committed to the custody, of the Bishop of Tibur, Saint Francis being
invocated with prayers and tears does by miracle free one out of prison.
to be by him kept forth coming, upon pain of the loss, of his
Bishoppricke. Whom therefore he caused to be put in irons, and to shut up in a
dark prison, that he might have no mean to escape: giving unto him bread, by
weight, and drink, by measure. But now did the man begin, with great store
both of prayers and tears, to call upon Saint Francis, to have compassion upon
him: because he had heard, that the vigil of his solemn feast, was presently
now at hand. And for so much as, he had by the purity of faith, already
renounced, all error of heretical impiety, and had withal the devotion of
his heart adheared, unto the most faithful servaunte of Christ, Saint Francis,
he obtained by the intercession of his merrittes, to be heard at the hands,
of our Lord. For the night before his festivitie, about the twilighte of the
evening, Saint Francis, taking compassion, came down into the prison, unto
him: and calling him by his name, did command him, forthwith to rise. Who
being stricken with fear, and asking who it was, did perceive that Saint
Francis was present. And beholding the fetters of his feet, to lie broken
before him, the doors of the prison to be opened, by reason that the very
nails flewe out of themselves, yea and a plain way, to be prepared for his
departure, and all this to be done, by force of the presence of the Saint;
albeit that he were set at liberty, yet was he so amazed, that he could not
find the way to depar te, but making a noise at the gate, terrified all his
keepers. Who making report unto the Bishop, of his deliverie, from
imprisonement, the Bishop himself, after understanding had, of the order and
course of the matter, came with devotion unto the prison, and manifestly
knowing, the power of God: adored our Lord, in that place. The bonds also and
fetters, were brought before our Lord the Pope, and the Cardinals all, that
were present: who seeing what had binne done, and admiring the same,
exceedingly, gave honor, and praise, unto God.

One Guidolotus of Saint Geminianus, being falsely accused of killing a
certain man, with poison, and that by the same manner of death, he would also
have destroyed his son, and all his family, was therefore apprehended, by
the Governor of the land, by whose commandment, he was laden with irons,
and straightly imprisoned, in a certain Tower. But he having hope in our Lord,
by reason of his innocence, which he knew in his own heart, commended his
cause, to the defense, of Saint Francis, his patronadge. But while the
Governoure was thinking with himself, by what manner of torment, he might make
him confess, the objected crime, and further with what pains, he might after
such confession, finally put him to death, the poor man, being the next
morning to be brought to his torments, was visited that very night, with the
presence of Saint Francis: and being until the morning, inco^passed with a
great brightness of light, and being also filled with joy, and much
confidence also of mind, he received security of his escape. But in the
morning the torme^tours came about him: they led him out of the prison: they
hung him upon the torture: and increased upon him, many and sundry waights of
iron. He was oftentimes, let down, and lifted up again: that by the
succeding of one pain, after another, he might be the sooner enforced, to
confess the crime: but by the spiritte of his innocence, he retained a
chearefullnesse in his countenance, making no show of sadness, in all those
pains. Yet after this, a great fire was made beneathe him, but not so much as
one of his hears was thereby perished, though he hung with his head to the
ground. And last of all, being scalded all over his body, with boiling oil,
by virtue of his patron, to whose defense, he had commended himself,
overcomming all these things, he went away safe, and free from harm.

THE SIXTE DIVISION. Of Women delivered, from danger, in Childebirthe.
A certain Countess in Sclauonia, no less virtuous in conversation, than
high, in honorable degree and condition, did bear toward Saint Francis, an
exceeding great devotion: and toward the brethren an industriouse affectionof
piety. But she suffering one time, in her travel of child, exceeding sharp,
and dolorouse pains, was brought unto that extremity, of distress, that the
future birthe of the child, seemed likely in all expectation, to be the
present death, of the Mother. For it seemed impossible, that the child should
be borne, with life; unless that she thereby, should end her life: and
should by such a deliverie, nor bring forth, but perrish. But then she
bethought her self, of Saint Francis, his fame; of his virtue, and glory: her
faith, was stirred up; her devotion was inflamed. She turned her self, unto
his efficacious help, unto him, as unto a true frind, as unto a solace, of the
devoute, as unto a refuge, of the afflicted. O Saint Francis (quoth she) unto
thy piety, all the bones of my body, make humble supplication: and I vow, in
mind, what I cannot express, in words. And marveilouse was the speed of his
piety. A certain woman being helped by S. Francis in the danger of childbirth
does afterward perform her vow and build a Church in his honor.
The end of her speaking, was the end, of her lamenting: the bound, of her
travel, the beginning of her child bearing. For presently her labors being
all at an end, she did with safety, bring forth her child. And afterward,
she was not unmindful of her vow, nor yet refractorie, from her well intended
purpose. For she caused, a goodly Church to be builte: and the same being
builte, and finished, she assigned unto the brethren, in honor of the holy
Saint.

In the parts about Rome, there was a certain woman, named Beatrice, who
looked now shortly to be brought a bed, of a child: but having borne it
dead, by mischaunce, for four days space in her womb, she miserably
sustained, many and sundry, torments: and was distressed with dolorouse
pains, even to the point, of death. For the dead issue, constrained the
mother to death: and the abortiue, being not yet brought to light, enforced
the apparent perrill and danger, of the Mother. She tried the help of the
Physicians. Genesis 3.16.
But by whatsoever humane help, she labored: it prooved, all in vain. And
so of the first maledictions, some part did plentifully befall upon this
miserable woman, that being made the grave and Sepulcher, of her own
conception, she was for certain to expect, a grave for her self, immediately.
But she at the length, withal her devotion, committing her self, by message,
unto the Friars Minors, did with great faith, humbly crave to have somewhat of
the Relics, of Saint Francis. And it happened (by Gods providence) that there
was found, a certain piece of a cord, See here how part of the: girdle of
S. Francis being applied to a Woman does deliver her from danger of death.
wherewith the holy man, had binne sometime girded. The which so soon as it
was put, upon the mournful woman, most easily, forthwith removed, all pain
and dolor, quite away, and the dead child, which was the cause of her danger,
being now brought forth she was perfectly restored, unto her former health.

A certain noble manswife of Narnium, named Iuliana, passed her years, in
sorrow and heaviness for the death of her sundry sons, and did continually
bewail, her unhappy misfortune, concerning them: in regard that all that ever
she had, with great pain and labor, brought into the world, she did (in
short space) with far greater sorrow, commit to burial. But bearing one
time in her womb, a child of four months conception, and being, by reason
of the former events more afflicted in mind, concerning the death, than
concerning the birth of the child, she faithfully prayed, unto the blessed
Father Saint Francis, for the life, of the child that was yet unborn. And
behold, one night as she lay at rest, a certain woman appeared in sleep
unto her; holding a goodly boy, in her hands, and offering him, in most
cheerful manner, unto her. But whereas she refused to receive, him whom she
feared forth with to loose again; the woman yet further, in this manner of
wise replied, saying: receive him securely: for he, whom Saint Francis (bearing
compassion with thee, in thy grief) does send unto thee, shall be sure to live
and shall continewe in perfect health. And presently the woman awaking, did well
understand, by this vision, from heaven vouchesafed unto her; Here two Women
prayinge unto Saint Francis for help are both of the^ heard.
that the suffrage of S. Francis, was ready, to help her. From thenceforthe,
therefore, she being more abundantly filled with joy, did for obtaining the
issue, which was promised unto her, offer up many prayers, and did also make
sundry vows. But the time of her childebirth being come at length, the woman
brought forth a male Child: who flourishing in the lustiness of his
youthful years, as having by the merittes of Saint Francis, received the
sustinance of his life, did give unto his parents, a provocation and further
encouragement, of more devoute affection to wards Christ, and to his blessed
Saint. The like also unto this, the holy father effected, in the City of
Tibur. For a certain woman, having brought forth many daughters, and being now
wearied with desire, of male issue, did make unto S Francis, many prayers and
vows. She therefore, by his meritts, conceived of Child: and he, who had been
prayed unto but for one, granted unto her to bring forth two sons at once.

At Viterbium, a woman great with child, and nigh her time, was by the
judgment of al, thought to be much more nighe unto death, by reason of the
extreme torments, she felt in her body, and other such like lamentable
distresses, incide^t unto women's misfortunes. And when the strength and force
of nature, had so failed, Behold here how an ungrateful woman is punished
for not honouringe the Saint yet afterward being penitent and vowinge again
unto the Saint by his merits is delivered.
that all industry of humane art, failed also, therewithal, by invocating
the name of Saint Francis, the woman was presently delivered, from her pains;
and safely brought for the her child. But she having obtained, what her self
desired; and being unmindful of the benefitte, she had received; did not
give due honor, unto the Saint; but did on the day, of his solemnity, put
forth her hands, to servile works. And behold her right arm being stretched
out unto labor, became sodeinely dry and stiff, and not to be bended. The
which, when she with the other arm, endeavored to pull back unto her; it
also, did with like revenge, wither forthwith. The woman therefore, being
stricken with the fear of Gods punishment; did make her vow anew: and whereas,
in regard of her ingratitude, and contempt, she had lost the use of her
members, she obtained, by the merittes, of the merciful, and humble Saint
unto whom she had now secondly, vowed herself; to recover, the same again.

A certain woman dwelling in the parts about Aretium, having for seven days
space together, sustained most greivouse and daungerouse pains in her travel
of Child, in so much that her flesh was at length discouloured, and turned to
black, being now dispaired, of at all hands, did make a vow, A woman which was
ready to dye prayinge unto S. Francis, for help and making a vow is
miraculously freed from death.
to Saint Francis, and began, at the very instant and point of death, to
invocate his aid and help. But as soon as her vow was made, she speedily
fell a sleep, and therein saw, blessed Saint Francis, sweetly speaking unto
her, and demanding of her, if she knew his face, and could, to the honor of
the gloriouse Virgin, say by heart, that Antheme of hers, which begins with
these words, All hail Queen of mercy. Whereunto, she making answer, that
she had knowledge of both: Begin then, said the Saint, that sacred
Antheme: and before it shallbe fully ended, thou shall with safety, bring
forth thy child. At this voice, the woman awaked, and began with fear to
say that Antheme, All hail Queen of mercy. And when she therein called
after, those merciful cies, and mentioned, the fruit, of the Virgins womb,
being presently delivered, from all her dolours and pains, she joyfully
brought forth a goodly boy: rendering thanks, unto the Queen of mercy, who by
the merittes of Saint Francis, had vouchesafed to have mercy, on her.

THE SEAVENTM DIVISION. Of giving sight unto the blind.
IN the Covent of the Friars Minors, at Naples, a certain brother named
Robert, having binne blind, for many years together, there grew at length
upon his cies, a superfluous piece of fles he, which hindered the motion and
use, of his eye liddes. At one time therefore, when the brethren of foraine
places, being to go into diverse parts of the world, did in great numbers,
assemble ^ither, the blessed Father Saint Francis, the lively pattern and
mirror, of holy Obedience, that by the novelty of a miracle; he might the
rather exhort the^ unto their journey, did cure the foresaied brother Robert,
during the time of their abode, there in manner heareafter following. One night
the same brother Robert, lay sick in so great danger, of death, that they
had already said for him, the co^mendations of his soul: and even then
stood by him the holy father, Thou which say that Saints can do nothing
after their death see what here does happen. Here we may note how the even of
Saint Francis is fasted in bread and water only how the body of our Savior
Christ is elevated in the Mass. As also that the holy Eucharist is to be
adored as a wonderful Sacrament and as the true and living light of our souls.

We may note also a miracle which does happen in the elevation and a doration
of the B. Sacrament.


accompanied with three brethren of great perfection in all manner of
holiness: namely Saint Anthony; brother Augustine, and brother lames, of
Asisium: who, as they had perfectly immitated him, in the time of their life,
so did they chearefully also, follow him, after their death but Saint Francis
taking a kinfe, did cut of, the superfluous piece of flesh, did restore unto
him, his former sight, and reduced him, even from the very jaws of death: and
therewithal, he said unto him, my son Robert, the grace which I have
wrought with thee, is a sign unto the brethren, who travel into far
Countries, that I will go before them, and will direct, their ways. Let them
therefore joyfully go on (said he) and let them with a cheerful mind
accomplish, the obedience enjoined unto them.

At a place called Thebas in Raman^^, a oertaine blind woman having fasted the
vigil of Saint Francis, with bread and water; was brought by her husband, the
next morning early (being the day of his solemnity) unto the Church of the
Friars Minors. Who, while the sacrifice of the Mass, was offered; did even at
the elevation of the body of Christ, open her eyes; did clearly see; and most
devoutely did adore. And in the time of that her adoration, crieing out with a
loud voice; Thanks be to God, said she; and to his Saint; for that I see,
the body of Christ. Whereupon all that were present, bursting forth into a
voice, of joy and exultation; the woman her self, after the end of the
solemnities, returned into her house; with ioyfullnesse of spiritte, and with
the light of her eyes. And she rejoiced indeed, not only for having
recovered the aspect, of this Corporal light, but much more, for that she
had, by the merittes (principally) of Saint Francis, and with the efficacious
help also, of her own faith; obtained to behold that marveilouse Sacrament,
which is the true and lively light, of our souls.

A certain boy, of the town called Pophis, in Campania, being fowerteene
years of age; was so afflicted with some sodeine infirmity, that he had
wholely lost his left eye. And the violent bitterness of his disease, had in
such wise remooved his eye, out of the proper place: that hanging down by a
string upon his cheek, a whole fingers length; for the space of eight days,
together, it was almost withered, and dried away. But when no hope of help,
was to be had, from the Physicians and surgeons, nor ought else remained to be
done, but only (...) the eye away: the Father of the boy turned himself with
all his mind, If injury were done to God almighty by invocating S. Francis. he
would not work so many miracles by him.

Lo here how saints are to be invocated and how being invocated they do
help those which seek for help.


and endeavor to crave the help, of Saint Francis. Neither yielded he, the
unwearied helper, of distressed persons, fail even now at the prayers, of his
humble Suppliante. For he by a marveilouse power, restored that withered eye,
into the proper place, and to the former strength thereof: yea and beautified
it also, with the beams of wished and desired sight again.

In the same province also, at a place called Castrum, a piece of wood of great
waighte, fell down from a high place, upon a certain Priest; and dashing his
head, most greivously; made him blind, of his left eye. Who lieing upon the
ground, began with a loud voice, but yet mournefully; to cry unto Saint
Francis, saying, Help me O most holy Father, that I may be able to go, unto
thy feast, as unto thy brethren I have promised to do. For it was the Vigil
of the Saint. And presently the Priest arising, and being in perfect manner
delivered; did break forth into a voice of joy and praise; now turning all
the standers by, that lamented with him for his misery; into a general
astonishement, and rejoicing. He also went unto the feast, declaring unto all
men, what a clemency and virtue he had found, by experience made, upon
himself.

A certain man of the mountain Garganus, laboring in his vineyard, and
hewing a piece of wood with a hatchette, chauced therewithal to hitte his
own eye, which with that stroke, he so parted and divided, that the one
half (as it were) thereof, did hang out of the due and propor place. And
dispairing, that in so desperate a case, any help, could be by man, procured
unto him, he promised to fast upon the feast of Saint Francis, if he would now
vouchesafe, to help him. And presently the Saint of God, See how health is
obtianed by the making of a vow which our beretickes so much scoff at.
restored the man's eye into the right place again. And did so exquisitely
reioyne it, in the place of devision: in such wise: also adorning the same,
with the former clearenesse of sight, that of the hurt-receaved, noe sign
remained, at all.

A certain noble man's son also, having bin a blind from his very nativitie,
did by the merrittes^ of Saint Francis, joyfully receive, the desired lighte^
of his eyes: who gaining a name, according to the^ event, was therefore called
Illuminatus: (which is as much to say, as illuminated, or enlightened). And
afterward, being further grown into years, as one not vnmindeful, of the
benefitte received, he entered into the Order, of blessed Saint Francis.
Whearein he so greatly profited, in the light of grace and virtue, that he
might verily seem to be, the child of light indeed. And by the blesse'd
Fathers merittes, he at the length concluded his holy beginning, with a more
holy ending.

At Zachantum, which is a town nighe unto Anagnia, a certain soldier named
Gerardus, had utterly lost his sight. But it fortuned, that two Friars Minors
travailing from foreign parts, did come to his house, for harbor. Who having
bin, for the reverence of Saint Francis, of all the whole family devoutely
Peceaued, and withal good humanity, entertained, rendering thanks to God, and
their host, came to a place of the brethren, not far from thence. One night
therefore blessed Saint Francis, appeared in sleep to one of them: saying;
Arise and make have with thy companion, unto the house of our host, who has
received Christ and me, in you: for I will requite the benef^^es of his piety.
He was indeed made blind, by due desent, of his own offenoes: which he had
not Andeavoured to cleanse, by penitent confession. Note here a miracle to
prove confession of sins and penance undertaken with contrition of the heart.
The Father thus disappearing, the brother in haste arose: that with his
companion, he might speedily perform, the commandment. And coming unto the
house of their host, they declared in order, unto him, all that which the one,
had seen. Whereupon, the man being not a little amazed, and acknowledging all
to be true, that was said, with compunction and tears, willingly made his
confession. And after promise made, of amends: the in ward man, being thus
renewed, the exterior sight, was there withal forth with recovered. The fame
of which miracle, being generally spread abroad, very many wereincited
thereby, not on unto the reverence of the holy Saint, but vn^ humble
confession also, of their sins, and to the meritte of Hospitality.

THE EIGHT DIVISION. Of persons delivered, from diverse kinds of infirmities.
AT Castrum Ilebis, a certain young man being a beggar was from his nativitie,
both deaf and dumb: whose tongue, was so exceeding short and slender, that
having binne many time sought for, by sundry persons, it seemed to hau^ binne
wholely, cut away. And it fortuned, that one Marcus, did for Gods sake,
entertain this you the into his house, who finding him to deal well by him,
began to abide with him continually And the said Marcus, being one evening as
suppe with his wife; at what time that boy also stood before them; That we may
see that vows are pleasinge unto God, consider here the wonderful effects
which follow of them.
did use these words, unto h^^. This would I repute, for a great miracle, if
blessed Sain Francis, would restore unto this youth, his heating and speaking.
Unto which words he further adjoined, these: I vow (said he) unto God, that
i^ Saint Francis, shall vouchsafe to work this effect I will for his love,
bestow the maintenance o^ this youth; during his life. It is a marveilouse
thing. Sodeinely his tongue was lengthened; and he spoke also, therewithal:
saying; Glory be unto God, and Saint Francis, who has given unto me my speech
and hearing.

Brother James of Iseum, when he was but a little boy, in his Fathers house; got
a grievous rupture, in his body. But he, albe it that he were both young and
weak; did by the instinct; of Gods heavenly spiritte; enter into the Order of
Saint Francis, with much devotion: not yet discovering unto any man, the
infirmity, wherewith he was molested. But it came to pass, that when the body
of Saint Francis, was translated unto the place; where the precious treasure,
of his sacred bones is even now reserved; the foresaied brother also, was then
present, at the joys, of the translation: that unto the body of the blessed
Father, now glorified; he might exhibit, due honor and reverence. And
approaching unto the tomb, wherein those sacred bones, were placed, for
devotion of spiritte he embraced the same: and praying with many tears; he
sodeinely found the parts of his body, to be in marveilouse manner restored
unto their due places. So that perceaving himself, to be perfittely well; he
put of his trusse; and was from thenceforth, delivered; from his former pain
and grief. From the like infirmity also brother, Bartholus, of Eugubium;
brother Angelus of Tudertum; Nicholaus, a Priest of Stichanum, one Ioannes de
Fora, a certain man of Pisis, and another of the town of Cisterna, one Peter
also, of Sicilia, a man of the town called Spellum, nigh to Asisium, and a
great many more besides, were by the mercy of God, and by the merittes of Saint
Francis, marveilously delivered.

Upon the Sea coasts, a certain woman having binne distracted, for five
years space together, had lost her fight and hearing. She tare her garments,
with her teethe; she reared not the perril, either of fire or water: and at
the last, she had an horrible passion of the falling sickness. But one
night, when God of his mercy, was pleased to have compassion upon her, she
being from heaven en vironed, with the brightness of a health giving light,
did set Saint Francis, sitting upon a high Throne: before whom, she
prostrating her self; Behold how one making a vow is forthwith ^ured.
did make huble suit, to obtain, her health. Unto whose perition, whereas he
did, as yet forbear, to assent, the woman thereupon made a vow, wherein she
promised, that so long as she should have any thing, she would not deny to
give some alms, unto such as should ask of her, for the love of God, and of
this his Saint. This Coveante the Saint forth with acknowledged; as being
like unto that, which himself had formerly made, with our Lord: and signening
her therefore, with the sign of the Cross, he thoroughly restored her to
perfect health. Sup. Cap. 1. parag. 2.
From the like passion also, a certain young maiden of Nurs^^, and a certain
noble man's son, and diverse others besides; have binne by the Saint of God S.
Francis, mercifully delivered: as has binne certainly found; by relation of
good creditte, and authority.

One Peter of Fulgineum, goeing one time to visit the Church of Saint Michael,
and performing that pilgrimage with less reverence than was convenient, having
tasted the water, of a certain fountain, was presently invaded, by the
devils: and being from that time, for three years together, possessed, was
miserably turmoiled, in his body, speaking most wicked things, and
pretending, horrible matters. Yet having sometimes, some kind of intermission,
and reasonable understanding, he did in humble manner, seek after the virtuous
power, of the blessed Saint, which he knew to be effectual, to drive away
the powers of the air. And coming unto the Tomb, Here we may see how those
that seek for refuge at the sepulchers of Saints are helped of them.
of the pious Father, so soon as with his hand, he touched the same, he was
marveilously delivered, from the devils, that did cruelly vex and torment
him. In like manner also, the mercy of Saint Francis, did help a certain
woman of Narnium; and diverse others more that were possessed with devils:
whose greivouse vexations, with the manner also, of their recoverie, were
overlong, to be in this place, particulerly rehearsed.

A certain man of the City of Fanum, named Bonus, being sick of the Palsy,
and infected also, with a Leaprosie, was brought by his parents: unto the
Church of Saint Francis: and recovered perfect health, of either disease. As
also another young man of Saint Seuerinus, named Acto, Here we may note that
some Saints have special privilege to cure some perciculer disease.
being wholly infected, with the Leaprosie, having made a vow and being also
brought unto the Sepulcher of the Saint, was by his merittes cleansed, from
that infection. For the blessed Saint had indeed a marveilouse power, in the
curing of this disease, in regard that he, for the love of humility and
piety, had humbly deputed himself, to serve the Leapears.

In the Diocese of Sora, a certain noble woman named Rogata; having binne for
three and twenty years space, overwearied, with a continual bloody flixe,
and having also sustained many evils, at the Physicians hands, did oftentimes
for very excess of the disease, seem even ready, to give up the ghost. And
if at any time it were stayed with in her, she did exceedingly swel thereby in
all her body. But hearing once, a certain boy in the street, to sing the
miracles (in the Roman tongue) which were done by Saint Francis, sustaining
then great dolor and grief, she burst forth into streams of tears: and so,
being inwardly inflamed with faith, she began to say, O blessed Saint
Francis? Thou that shinest, with so many miracles, if thou would vouchsafe
to deliver me, from his infirmity, much glory would thereby, arise unto thee:
for, such a miracle as this, thou haste not wrought, as yet. What shall I use
more words? So soon as she had but spoken, thus much, she found her self,
to be by the merrittes of Saint Francis, delivered. So also a son of hers
named Mark, having his arm contracted, upon a vow made unto Saint Francis, A
cer^^ine man ^auinge the sinews of his arm contracted is belped, by making a
vow to S. Francis.
obtained present help, thereof. And a certain woman of Sicilia, who had
binne for seven years, worn and consumed, with a bloody flixe, was by the
sign bearer of Christ, perfectly cured.

In the City of Rome, one Praxedes, a woman of great fame, for her
religiouse conversation, who from her tender age, had for love of the
everlasting spouse, by the space of well nighe forty years, betaken her self,
to a hard and straight prison, merited to obtain, at the hands of Saint
Francis, a special grace and favor. For goeing up one day, upon occasion of
some necessaries, into the open place over the Cell, and falling down, by
mean of some fantastical violence, she brake her foot and her thighe, as
also her arm, was thereby put out of joint: at what time, the most loving
Father, appeared unto her, apparelled all in white, with garments of glory:
and with sweet words, he began in this wies, to speak unto her: Rise up
(said he) my blessed daughter, rise up, and do not fear. And taking her by
the hand, he lifted her up and disappeared. But she bestirring her self on
every side, in her little Cell, imagined, that she had seen, a vision: until
such time, that at her clamor and noise, a light was brought, whereby she
perceaving her self, to be by the servaunte of Christ Saint Francis, perfectly
in health and strength restored, did orderly declare, all the matter as it had
befallen unto her.

THE NINTH DIVISION. Of such as observed not the feast, and of those that
honored not the Saint.
IN the parts of Pictauia, in the village, Note a strange miracle about keeping
holy the feast of S. Francis.
which is called Simo, a certain Priest named Reginald, being devoute, unto
Saint Francis: did bid his feast to be solemnly celebrated of all his
parishioners. But one of the people, not knowing the virtue, of the blessed
Saint, made light accounte, of his Pastors commandment. And goeing forth
into the feilde, to out some wood, as he was preparing himself, to work, he
heard a voice, speaking there times, in this manner, unto him: It is
affestivall day, you may not work. But whereas this his fervile temeritie, was
neither by the commandment of the Priest, nor yet by the Oracle of the
heavenly voice, restrained the power of God, to the glory of his Saint,
vouchesafed forthwith a miracle, and a scourge also, therewithal. For as soon
as, he now already holding in one hand, a prong, did with his other hand,
lift up an iron instrument, to work, either hand, was unto either instrument,
by devine power, so fastened and conjoined, that he could not open his
fingers, to let go any one, of them both. Whereupon being marveilously
astonished, and not knowing what to do, he being followed with many people,
that ran after him, to see the wonder, did make have, to go to the Church.
Where, with compunction of mind, he by advise of one of the Priests that
assisted (for there were many Priests invited, to come to the Feast) did
before the Altar, humbly devote himself, to Saint Francis: making three vows,
according to the voice he had heard, three several times: namely, to
Celebrate his Feast, to repair also on that day, unto the Church of that
place, where in he should then be, and personally to vifite, the body of the
Saint. It is a wonderful thing to be reported; As soon as he had made, his
first vow, one of his fingers, was loosened: at the making of his second vow,
another of his fingers was enlarged: and when he had made, his third vow, yet
another of his singers, and therewithal, his whole hand, as also his other
hand, was in like manner immediately set at liberty: mean while that the
people, which had now by this time, in great numbers, assembled to that place,
did most devoutely implore, the aid and clemency, of the blessed Saint. And
so the man, being perfectly restored, to his former freedom and liberty, did
without the help of any other, lay a side those instruments, whereby all men,
praised Almighty God, and the admirable power, of his Saint, who could, so
marveilously, both strike and heal again. But those instruments, themselves;
do until this day (in memory of that fact) hang up, before an Altar, which
is erected, to the honor of Saint Francis. Many other miracles also, done
there, and in the places, nighe adjoining, do evide^tly show and declare;
both that the Saint, is of excellent degree in heaven, and that his feast,
ought to be reverently celebrated, here in earth.

In the City also of Cenomanum; a certain woman, as she did, upon the
solemnity of Saint Fran^is, reached out her hand, to her distaffe, Here we
have a sufficient testimony that the feasts of Saints are not to be contemned.
and did with her fingers, begin to take hold of her spindle, her hands,
presently becoming stiff, and dry; she felt in her fingers exceeding
torments, of burning heat. Being thus therefore, taught by the pain, to know
the virtue, of the Saint, with compunction of heart, she haftily ran to the
brethren. And when the devoute Children, had for her health, craved the
Clemency of the holy Father, she was presently made well again: neither did
any thing of the hurt, remain in her hand, saving that for memory of the
fact, some only sign of the burning, was yet to be seen. In like manner also,
in the greater Campania, a certain woman, and in the village of Olletum,
another woman, and in the town of Pylleum, a third woman, contemning to
celebrate the Feast, of the blessed Father, were at the first, marveilously
punished: but being afterward penitent, were by the merittes of Saint
Francis, more marveilously, delivered.

A certain soldier of Burgum, Here by examples we are admonished not to
detract from the honor of the Sa^nts.
within the province of Massa, one who had binne sometime, appertaining unto
the wars, did most impudently detract, from the marveilouse works, and
prodigiouse miracles, of blessed Saint Francis. He used many reproaches to
pilgrims, that came to his memory, and against the brethren, he railed, with
open and unrestrained madness. But as he one time endeavored, to deface the
glory, of Gods Saint, he heaped upon the rest of his sins, an horrible
blasphemy, of all men to be detested. If it be true (said he) that this same
Francis, is a Saint let me this day, be slain, with a sword: but if he be no
Saint, then let me escape, untouched. And the wrath of God, made now no delay:
to inflict due punishment, upon him: considering that his prayer, was now
turned into sin. For within a little while, upon occafion of some eniurie,
which this blasphemouse person, offered to a nephewe of his, he took up a
sword, and thrust it into his Uncles bowels. And that very day died, this
wicked bond slave of Hell, and child of darkness. That other men might
leatne, not with blasphemouse words, to disgrace, but with devoute praises, to
honor, the marveilouse works, of S. Francis.

A certain Judge named Alexander, with his venomous tongue with drawinge, as
many as he could, from the honor of Saint Francis, was by Gods devine
judgment deprived, of the use of his tongue, that he was not able to speak
for the space of six years together. Who finding himself to be punished, in
the thing wherein he had offended, being recalled unto himself did with deep
and unfeigned repentance, sorrow in his heart that he had barked and
despitefully spoken, against the miracles of the Saint. For which cause the
indignation of the merciful Saint, was now of no longer contineuance; but he,
upon his repentance, and humble calling upon him, restoring unto him his
speech, did vouchsafe to receive him to favor. And from that time, he
consecrated his blasphemouse tongue, to the praises of the Saint, receaving
out of that scourge, both devotion, and good instruction.

THE TENTH AND LAST DIVISION Of certain other miracles, of diverse kinds.
IN the town of Galianum, which is within the Diocese of Valua, a certain
woman named Marie, who had, in a devoute course of service, devoted her self,
unto Jesus Christ, and blessed Saint Francis, we^^ out one day, in the so^mer
season, with her own hands to getr^, her necessary sustenace. But being
almost overcome, with the excessive heat of the wether, and beginning (even
presently) to fail, by reason of an exceeding, and violent thirst, as one
destitute of any mean, 10 obtain a Cup of drink, for that she was all
alone, upon a dry and barren Mountain, falling down prostrate upon the
ground, as though she had binne dead, she did with a devour affection of
mind, invocate the help, of her blessed patron, Saint Francis. But as the
woman persevered, in her affectuose and humble prayer, being marveilously
overwearied, with labor, thirst and hear, she was, for a while, overtaken
with sleep. And behold, Saint Francis coming unto her, and calling her by her
name: Rise up (said he) and drink of the water, which is by Gods bount^e;
vouchsafed unto thee, and many more At the hearing of which voice, the woman
being not a little comforted, rose presently, out of her sleep. And taking hold
of a fearne brake, that was hard by her, she pulled it by the root: and digging
round about it, with a little piece of wood, she found fresh and springing
water. Which though at the first, it appeared but as a little drop, yet
afterward, by the power of God, sodeinely increased to a foutaine. The woman
therefore, did drink of the water, and when she had drank her fill she
therewithal washed her eyes: which having formerly bin, very dim of fight,
by reason of some long infirmity, she found to be from that time forwards,
endewed, with a new and perfect light. A Well being spro^ge up miraculously by
the merits of Saint Francis does cure many diseased persons, they only going to
confession before.
Whereupon she hastened home: unto all men denouncing, so strange a miracle,
to the glory of Saint Francis. At the fame of this miracle, many people came,
from all the parts about, learning by experience, the marveilouse effect of
that water: mean while that at the touch thereof (after confession duly made)
many persons were delivered, from sundry dangers, of sickness. And to this
day a goodly fountain, is to be seen, in that place, where an Oratoire also,
was builded, in the honor of Saint Francis.

In Spain, at the town of Saint Facundus, he marveilously, beyond all hope
restored a withered C^erritree, belonging to a certain man, to greenness of
leaves, to flowers, and to the bearing of fruit. He also by a miraculouse
help: delivered the inhabitants of the land, among them that are called
Viles^j; from the plague of certain worms, that did in every place ear up,
and consume their vineyards. And whereas a certain Priest, dwelling nighe to
Palencia, had a certain barn of his, every year accustomably fraught with
worms, that consumed the corn: the same being faithfully commended, unto him
he did clearly lidde from those vermin. A certain piece of land also,
belonging unto the Lord of that place which is called De Petra Mala, in the
Kingdom of Apulia, being in devoute manner commended unto him, he safely
preserved, from an odious infection, and pestilence of those harmefull flies
which are called Brachi: whereas, all things, in the places thereaboutes
adjoining; were with the foresaied pestilence, wasted and devoured.

A certain man named Martin, driving his oxen, one time, somewhat far from
his house, unto the Pasture; one of them did by a chance, so desperately
break his thighe; that there was no hope to be had, of remedy. He minding
therefore to flea him; and having no instrument wherewith to do it, returning
home, did leave the care of his ox, to Saint Francis; and faithfully commended
him, to the faithfully Custody of the Saint; least that, before his return,
he should be by the wolves, devoured. In the next morning therefore early
returning with his fleaing knife; to the ox, he had left in the wood; he
found him at his feed, so strong and sound, that the broken thighe, could
not be discerned from the other. For which cause he rendered thanks, to his
good Pastor; who had both taken diligent care, of his ox; and had also given
help, unto him. And surely, the humble Saint does well know, how to succor
all that do call upon him: neither does he disdain, any the very least
necessities of men. For to a man of Amiternum, he restored a beast, that had
binne stolen away. For a woman also of Interducum, he repaired, a dishe, of
hers; which had binne broken into many pieces. And in like manner, whereas a
certain man of the Mountain Vlmus, in the Marquisate, had his plough share
broken in pieces, he made it whole again.

In the Diocsse of Sabina, there was an old woman, of four score years; whose
daughter departing this life, left a little sucking child behind her. But the
poor old woman, being very poor indeed, and voied of milk; and having no
other woman, that would give milk, to the thirsty child, according as
necessity did require; could not tell what to do, nor which way to turn her
self. But the infant being brought, See how ready the Saints are to help
those which pray unto them.
to great weakness, she destitute of al humane help, did one night, with an a
abundant stream of tears, wholly turn her self, to crave the help, of the
blessed father, Saint Francis. And forthwith the lover of innocent age, was
present with her: who said unto her. I am Francis (O woman) whom thou have
invocated, with so many tears. And put, said he, thy breasts into the mouth
of the child: because our Lord will give milk in abundance, unto thee. The
old woman thereupon, fulfilled the commandment of the Saint: and immediately,
the breasts of fowerscore years old, yielded forth plenty of milk. This
marveilouse guifte, of the Saint; was known unto all men: and many, as well
men, as women, made have, to comme and see it. And considering, that what the
eyes themselves, did testify; the tongue might not be able, to with stand; all
men were thereby incited, to praise God; in the marveilouse power, and lovely
piety, of his holy Saint.

At Spoletum, a certain man and his wife, having one only son: did every
day lament him, as the obloquie and reproache, of their house. For he, having
his arms, joined fast to his neck: his knees, to his breast: and his legs to
his hinder parts: seemed to be, no issue of man: but rather sum monstrous
thing. And the woman, being hear hence afflicted, with a more violent sorrow,
and grief; did, with frequent lamentations, call unto Christ, invocating the
aid of S. Francis: whereby to vouche-safe, to succor, and help her, in this
so great a reproache. One night therefore it came to pass, that when she
was, by reason of this manner of heaviness overtaken with sleep: S. Francis,
appeared unto her, comforting her, with sweet, and compassionate speeches: and
moreover persuading her, to carry her child, unto a place nighe hand, which
was dedicated, to his name: that being in the name of our Lord, washed with
the water, of a certain well in that place; he might receive, full and perfect
remedy. But whereas she neglected to accomplish, the commandment of the
Saint; he the second time, repeated those words unto her. Yea, and the third
time also, appearing: he, walking before the woman, conducted, her with her
child, unto the gate of the foresaied place. At what time, certain noble
Matrones, coming thither for devotions sake; and being by the foresaied woman,
diligently informed, of the vision; they together with the mother, did present
the child, to the brethren; and drawing water, out of the well, the more noble
of them, did with her own hands, wash the infant. Who having all his
members, presently brought, to their proper places; appeared sound and well;
and the greatenesse of this miracle, brought admiration, upon all men.

In the town of Chore, Lo with what devotion the Saint is inuocated and how
miraculously he does help his devoted.
within the Diocese of Ostea, a certain man, had so absolutely lost his
thigne, that he could by no means, either go, or move himself. Being
therefore, in this vehement distress; and desperate, of all humane help; he
began, one night: as though he had seen S. Frances, present; to take this
occasion of complaining, before him: Help me (said he) O Saint Frances
remembering my service, and the devotion, I have exhibited, unto thee. For I
have carried thee, upon mine Ass: I have kissed thy holy feet, and thy holy
hands: I have always binne devoute, unto thee: I have binne evermore, ready
to serve thee: and behold, now I die, with the most greivouse torment, of this
disease. With these his complaints: he that is never unmindful, of the
benefitts bestowed upon him; but is continually grateful, for the devotion,
which is used toward him: being moved, and incited, did presently stand
before him: and did with one brother, appear unto him. He told him, that he
was comme at his call: and had brought with him, helps, for his recoverie.
With a little staff therefore, that had in it the figure, of the letter Thau,
he touched the place, where the pain did lie: and therewithal breaking, an
impostume: he presently restored him to perfect health. And which is more
marveilous: imprinting the sacred sign of Thau, upon the place of the healed
ulcer, he left it there, to remain: in memory, of the miracle. With this
mark, S. Frances used to sign his letters: as often as for charities sake: he
directed any. But behold, now gentle reader mean while that our mind, being
distracted with variety, of narrations: has passed along, through diverse
miracles, of the gloriouse father, S. Frances: by meritte of that gloriouse
standard bearer, of the Cross; it has now, not without divine direction:
lighted upon the sign Thau, which is the sign of salvation: to the intent,
that out of it, we may observe: that like as, the Cross, was in his warfare
after Christ: a high advauncement of meritte, unto salvation: so is it also
unto him, now with Christ, triumphing: made a firm matter of testimony, to
his honor. For this great and marveilouse mystery, of the Cross: wherein the
peculiar guiftes, of graces; the merittes, of virtues: and the treasures, of
wisdom and knowledge: are in so profounde a degree, covered, and concealed:
that it is kept secrette, from the wise and prudent, of this world, was yet
so plentifully and fully revealed, unto this little one of Christ: that all
his life, does follow noe other thing, than the very footestepps, of the
Cross: he does savor, of noe other thing, than of the sweetness of the
Cross: nor yet does preach, or denounce, any other thing, than the glory, of
the Cross. Well, therefore, and truly, might he say, with the Apostle: in the
beginning of his conversion: God forbid that I should glory, saving in the
Cross of our lord JESUS Christ: And no less truly, might he say, in the
progress, of his conversation: whoesoeuer shall follow this rule, peace upon
them, and mercy. But most truly, might he, in the consummation of his life,
thereto adioyne, the words ensueing: I bear the marks of our lord JESUS in
my body. And these words also, we daily desire, from him to hear: The grace
of our Lord JESUS Christ be with your spiritte brethren. Amen.

Glory now therefore securely, in the Crosses glory; thou gloriouse standard
bearer of Christ: for that having taken thy beginning, from the Cross;
according to the rule, of the Cross, thou haste made, thy proceeding: and
finally, making thine end in the Cross; of how great glory, thou art in
heaven; it does, by the testimony of the Cross, evidently appear, to all
faithefull people. Securely now, may they follow thee; who do depart, out
of Aegipte: for that, having divided the red Sea, by the staff, of the
Cross of Christ, they shall pass thoroughe the deserts, into the promised
land of the living: and having also passed over; the Iordane, of this
mortality; they shall, by the marveilouse power, of the Cross, enter
thereinto. Whither, we beseerhe him, who is the true conductor, and Savior
of his people, Jesus Christ, crucified; mercifully to bring us, by the
merittes of his servaunte, S. Francis: to the praise and glory of God, who
being three in person, and one in substance, lives and reigns,
everlastingly. Amen.

Deo gratias.
A Table of all the Chapters contained in this book.
THe first Chapter of Saint Francis his conversation in secular habit. The
second Chapter of his perfect conversion unto God and how he repayered three
Churches. The third Chapter, of the institution of his order of religion, and
of the aprobation of his rule. The fourth Chapter, of the increase of the order
under his hand, and of the confirmation of the rule formerly approved. The
fifth Chapter, of the austerity of his life; and how the creatures of God gave
sollace unto him. The sixth Chapter, of his humility and obedyence, and of Gods
favorable condiscending unto all his desires. The seventh Chapter, of his
love of poverty, and of the marvelous supply of his wants. The eight Chapter,
of his affection of pyety: and how creatures devoied of reason, seemed to be
affected to wards him. The ninth Chapter, of the fervor of his charity, and
of his desire of martyrdom. The tenth Chapter, of his diligence and feruency
in prayer. The eleventh Chapter, of his, understanding the scriptures, and of
his spirit of Prophecy. The tvvelfeth Chapter, of the efficacy of his
preaching: and of his gift in curing. The thirtenth Chapter, of his holy
stigmattes. The fourtenth Chapter, of his patience, and death. The fifteenth
Chapter, of his canonisation, and of the translation of his sacred body. The
sixteenth Chapter, containing certain miracles do^ne by Saint Francis, after
his death, which because it is long, and considering the miracles be of diverse
kinds, is therefore par^ed in^o ten divisions, according to the several
titles of the miracles. The first division, of the virtue, and force, of the
holy stigmattes. The second division, of dead persons raisde to life again.
The third division, of such as he delivered from the perrill of death. The
fourth division, of persons that were saved from shippevvracke. The fifth
division, of persons delivered out of bonds and imprisonment. The sixth
division, of women delivered, from danger, in Childebirthe. The seventh
division, of giving sight unto the blind. The Eight division, of persons
delivered, from diverse kinds of infirmities. The Ninth division, of such as
observed not the feast, and of those that honored not the Saint. The Tenth
and last Division, of certain other mirecles, of diverse kinds.
For such faults as are here escaped in printing, I beseech the courteous
reader, out of his charity to pardon, and with mature judgment vouchsafe to
amend them.


