THE CITIES ADVOCATE,

IN THIS CASE OR QVEstion of Honor and Arms; Whether Apprentiship
extinguisheth Gentry?

Containing a clear Refutation of the pernicious common error affirming it,
swallowed by Erasmus of Roterdam, Sir Thomas Smith in his Commonweal, Sir
John Fern in his Blazon, Raphe Broke York Herald, and others.

With the Copies or Transcripts of three Letters which gave occasion of this
work.

Lam. Ierem. cap. 3. ver. 27. Bonum est viro cum portauerit jugum ab
adolescentia sua. LONDON, Printed for William Lee, at the Sign of the Turks
Head next to the Miter and Phoenix in Fleet street.

Monsieur FLORENTIN de THIERRIAT, Escuyer, Seigneur de LOCHEPIERRE, LONOVET,
SAINT NAVOIR, RAON AV. BOYS, etc.
De la Noblesse de Race, Number. 99. En matiere de Noblesse il faut obseruer la
Coustume du lieu, et les moeurs des peuples; dautant que les uns estiment une
chose honneste et Noble que les autres tiennent pour sordide et dishonneste.
Number. 118. Les chooses que derogent a la Noblesse, qu'il faut tousiours mesurer,
sur les Coustumes des lieux, parce qu'un peuple approuue souuent un exercice
pour honneste, qu'un autre defend et prohibe comme sordide, et uicieux au
Gentilhomme. HONORATISSIMO SENATVI POPVLO QVE, AVGVSTAE VRBIS LONDINENSIS.



RIGHT HONORABLE:
THe Author of this work, styling himself according to the nature of his part
therein THE CITIES ADVOCATE, after ten, or twelve years space from the first
date of the accomplishment, resolving at last to permit the edition, does
reverently here advance and present to the honorable good acceptance of your
Lordship, of all the Lords, and other the worthy persons, to whom, in the
quality of the cause, the consideration reaches; The clear refutation of
that pestilent error, which having some authority for it, and many injurious
partakers, lays upon the hopeful, and honest estate of APPRENTISHIP in
LONDON, the odious note of bondage, and the barbarous penalty of loss of
Gentry: to the great reproach of our Kingdoms policy, and to the manifold
damage of the public. In this one act of his, the Advocate therefore does not
only seem to be the Patron or Defendor of birthrights, and of the rights of
fortunes, but the Champion also of civil Arts, and of flourishing Industry
among you: the sinews, and life it self of Commonweal. The occasion which
induced him to enter the lists single against a multitude, in this good
quarrel, was private, as appears by the Letters at the end of the work, but
the cause, is absolutely such (according to his best understanding) as he
should not refuse to abett and second with his sword, the strokes of his pen,
to that purpose. For, though the Schools, and Camp, are most proper for Honor
and Arms, yet the ancient wisdom, and the like ancient bounty of our Sages,
did ever leave the gates of Honor open to City-Arts, and to the mysteries of
honest gain, as fundamental in Commonweal, and susceptiue of external
splendour: according to the most laudable examples of rising Rome, under her
first Dictators, and Consuls. By which their such moderation and judgment,
they happily avoided two opposite rocks; tyrannical appropriation of Gentry
to some certain old families, as in Germany, and the confusion of allowing
hereditarie Nobleness, of Gentry, to none at all, as under the Sultan, in
Turkey. With how true and entire a good will this free service is performed by
the Author may easily be gathered from hence, that he willingly gives the
oblivion of his own name into the merit; conscience of the fact, sufficing.
Now, for him to inform your Lordships and the rest (out of the title de
origin iuris, in Caesarean Laws) how the noble people of oldest Rome accepted
the book which Gnaeus Flauius dedicated to their name, and uses, what were it
else, but inofficiously to dictate your part, and not humbly to offer his own;
which nevertheless here he most officiously does, being truly able to say,
upon his own behalf, that he has purloined no man's labors (as that Flauius
did) but is through all the true and proper owner.

The Author is your humble servant.
Valete in Christo Jesus. XI. Call. November. MCICXXVIII.
To the Gentlemen of ENGLAND in general.
BE not displeased with this bold enterprise, as if it were in favor of the
evil manners of a multitude, who pass under the title of APPRENTISES. For
neither the incorrigibly vicious, who are pestilent to moral and civil
virtue; nor the incorrigibly forgetful of their betters, whom insolency
makes odious, have any part herein at all. For first, it wholly belongs to
such, among masters, or Citizens, as are generously disposed, and worthily
qualifide, men who say with Publius Syrus, Damnum appellandum est cum mala fama
lucru^; and then to such among Apprentises, as resemble Putiphars chaste
Joseph, or Saint Paul's converted Onesimus; yongmen, who say (with Statius
Caecilius, in his Plotius)

Libere seruimus, salua vrbe, atque arce, meaning by the City, and the
Citadel, the body and the head of man.

Valete.
To the happy Masters of Laudable Apprentises in LONDON.
RIght worthy Citizens, you shall not for this work find your honest servants
the less serviceable, but the more. For, in good bloods, and good natures,
praise, and honor prevail above rigor and blows. And because your selves,
for the most part, were Apprentises once, you may therefore behold herein, with
comfort, the honesty of your estate when you were such, and the splendor of
what you are now in right. The unthankful (if any such should happen to
rankle among you) may be warned; that the juice of Ingratitude does forfeit
liberty, and that they are truly bondmen; if not according to the letter, nor
in their proper condition, yet according to the figurative sense, and in their
improper baseness.

VALETE.
TO THE MODEST APPRENtises of LONDON, Scholars, and Disciples in Citie-Arts,
during their seven or more years Nouiceship.
THe principal objection against publishing either this or any other book of
like argument, has always been grounded (by the most wise and noble) upon a
fear, that the insolences of the youth, and irregular fry of the City,
would thereby take increase: which having heretofore been intolerable (in
common policy) and in no little measure scandalous to the Kingdom, were
hateful to cherish, or to give the least way unto. But it has already been
elsewhere answered; that those Apprentises are of the dreggs, and branne of the
vulgar: fellows void of worthy blood, and worthy breeding, and (to speak with
fit freedom) no better then merely rascal; the ordinary balls, played (by the
hand of Justice) into the Bridewells, in or about the City: yea perhaps, not
Apprentises at all, but forlorn companions, masterlesse men, tradelesse, and
the like, who preying for mischief, and longing to do it, are indeed the very
Authors of all that is vile; discourteous to honorable (all traveling
strangers ought to be generally used as such) rude toward Natives, seditious
among their own, and villainous euerywhere. But you (none of that caitiue and
untrusty number) are the parties, for whom this labor has been undergone,
whose behauiours (full of gentleness, and of bounden duty to superiors)
commend you to the present times, and maintain in you that stock of good
hope, out of which are in due time elected those successions of the whole,
which make the political body or state of a City immortal. Think therefore
with your selves, that by how much this most friendly office tends to your more
defense, and praise, by so much you are the more bound to bear your selves
honestly, and humbly. In your so doing, the City of London, which (before Rome
it self was built) was rockt in a Trojan Cradle, by the founder, and Father
thereof (as the most ancient extant monuments, setting all late phansies aside,
bear witness) heroicke Brute, or Brytus; under Claudius Caesar, the
Metropolis of the Trinobants; under other Caesar's afterward, Augusta, or the
maiesticall City; which, for hugeness, concourse, navigations, trade, and
populosity, very hardly giving place to any one in Europe, does absolutely
excel all the Cities of the world for good government, or at least does match
and equal them; that very London so venerable for the antiquity, so honorable
for the customs, so profitable for life, noble in renown, even beyond the
names both of our Country it self, and of our nation, the birthplace of
Constantine the Great, and inmost recesse, or chamber of her Kings, that very
City, that very London whether your local parent, or loving foster-mother,
shall not grace, or honor you more, then you shall grace, and honor her, and
England also.

VALETE.
From Sir WILLIAM SEGAR Knight, GARTER, principal King of Arms of ENGLAND, a
special Letter to the Author, concerning the present work.
Sir:
I Have viewed and reuiewed your book with good deliberation, and find, that
you have done the office of a very worthy Advocate to plead so well for so
famous a Client as the City of London in her generality, which as I gratulate
unto her, and to all interessed parties, so I shall much more gratulate to her,
and you, the honor and use of so fair a labor, if I may once see that
public: And for my part, considering that you define nothing, but lie only
upon the defensive, and affirmative, against assaylers, and denyers, with due
submission for the judicial part to the proper Court of Honor, the illustrious
high (...) I see no cause why your learned work, may not receive the glory of
public light, and that most renowned City the benefit of honors increase, for
encouragement of enriching endustrie; And so with my hearty respects I rest.

Your very loving friend WILLIAM SEGAR Garter.

THE TRVE COPIES OF the Letters mentioned after the Book.
The first letter, from the Citizen in the behalf and cause of his eldest
son, to a special friend, of whose love, and learning he rested confident.
Right Worthy Sir,
IF having been at no small charge, and some care, to breed my son up in
Gentleman like qualities, with purpose the rather to enable him for the service
of God, his Prince, and Country, I am very curious to remove from him as a
Father, all occasions, which might either make him less esteemed of others, or
abate the least part of his edge; I say, not toward the honesty of life only,
but toward the splendour thereof, and worship also, my hope is, that I shall
not in your worthy judgment, seem either insolent, or vain glorious.

Truth and Justice are the only motives of my stirring at this present. For,
as I mortally hate that my Son should bear himself, above himself so should I
disclaim my part in him, if being unjustly sought to be embased, he sillily
lost any inch of his due. He has been disgraced as no Gentleman borne, when
yet not he but I his Father was the Apprentise, thanks be to God for it. They
cannot object to him want of fashion; they cannot object to him the common
vices, badges rather of reprobates then of Gentlemen: They cannot object to him
cowardice, for it is well known that he dares defend himself: nor any thing
else unworthy of his name, which is neither new, nor ignoble: But me his poor
father they object unto him, because I was once an Apprentise.

Wise Sir Thomas Moore teaches us, under the names, and persons of his
Eutopians, that victories, and atchieuements of wit are applauded, far above
those of forces: and seeing reverence to God, and to our Prince, commands us,
(as his Majesty's book of Duells does affirm (not to take the office of
justice from Magistrates, by private rash reuenges, I have compelled my son,
upon Gods blessing, and mine, to forbear the sword till by my care he may be
found not to be in the wrong. For if it be true, that by Apprentiship we
forfeit our titles to native Gentry: God forbid that my son should usurp
it. And if it be not true, then shall be have a just ground to defend himself,
and his adversaries shall stand convicted of ignorance, if not of envy also.

These are therefore very earnestly to pray you, to clear this question. For,
in the City of London there are at this present many hundreds of Gentlemen's
children Apprentises, infinite others have been, and infinite will be: and all
the parts of England are full of families, either originally raised to the
dignity of Gentlemen out of this one most famous place: or so restored, and
enriched as may well seem to amount to an original raising. And albeit I am
very confident, that by having once been an Apprentise in London, I have not
lost to be a Gentleman of birth, nor my son, yet shall I ever wish, and pray
rather to resemble an heroicke Walworth, a noble Philpot, an happy Capel, that
learned Sheriff of London Mr. Fabian, or any other famous Worthies of this
royal City, out of any whatsoever obscurest parentage, then that being
descended of great Nobles, to fall by vice far beneath the rank of poorest
Prentises.

In requital of your care in this point, you shall shortly receive (if I can
obtain my desire) out of the records and monuments of London, a Roll of the
names, and Arms of such principal friends as have been advanced to Honor,
and Worship, throughout the Realm of England, from the degree of Citizens. A
warrantable design, by the example of the Lord chief Justice Cook, who has
bestowed upon the world (in some one or other of his books of reports) a short
Catologue of such as have been eminently beholding to the Common Laws, and if
I should fail in that, yet do I promise you a list or Alphabet of Apprentises
names, who by their enrollments will appear upon good Record, to have been
sons of Gentlemen from all the parts of England.

Neither let your approved virtue doubt, but that in the mean time you shall
find us very ready to show our free, and honest minds, in all commendable,
and disenuious emulations, with the best Gentlemen whosoever. Which disposition
measure not by the few Angels you receive in this Letter. For what are twenty
in such a case?

If this my suit, and request, carry the less regard, because it comes but from
a private Citizen, be pleased I pray to understand, that in me, though being
but one man, multitudes speak, and that out of a private pen, a public cause
propounds it self. And yet I come not single. For with this Letter of mine, I
send you two other. The one from a worshipful friend, and kinsman of mine,
written to me, and the other of my Cousin his second son, much what of one
nature with this of mine. And so with my love, and best respects remembered, I
commit you to Gods holy keeping, and rest, etc.

The true Copies of those two other Letters, whereof in the former there is
mention.
The Fathers Letter.
Cousin, I pray peruse the enclosed, which troubles me as much as it does my
son, and seek satisfaction of such as are skillful indeed. I care not for
charge, for look whatsoever it costs I will bear it. In the mean while
comfort my child, for if it be so as he writes, he shall not stay in
London, though it cost me five hundred Pounds. And so in great have I leave you
to our Lord Christ, etc.

The Apprentises Letter to his Father.
MOst dear, and most loving Father, my most humble duty remembered unto you.
These are to give you to understand, that my body is in good health, praised he
God, but my mind, and spirits are not, for they are very much troubled. For,
so it is Sir, that albeit my Master be a very worthy, and an honest Citizen,
and that my self, doing as an Apprentise ought (which I do willingly, not
refusing any thing, as remembering St. Peter's precept, Serui, subditi estote in
timore Domini) am as well used in this house, as if I were with you; yet by
reading certain books, at spare hours, and conferring with some who take
upon them to be very well skilled in Heraldry, I am brought to believe, that by
being a Prentise, I lose my birth right, and the right of my blood both by
father, and mother, which is to be a Gentlemen, which I had rather dye, then to
endure. This is my grief, and this the cause why my mind is so troubled, as I
cannot eat, nor sleep in quiet: Tears hinder me from writing more, and
therefore most humbly craving pardon, and your most fatherly blessing, I commit
you to God, etc.

From London, etc.
THE CITIES ADVOCATE, In a question of Honor, and Arms.
Whether Apprentiship extinguisheth Gentry.
The Contents of this first part.
1 THe present question very important for many great causes. Two Crowned
Queens of England, and much of the Nobility parties to it. Bullen and
Calthorpe L. Majors of London; their interesses in royal blood. What Quaestio
status, and what the least capitis diminutio is. Only the base neglect it.
Honor a fair Star. Disparagement odious. Prevention of mischiefs by
determining this question. Proud Citie-races unworthy of the City. 2 The
Cities Honors in Arms proved out of ancient Monuments. The L. Fitz Walter,
Standard Bearer of London. Claurie and Biallie two terms in old blazon. 3 The
transcendent power of opinion. To derogate from the splendour of birth, reputed
a wrong. Whence comes the present question of Apprentiship. 4 The maine reason
why some do hold, that Apprentiship extinguisheth Gentry. Apprentiship no
bondage either in truth, or at all. The case truly propounded. The skill of
honest gettings a precious mystery. What kind of contract that seems to be,
which is between Master and Apprentise. 5 An objection that Apprentiship is a
kind of bondage. The fine folly of Erasmus in his Etymology of an Apprentise.
The comparison between Seruus among Ciuilians, and Apprentises among
Englishmen, holds not. What the word Apprentise means. Sir Thomas Smiths error
in confounding servitude and discipline. 6. 7. 8. Particular points touching
Seruus. Sanctuary at the Princes image. Manumission, and Recaptiuitie by Law.
None of those points concern Apprentises more then Soldiers, Scholars, or
religious nouices. 9. 10. The final cause denominates the action, and proves
Apprentiship not to be base. The contrary opinion pernicious to manners, and
to good Commonweal among us, chiefly now. The different face of both opinions
in daily experience.
The First Part.
THE present question, Whether Apprentiship extinguisheth Gentry being now not
so much a paradox, as grown in secret to be of late a common opinion, I am
bold to call a weighty and important question unjustly grounded upon the
learned folly of Erasmus of Roterdam, and the incircumspection of Sir Thomas
Smith Knight, in his book de Republica Anglorum, and out of certain wandering
conceits hatched among trees and tillage, as shall appear hereafter. Weighty
and important I am bold to call it, and it is so. Because in looking out upon
the concernings of the case, I find that prospect so spacious, that within the
compass thereof, as well the greater as the lesser Nobility of England are
very notably, and very inexplicably enwrapped. What do I say of the
subalternall Nobility, when the Royal name it self (with all humble
reverence be it spoken) was deeply interessed in the proposition? For Queen
Elizabeth, though a free Monarch, and chief of the English in her turn, was a
party of the cause, which she ingenuously, and openly acknowledged, calling
Sir Martin Calthorpe, kinsman, (as indeed he was) being at that time Knight,
and Lord Mayor of London: Yea Sir Godfrey Bullen (Knight also and Lord Mayor of
London) was lineall Ancestor to Queen Anne her mother (says Camden in his
Annals) no longer before then in the reign of Henry the sixth King of England.
Both which Knights (being also Gentlemen borne, and of right Worshipful
Families) ascended by due degrees from the condition of Apprentises to the
greatest annual honor of this Kingdom. It is weighty and important, because
without much impropriety of speech, it may be called quaestio status, which in
the ancient phrase of the Emperor Justinian, is as much to say as a trial,
whether one is to be adjudged bond, or free, servile, or ingenuous, and
implies that odious, and unnatural sequel, which by Textuists has to name,
Capitis diminutio: whereof though the Roman laws make a threefold division,
yet in this our question, if but only the third and lowest degree were
incurred, which happens, cum qui sui juris fuerunt, coeperunt alieno iuri
subiecti esse, that alone should keep us from neglect. It is weighty and
important, and can appear none other, because it directly tends to darken, and
as it were to intercloud the luminous body of that beauteous planet HONOR, with
not only foul but lasting spots. For what can lightly be a more
disparagement, then for the free to become a kind of bondmen, or to be come of
such? Nay, there is nothing without us, which can be of so great
disparagement. Finally, it is weighty, and important for very many other
reasons, and particularly because it is not only fit that states of opinions
should be rectified in this kind, as breeding bad affections among people of
the same nation (from whence great mischiefs often rise, even to hatred,
quarrels, and homicides) but that such also, as through vanity, or other
sickness of the wit, or judgment, disdain to seem either Citie-borne, or
Citie-bred, or to owe any thing of their worship, or estate, either to the
City, or to Citizens, may understand their own place, and true condition, lest
they be convinced to be among them, who are unworthy of so honest either
original or accession as the City yields.

But let us first behold the Cities Honor in Arms, as it stands displayed in
ancient Heraldry, and as it is commented upon out of authenticke Monuments in
that worthily well commended Survey of LONDON, composed by that diligent
Chronologer, and virtuous Citizen M. John Stowe; The present figure with the
same words as here they stand, is a copy of that which an old imperfect larger
volume at the Office of Arms contains.

(...) BADGES LONDON
OF THE CITY OF LONDON THE LORD FITZ-WALTER BANNERER


There needs no greater demonstration of the Cities ancient honor, and of her
peoples free quality, then this, that a principal Baron of the Realm of
England was by tenure her Standard Bearer. The figure of St. Paul (titularie
patron of London) advanced it self in the Standard, and upon the shield those
famous well-knowne Armories of the Cross, and Weapon. The like picture of
which Apostle was also embroidered in the caparisons of that horse of war,
which for the purpose of the Cities service he received of gift at the hands of
the Lord Mayor. Upon the Standard-bearers coat armor are painted the
hereditarie ensigns of his own illustrious Family, that is to say, Or, a
Fesse between two Cheuerns Gules. Which kind of field the ancients called
Claurie, perhaps a claritate, because such fields as were all of one color
made their charges the more clearly seen, and perspicuous. And as they gave
to that species of blazon a peculiar name for the dignity, so did they also
assign to this manner of bearing two Cheuerns, the term Biallie, or a coat
Biallie, a numero binario. In which brave times had that noble Gentleman, but
slightly, and far off suspected, that he displayed that banner, for a kind of
bondmen, or as for their service, his great heroic spirit would rather have
trodden such an office under foot. In good assurance therefore of this common
causes justice, we proceed.

Sound opinion (meaning doctrine) is the anchor of the world, and opinion
(meaning a worthy conceit of this or that person) is the principal ingredient
which makes words, or actions relish well, and all the Graces are, without it,
little worth. To take the fame from any man that he is a Gentleman-borne is a
kind of disenablement, and prejudice, at leastwise among the weak (who
consider no further then seemings) that is to say among almost all.
Consequently a wrong. And if a wrong then due to be redressed. To find injury,
we must first enquire

Whether Apprentiship extinguisheth Gentry.

4 The maine reason, certainly the most general, used to prove, that it does,
is, That Apprentiship is a kind of bondage, and bondage specially voluntary
(in which case the Imperial law-rule, non officit natalibus in seruitute
fuisse, may be perhaps defective) extinguisheth native Gentry. But I deny
that Apprentiship is either vera seruitus, or omnino servitus.

For explication of this difficulty, I will set before your eyes the case as
it is. A Gentleman has a son, whom he means to breed up in an Art of
thrift, not rising merely out of a stock of wit, or learning, but out of a
stock of money, and credit, managed according to that Art; and for this cause
he brings his child at 15. or 16. years old, more, or less, to the City of
London, prouides him a Master, and the youth, by his fathers counsel, willingly
becomes an Appre^tise, that is to say, interchangeably seals a written
contract with his Master by an indented instrument. That he, for his certain
years true and faithful service, shall learn that precious mystery of how to
gain honestly, and to raise himself. Let the legal and ordinary form of
that instrument (extant in Wests Precedents, and familiar every where) be duly
pondered, and it will appear a mere civil contract, which as all the world
knows, a bondsman is incapable of. If you would know under what kind, or
species of contract that does fall; I answer: That it seems to be a contract
of permutation, or interchange: In which mutual obligation, or conuention, the
act of binding is no more, but that (as reason and justice would) the Master
might be determinately for the time, and sufficiently for the manner, sure to
enjoy his Apprentise. Appre^tiship being therefore, but an effect of a civil
contract, occasioned, and caused by that prudent respect which the Contrahents
mutually have to their lawful and honest commodity, and such only as are
freeborn, being capable to make this contract with effect, Apprentiship does
not extinguish Gentry.

On the contrary, it is urged: That although Apprentiship be not a true
bondage to all constructions, and purposes, yet, that it is a temporary
bondage, and equal (for the time it lasts) to very servitude. In which
opinion Erasmus is, making his Etymology of our Prentises to be, for that they
are like to such as are bought with money, pares emptitijs, which conceit, as
it is more literate, then happy, so, if it were set to sale, would find few
Chapmen, but to laugh at it. For Erasmus is as well proved to be errans mus in
obscurorum virorum Epistolis, as Apprentises in England to be pares emptitijs.
But we absolutely deny that Apprentiship is in any sort a kind of bondage. For
notwithstanding that to prove it be so, they make a parallel between the
ancient Roman servitude, and the London apprentiship, yet will these comparata,
be found disparata, if not disparatissima. For seruus among the old Romans, was
so called of seruando of preserving or saving, and not of seruiendo, of
serving, says the Lawmakers himself, the Emperor Justinian. But the word
Apprentise comes of Aprenti, the French word, a raw soldier, or young
learner, Tyro, rudis discipulus; or of the French verbe^, which signifies to
learn, or of the Latin word apprehendo, or apprendo, which properly is to lay
hold of, and translatiuely to learn, which deriuations are consonant to the
thing, and true howsoever Sir Thomas Smith in his books de Republica Anglorum,
not remembering to distinguish between servitude and discipline, bondage, and
regular breeding, injuriously defined them to be a kind of bondmen (meaning
mere slaves, and not as in some places of England, bondsmen are taken for such
as are in bonds for actionable causes) and such bondmen as differ only thus
from very bondmen (whose like words for signification are those foulest ones,
slaves and villains) that Apprentises be but for a time certain. An oversight
which I could have wished far off from so grave and learned a Gentleman, as
that Knight, who was of privy Counsel, in the place of Secretary, to Queen
Elizabeth.

Again, that which did constitute a bondsman among the old Romans, was such a
power and right, vested in the Lord, over the very body of his bondsman, or
slave, as descending to him under some received title, or other iure gentium,
was maintained to him, iure civilly Romanorum. By virtue whereof he became
proprietarie in the person of his bondsman, as in the body of his ox, horse, or
any other beast he had, which proprietariship was indeterminable, but only by
manumission, and that act merely depended upon the will of his Lord, without
any endentment, or condition on behalf of the slave, which a right Roman would
never endure to hear of from his bondsman. Finally (which in the quality of
that servitude was most base,) seruus among them, nullum caput habuit, had no
head in law, and neither was in censu, nor in lustro condito; as much to say,
that they were out of the number of men, their names being neither put, as
among such as had wherewith to pay, in the Rolls of their Exchequer, or tables
of their Capitol, nor, as bodies wherewith to serve in the general musters of
their Commonweal, but (to be brief) were reputed ciuiliter mortui, dead in
Law, death, and bondage being alike among them, without any more reputation of
being members in the body politic, then brute cattle, for bondmen were
reputed no body, serui pro nullis habiti.

And albeit the authority of the commonweal upon this good ground of State,
interest reipublicae ne quis re sua male vtatur, and the Majesty of Sovereign
Princes, merely as in honor, and as moved with commiseration of humane
miseries, did sometime interpose it self upon just causes; as, where the Lord
did immeasurably tyrannise, or the bondsman took Sanctuary at the Emperors
statue, and image, or, at the altar of some one or other of their gods (an
example whereof is in Plautus) yet the bondsman after manumission, continued in
such relation to his late Lord, that in certain cases, (as ingratitude) he who
was once enfranchised was adjudged back to his patron, and condemned again to
a far more miserable servitude then ever.

These things considered, and nothing being like in Apprentiship, who lives so
careless of the honor of the English name, as to bring the disciples of
honest Arts, and Scholars of mysteryes in civil trade, and commerce for
virtuous causes, all called by the fair title of Apprentises, into the state
or quality of bondmen? Fair I call it, because that title is common to them
with the Inns of Court, where Apprentises at Law, are not the meanest
Gentlemen. Apprentiship therefore is no voluntary bondage, because it is no
bondage at all, but a title only of politic or civil discipline.
Apprentiship therefore does not extinguish Gentry. So then, Apprentises,
whether Gentlemen of birth or others, whatsoever their Indentures do purport,
and howsoever they seem conditional servants, are in truth not bound to do,
or to suffer things more grievous then young soldiers in armies, or scholars
in rigorous schools, or nouices in nouiceships: each of whom in their kind
usually do, and suffer things as base and vile in their own quality, simply,
and in themselves considered, without respect to the final scope, or aim of
the first institution, as perhaps the very meanest of five thousand Apprentises
in London.

The final cause therefore of every ordination qualifies the course, and the
end denominates the means and actions tending to it. For if that be noble, no
work is base prescribed in ordine, or as in the way to that end. Though
abstracting from that consideration, the work wrought, in the proper nature of
it, be servile. As, for a soldier to dig or carry earth to a rampire, or for a
student to go bare-headed to a fellow of the house within the College, as far
off as he can see him, omitting the more deformed necessity, of suffering
private, or public disciplines: or for a nouice in a nouiceship to wash
dishes, or the like seeming-base works, as by report, is usual. If then the
general scope, or final reason of Apprentiship be honest, and worthy of a
Gentleman (as will appear hereafter that it is) what can be clearer then that
Apprentiship does not extinguish Gentry?

I am the more fervent in this case; because this one false conceit (at all
times hurtful, but chiefly in these latter times, in which the means of easy
maintenance are infinitely straightened) that for a Gentleman borne, or one that
would aspire to be a Gentleman, for him to be an Apprentise to a Citizen, or
Burgensis, is a thing unbeseeming him, has filled our England with more vices,
and sacrificed more serviceable bodies to odious ends, and more souls to
sinful life, then perhaps any one other uncivil opinion whatsoever. For they
who hold it better to rob by land, or sea, then to beg, or labor, do daily
see, and feel, that out of Apprentises rise such, as sit upon them, standing
out for their lives as malefactors, when they (a shame, and sorrow to their
kindred) undergo a fortune too unworthy, even of the basest, of honest bondmen.

The Contents of this second part.
1 APprentiship a laudable policy of discipline, not a bondage. The contrary
opinion over throws one maine pillar of Commonweal Severity of discipline
more needful to be recalled, then relaxed. 2 The adversaries conceits brand
our founders. Mechanical qualities Gods special gifts. 3 Of Tubal-Cain, and
the dignity, and necessity of crafts. Hiram, the brass founder. S. Paul's
handy Art, and the cause showed out of the Rabbis. Of other ennoblements
touching them. 4 The wisdom of instituting Apprentiship defended by the
argument a minori ad maius. 5 London the palace of thriuing Arts. Concerning
Hebrew bondmen. The quality of Masters power over Apprentises. Masters nos
Lords, but Guardians and Teachers rather. 6 The adversaries manifest folly. Of
corruption in blood the only means of extinction, and disenablement to
Gentry. Of bondmen, or villains in England.
The Second Part.
THese things considered, how should it fall into the mind of any good, or
wise discouser, That Apprentises are a kind of bondmen, and consequently, That
Apprentiship extinguisheth native Gentry, and disenableth to acquisitiue? For,
if that opinion be not guilty of impiety to our Mother Country, where that
laudable policy of Apprentiship necessary for our nation, is exercised as a
point of severe discipline, warrantable in Christianity; certainly it has in
it a great deal of injurious temeritie, and inconfiderance; and why not
impiety also, if they wilfully wrong the wisdom of England, their natural
common parent, whose children are freeborne? Surely, notorious inconsiderance
is apparent, because there are but two maine pillars of Commonweal, PRAEMIVM
and PAENA, Reward and Punishment. Of which, in civil rewards, Honor is
highest, according to that of the most eloquent Tullie in his perished works,
de republica, (as S. Augustine cites them) as that thing with which he would
his Prince should be fed, and nourished; and in his Philosophy has uttered
that famous sentence concerning the same, Honos alit arts, omnesque
accenduntur ad studia gloria. Among us therefore coats of Arms, and titles of
Gentlemen (which point the Knight beforesaid, howsoever erring in Apprentises
estate, has truly noted to be commodious for the Prince) being the most
familiar part of Honor, they rip up, and ouerturne the principal of those two
pillars of commonweal, from the very basis. A strange oversight, specially of
professors of skill in the Arts of public government, unless perhaps they
speak it because they would have things reformed, or changed in this
particular of Apprentiship. But we do not remember, that either Sir Thomas
Eliot in his Governor, or Sir Thomas Chaloner, (Leigier Ambassador for Queen
Elizabeth in Spain) in his books of Latin Hexameters de rep. Anglorum
instauranda, (published with the verses of the Lord Treasurer Burghley's before
it) or any other Author rightly understanding our England, and her generous
people, did ever once tax our Countries policy in this point. Yea, some make
it a quaere, whether the Cities discipline had not more need to be reduced
nearer to the ancient severity thereof, considering with what vices London
flows, and ouerflowes, then that it should be abduced, though but a little,
from it.

Now then let any one but rightly weigh with what conscience, or common sense,
the first institutors, or propagators of the English form of government could
lay upon Industry, and civil Virtue (whose subject are the lawful things of
this life, and whose nearest object is honor, and honest wealth) so foul a
note as the brand of bondage, or any the least disparagement at all? whereas to
quicken, and inflame affections in that kind, all wise Masters in the most
noble civil Art government, and all founders of Empire, and States, have bent
their counsels, and courses, to cherish such as are virtuously industrious,
yea, God himself, (the only best pattern of governors) has made it known,
that even Mechanical qualities are his special gifts, and his infused, as it
were charismata.

3 For Moses having put into eternal monuments, that Iabel was pater pastorum
(the most an-Art of increase) and that Iubal was pater canentium (the first of
which inventions was for necessary provisions of food, and raiment, and the
second to glorify God, and honestly to solace men, toward sweetning the
bitter curse which Adam drew upon humane life,) it is thirdly under added in
accomplishment of the three maine heads to which mortals use to refer all
their worldly endeavors (necessity, profit, and pleasure) that Tubal Cain was
Malleator, and faber ferrarius, an hammer-Smith, or worker in iron, that being
one of those Arch-mysteries, sine quibus non aedificatur ciuitas, as the words
are in Ecclesiasticus, Nay, there belonged in Gods own judgment so great
praise to the particular excellency of some artificers, as that, in the
building of Salomons Temple, they are registered to all posterities in
Scripture; and their skill is not only made immortally famous, but a more
curious mention is put down of their parentage, and birth place, then of many
great Princes, as in Hirams case, not he the King, but the brasse-founder. And
in the new Testament, S. Paul, (being a Gentlemen borne of a noble family, as
the Ancients write) had the manual Art of Scoenopoea, commonly englished,
Tent-making: upon which place of St. Paul's trade (whereof in his Epistles he does
often glory) it is declared to us out of the Rabbis, that S. Paul (who
himself tells King Agrippa that he had lived a Pharisee; according to the most
certain way of Iewism) was brought up so, by a traditionall precept, binding
such a would study sacred letters, to learn some one or other mystery in the
Mechanics. And at this present among other things which the Turks retain of
the Jewish rites, this seems one, when even the Sultan himself, or Grand
Signior (as all his progenitors) is said to exercise a manual trade, little,
or much, commonly once a day. And in fresh memory Rodulphus the Emperor had
singular skill in making Dials, Watches, and the like fine works of
Smith-craft, as also a late great Baron of England, which they practiced.

4 If then such honor be done by God (as beforesaid) not only to those which
are necessary handy-crafts, but to those also which are but the handmaids of
magnificence, and outward splendour, as engrauers, founders, and the like; he
shall be very hardy who shall embase honest Industry with disgraceful
censures; and too unjust, who shall not cherish, or encourage it with praise
and worship, as the ancient excellent policy of England did, and does, in
constituting corporations, and adorning Companies with banners of Arms and
special men with notes of Noblesse.

5 And, as of all commendable Arts all worthy Commonweals have their use, so,
in London they have as it were their palace. But into the body of the City
none generally are encorporated, but such only as through the strait gates of
Apprentiship aspire to the dignity and state of Citizens. That Hebrew bondmen
were not, in MOSES law, among themselves, like to our Apprentises (howsoever
the seventh year agrees in time with the ordinary time of our Apprentises
obligation) is evident both in the books of Exodus, and Deuteronomie. For,
first, their title to their bondmen grew to their Lords by a contract of
bargain, and sale, which was indeed a kind of servitude. For, when the seventh
year, in which the bondage was to determine, and expire, if then he resolved
not to continue a bondsman for ever, he was compelled to leave his wife (if
married in his Lords house during bondage) together with his children, borne in
that marriage behind him, though himself departed free, but withal rewarded
also. So that voluntary bondage is not only de iure gentium (as the Roman
laws import, by which a man might sell himself, ad participandum precium) but
also de iure diuino positiuo. By which notwithstanding it does not appear,
that such a bondage was any disparagement, or disenablement in Jewish blood
among the Jews, because in Exodus we read of a provision made for the Hebrew
bondwoman, whom her Lord might take in marriage to himself, or bestow her upon
his son, if he so thought good, but might not violate her chastity, as if he
had ius in corpus. But the condition of an Apprentise of London resembles the
condition of no persons estate in either of the laws, Divine or Imperial; For
he directly contracteth with his Master to learn his mystery, or Art of
honest living, neither has his Master (who therefore is but a Master, and not
a Lord) Despoticu^ imperium over his Apprentise (that is, such a power as a
Lord has over slave) but quasi curaturam, or a Guardianship, and is in very
truth a mere Discipliner, or Teacher, with authority of using moderate
correction as a Father, not as a Tyrant, or otherwise. Immoderate correction
whosoever does use, is (by a gracious statute of the fifth of Queen Elizabeth)
subject to be punished with the loss of the Apprentise, by absolutely taking
him away.

6 Which things, so often as I deeply ponder, I cannot but hold it as loose,
and as wandering a conceit, and as uncivil a proposition in civil matters as
any: That Apprentiship should be imagined either to extinguish, or to extenuate
the right of native Gentry, or to disable any worthy, or fit person to
acquisitiue Armories. For how can it in Gods name work that effect, unless it
be criminal to be an Apprentise? Because no man loses his right to bear
Arms, or to write Gentleman, unless he be attainted in Law for such a cause,
the conviction whereof does immediately procure corruption in blood, which as
in this case no man yet has dreamed of.

Again, when by the old common Law of England there are only two sorts of
bondmen, that is to say, villains in gross, and villains regardant to a
Manor, and it is most certain, that our Apprentise, or Scholar in
Citie-mysteries, is neither one nor other of them, what ignorance then, or
offense was mother at first of this, not paradox, but palpable absurdity, that
Apprentiship extinguisheth Gentry, or that Apprentises are as with us a kind of
bondmen?

The Contents of this third part.
1. 2. FOr clearer understanding the question, the service of an Apprentise
described. 3 The four maine points of the Indenture discussed, the service,
the time, the contract, the condition. 4 The case of Laban, and Jacob weighed.
5 Of the mutual bond between Master and Apprentise. 6 An Apprentise proved to
be in no respect a bondsman. Of the right of blood in Gentry, and of the right
of wearing gold-rings among the Romans. 7 The Masters power over the
Apprentises body, objected and solued. Aristotle's error about bondmen. Of
young Gentlemen, Wards in England. Of University Students, and of Soldiers,
in respect of their bodies. 8 Apprentiship a degree in commonweal. 9 Of the
tokens, or ensigns of that degree, the flat round cap, and other. 10 Unwisely
discontinued. 11 Resumption of Apprentiships marks, or habits, rather wished
then hoped. 12 The injurious great absurdity of the Adversaries opinion, and
the excellency of London.
The third Part.
1 THough in the premises we seem to our selves, to have said enough for
establishing our Negation in this importa^t question, that is to say, That
Apprentiship is not a kind of bondage, consequently, that it cannot work any
such effects as is before supposed, yet to leave no tolerable curiosity
unsatisfied, we will set before us, as in a table, the whole condition of an
Apprentise. Meaning chiefly such an Apprentise as being the son of a Gentleman,
is bound to a Master, who exercises the worthier Arts of Citizens, as
Merchants by sea, Assurers, Whole-sale-men, and some such few others which may
more specially stand in the first class of the most generous mysteries, as
those in which the wit or mind has a far greater part then bodily labor.

2 Such an Apprentise therefore when first he comes to his Master is commonly
but of those years which are every where subject to correction. His ordinary
services these. He goes bare-headed, stands bare-headed, waytes bare-headed,
before his Master and Mistress, and, while as yet he is the youngest
Apprentise, he does perhaps (for discipline sake) make old leather ouer-night
shine with blacking for the morning, brusheth a garment, runs of errands, keeps
silence till he have leave to speak, follows his Master, or vshereth his
Mistress, and sometime my young Mistresses their daughters (among whom some
one, or other of them does not rarely prove the Apprentises wife) walks not
far out but with permission, and now, and then (as offenses happen) he may
chance to be terribly chidden, or menaced, or (which sometime must be) worthily
corrected; though all this but only in ordine, and in the way to Mastership,
or to the estate of a Citizen, which last worst part of this Apprentises
condition continues peradventure for a year, or two, and while he is commonly
but at the age of a boy, or at the most but of a lad, or stripling. And, take
things at the very worst, he does nothing as an Apprentise under his Master,
which, when himself comes to be a Master his Apprentises shall not do, or
suffer under him. Such or the like is the bitterest part of an Apprentises
happy estate in this world, being honestly provided, at his Masters charge of
all things necessary, and decent. The Master in the meane-while serving his
Apprentises turn with instruction, and universal conformation, or moulding of
him to his Art, as the Apprentise serves his Masters turn with obedience,
faith, and industry.

3 Here have we a representation of an Apprentises being, or rather the
well-being of a child under his father, who has right of correction. Upon view
whereof we demand, why it should be supposed That Apprentiship extinguisheth
Gentry? For if an Apprentise in London (since to have Apprentises is a power
not derived to corporations out of prerogative, and royal privilege, but out
of common Law) be in their conceits a kind of bondsman, it must either be,
ratione generis obsequij, or ratione temporis adiecti, or contractus, or
conditionis, or for all together; a fifth cause being hard to be either
assigned, or imagined.

For the first point (which is in regard of the kind of service) that is but an
effect of the contract, or bargain, and consequently depends thereon, or
participates in nature with it; which not importing any kind of bondage,
neither can the service it self, due by that agreement, be the service of a
bondsman. So that as on the one side we grant, that Apprentises, as
Apprentises, do some things, which Gentlemen would not do, that lived sui
iuris, specially upon a necessity to obey, yet on the other side we constantly
deny, that they do any of them, either as servile, or as seruilely, but
propter finem nobilem, that is, to learn an honest mystery to enable them for
the service of God and their Country, in the station, place, or calling of a
Citizen.

For the second (which is in respect of a certain time (as of seven years at
least) added and limited in the contract, that is merely but a circumstance of
the agreement, and per consequens cannot alter the substance of the question.
For if Apprentises are not a kind of bondmen, abstracting from the time which
they are bound to serve, the addition of time, adds nothing to the quality of
the contract, to make it servile.

For the third (which is in regard of the contract, as it raises a relation,
or the titles between two, of Master, and servant) if the very act of binding
to performance, be a sufficient reason to make Apprentises a kind of bondmen,
and so to disenable them to Gentry, either deriuatiue, or acquisitiue, the
Masters themselves are also a kind of bondmen, because, suo genere they as well
are bound as the Apprentises.

For the fourth (which is in respect of the condition either vocally expressed,
or vertually implide in the contract) there is in it no proof of bondage, but
the contrary. For in that the obligation is mutual, it proves the Apprentise
free as from bondage, though (for the Apprentises own good) not free from
subjection to discipline. Because only free men can make contracts, and
challenge the benefit of them. The verb, not, seruire, but the verb,
deseruire (which is of far less weight) comprised in the instrument, or
Indenture, and containing the whole force of the obligation, has only in that
place the sense of obsequi, and facere, to obey, and do as an Apprentise, and
not according to the ancient sense, which it had among the Romans. This ought
not to seem a paradox. For the word dominari, to which seruire is a relative,
and the word dominus, have in tract of time been so softened, and
familiarised, as they are grown to be words of singular humanity. And what so
common among the noble as to profess to serve? But the relation constituted in
this case, is peculiar, and proper, the odious word dominus is not there at
all, nor seruus, no nor famulus; the relation constituted is directly named
between Master, and Apprentise: a clear case that all injuries to blood, and
nature, are of purpose avoided in those conuentions; and conuentiones they are
called in the interchangeably sealed instrument it self. So clear a case,
that in the Oath which all freemen make in the Chamber of London at their first
admission, this clause among many others, is sworn unto by them, That they
shall take None Apprentise, but if he be Free borne, that is to say, no
Bondmans son: which are the very words of the oath. Thus carefully open was
the eye of institution in this noble point of the Cities policy, to prevent
that no stain, no blemish, nor indignity should wrong the splendour thereof. A
thing which could not but follow ineuitably, if they who provided against
admission of bondmens issue, into the estate of apprentiship, should themselves
by making apprentises, make bondmen; or should in any sort embase their blood,
whose Masters they were to be, as to the purpose of coming to be Citizens in
time. They never meant to make any man bond, who would have none but the sons
of freeborn persons bound apprentises. It shall be wilful ignorance or
malice from hence forth to maintain the contrary.

4. A most memorable example in Scripture to the purpose of the present
question is that of Jacob and Laban in the nine and twentieth Chapter of
Genesis, where the time (seven years) yea, and the very word (seruire) are
plain in that contract which was made between the uncle, and the nephew: yet
who did ever say that Jacob was for this a kind of bondsman? The reason why he
was not, rises from consideration of the final cause, or intention of the
contract, which is recorded to have been honorable; the obtaining of a worthy
wife, and of an estate to maintain her with. Neither, when he was no longer
defrauded of Rahel then seven days after his first seven years, and when in
the fruition of Rahel he served also other seven years, was he a kind of
bondsman, by as it were a relapse, or as by a cessation of expecting his reward,
which he enjoyed in enjoying her. Out of which it follows, that as Jacob was
no kind of bondsman though he served, and served out all his time twice over, so
neither are Apprentises. And from this place of the Bible it is vnanswerablie
proved that bodily service, is a laudable means to atchieue any good, or
honorable purpose; a means truly worthy of a Gentleman.

5 Hereunto we finally add, and repeat, that as an Apprentise ties himself to
his Master in the word deseruire, that is, to obey, and do, restrictiuely to
the ancient reason, and traditionall discipline of Apprentiship in London, so
the Master ties himself to his Apprentise in the word docere, in lieu of his
honest service, to teach him his Art to the utmost. Which Masters part is
grown to such estimation as that Apprentises now come commonly like wines with
portions to their Masters. If then Apprentiship be a kind of servitude, it is
either a pleasing bondage, or a strange madness to purchase it with money.

6 An Apprentise therefore, as an Apprentise, being neither ratione obsequij,
temporis, contractus, nor conditionis in any kind a bondsman, is in no respect
a bondsman: and has therefore no more lost his title, and right to Gentry,
then he has done to any goods, chattels, lands, royalties, or any thing else,
which, if he had never been an Apprentise, either had, might, or ought to
have come unto him. Nay, much less can Gentry be lost in this case, then
right to lands, and goods, how much more inherent the rights of blood are then
the rights of fortune. For, according to the law-rule, iura sanguinum nullo
iure civilly dirimi possunt; whereas those other may be dissolved. And, that
Gentry is a right of blood may appear by this, that no man can truly alienate
the same, or vest another in it, though legally he may, in case of Adoption,
which is but an humane invention in imitation of nature, and therefore, in rei
veritate, no alienation at all, but a fiction, or an acception in law as if it
were such. So that none can any more pass away his gentry, to make another a
Gentleman thereby, who was not a Gentleman before, then he can pass away any
habit, or quality of the mind, as virtue, or learning, to make another honest,
or learned, who was unlearned, or dishonest before. For Gentry is a quality of
blood, or name, as virtue, and learning are of the mind. Upon which reason
that rule of law is grounded, which teaches us, that annulus signatorius
ornamenti appellatione non continetur.

7 To all this if it be replied: That Apprentiship is a kind of bondage, for
that if an Apprentise abandon his Masters service; his Master may both fetch
him back, as Lord for the time over his servants body, and compel him also to
live under obedience. We answer thus. That such a power over the body of an
Apprentise is not sufficient to constitute a bondsman, though the service of the
Apprentise belongs to the Master, Gods partin him, and the Commonweales being
first deducted.

Aristotle held, that only the Grecians were free, and all the barbarous, that
is to say, all not Grecians, were bond. Some among us seem Aristototelians in
this point, who as he gloriously ouer-valued his Countrymen, so these
ouer-value their paragon-Gentry, and repute none worthy of Arms, and Honor
but themselves, we supposing on their behalf, that they are indeed not
vaine-pretenders only, but true descendents from the most unquestionable noble
races, howsoever troubled perhaps with some little of the spirit of vanity,
and of too too much scorn of others. But as the Italians in our time,
notwithstanding they think meanly of all who are not Italians, calling them
(in Aristotle's humor) Tramontani, and in that word implying them to be
barbarous, do commit an error, as well as that great Philosopher, so those
Gentlemen (how eminently noble soever) will be likewise found to live in
error, for that others also may be truly Gentlemen, for any thing which as
yet is spoken in the former Sophisme: videlicet; The Master has power over his
Apprentises body: Ergo, Apprentises are a kind of bondmen. Because if such a
power be enough to constitute a bondsman, we will say nothing of those
freeborn persons being in minority, whose bodies their Guardians, may not
only by a right in law, fetch back after escape, or flight, but give away
also in marriage. Nay, if for that reason Apprentises, borne Gentlemen, shall
be thought to have forfeited their Gentry, in what estate are all the sons,
and children of good houses in England, whose bodies their parents by a right
of nature, may fetch back after flight, and exercise their pleasure, or
displeasure upon the^, even to disinherison? Nay, in what case are soldiers
(to whom most properly, and most immediately the Honor of Arms does belong)
who for withdrawing themselves from their banner, or Captain without leave,
may not only be forced back to serve, but (according to the usual discipline
of war) may be martial Law be hanged up, or shot at the next tree, or
wheresoever, deprived of breath at once, and of brave reputation together? So
absurd it is to dispute, that the power of a Master, by the title of a contract
over the body of an Apprentise, in case of discipline, does convince a
seruilitie of condition in the sufferer. For if the right to exercise corporal
coerction should absolutely constitute a state of bondage in the subject, the
injury of that untrue assertion would reach to persons of far higher mark
then City-prentises, as is most plainly proved. And therefore they must
allege somewhat else besides subjection of body to draw the estate of
Apprentiship into that degree of reproach, which as they cannot do, we having
prevented those objections, so must they leave it clear from taint, or
scandal.

8 We lay it down therefore out of all the antecedences for a clear
conclusion: That Apprentises are so far from being a kind of bondmen, as
that in our Commonweal they then first begin habere caput, and to be aliqui:
to be of account, and some body. For Apprentiship in London is a degree, or
order of good regular subjects, out of whose as it were Nouiceships, or
Colleges, Citizens are supplied. We call them Colleges according to the old
Roman Lawphrase, or fellowships of men, for so indeed they are, comprehended
within several corporations, or bodies of free persons, intended to be
consociated for commerce, according to conscience, and justice, and named
Companies, each of them severally bearing the title of their several worthy
Monopolies, as Drapers, Salters, Clothworkers, and so forth. We say as before,
that Apprentises in the reputation of our Commonweal, when first they come to
be Apprentises then first begin to be some body, and that Apprentiship is a
degree, to which out of youth, and young men, who have no vocation in the world,
they are advanced and that out of Apprentises, by other ascents or steps, as
donari ciuitate, to come to be free of London, or Citizens, from thence to be
of their companies Liuerie, the governors of Companies, as Wardens, and
Masters, and governors in the City, as Common-counsel-men, Aldermens-deputies,
Sheriffs, and Aldermen; and lastly the principal governor, or head of the
City, the Lord Mayor; yea sometimes also Counselors of Estate to the Prince
(whereof Master Stowe has examples) are very orderly elected; and the whole
policy disposed after as excellent a form as most at this day under heaven.

9 True it is, that Apprentiship, as it is a degree, so is it the lowest
degree, or class of men in London. Lowest we say, that it may come to the
highest, according to that of S. Augustine, and of common sense, that those
buildings rise highest, and stand fasteth, whose foundations are deepest. And
as Apprentipish is the first in order, and meanest in dignity, so can that be
no title to embase the vocation, because there must be a first in all things.
Of this degree the flat round Cap, hair close-cut, narrow falling-band, course
side-coat, close-hose, cloth stockings, and the rest of that severe habit was
in antiquity, not more for thrift, and usefulness, then for distinction, and
grace, and were originally arguments, or tokens of vocation, or calling, which
point of ancient discipline the Catoes of England, grave common Lawyers, to
their high commendation therein, retain in their profession, and professors at
this present, even to the partie-coulored coats of serving men at Serieants
Feasts. An object, far more ridiculous among the new-shapes of our time (enemy
of rigor, and discipline) then that of Apprentises. At which retained signs,
and distinctiue notes among Lawyers, though younglings, and frivolous nouices,
may somewhat wonder, till the cause be understood, yet is the thing it self so
far in it self from deserving contempt, as that they who should offer it,
would themselves be laughed at. For the late Lord Coke, in the preface of his
third book of Reports, has affirmed for the dignity of the word Apprentise,
that an Apprentise at Law is a double reader, whose degree is next to that of a
Serieant at Law, who is only inferior to a Judge, and to no other degree of
Lawyers.

10 Here now let me be bold to say, that Apprentises seem to have drunk and
sacrificed too deeply to their new Goddess, Saint Fashion* An Idol which was
always noted fatal to the English. As at the periods, or universal
concussions of Empire in our portion of great Britain, may in old Writers be
observed. This they do not without wrong in our opinions to the honesty of
their degree, at leastwise in so far abandoning their proper ornament, the
Cap (anciently a note of liberty among the Romans) as not to have one day at
least in the year, wherein to celebrate the feast of their Apprentiship in the
peculiar garb thereof, which they should do well and wisely to frequent for
downe-bearing of contumely, and scorn, by making profession in this wise,
that they glory in the ensigns of their honest calling.

11 For reuocation of which into use though we see no manner of hope, yet are
those late Magistrates of the City who labored to reduce Apprentiship to
practice this laudable point of outward conformity, not the less to be
commended: and it were to be wished perhaps, that instead of scattering Libels,
and of discovering inclinations to tumult, Apprentises had rather submitted
their understandings, and resigned their wills in this particular to their
loving superiors, making humble, and wise obedience the glory of their
persons, much rather then apparel in the fashion. For they who are not ashamed
of their profession, ought not to be ashamed of the ensigns, and tokens of
their profession, or degree. They indeed are out of fashion who are not in that
fashion which is proper to their quality. The flat round Cap, in it self
considered as a Geometrical figure, is far more worthy than the square,
according to that ground in the Mathematics, figurarum spaerica est optima,
and in Hieroglyphickes, is a symbol of eternity, and perfection, and a
resemblance of the worlds rotunditie. But I will make no encomium for caps.
This I say, that as the square capp is retained not only in the Universities,
but also abroad among us, as well by Ecclesiastical persons in high places, as
by Judges of the Land, so the round capp being but a note in London, of
Apprentises, and Citizens of London, as it is of Students, Barresters,
Benchers, and Readers, in the Innes of Court, so the wearing thereof by
Londoners cannot be a reproach, but an ornament. But communis error facit ius,
and how freely soever these thoughts come from me out of abundant love to the
preservation of virtue in that most honorable City, which civil discipline is
ablest to do, yet as much piety as it is to wish the best, so great is the
vanity to think to stop the general stream of predominant custom by
private wishes. Apprentises moreover, and Citizens, because they are always
conversant in the light of action, and concourse, and not shut up in Colleges
for studies sake, may think by this contrary way the more to honor their
City, and to enjoy themselves.

12 Well may they in the mean time blush at their temeritie, who by teaching
that Apprentises are called Apprentises, as if they were pares emptitijs, do
dishonor and highly wrong the excellent old policy of this land. For they (as
much as lies in the credit of their words) most dangerously discourage
flourishing Industry, who cast such an aspersion upon any civil profession,
and order of men (assembled to uphold a kingdom by co^merce, according to
Justice) as the least conceit of so hateful a note as bondage. And if it be
temeritie to cast it upon any renowned, or other corporation unjustly, it is
singular iniquity (let it not be called madness) to lay it upon London, which
shines among all Cities within the Empire of Britain. -- velut inter ignes;
Luna minores --


The Contents of this fourth part.
1 THe Author means not to erect a new Babylon by confounding degrees. Horaces
monster. The common laws distinction. 2 Citizens as Citizens not Gentlemen,
but a particular species. The Gentleman the natural subject of all Nobility.
The Authors meaning explained. Encouragement of honest Industry. Ius
annulorum, that among the Romans, which bearing of Arms among us. The causes
compared. The distinction of a mere Citizen. Disparagement of Wards how to be
understood in this case. King Edward the first his displeasure an efficient of
what effects. Armories to symbolise with the first bearers quality. Antiquities
sacred care in point of ennoblements. 3 The Authors Apostrophe to Fathers,
whether they be Gentlemen borne, or not. No cause why the Great should be
ashamed of City-beginnings. Martial virtue principal owner of Armories. The
Chamber of the King. 4 Kings of England ennoble the Companies of London with
their persons, by a singular favor. Henry the seventh his admirable
sociabilitie, or configuration of himself to popular forms. Clothworkers his
late Majesty's brotherhood. 5 London-Companies denominated of their Monopolies,
but not embased thereby. Of Circensian-games and colors. Plinius his complaint.
Gentlemen's means if properly entitled are as mean as London-Mysteries. Nor,
in that respect, any great disparilitie between Country, and Citie-Gentlemen.
6 The Ecclipticke line of Londons Zodiac. The mind, and not names is
essential to qualifications. 7 The Authors second Apology for his meaning in
this case. His scope to beat down injurious vanity, not to wrong vocations.
London Companies best so called as they are. The first Roman Consul, not being
a Patrician, free of Butchers. Where Majesty is, there can be no baseness.
The glory of wit, and arms due to London. 8 All honest natures love glory,
and no glory good but as subordained to God.
The fourth Part.
THough thus I have been the Advocate, and Defender of the credit of the City,
yet desire I not to be mistaken. For it is very far from my thoughts, by this
Apology, or patronisation, to confound degrees in commonweal, so to set up as
it were a new Babylon of mine own. I am not ignorant therefore, that Citizens,
as Citizens, are not Gentlemen, but Cizens; To hold otherwise were to take one
order, or degree of men out of the Realm, or like Horaces monster (a man's
head, and a birds body) to create a thing which had half one, and half
another, and our laws give a proper name both to the tenure, and person,
calling the tenure of Citizens in Cities, Burgage, and their persons,
Burgenses, among whom the more eminent of them in London had of old not only
the honor of the title of Citizens, or Burgesses, but of Barons also.

2 The ordinary Citizen therefore, is of a degree beneath the mere Gentlemen,
as the Gentleman is among us in the lowest degree, or class of Nobility in
England. And all Citizens as Citizens, yea, the Lord Mayor himself, simply as
a Citizen, is not a Gentleman, but Burgenfis. As the greatest Princes, and
Despots that ever were, or ever shall be in the world, considered in their
first natural condition, are at most but Ingenui, or freeborn, in which
respect all are equal, for omnes natura aequales, and their first civil
degree, or general state, which either comprehends all the orders of
Nobility, or is capable of them, is among us the Gentleman. In which respect
he who shall say, That this or that King, or Emperor is a Gentleman, speaks
rightly, and as the thing is. For Gentleman is the title, about which all other
titles, as they concern honor, and conueigh no jurisdiction, are put as robes
and ornaments. This therefore is my meaning; That some Citizens may be a
Citizen, and yet truly a Gentleman, as one, and the same man may in several
respects be both a Lord and Tenant. Citizen in regard of his encorporation in
London, Gentleman in regard of birth, or of Armories assigned for encouragement
of Industry, to ennoble his honest riches and titles of honor, or worship, in
that City, whereof he is a qualified member. Neither is the communication of
rewards, which consist of painted distinctio^s, composed according to the
received rules of Heraldrie, injurious to ancient Gentry any more then the
promiscuous permission of wearing gold-rings on their fingers alike to
freed-men, as to freemen, granted by the Emperor in the authentickes: the
reason of gold-rings among Romans, and of Armories among us being the same.
Nor is it a new thing in our Commonweal, that special Citizens, not borne to
armories, but the sons of yeomen, or not of Gentlemen, should have arms
assigned them. For there is perhaps scarce any record of Arms granted in
England more ancient then testimonies in the Halles of London, that special
Citizens have bin honored with particular bearings. And these are advanced upon
the Lord Majors day by the speare-men of that company of which his Lordship is
a member, not all of them specially given of old, but some undoubtedly borne by
right of blood, as descendents of Gentlemen, but other again as undoubtedly
assigned for excellency in City-Arts. Of which number there are at this day not
a few, whose seri nepotes whose great-grand-childrens children are reputed
among the oldest and best families of their Shires, without any relation to
London, which notwithstanding raised them. Hence it follows, that as an
Apprentise being a Gentleman-borne remains a Gentleman, which addition of
splendour, and title, as God blesses his labors, so a worthy Citizen is
capable of honor and Arms, notwithstanding his Apprentiship. And by this
distinction made between a Citizen merely as a Citizen, and of a Citizen, as
he may also be a Gentleman, that objection which some bring out of a Statute
enacted under one of our Kings, which forbidding the disparagement offered by
the Guardian to marie the Ward borne gentle, to a Burgensis, may easily be
salued and answered. For in that Statute the word Burgensis is spoken in the
native, and more narrow sense thereof, that is of one who is simply Burgensis,
without any consideration of him as he may otherwise be a Gentleman, Esquire,
or Knight, which in some places happens, as in the famous corporation of Droit
Wiche in Worcestershire. But howsoever, cerainely Burgensis here nothing
concerns Citizens of London, who by an excellency of their calling had the
honor in antiquity to bear the name of Barons, and were styled so; and
weighing that, the Citizen is a distinct degree from Burgensis, and above it;
and therefore that law concerns them not. For the proof of their title to the
appellation of Barons, by way of Hexoche (as artists in eloquence call it) most
famous is that place in the Histories of Matthew Paris, where speaking of the
Londoners of his time, under King Henry the third, these words are eminent in
him: Londonienses quos propter ciuitatis dignitatem, and ciuium antiquitatem,
Barons consueuimus appellare. As for the distinct degree of a Citizen from a
Burgensis, that appears in this, that the City of London does not send
Burgesses to the Parliament, but Knights, or Citizens; and the enumeration of
the ranks is clear in a Statute of King Richard the second, enacted the fifth
year of his reign, and the fourth Chapter of the same, where they are, Count,
Baron, Banneret, Cheualier de Count, Citizen de City, Burgeis de Burgh. The
Princes before that time, but specially the Princes following (as the
worthiness of Citizens invited) did ennoble them exceedingly, and continue
more and more so to do. Yet, in conferring Arms, and arguments of honor upon
Cizens, not borne Genlemen, reason requires that they should not have coats of
the fairest bearing assigned to them, but such as either in Canton, Chief,
Border, or otherwise might carry some testimony, mark, or sign to show the
Art by which they were advanced, as Merchant-Aduenturers to bear Anchors,
Grocers Cloves, Clothworkers a Tezel, Merchantaylors a robe, and so forth;
which those Gentlemen ought in honesty, and thankfulness to choose, and not
only to accept; and rather strive to match the best in goodness, and worth of
spirit then in the silent tokens of it. Posterity thriuing, there may then
some change be also made in the coat for the better. Specially considering what
pretty riddance has been in our times made of surcharges in armories granted
about the end of King Henry the eight; what encroachments upon old Gentlemen's
rights, by new ones, because their names only have been the same; and many
other inventions to blanch or beautify newness. According to which notion and
dictamen, coats of Arms have been delivered from their original deformities,
surfets, and surcharges, by their proper Physician, the provincial King of
Arms; So Sir Thomas Kitsons of Suffolk, whose Chief, now simply gold, was
heretofore ouerladen with three ogresses, and they with an Anchor (the badge or
argument of the original) and two Lions rampant argent; as at this hour is
publicly extant to be seen in Trinity Hall at Cambridge, whereunto he was a
benefactor: and besides that Gentleman's, the coat armours of some of the Peers
of this land, and of others also, not a few: very many more needing the like
relief, or remedy. The rule of proportion seems diligently observed in
antiquity among us, where the principal, and most noble charges, and forms
of Armories were not appropriated but to analogicall competencies of honorable
quality.

3 Such therefore being the nature of Apprentiship, and such the condition of
Citizens estate, as to the purposes of honor, and arms, let Fathers who are
Gentleman put their children, who are not rather inclining to Arms, or
letters, to Apprentiship, that is to say, to the discipline, and Art of honest
gain, giving them a title of being somewhat in our Country. For it is a
vocation simply honest, and may prove a stay to posterity, and give credit to
their names, when licentious and corrupted eldest sons have sold their
birthrights away. For albeit many Citizens thrive not, but break, yet those
fathers, or such who are in place of Fathers, work more probably, who put
their children, or Orphans into a certain method of life, then others who
leave them at large. And as some riotous, foolish, or unfortunate Citizens
miscarrie, so ten to one more younger brethren in the Country. And fathers, such
of you are not gentlemen, put your children to be Apprentises, that so as God
may bless their just, true, and virtuous industry, they may found a new
family, and both raise themselves and theirs to the precious and glittering
title of Gentlemen bearing Arms lawfully. For which cause no Lord, nor Peer
of this Land, who may perchance owe his worldly estate, and as well the
completiue, as the fundamental greatness, or amplitude of means, to such as
have been Citizens of London; nor those other, whose originalls were from
cheualrie, and martial service (the most pure, and proper Noblesse of all, as
to the purpose of bearing Arms) and yet since have been mixed with
Citie-races, ought to think it the least disparagement to own their
benefactors and ancestors, Citizens of London. On the other part it will
worthily well become them, freely and thankfully to acknowledge so honest
originalls, and accession to originalls, as all this Realm from thence is
filled with. Because among them the virtues of commutatiue justice, and of
commendable industry flourish, and, the sinews of war, and peace, abundance
of treasure, are stored up, as in the Chamber of the King.

4 Which acknowledgment, besides that it is in the laws of honor, an act of
bounden duty, they may the rather take it for a glory, because our Princes
have vouchsafed to be incorporated; as members of several Companies in the
City, coming thereby as it were under that banner. Nor only so, but Henry
the seventh (whom all of us will easily confess to have well enough understood
what he did) is credibly said to have been in person, at the election of
Master and Wardens, and himself to have sitten openly among them in a gown of
crimson velvet, Citie-fashion, with a Citizens hood of velvet on his shoulders
a la mode de Londres, upon their solemn feastday, in the common hall of his
Company, Merchantailers. Moreover, his grandchild, Queen Elizabeth (no way
inferior to her ancestor in high policy) was free of Mercers. Lastly (which
is more to our present purpose) our late dread Sovereign himself King James
more learned then they both (though learning has been a Royal ability in
our ancient Princes, and so flourishing in Sebert, King of East-England, that
our venerable countreyman BID, affirms him to have been, per omnia
doctissimus) encorporated himself into one the most important society of this
kingdom Clothworkers, as men dealing in the principal and noblest Staplewares
of all these Islands; wool, and cloth.

5 Nor let the names of Companies, because they seem not to sound honorably
enough as appellations of degrees in Gentry, and Nobility, auert the mind from
them as things ignoble and unworthy the dignity of generous dispositions, a
thing erroniously holden in Fernes Blazon of Gentry. For all renowned Cities
ever had in them vrbana nobilitas, and yet their citizens could not but be
distributed into orders, tribes, or titles of professions, yea sometimes also
in their games, For the Circensian companies in Rome, called factiones, that is
to say, companies, and denominated from the several colors of their several
clothings, White, blew, green, and red, to which Domitian added two other,
purple, and gold, were the special delights and exercises of Prince and
people; which grew to such excess, no longer after then in Traians time, that
Plinius secundus held it a matter worthy of his complaint, and censure, as in
one of his Epistles is extant, where he says nunc panno fauent, nunc pannum
amant. Again, such of the Gentry, who live not in the city, and do most of
all eleuate themselves with contempt of others in respect of the Arts, and
ways of maintenance, were they but incorporated under the true titles of their
means, in which we will not speak of the prodigious eating up of whole
houses, towns, and people, by a thousand wicked devises proper to the mystery
of depopulation (against whose consuming works so many statutes of this land
have long time warred in vain) the names of those citie-brotherhoods, or
Companies would easily sound, in a most curious ear, full out as fair, and
well. Corn, Cattle, Butter, Cheese, Hay, Wood, Wool, Coals, and the like, the
materials of their maintenance, all of them inseparable to
Countrey-Commonweales, and without which they can no more subsist then Drapers,
as Drapers without cloth, Glodsmiths, as Goldsmiths without Jewels, or plate,
and so forth. Neither does it create any great odds in this point touching
honor between parties in this dispute, that Gentlemen, by their officers, as
Bailiffes, Reeues, or the like, do order their affairs for their more ease,
and dignities. For besides, that the wisest among them exercise that
superintendency in their own persons, so herein the worthy Citizen is no way
behind, dispatching his businesses by Factors, Iourneymen, or expert
Apprentises, reserving only to himself the oueruiew, and control all their
doings. Citie-noblesse so apparent, that the Knights or Gentlemen of Rome,
professing Merchandise, and others among them that way bent, had their Hall, or
seat of their College, or company upon Mount Capitoline it self, dedicated
to their patron Deity, or tutelarie Godhead, Mercury. Other encorporated
societies there also were, as Goldsmiths, and the rest, who lived so far from
being excluded out of the power of commonweal, or from honors, and signs of
nobleness, that they had right in some cases even to ouertop the Lords, and
out of their own body to choose not only Consuls, but even Dictators also,
their super-soueraigne and most absolute Magistrate before their Emperors
times. Yea so mighty were they grown in respect of elections and negative
authority, that Clodius to be revenged upon Cicero, left his own rank of
Patritians, and Lords, and turned Commoner.

6 To conclude, such Gentlemen are much deceived, which no sooner hear one
named to be of this, or that Society, or College of trade in London, as of
Grocers, Haberdashers, Fishmongers, or of any other of the twelve principal
Monopolies (the Zodiac of the city, in whose Eclipticke line their Lord
Mayor must ever run his years course) but they forthwith entertain a low
conceit of the parties quality, as too too much beneath their own rank, and
order, without further examination; when it often happens, that he who is
titularlie of this, or that Fraternity, never was bred up in it, nor
understands any more what it means then the remotest Gentleman, their Masters
themselves having been Merchants, or of other profession of life diverse from
their title, under which they are marshalled, the law of the city imposing an
absolute necessity that all who are free of the city should carry the name of
some one, or other of their brotherhoods. Again, what do the constellations
of heaven shine the worse, or the less, because they carry the names of Ramm,
of a Water-bearer, of Fishes, and so forth? Or how many the fewer are their
several lights for that? Answerably to which I say, that if the parties mind
be adorned with the starre-lights of virtue and honor, what baseness is it for
him to be marshalled under any of the names comprehending one, or other of the
honest Arts of worldly life?

7 In disputing thus, let me not be thought to set up an envious comparison
between these two worshipful degrees, or qualificatio^s of men. That is very
far from me. For it must ever be granted, to the authority of general
opinion founded upon custom among us, that the true Countrey-Esquire caeteris
paribus, is in his proper place before the Citie-Esquire, which with the
perpetual clause beforesaid of caeteris paribus holds also, throughout the
other degrees of the inferior Noblesse in England. I reason here, as reason
bids, not against the right, or dignities of persons either as in parallel, or
as in disparagement, but against the vanity, and offenses rising out of
causeless elatio^, and arrogance, and against their errors, who not
understanding the things of their own country, are indeed mere
Meteoroscopers, and houer in the clowdy region of admiration upon rude, and
unlearned fancies, for which cause as minds needing to be healed, so would I
sincerely that they were healed. Such are theirs, who would perhaps think the
Companies, or Monopolies of the city more worthy of their acknowledgement, if
where now they are denominated of some particular ware, or craft, they were
named of Eagles, Vultures, Lions, Bears, Panthers, Tigers, or so forth, as the
several orders of the Noble in Mexico (which Josephus Acosta writes) under their
Emperor: yet much better, because more truly, these fellowships of London carry
the names of men as they have vocations in professions, which only men can
execute. Or they would peradventure think more nobly of them, if those
societies were denominated of Eyes, ears, hands, feet, or of other members, as
Philostratus, in the life of that impostor Apollonius Tianaeus, says, the
officers, and instruments of a Philosophical King in India were. But as those
were called of their King his eyes, ears, and so forth, so have these
mysteries some one, or other professor in each among them, from the higher
trade to the lowest eminently designed out with the addition of King, as the
Kings Mercer, the Kings Draper, and so forth. Again, how much more worthy the
whole is then the parts, because the parts are in the whole, so by that
argument it is more honorable to be marshalled as a man among societies of
civil men, then to be distinguished by allusions to particular members. At
leastwise, those singular Gentlemen might certainin their most contempt of the
City remember that of Plato, Nemo Rex non ex seruis, nemo non seruus ex
Regibus; and that also rare and real worth may be in the persons of Citizens
themselves, seeing Terentius (Consul of old Rome, with that noble Paulus
Aemilius) was free of the Butchers company, and our Walworth Lord Mayor of old
London was free of the Fishmongers. And they were not only the Lords, Knights,
and Gentlemen of Rome, who had voice in election of their principal yearly
Magistrates, but even handycrafts-men* and Artificers, as is most manifest by
that place of Salust in his Iugurthine war, where Marius was chosen Consul,
by the special affection of that sort of Roman Citizens, who (says he) sua
necessaria post illius honorem ducebant, preferred his election by their
voices, before the trades by which they earnd their livings. Finally, they may
remember, that in the posterity of Citizens many right noble, and worthy
Gentlemen are often found, and that, besides the universal mixture with
Citie-races through the Kingdom, it may not be denied that true nobless shines
often very bright among the^. For they are Companies of free Citizens, in
which, sovereign Majesty it self is incorporated, making them at once to be
sacred as it were, and certainly magnificent. For even as where the Sun is,
there is no darkness, so where soueraign Princes are interressed parties, there
is no baseness. And as the Philosophers Medicine purges vilest metals, turning
all to gold, so the operation of Princes intention to ennoble Societies with
his personal presence, transmetalls the subject, and clearly takes away all
ignobilitie. Which things as they are most true in London, so, for that, the
Emperor Constantinus magnus (if our ancient Fitz Stephan reports the right)
Henry King of England, son of king Henry the second, and that brave great
Prince Edward the first, and whosoever else, were borne in the City, they give
to it the glory of Arms: and Ieffrey Chaucer, Sir Thomas Moore knight, with
others borne in London, communicate thereunto the glory of wits and letters.
To nourish up both which most excellent titles to real nobility in the City,
the Artillery-yard, and Gressam College were instituted.

8 Thus this question of Honor, and Arms, undertaken at the instance of
interessed parties, but more for love to that great City, and her children,
being by Gods assistance, and, as we hope, sufficiently discussed, the end of
all is this, that albeit the love of humane praise, and of outward splendour in
the marks, and testimonies of it, are very vehement fires in all worthiest
natures, yet have they no beatitude, nor (so to say) felicitation, but only as
with referment to this of the blessed Apostle,

Soli Deo Honor, and Gloria.
Amen.
I have viewed this book, and perused the same, and find nothing therein
dissonant to reason, or contrary to the Law of Honor or Arms.

William Segar Garter princip. King of Arms.

Errata.
In the Epistle to the Masters.

For juice of ingratitude, read vice of ingratitude.

In the Epistle to the Prentises.

For preying, read prying.

For honorable (all, read honorable strangers (all.

Page 5 For larger volume, read ledger volume.

17. For discouser, read discourser.

19. For civil Art government, read civil Art of government. ^ad For most an-
Art of increase, read most ancient Art of increase.

20. For a would, read as would.

23. For ouer-slaue, read over his slave.

38. For fasteth, read fastest.

51. For you are read you as are.

55. For control all read control of all.

57. For Ram, read a Ram.

58. For certain, read certainly.


