HELPS TO HVMILIATION.

JAMES 4. 10. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift
you up.

Printed at London, by T. Cotes, for Peter Whaly, dwelling in North-Hampton.
1630.

To the Reader.
I Here commend unto thee Christian Reader a table of Repentance, now put into
a little Tract, collected from that grave, learned, and godly Divine, Mr.
Robert Bolton. I could have been content to have stayed the publishing
thereof, until such time, in which the Author might have been prevailed with
to print it; for there cannot but want much beauty and luster which it might
have had, if it had been set forth or perused to be fitted for the Press by
him that first gave life unto it; but being enforced to it by the importunity
of many well affected, both far and near; and I unwilling to have such a
precious fountain sealed up, considering the good that might redownd to many
in the mean time by it. I resolved by the Authors leave no longer to ingrosse
the same to a private use, but to impart it to a public good, especially
considering, first, how few are acquainted with the right nature of
Humiliation, no more than Nicodemus was with regeneration: that though many
boast of it, few have it, when alas it is plain, without true Repentance Luke
13. 3. 5.
there is no salvation. Now this table having so perspicuously unfolded the
nature of this grace: those that have a beginning of it, may from hence add an
increase to their store; and they that want it, may here see the way and means
of obtaining it. Secondly, the extraordinary exercise of fasting and prayer, a
duty of precious account amongst Gods Children, which has always been
wonderfully blessed with a happy success, in so much as albeit their ordinary
prayers return not empty without a blessing, yet respectively to those prayers
which are joined with fasting, they seem barren and blasted, which otherwise
are fruitful and full eared. How then could I withhold this which by
experience and the judgment of judicious Christians, cannot but be of
special use and help unto such a blessed and successful ordinance? Thirdly,
these times call for it, to fast and pray and cry mightily unto God by our
prayers, that we may stand in the gapp, and make up the breach: and from this
table we may receive much help in this particular. Wherefore I hope I shall
need no further persuasion for thy gracious acceptance, than that hereby if
the fault be not thine own, thou may receive much good and comfort to thy
soul: which if thou find, give God the glory, the Author thy thanks, and
me thy prayers.

I. S.

HELPS TO HVMILIATION.
Acts 2. 37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and
said unto Peter, etc.
IN these words their hearts.



Thirdly, Peter's holy counsel; Amend your lives, and be baptized.

From the first, in that these men when they had heard of the greatness of
their sin, were thus wounded at the heart, observe:

That contrition in a new creature ordinarily is answerable Point.
to his former vanity.

Manasse, 2 Chronicles. 33. 6. Instan.
Mary Magdalen, Luke 7. Augustine a great sinner, wrote 12. books of
Repentance.

To whom much is forgiven, Reas. 1.
they love much: and this is a fountain of Evangelical Repentance. As a
traitor condemned to dye would wonderfully break his heart to think he
should be so villainous to so gracious a Prince: so is it with a Christian that
beholds Gods mercy to him.

Christians after their conversion desire to see their sins to the utmost,
Reas. 2.
with all the circumstances that make them hateful, as the object, nature,
person, time, and age, etc. In which or how they were done, that so they may
be more humbled for them.

If it be not so (as it may be otherwise, for God is a free agent and is not
tied to any proportion of sorrow) then such troubles as these usually seize on
them.

First, they are often Godliness.





because they have no more sorrowed for it. For the less it is sorrowed for,
the more it insnares men.

Fifthly, some of them but this I have known, some have been troubled, and
this may be in great mercy to make a weak conversion more strong. Least any
Christian should be troubled at it, take notice in Contrition:





transmutatio^ or strong reasoning in the mind out of the word of God against
sin. This is the Sinew of Repentance as Austin had against Plays, that all men
could not draw him to it.

There must be a resolution Job with his eye. Job. 31. 1.

There must be a excellent in all these, and herein make up what thou want
in the former. These be in some measure in all Christians; some are more
eminent in one part, some in another, as Joseph had little sorrow, but a strong
Resolution, because he had so strong a temptation, and withstood it; he had
strong reasons beyond nature to resist sin, and resolve against it, so that it
is not so much the measure, as the truth of every part that is required. But if
they be not in an excellency in great sinners, they are to mourn for the want
of them. To help herein, observe these ten degrees or Acts of repentance or
rather helps to humilation.

Get sight, and survey, 1 Act.
and full apprehension of all thy vileness, iniquities, transgressions, and
sins, the number and nature of them.







of heart and bleeding of soul.

Get an outward bewailing

Get an hatred and

Get a strong reasoning

Get a sincere opposition

Get a sincere greiuing these things no better. Now for the first act (viz.)
Get a sight and survey, and full apprehension of all thy vileness, iniquities,
transgressions and sins, the number and nature of them; for which purpose
take these three helps.



ways thou can possible to anatomize thy sin.

Thirdly, take notice

For the first of

First the Rules of the heathen that never did know Christ.





(viz) The rules of the Heathen that never did know Christ, as instance Revel.
22. 21.
from Heaven, by the light of natural reason Aristotle says, A lie is evil
in it self, and cannot be dispensed withal; and the reason of it is this: we
have a tongue given us to express the truth; now if our tongue tell more or
less then our mind conceiues, it is against nature.

Ribald talking, of which many make a sport, and rather then they will lose a
Jest, they will venture to damn their souls. Epictetus says, Its dangerous to
digress into obscenity of speech. Aristotle Ethic. 3. cap 1. that in some
cases a man had better lose his life then be cowardly.

in impiety, that if a man be drunk every day, yet he will take it in a great
disgrace if he be not counted an honest man; whereas Seneca says it is but a
raging madness, and if he should behave himself so but two or three days as
he does then, men would count him mad.

Mourning immoderatly of anger, moral Philosophers have many excellent rules,
the which if a natural man would take notice of, he would never be so
passionate: for they say it arises and impotent affections. From selfeloue.
they give these rules.



Alphabet before thou say any thing in rage.

Homer, his eyes sparcle like fire, his heart swells, his pulse beats. etc. so
that if in this mood he should see himself in a glass, he would never again
be angry.

Secondly, observing Regulus the Roman, being taken prisoner of his enemies
the Carthaginians, and upon promise of return if he sped not, obtaining to go
home to Rome to treat with the Senate for a commutation of Captives,
Carthaginians for Romans, of whom himself was one: Coming to the Senate, he
gave weighty reasons to dissawde them from commucation; so as choosing rather to
abide the certain cruelty of his Enemies, then to break his faith and
promise; he returned, where he was most cruelly used of them; by whose example
Christians might be ashamed that make no matter of breaking their promises.

Fabricius attained to

Cato was so excellent, did not good for fear, shame, profit, etc. but because
goodness was so incorporated into him, that he would not do otherwise.

Cambyses stood so stricktly against bribery, that a Judge being taken in that
crime, he flayed him, and set his skin in the seat of Justice, and let his
son lean thereon that he might hate that vice.

Zaleucus King of the Locrians, made a law for adultry, that whosoever was
taken in that fact should have his eyes pulled out; now his own son being
taken in that fault first, because he would not violate his own decree,
pulled out one of his sons eyes, and one of his own.

Thirdly, observing in the Heathen.









Quest.
Is not this notion extinguished in them that deny God?

Not utterly, Ans.
but it generally dwells in them; so far only they have use of it, as to
leave them without excuse Romans 1. 19. 20.

A man's life is to be

Against God the Father.

Against God the





(viz.) thou sinnest against God the Father, who commands, Thou shall not
kill, and so thou sinnest:





thee to work in his vineyard, and thou will rather dye, etc. as if he were a
hard Master, that thou dare stay no longer in his service.

Thou dishonourest

He has planted

Thou sinnest against God the Son; for,





Ghost; for,

Thou pollutest thy

It is the office of

It is the office of the Esaias 51. Oh! but my soul is black with sin, etc.
This is the action of the Spirit to reveal this unto thee.

Thou sinnest against the light of nature most cowardly, and against fortitude;
thou sinnest against the Kingdom; against thy neighbor, thy family, and thy
self; and put thy self among the sorrows of the devils, which is a
Bedlam madness.

Be acquainted with all the ways thou can possibly, 2 Help.
how to anatomize thy sins; for which purpose take these methods and helps.

Be perfect in the

Preparation.

Celebration.

Preparation, which

In praying:











passed it with many wanderings; for which thou have not been humbled: All
these are to be brought to thy mind with much bleeding.

An utter Cessation

Take survey of all have offered to all things in Heaven and Earth; all things
are the worse for a wicked man, so far as his sin can add hurt unto them.

and, if in one part so many, what are there in the whole body?

Consider all the commissions,

As a Creature, how thou have carried thy self to thy Creator.

As an husband, to thy wife.

As a Father, to thy Children.

As a Master, to thy Family.

As a Neighbor, to them without, or to Gods children.

As a Subject, etc.

Take notice of all thy failings in all these, and thou shall find sufficient
matter for a day of humiliation.



Of Gods mercies, spiritual and temporal.

Take notice of the guilt of original sin.

Look to the seed and sink, 1 Quic: point.
and natural inclination of thy heart to all manner of wickedness: for
suppose by the mercy of God thou were able to say, and that truly, that thou
could not possibly find any actual sin within thee: yet look back to the
corrupt fountain, and there thou shall find that thou and the most holy
christian on earth, whilst thou live in this house of flesh and tabernacle of
clay, thou have it in thy nature to sin against the holy Ghost, to kill Jesus
Christ to commit sodomy; and what hinders but Gods free mercy? This then
thoroughly considered* is sufficient matter to humble thee, to consider with thy
self, what a wretch am I yet, that have this seed still in my bowels.

Consider and thoroughly weigh the circumstances 2 Quic* point.
of all thy sins, of thy unregeneration, at what time, in what place, with what
scandal, etc. As Austin says of him self, he did wonderfully weep in
reading the fourth book of Virgill when Dido was killed what a damned soul
had I (quoth he) that could weep for her misery, and not for my own? so when
he listened to music and to the tune in singing of a Psalm in the Church,
rather then kept his heart to go along with the matter: and for being much
addicted to stage plays, and many more, but especially for robbing an orchard,
which he aggrauates by many circumstances; that great renowned Father left this
example to all posterity; where as if a young man now adays should but cry out
of robbing an orchard, he would be thought simple and too precise. Look the
second book of his Confessions, where see his sin aggrauated, Chap. 4.
by these ten circumstances.

my heart daily.

Volui, feci I resolved

Fastidio aequitatis, I did

I had abundance of

I did steal them, own theft, that it might be said of my old companions,
that I robbed an Orchard.



Nocte intempestiua, at midnight: which he aggrauateth with another
Circumstance when we had been sporting and dancing we did it.

We carried so many away,

When we came Oh my God, behold my heart, Ecce cor meum Deus.

If we would look back on such a Sabbath breaking, how in such a place, at
such a time, so inflamed with lust; If drunkards, whoremongers, usurers, etc.
would take this course, they might find such aggrauations, that by the mercy
of God, might terrify them from their evil courses.

In case of barrenness consider, 3 Quic: point.
we had our hands in the sin of Adam, and so brought all the sorrow, sin,
and damnation upon all that shall be damned, and we are guilty of all the
horrors of conscience; If we had not hearts of adamant, or hewne out of a
rock, or had sucked the breast of Wolves or Tigers, we would be moved at this,
which is able to break a thousand adamants. I speak advisedly, it is able to
open a wide gap of penitent tears in the most flinty soul of the most bloody
sinner.

Cut off all sin both original and actual that thou have taken notice of, 4
Quic: point.
and do but consider the imperfections that follow the best actions, the
innumerable distractions of thy most holy prayer that ever thou made; the
sins of the last Sabbath, thy deadnes, fruitlesnesse, etc.

Remove all personal sins, 5 Quic. point.
yet consider how many ways we have our hands in others sins, which (it may
be) they have carried to hell with them. We have a world of matter from hence
to break our hearts: for we may be guilty of others sins 13 ways; There is
none but are guilty of some of these ways.

For the first, by encouraging cried Peace, peace, when there is no peace, when
they are but formal or civil professors, those that sow pillowes under men's
elbowes, that heal the wounds of the people with fair words, when there is
nothing toward, Esa 9. 5.
but tumbling of garments in blood, Eze. 13. 10.
and vengeance, Ier. 14. 14.
and devouring with fire. Ask all those Ministers that reveal not the whole
counsel of God, who sent them to encourage; it shall all fall to nothing; but
you of this place are inexcusable, for wherein have I hid any thing from you?
no, I dare not be guilty of any man's blood that way, for the damnation of his
soul.

By provoking; Job 2. 9.
as Job's wife said to him, Curse God and dye: so, Fathers provoke not your
Children to wrath, Ephe. 6. 4
for they then are guilty of their sins.

Iehosaphat for associating himself with wicked Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 20. 37.
saying, Should thou countenance the ungodly, and love them that hate the
Lord? Therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. Or as Psalm. 50. 18.
When thou saw a these, thou consentedst with him, and have been partakers
with adulteres. Therefore as Moses said to the people, Separate your selves
from the Tents of Corah, least ye perish with them. And, Come out of Babylon,
my people, have no communion with that Whore, least ye perish in her sins,
and be destroyed with her plagues, Reu. 18. David says, I have not dwelt with
vain persons, nor will I have fellowship with the ungodly Odi Ecclesiam
malignantiu^. And who would vouchsafe to let their love run on such in this
life, that must be separated in the world to come? But for works of thy
particular calling, as buying, selling, salutations, etc. we must have these,
or we must out of this world, as 1 Cor. 5. 10. 11.

By participation, Esaias 1. 23
Thy so Magistrates which execute not their office, are guilty of all the sins
which the people commit within the compass of the time of their government,
and they are all set on their score, without repentance.

score: so all those that are faint and cowardly for Gods glory and truth.

By defending, Esaias 5. 20.
Woe Therefore if any by quickness of wit will labor to maintain usury,
bribery, etc. they are guilty of those sins.

By counselling, as counseled her husband to kill Naboth. Or as those say,
Come, Wis. 2, 9.
let us crown our selves with rose buds before they be withered, let us all
be partakers of our wantonness, etc.

2, Sam. 11. 15.
as David commanded Vriah to be set in the fore front of the battle, and
therefore guilty of his death.

Act. 12, 22.
as those that commended Herod for his oration, saying, It is the voice of a
God; they were guilty of his sin in taking honor from God.

By conniuency, as Ely winked at his sons; for which you may see what a
fearful judgment fell upon that house for forbearing them. If we had no
other sins in a day of humiliation, it were able to break the hardest heart;
but especially for masters of Families, who wink at their parents and
servants swearing, sabbath breaking, etc. If these be not guilty of the former
sins, yet they are guilty in not praying with them and bringing them to
extraordinary exercises.

Acts 22. 20.
as Paul bewailed that he carried the clothes of them that slew Stephen when
he was stoned.

Psalm. 119. 136.
David Psalm. 25. 13.
shows what Christians ought to do. Mar. 3. 5


By not praying against

Consider the sins of the times: 6 Quic. point.
David's eyes gusht out with tears to see men transgress the Law. So Lots
heart was vexed daily with the sins of the people amongst whom he lived, 2.
Pet. 2, 8. And blessed are they that mourn, so Math. 5. 4. observe these
several branches well, and thou shall find sins enough to mourn for.

Now for the 2. Act. 2 Act.
viz. A right apprehension of Gods wrath and fiery indignation, and the pure
eye of God against sin. Now the Christian oftentimes complains, that he
cannot apprehend Gods wrath sufficiently. Let him take these helps.

The severity of Gods Judgment against sin; 1 Help.
for which

He threw down the

For but eating an Adam out of Paradise, and sent a world of misery upon him
and his posterity.

Genesis 7.


Sodom for those very sins now reigning amongst us. Eze. 16, 49.


Jews which were his most dear people: for they so provoked God, that they
are now no nation, and his wrath has so fiercely seized on them, that they are
most cursed vagabo^ds, and so have been a thousand six hundred years.

Consider, he has of the world shall be howling for ever.

Consider how hard a thing it is to get pardon for sin, 2 Help.
in that the Justice of God, was hard to be satisfied. Imagine all the world
were turned into a mass or lump of gold, the stones of the streets into
precious pearls, and the Sea and Rivers all flowed with liquid streams of
most pure gold: Mic. 6, 7.
they would not satisfy the wrath of God for the least sin: if all the
Angels and creatures in heaven and earth had ioyney together and made one
fervent prayer for man's sin, nay if that they had offered them selves to be
annihilated, it could never have been effected; nay if the Son of God
himself should have supplicated his Father with most earnest entreaties, could
he have been heard, unless he had taken our flesh upon him and suffered what
devils and men could imagine to inflict upon him? Which well considered, there
is infinite cause to bring us to a sense of Gods wrath, that he should lay,
and suffer such infinite torments to be on him, that he cries out unto God,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Though he loved him infinitely as
himself, yet he would have his Justice satisfied.

The irresistable coming of God against sinners, 3 Help.
though he is wonderful ready and easy to be entreated whilst he vouchsafes
a day of visitation; But if men will withstand the day, then he comes in
devouring rage; and his wrath being once kindled shall burn to the bottom of
hell; then his Arrows shall drink blood and eat flesh, Hosea 13. 8. then
will he meet them as a Bear robbed of her whelps, and tear in pieces when
there is none to help, Psalm. 7. 2. And Esaias 66. 15. is set down the manner of
his coming, with fire and Chariots like a whirlewinde.

Gods holiness, which opposes sin, 4 Help.
and is contrary to it, that he looks not on the least sin with the least
allowance.

Get a sense of the unspeakable misery thou art liable unto by reason of sin;
3 Act.
for which purpose consider all thy sins with their circumstances, as of
times, past, present, and to come.

Look back upon all thy sins past that ever thou committedst, all thou have
been guilty of ever since thou wast borne, original, or actual, known, or
unknown, of thought, word and deed; They are written with a pen of iron, and
with the point of a diamond, not to be raced out: they are all upon Record,
and now lie as so many sleeping Lions, gathering strength and vigor against
such time as the Lord shall awake the conscience; and then they will appear
and rent thy soul in pieces. I say, let natural men consider of this point,
and they shall see themselves miserable; for there are some for small sin put
to such frights, as they could not be comforted in a long space; as some who
having an adulterous project, without any actual pollution; and others who
having found a trifle, and made no conscience to restore it by light of
natural conscience, knowing they did not as they would be done by, was put
into unspeakable horror; and some who having an unworthy thought of God, these
were put into such amazement, that they wished they had never been. If these
for such small things (in men's account) have come to such a pass, that they
took no delight in any earthly thing, but are put to their wits end, ready to
make away themselves, wishing themselves annihilated; then what tearing of
hair, what horror of conscience will seize upon thee on thy bed of death; with
what a gashly countenance will thou look upon that black and hellish
Catalogue of all thy sins? as lies, oaths, railings, scoffings at Gods
people, rotten speeches, bedlam passions, goods ill gotten, time ill spent,
profanation of Sabbaths, and killing Christ at every. Sacrament, as all
natural men do: These shall be summoned before thee; and charged upon thy
conscience by the just God; then consider in proportion what horror will be in
thine heart; no heart can conceive it, nor tongue of men and Angels utter it.
Now then attend, and let none bless themselves and say, I never felt this
misery, therefore it shall never hurt me; I tell thee; it is the perfection of
thy misery, that thou art insensible of it: to be soule-sicke and feel it not,
is the complement of misery; and the reasons why thou can not see it, are
these seven.

The devil, 1. Reas.
while thou art his, will not trouble thee; he is a Politician of almost six
thousand years experience, and knows if once thou see thy sins, he shall
loose thee; therefore he blindes thee.

Thy conscience is lulled asleep with carnal pleasure, 2. Reas.
and worldly contentme^ts.

A bucket of water is heavy on earth, 3. Reas.
but in its own place it is not so. When men are merely natural, sin is in
its own place, and the weight is not felt.

The conscience of a natural man is like a 4. Reas.
wolf in a man's body, while its fed with carnal friends, good fellowship,
some great business of the world, etc. its quiet; but take this away, and then
its felt.

A natural man is spiritually dead, 5. Reas. Ephesians. 2. 1.
and a dead man feels no weight you know.

He looks on sin through false glasses, 6. Reas.
as upon covetousness and usury, through the glasses of good husbandry; so
prodigality through the glass of liberality.

For want of consideration; 7. Reas.
If we would by our selves consider when the Minister presses Sabbath
breaking, or any other sin, and say, this is my case, but now by the mercy of
God I will be humbled; this would much help us to see our misery.

Cain was a cursed man, and had a brand upon him for killing but a man; then
how will the murdering of so many souls affright thee, if thou have been a
means to set them to hell? as

1. For thy wife; thou

For thy Children;

For thy servants; it lie, etc. How will this soul curse thee in the pit of
hell, and curse that time, that ever they first saw thee? but no carnal man
will believe this till they feel it.

lie, swear, break Gods sabbaths, etc. and thou have obeyed him, and been
the devils drudge. The Turkish fetters are but cold iron at the worst, but
thine be invisible chains of eternal damnation: He scourges thy naked soul
with invisible scorpions, feeds thee every day with fire and brimstone; When
thou art out of the Turkish slavery, thou may be a man again: but here
Satan scourges thee and thou see it not; he feeds thee with poison, and
thou tastest it not: And shortly he will lock thee up in perpetual torments,
where thou shall never be freede from devils.

First, For present time.
now thou art in health, thou think all is well; but know to the contrary,
whilst thou art but natural, and unconverted:

Thou dishonorest

Thou tramplest under

The Spirit puts good motions into thy heart; as at this time it may be, thou
resoluest by the mercy of God to leave all thy former ways, and be Gods
servant: but presently thou triflest it away by worldly talk, and thy old
companions.

wandrest out of thy ways.

To Gods children

Thou drawest wife

The creatures thou burden by thy siune.





To temporal; any when, or where, thou know not. Calvin says, A man may
dye a thousand ways in one hour. Some Physicians say, there are three hundred
diseases in the body, all mortal: Besides, new sins have begotten new
diseases, and thou may dye suddenly by an impostume: thy house may be fiered
and thou consumed by it; thy horse may stumble, and so destroy thee; a tile may
fall as thou art walking, and so kill thee; an Adder under the grass or
herbs may sting thee. Can thou promise thy self to see the Sun again when
its once set, though now thou be in perfect strength? But howeuer, nature
will end at length, Satan then is ready to come with his utmost malice, when
thou art faint and loath to depart; then he will lay open all thy sins, and
then the very next step is,



are easelesse, endless and remediless. Oh the tearing of the heart, and the
gnashing of the teeth, that this will produce, especially when you consider God
every Sabbath stretched out his arms to embrace you, and you would not; Christ
offered to make a plaster of his hearts blood to cure you, but you trampled it
under your feet: The holy Ghost put good motions into your heart, but you
rejected them; the Minister he pressed hard to have you yield, but you
withstoode him. Oh the hellish cries that these will fetch from such an heart.

Wherefore let this betimes beget in thee a base esteem of thy self; 4 Act.
consider,

is a fair amiable creature in comparison of thee.

For a Toad following sworn friend to his most deadly enemy, and breakest all
his



upon that man in Mat. 8. possessed with a Diuill, who dwelt among the Tombs,
went naked, chains would not hold him, the devil was so powerful in him:
thou would have thought him a dreadful spectacle of most extreme misery; to
have a legion of devils by computation 6666. but I tell thee thou had better
have a thousand Legions, then one unrepented sin; for



nature; only sin makes him odious; therefore it is worse than a thousand
devils, yea worse, than either the tongue of men and Angels can express.

All the devils in hell it; so that it were better to be possessed with a
thousand devils, then one sin unrepented of, and unpardoned.

Get an inward wounding of thine heart and bleeding of soul; 5 Act.
Where take these helps.

streams, where all ill has been forged, all evil words, rageing passions,
and wicked thoughts; Now then by the rule of proportion, let thy heart be a
fountain of sorrow for sin; If Christ open a fountain of mercy for
mourners, let not us be excluded for want of sorrow.

Consider the heart sin, which for thy sake was killed with that singular
depth of sorrow and grief, that if all the godly sorrow of all the Christian
souls from the beginning of the world to the end thereof, in heaven or in
earth, dead or alive, were collected into one heart, they could not
counteruaile the depth of his anguish. Shall then his blessed soul fall*
asunder in his blessed breast, assaulted with all the wrath of God, and the
second death? Shall his soul be like a scorched heath, and so pressed with
the flames of Gods revenging wrath, which wrung from him those bloody droops
and ruefull cries, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The wrath of God
so fierce on him, that (I say) dropps of blood fell from him: and shall thy
heart be as stone within thy breast, and never be moved? Oh prodigious
hardness, and worse then the heathenish ingratitude.

to think on it. Is it not better then to mourn a little here for sin than
to have our hearts enlarged to endure unto all eternity the horror of hell? Is
any man so senseless to think he shall go to heaven as in a bed of down;
and never be touched for his sin, which is as impossible as for thee, to
reach heaven with thy hand. When Hezekiah a man perfect in all his ways, Esa.
38. 14.
complained and chattered like a Crane: David roared all the day long: Psalm 32.
3. Job complained, The arrows of the Almighty are within me, Job 6. 4.
the venom whereof does drink up my spirit. Nay Christ himself cried out in
the Agony of the Spirit.

down the glorious majesty of heaven, God Almighty with his chair of State to
sit in thy soul; for he has two habitations: Esaias 57. 15.
1. In heaven. 2. In an humble heart.


Get this, and get all.

Get an outward bewayling with heart-piercing confession: 6 Act.
where



They powered out tears as men water out of Buckets. 1 1. Sam. 7.


Mary washed Christ's feet with her tears.



Consider secondly,

Consider, that for outward things men will weep tears, as for deiection from
high places, losses, crosses, in wife, or children, as David for Absolon: so it
is with many; what wringing their hands, tearing their hair, bitter crying,
etc. Then the loss of Christ, who is infinitely better than husband, wife,
child, or any thing in the world; this, this, how should it break thy heart!
If all Jobs troubles were on thee, and could wring one tear from thee; then
one sin should wring blood from thy heart.

Get a hatred and auersion in thy will from sin, 7 Act.
considering

What sin is in it

How God is provoked

Sin in it self is that so, as fire is hotter then water that is heat*

ever; for the eternal duration in hell cannot expiate sin.

Its most infectious,

The first sin that Adam, but the Stars seemed impure in Gods sight, the
beasts were at variance, the earth full of brambles, and all things cursed.





But sin stains a more glorieus creature, which is the soul of man.

Sin is of that hellish

Sin is full of cursed

Privative: Positive.
Privative, loss of conscience, etc.





love is diuersified to himself, his Son, the Angels, the creatures: but his
hatred is confined only to sin. What infinite of infinites of hatred have
thou on thy soul, with all thy sins, when each sin has the infinite
hatred of God upon it?

Each sin is against and earth, who can turn all things into hell, nay
heaven and hell into nothing by his word. Now against this God thou sinnest,
and what art thou, but dust and ashes, a bagg of filth and phlegm, and all
that is naught. And what is thy life, but a span, a bubble, a dream, a shadow
of a dream? And shall such a thing offend such a God?

Every sin strikes

Sin is that which Eli, 1 Samuel: 2. 29: David 2 Samuel 12. 8. 9 etc. Mercy is the
most eminent attribute of God, and therefore the sin against it is the
greater. What therefore are our sins in the time of the Gospel?



Each sin kills thy soul which is better then the world. 1 Mat. 16. 29.


leaves a threefold sting: Natural. Temporal. Immortal.


Natural, after worldly pleasure comes melancholy: properly either because it
lasted no longer, or they had no more delight in it, etc. That as all waters
end in the salt sea: so all worldly joys are swallowed up in sorrows
bottomless gulf.



Joseph and David: the one raised after his conquest to much honnour; the
other, scarce enjoyed one good day after he was conquered; but as Ezekias,
walked heavily in the bitterness of his soul all his days. As some Divines
have said of Guliacius and Spira, the one is honored in Caluins Epistles for
ever* the other after his backsliding lived a while in exquisite horror, and
after dyed in despair.

souls are at this instant burning in hell for; What misery and hurt then
attends on thee for the same?

Get a strong reasoning in thy mind against sin: 8 Act.
as first, these three grand reasons.

The horror of hell; 1 Reas.
Therefore Christians wrong themselves, that will not use this as a motive; the
unquenchable wrath of God shall feed upon thy soul if thou committest this
sin.

The joys of heaven; 2 Reas
I shall dwell with God for ever, if believing, I make conscience of every
sin, as an evidence and fruit of saving faith. And above all, the glory of
God: if Gods glory and the damnation of our souls were in a balance, his
glory should preponderate and prevail, while we prefer Gods glory above our
own salvation; although we cannot seek it, but in and by our salvation, as
the means is subordinate to the end.

From every line in

His attributes, as 1 His Justice, 2 His mercy.


His Justice to terrify

H^s Mercy to allure us to him.





Thirdly from logical places: See Rogers on meditations, As 1 The definition. 2
The division. 2 The causes. 3 The effects. 5 The subject. 6 The adiunct. 7 The
comparison 8 The contrary.


Fourthly, from places of Scripture.

From examples in How shall I do this, and so sin against God? says Joseph.

From your former Ye were darkness, but now ye are light, etc.

From the end of all Seeing all things must be dissolved, what manner of men
ought we to be?

Fifthly, from thy self.

Thy soul is immortal,



Sixthly, from Christ.

Look upon him weeping, nay bleeding on the cross, and saying this, Sin
brought me from the bosom of my Father to dye for it.

Seventhly, from the incomprehensible excellency of God, against whom thou
sinnest.

Get a sinceere opposition 9 Act.
in thy life of sin. Helps thereto.

When any bait of Satan, 1 Help.
or old companions would allure thee to sin, take this dilemma:

Either I must repent,

Consider thy madness, 2 Help.
which layest most desperately in one scale of the balance heaven, the favor
of God, the blood of Christ, and thine own soul: in the other, a little dung,
pelf, base lust etc. And let this ouersway, which brings rottenness to
thy bones, perhaps loss of thy good name etc.

And that thou may yet be further armed to with stand the assaults 3 Help.
of thy three grand enemies, the world, the flesh, and the Devil, which daily
seek the destruction of thy soul: consider these twelve Antidotes:

Consider the shortness

Consider the companions alone, but being once entertained, it sets all the
faculties of the soul also in a combustion; and so procures a spiritual
judgment, if not temporal, upon estate and person.



Consider, sin causes us to lose a greater good than that can be, as the
favor of God, interest in Christ, a guard of Angels, right to the creatures
etc.

Consider the uncertainty of repentance; thou may never have motion to
repent after thou have sinned, and so art damned.

Consider the nearness some have lived out above half their time, others
almost all of it; young and old dye suddenly many times.

and pains in good duties, or persecution for them did hurt.

Consider the dignity

Consider the preciousnesse

Consider thou sinnest has sent to thee, as to soul, body, good name, Estate,
and others, that belong to thee.



burn at a stake, than they would sin; and thou so easily be drawn to it
or rather run to it? Anselme said, if the flames of hell were on the one side,
and sin on the other side, I would rather lie in those flames than sin. And
others would rather be torn in pieces with wild horses. We have as precious
means as they, and if our hearts were as good we should have the like
affections.

Get a sinceere grieuing that thou can do these things no better; 10 Act.
as considering,

heart: How much more when our hearts are barren and dry, had we need to
labor for this sorrow?

Considering when imperfections and failings thereof.

first place, to part from every sin for Christ, and to take him as a
husband, and a Lord, both for protection, and government? Then by the consent
of all Divines it is godly sorrow, and certainly accepted in Christ.

FINIS.

