HELPS TO HVMILIATION.

By R. B.

JAMES. 4.10. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift
you up.

OXFORD. Printed by William Turner, for Michael Spark, dwelling in Green
Arbor. 1631.

To the Reader.
I Here commend unto thee Christian Reader a table of Repentance, now put into
a little Tract, collected from that grave, learned, and godly Divine, Mr Robert
Bolton. I could have been content to have stayed the publishing thereof,
until such time, in which the Author might have been prevailed with to print
it; for there cannot but want much beauty and luster which it might have had,
if it had been set forth or perused to be fitted for the Press by him that
first gave life unto it; but being enforced to it by the importunity of many
well affected, both far and near; and I unwilling to have such a precious
fountain sealed up, considering the good that might redound to many in the
mean time by it. I resolved by the Authors leave no longer to ingrosse the
same to a private use, but to impart it to a public good, especially
considering, first, how few are acquainted with the right nature of
Humiliation, and Repentance, no more than Nicodemus was with regeneration: that
though many boast of it, few have it, when alas it is plain, without true
Repentance there is no salvation. Now this table having so perspicuously
vnsolded the nature of this grace, those that have a beginning of it, may from
hence add an increase to their store; and they that want it, may here see the
way and means of obtaining it. Secondly, the extraordinary exercise of fasting
and prayer, a duty of precious account amongst Gods Children, which has
always been wonderfully blessed with a happy success, in so much, as albeit
their ordinary prayers return not empty without a blessing, yet respectively
to those prayers which are joined with fasting, they seem barren and blasted,
which otherwise are fruitful and full eared. How then could I withhold this
which by experience and the judgment of judicious Christians, cannot but be
of special use and help unto such a blessed and successful ordinance?
Thirdly, these times call for it, to fast and pray and cry mightily unto God by
our prayers, that we may stand in the gappe, and make up the breach: and from
this little Tract we may receive much help in this particular. Wherefore I
hope I shall need no further persuasion for thy gracious acceptance, than that
hereby if the fault be not thine own, thou may receive much good and
comfort to thy soul: which if thou find, give God the glory, the Author thy
thanks, and me thy prayers. *

I.S.

HELPS TO HVMILIATION.
Acts 2.37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and
said unto Peter, etc.


IN THESE words here is: First a compunction and a through wounding their hearts.



Peter's holy counsel; Amend your lives and be baptized.

From the first, in that these men when they had heard of the greatness of their
sin, were thus wounded at the heart; observe:

a new creature ordinarily is answerable to his former vanity.

Manasse, 2. Chron. 33.6. Mary Magdalen, Luke 7. Augustine a great sinner,
wrote 12 books of Repentance.

a pardon would wonderfully break his heart to think he should be so
villainous to so gracious a Prince: so it is with a Christian that beholds Gods
mercy to him.

nature, person, time, and age, etc. in which, or how they were done, that so
they may be more humbled for them.

If it be not so (as it may be otherwise, for God is a free agent and is not
tied to any proportion of sorrow) then such troubles as these usually seize on
them.

that their conversion is not through and sound, and so do not with such
heartines and cheerfulness perform the duties of Godliness.

Secondly, they are many times haunted with listlessenesse and coldness in
their progress of Christianity.

sticks by them: to make them lay a greater Load upon sin.



death with sorrowful and strong temptations: Not that men should conceive
this is always the reason of it; for God has ends in all his works, known
only to himself; but thus I have known some have been troubled, and this may
be in great mercy to make a weak conversion more strong. Lest any Christian
should be troubled at it, take notice in Contrition:





as Austin had against Plays, that all men could not draw him to them.

Job with his eye. Job 31.1

some measure in all Christians; some are more eminent in one part, some in
another, as Joseph had little sorrow, but a strong Resolution, because he had
so strong a temptation, and withstood it; he had strong reasons beyond nature
to resist sin, and resolve against it, so that it is not so much the measure,
as the truth of every part that is required. But if they be not in an
excellency in great sinners, they are to mourn for the want of them. To help
herein, observe these ten degrees or Acts of repentance or rather helps to
Humiliation.

transgressions, and sin, the number and nature of them.

















that thou can do these things no better. Now for the first Act, (viz.) Get
a sight and survey, and full apprehension of all thy vileness, iniquities,
transgressions and sins, the number and nature of them; for which purpose
take these three helps.







clear, observe:







(viz) The rules of the Heathen that never did The rules of the Heathen.
know Christ, as instance Revel. 22.21.
by the light of natural reason Aristotle says, A lie is evil in it self,
and cannot be dispensed withal; and the reason of it is this: we have a
tongue given us to express the truth; now if our tongue tell more or less
then our mind conceiues, it is against nature.

Epictetus says, It Is dangerous to digress into obscenity of speech.

in a whole skin, Aristotle Ethic. 3. cap. 1. that in some cases a man had
better lose his life then be cowardly.

Seneca says it is but a raging madness, and if he should behave himself so
but two or three days, as he does when he is drunke^, men would count him mad.

Seen. 100. ep.


Philosophers have many excellent rules, the which if a natural man would take
notice of, he would never be so passionate, for they say it arises first,
wrong.

tongue in quiet.

Alphabet before thou say any thing in rage.

Homer, his eyes sparkle like fire, his heart swells, his pulse beats, etc. so
that if in this mood he should see himself in a glass he would never again
be angry.

The endovvments of the Heathen. Secondly, observing the endowments of the
Heathen. Regulus the Roman, being taken prisoner of his enemies the
Carthaginians, and upon promise of return if he sped not, obtaining to go
home to Rome to treat with the Senate for a commutation of Captives,
Carthaginians for Romans, of whom himself was one: Coming to the Senate, he
gave weighty reasons to dissuade them from commutation; so as choosing rather to
abide the certain cruelty of his enemies, then to break his faith and
promise; he returned, where he was most cruelly used of them; by whose
example Christians might be ashamed that make no matter of breaking their
promises.

Fabricius attained to that height of excellency, that it was said, A man may
as soon pull the Sun from its Sphere, as that man from his honest and just
dealing.

Cato was so excellent, that it is said; he did not good for fear, shame,
profit, etc. but because goodness was so incorporated into him, that he could
not do otherwise.

Cambyses stood so stricktly against bribery, that a Judge being taken in that
crime, he flayed him, and set his skin in the seat of Justice, and let his
son lean thereon that he might hate that vice.

Zaleuchus King of the Locrians, made a law for adultery, that whosoever was
taken in that fact should have his eyes pulled out; now his own son being
taken in that fault first, because he would not violate his own decree, pulled
out one of his sons eyes, and one of his own.

Common notions in Heathen. Thirdly, observing the common notions of nature,
which were in the Heathen as,











Romans 1.19.20.











Against God the Father. For the first, (viz.) thou sinnest against God the
Father, who commands, Thou shall not kill, and so thou sinnest:





a hard Master, that thou dare stay no longer in his service.





Against God the Son. Thou sinnest against God the Son; for,

thine own, thou art bought with aprice: this will help thee against the
Devils temptations; for when he comes to tempt thee to that sin, say, thou
art an others 'and not thine own.



Against God the Holy Ghost. Thou sinnest against God the holy Ghost; for,





Esaias 51. Oh! thee.

Against the light of nature. Thou sinnest against the light of nature most
cowardly, and against fortitude; thou sinnest against the kingdom; against thy
neighbor, thy family, and thy self; and put thy self among the sorrows
of the devils which is a Bedlam madness.

all the ways thou can possibly, how to anatomize thy sins; for which
purpose take these methods and helps.











Publicly with thy Family; Privately with thy self.











recreation; more then for necessity, mercy, or comeliness.



toe. The sins of thy eyes: each thing thou look on, not making a holy use
of them, is a sin of omission: consider then how many there are every day,
and, if in one part so many, what are there in the whole body?

relations.

As a Creature, how thou have carried thy self to thy Creator.

As an husband to thy wife.

As a Father to thy Children.

As a Master to thy Family.

As a neighbor, to them without, or to Gods children.

As a Subject, etc. Take notice of all thy faylings in all these, and thou
shall find sufficient matter for a day of humiliation.



Of Gods mercies, spiritual and temporal.

guilt of original sin. Now because a Christian may have his heart locked up
more at one time then at another, let them in case of barrenness, consider
these six quickening points.

for suppose by the mercy of God thou were able to say, and that truly, that
thou could not possibly find any actual sin within thee: yet look back
to the corrupt fountain, and there thou shall find that thou and the most
holy Christian on earth, whilst thou live in this house of flesh and
tabernacle of clay, thou have it in thy nature to sin against the Holy Ghost,
to kill Jesus Christ, to commit sodomy; and what hinders but Gods free mercy?
This then thoroughly considered, is sufficient matter to humble thee, to
consider with thy self what a wretch am I yet, that have this seed still in
my bowels.

Austin says of himself, he did wonderfully weep in reading the fourth
book of Virgill when Dido was killed; what a damned soul had I (quoth he)
that could weep for her misery, and not for my own? so when he listened to
music, and to the tune in singing of a Psalm in the Church, rather then kept
his heart to go along with the matter: and for being much addicted to
stage plays, and many more, but especially for robbing an orchard, which he
aggravates by many circumstances; that great renowned Father left this example
to all posterity; whereas if a young man now adays should but cry out of
robbing an orchard, he would be thought simple and too precise. Look the
second book of his Confessions, Cap. 4.
where see his sin aggravated, by these ten circumstances.



Volui, feci I resolved with free will to do it, and I did it.

Fastidio aequitatis, I did not do it for want, but in disdain of goodness,
and out of an eager desire to do wrong.





Devils with me.

Nocte intempestiva, at midnight: which he aggravates with another
Circumstance, when we had been sporting and dancing, and drinking we did it.





to the swine: and then at the conclusion, he cries, Oh my God, behold my
heart, Ecce cor meum Deus.

If we would look back on such a Sabbath breaking, how in such a place, at
such a time, so inflamed, with lust; If drunkards, whoremongers, usurers, etc.
would take this course, they might find such aggravations, that by the mercy
of God, might terrify them from their evil courses.

Adam, and so brought all the sorrow, sin, and damnation upon all men that
are or shall be damned, and we are guilty of all the horrors of conscience; If
we had not hearts of adamant, or hewn out of a rock, or had sucked the breast
of Wolves or Tigers, we would be moved at this, which is able to break a
thousand adamants. I speak advisedly, it is able to open a wide gap of
penitent tears in the most flinty soul of the most bloody sinner.

original and actual that thou have taken notice of, and do but consider the
imperfections that follow the best actions, the innumerable distractions of the
most holy prayer that ever thou made; the sins of the last Sabbath, thy
deadness, fruitlesnesse, etc.

ways we have our hands in others sins, which (it may be) they have carried
to hell with them. We have a world of matter from hence to break our hearts:
for we may be guilty of others sins 13 ways; There is none but are guilty of
some of these ways. viz.

Prophets which cried Peace, peace, when there is no peace, when they are but
formal or civil professors, those that sow pillowes under men's elbowes, that
heal the wounds of the people with fair words, when there is nothing toward,
Esa. 9.5. Eze. 13.10. Ier. 14.14.
but tumbling garments in blood, and vengeance, and devouring with fire. Ask
all those Ministers that reveal not the whole counsel of God, who sent them
to encourage; it shall all fall to nothing; but you of this place are
inexcusable, for wherein have I hid any thing from you? no, I dare not be guilty
of any man's blood that way for the damnation of my soul.

By provoking; as Job's wife said to him, Curse God and dye: Job. 2.9.
so, Ephesians. 6.4.
Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath, for they then are guilty of their
sins

the Prophet gave to Iehosophat for associating himself with wicked Ahab, 2.
Chron. 20.37.
saying Should thou countenance the ungodly, and love them that hate the
Lord? Therefore is wrath upon thee before the Lord. Or as Psalm. 50.18. When
thou saw a thief, thou consentedst with him, and have been partakers with
adulterers. Therefore as Moses said to the people, Separate your selves from
the Tents of Corah, least ye perish with them. And, Come out of Babylon, my
people, have no communion with that Whore, lest ye perish in her sins, and
be destroyed with her plagues, Rev. 18. David says, I have not dwelt with
vain persons, nor will I have fellowship with the ungodly. Odi Ecclesiam
malignantium. And who would vouchsafe to let their love run on such in this
life, from whom they must be separated in the world to come? But for works of
thy particular calling, as bying, selling, salutations, etc. we must have
these, or we must out of this world, as 1. Co 5.10.11

Thy Princes are rebellious, Esa. 1.23.
and companions of thieves: so Magistrates which execute not their office, are
guilty of all the sins which the people commit within the compass of the time
of their government, and they are all set on their score, without repentance.

nothing; especially dumb dogs; every Sabbath is a bloody day to them, for
their silence is cause of all the iniquities done that day, and all these
things which they do amiss, whether by swearing, Alehouse haunting, etc. all
are set on their score: so all those that ore faint and cowardly for Gods glory
and truth.

Esa. 5.20.
VVoe to them that call darkness light, and light darkness; Therefore if any by
quickness of wit will labor to maintain usury, bribery, etc. they are all
guilty of those sins.

1 Kings 21.7.
as Iesabell counseled her husband to kill Naboth. Or as those who say, Come,
let us crown our selves with rose buds before they be withered, Wis. 2 9
let us all be partaker of our wantonness, etc.

2. Sam. 11.15.
By commanding, as David commanded Vriah to be set in the sore-front of the
battle, and therefore guilty of his death.

Act 12.22.
as those that commended Herod for his oration, saying, It is the voice of a
God; they were guilty of his sin in taking honor from God.

1. Sam. 3.13.
as Ely winked at his sons; for Which you may see what a fearful judgment
fell upon that house for forbearing the^. If we had no other sins in a day of
humiliation, it were able to break the hardest heart; but especially for
Masters of Families, who wink at their children and servants swearing,
Sabboath breaking, etc. If these be not guilty of the former sins, yet they
are guilty in not praying with them and bringing them to extraordinary
exercises.

Acts 22.20.
as Paul bewailed that he carried the clothes of them that slew Stephen when
he was stoned.

Psalm. 119.136. Psalm. 25.13. Mar. 3.5.
David shows what Christians ought to do.



David's eyes gush out with tears to see men transgress the Law. Psalm. 119.136.
So Lots heart was vexed daily with the sins of the people amongst whom he
lived, 2. Pet. 2.8. And blessed are they that mourn, so Math. 5.4. Observe
these several branches well, and thou shall find sins enough to mourn for.

Second Act. Now for the 2 Act. viz. A right apprehension of Gods wrath and
fierce indignation, and the pure eye of God against sin. Now the Christian
oftentimes co^plaines, that he cannot apprehend Gods wrath sufficiently. Let
him take these helps



think but for a thought.

Adam out of Paradise, and sent a world of misery upon him and his posterity.

Gen 7.
which shows the infinite purity in God not to abide sin.

Sodom for those very sins now reigning amongst us. Ezec. 16.49.


Jews which were his most dear people: for they so provoked GOD, that they
are now no nation, and his wrath has so fiercely seized on them, that they are
most cursed vagabonds, and so have been a thousand six hundred years.



pardon for sin, in that the Justice of God, was hard to be satisfied.
Imagine all the world were turned into a mass or lump of gold, the stones of
the streets into precious pearls, and the Sea and Rivers all flowing with
liquid streams of most pure gold: Mic. 6, 7.
they would not satisfy the wrath of God for the least sin: if all the
Angels and creatures in heaven and earth had joined together and made one
fervent prayer for man's sin, nay if they had offered themselves to have been
annihilated, it could never have been effected; nay if the Son of God
himself should have supplicated his Father with most earnest entreaties, he
could not have been heard unless he had taken our flesh upon him, and suffered
what devils and men could imagine to inflict upon him. Which well considered,
there is infinite cause to bring us to a sense of Gods wrath, that he should
lay, and suffer such infinite torments to be on him, that he cries out unto
God, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Though he loved him
infinitely as himself, yet he would have his Justice satisfied.

withstand the day, then he comes in devouring rage; and his wrath being once
kindled shall burn to the bottom of hell; the^ his Arrows shall drink blood
and eat flesh, Hosea 13.8. then will he meet them as a Bear robbed of her
whelps, and tear in pieces when there is none to help, Psalm. 7.2. And Esaias
66.15. is set down the manner of his coming, with fire and Chariots like a
whirlewinde.



Third Act. Get a sense of the unspeakable misery thou art liable unto by
reason of sin; for which purpose consider all thy sins, with their
circumstances, as of times, past, present, and to come. Time past.


Look back upon all thy sins past that ever thou committedst, all thou have
been guilty of ever since thou wast borne, original, or actual, known, or
unknown, of thought, word and deed; They are written with a pen of iron, and
with the point of a diamond, not to be raced out: they are all upon Record, and
now lie as so many sleeping Lions, gathering strength and vigor against such
time as the Lord shall awake the conscience; and then they will appear and
rent thy soul in pieces. I say, let natural men consider of this point, and
they shall see themselves miserable; for there are some for a small sin put to
such frights, as they could not be comforted in a long space; as some who
having an adulterous project, without any actual pollution; and others who
having found a trifle, and made no conscience to restore it; by the light of
natural conscience, knowing they did not as they would be done by, were put
into unspeakable horror; and some who having an unworthy thought of God, were
put into such amazement, that they wished they had never been. If these for
such small things (in men's account) have come to such a pass, that they took
no delight in any earthly thing, but are put to their wits end, ready to make
away themselves, wishing themselves annihilated; the^ what tearing of hair,
what horror of conscience will seize upon thee on thy bed of death: with what
a gashly countenance will thou look upon that black and hellish Catalogue of
all thy sins? as lies, oaths, raylings, scoffings, at Gods people, rotten
speeches; bedlam passions, goods ill gotten, time ill spent, prophanatio^ of
Sabboaths, and killing Christ at every Sacrament, as all natural men do:
These shall be summoned before thee; and charged upon thy conscience by the
just God; then consider in proportion what horror will be in thine heart; no
heart can conceive it, nor tongue of men and Angels utter it. Now then attend,
and let none bless themselves and say, I never felt this misery, therefore it
shall never hurt me; I tell the; it is the perfection of thy misery that thou
art insensible of it: to be soule-sicke and feel it not, is the complement of
misery; and the reasons why thou can not see it, are these seven.

see thy sins he shall loose thee; therefore he blindes thee.



and the weight is not felt.



Ephesians. 2.1.
and a dead man feels no weight you know.



this is my case, but now by the mercy of God I will be humbled; this would
much help us to see our misery.

guilty of the damnation of their souls. Cain was a cursed man, and had a
brand upon him for killing but a man, then how will the murdering of so many
souls affright thee, if thou have been a means to set them to Hell? as





feel it.

but cold iron at the worst, but thine be invisible chains of eternal
damnation: He scourges thy naked soul with invisible scorpions, feeds thee
every day with fire and brimstone; When thou art out of the Turkish slavery,
thou may be a man again: but here Satan scourges thee and thou see it
not; he feeds thee with poison, and thou tastest it not: And shortly he will
lock thee up in perpetual torments, where thou shall never be freede from
Devils.

First, For present time.
now thou art in health, thou think all is well; but know to the contrary,
whilst thou art but natural, and unconverted:





time it may be, thou resoluest by the mercy of God to leave all thy former
ways, and be Gods servant: but presently thou stiflest it by worldly talk,
and thy old companions.

out of thy ways.





to their burden by thy sin.



the Holy Ghost.

For time to come.
as to be possessed of the devil, etc. I wish every natural man seriously to
consider this; for thou dying in thy natural estate, art certainly damned,
and for any thing thou know thou may dye the next moment, and then all
things are thine enemies; death, which is certain: but how, when, or where,
thou know not. Calvin says, A man may dye a thousand ways in one hour.
Some Physicians say, there are three hundred diseases in the body, all mortal:
Besides new sins have begotten new diseases; and thou may die suddenly by an
impostume: thy house may be fiered and thou consumed by it; thy horse may
stumble, and so destroy thee; a tile may fall as thou art walking, and so kill
thee; an Adder under the grass or herbs may sting thee. Can thou promise
thy self to see the Sun again when it is once set, though now thou be in
perfect strength? But however, nature will end at length, Satan then is ready
to come with his utmost malice, when thou art faint and loath to depart; then
he will lay open all thy sins, and then the very next step is,

thee, and the Devil will plead to have thee.

Sabbath stretched out his arms to embrace you, and you would not; Christ
offered to make a plaster of his hearts blood to cure you, but you trampled it
under your feet: The holy Ghost put good motions into your heart, but you
rejected them; the Minister he pressed hard to have you yield, hut you
withstood him Oh the hellish cries that these will fetch from such an heart.

Fourth. Act. Wherefore let this betimes begette in thee a base esteem of thy
self; consider,

of nature, serves the Creator in its kind, it suckes up the venom of the
earth, which otherwise would poyso^ us: but thou art a degenerate creature and
Traitor, who drinkest poison out of Gods mercy, to sin more against him. Thou
art a sworn friend to his most deadly enemy, and breakest all his
commandments. Secondly, the venom of a Toad kills but the body: the poison of
sin kills both body and soul. Thirdly, When a Toad dies its misery is ended,
but then thy woe begins; then thou will wish thou had been any thing but a
man

Math. 8. possessed with a Devil, who dwelt among the Tombs, went naked,
chains would not hold him, the Devil was so powerful in him: thou would
have thought him a dreadful spectacle of extreme misery; to have a legion of
devils by computation six thousand six hundred sixty six: but I tell thee
thou had better have a thousand Legions, then one unrepented sin; for





the salvation of thy soul: but one sin wilfully unrepented of, and so
unpardoned, will damn it; so that it were better to be possessed with a
thousand devils, then one sin unrepented of; and unpardoned.

Fifth Act. Get an inward wounding of thine heart and bleeding of soul; Where
take these helps.

mercy for mourners, let not us be excluded for want of sorrow.

world to the end thereof, in heaven or in earth, dead or alive, were collected
into one heart, they could not countervaile the depth of his anguish. Shall
then his blessed soul fall asunder in his blessed breast, assaulted with all
the wrath of God, and the second death? Shall his soul be like a scorched
hearth; and so pressed with the flames of Gods revenging wrath, which wru^g
from him those bloody drops and ruefull cries, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? The wrath of God was so fierce on him, that (I say) drops of
blood fell from him: and shall thy heart be as a stone within thy breast, and
never be moved? Oh prodigious hardness, and worse then heathenish ingratitude!

enlarged to endure unto all eternity the horror of hell? Is any man so
senseless to think he shall go to heaven as in a bed of down; and never be
touched for his sin, which is as impossible, as for thee to reach heaven with
thy hand. When Hezekiah a man perfect in all his ways, Esa. 38.14.
complained and chattered like a Crane: David roared all the day long: Psalm.
32.3. Job complained, Job. 6.4.
The arrows of the Almighty are within me, the venom whereof does drink up
my spirit. Nay Christ himself cried out in the Agony of his Spirit.

with his chair of State to sit in thy soul; for he has two habitations.
Esaias. 57.15.


1 In heaven.

2 In an humble heart.

of that to come.

Sixth Act. Get an outward bewayling with heart-pearcing confession: where



1. Sam. 7.


Mary washed Christ's feet with her tears.

with a sorrowful acknowledgeme^t of his sins.

of tears; thy tongue should utter, and heart suffer grief.

David for Absolon: so it is with many; what wringing their hands, tearing
their hair, bitter crying, etc. Then the loss of Christ, who is infinitely
better than husband, wife, child, or any thing in the world; this, this, how
should it break thy heart! If all Jobs troubles were on thee, and could wring
one tear from thee; then one sin should wring blood from thy heart.

Seventh Act. Get a hatred and aversion in thy will from sin, considering these
three helps.









Sin in it self is fouler than any fiend in hell, because it made that so;
as fire is hotter then water that is heat.

near it. I consider of sin here in the abstract, so its a greater ill, than
the damnation of a man's soul; for when two ills fight together, that which
co^quers must needs be the greater; now when a man has lain in hell ten
thousand years, he is as far from coming out as ever; for the eternal
duration in hell cannot expiate sin.



Adam, but the Stars seemed impure in Gods sight, the beasts were at variance,
the earth full of brambles, and all things cursed.





can stain a Sunnebeame, but sin stains a more glorious creature, which is
the soul of man.









blood of Christ; the guard of Angels; peace of conscience, etc.



with it.

upon it?

thy life, but a span, a bubble, a dream, a shadow of a dream? And shall such
a thing offend such a God?



it for sin.

Eli, 1. Sam. 2.29. David 2. Sam. 12.8.9. etc. Mercy is the most eminent
attribute of God, and therefore the sin against it is the greater. What
therefore are our sins in the time of the Gospel?

thou art hurt by it: for

Mat. 16.29.


Each sin, bring it never so much pleasure in the committing, leaves a
threefold sting:


properly either because it lasted no longer, or they had no more delight in
it, etc. That as all waters end in the salt sea: so all worldly joys are
swallowed up in sorrows bottomless gulf.



will call thee to judgment for it. Each sin robbes thee of abundance of
comfort. What a vast difference do we see in conquering sin, and being
conquered by sin? as for instance in Joseph and David. the one raised after
his conquest to much honor; the other, scarce enjoyed one good day after he
was conquered; but as Ezekias, walked heavily in the bitterness of his soul
all his days. As some Divines have said of Guliacius and Spira, the one is
honored in Calvin's Epistles for ever: the other after his backsliding lived a
while in exquisite horror, and after dyed in despair.

thee one day for every sin, though now it seems hid to thee; and thy
conscience is more then a thousand witnesses, therefore thou will certainly be
overthrown.

in hell for; What misery and hurt then attends on thee for the same?

Eight. Act. Get a strong reasoning in thy mind against sin: as first, these
three grand reasons.

feed upon thy soul if thou committest this sin.



should preponderate and prevail, while we prefer Gods glory above our own
salvation; Moses and Paul would have done that, although we cannot seek it,
but in and by our salvation, as the means is subordinate to the end.

Secondly, from every line in Gods book:

His attributes, as 1 His Justice. 2 His mercy.










Thirdly, from logical places: (See Rogers on meditations, and in each
particular consider of thy sin.)

As 1 The definition. As 2 The division. As 3 The causes. As 4 The effects. As
5 The subject. As 6 The adjunct. As 7 The comparison. As 8 The contrary.


Fourthly, from places of Scripture.

How shall I do this, and so sin against God? says Joseph.

Ye were darkness, but now ye are light etc.

Seeing all things must be dissolved, what manner of men ought we to be?

Fifthly, from thy self.





Sixthly, from Christ.

Look upon him weeping, nay bleeding on the cross, and saying thus, Sin
brought me from the bosom of my Father to dye for it.

Seaventhly, from the incomprehensible excellency of God, against whom thou
sinnest.

Ninth Act. Get a sincere opposition in thy life to sin.

Helps thereto.

dilemma:

Either I must repent, and then it will bring more sorrow than the pleasure did
good, or not repent, and then it is the damnation of my soul.

one scale of the balance heaven, the favor of God, the blood of Christ, and
thine own soul in the other, a little dung, pelf, base lust etc. And let
this oversway, which brings rottenness to thy bones, perhaps loss of thy
good name etc.

the assaults of thy three grand enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil,
which daily seek the destruction of thy soul: consider these twelve Antidotes:

Consider the shortness of the pleasure of sin, with the length of the
punishment, the one for a moment, the other everlasting.

of sin: for one sin never goes alone, but being once entertained, it sets
all the faculties of the soul also in a combustion; and so procures a
spiritual judgment, if not temporal, upon estate and person.

Consider, thy life is but a span, a breath, a blast soon gone: now if we had
all the pleasure in the world, yet being so soon to loose it, it is not worth
esteeming.



repent after thou have sinned, and so art damned.



should have lasted a thousand years twice told. So on the contrary, one
moment in heaven does more good than all the hardness and pains in good
duties, or persecution for them did hurt.



of a good conscience which is a continual feast. This thou losest by sin.



of Christ. And will thou now pollute thy self again, as it were to have him
killed afresh to wash away thy sin.

Anselme said, if the flames of hell were on the one side, and sin on the
other side, I would rather lie in those flames than sin. And others would
rather be torn in pieces with wild horses. We have as precious means as
they, and if our hearts were as good we should have the like affections.

Tenth Act. Get a sincere grieving that thou can do these things no better,
as considering,

hearts are barren and dry, had we need to labor for this sorrow?

for the imperfections and failings thereof.

sell all: that is, to part from every sin for Christ, and take him as a
husband and a Lord, both for protection, and government? Then by the consent of
all Divines it it godly sorrow, and certainly accepted in Christ. *

FINIS.

