Certain Devout PRAYERS OF Mr. BOLTON upon solemn occasions.

Published by E.B. by M. Boltons own Copy.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller dwelling in Blackfriars. 1638.

To the Reader.
AMong Treatises fit to be published and read, Treatises of Devotion are most
fit: as being freest from offense, and fullest of divine matter. If comparison
may be made betwixt parts of sacred Scripture, the Psalms of David have an
excellency in that they consist of matters of Devotion. Answerable to the style
of his name, is the style of his book. The style of his name was, 1 Samuel 13. ^4.
A man after GODS own heart. Acts 13. ^2.
For such was his piety and sincerity as GOD was well pleased therewith, Juxta
cor ^^um. q. d. Qui praeceptum divini consi^^^ exequi^ur virtute devotionis
Greg. Mag. Expos lib. 5. in 1 Reg. Cap. 13.
and took much delight therein. The rather because his devotion toward GOD
incited him to do what GOD required to be done. So the Book of Psalms, may
well carry this style, A book after Gods own heart, in that nothing is more
acceptable unto GOD, nothing wherein he takes more delight then Devotion. And
no book of sacred Scripture fuller of Devotion then that book. Most of the
Psalms wholly consist of Prayers or Praises: very few, if any at all, wherein
there are not some divine raptures, Devotio* est pius and humilia affectus in
DEVM humilis ex conscientia infirmitatis pro priae: pius ex consideratione
divinae clementiae Aug* de Spir. and Anima Cap 50.
and such heavenly ejaculations, as manifest an heart full of Devotion. For
Devotion is a pious and humble affection to God-wards. Humble through
conscience of a man's own infirmity. Pious through a due consideration of the
divine clemency. Such Devotion is never more fully and to the life manifested
then in Prayers and Praises. For in these divine duties, if rightly performed,
the soul presents it self before GOD, and that in a special manner, being
after a sort even rapt out of the body. Then, if ever, does the soul, so far
as it is capable, with an holy admiration apprehend the divine Majesty, Purity,
Justice, Wisdom, Power, yea Mercy, Goodness, and other excellencies wherewith
GOD is decked. Then, if ever is the soul brought thoroughly to discern its
own infirmity, (...) dixit Arist.
impurity, baseness, vileness and cursednesse. For contraries paralleld, Rhet
lib. 3 cap. 2.
or laid together do most lively set forth each other in their own proper
colors. He that lives in a dark dungeon, will be enamoured with the bright
shining of the Sun, when he can have liberty to see it. And he that has long
lived under bright Sunshine, more thoroughly discernes the horror and damage
of darkness. Now GOD and man are in many respects directly opposite each to
other: This opposition is best discerned in our most serious contemplations of
Gods excellencies and due consideration of our own manifold infirmities, which
is most to purpose done in acts and exercises of Devotion. In this respect this
present Treatise is worthy of all acceptance, even for the subject matter
whereof it consists, which is divine Devotition. Herein you shall observe GOD
most highly advanced; and man most lowly dejected. GOD advanced above the
highest Heavens; Man dejected below the lowest parts of the earth. GOD
magnified in his mercies, and justified in his judgments; Man judged and
condemned according to his just deserts. If the Author of a Work add any thing
to the worth of a Work, the Author of this Work must needs add much to the
worth of it. For he was a man of a profound judgment, and a zealous spirit:
which endowments are most fit for matters of Devotion. Devotion must have fire
in it, in which respect a zealous spirit is very requisite. Devotion has an
especial reference to GOD, in which respect solid judgment is also requisite.
As all the true genuine Works of this Author give evidence of his more then
ordinary spirit, so this Model especially. By it you may perceive what kind
of fire fired the sacrifices which he offered up to GOD. We read in the Law
( Levit. 9. 24.) that there came a fire out from the LORD, ^lloigne qu^
divinitus ad Altar venerit deinceps custodito omnia erant accendenda quae in
tabernaculo accendi oporteba^t.
and consumed upon the Altar the burnt offering. Aug. Quest. Super Levit. lib.
3. ^ 31.
That fire which once came from the LORD being continually preserved, all
things which required fire in the Tabernacle were to be fired therewith, as
all manner of sacrifice, and incense. Such a fire, a celestial, a divine fire,
which must needs come from the LORD, set on fire the spiritual sacrifices, and
sacred incense which this Priest of the LORD, the Author of this Treatise,
offered up to his GOD. We ought therefore to give the more earnest heed
heereunto: and to help our own devotion, and to quicken and inflame our own
spirits thereby. Without all question the Modells of some eminent persons
Devotion, may be a singular help to others Devotion. Every one that has this
divine fire of Devotion in his soul, cannot always readily bring fit fuel to
make it flame forth. But when fuel is brought by others, it will soon take,
and quickly flame out. Neither is this (as some too weakly, though very
violently cavil) to stint the spirit of supplication. For the work of the
Spirit consists not so much in the words and phrases whereby the matter of
Devotion is expressed, as in the intention of the heart, and in the entireness
and earnestness of the affection, wherein the very form, soul and life of
true Devotion consists. Otherwise, the spirit of all GODS people in all
public Liturgies, and forms of prayer would be stinted: yea by this reason
the spirit of every one that joyneth with another in prayer (except his spirit
only who conceives and utters the prayer) would be stinted. And if so, then
away with public assemblies for prayer: away with family meetings to call upon
GOD: away with all meetings of two or three together in CHRIST'S name,
notwithstanding CHRIST'S promise of being in the midst of them ( Mat. 18. 20.)
But rather away with such proud and preposterous conceits, (...) LXX Oration pro
pau^ere.
which clean cross the tenor of sacred Scripture, Tremel. and ^un.
and commendable custom of GODS Church in all ages. I^te Psalmus in principio
vocem Prophetae continet ex persona peccatoris Hier.
Sacred Scripture records sundry prayers conceived and uttered by one, but
assented to by sundry others, whereby they became also the prayers of those
others. Quod slen^es dica^^s nos qui pro peccatis (...) his ver^iculis
^do^emur. Arnob.
The 102. Psalm bears this title, A Prayer for the afflicted when he is
overwhelmed and powers out his complaint before the LORD. This title
apparently shows that the Prophet who first penned this Psalm, did it in the
persons and for the use of any poor distressed servant of GOD. So as we
thereby are taught what to pray when our sins lie heavy upon us, or when we are
in any other distress. It is expressly said that John taught his Disciples to
pray, Luke 11. 1. This questionless was done by prescribing unto them a form
of prayer. Whereupon when a Disciple of CHRIST said unto him, LORD teach us to
pray as John also taught his Disciples, he said unto them, when ye pray, say
Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. As John had prescribed a form to his
Disciples, so CHRIST does to his: and so teaches them to pray, as John did
his. Sundry forms of prayers were by the Ancient Fathers composed for the
Churches in their days. In like manner have all Christian Churches in
succeeding ages, had their particular forms. Never had any age, or country
more pious, pithy forms then ours, some for public, others for private use,
among which the form here tendered unto thee has its excellency. As it is
lawful to have such help, so may such an help be very useful.

W. GOVGE,

The Contents.
A Prayer upon a solemn occasion. Page 1. A morning Prayer for a Family. p.
30. Another morning Prayer. p. 53. A general form of Prayer and praise. p.
88. An evening Prayer. p. 105. A Prayer before a Sermon. p. 116. A Prayer
before Sermon. p. 122. A Grace before meat. p. 134. A Prayer before Sermon. p.
135. A Prayer after Sermon. p. 137. An Evening Prayer most useful in time of
war or invasion. p. 139. The Preachers Prayer. p. 159. A Thankesgiving for
the Kings return from Spain and a Prayer for his prosperity. p. 163. A Prayer
for wholesome and seasonable weather. p. 168. In visitation of the sick. p.
170. A Prayer when any draws near unto death. p. 176. A Prayer in time of
Plague. p. 184. and 186. A Prayer for confession of sin p. 215. A
Thankesgiving. p. 233. The Authors private Prayer. p. 256.
Errata.
Page 80. line 1. (...) read stirring. page* 155. l. 5. for bodies read souls*

A Prayer upon a solemn occasion.
O Eternal God, most holy and most Glorious, which dwell in the highest
heavens, and with righteousness and truth swayest the Scepter of the whole
world, thou that art unto the wicked and rebellious wretches a terrible Judge
and a consuming fire, but to the humble and repentant sinners a strong tower of
defense, and their exceeding great reward. We the most miserable and wretched
of all thy creatures, though the most noble by creation; for they in their
kinds and several conditions do thee honor and service, but we whom thou
have placed in this world for a more singular and extraordinary glorifying of
thee; have not only made our selves more vile then the basest creatures, and
more senseless in thy service then the beasts that perish; but have even
combined with Satan, with hell and with all the powers of darkness, to
blaspheme and dishonor thy great name, to profane thy Sabbaths, to break all
thy holy Laws and Commandments. O LORD we thus sinful and unworthy, are
here ashamed and confounded in thy presence; for our iniquities are increased
over our heads, and our trespasses are grown up unto the heavens, so that if
now in thy just judgment, thou should come against us, as we have many
times, and do daily most justly provoke thee, it had been far better for us
we had never been borne; Satan would challenge us for his, we should never
see thy face again, nor the heavens, nor the earth, nor all the goodness
which thou have prepared for man. From the foul pollution of Original sin,
which has universally infected and possessed all the powers and parts both of
our souls and bodies as from a filthy puddle, have issued all kinds of
impurities, many works of darkness and fearful transgressions, both in our
thoughts, words and actions. Much profanesse and hardness of heart, pride and
hypocrisy, contempt of the power of godliness and godly men, a senseless
neglect of thy word and judgments, of the way to Heaven and the salvation of
our own souls. Even the best of us before our calling, wearied our selves in
the vain pleasures and sinful fashions of this wretched world, being
detained by the policies of hell, either in notorious sinnefullnesse, or only
formal hypocrisy. We walked with boldness in the way of darkness and of
death, after the devices and desires of our own wicked hearts, in much
bitterness and malice against thy children and their sincerity. Nay and since
it has pleased thee to illighten our understandings with saving knowledge, and
to pull us by the power of thy good Spirit out of the slaverie of sin and
Satan into the glorious liberty of thy children: Our best actions and thy good
graces in us, have been foully stained by privy pride and secret hypocrisy;
we many times stay thy blessings from us by our dullness and untowardnesse at
religious exercises, and by reason we do not faithfully those good things
which we know, we have the knowledge of many evil things kept from us which
we unadvisedly commit. And whereas heretofore in our new birth, the sins of
our unregeneration have woefully vexed and disquieted our consciences; yet such
is the wretchedness of our corrupted nature, that we have sometimes looked
back upon them even with delight, if we have escaped relapse and backsliding,
we do not with that thankfulness and cherfulness, as we ought, embrace
in this happy time of grace and peace, those good means which thou have
ordained for our comfort and salvation; So that indeed we walk not worthy of
that blessed vocation whereunto we are called, but by our many slips,
imperfections and carelessness, we bring much discomfort upon our souls,
disgrace to our Christian profession, dishonor to thy Majesty, and offense to
our brethren. O LORD we beseech thee for thy holy names sake, and for thy rich
mercies in CHRIST JESUS to pardon us all these our offenses, and to forgive us
all our sins known and unknown, howsoever, or whenever committed, since
or before our calling, and to bury them in the death and Passion of our blessed
SAVIOVR, and to hide them in His righteousness for evermore. There is no
comfort to be expected to our conscience wounded with the terror of sin,
either in Heaven or in Earth, in Angel, Saint, or mortal man, but only in
the spotless justice of thy dear Son. Persuade therefore we beseech thee,
upon a good ground, with plentiful assurance every one of our souls, that his
precious blood was shed for our sins in particular, that we may sensibly feel
the forgiveness of our sins and rejoice in the hope of eternal life.

And for the time to come we humbly entreat thee, to mortify in us all
sinful affections, unruly lusts, and unlawful desires, to subdue in us the
power of sin, and every corruption whereby Satan keeps us any way in his
slaverie, or at any time gets the dominion over us. Save us we beseech thee
from idleness, worldliness, profanesse, security and all occasions whereby
thy good Spirit is grieved in us, our graces weakened, and thy great Name
dishonored. Vouchsafe us the Spirit of judgment, that we may discern
betwixt the short span of this wretched life, and the length and breadth of
immortality, that we never prefer the pleasures of sin for a moment, and a
little glory and preferment in this world, before the testimony of a good
conscience, and that excellent weight of glory laid up in Heaven for all thy
children. Make us faithful and conscionable in our Callings, zealous and
sincere in all religious duties and services, and wisely resolute to stand for
thy honor and truth against all opposition either by devils or wicked men. And
so direct, we beseech thee, and sanctify all our courses, that for a few and
evil days in this vale of tears, we may so store our selves with spiritual
comfort, with a sound heart, with a strong faith and a good conscience, that we
may stand firm and sure at the day of our visitation, and when upon our deaths
bed we shall be set upon, by the weakness of our own flesh, the terrors of
death, the fearefullnes of the grave, and the firiest darts of Satan, we may
comfortably pass through them all, in the name and power of thy Son, and be
received with joyfulnes and triumph into those sacred mansions, which he has
already made ready in Heaven for all those that truly love and fear thee.

In his blessed name we power out our souls in thankfulness, for all those
many blessings and comforts which thou have vouchsafed us, both upon our souls
and bodies, both for this life and a better. For our health, wealth and
liberty, our peace, plenty and prosperity, our food, apparel and preservation
from our infancy to this very hour, and for all the good means of all these.
For the free passage of thy glorious Gospel now so many years amongst us. But
amongst all other temporal blessings of our times, let us never forget, nor
we, nor all our posterity for ever, how it pleased thee in our days
miraculously to magnify the glory of thy mercy in our wonderful deliverance
from the most secret, bloody, and fiery plot of the Gunpowder Treason, that
great astonishment of men and Angels. All these outward comforts both public
and particular are excellent and precious; yet they are such as we have common
with the reprobates and those that shall never see thy face with comfort, but
after a short time spent in the miserable pleasures of this vain world, shall
be turned to hell and everlasting fire. We therefore more especially magnify
thy great name for the more special pledges and tokens of thy infinite love,
for that it has pleased thee to confirm and seal unto us by our effectual
calling, and the earnest of thy good Spirit, our Election to eternal life from
all eternity, our particular Redemption from the powers of hell by the death of
thy Son, and an undoubted assurance of the joys of Heaven in the world to
come. Increase in us good LORD, we beseech thee, daily more and more this
blessed assurance, which we infinitely esteem more dear then ten thousand
worlds, by making us to grow in repentance and faith, and spiritual wisdom,
and framing us to the obedience of thy Son in all knowledge, love and
obedience.

Furthermore gracious Father, we humbly entreat thee, with the bowels of thy
tenderest compassions to be merciful unto thy whole Church and every member
thereof. Fence it mightily we pray thee with the Spirit of truth, knowledge,
and zeal and constancy, that in these worst and last days it may make a
strong resistance against the great maine floods of Popery, Schism, profanesse
and Atheism.

Be gracious unto this sinful Kingdom, and enter not into judgment with
the horrible and crying sins, and the many fearful provocations thereof.

In the same look down with the special eye of providence and protection
upon our dread Sovereign JAMES, by thy grace King of great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defender of the truly Catholic faith, and in all causes, and over
all persons* next and immediately under thy Son CHRIST JESUS in all his
Dominions supreme Governor. O LORD as thou have enlarged his royal heart even
as the sand which is on the seashore for understanding, learning and wisdom,
so we beseech thee to continue unto him a proportionable measure of holiness,
zeal and sanctification for the execution of that great place wherein thou have
set him, and the enlargement of thy Kingdom here on earth. Settle his crown
fast upon his head, that he may long and religiously reign over us in despite
of all his enemies both at home and abroad. Vouchsafe all the graces of thy
good Spirit unto his gracious Queen, Plant the true fear of thy great Name in
the Princely heart of his Son, and let thy watchful providence and thy
loving mercies for ever rest upon all that royal family. Inspire his
Honorable Privy Counsel, his Nobility, Gentry, and Magistracy with
spiritual wisdom and heavenly understanding. Lead them all into thy
Sanctuary, and teach them out of thy holy Word, first and chiefly those things
which concern thy honor and glory, the good of the people which depend upon
them, and lastly the comfort of their own souls at the dreadful day of
judgment, when they shall give an account of their stewardships.

Enrich we pray thee with thy best graces all the Reverend Bishops and
Ministers of this Land, Endew them plentifully with knowledge, zeal, sincerity
and discretion, that by their faithfulness and conscionable discharge of
their duties, the many multitudes in this Land that lie in darkness,
ignorance, profanesse, Popery and Schism may be brought to the knowledge of
thy truth, into a holy obedience to thy heavenly Gospel to their own
everlasting salvation.

Bless and be merciful to both our Universities, Oxford and Cambridge.
Comfort all thy distressed children wheresoever, or howsoever afflicted,
whither with Pestilence, War, Famine, banishment, sickness, poverty,
imprisonment, disquietnesse of mind, vexation of conscience, want of
spiritual comfort, or what other cross or calamity soever it pleases thee to
exercise them with. Give them in the mean time a sure faith in thy promises,
and inward comfort in thy blessed Spirit, and in thy good time a happy
deliverance, whither by life or death, as it shall be best for thy glory and
the good of their own souls.

Lastly, gracious Father for this sacred business we have now in hand, we
humbly beseech thee to bless and sanctify unto us at this time the preaching
and hearing of thy holy Word, it is the ordinance of thy own infinite
wisdom, it is the glorious instrument which thou have appointed for the
conversion and salvation of the souls of men. But unto us miserable wretches
it has been many times through the barrenness of our hearts, the secret and
deceitful corruptions of our nature, much sleepiness and drowsinesse, but as
water spilt on the ground, and even the breath of thy Ministers scattered in
the air. Forgive us dear Father all our former untowardnesse, irreverence and
unprofitablenes in these holy exercises; and now at length before we go down
into our graves, into black and cruel habitations, from whence we must never
return to praise thee upon earth; let us feel thy divine finger working in us
effectually at the preaching of thy Word. Let us have the sense of thine
Omnipotency in conquering our corruptions and temptations, that we being
thoroughly sanctified both in our souls and bodies, forsaking all our known
sins, and laboring with sincerity to please thee in all things, may have our
fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life. Hear us, etc.

A Morning Prayer for a Family.
O LORD our GOD, we pray thee be merciful unto us, stir up we beseech thee
our dull hearts, out of a true sense of our sins and miseries, and a lively
faith* in CHRIST JESUS, and his precious deservings, to lift up our souls in
prayers and praises unto thee.

O LORD how are we bound to magnify thy great Name, for all the loving
kindness and great mercies vouchsafed us; for preserving us this night past
from the ills* and dangers, which no doubt have befallen many of our brethren,
as good by nature as our selves; for refreshing our frail bodies with quiet
rest and sleep, and bringing us in health, in strength, and vigor of body to
see the light of this day; for that it has pleased thee to reveal unto us the
mysteries of godliness, and some measure of saving truth, which thou have hid
from many thousands of the greatest and wisest of the world; For that thou have
preserved us from many fearful transgressions and excesses of iniquity, to
which our corrupt nature would otherwise have led us. For giving us the being
of reasonable creatures, and being borne in this blessed time and part of the
world, when and where thy glorious Gospel is on foot, for the continuance of
our health and strength of body, for the usefullnesse and vigor of the powers
of our souls and senses, of which for abusing them, we have deserved ere this,
to have been fearfully deprived. For our ingenuous and godly education, for
our Christian company and good counsel we have many times by thy mercies
enjoyed. For thy Word and Sacraments, the glorious means of our conversion and
continuance in grace. For many gracious mercies, by which thou have labored
gently and fairly to draw us unto thee. For those judgments which thou have
sent to humble us, and to bring us to repentance. For the enlarging of our time
for storing our selves with Grace, and comfort against the day of our
visitation. For our freedom from many miseries, crosses and vexations which
befall other our brethren better then our selves. For that it has pleased thee
by thine everlasting decree out of thine own boundless goodness and blessed
pleasure to save us from many thousand others which perish everlastingly, and
to make us heirs of endless happiness, as we are verily persuaded, in the
world to come. For preventing and following us with thy saving graces.

O LORD, we pray thee, to open our eyes daily more and more, to see and
acknowledge these thy great and undeserved mercies upon us; and to enlarge our
hearts sincerely and feelingly to magnify thy great Name for the same. And as
we humbly entreat thee upon the knees of our souls for pardon and remission
of all other sins, so especially for our monstrous and harefull ingratitude
for thy great and many mercies toward us most wicked and sinful creatures. We
are ashamed and confounded that so much favor, and mercy, and long forbearance
should be extended to such rebellious and carnal wretches as we are. For
besides that natural pollution we drew from the loins of our sinful
parents, we have heapt up a great measure of actual sins, since we had the
use and exercise of reason, and power and ability to sin. O LORD our GOD, we
humbly beseech thee to give us a full sight of them all, and a true sense of
thy great wrath and indignation against them. Let us have remorse and
compunction in our hearts and consciences for them all, in our affections a
perfect hate and detestation of the least corruptions and infirmities. And be
thou pleased, gracious Father, thoroughly to purge and wash our souls with the
precious blood of thy dear Son, deliver us quite, we beseech thee, from the
guilt, horror and damnation due unto them. And grant that hereafter we may
walk conscionably and carefully in all our ways, that we suffer no more our
poor souls to be stained with these foul pollutions we have formerly
delighted in. We confess and acknowledge to our shame and confusion, that we
have many times vowed betwixt thee and our own souls, that we would watch
more carefully over our own hearts, least they should breed and nourish
profane, idle and wandering thoughts and imaginations; over ourtalke, least we
should offend with our tongue, that we would be more zealous and faithful in
the duties of our calling, in sanctifying thy Sabbaths, receiving thy
Sacraments, hearing thy Word, in Christian conference, company, meditation and
all other holy duties: but alas, all these good purposes have been but as the
morning dew, we have even in short time broken our vows, grown cold again,
dull and formal, to the much grief of thy good Spirit, and discomfort of our
own souls. Now LORD we pray thee deal mercifully with us in this point,
forgive our many frailties and infirmities herein; and at length thoroughly
sanctify us, draw our affections from the false glory and sinful pleasures of
this vain world, and fasten them there, where true, sound and lasting comfort
is to be enjoyed. Give us wise and understanding hearts, that we may see and
perceive those things that belong to thy glory and the salvation of our own
souls, and sanctified wills and holy affections to follow and pursue them with
all earnestness, zeal and fervency of spirit. Let us even this day get some
ground against Satan, and forwardness in the course of Sanctification. Let us
store our selves with some new godly purposes and holy resolutions to do thy
will, and keep thy righteous commandments. Fill our hearts daily more and
more with all saving graces and the virtues of CHRIST JESUS. Cause us
perpetually to keep in mind, and consider that we are but as pilgrims and
strangers here in this world, that we must shortly depart hence, and never
return again, but presently come to judgment, and receive an everlasting
reward according to our works. Weaken we beseech thee daily more and more the
power of sin in us, let us feel it decay and loose its hold and haunt in us,
and strengthen in us the power of grace, the new man, and all spiritual
comforts.

Neither pray we for our selves only, but for all thy dear children, fellow
heirs with us of everlasting happiness in what part of the world soever they
be. LORD we pray thee to be continually present with them with all thy comforts
and mercies, let thy good Spirit lead them into all truth, let the wings of
thy providence and protection stretch over them all. And such as yet lie in
profanesse and under the shadow of death, hasten their conversion, reveal unto
them the glorious comforts of grace, and let the powers of darkness hold them
no longer.

LORD be merciful unto this sinful Kingdom wherein we live, and enter not
into judgment with the horrible rebellions and fearful abominations thereof.
Stay the rage of profaneness that fearfully overflowes in all places, to thy
great dishonor and grief of thy children. Stop the crying sins of the time,
and recover thine own glory out of the hands of thy creatures whosoever they
be. Glorify thine own self, and refresh and cheer up thy children. Prosper
thy Gospel amongst us, grant it a free and comfortable passage, send it where
it is not, keep and prosper it where it is, let thy blessings ever follow it,
and thy mighty power uphold it. Oppose thy self against them that oppose
against it, and let them know, that it is thine own glory that is in hand, and
that they set themselves against the mighty GOD of Heaven and Earth. Disburden
thy Church we pray thee of all ignorant, factious and scandalous Ministers,
and plant in their rooms men of care and conscience, sensible of the great
charge they have undertaken, truly fearing thee, and holding it their greatest
comfort in this world to save the souls of men.

Bless we pray thee our Prince and people, Magistrates and Ministers, all
degrees and estates from the highest to the lowest. Sanctify and furnish every
one of them with all needful graces fit both for the faithful discharge of
those particular places wherein thou have set them, and that they may do thee
the best and utmost service they can possibly.

Direct and guide with the Spirit of wisdom all his Counselors, that they
may chiefly and principally advise those things, which may make for the
advancement of thy glory, and comfort of thy children.

Be merciful to all Christian Families, to this family here present, continue
thy grace and mercy upon it, and let thy loving kindness and comforts of
salvation never depart from it.

Remember in mercy and love all mourners in Sion. Comfort all those that are
any ways afflicted, bind up the broken and contrite heart with thy sweetest
comforts. Give strength and life of grace to those that are babes in CHRIST,
recover those that are fallen, preserve those that stand, uphold those that are
declining, continue all in their first love, etc. and increase in every one of
them daily more and more christian resolution, zeal and forwardness, that
they may glorify thee in all their courses far more then ever they have done
heretofore.

Lastly, we pray thee be merciful to all those, whom thou have made, in more
special manner, the instruments of thy goodness and favor unto us, all that
thou have bound unto us with any bond of nature of friendship, or any way made
dear unto us, Those who remember us in their prayers, or commend themselves to
our most unworthy supplications; LORD we pray thee be merciful unto them, let
the light of thy countenance shine upon them, put Religion, thy fear and love
every day more and more into their hearts and souls, and let the comforts of
godliness ever rest upon them. And grant that we may all with one mind,
heart and soul, love, fear, reverence and glorify thy great Name; that so
after a few days, spent religiously in this vain and wretched world, we may
live and reign with thee everlastingly, in the glorious and endless pleasures
of the life to come, Hear us, etc.

Another Morning Prayer.
O LORD we beseech thee graciously to accept this our Morning sacrifice of
prayers and thankes-giving, that we poor wretches offer unto thee the GOD of
all glory and Majesty.

LORD take from us all dullness of heart, all wicked and wandering thoughts;
put into our souls the spirit of prayer with affection, zeal and fervency,
that we may rightly and reverently call upon thy great and glorious Name.

O Eternal GOD, most mighty and most fearful, which dwell in the highest
Heavens, and with thy wise providence directest all things ^o an excellent end;
Thou which art to the wicked and rebellious wretches a terrible Judge and
consuming fire; but to the humble and repentant sinners a strong tower of
defense, and their everlasting reward. We the unworthiest of all thy creatures,
though the most noble by Creation; for they in their kinds and several
conditions do thee honor and service, but we whom thou have placed in this
world for a more excellent glorifying of thee, have not only made our selves
more vile then the basest creatures, and more senseless in thy service then
the beasts that perish, but have even conspired with Hell, Satan and all the
powers of darkness to blaspheme and dishonor thy great Name, to profane thy
Sabbaths, to break all thy holy Laws and Commandments. We O LORD thus
wretched and unworthy are here ashamed and confounded in thy presence, for our
iniquities are increased over our heads and our trespasses are grown up unto
the heaven, and so grievous are they that if thou should require but the
least of them at our hands, Satan would challenge us for his, and we should
never see thy face again, nor the Heavens, nor the Earth, nor all the
goodness which thou have prepared for man. The thoughts of our hearts rise up
in judgment against us; for whereas they should be meditating of thy mercies
and goodness, of honoring thee in our vocations, whereas they should be knit
fast unto thy blessed Word, O LORD, they are for the most part idle, wicked,
entising, and full of the corruption of our raging concupiscence. The vanity of
our talk condemns us, for whereas our words should be spent in defending thy
honor and truth, in reprehending the horrible sins of those amongst whom we
live, in giving grace to those that hear us, they are for the most part full
of profanesse, worldliness and lying. The wickedness of our deeds cry
continually for vengeance and curses upon us; for besides our many and gross
sins, even our best actions are fearfully infected with privy pride and
hypocrisy, whereas they should wholly and principally be directed to thy
honor and glory, they are foully stained and corrupted with byrespects of
credit, pleasure or profit. In hearing thy blessed Word, which we should count
the very crown and garland of all our delights, we feel in our selves great
want of due preparation, reverent attention, meditation and practice. In our
prayers that inestimable comfort of a regenerate soul, we are grievously
vexed with dullness, weariness and by-thoughts. In all other good duties of
obedience to thy holy Commandments, we want that courage, zeal and spiritual
wisdom, which those excellent mercies thou have vouchsafed us require at our
hands. O LORD for thy great mercies sake forgive us these great sins. When we
look upon the vileness of our souls, by reason of these many transgressions,
we see nothing before our eyes but thy heavy wrath, and everlasting curse, the
torments of hell and endless confusion; but yet herein stands our comfort,
we know that to them which truly thirst after thy kingdom, which is
righteousness and peace and joy in the HOLY GHOST, which faithfully desire to
serve thee in sincerity, though they be encompassed with many weaknesses,
Thou art a Father of infinite mercies and everlasting compassions, and wilt
pass by many infirmities of thy dear children. We humbly therefore beseech
thee, most gracious Father, to bury all our sins both before and since our
calling in the grave of CHRIST JESUS, and hide them in his righteousness for
evermore. There is no help or comfort to be had either in Heaven or in Earth,
in Angels, Saints, or mortal men to our wounded consciences, but only in the
spotless justice of thy dear Son. Give assurance therefore we beseech thee to
every one of our souls, that his precious blood was shed for our sins in
particular, that we may sensibly feel the forgiveness of our sins, and
rejoice in the hope of eternal life.

In His blessed name we give thee all possible thanks, for those many mercies
and comforts which thou have plentifully bestowed upon us most unworthy
wretches.

We thank thee dear Father for our health, wealth and liberty; for our peace,
plenty and prosperity; for our food and apparel; for our preservation from our
cradle to this hour, and all the good means of these; but more especially for
the more special tokens of thy great love; for these we have common with the
reprobates, and those which shall never see thy face with comfort, but after a
short time spent in the miserable pleasures of this vain world, shall be
turned to hell and everlasting fire. We thank thee for choosing us before all
worlds to be heirs of Heaven and Citizens with thy Saints. We thank thee for
confirming unto us our Election by our effectual calling. O happy be that
blessed time, when thy good Spirit put the first motions into our hearts to
become thy children. This is the blessing we infinitely esteem before al
worldly comforts, and wherein is the preciousnesse of all true joy and
contentment. O most loving and gracious Father, we beseech thee go forward
with the work of this our New Birth that thou have begun in us, and never take
away thy hand unto the day of JESUS CHRIST. Thou have promised, that whom thou
have loved once, thou will love for ever, and thou art without all shadow of
change, and sooner shall the mountains be cast into the Sea before one jot of
thy gracious promise fall unto the ground, or one title of thy Word be
unaccomplisht. Take from us therefore we beseech thee all privy pride and
hypocrisy, all vanity and vainglory, all dullness, backwardness and
security in thy service, which hang so fast on, which cleave so close unto our
souls, and fearfully hinder us in the course of godliness, but above all
things let us never fall back again into the gross and horrible sins of
our unregeneration. Reveal unto us we beseech thee all our sins, give us
tender consciences and a continual increase in spiritual wisdom and
heavenly understanding, until we come unto that happy strength by which the
world is crucified unto us and we unto the world, and be able to say out of
the powerful feeling of thy goodness upon our souls, with thy blessed
servant David, GOD is our hope and strength and help in troubles ready to be
found. Therefore will we not fear though the earth be moved, and though the
mountains fall into the midst of the Sea. Though the waters thereof rage and
be troubled, and the mountains shake at the same.

GOOD LORD be merciful with the bowels of thy Fatherly compassions unto thy
Church, and every member thereof. Be gracious unto this sinful Kingdom, and
enter not into judgment with the horrible sins thereof. And in the same look
down we beseech thee, with the special eye of providence and protection upon
the excellent instrument of thy glory our most gracious Sovereign. Give him
the spirit of zeal, wisdom and government, that he may long and religiously
reign over us in despite of all his enemies both at home and abroad. Bless
all his Counselors, both our Universities, Oxford and Cambridge, the Nobility
of this Land, the Gentry, all inferior Magistrates, all Judges and Justices of
Peace, those that are imployd in fighting thy battles either by Land or Sea.
Give to every one a spirit to his calling. Lead them all into thy Sanctuary,
and teach them out of thy holy Word first and chiefly those things which
concern thy honor and glory, the good of the people that depend upon them,
and lastly the salvation and comfort of their own souls at the dreadful day
of judgment, when they shall give an account of their stewardships. Enrich we
beseech thee with many graces of zeal, faithfulness and sincerity the
Ministers and Preachers of thy holy Word; bless their labors that some good
may come of them, increase their number, place over every Congregation a
faithful and religious Watchman, that may go in and out before thy people in
soundness of doctrine and uprightness of conversation. Touch the hearts of
the many multitudes of this Land, that at length they may turn unto thy truth,
and so be delivered out of the tyranny and power of Satan, to the freedom of
thy dear Son CHRIST JESUS our LORD. Give success, good LORD, and prosper all
those which in their good purposes seek the preferment of thy truth by good
and lawful means.

Bless all them that thou have joined unto us with any bond of love, kindred,
or acquaintance, all those whose hearts thou have stird up to do us good any
manner of ways; and those also which wish and work us evil if they belong
unto thee.

Comfort O LORD with thy sweetest comforts all thy children which are vexed
either in soul, or body, whether by Pestilence, Famine, War, poverty,
imprisonment, sickness or banishment: trouble of conscience, vexation of
spirit, disquietnesse of mind, want of spiritual comfort, or whatsoever kind
of affliction of body, or mind thou do try them with. Give them in the mean
time faith in thy promises, and comfort in thy Spirit, and in thy good time a
happy deliverance, whether by life or by death, as it shall be best to thy
honor and glory and good of their own souls.

But especially as we are bound at this time, we humbly entreat thy loving
kindness and tender mercies, for our poor afflicted brethren and sisters here
about us in London, Oxford, and many other places of this Land. O LORD stay thy
revenging hand; Though we be but worms and dust, yet thou art our Creator,
and we the work of thy hands. Thou art our Father, and we thy children, Thou
art our Shepherd, and we thy sheep, Thou art our Redeemer and we the people
whom thou have bought, Thou art our GOD, and we thine inheritance. Forget not
therefore O LORD to be gracious, and shut not up thy loving kindness in
displeasure; turn thee again at the last, and be gracious unto thy servants.

And grant we beseech thee that these great judgments may effect and work
that for which they were sent, even true humiliation, and undissembled
repentance, that we all turning unto thee in truth and sincerity, thou may
turn unto us with thy mercies and everlasting compassions. And whereas we whom
of thy great goodness thou have thus long time spared, are as deep as those
whom the Plague has consumed. We beseech thee make us wise by their
afflictions, and so inform us in thy fear, that we may frame the rest of our
life in all holy obedience according to thy will.

Lastly most gracious LORD, we humbly beseech thee to take us this day under
the shadow of thy wings. Let thy Omnipotency be a brazen wall unto us, let thy
mighty hand and stretched out arm encompasse us, let thy careful providence
watch over us, and thy blessed Angels pitch about us. And since we now enter
into the affairs of this day, let not we beseech thee the delights, benefits
and honors of this life ensnare our souls, or make a breach into our
consciences: for these weak and carnal comforts will never follow us unto the
dark places, but when we shall sit down in the dust, and say unto corruption
thou art our father, and to the worm thou art our mother and sister, then they
will all leave us; nay they will turn to worme-wood and bitterness. Sanctify
we beseech thee our thoughts, knit them fast unto thy holy Word, and the
necessary businesses of our vocation. Keep, we pray thee, in a sanctified
moderation all the affections of our hearts, and stir our passions that none
of them break out upon us either to dishonor thy Majesty, disquiet our own
consciences, or disgrace our Christian carriage. Let all our words be seasoned
with grace, religion and charity. Let every action into which we shall enter
this day or ever hereafter, be just and lawful, and in them bless us with
sincerity of heart, with a godly end and good means. O LORD, we beseech thee
give us the spirit of judgment, that we may discern between the short span
of this wretched life, and the length and breadth of immortality, that we
never esteem the pleasures of sin for a moment, before eternal and
everlasting joys, but even count the best things of this world as dung, as
vanity and nothing, nay as worse then vanity and less then nothing, for the
winning of CHRIST JESUS, and that excellent weight of glory laid up in Heaven
for all thy servants. Work in our hearts we beseech thee a perfect
detestation even of our sweetest and lest sins; let us ever look upon them
in their true nature, and greatest ouglinesse, as accompanied with thy heavy
displeasure and fearefullest judgments; that we may loath them as a Serpent,
and so cease for ever to offend thee in them. And whereas we are every day
afresh to enter combat, not with flesh and blood, but with the Prince of
darkness, the rulers of the air, the spiritual craftiness and policies of
hell; vouchsafe us we beseech thee the complete armor of true Christians.
The brestplate of righteousness, the helmet of salvation, the sword of the
Spirit; but above all the shield of faith, that we may manfully fight against
our corruptions, that we may quench all the fiery darts of Satan, tread the
malicious Serpent under our feet, and at our last and greatest fight in godly
triumph and through the might and merits of our Captain JESUS CHRIST, may say
with gladness and joy, O death where is thy sting, O hell where is thy
victory. And in the mean time, for as much as every day we step nearer our
grave, and approach nearer unto thy presence, and that great and fearful
judgment before thy throne, even for our idle words and wandering thoughts,
give unto us we beseech thee every day a new grace, a new strength in the
course of regeneration, more full assurance of the remission of our sins, till
with a wise heart, we have such a feeling of the glory of GOD, and of eternal
life, that we make up our account with the world, and be at a point with all
that is under the Sun. And since at that day we must answer not only for the
sins of our own persons, but for many sins of those that depend upon us, if
we labor not to bring them unto GOD; for sins committed by our ill example;
for sins that we have seen and heard in others, and have not grieved and
religiously reprehended them. LORD we beseech thee give us an exact and precise
care over all our ways; over our general calling of Christianity and those
particular callings wherein thou have placed us. And let us never be hindered
or discouraged in any good thing by the profane and malicious reproaches of
wicked and carnal men, and the many oppositions of Satan; and the rather
because to us it is a blessed mark that we are translated out of darkness
into light, and that we will not run with them unto the same excess of riot:
but to them it is a token of perdition. For why should we, good LORD, for the
vain and unjust censures of mortal wretches turn from thee for this little
inch of time, and hereafter receive everlasting confusion.

A General form of Prayers and praise.
LORD prepare our dull and unprepared souls to power out our petitions with
humility, zeal and reverence unto thy great Majesty. LORD make our hearts as
mountains of myrrh and Incense to send up praises and thankes-giving to the
Sanctuary where thy honor dwells.

MOst mighty and most glorious God, thou that inhabitest eternity, and dwell
in the light that no man can attain unto; at whose terrible presence the
mountains melt away and the Angels hide their faces, yet our most gracious and
merciful Father in CHRIST JESUS, vouchsafing from the height of Heaven to
look upon us vile worms and dust with the eye of tender compassion, we thy
wretched and sinful servants, heirs of corruption, children of wrath,
sons of disobedience; do in the name and mediation of thy dear Son our
blessed Savior prostrate our selves before thy throne of grace and
mercy-seate, begging and craving at thy hands pardon and remission for all our
sins. LORD they are most grievous and manifold, most horrible and intolerable.
To the original corruption of our sinful nature, wherein we were conceived,
we have added all kinds of actual transgressions. All the time before our
calling we gave our selves to wantonness, to work all uncleanness even with
greediness, we drunk up sins like water, and fed upon iniquity as the
horse-leach on corrupt bloods, we drew iniquity with cords of vanity, and
sin as with cart-ropes. All our thoughts, words and deeds were menstruous,
filthy and abominable, nothing but a slavish service of the world, the flesh
and the devil; since our calling when we should have been most pure, sincere
and sanctified, we have sinned grievously, although not notorious to the world,
yet horribly before thine eyes in privy pride, hypocrisy, dullness, security,
want of zeal and forwardness in thy service; nay LORD we have had many
fearful backslidings into our grossest sins, etc. so that now they are
become as many in number as the Stars in Heaven, as great as the mountains,
as red as scarlet; for CHRIST JESUS his sake, for thy infinite mercies sake,
and for thy holy Names sake, bury them all in the blessed and bloody wounds of
our dear SAVIOVR, that they never rise up at the dreadful day of judgment to
give testimony against our souls to our utter confusion. Hide them all in the
bottomless Ocean of thy endless mercy that they die out of thy remembrance
everlastingly. And send we beseech thee into every one of our souls that happy
and heavenly assurance of the remission of our sins, whence springs joy and
contentment most precious and unvaluable, infinite more worth then ten thousand
worlds.

LORD we bless, praise and magnify thy great and glorious name, for all
those great mercies, benefits and comforts, which out of thy immeasurable
bounty thou have plentifully bestowed upon us.

First and chiefly we humbly thank thee, for that it has pleased thee of thy
mere favor and love to elect us before the foundation of the world, to be
heirs of thy immortal Kingdom, for creating us after thine own image, for
redeeming us with the precious blood of thy dear Son, for calling us into
the glorious liberty of thy sons, for justifying us, for sanctifying us with
thy holy Spirit, for the joyful hope of glorification in the world to come.
Confirm unto us we beseech thee these great and incomparable blessings with
the sacred testimony of thy holy Spirit. Let thy blessed Spirit tell our
spirits that we are thy Elect. Let our sweet Savior CHRIST JESUS say unto our
souls I am your salvation. Seal our salvation unto our souls with the
pledge, seal and earnest of thy holy Spirit.

Furthermore most gracious Father we humbly thank thee, for that extraordinary
and universal blessing vouchsafed this Land by our gracious and religious King
it is the greatest that ever the face of this earth enjoyed, that ever thou
bestowedst on thy dearest children. For when wicked men and all the world, as
thou know, expected that this Land should have been clothed with fiery
persecutions, bloody wars, and all manner of calamities as with a garment;
Thou that sit in Heaven, and laughest the vain plots and devises and
wicked men to scorn, against all expectation have covered it with peace, joy,
plenty, prosperity, the free passage of thy Gospel, as the seas are covered
with water. Put we pray thee into the heart of every one in this Land a true
and continual thankfullnes, a godly and religious resolution to serve thee in
holiness and righteousness all the days of their life. And LORD we beseech thee
continue that good work that thou have begun, and let him and his posterity in
thy fear and true religion, if it be thy blessed pleasure, sit upon the throne
of this Land, so long as the Sun and Moon endures. Let his Scepter long
flourish in his hand, and set his crown fast upon his head. O mightily
preserve him from all the sons of violence and mischief. Let all those that
with foreign invasion attempt the destruction of his person, and desolation of
this Land become like Iabin and Sisera that perished at Endor, like Zeba and
Zalmunna that became as the dung of the earth. Let all unnatural practices,
and homebred conspiracies perish as the untimely fruit of a woman and never
see the Sun. Inflame his royal heart with true zeal, and love of thy blessed
truth, and as thou have enlarged his kingdoms, so give him a princely and
religious courage to enlarge thy Kingdom, and utterly to confound all Heresy,
Schism and the kingdom of Antichrist. Bless all his privy Counselors with
wisdom from above, that they may put these things into his heart, which
chiefly concern thy honor and glory, the good of thy Church, the safety of
his Person and quiet of this Land. Bless with several graces all inferior
Magistrates, that they may all faithfully and religiously discharge the
several places wherein they stand. Bless all his people with religion and
loyalty, the Ministry with learning, zeal and sincerity. O LORD go out with
his Captains and men of war that fight thy battles.

We thank thee also dear Father for blessings more particularly concerning
us, for delivering us from Popery, Idolatry, and Superstition, and illightning
our understanding with thy blessed truth. Confirm it we beseech thee unto us
daily more and more, that if need require, we may confirm it with our dearest
bloods.

We thank thee for giving us a taste of the powers of the world to come.
Crucify we beseech thee unto us continually the lusts and corruptions of our
sinful flesh, that the graces and comforts of regeneration may daily receive
in us strength and perfection.

We thank thee for remooving from over our heads those heavy judgments and
violls of thy wrath, that our crying sins have continually called for from
Heaven; even all diseases and infirmities of body, all terrors and vexations
of conscience, all civil deaths and torments, all shame and confusion; even
that the earth should have opened his mouth and swallowed us quick, the water
drowned us, the fire consumed us, vengeance from Heaven overtaken us, thy other
creatures devoured us. Grant we beseech thee that hereafter by sound and
undissembled repentance, and by agodly life we may abandon them and the fear
of them for evermore.

An Evening Prayer.
WE thank thee most merciful Father for our health, wealth, food, raiment,
preservation from our cradle to this hour; for thy releeving us in all our
needs and necessities, for comforting us so fatherly in all our tribulations
and distresses, for sparing us so long a time of repentance and for infinite
more blessings which neither our hearts can think, nor tongues express.

Now one thing dear LORD will we beg at thy hands, and that will we crave for
evermore, that thou would give us grace and power by thy blessed Spirit to
direct and dispose all these excellent blessings both eternal and temporal,
chiefly and principally to the honor of thy great Name, to the salvation of
our souls, and the good of thy Church. And to this end root we beseech thee
out of our souls all pride, malice, envy, covetousness, self-love,
hypocrisy; take from us all swearing, lying, vain and unprofitable talking,
al thoughts of Atheism, Infidelity, uncleanenesse, all the menstruous
filthiness of our abominable nature. And plant we beseech thee and ingraft
deeply into our souls the true fear of thy glorious Name, true humility,
true zeal and devotion, true sorrow and repentance for all our sins, true
spiritual wisdom and heavenly understanding, true hope and charity; but above
all things a true, strong and a lively faith truly to apprehend the death and
Passion of our dear Savior, and in particular and effectually to apply it to
our sinful souls. LORD make it ever powerful and invincible, but especially
in all times of our crosses and afflictions; but LORD make it most triumphant
and glorious even at the hour of death, at our last visitation, when the
devil shall set before the eyes of our souls the black and ougly catalogue
of all our sins, and when he shall prepare his firiest darts to wound our
souls to death, O then let the light of thy heavenly countenance shine upon
us, O then let* thy blessed Spirit comfort us with his sweetest comforts, let
the fresh bleeding wounds of our dear Savior appear gracious and effectual
to our distressed souls.

Bless good LORD, protect and defend thy Church wandering far and wide over
the face of the whole earth. Let thy mighty hand and stretched out arm
encompasse it, let thy Omnipotency be a brazen wall about it; lead it we
beseech thee into all truth, concord and sincerity; save it from all schisms,
errors and heresies; mightily fence it from bloody Tyrants, hellish Atheists
and merciless Politicians.

Comfort we beseech thee all those that be comfortless, and distressed with
sorrow, need, sickness, imprisonment, banishment, slanderous tongues, or any
other cross or calamity. Especially good LORD, speak comfortably unto them in
whose souls are the arrows of thine indignation, and the venom thereof
drinks up their spirit, those that groan under the burden of a vexed
conscience, and those that suffer persecution for the testimony of thy truth.
LORD give them faith, patience and constancy to abide their trial, and a
joyful issue to all their temptations.

And as at this time we are bound we humbly entreat thy tender mercies and
loving kindness for all those in this Land that thou have heavily visited with
the Plague of Pestilence. For CHRIST JESUS sake if it be thy blessed pleasure
command thy Angel to cease from striking, put up the sword of judgment, which
in great wrath and indignation thou have drawn out against them. And LORD in
the mean time give them joy and comfort in thy holy Spirit, that howsoever
they be strangely and fearfully tormented in their body in this life, yet they
may be assured of eternal happiness in the life to come. And teach we beseech
thee both them and us by thy holy Spirit to take a right view of all our sins,
the true causes of thy wrathful displeasure, and faithfully to repent for the
same. And so much the rather O LORD, because the reprobate and such as thou
forsakest cannot praise thee nor call upon thy Name, but the broken heart, the
sorrowful mind and a conscience hungring after righteousness shall ever set
forth thy praise and glory.

Lastly most loving Father we beseech thee take us into thy defense and
protection this night, let thy careful providence watch over us, let thy
blessed Angels pitch about us, preserve us from all perils and dangers, from
all the assaults of Satan, from vain, idle, and wicked dreams. Grant unto our
bodies comfortable rest and quiet sleep, but let our souls continually watch
for the coming of our Savior in the clouds to end these last and worst days.
Amen, even so come LORD JESUS, that we with thee and the rest of thy Elect may
joyfully and triumphantly ascend unto the heavenly Jerusalem, there to enjoy
fulness of joy and pleasures at thy right hand for evermore.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A Prayer before a Sermon.
O LORD prepare our dull and unprepared hearts with fear and humility to enter
the presence of thy great and glorious Majesty.

O Most gracious God, our loving and merciful Father in CHRIST JESUS. We thy
poor and sinful servants most humbly beseech thee, at this time to bless,
and sanctify unto us the hearing of thy holy Word, it is the glorious
instrument which thou have appointed for the conversion and salvation of the
souls of men. But unto us miserable wretches and full of pollution, it has
been many times through the barrenness of our hearts, the secret and
deceitful corruptions of our nature, but even the breath of thy Ministers
scattered in the air, and as water spilt upon the ground. Whereas it might be
unto some being humbly and reverently received, as a two edged sword, that
would enter through even unto the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit,
and of the joints and the marrow, that would break in pieces their hard
hearts, and strike their conscience with terror and remorse for their sins,
a necessary step to regeneration. And whereas it might be unto others a
precious restorative to repair the ruins of their conscience, and to put life
into their dead zeal and affections, graciously to inform them in all the
parts of their callings; it is but even as a witness of our coldness,
sencelessenesse and unthankefullnesse, registered in the book of our conscience
against the day of our visitation. LORD we beseech thee out of thy tender
compassions to forgive us all our former untowardnesse, irreverence and
unprofitablenesse in these holy exercises. And now at length before we go
down into our graves, into black and cruel habitations, from whence we must
never return to praise thee upon earth, let us feel thy divine power working
in us effectually at the preaching of thy Word, let us have a sense of thy
Omnipotency in in conquering our corruptions and temptations, let thy powerful
Spirit stir up our hearts, and quicken our affections to embrace the power of
religion and true godliness, that so being freed from sin by the blood of
CHRIST, and forsaking all our known sins, and laboring sincerely to please
thee in all things, we may have our fruit in holiness, and the end
everlasting happiness.

A Prayer before Sermon.
MOst merciful Father we humbly beseech thee to give every one of us grace to
let these things sink deeply into our hearts. Bless we beseech thee our wills
and affections with sanctified desires to entertain them, our memories with
faithfulness to retain them, our minds with serious meditations to digest
them, our hearts with fervency and prayer for thy blessings upon them, our
lives with practice and piety to profit by them. LORD we see clearly that all
our pleasures shall die and perish, that our honors shall be laid in the dust,
that our gold and silver shall canker, and the rust of of them shall be a
witness against us at the last day, that outward performances of religious
duties without inward sanctification, shall have their portion with Hypocrites
in the lake which burns with fire and brimstrone. Where then shall appear
the liar, the swearer, the drunkard, the profaner of the Sabbath, the unclean
person, the proud, the idle, the malicious, the careless in his calling, even
without timely and sound repentance, in the bottomless pit of the lowest
hell. O then we beseech thee, gracious Father, to vouchsafe us in time wise and
understanding hearts, the spirit of judgment to discern between the short
span of this miserable life, and the length and breadth of eternity. Let us now
at length make a through and deep search into the state of our souls and
consciences, and if we find that we be not yet possessed of that inward
sincerity and true happiness; let us for ever hereafter, with greatest
fervency, earnestness and contention of spirit hunger and thirst, labor and
strive after saving grace, the power of religion and true godliness, that so
for a few and evil days, we stand wisely and resolutely for thy honor and
truth, and with comfort and courage running the race of sanctification, may be
provided and furnished with assurance of glory, clearenesse of conscience,
strength of faith against the day of our visitation, that when we shall lie
down upon our deaths-bed, and we know not how soon, we may be able to meet
with the fearful temptations of our sinful flesh, the fiery darts of
Satan, to encounter with the pangs of death, and terrors of the grave, and so
pass with joyfullnesse and triumph to those glorious mansions of light and
blessed immortality with thee in the highest heavens.

Lastly Gracious Father, for this present holy business we have now in hand;
we humbly beseech thee to let thy blessings be mightily upon thy Word at this
time, that it may pierce and enter through to the dividing asunder of the soul
and the spirit, of the joints and the marrow, and to discover the very thoughts
and intents of the heart. Keep we pray thee out of our hearts and heads all
troubles, cares, wanderings, humors, passions, prejudice, distractions,
deadness or whatsoever other cursed let shall be suggested by the devil, or
our own wicked hearts. So sanctify unto our souls this holy ordinance of
thine, that we may handle and hear it with all feeling power and reverence as
the Word of thee the true and everliving GOD, and as that by which we must be
judged at that last dreadful day. Make it to be a Word of conversion and
enlargement to all them that are yet in the snares of the devil and ways of
death: but of strengthening, encouragement and comfort to those that are
already thine, that so by thy merciful blessing it may prove unto every one of
us, the savor of life unto life, and thy mighty power unto us for salvation,
and that for the LORD CHRIST JESUS his sake: In whose glorious Name and
mediation we beg these and all other needful blessings, concluding in his own
prayer, Our Father, etc.

O LORD hear us in these our weak requests, and grant them unto us, and all
other things necessary for us, for our bodies, our souls, our callings, or
this present action, and for every member of thy Church; we beg them all in
the name and mediation of CHRIST JESUS thy Son and our only SAVIOVR, to whom
with thee and the holy Spirit, be all praise and power, and might, and dominion
and thankesgiving ascribed at this time and evermore hereafter, Amen.

BLessed are all they that hear the Word of GOD, believe it and do it. The
grace of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and the love of GOD the Father in him, and the
most comfortable fellowship, help and communion of GOD the HOLY GHOST, be with
us all, bless us, preserve us and keep us, and every member of his Church in
faith, a good, quiet and peaceable conscience, the rest of this day and
evermore hereafter.

Grace before meat.
LORD GOD who have created all things for the use and comfort of man, and man
for thy own glory; Make we beseech thee these thy creatures wholesome for our
bodies, and us thankful for them for CHRIST JESUS his sake.

A Prayer before Sermon.
MOst holy and righteous LORD GOD, we humbly and heartily thank thee for our
preservation this night past, pardon we beseech thee unto us the sins
thereof; And now prepare and sanctify us, for a right and comfortable serving
of thee in this morning sacrifice, and holy duties we take in hand. Illighten
our minds and enlarge our hearts by thine own good Spirit, that we may
rightly conceive of the great mystery of grace and true meaning of thy holy
Word, that we treasure it up in our memories with an holy greediness, and
after walk by the strength thereof, with all fruitfullnesse and power in all
thy ways, all the days of our life, and that for thy CHRIST his sake.

A Prayer after Sermon.
O LORD our GOD, thou clearly see and beholdest from Heaven, what hearts we
now bring into thy glorious presence from the business of this day, how full
of earthlinesse, deadness, listlesnesse and unfitness to speak unto thee.
We pray thee for CHRIST his sake to possess, quicken and sanctify them by
thy blessed Spirit, that they may be ever feeling and fruitful in these holy
exercises. Make us every day more and more wise, with all thy Saints and elect
children unto our eternal salvation in the right understanding, believing and
obeying of thy blessed Word, and great mystery of godliness, in JESUS CHRIST
our LORD.

An Evening Prayer most useful in time of war or invasion.
O LORD our GOD, high and mighty, great and fearful, which dwell in the
highest Heavens and light that no man can attain unto, which by thy great
power have created Heaven and Earth and all things therein contained, and by
thy wise providence directest every thing unto an excellent end.

If thou should deal with us in justice, we deserve to be plagued with
all the horrible and fearful plagues of Egypt in this world, and hereafter to
be perpetually damned, both in body and soul in the lake of hell fire, where
there is nothing but endless woe, weeping and gnashi^g of teeth. If there be
any sin we have not committed, it was because we wanted means, opportunity,
enticement, temptation, or something, not for want of a sinful disposition in
us. If thou should deal with us, as we have dealt with thee, we should be
presently damned eternally. If thou should be as careless of us, as we have
been of thee, and the salvation of our souls, we should never see thy face in
Heaven.

O LORD fright our heart with a true sight and sense of all our sins.

O LORD persuade our hearts, that since thou did not curse and damn us, when
we lay wallowing in horrible sins, thou will not now cast us away when we
are converted, etc. Thou will rather pity us for our infirmities then condemn
us for them.

Persuade our souls by that good experience we have had of thy goodness that
thou will be our GOD for ever. Let us not so much fear and abhor the
punishment and guilt of sin, but also the power and tyranny, whereby we are
enforced to offend so loving and so gracious a Father.

Give us soundness of knowledge, purity of heart, holiness of life, contempt
of the world, conquest over our sins, the comforts of thy blessed Spirit, a
joyful expectation of our deliverance from sin and sorrow. The spirit of
meekness and wisdom, the spirit of courage and constancy, the spirit of love
and joy, and of a sound mind.

Let us be just in our dealings, conscionable in our callings, merciful,
courteous.

Let us so comprehend the glorious state to come, that we may be willing to
be dissolved and to be with CHRIST.

LORD grant that in the midst of a dark world, we may see the brightness of
thy Heavenly Kingdom, and in this weak tabernacle of small continuance, we
may know the dwelling place, which we shall have for ever in the resurrection
of the just.

Thou that have the issues of death in thy hand, I beseech thee in mercy set
before mine eyes always the remembrance of thy judgment seat, and my last
end, whereby I may be daily stirred up to consider in what great danger I stand
through the horrible punishments due unto my sins.

Set before us the shortness of our own life, the vanity of all things we
enjoy, the excellent weight of glory prepared for all those that love thee, the
plagues of the wicked, that great account we must make at our death, that great
and terrible day, that having these things in our sight we may not put our
hands to any iniquity.

O LORD at this time go out with the Armies of thy Saints, and that fight thy
battles in the whole Christian world. Pardon we pray thee and pass by all
their and our sins: Help us to repent, to renew covenant with thee, and to
fear before thee, that they may more cheerfully, courageously and
successively defend their righteous cause. But infatuate we beseech thee the
counsels, and strike faintness into the heart of al them, that lift their
hearts or swords against the kingdom of Jesus Christ.

And now find out and call to account the blasphemies, idolatries, cruelties
and insolences of thine and our adversaries, and all the blood of the Martyrs
of JESUS CHRIST which they have spilt as water upon the ground. And if they
will not return unto thee, return it now O LORD GOD of recompenses into their
bosoms in fury and in jealousy. Make them like a wheel, etc. Psalm. 83. 13.

Thou have promised ever to help thy people in the needful time of trouble,
even now LORD is the season for thy succor. And therefore we pray thee for
JESUS CHRIST his sake to stir up thy self like a man of war against all
those boisterous and railing Rabsakees, that band and combine themselves to put
out the glory of Isreal's, or any of thine anointed. And give us LORD in the
mean time pitiful, compassionate and fellow-feeling hearts over the woeful
calamities and miseries of thy people in these parts, that we may power out our
hearts more fervently unto thee, and give thee no rest until for thine own
names sake thou become glorious in giving deliverance and victory unto thy
poor humble servants, that trust in thee alone, and call upon thy name.

O LORD of Hosts, GOD of Israel, which dwell between the Cherubims, thou
art very GOD alone over all the kingdoms of the earth, thou have made the
Heavens and the Earth, Incline thine ears O LORD and hear, Open thine eyes O
LORD and see the blasphemies and bloody desolations which thine and our enemies
have cruelly brought upon thine own people.

O LORD put on the garments of thy just indignation for clothing.

O LORD tread down our enemies in thy wrath, and make them drunken in thine
indignation, and bring down their strength to the earth.

O LORD we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness as filthy
rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind have
taken us away.

Rise up O LORD, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate
thee, flee before thee. Return O LORD to the many thousands of Israel, Numb.
10. 35.

Let thy people eat up the Nations their enemies, and bruise their bones, and
shoot them through with their arrows, Numb. 24. 8. That in our songs of
praise and solemn thanks giving hereafter thy whole Church may joyfully sing
and say, It was not our own arm or our own sword, O Lord God of Hoasts, that
did save us, but thy right hand, and thy holy arm, and the light of thy
countenance, because thou did favor them, Psalm. 44. 3.

O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us, deal with us according to
thy Name: for our rebellions are many, we have sinned against thee.

O thou hope and holy one of Israel, the Savior thereof in the time of
trouble, why art thou as a stranger in the Land, as one that passes by to
tarry for a night, etc. Ier. 14. 9.

See Daniels Prayer, Dan. 9. 4. etc.

O Lord God destroy not the people of thine inheritance.

O Lord our God, thou art God of gods and Lord of lords, a great God, mighty
and terrible, which accepts no persons nor takes reward, etc. Deuteronomy. 10. 17.
etc. with all reverence and lowliness of spirit, we acknowledge, adore, and
only rely upon thy greatness, thy mighty hand and stretched out arm, Deuteronomy.
11. 2.

And finally we most humbly thank thee, for that it has pleased thee to keep
us this day, and all the days and times of our lives; beseeching thee that
thou would receive us this night into thy holy keeping, that we may have
quiet rest, not of bodies alone, but of our bodies also resting from all those
things, that are contrary to thy most holy will, attending whilst thou raisest
us up in the morning, to do all those things that thou have appointed us.

Grant that we laying our bodies down to rest, may be thereby put in mind of
our long rest of death: that as we do now lay down our bodies in bed, so we
may be thereby admonished, that hereafter they shall be laid down in the
grave, to be consumed to dust, earth and ashes, from whence they were taken;
that we having this before our eyes may be stirred up in mind warily to walk
in this our pilgrimage, not knowing when the time shall be of our departure,
but always to be found ready with our lamps of pure faith clearly burning,
that we may be accepted to mere the Bridegroom, when our Savior shall call
us to judgment at the last day.

LORD we deserve that thou should leave us to the vileness of our own
hearts, and to the corruptions we nourish in them, and since we have so often
neglected and abused those good means which thou have ordained for our comfort
and salvation, we even deserve that thou should take them quite from us, or
turn them to be curses unto us; we deserve that thou should say to the
ignorant, be ignorant still, to the filthy, be filthy still, to the malicious
be malicious still, etc. till we have filled up the measure of our iniquiries; so
that at length thou might have a full stroke at our destruction, etc.

The Preachers Prayer.
GRant that thy Word may be delivered according to the true meaning of thy
Word, as it is left unto us by thy holy Prophets and Apostles, that it may be
divided with conscience, wisdom and discretion; with all plainness and
evidence, to the capacity of those that are most simple amongst us. And bless
we beseech thee our conceptions and memories that we conceive a right use of
those things that shall be delivered, and retain them in our minds with full
purpose of heart to put them in practice, etc.

O LORD be merciful unto us, pardon and forgive us all our sins, our many
abuses of thy great benefits and mercies, especially of thy holy Word, pass by
we beseech thee our many infirmities and weaknesses. Sanctify unto us at this
time our hearing, reading and conferring of thy sacred Word. Bless our
conceptions and memories, that we may rightly conceive it, and retain it in
our minds with full purpose of heart to practice it in our lives and
conversations. Range into order our worldly and wandering thoughts, that we may
with reverence and attention receive it, meditate of it and lay it close unto
our hearts, that so by thy good blessing we may bring forth much and good
fruit.

A thankesgiving for the Kings return out of Spain, and a prayer for his
prosperity.
ANd as we are specially and extraordinarily bound at this time, we humbly and
heartily thank thee, for the safe and comfortable return of our gracious
Prince CHARLES. It has been from thy great mercy and goodness, that thou
have gone in and out before him, and walked by him in his most dangerous
journey, and kept him in all his ways. That thou have been a brazen wall and
fiery pillar about him, both by Land and Sea, and preserved him, from every
hurtful snare both of soul and body, and broughtst him with peace and comfort
again unto his Fathers house. Blessed and bountiful LORD GOD, we heartily
praise and magnify, we humbly admire and adore, the length, and breadth and
height and depth of thy free grace and love therein to thy Church and Gospel
and all that are true of heart. Enlarge our hearts, we pray thee, with all
heartinesse and truth to bless thy great and holy Name, the fountain of all
bliss, the author of all our good, the wellspring of immortality and life
wherein we live and move and have our being, both natural, spiritual and
eternal. And good LORD go on with that glorious and happy work of blessing
him still, so settle and establish the fear of thy great Name and truth of our
blessed Religion in his Princely heart, that he may stand therein like Mount
Sion, and never be removed. So guide and direct, by thine own merciful hand
all those great affairs, which any ways concern him, and with wisdom from
the breast of the everlasting counsel of the LORD JESUS, that he may hereafter
prove a glorious and renowned Instrument for the advancement of the Gospel of
JESUS CHRIST that the heavenly lamp of thy blessed truth may shine fair and
pure upon us all our days, and afterward upon our children, and childrens
children to the worlds end, and the coming of JESUS CHRIST the second time.

A Prayer for wholesome and seasonable weather.
STay thy wrath most gracious Father, we humbly entreat thee in this heavy
judgment that is growing upon us by this unseasonable weather. Thou have
richly laden and crowned the earth with abundance of thy goodness and bounty.
Add this mercy we pray thee, to give a convenient season season to gather it in
comfortably. We confess and acknowledge before thee, we far rather deserve
that thou should rain down fire and brimstone upon our heads for our many
horrible sins, that great one the contempt of thy Word, which makes us worse
then Sodomites, then that thou should answer us in this our desire. But we
beseech thee in mercy make us first sensible of thy just displeasure, to be
humbled to the heart root, to part from all our evil ways, and to seek thy
face and favor extraordinarily, and then return unto us in thy wonted
compassion and love.

In visitation of the sick.
WE confess unto thee, merciful LORD GOD, that out of the consideration of
our own many pollutions and imperfections, and the glorious purity of thy holy
nature, we find and feel our selves most unworthy, and very fearful to
speak unto thy Majesty, either for our selves or others: yet because it has
pleased thee to give us a commandment and charge to perform this duty of
praying one for another, and having a gracious promise annexed of prevailing
with thee, if our prayers be faithful and fervent. We are bold here upon the
knees of our souls, with all the instancy and fervency our poor dull hearts
can possibly to entreat thy favor and mercy, for thy servant our dear
Christian Brother that lies here amongst us upon his bed of sickness under thy
visiting hand. Oh blessed LORD, we humbly beseech thee for thy CHRIST his sake,
thy holy Names sake, thy infinite mercies sake, thy covenant sake to look
down from Heaven upon him with the eye and affection of tender-heartednesse
and love* Let the loving countenance and cheerful face of JESUS CHRIST shine
comfortably upon him, let the powerful presence of thy sanctifying spirit
possess his heart wholly with all the graces of salvation, and blessings of
Heaven, let the word of thy grace put quickening life and sanctifying power into
his soul, that it may be raised from earth and sin to rest and peace in the
bosom of thy compassions. Deal with him, we pray thee, as thou usest to deal
with those whom thou fashions and frames for the joys and pleasures of the
life to come.

Sanctify O LORD unto him this present sickness, let it by thy blessings upon
it break and plow up his heart soundly and thoroughly to search and to try his
ways, that so out of the abundance of his feeling, he may power out a most
plentiful and sincere confession of his sins before thee, and groans and
sighs and desires unutterable for pardon and remission of them all in the blood
of thy Son.

Let it we pray thee beget and bring forth in him those blessed effects and
happy ends, which in such cases thou art wont to work upon the souls of holy
men and women. Let him upon this occasion be truly humbled under thy mighty
hand, with sight of his own vileness, frailty and sinful miseries, that from
thence may spring in him an unfeigned and longing desire after CHRIST, and
comforts of salvation. Let him shake off all carnal security, dependence or
confidence upon the arm of flesh, or upon any glory and vanity in this life.
Let his repentance upon this occasion be performed unto thee with more
sincerity, universality and thorownesse then ever heretofore.

A Prayer when any draws near unto death.
O Merciful LORD GOD, upon the knees of our souls, and from the ground and
bottom of our hearts we humbly beseech thee, that wherein soever Satan has
any ways blinded him, or his own heart deceived him, or how far soever the
image of CHRIST has been defaced and decayed in him. All his omissions of
good duties, all his defects and wants in faith, repentance, prayer, obedience,
etc. or whatsoever, I say we most humbly beseech thee to forgive and pardon
them all for the passions sake of thine only Son. Whatsoever at any time
since he had his being, he has either thought, or said, or done amiss, do
it away dear LORD, as though it had never been, and drown it for ever in the
bottomless sea of thine own mercy. Thou have promised by thy Prophet Isa.
44. 22. that thou will put away the transgressions of thy people like a cloud,
and their sins as a mist. Now we pray thee let the inflamed heat of thy
everlasting love shed through the bloody wounds of thy Son, and shining through
the Son of righteousness upon his soul, disperse and dissolve into nothing
all his iniquities, transgressions and sins. Thou have promised by thy Prophet
Micah 7. 19. That thou will cast them all into the bottom of the Sea. Now
blessed LORD GOD, we pray thee, as that mighty host of Pharaoh sunk into the
red Sea like a stone, so that neither Son of man, nor Sun of Heaven ever saw
their faces any more; so let all his sins be swallowed up for ever in the red
sea of CHRIST JESUS his blood, that they never show their faces again to his
shame, discomfort or confusion.

Thou have told us with thine own mouth, that thou inhabitest eternity, and
dwells in the high and holy place, and yet with him also, that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to give life to them
that are of a contrite heart; we humbly entreat thee for CHRIST JESUS his
sake, that thou would make good this promise to this thy servant, to the
utmost sweetness and comfort thereof.

O blessed LORD GOD, let thy glorious presence shine into his heart with all
those sweet refreshings, with which thou art wont to fill those happy souls
which depart in thy favor and at peace with thee. Let the precious deservings
and saving bloodshed of CHRIST JESUS appear fresh unto the eye of his faith:
And let the blessed Angel ministering Spirits to thy chosen, at thy appointed
time carry his soul with peace and comfort into the bosom of thy glory.

O LORD he is now going the way of all flesh, and his habitation is remooving
from him like a Shepherds tent. Help now LORD in this time of need. Comfort
him, we beseech thee, with all the strength of Heaven. Thou have within the
rich treasury of thy mercy, thine own tender hearted bowels of compassions,
the unvaluable blood shed of thy dear Son, the unutterable comforts of thy
good Spirit, the precious promises of life, and all the joys of Heaven, and he
has a poor soul that hungers and thirsts and longs for thy mercy and favor,
before all the world. O LORD our GOD we humbly pray thee crown that soul of
his with them all. Let thine own omnipotent hand encompasse him, let the strong
arm of the Son of GOD mightily protect him from all infernal power, let the
Spirit of all comfort raise in his heart those heavenly raptures and sweet
exultations of spirit, which are wont to fill the souls of them which are
ready to lay hold upon a crown of life, let thy blessed Angels at thine own
time, carry his soul into the bosom of Abraham, there to reign with thee in
rest, and joy through all eternity.

A Prayer in time of Plague.
O LORD our GOD, remember us we pray thee in mercy concerning that heavy and
sore judgment of the Plague of Pestilence that fearfully walks in
darkness, and wastes at noone day, which thy just wrath has kindled in the
chief City of this Kingdom. We pray thee, good Father, to bless us with
care and wisdom to meet thee now at first with truly remorsefull and
repentant hearts, both for our own personal sins, and the crying
abominations of the times: Let us seek thee with fervency and truth in days
of humiliation and fasting, and cry mightily unto thee that so turning al unto
thee with unfeigned repentance and sincere resolution to amend, thou may in
mercy heal our Kingdom, and turn thine indignation away from us.

A Prayer in time of Plague.
MOst gracious GOD, since by thy good providence we are met together at this
time solemely to humble our selves, and afflict our souls in thy glorious
presence, and before thy pure eye, we humbly beseech thee to give unto every
one of us spiritual ability, and the saving assistance of thy Holy Spirit,
that we may all do it unfainedly, fruitfully, effectually, in the name of
JESUS CHRIST.

O Most mighty, and blessed LORD GOD, our ever loving Father in JESUS CHRIST.
We poor wretches, thy unworthiest servants, do here humbly prostrate our
selves, our souls and bodies before thy Throne of grace, acknowledging from
our hearts, that we are the vilest of all Thy Creatures, by reason of our
manifold, and heinous sins, we are defiled and polluted in every power and part
both of body and soul, to the very heart root, and from the beginning of our
being, we laid at first a bloody foundation with Adam in Paradise, which
utterly undid all mankind, and had our hands in that horrible rebellion, which
brought all mischiefs and miseries, all sin and sorrow upon all the sons
and daughters of Adam from the Creation to the end of the world, yea and all
those Hellish woes and tortures which shall lie upon damned souls
everlastingly. O LORD strike our hearts with remorse for This sin, of which we
take so little notice, that we may be humbled for it, all the days of our
life; We came into this world very sinkes of all impurity, concupiscence, and
filth, we brought with us understandings stark blind in all heavenly things;
wills stubborn, froward, rebellious to every good word and work: Memory
sinful and defiled: hard and stony hearts, raging and bedlam passions, earthly
and sensual thoughts and imaginations, dead and guilty consciences; eyes full
of Adultery, wantonness, and wanderings, ear open to all rotten and ribald
talk, tongues set on fire by hell, hands full of iniquity, feet ready to
carry us to all manner of villainy, and vanity: even bodies and souls ingrafted
into the cursed communion of the Devil, and wicked spirits, by reason of that
original corruption, and crookedness which we drew from the loins of our
sinful Parents. And this hereditary mass of natural filth, lurkt in our
natures like venom and poison, which made us odious and abominable in thy
sight before we were able to sin: when we had power to serve the Devil, it
broke out upon us into as many fearful transgressions and abominable lusts,
as could possibly proceed from so empoysoned a fountain. And since that time,
good Lord thou know we have borne our selves like Traitors and rebels
against thy holy Majesty: we have actually transgrest all thy blessed Laws and
Commandments, every manner of way, in thought, word, and deed: fearfully
wounding our consciences, greeving thy good spirit, and treasuring up wrath
against the day of wrath.

O Lord we have grievously sinned against Thee, by contempt of thy Word, The
crying sin of this place: by Atheism, ignorance, profaneness, unbelief,
distrust of thy providence, carnal security, pride, hypocrisy; By
fearelissnesse, and forgetfullnesse of thy great Majesty, Love of this world,
and putting from us the evil day: by impatiency, discontent, inward Idolatry
in preferring some Creature before the mighty LORD of Heaven and Earth: By the
gross neglect, or wicked abuse of all the parts and kind of thy Divine
Worship: Precious and powerful are those heavenly Ord^nances of thine. Thy
Word preached or read, prayer, meditation, conference, vows, fasting, use of
good books, good company and the like, some of those have been utterly
neglected by us, others quite mard by formality and sloth.

We have highly dishonored thy Majesty, by taking thy great name in vain: in
want of due esteem, and an holy use of thy Titles, Attributes, Ordinances,
Creatures, Works of justice and mercy abroad in the world.

We have fearfully polluted thy Sabboths, and profaned all thy Ordinances upon
those blessed days.

And as we have thus wickedly neglected thy Worship and Service in the first
place, so we have been justly given over to bear our selves wretchedly, and
unworthily toward our brethren: we have behaved our selves unthankfully to our
Superiors: proudly to our Equals, unmercifully to our Inferiors.

Though it may be we have kept our hand from the gross act of murder: yet
LORD thou know our tongues have been swords, and our hearts full of blood.

We have been defiled with all manner of abominable lusts in our inward parts.

Our noble spirits that can never die, have been basely chained down to the
earth; and kept in a wicked and dunghill slavery, and bondage to the world and
worldly things.

In our tongues we have been guilty of a world of wickedness.

But above all, our hearts have been restless fountains of all ill:
innumerable litters, and swarms of vain, vile, filthy Thoughts, affections,
and desires have continually bred in them; very thorough-faires have they been
for Satan's impure suggestions, to walk up and down in: in regard of malicious
thoughts, very slaughter-houses; in regard of unclean lusts, very stews, and
brothel-houses; in regard of the heat of boiling concupiscence, very
hot-houses, and as the Prophet Hos. 7. 4. speaks, like a bakers Oven. And LORD
our GOD, these are but the heads of our sins: The branches, streams, and
particulars are infinite, able to sink us into the bottom of ten thousand
hells: And that which makes our sins a great deal more sinful, we have
wretchedly and stubbornely committed them against many means of
sanctification; against the ministry of thy Word; against many Sermons and
gracious invitations; against the motions of thy Spirit, the checks of our
conscience, the light of our knowledge; against our vows, and promises, Thy
many fatherly corrections, great mercies, and miraculous patience.

Good LORD we beseech thee to open our eyes, that we may see the length, and
breadth, the height and depth of this our woeful misery: The least of all our
sins without repentance may justly bring upon us all manner of plagues and
judgments in this world; despair and horror upon our beds of death, and
everlasting misery and torment in the world to come. What height of horror
then, and depth of hell do all our fearful pollutions, and provocations all
our life long deserve at thine hands?

Now good LORD our GOD help us, and for the blood of CHRIST give unto every
one of us before thee this day, true, and saving repentance, unfeigned godly
sorrow for them all. Let them all now come into our minds, and be represented
to the eye of our conscience, as so many fiery Scorpions, out of which, except
we take as it were the stings, by turning from them, while it is called to day;
they will sting hereafter with everlasting horror. Let us look upon them, as
upon so many foul feinds, (sin made the glorious Angels damned spirits) how
foul then do they make us, who are sons and daughters of Adam: Let us behold
them as so many foul and bloody instruments of CHRIST his death, and cruel
cutthroats to our own souls, etc.

Let us cast our eye also upon thy pure eye, and infinite indignation against
sin: by considering how in thy fierce wrath thou threwest down so many
glorious Creatures from Heaven. How thou cast Adam and Eve for eating the
forbidden fruit out of Paradise, drownedst the whole world, Cursedst Sodom and
Gomorrah as it were with hellish flame upon earth into ashes, cast off thine
own people who had been so dear unto thee: puts sometimes a guilty enraged
conscience even into an hell above ground, and have created and provided the
never dying worm, and unquenchable fire, even all the torments in hell, for
impenitent sinners.

O LORD let these considerations, of the foulness of our sins, and the
fearefullnesse of the curse due thereunto; but above all the beholding of JESUS
CHRIST, dying and bleeding upon the cross; make every one of our hearts to
break and burst and bleed within us for them all: That we may heartily, and
abundantly mourn over him whom we have pierced with them. And then most
merciful Father we humbly beseech thee be graciously pleased to open upon us
the blessed fountain for sin and for uncleanenesse, even the blood of that
Immaculate Lamb JESUS CHRIST the holy and the Righteous: Break thine own
sweet Name which is to forgive iniquity, transgression and sin, as a sweet
perfume upon our broken hearts, and let our poor souls cast themselves for
ever, with a lively and fruitful faith into the arms of JESUS CHRIST for
everlasting safety, and for ever cleave to all the promises in thy blessed
Book, as to the surest Rock, and let the soundness of the Truth of this our
cleaving unto Christ, be hereafter testified, and manifested, by an hearty
abandoning of all sin; by all the works of piety, justice, mercy, and truth,
by a sincere respect to all thy Commandments, by a fruitful partaking of all
thy Holy Ordinances, by a spiritual performance of all Christian Duties, by a
constant growing in all heavenly graces; and comfortable going on in the path
that is called Holy unto our dying Day.

And LORD our GOD, we being thus sincerely humbled, truly comforted and
reconciled unto thee in the face of Christ; we humbly beseech thee to enable us
by thy might, to cry mightily unto thee for pardon, and reformation of the sins
of this Kingdom, which are many and heinous, and have provoked thee many a
year; and to prevail with Thee in Christ's Name, for favor, and mercy upon
all our dear brethren and sisters that are now groaning under thy visiting
hand. Good LORD we beseech thee upon this occasion, and blessed opportunity
strike through the heart of every one in this land with a true remorse, and
godly sorrow, both for his own personal sins, and all the crying abominations
of the time: That so we all turning unto thee with unfeigned repentance, and
sincere resolution to amend, thou may in mercy command thine Angel to cease
from striking, heal our land and turn thine indignation away from us.

It is a heavy judgment, and horrible sickness, which devoures now and eats
up thy people in our chief City: And is fearfully scattered in many places
abroad: It is called thine hand, thy sword, the stroke of thine Angel, the
snare of the Fowler, the noisome Pestilence, the terror by night, the arrow
that flies by day, the destruction that wastes by noonday, and walks in
the darkness. O Lord our God, let us be humbled proportionably to the
extraordinary terror of thy heavy hand.

Thou Lord art acquainted with the anguish of all hearts, with the griefs, and
groans, the necessities, and wants of all distressed ones. And all those poor
souls that are still afflicted under thy mighty hand, with the grievous
Pestilence in any part of this Kingdom* lie in a most rufull, comfortless,
and desolate state, ordinarily they are destitute of all outward comforts; they
want the Physicians both of soul and body, the presence, and comforts of their
friends, neighbors, and all those who are dearest unto them. They are vexed
with the rage of a horrible disease, assaulted with the fearful sight of all
their sins, the pangs of death, and terror of thy dreadful Tribunal, we
humbly beseech thee most merciful Lord, to ease, comfort, succor, and relieve
them all, far above that which we can either think, or speak in their
behalf.

Especially Holy Father, we pray thee bless every one of them, with a right,
and holy use of this thine heavy hand upon them, give them saving sorrow, and
true repentance, the blood of thy Son, pardon of all their sins, persuasion
of thy love, peace of conscience, patience to endure their great extremities;
and a full recompense of all their outward desolations, with the sweet, and
inward consolations of thy blessed Spirit. And so sanctify good LORD this sore
judgment to the whole Kingdom, that we may all come from under thy visiting
hand, as gold out of the furnace, refined from the dross of our corruptions,
and filth of sin, and so fitted and sanctified for the more sincere and
glorious service of thy great Majesty unto our dying day.

O LORD our GOD, thou beholdest now from Heaven, what hearts we bring now into
thy glorious presence, how full of deadness, earthly-mindednesse,
listlesnesse, and unfitness to perform any holy duty with heavenly minds and
spiritual affections, we pray thee to stir them up, and quicken them by thy
Holy Spirit, that they may be ever feeling, and fruitful in the use of all
the Ordinances, give every one of us spiritual ability, and help from Heaven,
to go through it with life, and power effectually and pleasingly to thy great
Majesty in the name of CHRIST.

An other Prayer for confession of sin.
O Eternal GOD, great and fearful, strong and mighty, yet merciful, and
gracious, long-suffering, abundant in goodness, and truth: keeping mercy for
thousand, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin: we poor wretches, vilest
creatures do here humbly cast down our selves, at the foot of thy great and
glorious Majesty, acknowledging from our hearts, that we are most unworthy to
come into thy presence, or to call upon thy dreadful, and Holy Name. For thou
art a GOD of infinite Majesty, and glory, and dwell in light that no man can
attain unto, and we are vile worms, dust, and ashes, dwelling in houses of
flesh, and Tabernacles of clay, wherein we can do nothing but sin. Thou art a
consuming fire, and we are even as stubble before thee, ready to be devoured
by thy fierce wrath, if thou should deal with us, as we have deserved. Thou
art a GOD of pure eyes, and can not behold iniquity, and we are encompassed,
and laden with all manner of pollutions and sinfullnesse. Beside that bloody
rebellion with Adam in Paradise, and cursed Leprosy of Original sin, which
has universally corrupted all the faculties* and powers of body and soul,
filling them with all Hellish poison, confusion and pronenesse to ill, The
whole world has been worse for us, since we came into it, There is nothing
in Heaven or in Earth, but so far as in us lay, we have polluted, wronged,
dishonored and abused it one way or other.

1. We have villanously stroke at the Apple of thy pure eye; Holy Father, many
and many a time, with filthy thoughts, abominable lusts, and fearful
provocations, we have pressed thy mercies, even as a cart is pressed which is
full of sheaves, we have shamefully abused the riches of thy goodness,
forbearance, and long-suffering, leading us to repentance.

2. We have dishonored thy dear Son, by despising him in his Ministry,
neglecting his many gracious invitations, persecuting him in his members, and
shedding his blood in the Sacrament.

3. We have grieved thy good Spirit, by putting back his holy motions, or
smoothering them by worldliness, lusts, and earthly delights.

4. We have vexed thy blessed Angels, so much as in us lies, besides many other
ways, even in this house of thine, with unreverence, drowsinesse, sleepiness,
and the like, where they are beholding with delight the mysteries revealed in
the Gospel.

5. We have woefully abused all thy creatures, they should have ministered to us
continual matter of heavenly meditation upon thy greatness, and goodness,
power, and providence, etc. but our earthly minds have made no such holy use of
them, but we have covetously and sensually abused them to our own ends, and
carnal contentments.

6. Even this Kingdom, gracious Father, wherein we have been borne, and
bread, and enjoyed many good things, has been much worse for us; For we have
had our hands LORD thou know in pulling down upon us, this horrible
sickness of the plague of Pestilence, and other judgments, both temporal,
and spiritual: and without true, and timely repentance, are likely enough to
hasten the destroying sword, and besome of destruction to make an end of us.

7. We have abused all thy fatherly corrections, and chastisements laid upon us
in love, and for our good, they should have brought forth in us the peaceable
and glorious fruits of Righteousness, but they have rather begot murmuring,
impatiency, and coffeehouse.

8. We have abused thy mercies, which have been heaped abundantly upon us
above measure, and without number, even to increase our security, and
presumption and forgetfullnesse of the evil day.

9. We have abused the most gracious, and glorious day of visitation that ever
any people enjoyed upon earth: passing over it very unprofitably, like sons,
and daughters of confusion, not gathering any such stock and store of grace,
against our ending hour as we might plentifully have done.

10. We have abused all thy blessed Ordinances, those heavenly conduits of all
spiritual blessings, grace, and comfort: By our unpreparednesse before,
irreverence in the use of them, fruitlesnesse, and want of practice afterward.

11. We have wretchedly abused our own bodies, and souls, by abandoning them
to the service of Satan, and making all our members instruments of
unrighteousness to sin. Fearfully were they infected with Original sin at
first, but we have made them much more sinful by our actual transgressions
ever since; we have added a great deal of folly in respect of the mystery of
CHRIST: every way LORD thou know we are become exceeding sinful.

We humbly entreat thee in the name of the LORD JESUS to illighten our minds,
and open our eyes, to see the length, and breadth, the height, and depth, of
this our sinful misery, for which thou might justly bring upon us all the
curses in thy book, and all the torments in hell, and in the mean time plague
us with giving us over to more hardness of heart, blindness of mind,
deadness of conscience, slavery under our lusts, a reprobate sense, and to be
finally sealed up with the spirit of slumber against the day of vengeance,
which are far worse then all the plagues of Egypt.

1. Thou might Holy Father even thine own self for our many dishonours,
and disobedience against thee draw that sword against us, that would eat flesh
and drink blood: suffer that wrath to be kindled in thy bosom against us,
which would burn unto the bottom of Hell: come against us as a Bear robbed
of her whelps, and rent the caul of our hearts, and tear us in pieces like a
Lion when there is none to help.

2. Thine own dear Son might for ever deny us his precious blood, to wash
away the least stain from our sinful souls.

3. Thy Holy Spirit might never more put any motion into our hearts.

4. Thy blessed Angels might take no more charge over us, or be ministering
spirits unto us for our good, but leave us as a prey to that roaring Lion, and
his damned Angels.

5. All the Creatures might come justly armed against us, with their several
stings and rage to make an end of us, for rebelling against thee their Creator.

6. This Kingdom wherein we live, might justly fall into the mouth of some
horrible confusion, and we inwrapt in the miseries and desolations thereof.

7. All crosses, afflictions, and thine angry visitations upon us, might be
unto us the very beginnings of Hellish pains.

8. Thy many mercies unto us which should lead us unto repentance, might only
serve to far us against the day of slaughter.

9. The day of our gracious visitation might end, and the Sun set upon the
Prophets.

10. All thy blessed Ordinances might be unto us the savor of death unto
death.

11. Our bodies and souls might be most justly cast into the bottom of Hell,
there to be tormented with the damned for ever and ever.

O LORD our GOD, we humbly beseech thee for the LORD JESUS his sake, let a
serious consideration of this our sinfullnesse and cursednesse break our stony
hearts into pieces, make them burst and bleed within us, and good LORD our GOD,
we being thus sincerely humbled, let us get faster hold upon the LORD JESUS,
with a sound and fruitful faith then heretofore; by a steadfast looking upon
him, and all his sufferings, and satisfactions, from his coming from thy
bosom until his returning unto thy right hand again: by survaying all the
promises of of life sealed with his blood: by cleaving to his sweetest name:
which is to forgive iniquity, transgression and sin: and resting our selves
with a thankful, and joyful acknowledgement upon that blessed mystery of his
free grace, which reaches from everlasting to everlasting, etc.

A Thankesgiving.
MOst mighty and most glorious Lord God of Heaven and Earth, our light and
life, our Sun and shield: the strength of our hearts, and our portion forever.
Thou art the Author of all our good, the fountain of all our bliss, the
wellspring of immortality and life, wherein we live, and move, and have our
being, even our natural, spiritual, and eternal being. And therefore to thy
great and glorious Majesty, we render from the bottom of our hearts, all
possible praise, and thankesgiving, for all those glorious mercies, and richest
favors which thou from time to time, have abundantly and plentifully
vouchsafed unto us most rebellious, unthankful, and undeserving wretches.

We thank thee for the wellhead, and first fountain of them all, thy love
toward us, and of all our good every way, even the good pleasure of thine own
good will, thy free grace, and that mercy that reaches from everlasting to
everlasting.

We thank thee for putting us into this world in the best, and blessed part
and time thereof. We might have been borne, and lived in the time of the
flood, and so been drowned and damned, or within the compass of that almost
four thousand years between the Creation and the coming of CHRIST, out of
the partition wall, and so have had no means or ordinary possibility of
salvation. But have lived, and dyed in cursed Paganism, and Heathenish
Idolatry; we might have lived in that dark and damned midnight, and have
been choakt with the doctrine of devils: we might have lived at this time of
the world, but amongst Turks, Pagans, Infidels, where we should never have
heard savingly of JESUS CHRIST: It Is thy infinite mercy we have been borne,
and bread, and brought up in this happy time of the world, and blessed corner
of the Earth, this illightned Goshan, where we have enjoyed or might have
enjoyed, the glorious Gospel of our blessed GOD with such purity, power, and
peace.

We thank thee blessed GOD for making us reasonable Creatures, capable of grace
and immortality. Thou might have let us lie for ever in that abhorred state
of being nothing, and we should never have dishonored thee: Thou might
have made us of those Angels that are become wicked spirits, and then we had
been irrecoverably lost: Thou might have made us Toads, or Tigers, vermin,
or any vild thing: and we should never have prooved such Traitors, and rebels
against thee as we have been.

O LORD, we praise thee, that thou have made us of thy noblest Creatures, and
given us understandings like the Angels of GOD, so that if we be not cursedly
cruel to our own souls, they may be saved everlastingly by the means that
we enjoy.

We bless thee Holy Father, for thy Fatherly care of us, being yet in our
mothers womb, wonderfully, and fearfully made: For that miraculous mercy in
bringing us into this world, and giving us leave to see this light. For thy
gracious watching over us while we hung upon our mothers breasts, since that
time for thy merciful continuance to us of our life, health, liberty, outward
means, the use of our wits, limbs, senses; for all the good we have had by
good yoake-fellowes, good Parents, good children, good servants, good
neighbors, good governors, or any of thy good creatures, for every step we
have made upon this Earth, every bit of bread we have put into our mouths, for
every draught of air we have drawn into these frail bodies, and blessings
more then heart can think, or tongue tell, and which we can neither possibly
remember or express.

Above all, we of this place are bound to praise thy goodness most merciful
GOD, for that most incomparable Jewel, that ever this world had, or sons of men
enjoyed, the Ministry of the Word, and means of salvation, the discovery of
the mystery of CHRIST, and revelation of all thy blessed counsels. By the
power whereof so many amongst us, as have truly tasted how gracious and
glorious thou art in CHRIST, do bless, magnify, and admire, the bottomless
depth, and infinite height of thy free grace, for our happy conversion from
Satan to the living GOD, for our change from nature to grace, a greater and
more glorious work then the Creation of the world, wherein thou have improved
thine own infinite mercy, the unvaluable merit of thy Son, and the mighty
work of the HOLY GHOST, to make us of limbs of the devil members of CHRIST, O
blessed be that happy time, that ever we were so newborn.

We thank thee for pardoning all our sins, the least of which would have
damned us everlastingly: for renewing upon our souls the blessed image of the
LORD JESUS, the least glimpse whereof is infinitely more worth then the whole
world.

We thank thee for the LORD JESUS, and every drop of his precious blood, and
all other sweetness we find in him; for thy good Spirit, and his gracious
presence and residence in our souls; for thy blessed self, and all the sweet
Communion we have with thy holy Majesty; for the prayers of thy children,
Communion of Saints and the Intercession of JESUS CHRIST.

We thank thee heartily for any power or conquest thou give us at any time
over our sins; for all our ability to do thee any service, in any part or
kind of thy worship; for all those afflictions and temptations which thou have
sanctified for our spiritual good; for all the sweet and heavenly dewes of
spiritual joy, which thou have at any time shed into any of our hearts, from
the throne of grace by the influence of thy holy Spirit.

Blessed GOD, we thank thee infinitely for those glorious mansions of rest,
for our everlasting blessings and peace purchased for us, with the blood of
CHRIST: for every moment of eternity in the highest Heavens; where we shall
fully and for ever enjoy pleasures without end and past imagination. O blessed
Joys! O blessed Eternity! O everblessed GOD!

Furthermore gracious Father, we heartily praise thee for all those public
favors and blessings, which in great mercy thou have from time to time
vouchsafed unto this Kingdom, wherein we have had a large and comfortable part.

We thank thee good Father for the happy deliverance of this Kingdom from the
fiery and bloody times of Queen Mary; for raising up Queen Elizabeth, who
raised Religion as it were by a miracle from the dead: for all her miraculous
deliverances from the cruel conspiracies of the bloody Papists, especially
that in 88. For all her blessed days, wherein so many Holy Saints were sent to
Heaven.

We thank thee merciful GOD, for delivering us from the rage and blood of
that day so long looked for by the Papists, at Queen Elizabeth's death; for the
quiet and happy succession of King James of blessed memory, and all the peace
and prosperity, and freedom from Popery, and the destroying sword, especially
the Powder Plot.

We thank thee, Father, most heartily, for the gracious settling of King
CHARLES in the Royal Throne, for his life and safety, and the happy days we
enjoy under his blessed reign: and that thou have put into his royal heart to
give us this blessed liberty, and glorious opportunity, thus to humble our
selves, and afflict our souls in public before thy glorious Majesty. We
humbly entreat thee in the name of CHRIST let every one of us receive at thy
bountiful hands grace and power to do it unfainedly, effectually, and
savingly. For that purpose let thy blessings fall abundantly from Heaven upon
every soul here present, by the Ministry of thy Word, settle fast we pray
thee by the finger of thy Holy Spirit in our memories, judgment, affections,
hearts and consciences, all those points of Holy Truth with which we have
been acquainted with this day, that by thy merciful blessing they may prove
thy arm and power to every one of us for our salvation, for the conversion of
those who are yet uncalled, and the setting forward of those that are already
thine, in the ways of life, all holy conversation, and nearer communion with
thy blessed Majesty.

At last we cannot but reflect with compassionare hearts upon the grievous
miseries and bleeding sorrows of all our brethren and sisters afflicted with
the plague of Pestilence. Thou art a pitiful GOD, full of tenderness,
meltings, and compassions; thou art the Father of mercies, and GOD of all
comforts; now we humbly entreat thee for thy dear Sons sake, for thy
infinite mercies sake, for thy holy names sake, of all thy loves unto the LORD
JESUS, and that with all the earnestness and fervency our poor dull hearts
can possibly: that thou would be pleased to cast down thy compassionate
eye upon them all, stay the hand of thy destroying Angel, spare them good
LORD, destroy not the people of thine inheritance, put up we pray thee thy
arrows into thy quiver, and thy sword into the sheath, now at the joint
supplications of all thy dear children who are in this Kingdom, who are even
now wrestling with thee with all fervency of spirit, let our poor prayers, and
all theirs, even now meeting at the throne of grace, be mightily strengthened
and tendered unto thee by the intercession of the LORD JESUS, and pull down
speedily upon us this mercy and gracious deliverance, that we may praise thee
for evermore.

Lastly blessed LORD we humbly beseech thee to pardon in mercy all those
corruptions, infirmities, faylings, defects and imperfections which have been
mingled with these holy duties, sprinkle all our services, sacrifices and
persons with the blood of that immaculate Lamb JESUS CHRIST, the holy and the
Righteous: accept them and us graciously in him in whom thou art well pleased,
in whom thy soul does infinitely delight.

And so good Father we put our selves under the wings of thy gracious
providence, for our safety and preservation, and our souls into the hands of
the Holy Ghost for our further Sanctification, and final salvation in the name
of JESUS CHRIST, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, even to thee holiest
Father, to thee dearest Savior, to thee sweetest Spirit, be ascribed eternity,
infiniteness, and everlastingnesse of glory and praise world without end.

The Authors private Prayer.
O My good and merciful LORD GOD, most holy and dear Father in JESUS CHRIST,
I the vilest of all thy creatures and the worst that ever thou made, by
reason of mine own horrible sins, do here come unto thee upon the bended
knees of my bleeding soul to entreat thee and beg at thy hands with all the
instancy and fervency my poor, dull, cold heart can possibly for pardon, grace
and mercy, for favor, compassion and abundant forgiveness. O LORD my GOD,
thou know me full well, and thoroughly, even to the bottom of my heart and
beginning of my being: for besides that I came into this world laden with an
heavy burden and confused Babell of crookedness and corruption, in every part
both of soul and body: thou know what a cursed confluence of all manner of
pollutions, filthiness, uncleanenesse, strange abomination, abominable lusts,
and every villainous corruption that is wont to spring out of our impoysoned
nature, made my poor soul a very sink and Sodom before I was converted.

Reckon up here unto GOD particulars, out of abundance of feeling, with a
plentiful and sincere confession, and then go on.

Thus O LORD thou know, when thou very mercifully at the first did call
and knock at my heart by the Ministry of thy Word, with what stubbornenesse,
reluctance and delays I withstood the work of thy blessed Spirit for the
salvation of my own poor soul. How loath I was to open the eyes of my
understanding to let in the heavenly light of that holy truth, which only
could make me gracious here and glorious in thy Kingdom hereafter. And when
thou had something conquered the hardness of my heart, so that in some
measure I saw the hatefullnesse of my sin, and felt the horror of thy wrath for
them. O LORD thou know I did not so grieve, sorrow and take on, as so great
and grievous a sinner ought to have done, I did not mourn for them as the
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo, I was not sorry for them as
one is sorry for his first borne. I was not thrown down into the dust, and
into the place of Dragons, and into that depth of humiliation which the villainy
and variety of my many most horrible transgressions, far as much as the sins
of the vilest wretch that ever lived upon earth, required at my hands. Nay, and
when after the sense and acknowledgement of my vile and damnable estate, I saw
the blood and merits of my blessed Redeemer to be the only means to save me
from out of hell, I did not feel in my self that hunger and thirst, that
panting and longing, those groans, supplications and strong cries for that
sovereign and saving Plaster to heal my wounded soul, as mine own misery
and the excellency of my CHRIST should have moov'd me unto. And when at length
it pleased thee upon thy own free mercy to offer unto my sorrowful and
sinful soul thy dear Son, and all his precious sufferings, my unbeleeving
and naughty heart did not embrace, and lay hold upon him with that fastness
and faithfullnes as the certainty of thy promises, the truth and sweetness of
thy mercy most plentifully revealed in thy Word do straightly enjoyne me. Thus
LORD even every step of my passage out of nature into Grace, out of corruption
into Christianity, and the snares of the devil into the kingdom of Christ,
was, as thou know, fearfully hindered with the hardness of my own corrupt
heart, and fowly polluted with the lusts and rebellions of my sinful nature.

Nay, and that which grieves me the most, and should justly make my heart even
to bleed within me, since I gave my name unto religion, came into the
communion of Saints, and entered the ways of new obedience, I have been dragd
back by the cruel policy of Satan, and the accustomed yeeldingnesse of my
sensual dispositions into some vile and hateful abominations of the days of
my vanity, and time of unregeneration: and also overtaken with some new known
scandalous sins, to the grieving of thy good Spirit, the grievous wounding of
my conscience, and the disgracing of my profession. I have been very slack and
slow, and faint-hearted in promoting thy glory, furthering good causes and
performing holy duties. I have been very dull and cold, cowardly and formal
in all the ways of godliness, and my Christian warfare, in respect of many
Christians, who have not near been so great sinners before they were
converted, or received the thousand part of those favors from thee, as I have
done. I have been too heavy, heartlesse and uncomfortable in my profession,
conferences, godly exercises and practices of grace; I have not so rejoiced, as
I ought, in all the good things which thou have done for me, I have not walked
so cheerfully toward a crown of life, as formerly toward the damnation of
hell. Nay, LORD, and even in those things, wherein I should have the greatest
comfort, when I examine my naughty and deceitful heart, I find nothing but
confusion of face. Even my prayers, hearing and reading the Word, receiving the
Sacrament, meditations, conferences, etc. are so mingled with temptations,
worldly thoughts, by-respects, deadness and drowsinesse of spirit, so mard
with privy pride, and secret hypocrisy, that I cannot remember them without
grief of heart; neither dare I think upon them without prayer for the pardon
of their imperfections. I find great matter of humiliation in the best of
them, and I know thou might there also find much matter of damnation, if
thou should deal with me as I have deserved. O LORD my GOD, this is my
state, nay and indeed a thousand times worse and more woeful yet then I or the
tongue of an Angel can make it. And I have nothing in the world to say for my
self, I have none to go unto either in Heaven or in Earth, but only to
entreat my blessed Redeemer to speak unto thee in my behalf, to make
intercession for me with his glorious merits and precious bloodshed: and to
flee unto those melting bowels of thy Fatherly compassions and
tenderheartednesse, with which thou art wont to meet and fall upon the neck of
every humbled, sorrowful and brokenhearted sinner. I do therefore beseech
thee, merciful LORD, upon the bowed knees of my sin-grieved heart to pardon
and put away all my many horrible, heinous and abominable sins in the precious
blood of thine own dear Son. It is only the precious blood of that spotless
Lamb which has power and force to turn the deepest stain of scarlet and
crimson sins into the whiteness of snow and wool. And there was never poor,
sinful wretch had more need of the multitude of thy mercies, and abundance of
that saving blood to do away the multitude of my sins, and to wash and purge
and rinze my filthy and polluted soul. I pray thee therefore for Christ Jesus
his sake, for thy holy names sake, for thine infinite mercies sake, and for
thine own Covenants sake, to make good unto me the true sweetness, and utmost
comfort of all those gracious promises of life, which ere flowed from thy free
mercy, through the Passion of thy Son upon any poor soul, who sought thee
with truth of heart, and truly loved the glory of thy name. I strangely deceive
mine own heart if I do not hunger and thirst for thy favor and pleased
countenance more then for all the treasures of the earth, and the glory of the
whole world Make mine heart I pray thee, as thou would have it, and then be a
Sun and shield unto it, and crown it with all the comforts of Heaven, as thou
have promised: then seal unto it for ever the sure mercies of David, and the
salvations of the life to come. And I beseech thee also, to be so loving and
merciful to my longing spirit, so tenderhearted and kind to my trembling
heart, that I may feel in my conscience the sprinkling of the blood of thy
Son, for the appeasing of it, and that my poor soul may sensibly know what
great things thou have done for it, and that thou art reconciled unto it for
ever in Christ Jesus. Above all things fill my heart with the joyful feeling
of thy mercies in the pardon of my sins* that so my quieted soul may sweetly
sleep, and solace it self everlastingly in that peace which passes all
understanding, and in the bosom of thy compassions. And for the time to come,
I pray thee, to help me more and more to renew and increase my repentance, to
better and enlarge my obedience: and put to thine own holy hand to strengthen
every grace thou have given me. O Lord my God, I could never yet get near that
hand and hatred over my sins, as I have infinitely desired. I beseech thee now
at length let me feel thy special comfortable power mightily assisting me in
this holy business. The sins of my youth have been most hateful, execrable
and abominable, both to God and man, nay and I have been guilty of many
horrible villainies, which have been only known to thy All-seeing eye and mine
own corrupt conscience. I pray thee blessed Lord, for thy Christ his sake, to
work in my heart godly sorrow, true loathing, sound repentance and humiliation
for them all, in some good measure answerable and proportionable to their
heighnousnesse and excess. Oh grant me that happiness, that I may look back
upon all those foul pollutions, and sinful vanities of my unregenerate time
without either sensual delight, or slavish horror; even with a sincere hatred
and heavy mourning. Let me see them without any despairefull fear, being
assured they are done away with the blood of thy Son, as though they had never
been: and without any secret delight, lest I renew and multiply their guilt and
grievousnes upon my poor soul, which they have too fearfully wounded
already. And Lord I pray thee also, put quickening life, power and feeling into
my heart and affections in the performance of every holy duty, which is the
very heart and soul of a pleasing sacrifice and service unto thee. Increase in
me an holy fear, reverence and respect to all thy Commandments. Cause and
continue in me a sincere, universal, and constant obedience unto them all, and
that not from any slavish fear, private end or by-respect, but for conscience
sake, a soule-like fear of thee and love of thy glory. And if at any time, as
it is ordinary with Gods children, it shall please thee to exercise me with any
cross, disgrace, slander, discou^tenance, loss of goods, disease of body,
terror of soul, or the like, I pray thee ever sweeten and sanctify them unto
me by thy blessing: and grant that I may ever obediently with all peace of
heart, and patience of spirit submit to thy will and wisdom therein; being
fully assured that to me, which am in Christ, the sting, curse and poison of
them is most certainly pulled out by the Passion of thy Son. And resting ever
upon thy sweet and precious promises, that thou having given me Christ Jesus,
will never deny me any truly needful and and comfortable thing, while the
world stands. And that all things, even the rage of Satan, the malice of men,
the miseries of this life, nay even the sins of my soul, in an holy sense, by
thy blessings shall turn unto my everlasting good.

Add I pray thee, daily more and more strength and life, and new degrees unto
all these graces, which it has pleased thee in some measure to plant in my
soul of thy own free mercy, and for the mediation of* thy Son. Increase my
knowledge in the great mystery of grace, my reliance and trust in thee, as one
most powerful, merciful and true; my hope and patient expectation of thy
presence, and assistance in all things that are to come; my love of thee, thy
Word, thy children and all things that belong unto thee; my zeal and courage
for thy glory and truth and good causes and good men; fear of thy great name;
humbleness and lowliness of mind. The Spirit and power of Prayer; Patience
and contentedness in all troubles and trials, etc. or what other holy virtue
thou have in great mercy vouchsafed unto me. Grant I pray thee and give me
grace to employ and improove them all to the utmost and for the best advantage
in procuring thee glory, good unto thy Church and comfort unto mine own soul.

Bless I pray thee and be merciful to all creatures, and to the whole world.
Draw, if it be thy blessed pleasure Turks, Infidels, Jews, to the light and
acknowledgement of thy saving truth, and the salvation of their souls. Bless
our King specially and principally, and all his Dominions. Root out of them
we pray thee, all ignorance, profanesse, popery, pride, oppressions and all
the works of the devil. Purge we humbly and earnestly beseech thee this
Church and Kingdom wherein we live, and that mightily and speedily from all
disorders, sedition, faction and corruptions, which any way dishonor thy
Majesty, vex thy children or hinder a free and glorious passage of the Gospel
of thy Son. Bless the people committed to my charge, my own Family, my
friends, my goods, house, cattle and all things that any ways belong unto
me. Remember I beseech thee with special love and tender-heartednesse all thy
dear children whersoever they be, especially those who desire my prayers for
them, and have made the troubles of their souls known unto me. I pray thee
for thy Christ his sake, let them fare the better for the poor prayers of thy
weak and unworthy servant.

Gracious Lord, I praise and magnify from the ground and bottom of my heart,
thy glorious name, and the sweetness of thy mercy for that golden chain of
comfortable providence, which thy merciful hand has linkt together for my
good ever since I was borne. Thou gave me a most loving and kind Father, a
very skillfull and learned Schoolmasters, worthy and ingenuous education, etc.
Thou preservedst me mightily and almost miraculously from mayming or sudden
death. Thou followedst me bountifully with thy favors at the University; and
did infinitely above all hope and expectation, raise up variety of means
from time to time for my maintenance there, etc. Thou broughtst me at length
fairly, easily and uncorruptly into this place and pastoral charge I now
enjoy. Thou have given me out of thine own free, immediate mercy a dear and
loving Wife, incomparably the fittest for me that could have been found upon
the face of the whole earth. But above all, the comforts which thou have
brought unto my poor soul by my Book have been most unspeakeable and
glorious. Blessed for ever be thy glorious name therefore, etc. In a word, I am
verily persuaded there was never wretch upon earth, that received so many
mercies, favors and comforts from thee, and returned so little
thankefullnesse, service and obedience unto thee. O Lord my God, forgive I pray
thee the infinite disproportion of thine immeasurable bountifullnesse to me,
and my most weak imperfect and sinful obedience and service unto thee. O
forgive it, forgive it for Christ Jesus his sake, etc.

FINIS.

