A profitable and necessary doctrine, with certain homelyes adjoined thereunto
set forth by the reverend father in God, Edmunde Bishop of London, for the
instruction and enformation of the people being within his diocese of London,
and of his cure and charge.

Declina a malo, and fac bonum. Presis, vt profis.



The Preface of the Bishop of London to the reader.
WHere as in the time of the late outrageous and pestiferous (...), being here
in this Church, and realm of England al godliness, and good nes, was despised,
and in manner banished, and the catholyque trade, and doctrine of the church
(with a new enuyouse and odyous term) called, and named papystry, like also
as devout religion, and honest be hauiour of men, was accounted and taken for
super stition, and hipocrisye. And thereupon (by sundry ways and wiles
pernicious, and evil doctrine, was sown, planted and set forth, sometimes by
the procedyng preachers sermons, sometimes by their prynted treatise, sugared
all over with lose lybertye, a thing in deed most delectable and pleasant unto
the flesh and unto al unruly persons, sometimes by readyng playing, singynge,
and other like means and new devises, by reason whereof, great insolency
disordre, contention, and much inconvenience daily more and more: did ensue to
the great dyshonor of God, the lamentable hurt, and destructyon, of the
subjects, and the notable reproach, rebuke, and slander of the hole realm.
The people whereof, by sondri wicked persons, were borne in hand that they had
gotten God by the foot, and that they were brought out of tira^ny darckenes,
and ignorance into liberti light, and perfytte knowledge, where in very deed,
they were brought from the good to the bad. And from gods blessyng (as ye
proverb is) in to a warm son: infected with all error, and noughtynes,
drouned in sensualytie and malice, and armed with unshamefast boldness,
presumption, and arrogantye, taking upon them to be guydes, instructours, and
tea chers of other, where they themselves were in very deed utterly blind,
ignorant, and void of knowledge, only bent to destroy al good rule, and
order. I have for these causes, and other honest consyderatyons, thought
(consyderyng the cure and charge I have of all such as are of my Dyocesse of
London) it to be mete, conuenyent, and necessary for my part, earnestly to
travail and labor, with my chapleines and friends, both that errors,
heresies, and noughtye opinions may clean be weeded, pourged, and expelled out
of my dyocese (a great help whereunto is given by diverse prouysions made by
the Kings and Queens most excellence Maiestyes, and especyallye by that
godly proclamatyon, which of late was sent forth by their graces,
concerning the bringing in of certain heretycall and noughtye books) and
also that a very pure sincere, and true doctrine of the faith, and relygion of
Christ, in all necessary points of the same, faythfullye, playnelye, and
profitable, be set forth within my said dyocesse, to the good erudition, and
instructyon of all the people within the same. And therefore have at this
present, for mine own diocese, caused this present book with homelies there
unto adjoined, to be set furthe: that the said people (according to the will
and commandment of the great king and prophet David) may declyne from evil,
and do that thing which is good. And the order of this book is this. First
because without faith it is impossyble to please God, there shall be, in the
beginning, some thing spoken of faith, to know what it is, and how it is to be
taken here in this book. Secondly because the sum and pithe of our christen
faith is brefely collected, and co^prysed in effect, in our commen Creed,
therefore the said Creed, to teach us what, and how to believe, shall be
plainly and truly set forth, and also declared. Thyrdely, because there are.
vii. Sacraments of Christ's catholyque church, wherein God does ordynarily
work and participate unto us his special gifts, and graces, here in this
life, therefore in the third place, the said. vii. Sacraments shall be set
forth, and expounded. Fourthlye, because the. x. commandments are the high
way, ordained by God, in which every one in this life must walk, if he will
come unto the bliss of heaven: therefore the said.x. commandments, shall
orderly be set forth, and have also their declaratyon. Fyftely, because we
ourselves, as of our selves are unable to do good, and therefore need always
the assistance, grace, aid and help of almighty God, without which we ne (...)
can continue in this life, nether yet do any thing acceptable in the sight of
God, whereby to attain the life to come: therefore in the (...) place there is
a rowine for prayer, as whereby to obtain grace and help at Gods hands. And
that prayer is there set forth, which Christ him self, being here in this
world, did make and give to his disciples, that is to say: the Pater noster,
which conteyneth in it al things necessary for a christen man here in this
life: and this Pater noster has also his exposition.

Sixtelye, because the Aue Maria is a prayer taken out of Scripture, and
contains in it a blessed mat ter, and a joyful rehersall and magnifienge of
God, in the work of Christ's incarnation, wroughte in the womb of the blessed
virgin Mary, and she thereby worthelye to be honored and worshipped, therefore
the said Aue Maria, with the declaration there of, is in order following the said
Pater noster.

Seventhly, because persons, vicars, and curates, are commanded by the law,
to read and declare unto their paryshyoners the. vij. deadely sins, the
viij. beatytudes, and certain other things, therefore in the. vij. and, viij.
places, there are set forth at length the said things, with exposition and
declaration of the same. And albeit these things so set forth, being red and
declared (...) the people, delyberately, and plainly, may seem sufficient, and
the people thereby bound of reason, to be content therewithal, as having all
those things, which in (...) wise are requisite and necessary for their soul
health. yet to the intent they shall have no cause to murmr or grudge, for lack
of certain books in the english tongue for their instruction, or yet for
lack of preaching unto them, they shall in the. ix. place of this book,
though they cannot read, have certain homelyes, to be on the Sondayes and
holy days, by their persons, vicars, or curates, read unto them in the
English (...), trusting that the people thus ordered and taught, will take
this my doing in good part, and study as well to profyt them selves thereby,
as I and my chapleynes have been studious and careful herein to do them good.
And the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, give us also plentyfully of his
grace, that every one of us, in all parts, may do our duties, and that we
all may live in rest and quietness, and specially in the unity of Christ's
catholic church, and his religion, loving and seruyng God, with all our
heart in holiness and ryghteousnes, all the days of this our life, so yt
finally we may attayn to the life that never shall fail, but continue for ever,
which grant unto us the father, the son, and the holy gooste, preserving
our good king and queen in all joy and felicity, long to continue, to their
glory and our comfortes.

Amen.
Concerning faith, what it is, and how it is to be considered, and taken,
here in this book.
ACCOMPLISHINGE the promys made in my preface, for as much as faith is the
fundation and ground of all our Christian religion. I shall now entreat, and
speak thereof. And know you, that although this word faith, be diversely
taken, both in profane Aucthors, and also in Scripture, sometimes signifying
trust, sometimes truth, sometimes conscience sometimes (...), sometimes
credulity, sometimes credence, sometimes promys, sometimes proof, sometimes
help, sometimes the gift or grace of God, and such like: yet here in this
book or process, there shall not be cheifely and principallye entreated, or
spoken of every kind of faith, as in eve ry way it may be considered: but
only of two kinds or acceptions thereof.

And First do you understand, that faith may be considered by it self, as it
is a several gift of god, separate, and distinct from hope, and charity, and
being so considered, and taken, it signifies and imports a persuasion, and
belief, wrought by god in man's heart, whereby man assenteth, grants, and
takes for true, not only that God is (which knowledge is taught, and
declared, by the maruaylous work of the creation of the world, as S. Paul
says in his epistle to the Romans) but also that all the words and sayings
of God (which be releued and opened in the scripture) are of most certain
truth, and infallible verity. And not that these things one ly are to be
credyted and assented unto, but also that all things else (which were taught by
the Apostles, and which have been by a whole universal consent of the Church
of Christ, ever sithe that time contynually taught, and taken always for
true) ought to be received, accepted, taken and kept, as a true and perfect
doctrine apostolic.

This then is the first acception of faith, which man has of God, and wherein
man does not leave to his own natural knowledge (which is by reason) but he
leauethe to the knowledge attained by faith: without which faith, man is
ignoraunte and blind, and cannot understand, according as the prophet Esaias
affirms in his. vii. Chapter, saying: Nisi credideritis, non intelligetis.
That is to say: unless ye believe, ye shall not understand. This faith is the
beginning, the entry, and the introduction unto all Christian relygion, and
Godlynes: For as S. Paul says in his. xi. Chapter of his Epistle to the
(...). He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a reward
unto them which do seek to please him.

And this faith, although it be such a beginning such an entrye, and such an
introduction, very necessary for the beginning of all ryghtousnes, yet if it
do proceed no farther, adioynyng with it, hope and charity, it is called in
Scripture, a dead faith, be cause it is void and destitute of life, and
wantethe the help, and efficacy of charity. And this much for faith as it is
considered in the first acception.

Faith as it is considered in the second acception, may not be alone, but
must needs have hope, and charity, annexed and joined unto it. And faith so
taken, does signify not only the belief and perswa sion which was before
mentioned in the first acception, and taking of faith: but also it signifies a
sure confydence, and hope, to attain all whatsoever god has promised for
Christ's sake, and it signifies, and comprehends also, a hartye love to GOD,
and an obedience to his commandments.

And faith thus considered, is a lively faith, and works in man a ready
submission of his will to Gods will. And this is the effectual faith which
works by charity, and which (as S. Paul testifiet), unto the Galathians)
is of value and stre^gthe in Christ Jesus.

By this faith, Abraham, not knowing whyther he should go, went out of his
country, and dwelte in the land of beheste, or promise, as in a strange
land, lokyng, and trustyng for a city, founded, and builded by almighty God.

By this faith also, Abraham, when he was tempted, was ready to offer up his
only begotten son (...), in whom he looked for the promise, nothing
doubting, but that God who made the promise, was able to raise him up again
from death.

And in this sort and wise, faith is taken, in the most part of the
examples, which be recyted of S Paul, in the. xi, chap of his Epistle to the
Hebrwes

And this faith so considered and taken, every Christen man does promise,
profess, and covenant to keep, when he does receive the Sacrament of
Baptysme.

And here is to be noted and considered, that all the promyses of god, made at
any time to man, after the fall of Adam, for Christ's sake, are not absolutely
and puerly made, but under this condytyon, that is to say: that man should
believe in God, and with the grace of God given for Christ, endeuer him self
to accomplish, and keep the commandments of God: so that if man do believe
in God, and with the said grace, do endeuer him self to the best of his po
were, to keep and accomplish the said commandments, man may justly then
challenge the said pro mises, so graciously made unto him on gods part: and if
on the other side a man will not believe in God, and with the said grace endeuer
him self to the best of his power, to keep and accomplysh the said
commandments, then man can not justly challenge in any wise the said
promyses, or the benefyte thereof, in as much as he has not fulfilled and
kept on his part the said commandments, which were part of the promise
and conuenante, made no other wise by God unto man, but under condytion, as the
Prophet Dauyd plainly declares, in the. lxxx. and lxxxviii. Psalms, and
Christ in the. xix. of Mathe w. (...), (...) mandata. That is to say: (...)
thou wylt enter into life, keep the commandments. The Church the refore,
according unto the same, intending that manne should always have this in
good mind, that is to say: that the promises of god to man, be made but upon
condycion, and that with out keeping of the condytyon, no man is partaker of
Gods promyses, has taught, and ordained, that men before they do receive
baptysme, shall promise and conuenaunt, to fulfill the said condytion, and to
forsake the Devil, and the world, and to serve only GOD. Of which promise and
special conuenaunte, whereby man thus byndeth himself to God, man is called
in Latin, infidelis, that is to say: Faithful: And on the other side, if he
never made the promise or con uenaunt, or after yt he has made it, he does
renounce and refuse it, then that man in that case is among the Christen
people, called in Latin, Infidelis, That is to say: Unfaythfull, or Heathen.
And because God (as before is declared) has made promise and conuenaunt with
man, and is ever in his words and pro myses most true, most just, most
constante, and will (as we must most assuredly believe and think) perform and
accomplish the same, so far forth as he has promised in any wise,
therefore God is call led (as he is in very deed) Fidelis et verax, that is to
say: Faithful and true, obseruyng and keeping his faith, that is to say: his
promise to man: requyryng that man should like wise keep his faith and
promise toward him.

Now of these things that are before spoken, it is manifest that faith as it
is taken in the second accep is the perfect faith of a true chrystian man
containing the obedience to the hole doctrine, and religion of Christ. And
after this sort is faith taken of S. Paul in his epistle to the Romans,
and in other places of Scripture, where it is said that we be justified by
faith. In which places man may not think that we be justified by faith, (as
faith is a several virtue, separated from hope, and charytie, from fear of
God and from repentance) but by faith there is meant not the late invented and
devised faith that is to say, only faith, or faith alone, but faith with the
foresaid virtues, coupled, and joined to gether, conteinyng as is aforesaid
the obedience to the hole doctrine and religion of Christ.

And here by the way is to be noted, that every man that does offend God, does
not utterly lose his faith thereby, for both they that do sin by frailty and
soden motions (from which even the just men are not holly free, and be taught
therefore of Christ to say with other. Forgive us our trespaces etc) And the
other also which aduysedly fall into deadely sin (as they that do commit
murder, adulterye, and other abominations, albeit they be fallen from the
liuelye and perfect faith, for that they are disobediente to ye doctrine and
religion of Christ which they did know, yet there does remain in them so
offe^dyng, the certain and assured knowledge of God, and his doctrine, which
is the faith, after the first sort and acception of faith.

And that these. ii. things (it is to wit, knowledge and obedience) are
sometime separated and a (...) Christ in the. xii. chapter of Saint Lukes
Gospel, does plainly declare it, speaking of a servant that knows the will
of his master and does it not. And likewise S. James in his epistle says,
that faith may remain without charity.

Wherefore the truth being thus, a transgressoure of the law of Almighty God,
after baptysme, does keep a remorse of conscience and the light of knowledge by
faith, whereby he sees the remedies, how to at tayne the remyssion of sin,
and by a special gift of further grace, is moved to use the same remedies,
and so by faith walks the ways ordained to at tayne remyssion of sin, as
in the Sacrame^te of pe naunce shall be more perfytlye hereafter declared.

Thus have you hard the. ii, acceptions or takynges of faith, and that the
faith of knowledge, may remain in him that has fallen from the perfect faith
of a Chrystian man. But whether there be any special, particular knowledge,
which man by faith has certaynely of himself, whereby he may testyfye to
himself that he is of the predestynates, which shall persevere to the end in
their calling, there is not spoken as yet of, nor (...) can by the Scryptures,
or Dectoures, be proved that any such faith can or ought to be preached, (...)
taught.

Truth it is, that in the Sacraments (...) by Christ, and used in his
Catholic Church, here in earth, we may constantly and assuredlye believe the
works of god in them, and the applycation of his grace and favor therein (to
our present comfort) with assurance also, that he will not fail us if we
fall not from him: And therefore we so contynewyng in the state of grace with
him, have warrante and may believe undoubtedly that we shall be saved.

BUT FORASMVCH as our frayltye, and noughtines, ought ever to be feared in us,
it is therefore expedient for us, to live in contyuuall watch, and in
contynuall fight with our enemies, the devil, the flesh, and the world, and
not to (...) to much of our perseueraunce and contynuaunce in the state of
grace (which on our behalf, is uncertain and unstable) but dilygently and
often to remember the godly and wise lesson of S. Paul in the. x. chapter of
his first epistle to the Corinthyans, where he says. Qui se existimat (...),
Videat ne (...), that is to say: he that thinks or judges him self to
stand, let him take heed that he fall not. For all though GODS promysses
made in CHRIST be immutable, yet (as it has been said before) he does not make
them to us, but with condition So that his promise standing we may yet fail
of the effect of the promise, hicause we keep not our promis. And therefore if
we assuredly do reckon upon the state of our (...) (as grounded upon Gods
promises) and do not remember therwyth that no man shall be (...), unless he
lawfully fight, we shall tri umphe before the victori, and so look in vain for
that which is not other wise promised, but under a (...), and after this sort
every christen man must and ought assuredly believe.

Here follows the creed, or the. xii. Articles of the Christian faith.
i. I believe in God, the father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth. ii. And in
(...) Christ his only son our Lord. iii. Which was conceived by the holy
ghost borne of the (...) Mary. iiii. Suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucifted,
dead, and buried, and descended into hell. v. And the third day he rose again
from death. vi. He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God,
the father almighty. vii. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead. viii. I believe in the holy Ghost. ix. The holy Catholic church. x. The
(...) of saints. The forgiveness of sins. xi The resurrection of the body.
xii. And the life everlasting.
Amen.
Here follows thexposition, and declaration of this creed.
AS concerning this creed, there are. v. points generally to be marked and
observed, first that al christen people ought and must constantly believe
maintain and defend al those things to be true, which be comprehended in
this creed, and in the other two credes, whereo^ the one is used to be said at
Mass, being approved and establyshed by ancient general counsayles, and the
other was made by the great clerk and holy man Athanasius. And likewise we
must also constantly believe, mainteyne, and defend, al other things which are
comprehended in the whole body, and canon of the Bible.

Secondely, that all things contained in this creed, or in any of the other.
ii. credes, or in the whole body and canon of the said bible, are so necessary
to be believed for man's salvation, that whosoever will not constantlye believe
those things, or will obstynately believe the contrary of them, cannot (in
that state remaynyng) be the true and very members of Christ, and his espouse
the Church, but either are very infideles, or heretics, and members of the
Devil, with whom if they repent not, they shall be per petually dampened.

Thyrdely, that al Christen people ought, and must not only believe, maintain,
and defend, al ye said things as most certain and infallible truths of
Gods word, never by any contrary opinion, or authority, to be altered, or
conuelled, but also must take and interpret, all the same things, according
to ye same sense, understanding and meaning, which the Holy ghost has given
thereto, and which also the approved Doctors of the Catholic Church, have
received and agreably defended.

Fourthlye, that all true Christen people, must utterly refuse, and condemn
all those opynyons which were of long time past condemned in ye iiii, holy
Counsayles. That is to say: in the Counsel of Nyce. Consta^tynople, Ephese,
and Calcedonense.

Fyftly and fynallye. That although all things as they are now pertyculerlye
used in ye catholyque Church here in Earth, are not so distinctly,
particulerly, and expreslye in all words, fashions, cyrcumstaunces, and
points, set forth, taught and expressed in Scripture, yet the pithe, the
substance, ye matter, the foundation and ground, with the effect thereof in
general words are not only comprehended and contained in Scripture, but also
by express words confyrmed by other sufficient authority. And seeing the
Catholyke Church has so received, believed, allowed, and approved, the said
things, time out of mind, therefore it shall be a very great presumption and an
uncomely part, any man to control or contempne any such things so received,
believed, allowed and approved by the said catholic church, and in so doing
the same is in deed not worthy to be taken or reputed for a faithful membre or
obediente child of the said Church, but for an arrogant, noughty, and very
wicked person.

Here follows the exposition or declaration of the first article of the Creed,
which is.
I believe in God the Father almightye, maker of heaven and earth.
FOr the better, and more plain understanding of this article, ye must know,
that this word (Believe) taken by it self, generallye, and symplye spoken, is
to have faith, after the first acception, or taking of faith, as it has been
before already decla red, and showed unto you, but these words (I believe in)
have a farther, and more particular understanding, it is to wit, to have faith,
after the second acception, manner, or taking of faith. And therefore when we
are commanded to believe in God, we must not only assent, grant, and take
for true, this one thing, that God is (which in deed the very deuiles them
selves do acknowledge and confess) or this second, that all the words and
sayings of God reveled in Scripture, are of most certain truth, and
infallible verity, or this third, that al things which were taught by the
Apostles, and which have been by a whole universal consent of the Catholyke
Church, (...) taught, and taken always for true, ought to be received, and
kept, as a perfect doctrine Apostolyke. But also we must have a sure confidence
and hope, to attain whatsoever God has promised for Christ's sake, and we
must also have an hartye love to God, with obedyence to his commandments,
and then we do not only (...) God but also we do believe in God. This manner of
(...) that is to say: I believe in, we ought to have on (...) in God, and not
in any other creature of God else, be it neuerso excellent. And therefore in this
creed, ye said manner of speaking I believe in is used only in ye. iii. articles
which concern the three persons in trinity, that is: the Father, the Son,
and the holy ghost, for we do, and ought to say: I believe in God the Father: I
believe in God the Son: and I believe in God the holy ghost: and we do not so
say in any thing else, as more at large shall be said, when it shall be spoken of
the Catholyke Church.

We must further note, that as by this article we are bounden to believe
stedfastlye that both God is, and that he is true in all his words and promises
and as we are bounden to believe like wise that god is omnypotent, and creator
of heaven and earth, and that we must with this our belief, love god, and cleave
only to him with all our heart and power, continuynge, and dwelling still with
him in love, and obey inge unto his will, as well in all our inward thoughts and
affections, as also in our outward acts and deeds, so must we abhor, and
forsake all vice and noughtynes. and not wysshe or desire of God, any evil or
ungodly thing. And over this, we must con stantly betake, and commit our
selves, and all ours wholly unto God, and fix all our hole hope, trust, and
confidence in God, and we must quiet our selves in him: beleuyng perfitly, and
assuredly, that he (...) in (...) show no less goodness, love, mercy, grace and
favor unto us, then he promised by his word to do with us, using our
selves, as before is said.

(...) we must note, touching this article, that God is a spirytuall, and an
invisible substance or nature, of infinite power, and eternal, without
beginning or endyng, and of incomprehensible knowledge, wisdom, goodness,
justice, and mercy. We must also note for farther declaraiton of this article,
that albeit there be but one very true God, beside, or without which there is
no other God, yet there are in the Godhede three distinct persons, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy gooste: and though they are three persons, yet
they are not three gods, but all oue God, one nature, one substance, all one
everlasting essence or being, and all like and equal in might, power
wysedom, knowledge, ryghtuousnes, and in all other things else, belonginge to
the deity. And moreover we must know and believe, that God the Father is the
first person in this Trynitie and godheadde, yea, and the Father of his only
begotten Son, which is the second person in Trinytie, and that he the said
Father did beget of his own substance the said second person, by eternal
generation, that is to say: by generation that never had be gynnynge.

And where this article conteyneth farther, that God ye father is (almighty) it
is to be noted that this word almyghtye, is as much to say as that God the
fathere may do all things that he will, in heaven, and in earth, and that
nothing to him is impossible, and that his godly power and might, does, excel
infinitelye, and incomparablye, all powers, in Heaven, earth, and hell: So
that all other powers which be in Heaven, earth; or hell, be nothing as of
them selves, but have all their might, force, and strength of him, and be all
subject unto his power, and cannot resyste, or let the same.

And here with farther is to be learned, that although God be omnipotent, and
of infinyte power, yet he is not the aucthor, or worker of any sin, for
whenever any sin is done by any creature, the same is wrought by the
malice of the devil, or fre will of man, or by both, God only sufferyng and
permyttynge the same to be done, and not by his power and work, styrryng up,
fertheryng, or assystyng, the malice, or the evil thought or deed in that
behalf.

Fynallye, concerning those last words of this Article, it is to wit.
Maker of heaven, and earth. we are taught and instructed thereby to be leave
that God the father Almyghtye did at the beginning create, form, and make of
naught, Heaven, and Earth, and al things visible, and invisible and that he
did give unto them al their power, and might, and that he so, from time to
time, continually does preserve, govern, sustain, and maynetaine, the whole
world, and all the creatures therein, by his only goodness, and high
prouydence, that without his continual workyng, nothing is or can be able in
any wise to endure.

The exposition or declaration co^cerninge the second Article of the Creed,
which is.
And in Jesus Christ, his only son our Lord.
IN this article. iiii. things ar specially to be noted First that the second
person in Trinity, is very Jesus, the second, that he is Christ. The third,
that he is an only Son, and ye fourth, that he is our lord For the better
understanding of which four points ye shall know that Jesus is as much to
say, as a (Savior) S. Mathewe bearing witness thereunto in the first
Chapter of his Gospel, where the Angel of God appearing to Joseph in a
vision or dream, and speaking to him of the blessed (...) Marye, and of the
notable birth that she should be beutified withal, does say: Pariet autem
filium and uocabis normen eius (...), ipse enim saluum faciet populum suum a
(...) corun. That is to say: She shall bring forth a son and thou shall
call the name of him Jesus, for he shall, make his people safe, from their
sins. According whereunto S. Luke in the first chapter of his Gospel says,
that the Aungel of god (...) unto the said Uyrgin these words. Ne time as
Maria, (...) enim gratiam apud deum, ecce (...) in utero et paries (...) et
uocabis (...) That is to say. Fear thou not Mary, for thou have found grace
before God. Lo: or behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth
a son, and thou shall call the name of him Jesus. And agreeable hereunto S.
Luke in the second chap. of his said Gospel says. (...) postqua^ (...) dies
octo ut circu^cideret (...), puer, uocatum est nomen cius Jesus, quod (...) est
ab angelo priusquam in utero conciperetur. That is to say: And after that
eight days were perfited or ended, that the child should be circumcised, the
name of him was called Jesus, which was called or named of the Angel before
that he the said child was conceived in his mothers womb.

Now forasmuch as the second person in Trinite was eternally preordeyned, and
appointed, by ye decre of the whole Trinity to be our redemer, and Sa uiour,
therefore in this second Article here, he is called Jesus, And as concerning
this other name Christ, (wherewith also the said second person in Trynyte is
called and named) ye shall know that Christ is as much to say as anointed,
And by cause that God has anointed Christ (as the great Prophet Dauyd in
his. xliiii. Psalm, does testyfye) with the oil of gladness above his
partakers or fellows, and has both anointed him king and priest therefore the
said second person in Trinytye, is and ought to be called Christ. And where
the said second person is called also here in this article, an one ly son,
ye shall for the better understanding here of know, that although almighty God
the father, be the father of al people, by creation, and general grace yea and
the father of all christen people by creation, adoption and also special
grace, yet concerning the godhed of our Savior Christ, and the eternal
generation of him (whereof mention is made among other places. Psalm. 2.
Psalm. Cvi. and Ioh. i) god the father, in that respect is the father of
Christ, only by dyuyne nature, begettynge him of his godly na ture, and
substance, eternally, Christ being therein very God, and of the same
substance with God the father, and with God the holy ghost, unto whom he is
equal in all things of ye Godhed. Where as concerning the humanity of
Christ, God the father is greater then Christ, according to christ's own sai
yng, testified in the. xiiii. Chapter of S. John's gospel, Patermaior me est.
That is to say: The father is greater then I. meaning his own humanite. And in
this respect, God ye father, is the father of Christ by creation also
adoption, and grace.

And where moreover the said second person is called here in this Article (Our
Lord) as in deed he is, ye shall nothing there at maruayle at al, conside ryng
that by the said decree of the whole Trynytye, it was also eternally
preordeyned, and appointed, that the said second person, should be our
Lord, redemynge and bringing us from the thraldom of the Devil, and sin,
unto his kingdom, Lordshype, and governance worthily therefore to be called a
king, a pryest, and a Lord, as having done, and fulfilled, for all mankind,
the very office of a priest, of a king and of a Lord.

Of a preiste for that he offered unto Almyghtye God, a sacrifice, even his
very body and Blood, which he being a priest after the order of
Melchisedech, did at his maundye (which was the night before he suffered death)
offer, under the visible fourmes of bread and wine, institutynge there, the
Sacrament of his Body and Blood (commonly called the Sacrament of the Aultare)
and commaundynge his body and blood, in the said Sacrament, to be offered
unto the worlds end, fulfyllyng thereby the saying of God the father, spoken
to Christ the son. Tues Sacerdos in et ernum secundum ordinem Melchisedech.
psalm 106. That is to say: Thou art a priest for ever af ter the order of
Melchisedech. And Christ did also fulfill the office of a priest, in that he
upon good Friday (which was the day next following) did offer the same Body and
blood upon the Cross, in the visible fourmes of flesh and Blood, sufferynge
his natural body there to be slain, and his blood (...) visibly to be shed,
for the remission of sin, nodifference at all being in the substance of the
things so diverse ly offered, at the maundy, and upon the Cross, but ye
difference standing in the manner, form, and outewarde doing thereof. And as
for the office of a king and Lord, that he did fulfill, and accomplish, in
that he most myghtely conquered, overcame, and utterly oppressed his enemies,
and has spoiled them of the (...) session of mankyud which they wan before by
fraud, deceyt, lying and blasphemyng. And he has brought us now into his
possession and dominatio^, to reign over us in mercy, like a most loving
(...), and governor, and therefore in this Article, we call him also: (Our
Lord.)

Fynallye there is to be considered in this matter, that although this word
DOMINVS, diverse times is translated into our English Tongue, (The Lord)
(which the place and circumstau^ce of Scripture many times so requires, and
may well bear) yet amongst us Christen men, in our co^ men speech, when we
speak of Christ, and do call him Lord, it is most mete, and conueniente,
that we call him: (Our Lord) to (...), and admonyshe us that we be his
peculier people, redeemed by him, and delivered from the dominion, and the
captivity of the devil, and be made his own proper, and obedient servants.
After which forte the Heithen people (because of their infidelytie) be nether
his sernauntes, nor partakers of his benefits, and therefore cannot say and
call him (as Christen men do) (Our Lord) And (the thing thus being, and so
great pythe, effect and comfort, consystynge in this word (Our) what an
injury do these new fangled wits, who for a singularity, or for a glorious
badge of a protestaunt, do in all their talk (speaking of Christ our Lord)
use this peculier fashion of speaking, the Lord, the Lord, the Lord?

The exposition, or declaration of the third Article of the Creed, which is.
Which was conceived by the holy Ghost borne of the Uyrgyn Marye.
IN this article two things are specially to be considered, the first is, that
Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost. And the second is: that Christ was
borne of the Uyrgyn Marye. And concerning the first, ye shall learn that when
we say, that christ was conceived by the holy Ghost, we give not there in such
gross and (...) vnreuerente understanding as though the holy Ghost did
therein work as man do the with woman in carnal generatyon, (which God forbid
we should conceive or think) for his holy work of the incarnation of
Christ, was not wroughte by the sede of man, but by the ver tue and power of
the holy ghost, in the said most blessed virgyn, without any motion of any
concupiscence, or spot of sin, and was accomplyshed with out any violation,
or detriment, of the virginitye of that blessed vyrgyn S Marye, who both in the
conception, and also in the birth and nativity of her child our savior Jesus
Christ: yea and ever after, did retain still her pure and immaculate
virginity, as clear, and without blotte, as she was at the time yt she was
first borne. But when we do say that christ was conceived by the holy Ghost, we
do consider therein as Scripture does. That Mense sexto meaning of that sixth
month that S. Elizabeth, S. Ihon Baptistes mother, had gone with child with S.
John) missus est Angelus Gabriel a deo in ciuitatem Galilee, cui nome^ Nazareth
ad uirginem desponsatam uiro, cui nomen erat Joseph, de domo David, and nomen
uirginis Maria, et ingressus Angelus, ad eam dixit. Aue gratia plena dominus
tecum, Benedicta tu in mulieribus. Que cum audisset turbata est in sermon
eius: et cogitabat qualis esset ista salutatio, et ait Angelus ei, Ne timeas
Maria: inuenisti enim gratiam apud deum, ecce concipies in utero, et paries
filium, and uocabis nomen eius IESVM, hic erit magnus, and filius altissimi
uocabitur, and dabit illi dominus deus sede^ David patrisleius, et regnabit in
domo Jacob ineternu^, and regni eius non erit finis. Dixit aute^ maria ad
angelum, Quomodo fiet istud: quoniam uirum non cognosco? and respondens Angelus
dixit ei, Spiritus sanctus superueniet in te, and uirtus altissimi obumbrabit
tibi: Ideoque and quod nascetur ex te sanctum, uocabitur filius dei Lucae primo
That is to say: In the syxt month the Angel Gabriell is sent from God, into
the city of Galilee to whom the name was Nazareth, to a Uyrgin despoused unto
a man, whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, and the name of the virgin
was Marye, and the Angel entringe in said to her: All hayle, full of grace,
the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou among women. Which worcester des when she
had hard, she was troubled in his saying, and thought what manner salutation
this was. And the Angel said unto her. Fear not Mary, for thou have found
grace with God: Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy Womb, and thou shalt
bring forth a Son, and thou shalt call the name of him Jesus, he shall be
great, and shall be called the Son of the highest, and the Lord God shall
give to him the seat of David his Father, and he shall reign in the house of
Jacob for ever, and no end shall be of his Kingdom. And Marye said unto the
Angel, How shall this be, for I know not a man? And the angel
aunswerynge, said to her The holy Ghost shall come from above into the, and
the power of the most high shall ouershadowe the, and therefore, even that
holy one which shall be borne of the, shall be called the Son of God. Luke the
first. According whereunto, the Aungel of our Lord (as S. Matthew testyfyeth in
his Gospel. Math, 1) says: Cum esset despo^sata matter IESV Maria Joseph, ante
quam conuenirent, inuenta est in utero habens de spiritu sancto. That is to
say. When Marye the mother of Jesus was despoused to Joseph, and before they
came to dwell together, she was found having in her womb of the holy Ghost.
And immediatelye it follows in the same place. Joseph autem uir eius cum esset
iustus and nollet eam traducere, uoluit occulte dimittere eam. Haec autem eo
cogitante: Ecce Angelus Domini apparuit in somnes Joseph, dicens: Joseph fili
David, noli timere accipere Mariam coniugem tuam, quod enim in ea natum est, de
spiritu sancto est. That is to say: And Joseph the husband of her, when he
was a just man, and would not sclaunder her, he purposed secretlye to leave
her. And he thus thinking: Behold the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph
in a vision or dream, saying, O Joseph the Son of David, fear thou not to
take Marye thy wife, for that which is borne in her, is of the holy Ghost. So
that the second person in Trinity which is the Son of God, by eternal
generation, did, in the womb of the blessed vyrgyn Mary, by ye virtue and
workyng of the holy Ghoost, take upon him, of her very flesh, the nature and
substance of man, and being conceived by the holy Ghost, was borne of her
body, and did unite, and conioyne together the same nature of man (so taking of
ye substance of the said most blessed virgin) with his Godheade in one person,
with such an indissoluble and inseparable knotte, and bond, that he (being
one person Jesus Christ) was, is, and ever shall be, in the same person, very
perfect God, and very perfect man.

Now concerning the second thing, which is considered in this Article,
that is to say: that Christ was borne of the virgin Mary. Albeit in a great
part, it is proved already by such things as before have been rehearsed, yet
for the more full declaration and exposition thereof, having spoken of
Christ's co^ception by the holy ghost, ye shall now here how he was borne of the
virgin Marye. For knowledge whereof ye shall understand, that when the time
was come, in the which it was before ordained, and appointed, by the decree of
the whole Trynitie, that mankind should be redeemed, and saved, then the Son
of God, the second person in trynytie, being very God, did discende from
Heaven, into this world, to take upon him the very nature, habit, and form
of man, which he did of the very flesh and substance, of the blessed Uyrgyn
Marye, and in the same nature did also suffer his glorious passion, for the
redemption, and salvation of mankind. For after the fall of Adam, and before
the coming of Christ, (man being so blinded, and drowned in sin, that
the true knowledge of God, was euerywhere in the world forgotten, and his laws
broken, not only by the Gentyles in all other natyons, but also by the Jews,
the chosen people of God to who^ God by his servant Moses, had given his
laws, whereby they might know how to avoid sin, and how to please him)
almyghtye God having from time to time, sent unto his people his
aduertisementes, and admonitions by his prophets, inspyred with his holy
spyryte, both to admonyshe men of their sins, and also to teach them how they
should truly understand, and observe the said laws, given by his servant
Moses, did finally after those laws, aduertysementes, and admonitions, little
regarded of the said people, send, of his infynyte goodness, and inestimable
mercy and love, borne to mankind, his only begotten Son into this world,
(by whom in the beginning he had created ye world and all creatures in it) to
take upon him man's nature, and to redeem man, who by disobedience, had cast him
self into perdition. And for testimony here of, there are among other
prophecies in Scripture expressed, the prophecy of (...) the. vii. And the
prophecye of Ezechtel, the. xliiij. Chapyter. And there are the testimonies of
the Gospel (amongeste other) Math. i. and. ii. and Luke i. and. ii: and so
forth, by the which appears clearly, that this third article of the creed
is fully true, and approved by Scripture.

And if any man here for curiosity would demand why Christ entendynge to be
borne of a Uyrgyn, would have her yet despoused, and betrouthed he may herein
satisfye him self, readyng the commen taryes of S. Hierome, upon the first
chapter of S. Matthew, where he says thus. Quare non de simplici uirgine sed de
desponsata concipitur. Primum ut per generationem oseph, origo Marie
monstraretur. Secundo ne lapidaretur a Iudeis, ut adultera. Tertio ut in
Aegiptum fugiens haberet solatium. Martyr Ignatius, etlam quartam addidit
causam cur a desponsata co^ceptus sit. Vt partus (inquiens) eius ce laretur
Diabola, dum eum put at non de uirgine, sed de uxore generatum. That is to
say: Wherefore is he (meaning Christ) conceived of a vyrgyn betrouthed or
despou sed, and not of a virgyn vnbetrouthed? The first reason is, that by the
generation or genealogi of Joseph, the original of Mary might be showed.
Secondly that she should not be stoned by the Jews as an aduouterous person.
Thyrdely, that fleinge into Egypt, she might have help or comfort. And the
mar tir Ignatius has added also a fourth cause, why Christ was conceived of a
person despoused, to thintente (says he) that Christ's birth might be hyd
from the devil, whiles he thinks Christ to be gotten not of a v yr gyn, but
of a married wife. Thus says Saint Jerome, in the place before rehearsed. And
S. Augu styne very handsomely and in few words, in a cer tayne sermon made
upon Wytsonday, concerning the exposition of the Creed, says as follows.
Natus est ex uirgine, ut nos nasceremur execclesiae uirginis utero, That is to
say. Christ is borne of a Uyrgin, that we might be borne of the womb of the
church being a vyrgyn.

The exposition or declaration of the forth article of the Creed which is.
Suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucyfied dead, buried, and descended into
hell.
IN this forth article. vi. things are to be considered. First, that Christ
our Savior Suffered. Second that he Suffered under Ponce Pilace Third, that he
Was crucified. Fourth, that he Dyed Fyfte that he was Buried. Syxte, that he
Descended into hell. Concerning the first, we must understand that Christ
very God, and very man, after he was conceived, and borne of his bles sed
Mother, did continue hear in this world until he came unto the, xxxiii,
year of his age, and that in all this time of his life, he suffered and
endured for our sakes and our wealth, and also for our examples, much bodily
affliction, much labor, much travail, much hunger, thrist, and poverty, much
iniurye, and ignominy, and many such other miseries, and infyrmities, as all
mortal men are subject unto (sin and ignorance only excepted) and so
passed over all the whole course of his life, even from his nativity, until
his death, in such perfect obedience unto the laws of god and man, according
to the will of his father, and in such perfect innocence of living, that no
fault offense, or transgression, could justly and truly be lai ed against him.
And yet the blind, ignoraunte, and obstynate Jews, full of envy, and malice
(as the very members of the Devil, by whom they were provoked and induced
thereunto) labored continuallye, by all mean and craft they could, to
destroy him, and at length, conspyrynge together, they took him, searching and
procuryng false witness to accuse him and after they had bette him, and spytte
in his face, and used all the vylanye they could against him they bound him
and brought him to judgment, of all which things ye shall find testymony in
scripture, redyng S. Matthew S. Mark, S, Luke, S. Jhon, in this behalf, And
thus much for the first point.

For the second point ye shall understand, that our Savior Christ having
suffered diverse ways as before is declared, yet, concerning that notable and
special sufferyng (understand and (...) here in this article, which was his
passion) he suffered that under one Pylate, whose surname was Pontius, and at yt
time, was chief judge in Jherusalem and presydent or gouernoure of Jurye, under
Tiberyus Themperoure and gave judgment upon Christ, being most falselye
accused, as a subuerter of the laws of god, and as a person that seduced ye
people, and that moved sedition amongst them, and as a traytoure against
The Emperor of Rome, upon which accusaci ons, our said Savior and redemer Jesus
Christ, was grievously scourged, by the commandment of the said Pylate, and
had a crown of thorn put upon his head, by the souldyours of the garyson,
and was by them not only most spitefully mocked and scorned, but also most
cruelly tormented, and afflicted, and after this he was at the last, in public
and open judgment, by sentence of the said Pylate, con dempned to die, as the.
iiij. Enangelistes wholly, and S. Luke partly in the acts, do plainly testify
and declare. And as concerning the. iij. point in this article (which is of
the crucifieng of Christ, a thing which was pronounced in the condempnaty on
and judgment of Pylate) you shall understand that this kind of death, was ever
amongst the Jews, most abhorred and detested, as accounted and taken for the
most cursed and shameful of other. And (the con demnation and judgment thus
given and past) the soldiers of the garyson did take Christ, and did nail him
through the hands and fete unto the Cross: And also did hang with him upon.
ij. other crosses, two thieves, on a certain hill called Caluerye, and this to
be true is testified by the said Euangelystes. And that Christ did dye (which
is the. iiii. point in this article) it is evident also by the said
Evangelist, for S Matthew in the. xxvii of his Gospel, speaking of this matter
says. Jesus autem iterum clamans uoce (...) emisit spiritum. That is to say:
Jesus cryenge again with a great voice did give up the Ghost. The like does
S. Mark in the, xvi, chapyter of his gospel, and S, Luke in the. xxiii. and
S. Jhon in the. xix.

Moreover concerning the burieng of our blessed Savior Christ, (which is the
fyfte point in this article) ye shall know that the Euangeliste S. Mathewe in
the xxvii. of his gospel. S. Mark in the xv. chapyter, S. Luke in the xxiii,
and S. Jhon in the, xix. do tell this storye in effect after this manner: it is
to wit, that after Christ was thus dead, one Joseph of Aramathia, being oue
of Christ's dyscyples, (...) license of Pylate to take down the blessed Body
of our Savior Jesu Christ from the Cross, and that done, he and an other of
Christ's Dysciples called Nichodemus, wrapped and folded the same body in a
clean syndon, or fine linnin cloth and so laid and buried it in a new grave,
or Sepulcher, which the said Joseph hade made of stone, and wherein there was
never any buried before, and by this is proved this article to be true.

And finally concerning the discense or going down of Christ into hell
(which is the last point of this article) ye shall know that though to some
men upon some their vain and folyshe grounds, ymaginations and deuyses, it
may seem an absurdi tie, and a thing unseemly, that Christ, being virtue it
self, and of all perfection and power, should descend into hell, which is a
place of wicked persons, and of punishmente for them, and a place finally, from
whence there is no regresse, nor yet redemptyon in, as who says, if Christ
descended into hell, he should both there suffer punishment, and also not
return from thence, nor redeem there, yet if these men would consider, how
diuersely in scripture hell is taken, and withal would consider the will and
omnipotency of Christ, who is God and man, and who can do all things, in
heaven, earth, and hell, that pleases him to do (nothing to him being
impossible) and fynallye would consider withal, what the catholic Church
ever from the beginning, has in this behalf believed and taught, taking her
beleyfe, of Christ, and his doctrine, generally, and specially set forth in
scripture, this thing should not appear to them so strange, or so
incredible, as percase it does. And therefore let us with the scripture, and
the Catholic Church, firmly, and steadfastly believe (...) our savior
Christ, after that he was crucified, and dead upon the cross, did descend in
soul, knytte with the deity, into hell, (his body remainyng, and lyeng iy
the grave) and did lose the pains or sorrows thereof, in which it was not
possible that he should be holden, ne yet to se corruption at al: and he did
also (...) and oppress, both the Deuell, and hell, and also Death it self,
where unto all mankind was condemned, by the fall of our forefather Adam into
sin. A proof whereof is taken out of Zachary the. ix. Oze the. xiii. Luke
the. i. Math. the. xii. Luke. in the Acts, the. ii. Of Paul to the Ephesians
the iiii. and in other diverse places of scripture.

Now the process of the life of our blessed sauyoure Jesus Christ, thus
declared, with his passion, death, burial, and descence to hell, it is
specially to be noted, and to be believed for a certain truth, that our
savior, in all the time of his most bitter, and grievous passion, and in
sufferyng his most payneful and cruel death, not only did, most pacyently
without resistance, and like an innocent lamb, endure and su stayne for our
redemption, all the pains, and injuries, and all the opprobries and
ignominies, which were done to him: but also that he did wyllynglye (...)
gladely suffer this cross, and this kind of death for our example, that we
should follow the steps of him in pacyence and humility and that we should
bear our own cross, as he did bear his, and that we should also hate and
abhor all sin, knowing for suerty, that whosoever does not in his heart,
hate and abhor sin, but rather accompteth the breach and violation of
gods commandment, but as a light matter, and of small weight, and
impartaunce, he estemethe not the price. and value of the passion and death of
Christ, according to the dignity and worthynes thereof.

The exposition or declaration of the fyfte article of the Creed which is.
And the third day, he rose again from death.
IN this article two things are specially to be co^ sidered, the first, is
touching the time, in which our Savior Christ, did rise, that is, the
third day. The second, is touching the rysynge of Christ, with declaration,
that that rysynge was from death.

Concerning the first, S. Matthew, in the. xii chapter of his Gospel
(comparyng the being, or lyyng of Jonas in the whales belly Jonas. ii. with the
being, or lyinge of Christ in his sepulcher, or grave, says thus. Sicut enim
fuit Jonas in (...) ceti tribus (...), et tris bus noctibus, sic erit filius
hominis in cord terre, tribus diebus and tribus (...) That is to say: As Jonas
was in the belly os the whale, three days and three nyghtes, so shall the
son of man be in the heart of the ground, three days, and three nyghtes.
According whereunto Saint Paul in his oration made to the princes and
Israelities, of the Sinagoge being at Antiochia Pisidie, and amongst other
thin ges speaking of the inhabitauntes of Jerusalem, and the princes thereof,
who put Christ to death, and of Christ himself, sayethe (as S. Luke in the.
xiii. of the Acts does testify) thus: Cunque consummassent omnia, que (...),
deponentes cum de ligno, posuerunt cum in (...) deus autem sustitauit cu^ a
mortuis (...) die, qui uisus est per dies multos his qui simulascenderant cum
co, de Galileo in Iherusalem qui usque nune sunt testes eius ad plebam, That is
to say. And when they had fulfilled or perfected all things that were
written of him, they taking him down from the tree, did put him in a Sepul
chre, and God did raise him up again the third day from the dead and he was
seen many days to them which came vppetoge there with him from Galilee to
Jerusalem, who even till now be witnesses of him, to the people. Like wise the
said S. Paul writing to the Corinthians, and earnestly mindyng to prove the
resurrection of the dead, does in his first epistle written unto them, and in
the xv, Chapyter thereof, say as follows. Tradidi enim Vobis in primis quod et
accepi, quoniam Christus mortuus est propeccatis nostris, secundum Scripturas
and quia sepultus est: et quia resurrexit tertia die (...) Scripturas. etc That
is to say: I have delivered unto you specially that which I received, how
that Christ died for our sins, according to scrip tures, and that he was
buried, and that he rose again the third day, according to the Scripturs.
etc. And s. Augustine, concerning this matter, has in his, cxxiij. sermon,
this confortable saying. Site (...) luano (...) sepultura conturbet, gloriosa
resurrectio confirmet, quicquid enim infirmitatis audis in Christo nostrae
(...) necessit (...) it is, nostre redemptionis est causa quicquid gloric cius
est proprie potesta (...) quiid co mortuus est, ut uos (...), (...) resurrexit.
ut uos ad (...) resuscitaret eternam. That is to say. Of the three days
buryall, or lyinge in grave of our Lord, do trouble the, let his gloriouse
resurreccion con fyrme the. In deed whatsoever weakness or infirmity thou
do hear in Christ, that is for cause of our necessity, ye is for cause of
our redemption: whatsoever glory thou hear of him, that is of his proper or
own power: who therefore was dead that he might reuyue us, and therefore did
rise again, that he might resuscitate us unto life everlasting.

Likewise S. Augustyne again in his. cxxxi. sermon speaking o. this matter,
says, after this ma ner. Triduane sepulture mora, euide^ter oste^dit quod
du^corpus isepulchro iacuit, anima illa de infernis triu^phauit. That is to
say: The ta rying or abiding of the three days in the grave, does euydently
declare or show, that ye while that the Body (of Christ) did lie in the
sepulcher or grave, that soul of his did Tryumphe over the Helles. And that
Christ did rise again from death (which is the second part of this
Article) is most manifest, as well by such testimonies as are all ready here in
the former part of this article alleged, as also by these special testymonyes
folowinge. First, Actuum. ii. S. Peter (as S. Luke there testifies) Does say
as follows. Hunc Iesum resuscitauit deus, cuius nos omnes testes sumus. That
is to sai This Jesus has God raised up again whereof we all are witnesses.
Secondlye, actuum. iii. S. Peter there has these words. Quem deus (...) a
mortuis cuius nos testes sumus. That is to say, Christ whom God has raised
from the dead of the which we be witnesses.

Thyrdely actuum. iiii. S. Peter there has both these words, Quem deus
suscitauit a mortuis (being Englyshed as before) as also these words. Et
Virtute magna reddebant Apostoli testimoniu^ resurrectionis (...) Christo
domini nostri. That is to say, The Apostles with great power did give wytnes
of the resurrection, of Jesu Christ our Lord.

Fourthly, actuum. v. S, Peter and the Apostles have these words: Deus patrum
nostrorum suscitauit Iesum (...) uos interemistis, suspendentis in ligno. That
is to say, The God of our fathers has raised up Je sus, whom ye (the Jews)
did kill, hangyng him upon the tree.

Fyftelye Actuum. xvii. S Paul preaching in the Synagoge of the Jews at
Tessalonyca, has these words. Quia oportuit Christum pati, et resurgere a
mortuis. That is to say: That Christ must needs have dyed, and to rise again
from the dead.

Syxtely S. Paul in vys first Epistle to the (...) rinthyans, and in the. xv.
Chapter thereof has amongst other these words. Si Autem Christus non
resurrexit, inanis est predicatio nostra, inanis est and (...) vestra. etc.
That is to say: If Christ has not risen again, then is our preaching vain,
and your faith is also in vain. etc. And hereof also he speakethe, Ad
Romanos. fourth, et. ii. ad Timotheum. ii. and in many other places. But what
need is it to heap any mo testimo nyes hereof, seeing all the Evangelists do
clerelye testifye the matter, Mathewe the. xxviii. Mark the xvi. Luke the.
xxiiii. and Jhon the. xx. By this then it appears how that our Savior Jesus
Christ after he had conquered and spoiled the Devil and hell, he returned
again from thense, like a most mighty King and Conqueroure, in tryumphe and
glory and so reassumed and took again his blessed natural Body, the third
day after his said death. And so doing rose out of the Sepulture in his natu
rall and parfect manhood. That is to say in his soul and in the self same
body, which was borne of the Uyrgyn Mary, and did hang upon the Cross. After
which resurrection he was conuersaunte in the world, by the space of forty
days, and did eat and drink with his Apostles, and his disciples and prea
ched unto them, and aucthorised them to goo fourth into the world, to
manifest and declare, that he was the very Christ the very Messiah, and the
very God and man, which was promised in scripture to come to save and to redeem
al those, that believing in him, ordered themselves in obeying and following his
precepts and commandments accordyngly. In this article of Resurrection, it
is to be noted, that there is nothing that can in all aduersirye and trouble be
more ioyefull and comfortable unto us, than the (...) of this article. That
Christ rose again from corporal death to life, and that we shall also do the
same. The faith and belefe of this (if we continue in lyuinge well) is our
vyctorye and triumph over the Devil, hell and death, and a special remedy, to
put away the horroure and fear of them. Forasmuch as hereby we be assured that
as death could not hold Christ, even so it cannot hold us, which are by a
christen faith, the very members and body of Christ, but that we shall rise
from death, and live again in glory with him euerlastynglye, if we order and
conform our will in this world to his precepts. And the only hope here of,
should make us not to fear the adversities in this world, because we ((...)
as before) be assured to have a better and more gloryouse life after this, as S.
Paul writes to the Corynthyans the. xv. saying: If we christen men had no
hope of other life, than this that is present, than were we the most miserable,
of all men. But now Christ is risen again from death. Whereby is declared
that there is a life after this life which all Christen men hope to come unto.
According where unto saint Augustyne says. All the hope of our faith stands
in this point that we shall rise again. This made the faithful and good men
(of whom S. Paul the. xi. to the He brues speaks) to refuse to be preserved
from bodyly death, because they looked assuredly for a better resurrection.
Which Ressurection as it was by many and sondrye apparytions, and other
infallyble arguments declared and prouede unto the Appostles, so they being
besides other names perteynyng to their office specially called the witnesses
of Christ's resur rection, did in all places, and at all times, open and
inculcate the same as a special, and a chief article of Christ's doctrine,
wherein should depend, and rest the great comfort and solace of all true and
faith full beleuers in Christ.

Fynallye, by this article is not only confirmed unto us how the natural
body of man, shall after the corporal death and departing (...) of this
present life rise again, as is before expressed, but also by this
resurrection of our sauyoure (...), we be admonyshed, that as Christ after his
death, rose again so we dyeng from sin, should rise (...), and walk in a
new life of spyryt and grace.

Thexposition or declaration concerning the syxt article of the Creed, which
is.
He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father
almighty.
IN this. vi, article, ii things are to be considered ye first is that Christ
ascended into heaven, the second that he sits on the right hand of god the
father almighty. Concerning the first ye shall note, that as we by daily
experience do see, when an embassadoure is sent from some great prince, to ac
cheue any great affayre or busynes, as for example, to conclude and make a
peace, or any other such like thing this embassadoure having fynyshed his
busynes, according to his commission, comenli with glad nes, and joy do the
return again unto him from whom he was sent, like wise passyngers by water,
or by land, yea and soldiers to, being sent fourth in warrefare, so sone as
there busynes is spedde, they do return commonly into there country, or unto
those that did send them fourth. So likewise our blessed Savior Jesus
Christ, being sent ambassadoure from God his father, into this world, upon
an high and notable worthy message, that is to say: to take flesh of the
glory ouse vyrgyn S. Marye, and by his passion and death, to overcome the
Prince of this world, and Hell, and to remove and take away all other
impedymentes, and lettes, and finally to re deem also mankind, who by
disobedience and sin had lost the joyous possession of Paradyse, did
dylygently and faythfullye travail, to accomplish his embassade and message,
and when he had done it, he with great tryumphe and joy did ascend (...)
return again to God his father, having overcome the old enemy, by
humility, patience, and obedience Of whom, and his said embassade, the great
king and Prophet Dauyd in his. xviii. Psalm thus does say: Exultauit ad
Gigas, ad currendam viam That is to say: He (meaning Christ) has reioysed or
benne glade as a gyaunt to run his course, or way. And immediately in the
same Psalm the said Prophet does farther say: A summo coeloegressio cius and
occursus cius, usque ad sum mum cius. That is to say: The going forth of him
is from the highest heaven, and the recourse of him is to the highest of it.
According whereunto, very laudably and iustlye it is uttered in the divine
service of the Church. Egressus (...) a patre, regressus (...) adi patrem,
(...) usque ad inferos, recure susad sedem Dei. That is to say. The going
furthe of him is from the father, the return of him is to the father, the
excourse of him is even to the helles, and the recourse of him is unto the
seat of God.

Being then convenient (as is aforesaid) that Christ should ascend into heaven
(as also by this article it appears he did) well it shall be to declare how and
in what forte that ascension was. For knowledge whereof you shall understand,
that our savior christ, after his resurrection and before he did ascend into
heaven, did eat with his Disciples, as well to show therein a very sign and
token of hearty love (which friends departing from friends, are accustomed to
do) as also for to declare unto them, the verity of his flesh after his
resurrection (which was a thing then very necessary to be done, as well for
that he would not afterward give unto them any further sign or token of his
resurrection, as also for that some of the Disciples, not withstandyng that
they had seen and felt him, would not yet believe that he was so risen And
therefore. s. Gregory in an Homelye made hereupon says: Christus comedit and
ascendit, ut per effectum commestio (...) carnis That is to say. Christ did
eat and ascend, that by the effect of eating, the verity of his flesh
might be manyfested. And moreover after the said resurrection, and before this
said ascension, our savior Christ did rebuke and blame his disciples of their
incredulity, and (...) nes, or hardenes of beleuyng the said ressurection,
which thing he did, as (...) Gregorye says: Vt (...) que recidens
diceret, in cord audientium arctius impressa remanerent. That is to say: To
the intent that the worcester des which he departinge would say, might remain in the
heart of ye hearers more depely imprynted. Besides this our savior Christ
having opened their wit or sense to understand the scryptures, and having
enjoined unto them the office of preaching the Gospel throughoute the hole
world to all creatures, he went fourth with them into Bethany unto mount
Olyuete, and lifting up his hands he did bless them (which blessing was well
fygured by the Patriarche Jacob, who when he should dye, and leave this world,
did bless his chyldre, as appears Genelis. xlix. And likewise was it fygured
by Moses who before his death did bless the children of Israel, as
appears. Deute. xxxiii) And this being dooue, Christ in the (...) syghte
was lyfted up and (a cloud taking or receiving him from their eyes) he was
carried up into heaven: ascendynge as the Psalmist in his. lxvii, Psalm, does
say. Super (...) ad orientem. That is to say: Above heavens, unto the East.
And the said Difciples adorynge him, did return unto Jerusalem. These things
beforesaid are specially testified by S. Mark in the xvi. Chapyter. Luke in
the. xxiiii. John in the. xx. and by S. Luke also in the first Chapyter of the
Acts, and by sundry other parts of the scripture.

By the way it may be noted that this elevation of Christ into Heaven did
much differ from his eleuatyon unto the Cross, for there (as Esaias in the.
lxiii. Chapyter does say) Christ alone did tread the Press where here (as
Dauyd in his. lxvii. Psalm and S. Paul in the. iiii. Chapter to the
Ephesians, does say) Christ ascending into Heaven, did lead captivity
captive with him, and gave gifts to men. Furthermore the elevation upon ye
Cross was with most bitter sorrow, and pain, where the ascension into
heaven was with most unspeakable joy and wonderful gladness. And it is not to
be forgotten here, that amongst other causes why Christ would no longer tarry
here upon earth, but ascend into Heaven, there are five specially noted. The
first, that Christ's body being gloryfyed, Heaven and not the Earth, was a
place conuenyent and mete for it to be co^uersaunt in. The (...) that by the
said ascension he might glorifye the human na ture which before that time
was never admytted unto heaven. The third that ascendyng into Heaven he might
be an advocate and an intercessoure contynuallye for us. Hebre. ix. i.
Iohannis. ii. The fourth that so ascendyng he might show us the way and
prepare us a place. Michee. ii. and (...). iiii. The fyste and last that he
might send the Holy Ghost un to us, which he said he would not except he
departed. Ioannis. 19. And thus much for the first part of this Article.

For the second part of this article which is that Christ Sits on the right
hand of God the father Almyghtye, ye shall understand, that to sit on the
right hand of God the father, is not after a carnal and worldely fashion to
be understood, as who says, that God the father, had (like men) a right
hand, and a left hand, but by the sitting of Christ, on the right hand of God
the father, is understand and meant, that Christ has, and ever shall have,
communicated unto him, of God the father, glory, honor, power, felicity, and
everlasting monarchye, governance, rule, and dominion, over all pryncypates,
potestates, powers, dominions, and over all creatures that can be named, either
in this world, or in the world to come, ordained to be king of all kings,
and Lord of all Lords, and all things both in hea uen, and also in Earth to
ve cast under his fete, and made subject to him, and he appointed to be the
chief and principal head of the universal and hole Catholyke Church, which
is his mystical Body, having under him in his Church here in Earth such
ministers, and after such order and fashion, as lyked him to appoint and
ordain in the same. And albeit that Christ is ascended into Heaven, and
syttethe on the right hand of God the father almyghtye, yet we may not (as
the (...) do) gether (...) upon contrary to the (...), that the (...) of
Christ, in substance is not reallye and truly in the Sacrament of the
Aultare, but contrary (...), (...) Christ is both God and man, and so (...),
or almighty, and has by his godhed (...) unto his manhood, taken up his Body
and his (...) nitie into heaven (which to do is above the (...) and reach of
only nature, to accomplish and bring to pass) we ought with the catholyke
Church, firm lie, and stedfastlye believe, that, (...) as our Savior Christ
both promised to give his body in a Sacrament, and also (perfourming his
promise) did it so in deed, as the (...) and S. Paul also does testifye, and
declare: the body therefore of Christ does both sit on the right hand of God
the father almyghtye in heaven in the visible form of a man, according to this
article, and is also verily, real ly, and truly in substannce in the
Sacrament of the Aultare, under the forms of bread and wine. And where in
the. vii. chapyter of the acts it is written of S. Stephan that he did see,
Iesum stantem a dexteris virtu it is (...). That is to say: Jesus standing on the
right hand of the power or virtue of God. Whereby some have gathered a
contrary: ie in Scripture, (...) shall understand that these words Christ to
sytte or Christ to stand at the right hand of God the father, are not to be
understood, after the carnal and worldly manner and gesture of man, but
spiritually, to signifye his equality with God the father and the
partycipatyng of all glory with the same, (...) equalytie and partycipatyon in
(...) and the catholyke doctors, is as well understand by (...), as by
standing. Thus have you hard the hole exposi tion of this. vi. Article,
containing in effect, how our Savior Jesus Christ, after that he had
perfectely accomplished and performed the hole mystery of the redemptyon of
mankind, by his incarnation his birth, his passion his death, his burial, his
disce^dyng into Hell, and rysyng again from death to life and after he had
been here in Earth conuersaunte with his Apostles, and Disciples, by ye space
of fortye days after his resurrection, being amongst his Apostles, and he in
their sight, assended into heaven in the very fame his natural body, (which
was borne of the blessed vyrgyn his mother, and was cru cified upon the cross)
and so did wythdrawe his accustomed visible conversation, from the presence
of his Apostles, and from the bodily sight of al other creatures. By
remembrance whereof, both they and we should here in earth eleuate and lift
up our hole hearts, minds, desires, and all affections, from earthly things,
and from all carnal and worldly cares, toward heauene, and heavenly
things, and so should by his grace prepare our hearts, and make our selves
(...) and apt to receive his spyrytuall gifts, which he sends into the
world. Wherefore the thing thus being, let us in deed lift up our hearts
and minds unto Christ thus sitting at ye right hand of God the father, and
there praying co^tynually for us. And let us so in mind now from henceforth
dwell in contemplatio^ of heavenly things (during all the space of this mortal
life) that we may hereafter for ever dwell with the holy trinity in glory
everlasting Amen.

Thexposition or declaration of the. vii. article of the creed, which is.
From thence he shall come to 'iudge the quick and the dead.
IN this Article two things specially may be con sidered, the first is that
Christ being ascended into Heaven. Shall come from thense. And thesecond is
that coming from thense. He shall judge both the Quycke and the Dead. For the
proof of which first part, we have besides other testymonies of Scripture, the
special testimonye of Saint Luke, in the first chapyter of the Acts, where he
(spea king of the Disciples who did behold our Savior Christ when he did
ascend) says thus. Cunque iutuerentur in coelum euntem illum, ecce duo uiri
astiterunt iuxta illos, in uestibus albis, qui et dixerunt, uiri Galilei, quid
statis aspicientes in celum? HicIESVS quia assumptus est a uobis in celum sic
ueniet que^ admodu^ uidistis eumeuntem in celum. That is to say: Whenthey did
behold, or look upon him, departing or going into Heaven, Lo two men did
stand by the^ in white garments who also did say, (...) men of Galile, what
do you stand lokynge up into Heaven. This Jesus who is assumpted or taken up
from you into Heaven, shall so come as ye have seen him going or departing into
heaven.

And so ye see, that into Heaven he is ascended, and from heaven he shall
descend, or come. And here shall ye learn that there are two special
commings of Christ into the world, mentioned and spoken of in scripture, and
they be very diverse in them selves the first coming of Christ into this
world, was to be borne of the virgyn Mary, and by his death and passion to
redeem the world, of which is spoken fully and largely, in the exposition, or
declaration of the third Article of this Creed. The second coming of Christ
into this world, shall be to judge, both the quick and the dead, as is
contained in this. vii. article. And concerning the second part which is his
coming to judge the quick and the dead, ye shall understand that our
savior and redemer Jesus Christ, being ascended (as is declared before) into
heaven, shall come from thence, that is to say: from heaven into this world,
and he shall come in his glory and majesty, and shall then, in the very
visyble form of his natural body, appear unto the bodily eyes of all the
people of the world, in his perfect manhood, and in the self same body,
wherein he ascended, to the inestimable comfort and rejoice of the good, and
the extreme terroure, and confusion of the wicked. Where being accompanied with
his holy Angels his ministers, waiting upon him, he shall sit openly in the
clouds of the air, and shall judge al, quick and dead, according to truth
and justice and according to his holy word expressed in scripture, that is to
say: according to every man's own works and deeds, done by him in his life
time, which works and deeds shall be then examined dyseussed, and tried, not
after menes own fantasye and invention, without authority and ground of
Scryptur: but according to the commandment of God, and the teaching of
Christ, and his Apostles: For at that day of judgment, all the people of the
world, quick and dead, that is to say, as well all those which shall be
found on live in the world at that day, as also all those, which ever sith
the creation of Adam, lived here in this world, and dyed before that day
shall come and appear before the presence of Christ, in their very bodies and
souls.

And when they shall be so gathered and assembled together, our sauyoure
IESVSCHRIST, shall pronounce the final sentence and judgment of everlasting
salvation upon all those persons, which in their life time obeyed and
confyrmed them selves un to the will of God, and excused the works of right
belief and charity, and so perseueryng in well doing sought in their hearts
and deeds, honor, glory, and life immortal. And contrarywyse, upon all
those, which in their life time were coutentions, and did (...) against the will
of God, and followed in justice, and iniquity, rather than truth and virtue,
our savior Christ shall than and there pronounce the sen tence of everlasting
punishment and dampnation. In which sentence there shall be made a perfect sepa
ration or division, between these two sorts of people that is to say: between
the sheep and the goats, the come and the chafe, the good and the badde, the
blessed and the cursed, the members of his body, and the members of the
devil, and so the good and the blessed, being upon his right hand he shall
clearly, and perfectly deliver them for ever, from the power and ma lyce of
the wicked, and from all pains and evil: and so take them all up with him
into heaven, there to be crowned and rewarded in body, and soul, with
honor, and glory, and everlasting joy, and peace, which was prepared for
them from the beginnynge of the world. And all the other which shall be judged
to everlasting pain, and death (being upon his left hand) he shall send them
down into Hell, there to be punyshed in body and soul eternallye, with fire
that never shall have end, which was pre pared from the beginning of the
world, unto the Devil and his Angels.

And here it is specially to be remembered how this article was for great
considerations added immediatelye, and conjoined unto the former articles, and
chiefly, to the intent that no man should in his life time, (...) upon the said
benefits of Christ, or take occasion of carnal liberty or security, and so
live without fear to transgress, or without regard to observe the
commandments of God: but rather that every good christen man, should in
every part of his life, have a continual remembrance, and respect, unto
the last day of judgment, and so be in continual fear to commytte any
thing contrary to the will of God, for the which he might deserve to have the
sentence of everlasting dampnation pronounced upon him. For this is certaynely
true, that at that day, every man shall be called to an account of his life,
and shall be than finally judged, according to his works, good or badde, done
in his life time, that is (as S Paul says, to them that persevere in well
doing, and labor to attain glory, honor, and immortality, shall be given
life everlasting: and to them that be contentious, and obey not the truth but
follow and do injustice, shall come indignation, ire, afflyctyon, trouble, and
pains, everlasting.

In this article it is further to be noted, that like as there is nothing more
certain unto us, than that we be all mortal, and shall once dye, and yet no
man (...) knows the time when he shall dye: even so there is nothing more
certain, than that this day of judgment shall once come, and yet the hour,
and time when it shall be, is hydden, and kept secret from the knowledge of all
men and angels, and is reserved to the knowledge of God only, which thing
precedeth only of his goodness toward us, and is done, to the intent we
should always here in our life time, flee from sin, and imploye all our
hole stu die and endeavor to walk in the ways of God, that is to say, in such
faith hope, and charity, as God requires of us, and so prepare our selves,
and order our (...) toward God, that we may be in a readiness at all times,
whansoeuer it shall (...) God to call and sommon us to appear before him in
the said general judgment, there by his mercy and goodness, to receive the
crown which he promised unto all men that (...), and love him and walk in his
ways, This article and ye declaration thereofhath many and most manifest
testimonies both in the old Testament, and in the new, of which among many
other, these places following may for this present suffyce, Psalm 92. Eccle. 11.
Esa. 13. 51. Zach 14. Mala. 4. Soph. 1. Iohel. 3. Math. 13 16. 24. 25. Mar. 9.
13. Luc. 9. 17. 21. Act. 1. 1. Corrinth. 1. 2. Corin (...) 2. Tessa. 1. and. 2.
1. Thesi. 4. Phil 4. 2. Pet 3. Heb. 10. Apo. 3. and. 22.

Thexposition or declaration of the eyghte article of the creed, which is.
I believe in the holy ghost.
FOr the better understanding of this article, ye shall note that as there is
in the Trynitie, one (...) son, which is, and so also called, God the father,
and as the same Trynytye, there is an other person, which is and so also
called God the son: so in the same Trinity, there is a third person, which
is and so also called, God the holy Ghost. And know you also that it is not
inoughe to believe only that there is an holy Ghost: but we must also believe in
him likewise as we do concerning God the father, and God the son, for it is
not enough for us only to believe, yt there is a God the father, and that there
is a God the son. But we must believe in them al, as is more specially and
largelye declared before in thexposytyon of the first Article. And this holy
Ghost being the third person in Trinity, is in deed, very God and Lord,
author, and former of al things created, and does proceed both from God the
father, and from God the son, of one with the^ in nature and substance and of
ye same everlasting essence or being which the father and the son be of, and
is equal also unto the^ both in almyghtynes of power, and in the work of
creation, and in all other things pertaining unto the deytie or Godhed,
wherefore he is also to be honored and glorified equally with them both.

This holy Ghost, which is the spyryte of God, is of his nature all holy, yea
holiness it self, That is to say, he is the only Ghost or spyryte, which with
the father and the son, is, was, and ever shall be the author, causer, and
worker, of all holiness, purytye, and sanctimonye, and of all the grace,
comfort, and spiritual life, which is wrought, and commethe into the heart of
any man, in so much that no man can think well, or do any thing that good
is, but by the motion, aid, and assistence of this holy spirit, neythere is
it possible, that the Devil, or any of those euel spyrites, which do possess
and reign in such per sons as be subject unto (...), can be expelled or put
out of them, but by the power of this holy spyryte, neither is it possible
that the heart of any manne being once corrupted and made as profane by
sin can be purged, purified, sanctified, or justified, without the work and
operation of this holy spyryte, neither is it possible for any man to be
reconciled un to the favor of God, or to be made and adopted in to the number
of his children, or to obtain that in comparable treasure, which our
savior Jesus Christ (...) purchased and laid up for mankind, oneles this
holy spyryte shall first illumyne and lyghten his heart, with the right
knowledge and faith of Christ and stir him by grace, to have dew (...), and
penance for his sins, and shall also instruct him, govern him, aid him
dyrecte him, and indue him, with such spiritual gifts and graces, as shall be
requisite and necessary to that end and purpose.

Moreover this holy spirit of God, is of his own nature full of all goodness
and benignity: (...) goodness it self, from whom proceeds all and singular
graces and gifts of fear, wisdom understanding, counsel, strength, faith,
charity, hope and all other which be given, conferred, and distributed, unto
us mortal men here in the Earth, at his own will and dispensation, and that
no man can purchase or obtain, ne yet receive, retain, or use any of them,
without the operatyon of this holy Spyryte, which gifts nevertheless he
gives not, nor dispen seth the same equally and to every man a like, but he
deuideth them particularly and specially to every member of the Church, as
is most necessary for the hole body, and in such plentye and measure, as unto
his Godly will and knowledge is thought to be most beneficial and expediente
for the same, All which things he does of his mere mercy and goodness freely
and above our deseruyng.

Furthermore this holy spirit is of his own nature full of charity and holy
love, yea charity it self, from who^e proceeds al charity, and so by his
godly operation is the bond and knot, wherewith our Savior Jesus Christ and
his most dear espouse the Church (which is also his mystical body) be united,
knytte and conjoined together, in such perfect and everlasting love and
charity that the same cannot be dyssolued or separated: And over this, is also
the very bond and knot, where by all and every one of the very members of
Christ's Church and Body, be united, coupled, and conjoined, the one of them
with the other in mutual love and charity.

Also this holy spyryte of God is the spyrite of truth, and the aucthour of
all holy scripture, contained in the hole canon of the bible, and did not
only inspyre, and instruct all the holy patriarchs and prophets, with all
the other members of the Catholic Church, that ever were from the beginning
of the world, in all the Godly truths and verytyes, that ever they did
know, speak, or writ, but also descended and appeared in the similitude and
likeness of fyrye tongues, and did light upon the Apostles and Dyscyples of
Christ, and inspyred them with the knowledge of all truth, and replenyshed
them with heavenly gifts and graces: and shall be contynually present in the
Catholyke Church, and shall teach and reuele unto the same Church, the secrets
and mysteryes of all truth, which are necessary to be known, and shall also
continuallye from time to time, rule, dyrecte, govern, and sauctyfye the same
Church, and give remyssion of sins, and all spiritual comfort as well
inwardelye by secret operations, as also outwardelye by the open mynystratyon
and effycacye of the word of God, and of the holy Sacraments, in the said
Church: and shall endue it with all such spyrytual graces and gifts, as
shall be necessary for the same.

(...) shall also note, that albeit holy Scripture does worthily attribute,
unto the holy Ghost, our sanctification, our justification and al other
benefits which Christ by his passion has meryted and deserved for us, yet
nevertheless the same be also the works of the hole Trynitie, and be not to
be separated in any wise, although Scripture commonly does attribute them unto
the holy Ghost: For in like (...) does Scripture artribute power unto the
father, and wisdom unto the son, which nevertheless be common unto all
three.

FINALLY ye shall note the manner of the speech here in this article, where it
is not said. I believe ye Ghost or spirit, but it is said, I believe in ye holy
Ghost, and so holy is adioined unto ye Ghost, which is done not only to
declare that here is not mente of every thing that is or may be called a
spyryte or a Ghost, but here is only meant of that spyryte, which by
excellencye, and by peculyer name in Scripture both is and so also called, the
holy spyryte or Ghost which is the third person in Trynytie, and therefore
though many times in Scripture, an incorporall thing is called a spyryte, and
also both Angels and ye minds of men diverse times have that appellation or
name, yet here as well for the said peculier name, as by a certain excellency,
the said third person in trinytie, is called the holy spyryte, or holy Ghost,
for he it is that does make holy or sanctifye all creatures, that are called
holy.

Thexposition or declaration of the ninthe Article of the Creed, which is.
The holy Catholyke Church?.
IN these few words, of this nynthe Article four things are to be
considered, first what hear is meant by this word, Church. Secondely why or
for what cause the same Church is called Holy. Thirdely why it is called,
Catholyke. And forthely what it is To believe the holy Catholic Church
Concerning the first ye must understand that though in our English tongue
we by this word Church, sometimes do mean the place wherein the word of GOD
is commonly preached and the sacraments mynistred, and used, yet in this
present article it does sygnyfye the hole multitude of people, which being
called of GOD do come, to one faith, one doctrine, the self same Sacraments
according to the Apostolyke, and catholyke tradition, in an indiui sible bond
or knotte of concord, and unity, whether the said multitude be of the
cleargye, or of the laytie. Concerning the second ye shall consider that
albeit in the said church or multitude of people, there be many evil men, many
sinners, many that turn by true penance to grace, and sometimes yet do fall
again: some after their turn by true penance, still persevere and continue
in goodness, many also that fall and never rise again, so that spots, blots,
and imperfections, do appear (...) in this Church, and many times in the
more part thereof yet nevertheless because the calling is of it self holy
the caller also most holy, and the end of calling, holiness it self, with
this (...) that the people so called do prosesse holiness, and make a body,
where of the chief headde our Savior Christ is most holy or rather
holiness it self, by the merytes of whose (...) the said people are releued,
and nouryshed with the seven holy sacraments, and be in their calling endued
with most special holy gifts, and gra ces of almyghtye God, being authoure
thereof, and finally by his holy spyryte are directed, and governed in the
saine, so long as they (by following their concupyscence, the Devil, or the
world) do not fall from that state. For these causes, I say, the Church is
called Holy, taking this name Holy, of that, that Christ the high headde
thereof is Holy, God the caller, Holy, The profession and calling, Holy,
and the end Holiness. which of very dewty, ought to be in all them that be
called, and is in dede', in such members as do continue and persevere in that
holy calling. Touching the third ye must understand that this word.
Catholyke, being orygynally taken out of the Greek toungue, and now used in
our English tongue, is as much to say as universal or whole. And forasmuch
as God of his goodness does call al people (as is before) without all acceptyon
of (...), or acception of Country, therefore this Church is called,
Catholyke, in as much as all people of all manner of estates, of all places and
countries throughout the hole world, may (professyng the foresaid one faith,
one doctrine, and the self same sacraments, according to the said Apostolic
and catho like tradition) be of this Catholyke church, and co^tynue in the
same, except they wyllyngly, by heresy and scysme, do goo out of it, or for
other their offenses be cut of and cast out thereof. And here by the way is
to be noted, that although in the world there be many particular Churches,
and several multytudes of people, having the said faith, the said doctrine,
and the self same Sacraments according to the said tradition, and therefore
are commonly called every one of them, catholyke, yet they all together make
but one catholyke universal Church, of which one catholyke universal
Church, all the rest be called catholyke, as being partakers and members, of
the said one catholyke universal Church, and fully agreing in all necessary
points with the same. And now as concerning the fourth which is, What it is.
To believe the Catholyke Church. Ye shall understand that to believe the
Catholyke Church, is not only to believe that here in earth is and shall be
continually to thend of the world, such a holy catholyke Church (as before is
declared commonly called the Church Mylytante) but also to give credyte and
belief unto the whole Doctrine, faith, and religyon of the said Church.

And for the farther understanding of this whole article, here may most
frutefully and very well to the purpose, be brought in one most notable place
of S Augustyne, written upon this same article of the Creed, in his, clxxxi
sermon de tempore, where he says in this manner. Sciendum est, quod Ecclcsiam
credere, non tamen in Ecclesiam credere, debemus, qui Ecclesia non Deus, sed
domus dei est. Catholicam dicit toto orb diffusam quia diuer soru^haereticorum
ecclesic idio catholicae non dicuntur, quio per loca atque per suas quasque
prouincias cantinentur. Haec uero a solis ortu usque adoccasum unius fidei
splendore diffu^ditur. Nullasunt maiores diuitiae, nulli the sauri, nulli
honores, nullae huius mundi mayor substantia quam est cacholicafides, quae
peccatores homines saluat saecos illuminat, infirmos curat, Cate chuminos
baptizat fideles iustificat, poenitentis reparat, iustos augmentat martyris
coronat, clericos ordinat, sacerdotes consecrat, regnis celestibus preparat,
and in aeterna haereditate cum Angelis sanctis communicate. Quisquis ille est,
and (...): ille est Cristianus nonest, qui in Christi Ecclesia non est.
Solaquippe est perquam sacrificium dominus libentur accipiat sola quae pro
errantibus fiducia liter intercedat. Vnde etiam de agni hostia dominus
praecepit dicens. (...) Domo commeditls, necefferetis de carnibus eius (...),
In unana^que domo agnus come ditur, quia in una Catholica ecclesia uera hostia
rede^ptoris immo latur. De cuius carnibus diuinaiussio efferriforas prehibet,
quia dari sanctu^ canibus uetat. Sola est in qua opus bonum fructuose
peragitur, unde merre de^ de naru^ non nisi qui intra uine a^ laboraueru^t
acceperu^t. Sola est quae in ra se positos uaelid a charitatis co^page
custodit. unde and aqua diluuii arca^ quide^ ad sublimiora sustulie omnes autem
quos extro arcam inuenit extinxit. Sola est in qua mysteria superna ueraciter
contemplemur. Vnde ad Moses Dominus dicit, Estlocus apud me, and stabis
suprapetram, (...) Paulo post tol lammanum mean and uidebit posteriora mea Quia
enim cx sola catholica Ecclesia ucritas conspicitur apud se esse locum Dominus
perbibet de quo ui (...) in petra Moses ponitur ut Deispecie^ contempletur,
quia nisi quii fidei soliditatem tenuerit, (...) presentam non agnoscit,
Auelle, inquit, radium solis a corpore, diuisionem lucis unitas non capit.
Frange (...) ab arbore, fractus germinare non poterit. A font praecide riuum
praecisus as rescit, In his Cipriani uerbis intelligimus lucem non capere
diuisionem nisi in sanctis regno Dei praedestinatis qui diuidi ab Ecclesia
nullo modo possunt (...) non germinare ramum sructum salutis (...) germine
accipimus, Ariditatem uero riui a font praecisi, in co quod spiritu sancto
(...) qui (...) unitate seperantur (...). That is to say: We ought to believe
the church, and not in the church: for the church is not God, but the house
of god. This church he calls catholyke, that is to say, spredde thoroughout
the whole world, because the churches of sundry heretics, be ynge but in
particular places and provinces, can in no wise be called catholyke. But this
church from the East to the West, glyttereth and (...) with the brightness of
one faith. No greater riches no greater treasures, no higher honors, no
greater substance, can be in this world, that is the catholyke faith, which
saves sinners, gives syghte to the blind, does heal the sick, makes
yonglinges to be baptized, iustifyeth the faithful, restores penitent
sinners, encreseth righteous men, crowns martyrs, does admit clerks to
orders, does consecrat preistes, makes preparation to the kingdom of heaven,
and makethe men partakers of the everlasting enheritaunce with the holy
Angels. Who so ever he be, and of what quality or condytion soever he be, he
that is not in this church of Christ, is no Christen man: for this church is
she only by whom our Lord willingly receives sacrifice, she only it is
which may confidently make intercession for such as do err. Wherefore our
Lord speaking of the sacrifyce of the lamb: did command (...) In one house
shall ye eat, and of the flesh thereof ye shall carry nothing out of the doors
forsooth in one house is this lamb eaten, for as much as in one catholyke
church, the true sacrifice of our redemer is offered. Of whose flesh the
commoundeme^t of God forbids any thing to be carried out, for that he forbid
death that which is holy, to be (...) dogs, She only it is in whom a good
work is done frutefullye, for which cause only, they that labored within
the vine yard had the reward of the pennye. She only, it is that al such as
ar once placed in her does keep together with a strong ioynte, or knotte of
charity, Wherefore the water of the floude, bare up the arc to the (...),
but all such as were found without the same arcke, it drowned, She only it
is in whom we do behold truly the heavenly mysteries, Wherefore our Lord
says unto Moses Exodusxxxiii. There is a place with or byme, and thou shall
stand upon the rock. etc. and by and by after he says. I will take away my
hand, and thou shall se my back part. And because in deed out of this
catholyke church alone, the truth is seen our Lord says, a place to be with
him from which he may be seen, Moses is set upon the rock, that he may
behold the form of God, for onles a man have and hold the stedy substanciales
of faith, he knows not ye dyuine presence, Take away says he (meaning S.
Cyprian) the beam of the son from the body of the son, the unity of the
light, can not suffer no division: break a boughe from the tree, the bough so
broken, can florishe and budde no more, cut of the river from the spring, the
river so cut of, dries up. In these words of Cypryan we perceive that light
does not admytte any division in the saints predestinate to the Kyngedome of
God, which can by no means be divided from the Church, and that the bough
broken of, can not budde with a budde of everlasting salvation. And finally we
know the drying up of the river being cut of from the spring or head, in
that they are made void of the holy ghost which are separate from the
unity. Thus much says S. Augustyne, whereby it appears yt though we must
believe in God the father, in God the son, and in God the holy Ghost (as was
declared here before unto you in the exposition of the first article of this
creed) yet concerning the Catholic Church, we must believe it. That is to
say: give credit to it, but not to believe in it: for to believe in it, were to
make it God, as more at large shall be declared in some Homelies, hereafter
specially to be made thereupon, and also by what signs and tokens the true
Catholyke church is continually known.

And forasmuch as this catholyke militant church of which this article
entreats, has for the preservation of the unity thereof, by the ordinance,
and appointment of our savior Christ, one principal head or chief governor,
here upon earth, which being the chief vycar, and substitute of Christ, in
his said church, does, and ought, with other ministers under him attend, and
give head, to the good order, and rule of the said militant church (S. Peter
the Apostle being the first general vycar and gouernoure, therein, and having
to him, and to all his lawful successors iu the Apostolic see, the
governance, rule and charge thereof, cheifelye committed and given, which in
very deed, both he and they, by the continual help, and assistaunce of the
holy spyryte of God, from time to time in their succession, always hither to
have done, and thereby have preserved, and kept the unity of the said
church) therefore all they which have, or do refuse to acknowledge the said
gouernoure, government, and authority, can not in any wise be accounted or
taken for catholyke persons, but for such as in deed are disobedient,
seditious scismatike, and very wicked people, as more at large shall be declared
in some homelies to be specially made thereupon.

Thexposition or declaration of the tenthe article of the Creed which is.
The communion of saynctes, The forgeuenes of sins.
IN this article be taught two special fruits and benefits, which all men
called of God, and obeyinge to the same, calling in their will and works, do
obtain by Gods grace, in the said Catholyke church, that is to say. The
communion of saints and forgyuenes of sins. And here is to be noted, that
although this word, Saints, in our English toungue signifies properly
them that be departed this life, and be established with glory in Christ.
(...) the same word Saints, (whereby in this article we express the Latin
word, Sanctorum,) is here extended to signifye not only those that be so
departed this life and established, but also such as being in life here in
earth, be called into this holy assemble and Church, and be sanctyfyed in our
Sauyoure Jesus Christ. Accordyuge whereunto S. Paul in sundry his epystles, to
the Roma. 12. to the Epher. to the Philip. 4 to the Colos. 1. and to the (...).
14. uses the said word, Saints, and so does he in dynerse other places else.

And as touching the first of the said. ii. fruits or benefits, which is. The
communion of saints. That is to say the mutual participation of saynctes, ye
shall understand that like as all the (...) parts and members of the natural
body of man, do naturally communicate and be participante of one spirit or
soul which govern the said body, and every lyuelye part thereof, even so
do all good Christen men, participate of one holy ghost, which always
governs the catholyke church, and allyuely mem bres of the same, and does
give to sondrye members, sundry spiritual gifts, to the intent the whole body
should thereby be edified, according to the saying of S. Paul in the, xii.
Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corynthians, where he says in this manner.

Vnicuique autem datur manifestatio spiritus ad utilitatem. Alis quidem per
spiritum datur sermo (...), alijautem sermo (...) secundu^ eun them spiritum.
Alteri fides in (...), alij gratia sanit at um in eodem spiritu, aly operatio
uirtutum, alii prophetia alii discreto spiritum, alii generalinguarum alii
interpretatio sermonum. Hec autem omniaoperas tur unus a que idem spiritus,
diui dens singulis prout uult. That is. The gifts of the holy ghost are
given to every man, to profit other wythall, to one is given through (...)
spirit the vtteraunce of wisdom. To another is given the vttetaunce of (...)
by the same spyryte to another, faith by the same spirit, to another the gift
of healinge by the same spyryte, to another power to do miracles: to another
prophecye, to another judgment to discern spirits, to another diverse
tongues, to another interpretation of sayings. And al these things works
the self same spirit, deuydinge to every man as he will. By which place of
Saint Paul, it is evident that all the lyuelye members of the Church do
communycate and participate of one common spirit.

And this participation being one of the hygheeste benefits, that men receive
in the Catholyke Church, is comprehended in this article of the communion of
Saynctes. Of which communyon the Prophet David in his. cxviii. psalmedoth also
speak saying. Particeps ego sum omnium timentium te, et (...) man data tua
That is to say. I am partaker with all such as fear the, and keep thy (...).
But besides this foresaid participation or communion of the holy ghost, being
commune to all the liuelye members of the Church, there is also an other
communion comprehended likewise in this article, which is the (...) or union
that all good christen men have with Christ, who is the head of the church
and who has for his mystycall body the whole church. And of this kind of
communion of Saynctes, S. Paul likewise speaks, in the foresaid twelth
chapter of his first epistle to the Corynthyans, saying. In uno spiritu omnes
nos in (...) pus baptizati sumus, sieve dei, sieve gentiles, sieve serui, sieve
liberi and omnes in uno spiritu potati sumus. That is to say: In one spyrite
are we all baptized to make one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, free or
bond, and have all drunk of one spyryte. And likewise does he in the fifte to
the Ephesians where spea king of the same he says. (...) sumus corporis eius,
de car ne cius, et de ossibus cius. That is to say: We are members of his
body (meaning of the body of Christ) and of his flesh and of his bones.

And forasmuch as the most blessed sacrament of the altar (wherein by the
mighty operatyon of Gods word, is really present in the fourmes of bread
and wine the natural living body and blood of our sauyoure and redemer
Jesus Christ) does increase and work in all them that worthelye do receive
it, the communion and conjunction in body and soul of them to Christ, and of
Christ to them, with a mutual coniunctyon also in love and charytye, of each
good man in Christ to other. Therefore the said Sacrament may also worthily be
called the commu nion of Saints. And so has the first part of this article
been by good devout and learned men expounded long ago.

Now touchy nge the second fruit or benefit in this article which is the
remission of sins, you shall understand, that only in the catholyke church,
and no where else the remission of sins is to be had. And there undoubtedly
it is to be had: and that by two means, that is to wit by baptism, and
after baptism by due penance and (...) of the keys, given unto the church.
And as for baptism it washes clean away all the former sins as well
actual as original: so that they shall never after that be imputed unto us.
But in case after baptism we fall into sin then the remedy must be by the
wholesome sacrament of Penance, which sacrament is of so great forse and
virtue, that how heinous so ever our sins and offenses be, yet by the mean
of the same, the said sins may be and are released and forgeuen unto us.
And for to take away all doutyng on our behalf herein, and that no man should
need to despair, our Savior Christ openly and by express words, in the
twentye of Sayncte John af ter he had breathed upon his Disciples, said unto
them, and generallye to their Successors. (...) the holy ghost, whose sins
ye release or forgive they are forgeuen or released unto them and whose ye
withholde or reteyne, they are withholden or retained. And also with a special
(...) assygned unto Saynct Peter, gave unto him and his lawful successors,
the full (...) of releasyng and withholdyng of sins, saying unto him (as it
is written in the. xvi. of Mathewe. Tibi dabo claues regni celorum: quodcunque
ligaueris super terram crit ligatum et in celis: et quodcumque solueris super
terram erit solutum et in celis. That is to say: Unto thee will I give the
Keys of the kingdom of heaven, whatsoever thou do bind upon earth, shall
also be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou loosest upon earth, shall also be
loosed in heaven. Which (...) all Christen men should to their great comfort
most gladly embrace, and by all means be most careful and wary (to the
uttermost of their power) to keep them selves in such state that they may still
enjoy the fruit of this so comfortable a privilege. Wherefore good people
(according to the exhortation of the Prophet Ezechiell, in the eyghtenth
chapter) Turn and do penance for all your iniquities, and your iniquitye
shall not be your destruction. But you shall undoubtedly (according to this
article) be unburdened of your sins, and made partakers of the communion of
saynctes both in this world and in the world to come.

Amen.
Thexposition or declaration of the eleue^th article of the Creed which is.
The resurrection of the Body.
Coucernynge this eleventh article, for as much as it may seem itraunge to some
men why: this word Body, is here placed in the English, seeing the Latin is.
Carnis resurrcctionem, That is to sai. The resur rection of the flesh. (...)
shall know that in (...) ture many times this word (flesh) does signyfye the
hole man, as for example, where it is written in the first of S. Jhon. Verbum
caro factum est. that is to say The word was made flesh. the meaning is
that the son of god took upon him the hole nature of man. Again, (...) the
first chapter of saint Paul's first epistle to the Corynthians, it is
written in this manner. Vt non glorietur omnis caro, that is to say That no
flesh should glory, the meaning is that no man should glory. Likewise,
where in the third of S. Luke it is written. Videbit omnis caro salutare dei.
That is. All flesh shall se the savior sent of God, The meaning is, that al
men shall see the savior sent of god. And many times also this said word
(Flesh) does in scripture, signifye only the body of man without any
respect of the soul thereof, as in the first Chapyter of Genesis, where Adam
speaking of his wife Eve, says in this manner. Caro de carne (...). that is.
Flesh of my flesh. meaning that her body was made of his body. Likewise in
the. xxi, of Job, where Job says. Concutit carnem (...) tremor. That is,
Tremblyng does shake my flesh. meaning there by his flesh his body. And
according to this second acception, this Latyne word. Carnis, Which is to
say: Of the flesh, is taken here in this article of the Latin Creed, and by
cause the body, and the flesh, here in this article, do signifye and mean
one thing, we may both say the resurrection of the body, and also the
resurrection of the flesh.

And thereby we do understand that at the day of the general dome or
Judgment, when Christ shall come (as in the. vii. article of this Creed is
contained) and sit to judge the quick and the dead: almighty God shall
stir and raise up again the very flesh and bodies of all men, women, and
Children, both good and bad, christened and heathen, that ever lived here in
this world, from the beginning of the same, and died before that day. And
although the said flesh and bodies were dead and buried, yea, and consumed,
or by any means destroyed, yet God shall of his infinite power make them all
at that day, wholl and perfect again. And so every man generally shall
resume and take again, the very self same body and flesh in substance,
which he had whi les he lived here on earth, and so shall rise from death and
live again in the very self same body and soul which he had before.

(...) which time, man thus being made perfect in conjunction of body and
soul, shall at that day, appear before the high judge our savior Jesu
Christ and there shall make an account of his works, and his deeds such as he
did (good or evil) while he lived here in this world. And for proof that the
contents of this article are true, these authorities and testimonies both of
the old and the new testamente, shall be sufficient for this present, that is
to wit, the. xix. of Job. Esaias. xxvi. Ezechi. xxxvii. Daniel. xii. Matthew.
xxii. John. v. Rom, xiiii. i. Cor. xv, ii. Cor. v, i, These, iii. and. iiii.
Philip. iii. and the, ii, to Timoth. ii.

The exposition or declaration of the twelft Article of the Creed, which is.
And the life everlasting. Amen.
In these few words is the most comfortable and joyous knyttynge up of
this Creed that may be. For two excellent things are here set fourth to be
believed, the first is Life, which all things do desire: the second, is the
Eternity, and continual lastyng of it. which is a thing that makes it most
pleasant, and most sweet and most profitable. And when I do say that there is
a life, and also an everlasting life, I do mean both concerning the body and
also concerning the soul, for unto them both this everlasting life shall
without any ending continue and abide.

B V T H E R E must ye mark, that like as the good shall enjoy for ever,
this most (...) estate of everlasting life to their unspeakable comfort and
gladness, so also the noughtye and wicked shall both in body, and also in
soul receive for ever punyshmente and tormente incessantly, according
whereunto our Savior Christ in the. xxv. of saint Mathewe says. Et ibunt hi
in supplicium (...) em in uitam eternam. That is to say. And they (meaning
the noughtye and wicked) shall go into everlasting punishment, but the just
shall goo into life everlasting. And hereupon may be (...), that though the
noughtye, and wicked shall continue for ever, and have immortality, yet
forasmuch they so contynuing shall never have joy but everlasting torment of
body and soul, without hope of forgyuenes, and without any end: Therefore
their contynuaunce and immortality is rather to be called everlasting death,
then everlasting life, or life at all, according whereunto S. Paul in the. vi
chapter of his epistle to the Romans, does say. Stipendia enim peccatimors,
gratia autem dei uita (...), in CHRISTO IESV domino nostro. That is to say:
The reward in deed of sin is death, but eternal life is the gift of God
through Jesu Christ our lord. So that such as have led their lives, in
obedience and observation of Gods commandments. and die in true faith and
charity, shall then be perfectly (...) tified. puryfyed, and delivered from
all contagion of sin, and from all corruptible and mortality of ye (...),
and shall be perpetuallye glorified, and receive both in body and soul
together, everlasting life, which life everlasting, though it passes all
men's wits, to express how pleasant and ioyefull it is, and that man's
capacity, can not compryse and un derstande the same (as S. Paul witnesses
in his (...) epistle to the Corinthians the. ii. chapter saying: That which
the eye has not seen, nor the ear has not herd, nor has not entered into
man's heart, GOD has ordained for them that love him, (...) holy scripture
speaks of it, after our capacity, and intelligence, but far under the
worthynes and excellency thereof. For the prophet Esaias says, in the. xxxv.
chapter. Everlasting gladness shall be over their heads, they shall have joy
and gladness, sorrow and wayling shall forsake them. And (...) Jhon in the
seventh chapyter of his (...) says, God that sytteth on his throne shall dwell
over them They shall not hunger or thyrste any more, neither son nor heat
shall hurt them, for the lamb that is in the mids of the throne, shall feed
them, and bring them to the fountaynes of the water of life: and God shall wype
away all weapyng and tears from their eyes, death shall endure no longer.
There shall be no waylyng, nor crying, nor sorrow any more, (...) there is no
joy or comfort, that can be wysshed for, but it is there most plentyfully.
There is true glory, where praise shall be without error or flattery. There is
true honor which shall be given to none, onles he be worthy, there is true
peace, where no man shall be molested or grieved, neither by himself, nor by
others. There is true and pleasant felowshype, where is the company of
blessed angels, and the elect and chosen (...) of God. There is true and
perfect love, that never shall fail. For all the heavenly company is linked
and fastened together, by the bond of perfect charity, whereby also they be
united and knitte to almighty God euerlastynglye.

Fynallye there is the true reward of all Godlynes, God him self, the sight
and fruition of whom, is the end and reward of al our belief, and of all
our good works, and of all those things which were purchased for us by
Christ, He shall be our sacietie, or fullness, and desire, he shall be our life,
our health our glory, our honor, our peace, our everlasting rest and joy,
he is the end of all our desires, whom we shall se continually, whom we shall
love most fervently, whom we shall praise and magnifye incessantly, and world
without end.

And forasmuch as most firmly and without all doubt we believe all the foresaid
articles of this creed and every thing concerning the same, and in them
comprehended to be most true: And moreover for yt we likewise believe al
things which concern either our creation, redemption, or sanctification, of
the heavenly father, by his son, and with the holy ghost, to be fully
wrought, and that they shall most certenlye through the mercy of God, come
unto us. Therefore in the end of this creed we say. Amen. Which is a word
confirmyng a saying, and a pray inge that it may so be allowed and
establysshed, the very signification of which word being, be it so, most
certaynelye.

Of the seven Sacraments.
Forasmuch as there are now two parts performed of the promise made unto you
in the preface of this work, it is to wit, of the acception or ta king of
this word Faith, and also of the articles ofye (...) with exposition, or
declaration of the same. The next matter to be set forth and declared, is the
treatise of the. vii. Sacraments, with their expositions. And forasmuch as it
is expediente before the special intreatye thereof, to speak somewhat, as well
of the signification of this word Sacrament being taken in his generaltie, as
also to defyne in specialtie how this word Sacrament, shall be taken and
understood here in this treatise, therefore here in the beginning, these two
things shall be set fourth and opened unto you.

And as concerning the first, ye shall understand that this word Sacrament,
is diuersely taken, for amongst them that have a respect to the propriety of
the Latin tongue, and do seek the signification thereof in profane writers. A
sacrament among other (...), is pryncipally called an obligation or promise
made and confyrmed by an oath, of which thing S. Augustine in his. clxxxi.
Sermon makes mention. And among them that have a respect un to scripture,
and the writers thereof, a Sacrament does signify a mystery, that is to say, a
secret or hydden thing apperteynyng to the religion: and so being considered,
it is sometimes taken in a more larger signifycation, and sometimes in a more
strayter: and being taken in the larger signification it does signifye every
secret mysterye appertaynynge to religion, and every holy thing hydden,
though it be not a sign or token of another thing, as when we use to name and
say, the sacrament of the godheade, meaning thereby the very godhead it self,
whythe is a hyd and secret thing, and yet not a sign or token of any other
thing. And in this signification also S. Paul does use it in the first
Chapter of his epistle to the Ephesians, where he says that God has reueyled
or opened unto us the Sacrament of his will, meaning there (by the Sacrament
of his will) the secret eternal will of God, whereby he appointed from the
beginning, that the Gentyles should be incorporated, and made partakers of
his promise in Jesus Christ, in whom we al have trust, and in trust, have an
access by faith unto him. And likewise he does in the third chapter of his
first epistle to Tymothe, where be writes (...) this manner. Et manifest (...)
est pictatis Sacramentum, quod mainfestatum est (...). etc. That is to say:
And undoubtedly, great is the Sacrament of godlynes, which is she wed in the
flesh. etc. Meaning thereby, that Christ him self is a great Sacrament of
godliness, for that he being the invisible son of God, is manifested or opened
in the flesh.

And this word sacrament, being taken after the strayter manner or acception,
(in which most co^monlye it is) it signifies the sign of a holy thing,
which bears the similitude or likeness of the thing, whose sign it is. After
which sort the signs and fygures of the old testamente are called
sacraments, and so the ancient fathers, speaking of the signs of the old
testament, do use commonly and frequently to name them. According whereunto S.
Augustine in the. xiii. Chapter of his. xix. book against Faustus does say.
Prima Sacramenta gue obseruabantur and celebrabantur ex lege (...) erant
Christi uenturi. That is to say: The first Sacraments which were observed
and celebrated by the law, were prenunciatyue of Christ to come. Now to
consider the signification of this word sacrament, as it shall be con sidered
and used in this treatise, (which is the most straytest signification of al
other) ye shall note, that it being so taken, is defined after this sort. That
is to say Asacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace of God, which
grace, God effectually and certainly, does work in it, so that the same be
duelye handled, and not unworthily received. According to which diffinition,
and the word sacrament being so taken, there are. vij. sacraments of the
church and no mo, it is to wit, Baptysine, Confyrmation, Penance,
Eucharistie (or the sacrament of the aultare) Order, Matrimonye, and extreme
unction. And these seven to be such sacraments, and mysteryes, and so truly
and properly to be accepted and taken, the old ancient fathers of the
catholyke church, have prudently and godly observed, and noted especially, for
that they so be sensible signs of the invisible grace of God, that they both
bear the image, or similitude, and be also the cause of the invisible grace of
God that is given, Which to make more plain and manifest unto you let us for
declaration hereof, consider external things. (...) know that external
things may sometims be considered as done for them own selves, and the same
external things may also be considered as do^e for other things, to be
signified and noted by them in that respect in which they are in deed, and be
called signs or tokens. As for example, a ring is sometime given not as a
sign or token of an other thing but only for it own self, and sometimes it
is given as a convenient and fytte sign or token of fydelitie, as when the
Lord does give (...) his vassail a ring, for a token of the inuestiture of
possession or liuerye of his fee or gift, which ring being so given and
received, the vassal not only is asserteyned of the benevolence or benefit
received of his Lord, but also there is contracted and made thereby, between
the said vassal, and his said Lord, a certain couenaunte and bargayne, so
that the said vassal, having received the same ring, may say, I have now a
title of inheritance, and not a ring only. After the same manner must you
think and believe (which is the chief point in this matter) that our lord
Jesus Christ, did chose and ordeyne signs, by which God in the virtue of his
word, might cure or heal our sins, and (as it were) inueste us of his
grace, and bind us unto him by a spiritual bond or couenaunte. For so
commonly it seemed good to God almyghtye, by sensyble things, and signs to
lead and train us to invisible and spiritual things. And such also is the
dulnes of our understanding (being derived unto us from our first parents
Adam and Eve, through their transgression) that of our selves we are not able
to rise up, or clymbe to the knoweledge of God, or by the forse of our reason,
to attain to the knowledge of gods will, in releasynge or forgeuynge sins.

Wherefore God always both by words and also by outward or external signs,
has dealt with us, whereby he might open or (...) him self unto us, and also
declare his will by the same. In so much that where as in old time God by many
means and by sundry ways did speak in his prophets, and gave counsel as
by word, by the law, by signs and wonders, he has now last of all spoken
in or by his only son our lord, whom his will was to take our flesh on
him and be crucified for us, that we castyng our eyes and consyderations upon
him, being made like unto us visible, palpable, and as a most mighty sign,
sent and given of god, and hearing him speak, might begin in him to know
god, believe and put our whole confidence in god, and finallye to love god above
all things else. For in him the power, wisdom, and goodness of God, do
shine most perfectly and clearly, in whom the fullness of the divinity does
dwell corporallye. And by what sign else could God more myghtylye or
effectuallye have declared that he had a special care for us, the^ to send his
son and declare that whosoever believes i him perysheth not, but has
eueriastinge life. And for that all the virtue and effect of the passion of our
savior Jesus Christ (as much as concerns us) does consiste in the
application thereof (that is to wit, that we may be made partakers of that
grace, which Christ on the Aultare of the Cross, deserved or meryted unto us
by his death,) for this said entente and end, Christ him self has
vouchesaued to leave (...) him certain Sacraments, which he has confyrmed
and establyshed unto us by his word and promise: that by the dew and lawefull
use of them, we might know, and be assured, the fruit of his passion
effectualiye and most certenlye to be imparted and communicated unto us. True
it is that without any manner of visible form he could indewe us with his
grace, but because we are carnal and very dull to comprehend spiritual
things, and the force of our soul being weakened and co^bred with the
clogge and busye workynge of our corrupt body, we often times fall from faith,
hope, and charity: Therefore the fraylcnes of our flesh must under a visible
form be repaired, styrred up, enstruc ted, nourished and comforted. And least
any man should doubt of the virtue and efficacye of the visible Sacraments,
God has added to the visible (...), his word of promysse: and moreover at the
beginning when Sacraments were first ministered, he adjoined manifest visions
and miracles, to the intent that such things as we once see done, we should
with an earnest faith believe, by the same sprit of Christ. daily to be done in
the same Sacraments As to induce the with most constant faith to believe, that
when thou art baptized, the holy Ghost does come upon the, the holy Ghost did
therefore appear upon Christ, in the form of a Dove when he was Baptized.
And that thou should likewise believe, that when thou art confyrmed, the
holy Ghost is given the for thy strength and force. Therefore upon the
Whytsondaye among the Apostels, there was made a great sound, and there did
appear cloven tounges as fire, syttyng upon the apostles. As likewise also
(Acts the. ix.) by the imposition of Paul's hands upon such as were before
that time baptized the holy ghost came upon them, yea, and they prophesyed.
And so likewise concerning the other Sacraments: which evident tokens and
signs daily now to be repeted is not need, for that a good and strong
faith must here serve, which utterly would decay and vanysh away, if that
we would not believe the force and virtue of the Sacrament, having Christ's
words adjoined unto it, unless ever a manifest miracle must thereat be
wroughte unto us.

The Sacraments therefore of the new testament, are especyallye for this
intent instituted, that they might be certain and effectual signs to our
outward sense, of the will and grace of god: (admonyshyng and instructinge us,
most firmelye to believe that, that thing which we see out wardlye done by a
visible sign, is effectually wrought inwardly by the virtue of God,) And they
are also most ready remedies against sin, and do far pass those of the
old law. For they were the shadows of things to come and as signs and
fygures were abolyshed, (Christ after his coming having fulfilled them) and
they were therefore abolyshed, because they were fulfilled But these of the new
testament were instituted, both as greater in virtue, better in profyt, easier
in mynystration, and fewer in number (as being but seven) and that they
should not only signifye, but purge and sanctifye also. In every of which
seven sacraments, the minister or dispenser of the same, does not execute in
his own behalf or name, but does represent the person of our savior Jesus
Christ, to whom be honor and glory. Amen.

Of the Sacrament of Baptysme, and the exposition or declaration thereof.
BEcause the Sacrament of Baptism, is in order the first of al Sacraments,
and the gate or entrye, by which we must and do enter into the church and
unto the other Sacraments thereof, to obtain remission of our sins, and is
a thing so necessary, that without it no man can enter into the kyngedome of
God, as Christ in the third chapter of S. John's gospel does plainly
testify, saying: Nisi quis renatus (...) ex aqua (...) spiritu sancto, non
potest (...) in'reg (...) dei. That is to say. Except one be borne again of
water and the holy ghost, he can not enter into the kingdom of God Therefore
in this noumbre of vii. Sacraments, the Sacrament of Baptysme for these
respects shall occupy the first place.

For the better understanding whereof, ye shall emongeste other things
consider, and note four points.

First ye shall note that in the Sacrament of Bap tysine there are certain
formal words necessary and requysyte to be used in the ministration thereof.
Second that in the said Sacrament of Baptism besides the said formal words
there is required al so an outward visible thing or element to be concur runt
therewith. Third is to be considered, the virtue, force, and effect of the
said Sacrament. And iiii. is to be declared, what rites solempnities, or
ceremonies, are required for the dew administration of the said Sacrament.
Now concerning the first of these four things to be noted in Baptysme, ye
shall know that our sauyoure Christ, when he did send his apostles to
preach throughout the hole world, he did say unto them, as is testyfyed in
the xxviii. Chapter of Sayncte Mathewes Gospel. Data est mihi omnis potestas
in coelo and in terra, euntes ergo docete omnes (...) baptizantes cos in nominc
patris, and filij, ci spiritus sancti. That is to say, All power is given unto
me in heaven and in earth, go you therefore and do you teach all nations
baptizinge them in the name of the father of the son, and of the ho ly Ghost.
By which plainly appears, that our (...) Christ, in his commyssyon given
unto his apostles, did prescrybe certain formal words unto them, which they
in administration of Baptysine should use, according whereunto the minister of
the Church being therein the successoure of the apostles, does and must use
in the administration of the Sacrament of Baptism, these formal words, I
do Baptize thee in the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy
Ghost, and this much for the first point. For the second point considered
in Baptysme, ye shall note the special words of our sa uyour Christ in the
foresaid, iii. Chapter of Saint John's Gospel, where speaking of
regeneration or Baptism, he uses these words. Aqua et spiritu sancto, say
ing. Nisi quis renatus fucrit ex aqud and spiritu sancto non potest (...)
regnum dei. Whereby it is evident that water, which is a visible element, and an
open thing, is a substancial part of baptism, and must needs be concurre^t
with ye formal words used in the administration of Baptism. According
whereunto we (...) read in the. viii chapter of the acts, that when Philip,
which was one of the seven deacons (acts: vi) had converted unto the faith of
CHRIST a certain noble man being in great authority and office with Candate
the Queen of Ethiope, he did baptyse the said noble man with water, so that
water is required in Bap tisme. The like whereof appears the, x. Chapter of
the acts, where it is euidente that Saint Peter, the apostle, baptized in
water one Cornelms a Centuryon and others with him.

Touching the third thing to be considered in Baptysme which is the virtue,
force, and effect there of, ye shall know, that the forgeuenes or remyssyon of
sins, and the grace of the holy ghost, is the virtue force, and effect of
baptysme, as is manyfeste in the second chapter of the acts, where the
blessed apostle S. Peter says thus. Penitentiam agite. and baptizes tur
unusquisque uestrum in nomine IESV CHRISTI, in remissionem peccatorum
uestrorum, et accipietis donum spiritus sancti. That is to say. Do you
penance, and let every one of you be Baptized in the name of Jesus Christ in
remission of your sins, and ye shall reccaue the gift of the Holy Ghost.
This effect and grace has this Sacrament of baptism by the virtue and
workyng of almighty God, there in by his minister, according to his own
promise annexed and adjoined to this Sacrament, as plainly appears in the.
xvi. chapter of S. Mark, where Christ geuinge commission to his Apostles to
go in the whole world to preach the gospel, says these words. Qui
credideret and baptisatus fuerit saluus erit. that is to say. Who shall believe
and be baptized, shall be saved. And as concerning the. iiii. thing to be
considered in baptysme, ye shall note that albeit of late, some have untruly
preached, and reported that the manner of baptysinge or christening, now used
in the Church, is not the same which was used in the prymatyue Church, but
has been of late years invented and devised, yet the ancient fathers both of
the Greek and of the Latin Church, have in their works declared the
contrary, for proof whereof among many other, ye shall read Denyce the
Areopagyte in his book De ecclesiastica hierarchia, in the title, De
perficiendis in baptismate, of whose authority none needs to doubt, seeing
that S. Luke in the. xvii. of the acts, makes mention of him: ye may read
also S. Cyprian in his first book and. xii. Epistle where he says thus. (...)
uero mu^dari and sanctificari aqua^ prius a sacerdote ut possit baptismo suo,
peccat a hominis qui baptisatur abluere. that is to say. The wa: ter must
first be made clean and sanctified of the priest that it may cleanse the
sins of him that is baptized. Read also S. Ambrose in his treatise, De ijs
qui initiantur misteriis, and in his first book al so De sacramentis. And if
you list read Chrysostom in his Homely entitled of Adam and Eve, where
amongeste diverse other his notable sayings ye shall find these words
folowinge. Illud etiam quod circa baptizandos in unluerso mundo sancta
ecclesia, sieve sunt paruulisiue iuuenes uniformiter agit, non ocioso
contemplemur intuitu, quod cu^ ad regenerationis ueniunt sacrame^ium non prius
fontem uite ingrediuntur qua^ exorcismis et exufflacionibus clericorum,
spiritus ab eis immundus abigatur. That is to say: This thing also which the
holy Church through the hole world uniformelye does practyse in persons
that are to be baptyled, whether they be little children, or young folk, let us,
not with idell consideration behold, how that when they do come to the Sacra
meant of regeneration or baptism, they do not enter into the funt of life
before that the unclene spirit be driven away by the exorcisines, and
exsufflations of the clerks or mi nisters. Agreeable whereunto S. Austyne in
his second book. De gratia Christi. And in his. xl. chapter does say thus.
Ipsa sancte ecclesie sacramenta que tam prisce traditionis authoritate,
concelebrat, satis indicant paruulos a partu etiam rece^tistimos per gratiam
CHRISTI, de diaboliseruitio liberari, excepto enim quod in peccatorum
remissionem, non fallaci sed fidcli misterio baptizantur, etia^ prius
exorcizatur in eis et exufflatur potestas contraria, cui, etiam uerbis eorum a
quibus portantur, se se renunciare respondent. that is to say. The very
Sacraments of the holy Church which she by so old or ancient tradition, to
gether with other does celebrate, sufficiently do declare. young children, even
most newly or freshely cummen from birth, to be by the grace of Christ,
delivered from the service of the devil. For besides that they be baptized,
not with the deceatefull, but with the true misterye, there is also first in
them exercised, and exufflate the contrary power (meaning there by the Devil)
which contrary power, the children (by the words of them yt did bear the^) make
answer that they do renounce it. The same S. Augustine also in the. iiii.
book, and xxiiii Chapyter of his work entitled, De baptismo contra Dona
tistas, writes in this manner. Et sicut in illo latrone, quod exbap tismi
sacramento defuerat compleuit omnipotentis benignitas, quia non (...) perbia
uel contemptu sed necessitate defuerat. Sic in infantibusqui baptiza
timoriuntur, eadem gratia omnipote^tis implere credenda est, quod no^ exa
impiauoluntale, sed ex etatis indigentia, nec cord credere ad institia^
possunt, nec ore confiteri adsalutem, ideo aliipro eisrespondent, ut impleatur
erga eos celebratio sacramenti, ualet utique ad eorum consecrationem, quid ipse
respondere non possunt. That is to say. And as the be nignitie of the
almyghtye did fulfill in the these (specially mentioned in the, xxiii. of S,
Luke) that thing which wanted, as touching the sacrament of Baptisine, because
it wanted not of pride, nor of contempt, but of necessity. So the same grace
of the almighty, must be believed to fulfill that thing in infantes, who do dye
being baptized, which they not of wicked or noughtye will, but of lack of age,
neither with heart were able to believe to justice, nor with mouth confess to
salvation, by reason whereof other do answer for them that the celebration of
ye sacrament (meaning Baptysme) may be fulfilled toward them, which in
deed is auaylable to their sanctification, because they cannot answer.

Now this sacrament of Baptism being instituted and ordained by our Savior
CHRIST, in the new testament: and the effect and virtue of ye same being the
forgeuenes of sins: and it having with it the grace of the holy ghost: and
finally it not only apparteynyng to all such as have the use of reason, who
thereby have all kind of sins, both original and actual, committed and
done before their baptysine, clearelye taken away from them: but also ap
pertaining and being offered unto infantes, who being borne in original
sin, have need to be chrystened, and being offered in ye faith of the
church, do both receue the forgeuenes of their sin, and also such grace of
the holy ghost, that if they dye in the state of their infancy, they shall by
the said baptism be vndoutedlie saved. Ye shall note (touching this oryginall
sin in infantes) that as the said infantes do take of their parents their
original and natural qualities, even so they receive from them, oryginall
sin, by which they are made the children of the ire of God, and by the same
have a natural inclinati on to sin, by lusts and desires, which in fnrther
age and time, sensibly do move and stir them to wyckednes. For although the
parents be never so clean purged, and pardoned of their oryginall sin by
baptism, and grace given in the same, yet nevertheless the children of them
begotten, be conceived and borne in original sin. Example we may take of
corn, which though it be never so clean wynowed and purged from the chafe,
yet if it be cast into the ground and sown, the new which spryngeth of it,
is full of chafe again, until it be also winowed and cleansed: So likewise the
children of christen me^ be full of the chafe and corruptyon of original
sin, until that by baptysme, they be washed, cleansed, and purged from the
same as their parents were.

AND although certain heresies have risen up and spronge in our days,
against the Chrystenynge of infantes, yet as the ancient fathers, and holy
(...), of the church do testify, the universal consent of the churches in all
places, and of all times using, and frequenting the Chrystenynge of infantes,
is a sufficient witness and proof, that this custom of the Church in
baptyzing of infantes, was used by Christ's Apostles them selves, and by them
given unto the church, and in the same has been always continued even unto
these days. And this custom and perpetual usage of the church even from the
beginning is agreeable with the saying of S. Paul. Ephe v. Christ loved his
Church, and has given him self to the death for his Churches sake to
sanctifye her and make her holy, in cleansynge her by the fountain of water
in his word. etc. So that no man is nor can be of this Church, but he which
is cleansed by the Sacrament of Baptysme: Like as the text before alleged,
shows, where Christ sayethe: Whosoever is not borne again of water and the
holy Ghost shall not enter into the Kyngedome of Heaven. Wherefore seeing that
out of the church, nether infantes, nor no man else ca^ be saved, they must
needs be christened and cleansed by baptysme, and so incorporated into the
Church. And as the infancy of the children of the Hebrews, in the old
testamente, did not let, but that they were made participant of the grace and
benefytte given in Circumcision.

Even so in the new Testament, the infancye, of Children does not let, but
that they may and ought to be baptized and so receive the graces and virtues
of the same.

AND albeit baptysme be of this great efficacye, yet ye shall understand, that
there remains in us that be baptized, a certain infirmity, or inclination,
to sin, called concupiscence which by lusts, and desires, does move us many
times to sins, and wickedness, nevertheless, almyghtye God of his great
merci and goodness, has (...) us such grace in this his holy Sacrament of
baptysne, that such carnal and fleshely lusts and desires, shall not, ne can
in any wise hurt us except we do first consent unto them By which grace also
we be made more strong, and able to resist, and withstand the said
concupyscences and carnal desires, than another man is that never was
christened.

BUT this shall you note by the way, that children, or men being once duley
baptized, ought not in any wise (as the Anabaptists have taught) to be
baptized again, for Saynct Paul in the sixth chapter of his Epistle to the
Hebrews says thus. Impossible enim (...) qui semel sunt illuminati,
gustaueru^t etia^ donu^ celeste, et participes factisunt spiritus sancti,
gustauerunt nichilominus bonum dei uerbum, uir tutes que seculi uenturi, et
(...) sunt: rursus renouari (...) penitentiam. That is to say: Impossible in
deed it is, those who once be illuminate, and also have tasted the heavenly
gifts, and have been partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted besides
the good word of God, and the virtues or power of the world to come, and be
fallen: to be renewed again unto penance. Where, (by such renewynge) Saint
Paul understands baptism.

AND because as well this sacrament of baptysme, as all other sacraments
instituted by Christ, have all their virtue, efficacye and strength by the
word of God, which by his holy spirit, works all the graces and virtues,
which be given by the sacraments, to all those that worthelye receive the
same: Therefore we must understand and know, that although he which does
minyster the sacrament, be of a synnefull and evil conuersatyon, yet the
virtue and effect of the sacrament, is thereby nothing dimynished or hurted,
neither in infantes, nor yet in them which being endued with the use of
reason, come there unto truly contryte, and penytente of all their sins done
before, beleuynge and confessinge all the articles of the Creed, and having a
sure faith and trust in the promysses of GOD of remyssyon of their sins,
and purposynge ever after to live a christen life.

FINALLY ye shall note concerning this Sacra meant of Baptism, that it may
well be called, a coue naunte between GOD and us, whereby GOD testifyeth, that
he for his son Christ's sake, iustifyeth us, that is to say: forgyueth us our
sins, and indueth us with his holy spirit, and gives us such graces that
there by, we be made able to walk in the works of Justice, ordained by God to
be exorcised of us in this present life, to the glory and praise of GOD And
so persevering, to inioye the fruit of the life everlasting. And we again
upon our part, ought most diligently to remember and keep the promysse, that
we in baptysme have made to almyghtye God, that is, to believe only in him,
only to serve him and obey him, to forsake al (...), and the works of Sa
tan, to mortify our affections of the flesh, and to live after the spirit in
a new life. Of which promise and conuenau^t by us made to GOD S. Paul puts
us in remembrance, saying. Romans vi. Know ye not that all we, which are
baptized in Jesus Christ, are baptized to dye with him? for we be buried with
him, by baptysme to dye, that likewise as Christ was raised up from death by
the glory of his father, even so we should walk in a new life. By the
which words. S. Paul gives us to understand that al we which be baptized
in Christ, That is to say which are incorporated into the mystical body of
Christ have professed and (...); our self in Baptysme, to dye from sin, and
utterly to abstain from the corruption of our old synnefull life, and to
walk and proceed in a new life of grace, and the spirit, into the which we
are called by the word of God, and by faith, and due receauynge of this holy
Sacrament, are brought and set into the same.

Of the Sacrament of Confyrmation and thexposition or declaration thereof.
HAVINGE last entreated of the Sacra mente of Baptysme, by the which al manner
of sin, as well original as ac tuall, is remitted, and the holy ghost therein
given, which does regenerate us into a new creature, and does thereby so
weake^ and attenuate ye foam, or rage of co^cu pisce^ce in us, yea and so help
ye weakness of our corrupt nature, that the said foam of concupiscence can in
no wise hurt us except we will again consent unto sin, mete and convenient
it shall be to entreat of confirmation, which is the second Sacrament above
touched and rehearsed. For albeit that the Sacrament of Baptysme alone, to al
such as have received the same, and been thereby regenerated by water and the
holy ghost, is sufficient to salvation and to bring them to heaven, if in that
state of innocencye recovered and gotten by (...), they should by and by
depart this world. Yet if they having passed the red sea should enter into the
great wilderness, and deserte of this large and miserable world, in as much
as they should encountre, and have much to do, with their outward and inward
enemies, as well the flesh, the devil, and the world, before they should
come to the land of promise, requisite and expediente it, were for them to be
armed at all points and made apt unto the battayll, and to abide all
assaults that their enemies would goo about to make against them.

In consyderatyon whereof, likewise as in the old testament, almyghtye God,
was benefyciall and good to the children of Israel, whom he caused safelye to
pass the red sea, drowning their enemies, and confortyng the said Israelites
many ways, as well in spreadyng abroad over them the cloud in the day, for
their protection, as geuynge them fire, to light them in the night, over and
besides the feadyng of them with celestial fode, and refreshynge of them with
water that issued out of the hard rock. So our blessed Savior Jesus
Christ, having fulfilled the fygures and shadows of the old law, does
after baptysme, give unto his Isralites, the christen people, diverse gifts of
the holy Ghost, and manyfoide graces, whereby he does hold up, and confyrme,
or make strong his said people, that they are able, to abide and to overcome
all the assaults of their (...) and amongst other he gives unto them his
holy Sacraments, of the which confyrmatyon is one succedyng in order after
Baptism.

(...) this Sacrament of Confyrmation (albeit the heretyckes in our time have
folyshlye, busely, and maliciously gone about to deface it, scant (...)
taking, or allowynge it for a rite or ceremonye, and utterly denying it to be
a Sacrament) yet ever in the catholyke Church and (...) the faitheful
Christen people it has been (as in deed it ought) taken, accepted, used, and
allowed for a Sacrament, yea and for one of the seven Sacraments to. For the
(...) whereof, besides the testimonies of the said faith of the catholyke
Church, and of the most holy; and most ancient fathers thereof, we have
diverse most plain and evident open places of Scripture, by continual usage,
acceptyon, and interpretatyon, so allowed, ratified, and approved. And first
ye shall for proof thereof have the testimonye of S, Luke, in the viii, chapter
of the acts, where he says thus.

Cum autem (...) Apostoli qui erant in Hierosolimis quod recepisset (...) maria
uerbum DEI, miserunt ad eos, Petrum et (...): Qui cum uenissent (...) pro ipsis
ut acceperent spiritum (...) (non dum enim in quemquam illorum uenerat, sed
baptizati tantum erant in nomine Domini (...)) tunc imponebant manus super
illos; et (...) spiritum sanctum. That is to say. And when the Apostles which
were at Jerusalem, had heard that Samaria had (...) the word of God, they did
send unto them Peter and Jhon: Who when they were commen did pray for them
that they might receive the holy ghost (for as yet the holy ghost was not
comen into any of them, but only they were baptized in the name of our Lord
Jesus) then they did put, or lay their hands upon them, and they did (...)
the holy ghost.

According where unto S. (...) in the. xix. chapter of the Acts, says thus.
Factum est autem cum (...) set (...) ut Paulus (peragratis superioribus
patribus) (...) et Ephesum et inuenire quosdam discipulos, dixitque ad eos, Si
spiritus (...) credentis? At illi dixerunt ad eum. Sed neque sispiritus sanctus
ost audiuimus. ille uero (...) in quo ergo baptisati estis? qui dixerunt in
Ioannis baptismate. Dixit autem Paulus. Ioannes baptiz auit baptismo (...),
dicens, in (...) qui uenturus (...) post ipsum ut (...) est in Iesum hijs
auditis baptisati sunt in nomine (...), et cu (...) illis manus Paulus, uenit
spiritus sanctus super coset (...) et (...). That is to say. And it came so to
pass when Apollo was at Corynth, that Paul (having trauayled through or
passed the over parts of the countreye) did come to Ephesus, and did find
there certain disciples and he demaundinge said, unto them. Have you since
you believed received the holy ghost? And they aunswering said no: nor yet have
heard whether there be any holy ghost at al. Then Paul said: In whom then
are ye baptized? and they said in the baptysme of (...). Then Paul said.
Jhon did (...) the people with the baptism of Penance, tellyng them, that
they should believe in him that should (...) after him. That is to say: in
Jesus, these things being heard they were baptized in the name of our Lord
Jesus And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the holy Ghost came upon
them, and they did speak with tounges and did prophecye.

By which aucthorities, being of all catholyke writers vnifourmely ever taken
and understand of this sacrament of Confyrmation, it appears most
manifestiye that by the outward visible sign of imposytion or layinge on of
the hands after baptysme, not only grace is given and conferred, but also
the spirit of grace it self, according whereunto we read in the. xx. chapter
of Saint Ihons gospel, that our Savior Christ, albeit after his
resurrection he did breath upon his apostles saying, take you the holy Ghost
(which yet nevertheless in some degree they had received before in baptysme)
yet for all that our said savior being ready to ascend into heaven: did
promise to his Apostles and by them to all that by baptysme should be
regenerate, an other gift saying. Luce. 24. Ego (...) promissum patris mei in
uos, uos autem sedete in ciuitate quoadusque induamini uirtute ex alto. That is
to say: I will send into you the promise of my father, do you sytte or tarry
in the City until ye be endued with virtue from above. Likewise (as is
testified Actorum. 1.) Our Savior (having eaten with his apostles and having
bidden them to tarry at Iherusalem, and not to depart from thence, but look
for the promise of God the father) says: Accipictis uirtutem (...) spiritus
sancti in uos, etc. That is to say. (...) shall receive the virtue of the holy
ghost coming upon you.

And this gift so promised, was performed most eui dently upon Whytsondaye, by
visible signs and tokens feetlye resembling, and lyuelye answering, to this
sacrament: wherein ye may consider that as in baptism the holy ghost came
down in the form of a Dove, declaryng thereby that as the Dove is of all
other, simple and innocent, so by Baptysme innocence is purchased and
obtained: So fiery tongues be yng sent down upon the Apostles on Whitsondaye,
did signifye the ardente zeal, and great boldness that the apostles and
christen people should have to express and declare their profession and
faith. Therefore, as in baptysme we are regenerate to life, so by confirmation
succedynge baptysme, we are armed and stre^gthened to fight and battle. In
baptysme sin is forgeuen and grace is given, in confirmation the grace given,
is (...). In baptism we do profess the faith and religion of Christ. In
confirmatyon we have grace and (...) boldelye to maintain and to stick to the
same, so that he which is baptized and confirmed has more aboundaunt grace and
glory then he which is baptized only. Example hereof we have in the apostles.
For Peter the head of the apostles although he had seen Christ, tasted also
of his glory in the mount, had hard the voice of his heavenly father, had
seen with his eyes ye wonderful works that Christ had wrought, and had him
self done miracles, walked upon the water, and been very familier with
Christ. (...) and after that he was washed and pronounced also to be pure and
clean, and finallye after he had made a brag that he would with Christ go into
prison and suffer death, yet after all these things the said Peter was afraid
at the voice of a wenche, and did by and by deny Christ, and the like also he
did at the voice of an other wenche: yea and moreover after Christ's
resurrection, when he had seen Christ and received great comfort at
Christ's hands, he did with the other Apostles for fear of the Jews hyde him
self, and also when the said Peter with other the Apostles had seen Christ
gloriouslye ascendynge, and had been by the syghte of the aungeles greatly
comforted, yet he durst not show his face abroad, but tarried and looked for
the coming of the holy Ghost, to make him strong and bold. At whose
coming both he and the rest of the apostles were so confyrmed and boldned
that they shranke not before all the Jews, and all creatures under the sky,
ye before the kings and princes, to preach the name of Jesus. And professyng
their christen faith, with all boldness and constancye, did rejoice to suffer
displeasures and rebukes inflicted and done unto them therefore. And because we
here do speak of confirmation, some peradventure do look that we should give
some diffynytyon of confirmatyon; wherein to satisfy their appetites, this may
be said. That Confirmation is a certain, consignation or markyng, made with
chrisme, in the foreheade of the person that is baptized, with a certain
form of words, to the intent that the person confyrmed, should boldly give
the name of Christ: or else thus may be said to them.

CONFIRMATION, is an enoyntynge in the foreheade of the party that is
baptized, made in the figure or form of the cross by a Bishop, with holy
chrysme for the strength, or increase of the faith, to be boldelye by the
said party confessed. And this chrysme is made of oil and balm. The said
oil (which is a clear or clean thing of it self) to betoken, the
clearenes or cleannes of the heart, or conscience in our self. The balm
(which is a thing very fragraunt, and of a sweet smellyng) to signify ye
sweet and good sauoure, of good name and fame, toward our neighbor, and the
said oil and balm being mingeled together to signifye, that the party
confirmed should have truly in him self, both clerenes of conscience and also
with his good works to have a good name, and to stir there by his neighbors
to the like.

And we ought not to think that this enoyntinge is a new invention, in as much
as Dionyse and Clement, being in the apostles time, and besides them, Fabian,
and (...), being very nyghe the said Apostles time, and Cypryan, Hierome, and
Saint Augustyne not being much from the Apostles time, with other (...)
writers, do vnyformely agree, that this sort of enoyntyng came from the
Apostles. For as concerning Dionyse, he besides many other places does
affirm it in his book De ecclesiastica hierarchia, and in the. iii. chapter.
And amongst many other notable things, does say thus Deinde chrisma summus
sacerdos accipiens (...) ponit diuino altari. etc. That is to say: The chief
preiste afterward taking the chrisme, does put it upon the divine altar.
etc And Clement does speak hereof in the. iii. book of his recognitions in the
second epistle thereof. Fabiane also in his second epistle written to all the
bishops of the East, does most playnelye affirm the like. Tertullian
likewise in his first book against Martian does the same.

And to speak of S. Cypriane, he also in his sermon, De unction Chrismatis,
in diverse places does testify it most largelye. Likewise S. Hierom most
plainly in his commentaryes upon the xvi. chapter of Ezechiel, and upon the.
xxxiii. of Job.

And as for S. Augustine, he most largely, plainly, and effectually approves
it, specially in his second book and. iiii. chapter, Contra literas (...).
And in his xv. book and. xxvi. Chapter, De Trinitate. And so does Euse bius
in his. vi. book, and. xliii chapter, (...). where speaking of Nouatus, who
was baptized only in his bed not having other things usually observed
after the order and rule of the church, he says thus. (...) exorcistis
curatus in (...) morbum incidit, et quoniam iam moriturus putabatur, inipso
lecto quo decumbebat baptismi infusionem accepit, sitamenhancillum accepisse
dicendum est. Imo nec (...) consequutus est post verbum quae iuxta (...)
consequidebebat, obsignationem uidelicet ab episcopo (...), cum autem illa
potitus non sit, quomodo spiritum sanctum est consequutus. That is to say:
Nouarus being cured of the exorcistes, did fall into a grievous disease, and
because it was thought that he would dye out of hand, he did in the same
bed upon which he lay sick, receive the infusion of Baptysme, if a man may
say that he received that, but as concerning things which as yet remained
undone, and which he ought according to the order and rule of the Church to
have had, that is to say, the consignatio^ or (...) to be given or conferred by
the by (...), those things after his discease he received the^ not and
forasmuch as he had not that, how than has he received the holy ghost.

CONCERNING the latter writers, in as much as they be innumerable, and
uniformly do agree here upon. I will not rehearse them at all, but by them, a
greynge with the ancient and holy fathers of the church, ye may undoubtedly
see and perceive, that this sacrament of confirmation, or imposition of the
Byshopes hands, is received, approved, and specyallye commended of all
Catholic men, and at al times.

Seeing then that this Sacrament of Confyrmation, for many considerations is so
greatly to be esteemed and regarded, not only for the authority of Christ,
that did institute it, and the authority of the church and of the Apostles
that did re ceaue and use it, but also for the commodity and profyt which
the said Sacrament does bring with it. Therefore they do very wyckedlye,
that in any wise do contempne it. And those may be seen, and judged to
contempne it, which either do rail at it or else having opportunity to have
it ministered, do re fuse it, or wyllyngly neglecte it.

And the formal words used in Confyrmatyon, (which in old time was called
Impositio manuum) are these. Signo te signo crucis, and confirmo te (...)
salutis, in nomine patris, and filij, and spiritus sancti. That is to say. I
sign, or mark the with the sign of the Cross, and confirm the with the
chrysme or oyntement of health. In the name of the father, of ye son, and of
the holy Ghost. And of this imposition of hands, we have (besides many other
places expressed in scripture) a notable example in the. x. of saint Mark,
practiced and used by Christ himself. And this Sacrament of Confirmation, or
layinge of the bishops hands, was instituted ordained, and used in the
catholyke Church, to remedy the weakness that ryseth of the foam or rage of
concupyscence, which weakness remains in us for our exercise, and is of two
sorts, that is to say, inward and outward. The inward, is a certain
shamefastnes, or timerousnes, whereby we do not boldly confess the name of
Christ, as Christ requires of us, saying in the tenth Chapter of Saint
Mathewe. Omnis qui (...) me coram hominibus, (...) and ego (...) patre meo
(...) in coelis est: qui autem negauerit me coram hominibus, negabo and ego
(...) coram (...) meo qui in coelis est. That is to say. Every one that will
confess me before men I will also acknowledge him before my father which is in
heaven. And who will deny me before men, I will also deny him before my father
which is in heaven. This inward shamefastnes rysynge without fail of the
inward weakness, is taken away by confyrmation, where in the forehead is made
the sign of the cross, in which place is dysclosed our fear, and shame, in
as much as we stricken with fear, do wax pale, and being ashamed, we do blushe
and wax read. Wherefore he that is baptized, is afterward armed in
confyrmation, with the sign of the cross, to the intent he may thereby reme^
ber that he shall ouercum by vertne thereof, al manner his enemies, as before him
did his chief capytayne Jesus Christ, under whose (...), he is now become to be
a soldier, and likewise thereby boldened and assured that as the distroyinge
angel, did forbear and pass by those houses in Egypt, whose door posts,
and lyntell, he did see to be enointed with the blood of the lamb, so the
wicked spirit beholdynge the person baptized, and confyrmed with the
tryumphante sign of the cross is discoraged to make any hot assault against
him.

And the other weakness which is outewarde, is a certain instablenes or
(...), to stand and abide earnestlye, both in words and deeds, before all
persons, and estates, to the defense and mayntenaunce of the Chrystyan
relygion and faith, to the best of his power, that the saying of S. Paul in
his epistle to the Romans, the tenth chapter, may be ve refied in him, Where
is said: Cord creditur ad adiustitiam ore autem confessio fit ad salutem.
That is to say: Beleyfe with heart, is to justice, but confession is made by
the mouth to salvation.

And this outewarde weakness, is also expelled in confyrmation, by the Chrisme
of health, which makes the person ennointed, to be in courage, and boldenes,
having therein the aid and assistence of the holy Ghost: against all manner of
enemies bodily or ghostlye.

Of the Sacrament of Penance, and Thexposition or declaration thereof.
HAVINGE now spoken of the Sacra meant of Baptism, whereby alsynnes orygynall
and actual, are remytted and forgyuen: And having also spo ken of the
Sacrament of Confyrmation, whereby the party so baptized and confyrmed is made
able to resyste and abide, yea and to overcome the assaults of all his
enemies. It shall now be conueniente (Forasmuch as man having all these
great helps, and remedies at Gods hands does for all that many times, by
his own fault, fall into sin, and then can neither by baptysme, nor
Confyrmation be pourged, or quytte hereof, but must needs in that case have the
benefytte and help of Penance, which as S Hierome says, is after
shypewracke the second table or planke, to be helped and socored by) that
consequentlye, and keeping the due promised order, we do speak hear next of
penance. For as it is necessary for the body when it has surfyted and lost
his prystyne health, to have physic to restore the same again: so necessary
it is for the soul, when by sin it is spotted or defiled, to be made clean
and bewtyfyed a fresh by penance. For an entrye unto which matter of
Penance and for the more clear understanding thereof ye shall note. ii.
things, the first is how this word Penance is here to be taken.

THE second is, what is properlye mente by the (...) of Penance. And as
concerning the first ye shall note that this word Penance, as it is here in
this treatise to be taken, does signysye an inward sorrow, and grief of the
heart for the sins (...) us done and committed, and an hatred and detestation
of the same, with an earneste desire to be purged and rid from them, and
finallye to recover and get again the grace and favor of GOD, by such
means and remedies, as God has appointed for the obteynyng thereof, with a
stedefast purpose and mind never to offend again. For without such purpose
and mind, he that says he is sorye for his offenses committed against the
high majesty of GOD, and yet still contynueth or intends to continue in the
same, is no penitent, but a (...) a deryder of Penance. And in this sort and
after this acception Penance is commonly taken, as well in the new as in the
old Testament. And this sort or kind of Penance is so necessary for manes
salvation, that without it no man that offends GOD, can be saved or attain
unto everlasting life. And as tou chyng the second thing it is to wit, what
is mente by The Sacrament of Penance, (...) shall understand, that it is
properly the absolution pronounced by the priest upon such as be penitent for
their sins and so do acknowledge and confess them selves to be. For the
obteyninge of which absolution or sacrament of Penance, there are required,
iii. several things, it is to wit Contrition: Confession, and sa
tisfaction, as being ways, and means most expedient and necessary to
obtain the said absolutyon. And here to begin with Contrition, which is the
first part to perfect penance, ye shall learn that it is a sorrow
willingly taken for our sins, with a purpose and intent, to confess them,
and to satysfye for them, and never to commytte them again, with out which
contrition it will not be that any person can be truly and perfectlye
penitent, or yet have hope of remyssyon or forgyuenesse of his sins, nor yet
ought the preiste to absolve any that wants this contrition.

Wherefore necessary and expediente it is for the sinner, wyllinge to have
absolution of his sins, to consider these things following. First to have a
contynuall remembrance of his sins. Esaye, 38. and Psaline. 37. Second to
consider the vylenes of the sins, and to have thereupon a shame in himself
to have committed them. Prouer. 12. Joan. 8. 2. Petri. 2. Hierome. 2. Third to
have in consyderatyon both the terryble day of judgment, and also the eternal
pain of hell that is due for sins, and the loss of the joys of heaven,
from the which vnrepentante sinners be excluded, Sapientie. 5. Luce, 16. 1.
Petri. 4. Ecclesi. 7. Which things being so considered on the behalf of the
said sinner, and (...) thereupon ferther remembering, what a filthy and
vitiouse life he has led, and how he thereby has provoked the high
indignation and wrath of GOD, considering also with himself the dygnytye and
purytye of that state whereunto he was called in baptissne, with his promise
there made unto GOD, (...) and besides that manifold benefytes daily by him
received of God, (...) engendre in the sinner an ernest sorrow, for that he
leauinge so loving a Lord, has by sin made him self thrall to the devil.

AND here upon being thus moved and troubled in spyryt, and lamenting with
himself the miserable estate, which he is now in by his own defaulte, he
shall be pricked and stirred in his heart according to the teaching of the
scripture, and the instructynge of his mother holy Church, to repair to a
pryeste be ing the minister which God has ordained, and ap pointed therein, to
pronounce the sentence of remyssi on of sins in this behalf. According
as well to the counsayl of Saint James (Jacobi. 5) as also to thex ample of them
that were converted at Ephesus, who beleuynge did come, confessyng and showing
there acts and deeds. Actorum. xix. And because here we do touch and speak
of confession, which is the second thing toward parfytte Penance, ye shall
therefore know, that albeit, this word Confession both in scripture and in
profane authors does sygnifye many things and in diverse sorts, yet
Confession (as it is hear to be accepted and taken) is a voluntarye, lawful,
and sufficient declaratyon, or vt teryng of sin, to be made unto the pryeste
having sufficyent aucthoritye to give absolution therein. And when I do say
Adeclaration or vtteryng: I do use the same to exclude mental confession,
which though it may and ought at all times to be made un to God, yet that is
not that sacramental confession of which we hear speak. And when I do say
Uo Uoluntarye, I do put in that to declare that like as wyllyngly the sin is
committed, so also willingly and without compulsion the confession ought to be
made. And when I do say, Lawefull and sufficient. I do put in that, to declare
yt it is not I noughe to make a bare or naked confession not carynge how or
after what sort it be made, but to make it in such wise that it may be
lawefull and sufficient, That is to say, after dew deliberation and
consultation for seen and had, to so order the same, that it may be done as is
comprehended in these verses following.

Sit simplex, humilis confessio (...), fidelis.
Atque frequens, nuda, discreta, libens, uerecunda
Integra secretalacrimabilis (...).
Fortis et accusans, et fit parere parata.
That is to say: Let confession be plain, humble, pure, faythefull, and often,
not cloked, discrete, voluntarye, having shamefastnes, hole, secreate,
lamentable, spedy, strong, accu satorye of him self, and ready to obey.

AND when I do put in this word Sin. I do that, to declare that he who
comes to confession must not do as the proud Pharisie did, who prai sed
himself and condemned the publican Luce. 8. But humbly and lowely (as is
beforesayde) he must declare and show his own sin, verefying in him self
the saying of Solomon in the. xvii. chapter of his proverbs. Iustus prior est
accusator sui. That is to say: A just man is first an accuser of himself.

AND fynallye when I do say those words Unto the priest having sufficient
authority to give absolution therein. I do purposelye put in them to declare
that he who shall give absolution must be both a priest and also have
sufficient authority to give absolution.

NOW concerning satisfaction, which is the third thing that apperteineth to
perfect penance, ye shall know, that albeit this word. Satisfaction, is
diuersely taken as well in scripture as other where: yet as is shall be here
considered, and as it is taken in the publyke and common use of the catholyke
Church in this matter, it is a chastemente or punyshmente which is inflycted
or put by the priest upon the penytent sinner (so confessing himself)
according to ye nature and quality of the offense by him committed And hereby
apeareth that when we here do speak of satysfactyon, we do not mean that the
penytente sinner by any pain, or punyshmente by them to be suffered, can
worthily either merit remission of his sins, or make unto God any just or
full reco^pense equyualent to the sin, which he has committed against God,
and so satysfye God thereby, (which in deed after that forte he never can do,
for that sort of satysfaction only apperteyneth to our Sauyoure CHRIST, who
alone by his glorious passion has worked and purchased the same. But to
satisfye (as here is meant by satysiactyon) is, the sinner after (...), and
confession, to submit humblye himself to such discipline and ways of
reformation, as the priest hearing his sins and offenses, shall by his (...)
and wisdom, agreeable to the word of God, think mete and conueniente, which
humble submission (with consent and agremente to receive dysciplyne) made by
the penytente unto the priest being the gostlye fathere, either to the gyuynge
of alms, making of prayor, vsyng of fasting or of doing any such like works
of penance, shall make the said penitent an apt vessel to be partaker of that
only satysfactyon procured meryted, and gotten by the preciouse death of our
Savior CHRISTIESVS and it shall give great occasyon and good matter to the
penytent sinner always after, to lead a new life declinynge from vice, and
embracing virtue, yet it shall enduce him not only to restore to all men,
athat ever he has unjustly taken or retained from them, and to recompense al
hurtes and iniuryes in any wise done unto them, according to his habylitie and
power. But also to forgive unto all mean for CHRIST'S sake all such iniuryes
and trespases as they in any wise have committed, or done against him. And the
penytente sinner being content thus to do (wherein he shall undoubtedly much
please almyghtye God, who by virtue of Christ's satysfaction will accept, and
allow, of his infinite goodness this satisfaction, and contentment so don by
man) ye said penitent sinner may desire to hear ye comfortable words of
remyssyon of sins, and to have absolution thereof given and mynystred unto him
by ye pryeste. According to whose desire, the preyste being Gods (...)
therein must (ensuinge the Gospel) pronounce and give unto, and upon the
said penytent (...), the fente^te of absolution, unto the which sentence the
said penitent must give credence, with perfect faith and belief, that his
sins are now freely forgeuen, by the merytes of Christ's blessed passion in
this sacrament of Penance, having this contrition, Confession, satysfactyon,
and absolution, which we have spoken of. And albeit in the late pesti ferouse
(...), that overwhelmed this realm, this Contrition, Confession, satisfaction,
and Penance were condemned and (...); or at the least wise in manner neglected
of all folks, yet in very deed they so ought not have been (...) they are
allowed and approved by scripture (as anon shall be declared, and showed (...)
you) and have been ever continuallye received, used, and much set by, as
things most ne cessarye and profitable in the catholyke Church, for the
amendment of men's lives, and for their atonement with almyghtye God (...)
to be kept in good estate and order, to their great comfort, and spe ciall
releife. And amongst a great number, of commodities, that do come by
confession, this is not the lest, that where by custom or otherwise men be
drouned in (...), and do not se the abomination and filthynes (...), and
therefore many times, do want Contrition, and consequentlye remedy and help
against their sin, they having a discert honest ghost ly father, and (...)
coming to him may by his good instruction and exhortation grounded upon the
word of God, be styrred and moved to detest their sin, and to lament their
noughty (...), and thereupon to enter into a new life and to use godly
conversation, and honest be hauiour in all their doi^ges. And albeit this wai
before descrybed be ye ordinary way and means for sinners, to obtain
remission of sin, and to be reconciled to ye favor of almighty GOD, yet in
case there do lack a preyste to make this confession unto, and so to obtain
ofhim being Gods minister, the said absolution: or yt the sinner by extreme
necessity cannot do and fulfill (as of duty he ought and gladly he should) ye
said works of Penance in confession so enjoined unto him: the^ in that case
and having this good will, and being otherwise truly with all his heart
repenta^t of his hole former noughty life, not wanting therwt a harti mind and
un feigned purpose through Gods grace to do the same, when such necessity shall
cease and good occasion or opportunity shall be given, the said sinner
undoubtedly shall have at Gods hands pardon and forgyuenes of all his said
sins and misdoinge, for (as S. Cipryan does say in his first book, contra
(...),) even in the hour of death when ye soul is ready to depart out of ye
body, ye great merciful goodness of God does not dyspise Pe nau^ce, so yt
neither ye greatness of sin, nor ye shortness of time, nor yet ye enormitie of
life, do exclude yt sinner from ye mercy of God if so be, there be true
contrition and unfeigned change of the heart from (...) conversation. An example
whereof we have of ye thief yt did hang upon ye cross, who askyng mercy with a
co^trite heart was in yt case forthwt made a cetezen of Paradise, and where as
he deserved co^dempnation and punishment, this his contrite heart did chaung his
pain into martirdom, and his blood into baptism: yet this not withstandyng
no man ought, upon hope of Gods mercy still to continue in sinful living
(like as no man would be sick in his body upon hope to recover health) for
such as will not forsake their wyckednes, and yet do think that GOD will forgive
them, are full many times, and commonly, so prevented with the just plage of
GOD, that neither they have time to convert, nor yet grace to receive the
benefitte of forgeuenes. For consideration of which danger, scripture (Eccle.
5.) does say thus. Non tardes conuerti ad dominu^, et ne (...) de die in diem:
subito enim (...) illius ct in (...) uindicte disperdet te. That is to say:
Thou must not slack to convert or turn to God, and thou must not differ or
linger from day to day, for in deed his anger will come suddenly, and in the
time of vengeance he will destroy the. Wherefore embrasynge the mercy of God
on the one side, and fearyng the justice of God on the other side, let us at no
time neither despair of forgeuenes of our sins nor yet presumptuouslye
remain (...) in our sins, knowing that the justice of God will straytlye
exact and require the dettes of all men, which be not forgeuen or pardoned by
his clemency Here in this matter, amongst many other things two points are
specially to be noted and considered The first is that although the death of
Christ be a satisfaction, deseruyng and merytynge the remissyon of our sins,
and not only our sins: but of the sins of the hole world (as Saynct
John says. 1. John. 2.) Etipse e st propitiatio pro peccatis nostris, et non
pro (...) tantum sed etiam pro totius mundi. Whereby everlasting death is
sufficicientlye of Christ's part abolished, yet on our behalf it takes not
always effect, by reason that we endeavor not our selves that it may be dulye
applied unto us. For such is the mercy of CHRIST that he would have all to be
sauede, and therefore when he approached nigh unto the city of Jerusalem and
saw the great enormities and wickedness thereof he wept upon it and said. Si
cognouisses et tu et quid (...) in hac dei tud quae ad pacem tibi: nunc autem
abscondita sunt ab (...) Luce, 19 That is to say, And thou if thou hadest
known, and that in this thy day, those things which belong unto thy peace,
but now are hid from thine eyes. Luke the xix For which cause also Christ like
wise in the reproach of Jerusalem cried unto it saying Mathei. 23.

Jerusalem jerusalem qui occidis prophetas et lapidas cos, qui at te missi
sunt, quoties volui congregare filios tuos, quemadmodum (...) congregat pullos
suos sub alas suas, et noluisti? That is to say: O Jerusalem Jerusalem, which
does kill the Prophets and do stone them which are sent unto the, how
often would I have gathered thy children together, as the hen gathers her
chyckenes under her wings, but thou would not, Mathewe. xxiii. According
whereunto Christ also said unto his Disciples Mathei. 16. Si quis uult post me
uenire: aboget semetipsum, et to (...) lat crucem suam, et sequatur me. That is
to say: (...) any man will come after me let him deny himself, and take his
Cross and follow me. And immediately there does follow. Qui enim uoluerit
animam (...) saluam (...) perdet came. Qui autem perdiderit animam suam (...)
(...). That is to say: For in deed he that will save his soul, shall lease it:
and he that will lose his soul for my sake, shall find it Agreeable where unto
S. Paul, not contentyd to have said yt, no dampnation is to them that are in
corpate to CHRIST, and which do not walk after the flesh, but after the
spirit, nor being contented to have called them the children of GOD, ye heirs
of GOD, and coheyres of CHRIST, does in the. viii. chapter to the Romans,
knitte up al those things together and concludes all the same to take
effect co^ditionally, saying. Sitamen compatimur, vt et (...). That is to say,
(...) yet we do suffer with himthat with him also we may be gloryfyed And this
to be true it well appeared for that, that at the day of Judgment when the
son of man shall come in his glory, and all his holy Angels with him, and
on the one side of him there shall stand the shipe, and on the other the goats,
it shall not be sufficient or inoughe to say to Christ: Sir you have
sufficiently redeemed us by your passion, we need not for our part to do any
thing at all, saving to believe you so to have done, For Christ then shall say
otherwise un to them, for unto the blessed children of his father he shall
say: Venite benedicti patris mei, (...) paratum nobis regnum a constitutione
mundi. suriui et dedistis mihi ma^ducare. etc. That is to say: Come you the
blessed of my father do you possess the kingdom prepared for you from the
creation of the world. I have been hungry and ye have given me to eat etc. And
unto the wicked standing on his left hand he for the omitting of the said
works of mercy, shall say. Discedite a me maledicti^ in ignem eternum qui
paratus est diabolo et angelis eius? Esuriui enim et non dedistis mihi
inanducare etc. That is to say. Go ye from me ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, which is prepared for the Deuell and his aungells, for I was hungrye and
you gave me not to eat. etc. Fynallye in few words S. Paul to the
Galathians the. vi. Chapter, does tell us what is our parts in this behalf
to do saing. Bonum autem fac^entis non de ficiamus, Tempore enim suo metemus,
non deficicutis ergo dum tempus habemus operemur bonum ad omnes, maxim autem
ad domesticos fidei. That is to say. Let us not be werye of well doing, for
in the conuenyente time we shall reap without ceassynge or wearynes.
Therefore while we have time, let us do good unto all folks and specyallye
unto them which are of the household of faith. So that by all these scryptures
it does most euide^lye appear, that besides the passion of Christ, there is
some what also required of us: so that we may not lay all the burden on
Christ's back, though he be able to bear it, but we must take part of the
burden our selves, and lay it also upon our own necks to, as whereby we may
be partakers and accepted to enjoy that thing, which of Christ's part is
fullye purchased all ready. The second thing most nedeful also here to be
declared unto you is, that although ye gylte of sin, be in this sacrament of
Penance through the bountifulnes of CHRIST, clean taken away, yet by the
justice of GOD there remaynethe a temporal pain. An example whereof we have
in the. ii. book of the kings in the. xii. chapter (where not withstandinge
that Nathan, the messenger, and prophet of GOD had declared to Dauyd, that his
sins were forgeuen him, yet for all that, temporal punshemente was
inflicted. And so likewise Exodi. 22. and Numeri 14. Besides these, we have an
other euidente example in our own selves, for albeit all sins original and
actual be in our baptism remitted unto us, as has been before in the
Sacrament of Baptysme declared unto you: yet the pains do remain which are
inflicted by God himself for original sin, as all the incommodities we have
therefore in our body, and death also of the same, as appearethe Genesis
tertio. And though this thing thus plainly declared may seem to suffyce for
the full instruction of the ignorante in this said Sacrament Penance, or in
the parts thereof, or at all, yet if any shall be desirous upon promise made
before to have further testimonies of Scripture and of the fathers, they shall
here follow orderlye.

And first as concerning penance in gerneall, we read in the. xviii. of
Ezechiel thus. Si autem impius egerit poenitentiam, ab omnibus peccatis suis
quae operatus est, and custodierit pre^cepta mea et fecerit iudicium and
iustitiam, uita uiuet, and non morietur. That is to say: If the wicked do
penance from all his sins which he has committed, and keep my
commandments, and do judgment and justice, he shall live with life and
shall not dye. And in the. xi. chapyter of Sapience, is written. Misereris
omnium quia omnia potes, and dissimulas peccata hominum propter poenitentiam.
That is to say, Thou Lord have mercy upon all, for thou canste do all
things, and do make as though thou dyddest not see their sins, for
penance sake. And in the, viii, of the acts, Simon Magus going about, and
thynkyng that he might bye the holy ghost for money, was by S. Peter rebuked
therefore, and also after that was counsayled, or rather commanded thus.
Penitentiam age ab haec nequitia tua, and rogae deum, si forte remittatur tibi
haec cogitatio cordis tui. That is to say. Do penance from this thy wickedness,
and pray to God, if peradventure this thought of thy heart may be forgeuen
thee. And farther in the second of the Apocal. the church of Ephesus is
admonyshed and provoked unto penance after this manner. Memoristo, unde
exideris, and age poenitentiam: and prima opera fac, sin autem uenio tibi cito
and mouebo candelabrum tuum de loco suo, nisi poenitentiam egeris. Which is to
say. Remember from whence thou have fallen, and do penance, and do thy
first works, but if not I come unto the quickelie, and will remove thy
candelsticke from his place, unless thou do penance.

Of this penance you may fyude other testymo nyes in the holy Scriptures, as
Ecclesia, ii, Mat, iii, Luke, xiii. xv, xvii, Romans ii, ii, Pet, iii, Apoca, ix.
etc.

And as touching contrition, which is the second thing here considered,
what more may be said therein, then that which the holy Ghost spoke by
Dauydes mouth (Psalm, xxxi.) saying. Dixit confitebor ad uersum me iniustitiam
me a^ domino, and tu remisisti impietatem (...) That is to say. I did purpose
with my self and said: I will confess unto God mine vnrightfulnes against my
self and thou haste forgeuen the wickedness of my sin. According to which
sense the self same Dauyd (crauynge the (...) of God after his sin) did say.
(...) contritum and humiliatum deus non despicies That is to say. A contrite
and an humble heart (thou God) will not despise. Moreover Achab, although he
was never so evil a man, yet having remorse of conscience for his evil deeds,
and humblyng him self with a contrite heart he did hear these words of
Gods mouth, spoken unto the Prophet Esaye. Nonne uidisti humilitatem Achab
coram me? quia igitur humiliatus est coram me, non inducam malum in (...) cius,
sed in (...) filij sui in feram malum domui (...). 3. Reg. 21. That is to say.
Have thou not seen Achab humbled before me? Therefore because he is thus
humbled or contryte before me I will not bring this plage or evil in his
days, but in the days of his Son I will bring mischief upon his house, or
famylie.

Of this contrition and sincere sorowfulnes of heart a great number of places
are in the holy scryytures and amongst the rest, ye may consider, the, ii,
cor, vii. Pal. vi, xxxvii. cxviii, Iohel, ii. Math, v. etc.

Thyrdly concerning this Sacramental confession to be proved by Scriptures
and aucthorityes, yea and to have been of Christ and his Apostles left and
commended unto us, albeit a very great number of places might be brought in as
the. 5. and. 16. of Leuit. Numer. 5. Proverb. 28. 1. Joan. 1. etc. (...) these
folowinge for this present may suffyce: And first of all consider you that the
old testamente (according to the teaching of S. Paul ad Hebreos. 10) is a
figure of the new, and has not the very light it self, And seeing that in
the old testamente all those that should be healed were commanded to offer
their gifts, and show them selves to the preistes. Leuit. 14. so also in the
new testament Christ (...) that to be done Mathei. 8. to signify that thing
which in the old law was figured by the showing of the persons unto the
leuitycall preistes, to be now in the new testament by auryculer confession
accomplyshed and fulfilled, or else should there have been a shadow (...) out
a body, and a figure without a verytie. (...) unto this sense S. Augustyne,
Chrysostom, Bid and other, entreating upon the same place or Mathewe, do
fully agree. Secondely Solomon the wysest of all men (Proverb. 27) does say.
(...) agnosce uultum pecoristui. That is to say: Dilygently know and be hold
the countenance or behavior of thy (...), Not (...) thereby a brute or (...)
beast, but as S. Paul in the. ix, to the Corinthians by oxen, does understand
reasonable creatures, so he in the said place by the beast, does understand
such reasonable creatures, as are under the charge of other, the pastors and
governors whereof be bound diligently to look upon them, perfectly to know
the^ and discreatelye to use them: discerninge skab from skab, and lepre from
lepre: Which thing man (not knowing the heart or conscience of man) cannot do
unless it be by the party that is infected, so confessed and reveled unto him.
Which thing openly to do (...) is not commanded nor the matter so requires,
and yet not to do it secreatly and, in confession, it is sinful and
daungerouse. Wherefore S. James not requiryng that men should openly diffame
the^ selves by vtteryng to other their sinful life, and yet nevertheless
willing that we should unburden our constience (...) mind penitentlye by
confession, after that he has spoken of the bringing in of prestes to annoint
the sick, he by and by (lest parchaunce any man should think that mental
confession to God only were sufficient) does say: Confitemini ergo (...)
uestra. etc. Which is to say. Confess you there for one to another your
sins. Not meaning that every man to other indifferently should confess
himself, but referryng the matter to the preiste, of whom immediately before
he did speak, (...) of the visiting of the sick and the anointinge of them
and thus does Saint Augustyne Saint Bid, and Eusebius, understand those
Scryptures. And (...) you may be assured (if ye accordyngelye do confess
your sins) that from and by Gods own mouth (...) are absolved, and that
all preistes in the Apostles, received full authority both to bind and
louse the sins of the people, ye shall for a proof here in consider amongst
other things, the fact of CHRIST in ye reuiuinge of dead Lazarus, which is
notable, recorded in the. xi. chapter of Saint John, where Christ thinking it
not sufficient to reuyue Lazareth, and to call him out of his grave, said
Lazare ueni for as. Lazarus come forth: And there upon lazarus by and by
reuyuing, and in his wyndinge shete rysynge, being bound hand and foot, did
come fourth. And yet to (...) by a visible sign the Authority to remain
with Christ's (...) and their successoures to louse men bound with sin,
Christ did say to them. Solui (...) uos eum et sinite abire. That is to say.
Lose you him and suffer him to goo his way. And as for that place of the. xvi.
of Saint Mathewe, where the power of the keys, is promised to be given unto
preistes and mynisters to absolve and forgive sins and also for the place in
the. xx. of Jhon, where Christ after his resurrection breathinge upon his
dyscyples, and perfourmyng his promise did say. (...) spiritum sanctum quorum
remiserites peccata remittuntur eis, et quorum (...), (...) sunt. That in. Lake
ye the holy Ghost, whose sins ye forgive, or release, those are forgeuen or
released, and whose sins you withholde, they are with holden. These places I
say are so euydente, that no man can with any learning, or christen
conscience, withstand or deprave them, but they must be most vay leable for
this present purpose.

And for the establyshyng of al menes faythes herein, here follows farther the
consent and determination of three of the most godly and ancient fathers of
the primative church in this case, to whose determi nation all other catholic
(almost (...)) writers do agree. And first Clemente (the successoure of S.
Peter) in his first epistle to S. James the brother of Christ, says these
words. Quod st forte alicuius cor (...), uel insidelitas, uel (...) malum,
latenter irripserit, non (...) (qui (...) suae curam gerit) confit eri (...)
qui (...) est, ab ipso per (...) Dei, and consilium salubre curetur: quo (...)
integra (...). et operibus bonis poenas (...) effugere, and ad (...)
proeuinere. That is to say? If peradventure any rancor or infidelity or any
other evil has privily crept into any man's heart, let not him (which estemeth
his own soul) be ashamed to confess those faults unto him which has
charge over him, that he may of him be cured by the word of GOD, and wholesome
(...) that he may thorough perfect faith, and good works, avoid the pains
of eternal fire, and come to the perpetual reward of eternal life,

In like sort Orygen upon the. xxxvii. Psalm and in his second Home ly, does
compare sin (not confessed to a priest) unto raw and undigested meat
distemperatynge very sore the stomach, and the hole body, which if it be
vomited up eases the stomach and restorith health: so says he sin (...)
pryuelye kept, does inwardelye trouble the conscience: and there fore he
wylleth us to confess the same, and also dylygently to look about, and take
good head in chusinge our spiritual yhisition, which may minyster unto us, a
conueniente medecyne for the purgynge of our consciences.

And to knytte up this place of pryuate, or auriculer confession, we will now
bring only one place more, which is written in the second book of Saint
Augustyne, De (...) infirmorum, in the. iiii. chapter, and written to his
Nephewe, lyinge on his death bed, where he says thus. Sunt quidam (...) sibi
adsalutem (...), si solideo, cui nihil (...), est, quem nullius later
conscientia, (...) crimina. Nolunt enim, aut crubescunt, sieve (...), (...) dear
se sasardotibus, quos tamen inter lepram et (...) per (...) constituit dominus.
Sed nolo ut ipsa decipiaris opinione, quatenus confundaris confiteri (...)
uicario (...) praerubore, uel cerui cosus indignatione: nam ipsius (...)
subeundum est iudicium, que domi nus sibi non dedignatur uicarium. Ergo ad te
(...) roges (...), and sacipsum conscientarum tuarum penitus (...) Non seducat
te somni atium illa superstiti quae uisitando confirmat, quia saluat sacerdote
(...), (...) deum peccatorum confessio. Nos autemnon abne gamus quinsit ad deum
frequenter (...) confessio peccatorum, Beatus etenim qui (...) allidit (...)
suos ad Petram, Petra autem Christus est. Sed (...), and testatur illud sana
doctrina ((...) tibi applandeutium (...) auribus) quoniam prius (...)
sacerdotis qui mediator sit ad deum (...) salubri iudicio: alioquin and sublege
and sub gratia, (...) and ostendite uos (...) dotibus ((...). 17) (...)
diuinum, quomodo consummaretur? (...) alterutrum peccata uestra (Iaco. 5)
quomodo (...)? Ergo (...) tuarum arbiter dei uice adhibeat ur (...), and (...)
ci uias tuas, and ipse, exhibebet antidotum reconciliationis, etc. which is to
sai. Truly there are some which think it suffycient for their soul health, if
they confess their faults and sins to God only, to whom nothing is hid,
and every manes conscience is known. For they will not, or they are ashamed,
or else they dysdayne to (...) them selves to the preistes, to whom God by his
lawbearer, appointed the office to judge between lepre and lepre, but I would
not thou should be deceived with this opinion, so that thou should be
confounded to confess thy self before Gods vycar or deputye, either pynyng
for shame, or styffenecked with disdain, for thou must humbly stand to his
judgment, whom our Lord dysdayneth not to be his vicar or substitute.
Therefore de sire the (...) to come to the, and make him privy, throughlye of
all thy conscience. And let not that superstition of the dreamers de ceaue
the, which in visiting, does confyrme or bear the in hand, that confession
of thy sins to God the preiste not being made priuye) does save the: Truly
we deny not but oftentimes we must rehearse the confession of our sins to
GOD, for he is blessed which will keep under, and all to (...) his little ones,
or his great ones, against the rock, and the rock is Christ. But we do
testify, and the true perfect doctrine does testifye the same (which we do
say, least thou (...) favor the ears of them that do flatter the) thou
nedest first the wholesome censure, or judgment of a preiste, which may be a
(...) diatour unto God. For else how could that answer of God, Go and (...)
your selves to the preistes (Luke xvii) being given both under the law, and
also under grace be fulfilled? And also how could that saying of S. James,
Confess your sins one to another, (...). v. be accomplyshed? Therefore in
the stead of God, let there be had the priest, an arbiter or judge of thy
skarres or wounds, and do thou open or disclose unto him thy ways or faults,
and he shall give unto the a medecyne of reconciliation. etc.

This confession to be pryuate, or (as it is termed) auryculer, you may
(markynge the place well) euydently parceaue. For S. Augustyne in the foresaid
place (notyng the penitent, and the priest to be alone) says these words:
Non te pudeat coram uno (...). quod non pu duit forsitan coram multis facere.
etc. And again. Melius est cora^ (...) aliquantulum ruberis tollerare quam in
die iudicij, coram tot (...) hominum graui depulsa denotatum, (...). That is to
say.

Be not ashamed to declare that before one man which thou waste (...) ashamed
to do perchance before many, or rather with many. Better it is to abide some
shamefastnes before one man, then in the day of judgment before so many
thousands of men, with, or by a grievous repulse noted, to peryshe.

But now finally to speak touching the groun des and auctorities for
satisfaction, both by the scryptures, and also by the other catholyke, and
(...) oste ancient writers of the Church, let us first consider Job, who in
the. xlii. chapter says. Ego me reprehendo and ago poenitentiam in fauilla,
and cinere. That is to say. I rebuke my self, and do penance in duste and
ashes, sygnyfyenge by that, to make a satysfaction for his (...), and that he
would outwardely declare his contryte heart by his bodily affliction, after
the customable fashyon used in scryptures, in sack clothe ashes and dust. etc.
After which manner Christ, in the Gospel (Math. xi) when he reprehended
Corozaim, and Betzaida (synnefull Cities) in whom he had wroughte miracles
and preached of the kyngedome of heaven said: Si in (...) and Sidone (...)
essent uirtutis (...) fac tae sunt in uobis, olim in cilicio and cincere (...)
egissent, Which is. If in Tire and Sydon had been wrought the wonderful
works, which has been done in you long ere this, they would have done
penance in sack cloth and ashes. Whereby appears that Christ did not
reprove the (...) of the body, but rather allowed it, as being a mean and
way to make satisfaction.

Further we may consyd er the third chapyter of s. Luke, where unto a great
company coming to John to be baptized of him, he said, reprouynge their
hard hearts. Genimina uiperarum quis (...) uobis (...) auenturaira? Facite
erga (...) dignos (...). That is to say.

You adders brood, who has given you warning to fly from the wrath of GOD to
come, Do ye therefore ye worthy fruits of penance. Upon which place S.
Chrysostom says thus. We shall do the worthy fruits of penance if we do
things contrary to the faults before committed, as if thou have taken away
other men's goods, restore them, and begin now to give thine own, if thou
haste been a long time and aduouterer, suspend thy self from thine own, and
from the lawefull use of matrimony, and for a time bind thy self to
chastity, if thou have hurt thine neighbor either by word or deed, make him
a sufficient amends, and speak well by him, for it is not sufficient for a man
that is wounded to pull out the dark out of his body, but he must also get
medicines to heal the wound.

To these things shall ye adioyne the Counsayll of Saint Paul in the. vi.
chapyter to the Romans where he says thus. Sicut (...) exhibuistis membra
uestra seruire immunditiae ct iniquitati ad iniquitatem, ita nunc (...) membra
(...) seruire (...) in sanctificationem That is to say: Like as in deed you
have given your members to serve to uncleanness, and from one wyckednes to
another, so now give your members to serve righteousness unto sanctification.

And finally of this satisfaction over and besides these plain and manifest
scriptures the holy fathers and ancient writers as Cypryan in his. v. sermon
de lapsis, Orygen, in his 4. hom. upon the. 36. Psa. and in his 2. Homely upon
the. 37. Psalm. Cyryll, in his third book upon Leuit. Hierome upon the. x.
chapter of Ecclesiastis, and upon the Prophet Malachye, and the residue in
sundry of their treatyses, have left most sufficient testimonye. And because
that they all in effect do agree together, one here alone shall be alleged
for them all, and that is the holy Martyr Cypryan who in his. v, sermon
entytuled, de lapsis, says thus. Nec cesset in agenda poenitentia atque in
domini misericordia (...) canda, (...) quod minus esse in qualitate delicti
uidetur: in neglecta satisfactis one cumuleter. which is. Let not the sinner
cease in doing penance and calling for the mercy of God, least that which
in the qualitye of ye fault it self does seem to be little, should be
accummulated or made greater, in the neglectinge satisfaction. Whereupon he
concludethe a general lesson of all men easelye to be borne away in these
words. Confiteantur singuli quaeso uos sratres delictum suum, dum adhuc qui
deliquit in seculo est dum (...) confessio eius potest, dum satisfactio and
remissio facta per saccrdotes, apud dominum grata est. That is to say: I
beseech you brethren let every man make confession of his fault, while he that
has offended is yet here in this world, and while his confession may be
admytted and while the satisfaction and remission given by the priest is
acceptable before GOD. (...) he says further. Let us convert unto God, with all our mind, and expressyng our penance with true sorrows and lamentynges for
our sins, let us call for the mercy of God. In which two breyfe sentences
of this most excellent and famous Martyr, ye do se comprised and contained,
the hole and penitente conversation of man to God, by contrition, Confession
and satisfactyon, (which three points or parts must of necessity be in the
doer of true Penance, and so it is required of the said penitent, as we before
have proved) And the sacrament of Penance it self, being the absolution
pronou^ ced by the priest upon such true penitentes in ye said se^te^ce of. S.
Cipria^ is likewise comprehended.

Of the Sacrament of the Aultare with Thexposition or declaration thereof.
HAVINGE (...) spoken of three notable Sacraments instituted by Christ and
always solempnely used in his catholic Church, it is to wit, of Baptism,
Confirmation, and Penance, having also first entreated of the Sacrament of
Baptism, whereby we have a spirytual regeneration, having consequently and
secondly spoken of the Sacrament of Confyrmation, commonly succeding Baptism,
and gyuing unto us a spiritual augmentyng and incresse of grace, boldly to
maintain and defend the professyon of our faith made at the time of our
Baptism, and having thyrdely set forth the sacrament of Penance, which
purges and cleanses us, falling by sin (...) our baptysme, and
confirmation: Mete and conueniente it shall now be, that we do entreat of
that excellent spiritual fode, and noryshement, which in the said catholyke
church is mynistred, and given unto us being so baptized, confyrmed, and
pourged.

And because in the sacrament of the Altar there is that excellent spiritual
fode, and true nonryshme^t that passes all other, it is to wit, the most
precious body and blood of our savior Jesus Christ, there fore as was
promised in the preface of this book: here now shall be entreated of that most
excellent sacrament of the Aultare. And in deed right convenient and mete it
shall be to entreat diligently and fully of this sacrament, in as much as it
both in worthynes, and dignifie, does greatly surmounte and pass all the
other Sacraments of the Church, as also for that of late years it has most
of all other, been assaulted, and impugned, and yet of no good manne, but of
the wretched sort alone.

And to begin, this order, in some respect, may herein be thought convenient:
first to declare the institution of this sacrament. Second to set forth the
use of it.

And thyrdely, to declare the notable, or rather the unspeakable fruit
thereof. And as concerning the syrste, this, amongst other, is cheifelye to be
mar ked, that after our Sauyoure JESUS CHRIST had (according to the ryte and
usage of the old law) eaten with his twelve Apostles the fyguratiue or
tipical pascal lamb, and (being risen from (...)) had was shed his disciples
fete, he (sittyng down again) did take bread, into his blessed hands and
(giving thanks) did break it, and gave it to his Dyscyples, saying. Take and
eat, this is my Body which shall be given, or delivered for you. Likewise, He
took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it unto them saying: Drink ye al of
this for this is my blood of the new testamente, which shall be shed for many
to the remission of their sins Do this in the remembrance of me. These
words, being spoken by ye mouth of the son of Gob, who is equal in
Godheade with the father and the holy ghost, and testified also by his holy
Euaugelistes, over and besides the faythefull continual testimonye of Christ's
espouse, the Catholyke church, who is he that can with any good gru^d of
Scripture or lawefull authority say, but that which Christ gave to his
Apostles, at the maundye, was Christ's very body and blood, yea that self
same body and blood which was given and shed upon the cross, the next day
for them and al mankind. The verity of which Article, the Catholyke Church,
being ruled and governed by the holy ghost has always most consta^tly
believed, and taught, declaring that in this sacrament of the Altar there is,
by the omnipotencye of God, and the virtue and force of his word, the very body
and blood of our Savior Christ, reallye, truly, substantiallye, and in
deed.

AGREBLYE whereunto that blessed instramente of God Saint Paul (being
instructed by a secreat revelation from God of the truth of this his mystery,
and speaking of this most blessed sacrament) does in the eleventh chapter of
his first Epistle to the Cyrynthyans say in this manner: Ego enim accepi ao
domino quod et (...) uobis: Quoniam dominus Jesus in qua (...) trade datur
accepit panem: et gratias agens fregit, et dixit. Accipite et manducate, hoc
est corpus meum, quod pro nobis credetur, hoc facite in meam (...), similiter
et calicem, post quam caenauit dicens, hic calix nenum testa mentum est in meo
sanguine, hoc facite quotie scunque biberitis in meam commemorationem, That is
to say: I in deed have taken, or receued of our Lord, that which I have
delivered unto you, that is to say. That our Lord Jesus, in that night in
which he was betrayed, did take bread, and giving thanks, did break it, and
said. Take ye, and eat, this is my body, which shall be given or delivered for
you, Do you this in my remembrance. Like wise also he did take the cup after
he had supped saying, This Cup is the new Testamente in my blood do you
this as often as ye shall drink of it in my remembrance.

Besides these most plain words, as well of our Savior him self, at the
institution of this sacrament, as of S. Paul also, in the wryttynge of his
said secret revelation, which alone might suffice to content and certifye any
godly heart herein, there are so many and most euidente Authorities and
testimonies of the ancient holy fathers, as well of the greek as of the Latyne
Church, concerning the very true and real presence of Christ his body and
blood, in this sacrament of the Aultare, that to rehearse them all, it would
be a great and an infinite labor. And yet for the establyshyng of good men's
minds herein ye shall bear have in a few, the full and uniform consent of
them all.

And first, Chrysostom who was (...) of (...), (not four hundrethe year
after Christ) writing in the Greek tongue upon the. x. chapter of Saint
Paul's first epistle to the Corynthians, and (expendynge these words of the
Apostle calix (...) cui benedicimus. That is to say: The cup of blessyuge
which we (...) he does speak thus, Quid est in calice, id ipsu^ est quod
(...) latere (...), (...) etus participes sumus Which is to say: That which
is in the coppe or Chalice, is the very self same thing that issued or ran
out of Christ's side, thereof wear partakers. Scconde S. Basyll being also a
Greek, does in his book called his rules, and in the. 127. question, put
forth this demand, it is to wit, with what fear and persuasion a man
ought to (...) to participate of the body and blood of Christ? and he does
make answer in this wise. Timorem (...) docet nos ap (...) dicens. Qui
manducat et bibit indigne, iudicium sibi man ducat et bibit, persuasionem vero
sirmam giguit in nobis fides verboru^ domini dicentis, hoc est corpus meum quod
pro uobis traditur etc. Which is to say: The fear in deed does the Apostle
teach us saying, who that eats and drinks unworthily, does eat and drink
his own dampnation, and as concerning the firm persuation or constant
belief, that does the faith of the words of our Lord engendre in us, who
(...). This is my bodi which is given for you. etc.

Thyrdly the great clarke Cyryl being also a Grecian, and Archebyshoppe of
Alexandria, above a thousand year ago, does in his treatise, sent to one
called Calosyryus affirm and say, that he should not dout of the real
presence of Christ's body in the sacrament, concludynge, after many profes had
in that behalf, and saying after this manner. Nec dubites an boe (...) sit, eo
manifest dicente, hoc est corpus meum, sed potius suscipe uerba saluatoris in
fide, cum enim sit ue ritas, non mentitur. That is to say. And thou must not
doubt whether this be true or no, seeing he (that is to say Christ) manifestly
does say, This is my body, but do thou rather receive the words of our
Savior in faith, saying he is the truth, he does not lie,

Now having hard the testymonye of certain greake authors, with whom the
rest do agree. Ye shall consequently hear the testimonye of certain notable
authors of the Latyne Church, with whom the rest do also consent and agree.

And first ye shall hear the most ancient (...) of the Latyne church, (...),
who in his treatise De resurrectione carnis. (speaking of the blessed Sacra
mente of the Aultare) does say in this manner. Caro corpore et sanguine
Christi (...), vt et anima de deo saginetur. That is to say: Our flesh does
eat, or feade upon the body and blood of Christ, that our soul also may be
made fat with God.

Secondly in order shall be Saynct Hylarye who is called of Saint (...), Tuba
latini eloquij and he in his. viii. book. De Trinitate, does say thus De
ueritate carnis et sanguinis no^ est relictus ambigendilocus. Nunc enim et
ipsius domini pro (...) side no stra uere earo est et uere sanguis est, et
(...) acceptd atque (...) staid efficinat, vt et nos in CHRISTO, (...) CHRISTVS
in nobissit. An ne hoc (...) nonest? Contingat plane his, uerum nonesse, qui
CHRISSVMIESVM uerum esse deum negat. That is to say Of the verity of the
flesh and blood (speaking of the flesh and blood of Christ in this sacrament)
there is not left a place to dout For now both by the profession or declaration
of our Lord, and by our faith also, there is truly flesh, and there is
truly blood, which being received or taken and dronken, do cause or make
this, that both we are in Christ, and Christ also in us. And whether is not
this the truth? let it chance not to be true unto them who do deny Jesus
Christ to be true God.

By all these most evident testimonies af ancient fathers, it appears, that
in the Sacrament of the Aultare are truly and reallye contained the body
and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, according to the said institution of
Christ. But because Christ took bread into his hands, and Saynct Paul also
calls the sacrament bread, and that thereupon the heretics have grounded
their opinion that the thing contained in the said sacrament is nothing but
bread it shall be meet to open and declare this matter forther, and in what sort
the Sacrament may be called bread: for the understanding whereof you must know
that albe it our Savior Christ took very material bread into his hands,
yet by his omnipotente power he changed the nature and substance of bread,
into the substance of his dody. And likewise he changed the substance of
wine into the substance of his blood, saying: This is my body, This is my
blood.

And this is euidentlye proved first by the. vi. of John, where our Savior
Christ himself thus says. The bread that I will give unto you is my flesh,
which flesh I will give for the life of the world. In which words it is
most manifest that Christ promised two things: the one that he would give a
bread that should be his flesh, and the other is, that he would give that
flesh for the life of the world: Now if Christ gave not at his maundye a
bread that was his flesh, and on good Friday gave the flesh upon the cross
for the life of the world, then he kept not his promise, for in no place else
he did it, therefore, either must we say that Christ made a promise and
performed it not (which is a wicked thing to think or say of Christ)
either else must we say that keeping his promysse, he did at his maundy give a
kind of bread, which was his very flesh in deed contained under the form
of bread, and that the same flesh he gave the day following under the
vysyble form of flesh upon the cross: and so he performed both his
promysses, that is to say geuyng a bread or (...) that was his flesh, and
also geuyng that flesh for the life of the world. And for a more plain and
full declaratyon of Christ's words herein, ye shall note, that in the said
syxte of Sayncte John, there is mentyon made of four kinds of bread.

First of the bread wherewith he myraculouslye sed five thousand in the
wilderness, which was in deed very material bread and made of Barleye.

Secondly there is mention made of a bread called Manna, which was a kind of
fode that God sent from above, to the children of Israel, when they in the
wilderness did travail toward the land of promise, whyth though it be there
called bread, yet bread in deed made of any kind of grain or corn it was
not.

Thyrdly there is mention made of bread, which is the second person in
Trinity, that is to say, the son of God sent down by his father from
heaven hither into earth to be incarnate.

Fourthlye there is mention made of bread that our Savior Christ promised
to give, which is his flesh, and the self same in substance which suffe red
for us upon the cross, and yet there called bread though in deed no
material bread in substance. and as for the calling of it bread it is not
materyal, for the godhead of Christ, and also manna, in the said chapter are
called bread, and yet no bread in substance. And here is not to be omitted
that where our Savior Christ speaks of the foresaid four kinds of bread
he does not speak of them all (...) one fashion, for touching the first
says, that he himself a little before had given that bread unto the people,
and touching the second the Jews did boaste that it was given by Moses to
their forefathers in wilderness, Likewise concerning ye third Christ does
affirm that it was at that present sent from the father of Heaven down to
the Earth. But touching the fourth, he said that it should be of his own
gyuing vuto them, and that in time to come, yea and ferther that the same (...)
be his flesh, and least any man might mystake this his saying, in such
spiritual or mystical sense, as thereby to exclude the very substance of his
feshe and body, he adds (to take away all doubt and cauillation) that it
should be the same flesh which should be given for the life of the world,
as apeareth before. And hereby may you learn that by this, word bread
mencyoned in the. vi. chapter of Saint Ihon, and as it is here taken in this
fourth acception, and in the other two next going before, our Savior
Christ does mean nothing else but a fode, and a fode may it be though there
be no substance of material bread at all.

After which sort is the word bread to be understood in the tenthe and
eleuenthe chapiters of the first epistle of Saint Paul to the Corynthyans:
where diverse times also he uses this word Panis, which ought to be
Englyshed food.

And that in very deed there is not the substance of material bread
remainynge in the sacrament of the Altar, ye shall beside those things
which you have hard all ready out of the scripture hear also out of the
ancient and catholic fathers, who do witness as follows. First Chrysostom in
his sermon made in (...). speaking of the Sacrament of the (...) (wherein in
deed to our senses there do appear the ormes of bread and wine) does write in
this manner. Nunc uides (...); number uinum? number sicut reliqui cibiin secessum
(...). Nesiccogites. Quemadmodum enim siceraigniiniecta illi assimilatur nibil
substantiae remanet, nihil superfluit. Sit and hie puta mysteria (...) mi
corporis substantia, That is to say: Doeste thou see bread? doeste thou see
wine? do they pass into the seage from us, as other meats do? God forbid
that any man should so think. for even as the wax which is cast into the
fire, is made like unto the fire, and no substance of the said wax then
remains, or is left, even so do thou think here, the mysteryes meaning the
substance of the bread and the wine) to be by the substance of Christ's
body consumed.

Eusebius Emissenus also, a Greek aucthor (and wrytinge above twelve hundred
years agoo) in his fifth homilye or sermon De corpore domini or De pascha,
(...) thus. Nec (...) quisquam primarias (...) potentiae, praesentiamaiestatis,
in dominici corporis transire posse naturam. Which is to say. Let not man
doubt, but that the former creature speaking of bread and wine) even by the
wynkynge or (...) of his power, by the presence of his majesty are able to
pass into the nature of Christ's body And again within a little after he
(...): Quanta (...) and quam celebranda (...) diuinae benedistionis operatur
attend, and (...) and impossible non debeat uideri, quod in Christi
subantiam, terrena and mortalia commutantur which is to say: How great then,
and how notable benefits the force and virtue of the divine benedictio^ does
work, or bring to pass, do thou consider, and to the in no wise it ought to
seem new or impossible, that into the substannce of Christ, earthly and mortal
things are changed.

And with these two anncient and notable fathers of the greek church, the
blessed martyr Cyprya^ does agree, saying in his sermon. De coena Domini in this
manner Panis istequem dominus discipulis porrigebat, non effigit sed natura
mutatus, omnipotentia uerbi sact us est caro. That is to say. That same bread
or food which our Lord reached or gave to his dysciples being changed not
in form or shape, but in nature, was by the omnipotencye of the word made
flesh.

And because Christ him felfe (who then did in the foresaid manner institute
this Sacrament) did also at the same time appoint and command, both his
Apostles, and in the^ their successoures, to do the same which he himself then
and there did saying, Luc. xxii. Hoc faciat in (...) commemorationcm. That is
to say: Do you this in my remembrance. Therefore no man may doubt, but at
this present also (and so until Christ come to judge the world) so often as
the minister, so aucthorised (intendinge to do as, ye church believes) does
take bread into his hands, and gyuynge thanks, does duly pronounce the
words of Christ, saying. This is my body, and taking the cup, and geuynge
thanks, does like wise duly say the words of Christ, This is my (...) of the
new testamente, so often the substance of bread and wine, by the will and power
of Christ, so commaundyng and aucthorisynge the said minister, is turned into
Christ's very real and natural body (...) blood: and the said body and
blood is there so present under the fourmes of bread and wine. For it is not
the visible priest, thatnowe works this high mysterye, by his own power or
strength, but it is Christ him self, the inuysible priest, that does work
it by the misterye of the vysyble priest. Likewise as Christ it is, and not the
preiste, that gives virtue in Baptysme, though the (...) of the priest, both
in Baptism and also here in the Sacrament of the aul tar be required, and that
by the special appoyntinge and ordeynynge of Christ, the same so to be.

And here do you note, that the aforesaid working of Christ, and ministerye of
the priest, here touching the Sacrament of the altar, is, and has always in
the catholyke church been called Consecration. Of which consecration. S.
Ambrose above an eleven hundred year agoo, writes most notablye and fully,
in his fourth book, Desacramentis. Cap. iiii saying after this manner. Tu (...)
dicis, meus panis est (...), sed panisiste panis est autem uerbasacramentorum
ubi accesserit consecratio, de (...) caro Christ, (...) igitur astruamus,
Quomodo potest qui panisest, corpus esse Christi consecratione. Consecr atio
igitur quibus uerbis est, et cuius ser (...)? Domini Jesus Nam (...) omnia (...)
dicuntur laus deo (...) oratione petitur propopulo, pro regibus pro (...)?
Vbiuenitur ut (...) sacran entu^, iam non suis sermonibus sacerdotes fed (...)
sermonibus Christi. Ergo seruo Christihoc conficit saeramentum. That is to
say: Peradventure thou Christen man will say, my bread is usual or common
bread. But I (...), before the words of the Sacrament, it is bread, but when
the co^sacration comes, of the bread there is made the flesh of Christ. Let
us then prove how that which is bread can by (...) become to be the body of
Christ. And by what words then and by whose sayings is consecration: by the
words of our Lord Jesus (meaning there by as he does declare in the chapter
folowinge, these words, Hoe est corpus meum, and hic est sanguis meus. etc)
For in all other things that are said praise is given to God, and petition by
prayer is made for the people, for the kings and for other, but when it is
come to that point that the blessed Sacrament must be made, then the priest
does not use his own words, but he uses the words of Christ. The speech
therefore or saying of Christ does make this Sacrament.

And by and by after, the (...) S. Ambrose does conclude, aunsweryng to ye
former question as follows (...) ut respondeam. Non erat corpus Christi ante
consecrationem, sed post (...), dico tibi, quodiam corpus est Christi. ipse
dixit and (...) est, ipse mandauit and, creatumest, That is to say, Now to
make answer unto thee, it was not the body of Christ before the consecration
but after the consecration, I tell the that now it is the body of Christ, He
that is to say Christ said it, and done it is, he commanded, and made it is.

In these two places of S. Ambrose, out whole process hither to made of this
sacrament (that is to wit concerning the real presence of the very body of
Christ in ye sacrament, concerning also the tra^substanciation or change of
bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, and finally concerning the
consecration continuallye ministered by the priest) is most euydentely
confyrmed and proved. And to the self same purpose does Eusebius (...) write
in his fyfte (...) or sermon De pascha. where amongst othere (...) of the
sacrament, he says thus: Inuisibilis (...) uisibilis creaturas insubstantiam
corporis and (...) sui, uerbo suo, secreta potestate conuertit it a dicens: A
ccipice, and commedite, hoc est enim corpus meum, and sanctisicatione repetia,
Accipite ((...)) and bibite, (...) est sanguis (...). Argosicutad nutum:
praecipient is domine repent ex (...) substit erunt excelsa coelorum, (...),
uasta (...) paripotentia inspiritualibus, Sacramentis verbi praecipit uirtus
and seruit effectus. That is to say: The invisible priest does turn or
convert the vifible creatures into the substance of his dodye and blood by
his word thoroughe his secret power thus saying Take ye, and eat, this in
deed is my body, and the sanctification or consecratyon (...) repeted, he
says, take ye and (...) this is my blood: Therefore (...) as at the beck of
our Lord, geuynge commandment suddenly of nothing the beyghtes of the
heavens had there being, and also the dep these of the wateres or fluddes, and
the large nes or greatness of the earth, so by the like power, in spiritual
Sacraments, the virtue of the word does command and the effect does serve
or is obedient (...).

And more over the said Eusebius Emissenus in the said homyly does say thus.
Sicut quicunque ad fidem Christineniens ante uerba (...) ad (...) in (...) est
ucteris debiti, hijs uero memoratis, moxexuitur omni face peccati ita quando
(...) uerbis (...) creatura (...) altaribus imponuntur, ante quam inuocatione
sui (...) consecrantur substantia illic est panis and uini, post verba (...)
Christi, corpus and sanguis est Christi Quid autem mirum est, siea (...) potuit
crerare, uerbo possit creata conuertere imo iam minoris uidetus esse miraculi,
siid quod de uihilo agnoscitur, condidisse, iam (...), in me lius uale at
commutare.

That is to say: Like as whosoever coming to the faith of Christ, before the
words of baptism is as yet still in the bond of the old debte, but after the
words of Baptysme be spoken, he by and be is delivered or (...) of all the
(...) or uncleanness of sin, so when the creatures, be laid or put (...) the
holy Aultats to be blessed with the (...), there is before they be (...) the
(...) of Christ's name, the substance of bread and wine, but after the words
of Christ, there is the body and Blood of Christ. And what maruayle is it
if those things which by his; word he could (...) of nothing, that those
things so created, he may by his word convert or change? Nay no we it
seems to be of a less miracle, if that which he is known to have made of
nothing, he be able to turn or change into better, being already made.

To these before rehearsed testimonies we may adioyne two other testymonyes of
Saint Chrysostom, whereof the one is in his. 83, Homelye upon Saint Mathe we
where he writes in this manner. Non sunt humane uirtutis haec opera: quae tunc
in illa coena (...), ipse nunc quoque operatur, ipse perfecet: ministorum nos
ordinem tenemus qui uero hec sanctificat, et (...) ipse est. That is to say

These words (Meaning of theose works which Christ did at his maundye) are
not of ma^s virtue or power: those things which in that supper or feast, he
then did, he also now it is that (...) work or do this matter: we do keep
the order or place of mynysters: but he it is (meaning Christ) that
sanctifyethe these things and changes them. The same saynct Chrysostom in
(...) homyly. De proditione Jude. says also in this manner. Et (...) est
CHRITVS, qui illam ornauit mensam, ipse istam quoque consecrat Non enim homo
est qui proposita de consecratione mensae domini, corpus faciet sanguinem, sed
ille qui (...) est pronobis (...). (...) ore uerba proseruntur, et dei (...)
consecrantur et (...): hoc est ait corpus meum, Hoc uerbo proposita (...). Et
sicut illa uox quae dicit, Crescite et multiplicam ni and replete terram, semel
quidem dicta est, sed omni tempore sen tit effectum ad generationem, (...)
natura (...) et (...) illa semel quidem dicta est, sed per omnes mensas,
ecclesiae usque ad (...). ad eius aduentum, praestat socrificio firmitatem.
That is to say. And now he the same Christ is present, who did beautify or
garnyshe that (...), he also it is that does consecrate it, for it is not
(...) that makes the things set forth or proposed in the consecration of the
table, to be the body and blood of Christ but it is Christ him self, which
was crucified for us: by the preistes mouth the words are pronounced or
spoken, but the things are consecrated by the power of GOD, and his grace, for
he (meaning Christ) says this is my body, and by that word the things set
forth or proposed are consecrated. And like (...) that voice which says, do
you increase and be (...) and do you fyl or replenishe the earth, was but once
spoken, and yet in, or at all times takes his effect to generation, nature
therewith workinge, So that (...) of Christ once in deed was spoken, and yet
it, through out all the tables of the (...), even until this day, and until
his coming (meaning of Christ's last coming) does give strength un to the
sacrifice. And thus much have we spoken to declare unto you both by the
scriptures, and also by most aunciente and plain aucthorities, that our
Savior Christ in the institution of this Sacrament, did turn the substance
of bread and wine into the substance of his own body and blood, and how
also he does the same daily, by the mynysterye of the preistes in
consecration. And now to come to the second part, which is concerning the use
of this sacrament, ye shall note that this use does consist specially in two
points. It is to wit, in the oblation or offeringe of the said sacrament by
the preistes unto al mighty God, and in the (...) of the same. And here before
we do enter any further, it seems most convenient to note unto you one
synguler privilege (emonge many other) where in this (...), passes all other,
and that is this, where all other sacraments do consist only in the use of
them, that is to say, in the very act of ministration and receauynge of them,
this sacrament has his perfection out of hand even as soon as the words of
Christ in the con secration be pronounced, (...) the sacrament be offered nor
receued, according as it is here before proved. And as touching the offering
thereof (commonly called the sacrifice of the mass) ye shall understand that no
one point of Christ's relygion was more notably prophesied of, and set forth
in the old testamente and before the coming of Christ, then was the
continual oblation, that is to say, this fore said sacryfice of the Mass:
for the prophette Malachye in his first chapyter (speaking in the name of
almyghtye GOD, and declaryng that in time to come, the sacryfices of the old
law should cease, and no more to be received or allowed at Gods hands, but
that there should another kind of sacrifyce be througheout the hole world
offered up unto him) does write in this manner. Non est mihi uoluntas in uobis,
dicit'dominus (...), et munus non suscipi. (...) de manu uestra, abortu enim
solis usque ad occasum, magnum est nomen meum ingentibus, et in omni loco
sacrificatur, et offertur nomine (...) ablatio munda, guia magnum est nomen
meum (...) gentibus. That is to say. Pleasure is not to me in you, says the
lord of hosts. And offetynge will I not take or accept at your hands, for
from the rysynge up of the son (...) the going down of the same, my name,
is great among the gentyls, yea in every place sacrifice is done, and a clean
meat offering is offered up unto my name, for my name is great among the
heathen.

The which place of the said Prophet Malachye to be meant or understand of no
other kind of sacryfice in the new testament, but only by the sacrifice of
the body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ offered up through the hole
Catholyke church in the Mass, the most famous and ancient aucthor Ireneus,
being immediately after the apostles time, does most manifestlye wytnes in the
xxxii. Chapter of his iiii. book written (...) the (...) of (...), and other
like (...), where he says in this manner. Sed et suis discipulis dans
consilium primitias deo offerre ex suis creaturis, non quasi indigemi, sed ut
ipse (...), nec ingrati (...) cum qui ex (...) and panis est, accepit, et
gratias egit, dicens: (...) est (...) corpus: et (...) qui est ex (...)
creatura, (...) est secundum nos, (...) confessus est: et (...) oblationem,
(...) Ecclesia ao Apostolis (...) in uniuerso mundo offert deo, qui alimenta
nobis prestat, primitias suorum munerum, in nouo Testamento: de quo in (...)
prophetis Malachias sic praesignificauit. Non est (...) inuobis. etc. That is
to say. (...) and also he geuinge counsel to his disciples to offer unto GOD
the first fruits of his creatures, not as that god had any need thereof, but
that they themselves should neither be unfruitful or unthankful, he did take
that bread which was of the creature of GOD, and did give thanks, saying.
This is my body. And taking like wise the cup or chalyce, which also is
made of that creature which emo^gest us is commonly (That is to say wine) he
did confess it to be his blood. And of the (...) testamente, he did teach a
new oblation or sacrifice, which oblation the church taking or receauyng of
the Apostles, does throughout the hole world offer up to GOD, who gives us
our fode as the first fruits of his gifts in the new testament, of which
offering Malachias one of the xii. prophets did prophecy in this manner. I
have no pleasure in you. etc.

And this foresaid sacrifice of the body and blood of our savior Christ in the
sacrament of the Aultare was not only long before Christ's coming in most
plain sort prophesied of, by the prophet Malachy (as you have heard) but
also it was in manner even in the beginning of the world (...) by the oblation
of Melchise dech the Priest of Almyghtye GOD, in that he offered bread and
wine and did bless Abraham the patriarche, as itis written in the xiiii.
chapter of Genesis. And that this oblation of Melchisedech being one of the
most notable figures of the old testament, was fulfilled and performed of
Christ himself, when he instituted this sacrament and daily is in the Mass
(by the commandment of Christ at the time of the institution thereof)
performed and fulfilled, ye shall here by the undoubted (...) of the fathers,
which were in the primative church, and first ye shall note what the blessed
Martyr (...) Cypryan does write hereof in his treatise De (...), where he
speaking of the institution of this sacrament has these words.

(...) a (...), et filijs (...) facientibus operaeius, summus sacerdos panem
profert et (...). Hoc est (inquit) corpus meum Manducauerant et biberant de
eodem pane et (...) lice secundum formam uisibilem, sed (...), cibus ille
communis, (...) nutriendo corpori commodus erat, et. (...) corporali subsidium
(...): sed ex guo a domino dictum est, hoc facite in meam commemorationem, Haec
est caromea, and hic est sanguis meus. Quotiescunque hijs uerbis, et (...) fide
actum est. Panis illi substantialis, and calix benedictione solenni sacratus ad
totius hominis uitam salutamque proficit simul medicamentum (...) ad sanandas
infirmitates, et purgandas iniquitates existens.

That is to say: The sacraments in times past from the time of Melchisedech,
prefigured do come forth. And the most high priest unto the children of Abraham
doing his works does bring forth bread and wine. This is says christ my
body: they did eat, and they did drink of the same bread and of the saine
cup, after the visible form, but before these words, that common food or
meat was apt or fit only to (...) the body and did give sustenaunce to the
corporal life: but after that it was said of our Lord, do you this in my
remembrance, this is my (...), and this is my blood, as often as with these
words, and with this faith, the thing is done, that substanciall fode, and
that cup consecrated or sanctified with the folempne benediction or
blessing, doethe profytte unto the life and health of the whole man being
both a medecin and also a pryncypall offering to (...) our (...), and also
to purge our iniquities.

The same Sayncte Cypryan also in his second book of Epystles and his third
Epistle (speaking of this sacrifyce) says thus. Si lesus Christus domiuus et
deus noster ipse est summus sacerdos dei patris, et sacrificium deo patri ipse
primus obtuli, et hoc fieri in (...) commemorationem precipet. Vtique ille
sacerdos uice Christi uere sungitur qui id quod Christus fecit, simitatur. Et
sacrificium uerum et plenum tunc offert in eeclc siadco patrisi (...) offerre
secundum quod ipsum Christum uideat obtulisss.

That is to say. (...) Jesus Christ our Lord and GOD, be himself the high
presste of God the father, and he him self did first offer the sacrifice to
god his father, and did command also that to be done in his remembrance,
truly that priest does verily occupy the place or stead of Christ, who does
follow that which Christ did. And then does the priest in the church offer
(...) to GOD the father a true and a full sacrifice, if he so begin to offer,
as that he has seen Christ to have offered. Thus much says Cypryan.

And here to omit many, or rather (...) aucthorities, and sufficient proses,
as concerning this (...) or (...) of tho (...) one (...) of S. Ambrose; who was
(...) eleven hundred years agoo, and by him also ye shall well (...), that the
name of Mass is not so strange a thing or so a new an invention as men would
make it. For S. Ambrose in his fyfte book of epystles and the. xxiii, epistle,
writing unto his sister Marcel lina, of a certain trouble and tumulte, (...)
in the city of Mylayne where he was bishop, did chance upon a sunday in
the moruinge, while he was at divine service, does say thus. Ego tamen (...)
munere: Missa^ facere capi, (...), raptum (...) populo (...) (quem praesbyterum
dicerent Arriam) hunc autem in (...) offenderant (...) tes: (...) fiere et
orare in ipsa oblatione deum coepi, ut subucuiret.

That is to say. (...) for all that I did abide in mine office or divine
service, I did begin to say Mass, And when I was at the oblation, I did
understande one called Castulus (whom the Arrians would take for a priest) to
be violentlye taken of the people Him in deed they (...) in the street had
found, most (...) I began to weep, and to pray to god eue^ in the very
oblation, that he would succoure or help.

According where unto the blessed martyr Ignatius in his (...) Epistle
written, to the Smyrnians does say thus. (...) sine episcopo, neque offerre
neque (...) immolare, neque (...) celebrare, That is to say. It is not
lawefull without the (...) neither to offer, neither to immolate the sacrifice,
neither to celebrate or say Masses. And the thing being so it may greatly
be marueyled, that this word Mass, being so ancient in the Catholyke church
and so termed amongst the ancient fathers thereof should be taken for so great
an eye soore, or so odyouse a thing, as amongst our late scymaticall
preachers, it has been impudentlye taught, who to blind the peoples eyes,
and do deceive there ears, have erroneouslye, and maliciouslye said, that
neither the word Mass, nor the thing therein contained, have been of old
time allowed or used in Christ's church Shortly to make an end of testimonies,
or proof of the first use of this sacrament, which we do say to consyste
in the sacrifyce thereof, ye shall have only one testimonye more in this part,
in which testimonye, besides the proof of the sacrifice, it is further also
declared, that the words of Christ, being dulye by a lawefull priest
pronounced, whatsoever his life or conversation be, better or worse, the words
always, if there be no other let, do take their full effect, and operation:
(...), and moreover that the said sacrifice of the Mass does stand in his
full force not withsta^dynge. And the said (...) is the saying off.
Chrysoltome, in his second homyly upon the second cpystle of S. Paul to
Tymothy, where he wrytethe thus. Volo quidem adijcere mirabile, and nolite
mirari, neque: turbemini, Quid ueroistud est? Sacraipsa oblatio, sieve illam
Petrus, sieve Paulus, sieve cuiusuis meritisacerdos. offerat eadem est, quam
dedit Christus ipse discipulis quamque sacerdotes modo quoque conficiunt. Nihil
habet esta quam illa minus. (...) id? quia non hanc sanctificant homines, sed
Christus qui illam anted sacrauerat. Quemadmoaum enim uerba guae loquutos est
Christus, (...) sunt quae sacerdotes nunc quoque pronunciant, ita and oblatio
(...) est: That is to say. And in deed I will add plain lie a marvelous
thing, and yet do you not wonder, nor be you troubled. But what is that, will
you say? The sacred or holy oblation, whether Peter does offer it or Paul, or
of what soever merit the priest be, it is the very same thing which Christ
himself did give unto his disciples, and the same which the preistes now
do make. This has no less then it: And why so (...) men do not sanctifye
this but Christ who sanctified or consecrated that before. For like as the
words which Christ did speak be the self same which the preistes now also
do pronounce, even so the oblation or sacrifice is the same.

AND now to come unto the other use it is to wit, of the receauynge of the
Sacrament, ye shall note, that although our Samoure Jesus Christ, at the
first institution of this sacrament, did minister it unto his disciples,
which were than present, under both the kinds of bread and wine, Yet that
fashyon and manner of ministrynge is not so necessary to the receauer (except
it be to the priest, when he does consecrate) that without the due observation
of that way, man might not receive that blessed sacrament to his salvation.
For the benefyte or hurt that comes to a christen man, by receauynge of this
sacrament, stands not in the fashyon or manner of receauynge of it, under one
or both kinds, but in the worcester thyor unworthy receauyng of the thing contained
in the same. For he that receaueth this Sacrament worthelye, under the one
kind, as under the form of bread only, receaueth the hole body and blood
of Christ, and as many and great benefittes of Christ as he that receaueth it
in both kinds. And therefore if any man should teach, that the lay people
(which by the ordinance and ancient custom of the catholyke church, have
used to receive this holy sacrament in form of bread only) be seduced and
so cause them to think, that the holle body and bludde of Christ, where not
comprehended in that only form of bread, as well as in both the kinds, this
doctrine ought utterly to be refused and abiected, as a very pestiferouse and
deuely she doctrine. For surely scripture teaches the contrary, and also
natural reason, although it cannot comprehend the hole mystery of this
sacrament, yet herein it teaches us agreablye with scripture, yt that lively
body cannot be without blood and therefore men ought to be led from that
fond opinion (if any such be) both by that faith, and credit which they do owe
unto scripture, and in this point also by natural reason. And christen men
knowinge this, ought not to grudge at this form and manner of receauyng of
this sacrament under one kind, used and allowed by the catholyke church, both
to avoid that error before rehearsed, and also for many other weyghtie
considerations, concerning both the honor of the sacrame^te, and the
liberty, and commodity of the hole church, seeing that not only lay men, but
also prestes (sauinge when they do consecrate) do use to receive this Sacrament
none otherwise Let christen men therefore humbly apply them self, to put all
erroneous fantasies clean out of there hearts, and satisfye them selves with
this, that when they receive the sacrament worthily, though it be but in one
kind they loose no part of the profyt and benefyte promised by virtue of the
said Sacrament. And yet to stably she this point (touching the receiving of
this sacrament under one kind) both with testimonies of scripture, and also
otherwise, ye shall understand, that when our savior Christ did deliver this
sacrament under both kinds, in the institution thereof, he of purpose had
only his twelve Apostles with him, to declare unto us that he there did rather
prescribe unto them being preistes, how they and their successors should
consecrate, and offer, and also they themselves in their ministry receive the
same, than how it should be received of other, not being of the same
vocation as the Apostles were of. And therefore it was never yet lawful, but
very straytely to be punyshed if a pressed when he did consecrate, and offer the
same, did not withal receive it under both kinds. Wherein appearethe (the
cyrcumstaunces of the institution being well marked and considered, that the
cammaundement and charge given at that time by our savior Jesus Christ, does
not of necessity bind the lay men, no nor yet the preiste, (but when he
says mass) to receive under both kin des. Therefore many time in Scripture,
mentyon is made but of one kind only, as apperteynyng generally unto all men,
it is to wit, of the sacrament to be received under the form of bread,
without any mention made of the other kind or form. As in the. vi. of John,
where our savior in a great multitude of people, (besides his apostles)
making promise of this sacrament to be given by him, in time then yet to come,
says. Panis quem ego labo caro mea est, (...) dabo pro mundi uita That is to
say. The bread which I will give is my flesh, which (...) I will give for
the life of the worlde-Saynte Luke al so in his. xxiii. chapter of his gospel,
tells how that our savior Christ after his resurrection, did appear in a
strange form or shape, to two of his dyscyples goinge toward Emaus, and when
he hade a good while walked and talked with them, and yet they knew him not, at
length they came to Emaus, where Christ syttyng with them, took bread, blessed
it, and brake it, and gave it unto them, and by and by their eyes were opened,
and they knew him, and he vani shed out of their sight. This bread so given in
Emaus to the two disciples, S. Augustine in his third book, Deconsensu
euangelistarum And saint Chrysostom in his xvii. homilye upon Mathewe, and
Theophilus also, auncienter then any of them both, do expound to be the
Sacrament of Christ's body? and yet there the scripture (as in sundry other
places else) does make no mention of the other kind or form, (it is to wit,
of the Sacrament under the form of wine) to have been given unto them.

To this consideration appertains also, the wonderful fedinge of the
children of Israel, in wyldernes, the space of. xl. years, with a strange
bread called Manna, being a figure of this sacrament, as it belongethe to all
christen people, who through the huge wilderness of this world do pass
toward the true land of promise. And yet farther to confyrme this thing by an
ancient and weightye testimony ye shall here what is recorded by the
excellent Author Nicephorus Calistus, who being about a thousand year ago,
in his work called Ecclesiastica histo ria in the. xiii. book and in the
seventh chapter thereof (writing of a certain woman, who obstynate lie long
time refused to receive the catholyke rytes, of Christ's Church, and so
obstinately, that although her husband most ernestlye labored with her in that
matter, and diverse times sore did fall out with her yea and threatened her
ferther displesure, if she would not uniformly receive the christen relygyon
and saramentes, yet in her heart she would not be persuaded, nevertheless at
length dissemblyngly, she fained herself to be by him herein persuaded, and
thereupon entendyng by fraud to cloak her doings and to perform more easily
her purpose, she made one of her maids (whom she trusted very well pryueye
of her intent and purpose) he thus writes. Mulier, post (...) persimulationem
annuit, ex ancillis (quam (...) sibi esse credebat) uni quid factura esset,
credibit: ut per fraudem uirum falleret (...) sacrorum (...) tempore accedens
illa, donum sicuti mors erat (qui (...) instituti sunt quid dicam intelligunt)
accepit, at que id retinens, perinde atque (...): mysteriumque sacro sastum
occul (...), et que (...) ancilla, pro (...) panem communem domo allatum
obtulit, quem illa ori admouens, in lapidis naturam induratum esse, dum
dentibus atterere conatur, sensit. etc. That is to say: This woman (after
that she by dissimulatio^ had grau^ ted, or agreed) did unto one of her
handmaydens (whom she thought to be faithful unto her) tell or show what she
intended to do: to the intent that by fraud she might deceive her husband.
And she the said woman coming in the time of the holy miste ryes, did take
the gift as the custom or manner was, (what thing I say or mean when I say
that, they yt are instructed in christen religion do understand well) And
keeping it, as though she would have fallen to prayer, leaning dounewarde,
bowed her self and did hide the most holy mysterye And her handmayden which
stood by her, delivered unto her for the said mysterye, the common bread
which she had brought with her from home, which common bread she the said
woman putting it to her mouth did the mean while she went about to have
broken it with her tethe, feel or perceive it to be hardened, as turned into
the nature of a stone. etc.

By which most notable historye (besides other goodly matters there in
recorded) it apeareth most euydently that even at the same time, the sacrament
of the Aultare was ministered unto the lay people under one kind only, it is
to wit, under ye form of bread. For if ye consider well the words which
do express the fact, and there with do note and remember the intent of yt
woman to deceive her husband in the recepte of this sacrament, there can be no
dout herein Over and besides all this it is euydent by ferther record, that all the hole body of Chrystendome with long and most diligent deliberation
examynyng this matter above. vii. score years ago, by reason of certain
disordered persons in the kyngedome of Boheme, which sterred up amongst the
people of ye said realm, great unquietness (the like whereof ye know well
enough has by other in some othere places with toth and nail, been attempted
and set forth) touching this manner of receiving under one kind, did then
find, that lay men and women had of very aunciente time before those days,
used the same fashion of receauyng the sacrament only under the form of
bread, and that use in the church, to have been also in the former ages,
generally commended and allowed, as may appear both in the xiii. session of
the general consayle holden at Constans, and also in the thirtyth Sessyon of
the general counsel holden at Basyll, about sixth score years ago, where
thus it is written.

Laudabilis quoque consuetudo communicandi (...) populum sub una specie ab
(...) et sanctis patribus rationabiliter introducta, (...) hastenus diutissime
obseruata, and a doctoribus diuinae legis, sacrarum scriptuarum, atque canonum,
multam peritiam habentibus, iam a longeno tempore commendare pro lege habenda
est. nec allicui (...) cst eam reprobare, aut sine authoritate ecclesiae ipsam
immutare. That is to say. The law dable custom also to communicate or howsel
the lay people under one kind or form being by the church and holy fatheres
with good reason brought in, and hitherto of most long time kept or observed:
and also of the docters having great knowledge of the divine law, of the
holy scryptures, and of the Canons now of long time commended, must be had
or taken for a law: nor lawful it is to any man for to reprove it, or without
the aucthoritye of the church to change it. The thing thus being mete and
convenient it is that ye authority (...) the church (which is as Saint Paul
says in his first epistle and third chapter to Timothe. Columna and
firmamentum ueritatis. That is to say. The Pyller and stay of truth. do
content and satysiye us well in this behalf. Having now spoken of the
institution of this sacrament, and also of the use thereof, consequently there
remains (according to the promised order) to speak of the third and last
part, which is of the inessimable fruit procedynge of the right use of the
said sacrament. And because the use is (as we have sufficientlye here before
proved) in two fortes, it is to wit in offering and in receyuyng thereof, it
shall therefore be expediente severally to entreat of the special fruit of
them both. And first touching the fruit of the sacrifyce of the mass, we
must understand, that (...) ye sacrifice which was made upon the cross, and
the sacrifyce of the mass, as concerning the substance of the thing
offered, there is no difference, for as much as in that respect, it is one
and the same, though the manner of offering be diverse, as has been showed and
proved heretofore unto you. For in the sacrifyce made upon the Cross, there
was the visible sorme and shape of Christ's body being man, yea and the
visible flesh and (...) of Christ in the native form of (...) and (...) but
herein this sacrament the same flesh and blood of Christ being truly in
substance, is set (...) not in the native forms of flesh and blood, but
under the forms of bread and wine. And therefore amongst the most aunciente
fathers, being of the Greek church, and also of the Latin. The one sacrifyce
(made upon the cross, is called a bloody sacryfyce, because vi sibly, there,
out of the side of Christ blood was shed. And the other (which by the Preiste
is offered at mass upon the Aultare) is named. Incruentum sacraficium, that is
to say: A sacrifice vnbloudye or without bloudshedynge. not because there is
no (...) there, but because there is no visible effusion (...) blood being
there nevertheless in substance (as we at large before have proved) both the
flesh and blood, of Christ. And because ye shall not think, that this
distinction or diversity is an imagination or a new invention, ye may for
the try all hereof, read the great and notable famous Counsayles, and other
very weyghtye aucthorities of the Catholic Church. And (...) ye may find in
the epistle sent to Ne storius. from the Counsel of Ephesus this same
difference noted, in which Counsel, Saint Cyryll at that time was
presidente, and that difference or distinctyon is (...) agayue by the same
(...) in his treatise against, (...), (...) undecimo. and in the general
counsel kept at (...), there is used in the Canons thereof, the same
distinction, which is before specyfyed. Nazianzen like wise in his verses to
the bishops, and in his first (...) against Julian has the same
distinction. And so have sondrye other right (...) fathers. And passing from
this distinction to declare unto you, the effect and fruit that comes of
the dew oblation of the body and blood of Christ in the sacrifice of the
mass, ye shall understand that nothing being so acceptable unto the father of
heaven, as is the body and blood of our savior Christ his son, the catholic
church therefore in all the co^clusio^s of prayers and petitions, that are made
unto the father is accustomed commonly to say. (...) Christum Dominum
nostrum. that is to say. Through or for the sake of our Lord Christ. or
such like words, tendynge ever to the same purpose, nothing doutynge but
that the thing which is so asked in his name, shall ye sooner be attained, in
as much as Christ him self, both learned us so to do, and adioyued thereto
the promise of obreynyng the same, as may appear in the. xvi. of John, where
Christ says thus. Si quid petieritis patrem in nomine meo, dabit uobis that
is to say: (...) ye ask my father any thing in my name he will give it unto
you. Now the Catholyke church does in the sacrifice of the mass, not only
pray in the name of Christ (as in other her prayers) but with prayer does
also offer up, and exhibyte therein unto the father in heaven the body and
blood of his dearelye beloved son our (...) Jesus Christ, by that mean
(as being the very (...) and iucomparable mean, passing all other means) to
obtain most frutefully, most habundantlye, and most assuredly all the
merits, and benefytes of Christ's death to be applied unto us, and that such
prayers as are made in the time of the mass, and the sacryfyce thereof, are
special and above all other effectnall S. Augustyne proves by scripture,
dicuslynge most exactly this place of S. Paul in the second chapter of his
first epistle to Timothe, where Saint Paul thus writes. Obsccro igitur primum
omnium fieri obsecrationes, (...) tioncs, postulatioms, gratiarum actiones, pro
omnibus hominibus, pro regibus et ommbus qui in (...) consti uti sunt, ut
quietam et tranquillam uitam (...), (...) omni pietate et chastitate: (...)
bonum est et acceptum coram saluatore nostro (...) qui omnes homines uult
saluos fieri et ad (...) nem ueritatis uenire

That (...) to say. I beseech you therefore above all things that
obsecrations, (...), supplications, and thanks geuyng, be made or had for all
men, for kings, and for all the^ which are in high authority, that we may
live a quiet and a peasable life, in all godlynes and honestye. For that is
good and acceptable before GOD our Savior whose will is all men to besaued and
to come to the knowledge of the truth. Upon which place S. Augustyne
discoursynge very dilygentlye in his, (...) epistle written unto Paulinas,
does say that by those four seuerali words of Saint Paul, it is to wite,
obsecrations, obtestations, supplications and thanks geuynge, are mente the
four several parts frequented in the hole Catholyke Church. in the divine
celebration which is done at Gods board. As by the first word obsecrations,
to be understand all that which is said at the altar before that the bread and
the chalyce set upon the aultare be blessed. By the second word (Which is ob
testations) to be mente all those prayers which be said from thence unto the
fractions of the hou^e, in declaration of which part. Saint Augustine does
expressly call this sacrament the (...) of the holy Aultare. And by the third
word Supplications to be understood that part wherein the bishop, after
the foresaid fractions does turn unto the people and bless them and wherein
also the sacrament is received. And finally by the fourth word. Which is
thanks geuyng, to be meant, the very end and conclusion of the divine
celebration. All which things concerning the mind of S. (...) upon those
four words of S; Paul, (...) may more at (...) synde in the foresaid
epistle of S. Augustine. So then this place of Scripture, thus understood
does most manifestly and evidently declare the great fruit and commodity of
the mass, and the oblation of the same, for immedyatlye in S. Paul follows,
that these four parts should be executed to the end. Vt quietam et
tranquillam uitam (...) in omni (...) and chastitate. That is, To the end that
we might live or lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. Where is to be noted that when saynct Paul gave this exhortation to
Tymothy, christen men every where did live under the domynion of heathen
princes and yet S. Paul would these four parts to be among the Christen
men frequented and used, yea for the said heathen princes that they either
should perfectlye be converted there by, or at the least some what relent from
their so out ragious and cruel (...) with the christen men, being their
subjects. But now farther to proceed in declaration of the inestimable (...),
and fruit which comes of this sacryfyce of the mass, it shall be necessary
here to note unto you that the fruit thereof does not only extend it self
to people being yet here upon the earth living, to (...) vuto them (having
good heart and mind to take and receive the profitte thereof) grace and mercy
at gods hands, but it is also fruitful unto as many as departing this
present life, are not utterly excluded from the favor of God, and the hope
of the fruityon of the godheade, (...) as much as such are members of Christ's
mystical body, having builded upon Christ the foundation, not only
gold, silver, and precious stones, but timber, hey, and stubble also which by
fire must be consumed, before they can enter into the kingdom of heaven, where
is all purity cleanenes and perfection. And that these sorts may by the
sacrifice of the Mass, be releaued, and the sooner delivered out of their
pains, and thereupon be received into eternal joy, there are beside the very
Scryptures of God, infinite authorities, of the most ancient fathers of
Christ's Catholyke Church, of which authorities, we here now allege certain
of the most notable unto you. And first we will bring in Saint Chrysostom
in his. 96. homilye, ad (...) antiochenum. where he wrytethe in this manner. Non
temere ab apostolis hec sancita fuerunt ut in tremendis mysteriis, defunctorum
agatur commemoratio. Sicunt enim illi sinde multum contingere lucrum,
utilitatem multam. Stante sequidem uniuerso populo (...) nus in coelum
extendente coetu item sacerdotali, uerendoque posito sacrificio (...) deum non
(...) pro istis (...), sed hoc quidem de hiis qui in fide migratunt. that is to
say. Not without great cause, of the Apostles these things were decreed,
that, in those dreadesul mysteries. (meaning the sacrifice of the Mass, where
there is presented and offered to god the father the body and blood of his most
dear beloved son Jesu Christ: in the presence or handlynge of whom, we
ought to tremble least by our unworthiness or misorder, we should otherwise
behave our self then the worthynes and dignity of that sacrifice (...)) the
commemoration of the dead should be had or made, for in deed they know well
that great commodity and profytte does come to the dead thereby. For when
all the people does stand holdinge up they haudes to heaven, andthe company
of the priests likewise, and also the dreadful sacrifice be laid upon the
Aultare, how can it be, but we shall appease or mitigate GOD prayinge for the
said dead? but this yet is to be done for such as do dye in the faith. This
fayeth Chrifostome.

And the same Chrysostom also, in his. xli. homily upon the first epistle of
S. Paul to the Corinthians reprouynge such as did immoderatlye lamente the
death of their friends, writes in this manner.

Sed qou abiret inquis ignoras? uel recte uixit uel secus. utrinque, quo
profectus sit, constat. Idipsnmest quod perturbat, inpuis, quia decesserit
peccator sunt haec subfugium and praetextus. Nam situ idcirco mortuum do les,
formare and componere uiuentem oportebat, Verum tuas tu uices, non huius
deploras. Arbiret peccotor sane, gaudere decct peccata (...) esse and non
accumulatum malum? utique quaotum fieri potest, ut iuuetur, non lachrimis, sed
prece, supplicationibus, eleemosinis, oblationibus. Non est temere hoc
excogitatum nec frustramemoriam mortuorum inter sacra misteria celebramus, aut
accedimus pro istis agnum illum iacentum, and (...) mundi tollentem deprecantis
sed ut his consolatio hinc aliqua sict, Nec temere qui altari assistit inter
horrenda mysteria clamat. Pro omnibus in Christo dormientibus, and pro his qui
memoriam celebrant illorum. etc.

That is to say. But thou say, I ca^ not tell whi there he is gone. Can thou
not tell? either he lived well, or else otherwise, on both sides it is certain
whither he is gone. But then says thou) that is it, that trobleth me because
he departed a sinner. Let this be your excuse and pretexte. For if therefore
thou art sorry for him now dead, thou shouldeste have enfor med and redressed
him while he was alive, but thou lamenteste thine own cause and not his.
Although truly he be gone a sinner thou ought to rejoice, that his sins
are stayed or let, and that vice is no more hea ped or increased, and thou
oughteste to endeavor thy self by all means possible, that he may be
helped, not with tears, but with prayer, with supplications with almesdedes
and oblations. It is not unadvisedly or with out cause devised, ne yet in vain
do we celebrate the memory of the dead, while we be at the holy mysteries,
or do come prayinge for the dead) unto that lamb there lyenge, which takes
away the sins of ye world but that thereby some comfort, may be unto the
said dead, yea not without a great cause it is, that he which stands at
the aultare, while he is about the dreadefull mysteries, does cry, saying.
For all them which sleep in Christ, and for all them which do celebrate their
memory etc. S. Augustyne also in the, xxii, sermon De uerbis apostoli, writes
thus. Crationibus uero sanctae ecclesiae and sacrificio salutari, and (...).
sinis quae pro eoru^ spiritibus erogantur non est dubit. (...), ut cum eis
misericordius agatura domino quam eorum peccata meruerunt. Hoc enim a patribus
traditum, uniuersa obseruat ecclesia, ut (...) qui in corporis and sanguinis
communione defuncti sunt cum abipsum sacrificium loco suo commemorantur,
oretur, ac pro illis qu^que id efferri commemoretur, cu^ uero eoru^
commendandorum causa, opera misericordiae (...), quis eis dubite suffragiari,
pro quibus (...) allegantur? (...) omnino ambigendum est, is it a prodesse
defunctis sed talibus qui ita uixerint ante mortem, ut possint eis haec utilia
esse post mortem etc, That is to sai we ought not to doubt but that the dead
by the prayers of the holy church, by the wholesome sacrifyce, and by the
alms which are given for their souls, are helped, that GOD may be more
merciful unto them, then there sins have deserved, for the universal church
does observe or keep this, as a thing delivered or left unto her from the
ancient fa there is, that for the^ which have departed this life in the
communion or felowshyppe of the body and blood of Christ, prayer should be
had or made, when at the (...) of the very sacrifice, the persons departed, are
in their peculier place remembered and mentioned also to be made, that the
sacrifyce is offered for them. And when the works of mercy are done for the
departed, they thereby to be commended or betaken to the mercy of God who
can doubt those works to releive them for who^ prayer is not vaynelye
alleged or made, it is not to be douted at all these things to profit or
avail the dead, and yet but to such who so have lived before their death,
that these things may be profitable unto them after their departure or death.
etc.

Hereunto may be added one notable discourse of S. Augustyne, nothing so long
as fruitful which is written in his treatise called Enchiridion ad Laurentium
in the. (...) chapter of the same in these words. Neque negradu^ (...)
functorum animas pietate suorum uiuentium releuari, cum pro illis sas (...)
offertur, uel eleemosynae in ecclesia siunt. Sed eis haec prosunt, qui cum
(...), ut haec sibi prodesse possint, emeruerunt: Est (...) quidam uiuendi
modus non tam bonus ut non requirat ista post mortem nec tam malus ut ei non
prosint ista post mortem. Est uero talis in (...), ut ista non requirat, and
est rursus talis in malo (...) nec his ualeat, cum haec (...) transicrit
adiuuari (...) circa hic omne meritum comparatur quo possit post have uitam,
releuari quispiam uel grauari. Nemo autem se speret, quod hic neglexerit cum
obieret apud (...) promereri. Non igitur ista quae pro defunctis (...), isti
apostolicae sunt Christi, ut referat unusquisque secundum ea (...) per corpus
gessit, sieve bonum, siui malum, Quia etiam hoc meritum sibi quisque cum in
corpore uiueret, comparas uit, ut ei possint is it a (...) non (...) omnibus
prosunt. Et quare (...) omnibus prosunt? Nisipropter (...), quam quisque gessit
in corpore, Cum ergo (...) altaris, sieve quarumcunque (...) defa^ctis (...)
offerantur, pro non ualde bonis, gratiarum actiones sunt, pro non ualde (...)
sunt, pro (...) malis and si nulla sunt adiumenta (...) qualesc unque uiuorum
consolationes sunt. That is to say. And it is not to be denied that the souls
of the dead, through the deuotyon of their friends being yet alive, are
relieved or eased, when as for them, either the sacrysyce of our mediatoure is
offered up, or alms is given in the church. But these things are
auayleable to such, as in their life time, did deserve. that the same might
do them good. For there is a certain manner of life and conversation, neither so
good or perfytte that it requires or needs not these things after death, nor
yet so badde, that after the departinge out of this (...) life, it may not
thereby have profytte and commodity. But there is such state of life in the
good man that it requires not such things And again in the extreme wicked
man, such as the state of his life, that when he goes out of this world he
can not by any devotion of the lyuinge be helped. Wherefore here in. this
life, all deserte or merit is purchased. Wherebye a man after this life may
either be relyeued or grieved. And let no man hope, that he can after his
decease, obtain of God that thing, which he here has neglected. And
therefore these suffrages which the church does use or frequent for the dead
to be received into more favor or mercy with god, are nothing contrary to that
saying of the Apostle saint Paul, where he says: For all we shall stand
before the judgment seat of Christ that eve ry oue of us may receive,
(according to the deeds which he him self hear in body did.) either good or
evil. Because every manne while he lived in the body, did procure to him
self this merit also (it is to wit) that these suffrages may be profitable
unto him. For undoubtedly these things are not auailable to al men, and why is
that? But by reason of the difference in the life and conversation of eueryche
man, which he did use while he here lived on the earth, wherefore, when the
sacrifices either of the altar or of any manner of alms, are offered for all
Christen souls departed, the said sacrifices for very good me^ departed, are
thanks geuings and for such as deceased, being not very evil, they are
propritiations, and finally, for the wicked or very evil, though they are
no helps to them, being dead, yet they are to them which are alive, some
kind of comfortes.

And now forasmuch as we have thus fully and plainly by sufficient
aucthorities declared, that the sacryfyce of the mass, or (as saint Augustyne.
in his foresaid process does call it) the sacrifyce of the Aultare, is a
uayleable for the dead, no man ought or can doubt but that the same is also
auayleable to men yet living which with faith and devotion most humblye pray
almighty god especiaily in the time of this sacrifyce to apply unto them by
Christ, that remission and (...) which was purchased and deserved by his
passion before. And yet as we have in all other the formar points concerning
the sacrament of the (...), so will we hear also allege some plain and
pythy testimonies for the confirmation of this part And first you shall call
to your remembrannce the saying of the Prophet Malachy (which is here before
in this process, alleged for the proof of this sacryfyce) and note that
forasmuch as god therein does say that the sacrifyces of the old law should
cease and give place to this pure and clean sacryfyce (which is offered up to
him throughoute the hole world) as to a most excellent and most acceptable
sacryfyce in his syghte, therefore all those sondrye commodytyes which are in
Moses law reckened, to have come unto the Jews by the said sacrifices of ye
old law, must now much more plentifullye and fruitefullye, come unto us
christen men, by the meaue of this so singular a sacrifice, so that we be
worthy to enjoy the effect and fruit thereof. Ye shall secondly also call to
your remembrance the place of Saint Paul in his first epistle to Tymothie,
and the second chapyter before of us alleged, with the exposition of S.
Augustyne upon the same place, in which his exposition he notes unto us the
four parts of the mass, and those to be dove (according to Saint Paul's
mind there) Pro omnibus hominibus pro re gibus, et omnibus qui in sublimitate
constituti sunt, ut quietam et tranquillam uitam agamus, in oms ni pietate et
castitate. etc. That is to say. For all men, for Kings, for all which are in
high authority, to the intent that we may lead a quiet and peaseable
life, in all godlynes and honestye. And according hereunto Saint Basyll (be yng
above an eleven hundred year ago) in his mass sets fourth (as used in the
Church at his time) this prayer following Da domine ut pro nostris (...) populi
ignorantijs, acceptum sit sacrificium nostrum. That is to say.

Grant o lord that for oursynnes, and the ignorances of the people, this
sacrifyce may be accepted of the. And the like has Saint Chrysostom also in
his mass, with (...) Saint Augu styne fully agreing, does in very many places
make mention of this sacryfyce, and in the fruit thereof but most notable in
the eight chapyter of his, 22, book De ciuitate dei.

But now to come to speak of that fruit which the worthy receauer of this
sacrament enjoys, three or four words may in this behalf suffyce, partelye
for that never any christen man to this day yet there of did doubt, and partly
for that the scripture most plainly in the, vi: of Ihon does say. Qui
manducat me and ipse uiuit propter me. That is to say. He that eatethe me
(meaning of the worthy receyuynge of the sacrament, as the process there
declares) he shall also live through me. And what greater proffytte joy,
comfort, or bliss can come to any man then to live through Christ, which is
as much to say, as both in this world to be a lyuelye member of Christ, and
(...) the life to come, to be coherytoure with him in the kingdom of heaven
According whereunto Saint Cyryll in his, 4, book and, xvii, chapyter upon Jhon
says. Nos uero si uitam eternam consequi uolumus, si largitore immortalitatis
habere in nobis desideramus, ad recipiendam benedictionem libenter concurramus.
That is to soye. (...) we will obtain everlasting life, if we desire to have
within us immortality, let us (...) run to receive the qenediction,
(meaning there by this (...) Benediction, the sacrament of the Aultare, as he
commonly does in that process made upon the vi, of Jhon) And the same Cyryll
in his third book and, xxxvii, Chapter upon (...) says thus.

Viuisicat enim Corpus Christi, (...) ad incorruptionem sua participatione
reducit. and by and by after in the same Chapyter he says. Ad coelestem
gratiam accedamus, Corporisque Christi participes efficiamur. Sic enim sic
inquam, diabolum fugabimus, and (...) inaturoe participes ad uitam et
incorruptibilitatem ascendemus. of which two places the first is thus in
English. Truly the body of Christ does give life and does reduce or bring
again them that particyparte or be partakers thereof, to incorruptyon. The
second thus. Let us come unto the heavenly grace, and be made partakers of
the body of Christ, for so, even so (I say) we shall chase away the devil,
and heynge so made partakers of the deuyne nature, we shall ascend to life,
and incorruption.

To these foresaid comfortable places, we will yet adioyne two other of the
holy martyr Saint Cyprian in his sermon. De coella domini, Where he says
thus. Panis iste angelorum oinne delectamentum habens (...) mirifica, omnis bus
qui digni et deuote sumunt; secundum suum de siderium sapit, ct amplius quam
manua illud cremi implet and satiat edentium appetitus, et omnia carnalium
saporum irritamenta, and (...) exuper at dulcediuum uoluptatis. That is to say.

This bread or fode of Angels, having all delight with maruaylous power or
virtue, does savor unto all them which worthelye and devoutly receive it,
according to their hearts desire, and more frutefullye does fulfill and satiat
the appetities of the eaters, than did that Manna in the wyldernes, and does
far pass fragantnes of al earthly savors, ye and the peasures of all
swetenes. And shortelye after says thus.

Verum, his quiuerbo tenus cord (...) aridi, sacris inter sunt, ueletiam
participant donis, lambunt quidem (...), sed inde necmel sugu^t (...) oleum,
qui (...) aliqua Charitatis dulcedine, (...) spiritus sancti (...) (...), necse
iudican^t, nec sacramenta diiudicat? sedsicut cibls communious, irreuerenter
sacris ut utuntur muncribus, et dominice (...) in ueste lutulenta se in (...),
(...) mclius erat uola as naria collo (...) mergi in pelagus, quamillota (...)
de manu domini buccellan accipere, qui usque body (...) ssimum et sanctissimum
corpus suum crcat, ct sanctisicat, ct (...), ct pie (...) diuidit. In buius
prae sentionon superuacue mendicant lachrymae ueniam? nec unquam partitur
contriti cordis holocaustum, repulsam. etc. That is to say.

But they which either be present at these holy mysteryes, or else receive these
gifts only according to the outewarde word, be ing dry in heart, and
withered in their mind, they truly do lick the rock, but thereoute socke
they neither honye nor oil, which nethere be quickened or nourished with any
swetnes of Charity, nor fattenes of the holy Ghost, nor do judge them
selves, nor yet discern the sacraments, but irreuerently do use these holy
gifts, as they would other commen meats, and impudentli (...) or thrust them
selfs in, to come to Gods board in a fylthy garment. For whom it were
better, that they had a milne stone (...) abute there neck and so were drowned
in the sea, then to take with an unclean conscience, a morsel at the hand of
our lord: who until this dai does create and sanctify, and bless, and to the
worthy receyuers, does divide this his most true, and most holy body. In
the presence of this body the tears of man does not beg forgiveness in
vain, (...) the sacrifice of a contrite heart does suffer repulse or denial.

Wherefore confiderynge the most excellent grace efficacye and virtue of this
sacrament, it were grate lie to be wyshed and prayed for that all christen
people, had such devotion there unto, that they would gladely dispose and
prepare themselves, to the more often worthy receyuyng of the same. But seeing
that in these last days, Charity is waxed cold and sin does habounde, as
(...) says in the gospel Mathewe, xxiiii. that it should, yet if christen
men will avoid the great indignation of GOD, it shall be good for them,
whansoeuer they receive this sacrament them selves, or be present, where it is
ministered or used, as specially in the time of mass to behave the^ self
reverently, iu (...) devotion and prayer, and not to talk, or walk up and
down, or to offend other by any evil example of irreverence to the said
Sacrament: except they will declare them selves to have small regard to our
Savior Christ, there bo dyly present, of which vnreuerencye and contempt, may
ensue, not only spiritual punyshmentes of god, by withdrawing his grace from
such ungodly persons, but also bodyly and open scurge, as saint Paul shows
in his first epistle to the Corynthyans the xi. chapter. That for the
unworthy entreatyng and using of this sacrament, many emongeste them were
weak, sick, and dyed.

Of the Sacrament of Orders, and the exposition or declaratyon thereof.
FORASMVCHE as our promised order does now require that we should next speak
of the said sacrament of Orders, first of all touching the said sacrament,
this is to be noted, that though sometimes in scripture in some respect all
christen men and women are called preistes, for that they ought and must
contynuallye offer to almyghtye God the spiritual sacrifyces of faith prayer
and other godly virtues (which kind of preisthode Saint Peter speaks of, in
the second chapter of his first epistle, and Saint Jhon like wise in the,
xvi. chapter of the Apocalipse) yet is there (...) that general preisthode, a
certain special and singular vocation or function of preisthode and
ministratyon appointed by our savior Christ, to be executed only of such as
being baptized, have by the imposition of the bysshopes hands, received a
certain grace and power to be publyke ministeres in ye catholyke church. And
of this special kind of priest hode, Saint Paul in his first chapter of
his Epistle to the Nebrues dyth speak saying. Nec quisdam (...) sibihonorem
sed qui uocatur deo quemadmodum Aaron. That is to say. Nor any man does take
the honor unto him, but he which is called of GOD (...) as Aaron was.
Acordyng whereunto Christ him self, being the high priest of the new test
(...) meant, first sayethe of him (...) in the eyghte of Jhon. Neque enim a
meipso ueni, sed ille me misit. That is to sai. Of my self truly I came not,
but he (meaning the heavenly father) did send me. And secondlye in the. xx.
of Jhon (appoyntynge to his apostles this specyal office or ministration, and
authorisynge them in the same) he also says. (...) misit me pater and ego
mitto uos. That is to say. As my father sent me, I also send you.

The geuyng of this special auchoritie of ministra tion and priesthode by the
bishop, unto such persons as by due examination shall be thought mete for
that bocation, is called here the sacrament of orders: and has always so been
called, taken, and reputed from the beginning of christen religion unto this
day, as appears most euydently by saint Augustine who in his second book.
Contra epistolam parmeniani, and the xiii. chap. thereof, does often times call
it by the name of a sacrament: and ioyntlye speaking of it, and of the
sacrament of baptism, affyrmeth that both of them are given by a certain
sanctification, and that neither of them can be iterated or again taken,
saying thus (...) enim sacramentum rst etc. that is to say: Truly both of
these are Sacraments etc.

And where the said (...). Augustyne in the foresaid place says that this
sacrament of orders is ge uen with a certain sanctification, no better or
playner proof thereof can be had, than out of the very scrip ture, as in the.
xx, of Sainete Jhon, where our savior Christ after his resurrection geuyng
unto his apostles auethoritie to release or retain sins, did say unto them
in this manner. Accipite spiritum sanctum, quorum remiseritis peccata
remittuntur eis, et quorum retinueritis (...) eataretenta sunt. That is to
say. Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose sins ye remitte, they are remitted
are forgeuen them, and whose sins you reteyne are retained. To this purpose
apperteyneth also that saying of S. Paul in his first Epistle to Tymothe, and
the, iiii, Chapter, where he says thus, Noli negligere gratiam queinte est,
que data est tibi per prophetiam cum imposuione manuum praesbiterij. That is to
say. Neglecte not the grace that is in the which is given unto the through
prophesye with the imposition of hands of preisthode, And again in the
second epistle to Tymothie and the first chapter thereof, the said Saint Paul
does say thus. Admonco te ut resuscitis gratiam dei, quae est in te, per
impositionem (...) nuum mearum. That is to say. I adinonyshe the, that thou
stir up the grace of god which is in the by the imposition of my hands. By
which words of Saint Paul in the both these places farther ye may note,
how this sacrament of Orderes (...) that perfection to make it a sacrament,
which in the difinition of a sacrament before given was required, it is to
wit, a visible sign (which is the imposition of the hands) and therewyth
effectuallye concurraunt and annexed grace.

And for the better understanding of this grate, ye shall mark that the same
does consyste in three general points. The one to pray in the name of the
hole church, and for the hole Church. An other to preach and teach the
word of GOD to all people The third to minister the Sacraments, where ye
may note that the preistes being amongeste other things called to the
minystration of the sacraments and the chiefest and most pretiouse of all
sacraments being the sacrament of the Altar, in mynystratyon whereof (as
before in the exposition of the same sacrament, is sufficiently proved, the
priest ought both to consecrate, and to offer. Therefore the late made
mynysters in the time of the scysine, in their new devised ordination, having
no authority at all given the^ to offer in the mass the body and blood of
our (...) our Christ, but both they so ordered (or rather dysordered) and
their scysmatycall orderers also, utterly dispising and impugninge, not only
the oblation or sacrifice of the mass, but also the real presence of the body
and blood of our savior Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar, therefore I
say, that all such both dampnably and presumptuously did offend against
almighty God, and also most pitetullye begyled the people of this realine, who
by this means were desrauded of the most blessed body and blood of our
savior Christ, and the most comfortable fruit thereof, and also of the
sacrifice of the mass, and of the inestimable fruit which comes thereby. Of
which things the truth at large and sufficiently in thexposition of the
sacrament of the Altar is already taught and proved. And saying that every
man (be he never so simple) may sufficientlye hereby perceive how these late
counterfeted ministers, have in so weighty a matter deceived the people,
concerning eternal salvation, and greatly abused them and brought the^ into a
most lamentable state, you may thereby consider both what thanks you owe to
almyghtye God who has restored unto you, the right use of the Sacraments
again, and also how much you ought to esteem the right (...), now brought
home again, by which as an ordynary means, God worcester keth his graces amongst
you, and do you not herein forget for your part, the saying off. Paul in his
first epistle to Tymothie the first chapyter which is this. Quibene praesunt
(...) byteri duplicihonere digni habeantur, maxim qui laborant in uerbo, et
doctrina. That is to say. Those preistes which rule well, let them be counted
or judged worthy of double honor and specially they which labor in the word
and teaching. And thus much we think suffi cient for the lay people to be
instructed herein

Of the Sacrament (...) Matrimonye, with the exposition or declaration thereof.
Having hy thereto observed and kept the order promised in the preface of this
book, entreatyng of Baptysme, Confirmation, Penance, and of the Sacrament of
the Altar, which all in their due consideration, are sacraments of
necessytye, having also spoken of ye sacra meant of orders, whereby a
spiritual multiplication of the church, is induced, though no man herein be
inforsed or compelled but of his voluntarye electyon and choice does take and
receive it. This place now requires that we shall here entreat of the
sacrament of Matrimonye, which does follow next in order, whereby a carnal
multiplication, very expedient in a commonwealth is induced. And this
sacrament of Matrimony does differ a great deal both in matter and form,
and also in diverse respects else from the other before said, and specially it
differs from Baptysme, Confyrmation, Penance, and the sacrament of the
Altar, for that this Sacrament of Ma trimonye is not of that necessity as
they are, but is in the free will of the manne, and also of the woman which
freely may choose to marye, or not to marye, and neither of them is compelled of
precise necessity to come unto it, and being besides in that estate, that
without it they may be saved.

And very expedient it shalve, diligently to speak of this sacrament of
Matrymonye, as well for that the persons, vicars, and curates may, to all
such persons as lawfully may be coupled in matrimony, declare, both the
institution of Matrimonye, the holiness and efficacy there of, the mystery of
this Sa cramente, and all other things thereto appertaynyng, as also for that
this sacrament of Matrimony (which in our late schismatic time, has been by
seditious carnal preachers, or rather praters greatly impugned) may hereafter
for the worthynes and dignity thereof be better esteemed, accepted, and taken
And to make a ground, it shall be well to discrybe and tell you what Matrymonye
is, who is the aucthour thereof, where it was instituted, what was ye cause of
the instytutyon, who may contracte it, how it is contracted, how it ought to
be used, and the gifts or treasures of it, with other such like, as they
shall come in their place, and for the first ye shall know, that the learned
do defyne. or describe matrimonye, to be a lawefull conjunction of a man and
of a woman, having in it an individual or inseparable bond or knotte of
living, whereby either to other must do as that vocation requires.

And when I do say Lawefull I do speak that to exclude such coniu^ctions as
are made betwixt man and woman contrary or against the oroer of ye law
comprehended in effect in these four verses following.

Error, conditio, uotum, cognatio, crimen.
Cultus disparitas, uis, ordo, ligamen, honestas.
Si sis affinis, siforte coire ne quibis.
Hec sacienda uetant connubia, facta (...).
That is to say. Error, servile condition, a vow, kynred, a notable crime,
diuersitye of faith or religion, violence, holy order, bond to another wife or
husband, public honestye, affinity, and impotencie, which things do let or
forbid matrimony to be made, and do disanull it, if it be already made.

And when I do say conjunction, I do put in that to declare that in this
conjunction between the manne and the woman, there must be a voluntarye consent
of mind between the said man and the said woman, (...) being wyllynglye
content to take other, and to join in this state of life. And when I do add
and say, of a man, and of a woman. I do put in those words, as well to declare
that matri monye can not be betwyxt any, except the one be a man, and the
other a woman, as also to exclude pluralitics of husbands and wives, and when
I do say, having in it an individual or inseparable (...) or knotte of
living I do put in those words as well to exclude that conjunction between
man and woman, which is (...) by fornication or other wise vnlawefully, and
therefore has not in it an inse parable bond or knot, as also to declare, that
after ye conjunction made between ye man and the woman, it is not laweful for
either of the^, during their life to take an other, and where I do say,
whereby either to other must do as that vocation requires. I do declare
therebye the office and duetye of the manne to the woman, and of the woman
again to the manne accordyngelye, as that state of Matrymony e does require,
and albeit as touching the bond, the man and the woman are sometimes upon
reasonable causes, approved by the law, separated, yet that separation
breaks not the bond or knote of Matrymonye.

Nowethat ye know what Matrymonye is, ye shall also have declared unto yon,
who was the author thereof. For knowledge whereof ye shall understand, that
the blessed trinity, having newly made the world and beautified it with
creatures, and last of all made man, did consider that it was not expedient
man to be alone, and therefore as scrip ture does declare Genesis. ii. did put
Adam to sleep and there in the time of his sleep, did take one of his rib bes,
supplieng flesh for it, and in conclusion did make thereof a woman, called
Eua, bringing her to Adam that by both their consentes (and the holy trinity
aydynge and assysting therein, and being the very aucthor thereof) a bond or
knotte of Matrymonye might be made betwyxt Adam and Eve, whereupon Adam
beholdynge the said woman being brought unto him, and being undoubtedly
inspyred by the holy ghost, did say these words following.

Hoc nunc os ex ossibus meus and caro de carne mea. Hec uocabitur uirago,
quoniam de uiro sumpta est, quam ob rem relinquet homo patrem suum, and matre^
and adherebit uxori sue: and erunt duo in carne una. that is to sai This now a
bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, she shall be called Virago, because she
is taken of the man: Wherefore man shall leave or forsake his father and mother,
and shall adioyne or cleave to his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh. By
which words it euidentlye appears, that God is the author, inuentour and
maker of Matrimony: which thing to be so, Saint Mathewe in the. xix. chapter
of his ghospel, Saynct Mark in the. x. and S. Paul in the. vi. and. xi. of
his first epistle to the Corynthians, and the said Saint Paul in his first
chapter to the Ephesians, do plainlye affirm and testify, and so have you
this poyncte suffyciently opened and proved unto you.

And as touching the third thing, it is to wit, where Matrymony was
instituted, ye shall soon learn that in the first and second chapter of
Genesis, where Moses declarethe that almyghtye God having planted paradyse, a
place of great pleasure, and therein putting man, whom he had formed, did not
only join man and woman there together, as is before said, but also did
bless the said man and woman, saying. Crescite, and multiplicamini and
replete terram. that is to say. Do you increase, and be you multiplied, and
do you replinyshe the earth, or world. Which words were ofsuche effect and
virtue, being spoken of almyghtye God, that always contynuallye from the time
that they were spoken, they do and shall to the worlds end work, and be
auayleable, in the generation of things, as the great learned man Chrysostom
in his homilye, De proditione Jude. does plainly testify.

Now concerning the fourth point, it is to wit, Wherefore was matrimony
instituted, ye shall know that consyderyng the state of matrimonye, as it was in
the time of innocencye, and before sin was committed by Adam and Eve, so the
cause of institution of matrimonye was double one concerning the persons
married, and the other concerning the issue that should come of them. And as
touching the persons married, the cause in them is that there should be
thereby, the first and chief copulation of humayne society, having a true
and an amiable conjunction in it, of man and woman, the one to rule, and the
other to obey. And as touching the issue ye cause of marryage in that
respect, is both in honest love to bring forth children, and also Godly and
virtuously to bring up the same, both which causes we have expressed and set
forth in scripture, the first Genesis, ii, where God says. Faciamus ei
adiutoriu^ simile sibi. That is to say. Let us make an aid or help unto him
like unto him self. And the second Genesis. i. where God says, Crescite and
multiplicamini and replete terram. That is to say. Do you increase, and be you
multiplied and replenishe you the earth. And considering the state of
matrymony as it was after the sin or fall of Adam and Eve, then besides the
foresaid.ii. causes there was a third, it is to wit to avoyde fornication and
that humayne weakness and infirmity might have therefore, the honest remedy of
marriage and lawefull copulation, according whereunto Saint Augustyne. De
Genesi ad literam. in his nynth book and seventh chapter, says thus. Denique
utriusque sexus infirmitas propendens in ruina^ turpitudinis recte excipitur
honestate nuptiarum, ut quod sanis possit esse officium, sit egrotis medium.
That is to say. Finally or for conclusion, the infyrmitie or weakness of both
the kinds (it is to wit, of man and woman) prone or ready to fall into
the ruin or (...) of filthiness, is well holden up or preserved by the
honesty of matrimony, that that whi che might be unto the innocente or hole
per sons an office or duetye, might be unto the sick or weak persons a
remedy or help.

And here by the way ye shall note, that if our fore fathers Adam and Eve had
not sinned, the^ they and their ofsprynge should not have been troubled with
the prickynge or styrrynge of the flesh, nor with the feruor or rage of carnal
lust, but should have begotten or procreated children without any such stir
or rage, and without any sin at all, yea and with me rite also, where after
their fall, both they and their posterity by the deadely law of
concupiscence, inhe tynge unto their members, (without the which carnal
conjunction is not done) had not that liberty, so that need it was, both them
and their posterity to have some good aid and help, to excuse carnal
copulation (otherwise culpable) and to make it laweful. And hereupon S.
Augustine considering well ye matter does attribute two offices unto matrimony
before the fall of man, and the third he does attribute unto it after the fall
of man. But yet besides these cause or ends, for which matrimony was by god in
paradise instituted, there is another not ye least but rather and principal
(if we consider and regard the purpose of God herein) which is, that
Matrimonye or marriage should be a fytte sign or mystical token, of that
most assured and strong conjunction, that should be between Christ (yet, then
to come) and the church, which church euerlastyngly before the creation of the
world, and from the beginning, God did preordeyne, chose and elect unto
himself: as Paul witnesses in the first chapters of his Epystles to the
Ephesians and to Tyte. For the vnspeak able wisdom of God, forseyng and
knowing before, that man after his creation through the wylynes and deceate
of the devil, would fall, and deserve eternal death, did most mercifully in
this his foresyght (...), cast, determine, and dispose with himself, a mean,
how man being fallen, might again be restored and regenerated. And therefore
appointynge unto Christ (who should be the father, and parent of this
generation) a marriage mete therevn to, did to man's great and marvelous
comfort in the myraculous couplynge, and conioynynge of Ada^ (representyng
Christ, then to come) and Eve, being formed and made of the ribbe of Adames
side, Ada^ being a sleep, did (I say) as in a shadow, and a figure, show
before, and express the same knotte and bond of marriage of Christ and the
church. And this (as it were) plyghtyng of troth, for this marryage to come,
was farther by a promise made by God to man confyrmed and ratifyed, when he
said in the third chapyter of Genesis, that the sede of the woman should
with his foot tread down the serpents head. Which promise from the
beginning, contynuallye, and from time to time, God almighty renewed to the
holy fathers and patriarchs, and wylled his prophets to open and publyshe it.

And to pass over al other testunonyes, how notably and plainly does the
prophet Oze in his third cha piter speak hereof, sayiug. Et sponsabo te mihi
in sempiternum et sponsabo te mihi in iustitia, in iudicio et misericordia, et
in miserationibus Et sponsabo te mihi sed. etc. That is to say. And I will
marye the unto my own self for evermore, yea unto my self will I marie the
in right wysenes, in judgment, in mercy and in com passion. And in faith
also will I marye the unto my self. etc.

According whereunto Solomon, in his notable and excellent book called Cantica
Camicorum, did sing and prophecy of this marriage, then yet to come, where
he declarynge the great desire and longing that the bride had, that the day
of solempnyzynge the marriage (standing yet between her brydegrome and her, in
only handfastyng or plyghtyng of faith and troth) might come says thus
(...) me osculo oris sui. That is to say. Oh that he would kiss me with the
kiss of his mouth. But fynallye when the day drew (...), and the brydegrome
was come down into the world, how did Ihon baptiste, the most holy
brideman, rejoice of this the brydegromes com mynge and that the time was full
run out. And said as witnesses S. John the Euangeliste in his Gospel and
in the third Chapyter in this manner. Qui habet sponsam sponsus est, amicus
autem sponsi qui stat and audit. eum (...) gaudit, propter uocem sponsi: Hoc
ergo gaudium (...) impletum est That is to say: He that has the bryde is the
brydegrome. And the friend of the bridgrome who standethe and hearethe him,
reioysethe greatly to hear the voice of the brydgrome. This my joy therefore
is fulfilled. So that here (...) how from the beginning of the world, the
church has been berrouthed to Christ. His servants the prophtes were
sent, which should call them, that were bidden to the ma riage. At length
came Christ the brydegrome, more beutyfull then the children of (...), to
whom while he did ascend or goo up to the bryde chamber of the cross, and
there falling into sleep, the heavenly father out of his sons side, being
opened with the spear of the soldier, did (...), and as it were shape unto
Christ his betrouthed bryde, the church, and so beautified her and coupled
them two together in such an indissoluble band or knotte, that everlasting
they shall continue and cleave together, as two in one flesh. And so is
fulfilled and consummate that marriage, so long before prefigured, so often
promised to the patriarchs, so playnelye spoken of by the prophets, and
contynuallye in the laweful marriage of man and woman, mystycally represented
and remembered, of which S. Paul says. Ephesians. 5. Sacramentum hoc magnum est:
ego autem dico in Chisto et ecclesia.

That is to say. This (speaking of Matrymonye) is a high or great mystery,
I mean it truly in Christ and the Church. And thus much have we spoken to
declare, what matrymony is, who is author thereof, where is was first (...),
and what were the causes of the institution. Next there fore according to our
proposed division in the begin nynge of this (...), is to speak of the. v.
point that is, who may contracte matrymonye. For know ledge whereof ye shall
understand, that the law or ordinance made concerning persons which are to
be allowed unto, or rejected from matrymonye, is an ordinance, or law
prohibytorye, that is to say, forbyddynge some, and permyttinge, suffryng, and
al lowynge ail the rest not being forbidden, so that who soever is not
forbidden specially, or generally, to contracte matrymony, the same is
consequently to be ad mytted and allowed unto it, and this resolutyon to be
true, may be proved by the rule of contraryes, which here also does take his
place, for if I do well know who cannot marye (which knowledge I have had all
ready given unto me in the declaration of the impedymentes or lettes to
contracte matrymonye) I shall by and by know who may contracte matrymony. Quia
contrariorum cadem est disciplina and cognito (...) de contraijs cognoscitur et
(...). In deed certain persons there are forbidden both by the (...) and also
be the Canon laws, to marye togethere, as appears amongst many other places
in the tytles (...). et de consanguinitate et affinitate. In so much that
between those persons that are in linea ascendenti ucl descenden ti, Marriage
is utterly forbidden, and between those persons that are in the collateral
line, marriage can not be made, if either of the persons which is to be
married, be of (...) or allyaunce unto the other in the forth degree or under.
And of specyal prohybyty ons concerning matrymony, ye have mention made in
Scripture both in the, xviii. and. xx. chapyters of Leuytycus, and also in
the. xxii. of Deuteronomij, which places shall sufficientlye and plainlye open
and declare this matter unto you. And now concerning the six point which
is how matrimonye is contracted, ye shall understand, that if matrymonye
(...) considered as touching the bond and knotte thereof only, so matrymony
is contracted and made by the only lawefull consent of the man and of the
woman, that may be coupled, and (...) together in matrymonye, for the proof
whereof, words of the present time, or sufficient and equyualente signs, are
by the order of the law necessaryelye required to testyfye that consent.

And if matrymony be considered as touching the full and hole perfection
thereof, then matrymonye may be seen so contracted, when not only such con
sent is had, but also carnal copulation, there upon does follow. Example
after the first consyderatyon may be taken of our first parents Adam and
Eve, who by our Lord in paradyse, were before thereupon and in the state of
their innocencye, joined in matrymony, by conjunction of minds, though there
then between them was no carnal copulation at all, and yet true matrimony, for
as the law says: Nuptias non concubitus sed consensus facit. That is to
say, Consent does make matrimony, and not the carnal copulation or lyinge
together. And as for exam ple also the second consideration of matrymonye, it
may also be taken of our said parents after their fall and when they were for
their transgressyon expulsed out of paradyse, for being man and wife, they
did then carnal know each other, and had thereby generation of Chylder, as
appears in diverse places of scripture, and especially in the. v. and syxte
chapyters of Genesys. And touching this dyuersytie of considerations in
matrymonye, with the diverse sygnifications thereof, and of many things else
apper teynynge unto the same, who lysteth, may have recourse to the. xxviii
cause and second questyon, where he may see the judgment of Saint Chrysostom
S. Am brose, S. Augustyne and or many other in this mat ter, and likewise he
may have in the Chapyter Expublico, de conuersione coniugatorum. And as
touching the seventh point which is how matrimony ought to be used ye shall
note herein the council of S. Paul in the. vii chapyter of his first epistle
to the Corinthians, where speaking to married persons, and exhorting them to use
them selves in their vocation after a good and per fecte sort he does say
thus. Hoc itaque; dico fratres, tempus breue est, reliquum est (...) quihabent
uxoris tanquam non (...) sint.

That is to say. Therefore brethern I say this unto you, the time is (...),
there remains that they which have wives be as though they had (...). And
the same Saint Paul declarynge how purelye and clenely married folks should
use them selves in matrymonye, does in the fourth chapyter of his first
epistle to the Thessaloni senses say thus. Hec est enim uoluntas dei
sanctificatio uestra vt ab stineatis uos a fornicatione ut sciat unusquisque
uestrum, uas suum possidere in sanctificatione and honor, non in passione
desiderij sicut et gentes quae ignerant deum. That is to say: This in deed is
the will of GOD, your sanctification, that ye do abstain from fornication,
that every one of you may learn or know to possess his vessel in
sanctification, and honor, not in the possion of desire or lust, as the
gentyles also who do not know GOD.

And the self same Saint Paul also declarynge father how married folks
should use them selves ye one unto the other, does in the fyft chapyter of his
Epistle to the Ephesians say thus. Mulieris uiris suis subdita sunt sicut
domino, quoniam uir caput est mulieris sicut Christus caput est ecclesiae, ipse
saluator corporis, sed sicut Fcclesia subiecta est Christo ita et mulieris
uiris siuis in omnibus. Viri diligete uxoris uestras sicut and Christus dilexit
ecclesiam. That is to say Let women be subject unto their husbands as to
our Lord, for the husband is the head of the woman, as Christ is the head
of the Church, he is the savior of the body, and as the chur che is subject
unto Christ, so let women be unto their husbands in all things. (...)
husbands do ye love your wives as christ has loved the Church. Moreover
the same S. Paul in the syxt chapyter (...) the said Epistle, teaching married
folks to whom God has sent children, how they should use their children,
does say thus. Educate illos in disciplina, and correptione domini. That is to
say. Bring up your children in the discipline, and chastisement of our
Lord. Diverse examples we have of this, in the ho lie scripture as of Sara the
daughter of Raguel, and of young Thoby her husband, of whom mention is made in
the. viii chapyter of Thobye, and also of that godly and modest matron Sara,
and Abraham her husband, of whom S, Peter in the third chapyter of his first
Epistle, says thus. Sit enim aliquando and sanctae mulieris, sperantes in
deo, ornabant se, subiecta proprijs uiris, sicut Sara obediebat Abrahae,
dominum eum uocans. That is to say.

For so sometimes holy women also trusting in God, did (...) them selves,
being subject or obedient to their own husbands, and Sa ra did obeie
Abraham, calling him master, or Lord.

Like examples are of the godly couples, Isaac, and Rebecca (Gene, xxv)
Helcana and Anna (i. Re. i) with sundry other, which all did use the^ selves
so in the state of matrymonye, that they continuallye lived in the fear of
God in the chaste love of wedlock, in the honest affection or mind toward
the bringing furthe of children, and did also diligently look unto the godly
education of the same. And as concerning the. viii. and last part of our
foresaid division, it is to wtte, of the treasures, gifts, and (...) of
marriage, ye shall understand that S. Augustyne in his. ix book upon the
Geneses, and the. vii. chapyter thereof, teaches us, that matrymonye
conteyneth in it three gifts, graces, or benefyts, it is to wit a
sacrament, a faith, and an of spring or issue.

Concerning the Sacrament, he says that this is specially herein to be
observed, it is to wit, that between the man and the wife there be no
separatyon and that nether the man or the wife, being each from other
dismised, do marye or couple them selves with any other, and so the virtue of
this sacra meant does consyste properlye, and specially in the inse perable, or
vnbreakeable bond of the marriage couenaunte, which (as we said before) is
the (...) or chief point belonging to marriage. This covenant, God
assysteth, and this knot he knittethe and being once knytte, he makethe it
strong, and establysheth it, yea, and further does give such grace with it,
that they which abuse not that grace, may be hable to keep the marryage
couenaunte vnuyolated, and mutually so to love one the other, as Christ has
loved, and does love the church, And by the aid of the same grace, they
shall and will frankelye, truly, and most louynglye, communycat one to an
other, all things according to Gods law, and man's law, and al manner of
chances, good or badde prosperity, or adversity, they shall most
contentedly and quyetlye, receive, bear, and use together, till death them
depart. This benefyte of this sacrament does engendre an assured boldness, or
confydence and trust of good consience, by the which both the man and also the
wife, are made sure that the state of matrymonye (into the which they, in the
fear of God, and for honest and virtuous respects only, have entered and
truly and holylye observed of their parts) is not void of the grace of God,
but that GOD has a care over them, yea and that this their state of Matrimony
is also merytorious: according where unto S. Paul to Tymothey. i. Epistle. 2.
Cap. says. Mulier (...) fiet per liberorum generationem, si (...) in fide.

That is to say: The wife shall be saved by the bringing forth of Children, so
that (...) co^tynue or persevere in the faith. And again in ye last chapter
to the Hebrews, he says thus. Honorabile connubium in omnibus. and thorus
imaculatus. That is to say: Marriage in all is honorable: and a bed
undefiled. And saint Ambrose also in his second book of the Patryarche
Abraham (...) in the. ix. chapter does say that a notable gift of chastitye
will follow marriage, (...) the persons so married do think verily that this
marriage where in they are (...) is provided, procured, and done of God. This
gift of this sacrament to them that diligently will ponder and consider the
same, will especyallye edyfye their consciences to them selves, and will also
kyndle mutually the fire of chaste love between them. The second benefit or
gift of matrimonye (Saint Augustyne says) is faith, not meaning that faith
and (...) confydence which we have in God, but that faithful true and honest
dealing, which is required to be between man and wife, in not having carnal
knowledge with an e other: the man not with any other, then with his true and
laweful wife, and the wife not with any other, then with her true and lawefull
husband: which synguler gift, only God in this sacrament imparteth and
gives of his goodness to them, which (in such sort as we have declared) are
married, or else what man or woman is there, of many thousands, that being as
they are (...) with the snares, (...), and alluerments of the world, the
flesh, and the devil, would not offelide, and break that bond of faith,
and fidelity, at the least, in heart and mind, which Christ him self
(Math. v) judges to be no less adulterye, then the fylthy and adulterous
carnal copulatoin.

Now the third gift or benefytte which saynete Augustyne say the to be in
Matrunonye is islue or ofsprynge, for which cause cheifely matrimonye is
contracted, whereunto the man and the (...), coming in the fear of God,
ought so to respect and regard their issue and of spring, that in chaste
and mutual love, they may be get and bring forth children, and in the
says, fear, and relygion of God bring up, and instruct the same. And in
so doing, matrymonye not only is void and clear from all manner of fault,
but also has his certain merit at Gods hands. These three gifts
concurrynge in matrymonye, and causynge the accompanyenge of man and woman
together in carnal knowledge, to be by this means without sin, yea, and
well used to be meritorious to, how great a grace then is annexed to this
sacrament of Matrymony, of which hitherto we have entreated.

And here to conclude this counsel seems good to be given to those that
hereafter shall be minded and disposed to marye, that they do choose to them such
a mate, as neither Gods Iawe, nor man's law do prohibit them to take, and
with whom they may conceive good hope that they being joined in matrymonye,
shall lead an holy Godly, and comelye life, ever to continue inseperablye,
during their lives, which is like they shall do, when they not rashelye and
indeliberatlye but with good advise co^sideringe equality and virtue more,
then either carnal lust, worldly honor or pryuate respects, do in the
fear of God enter into this honest state of matrymonye, entendynge thereby to
serve God there country and friends, living also them selves in honesty,
justice, and temperaunce, and finallye bringing up their children, and
gouernynge there famylye in virtue and Godlynes.

FINIS.
Of the sacrament of extreme unction, and thexposition or deciaration thereof.
Having entreated sufficientlye of six of the sacraments used in the
catholyke church, and none of them remaining indiscussed, saving one, which
is the sacrament of extreme unction, we will now of it, being the last in
number and order, speak lastely and breifely And though it be last in number
and order, as is a foresaid, and also commonly is called the extreme unction,
that is to say: the last unction, yet ye shall not understand thereby that
this sacrament can not be ministered at any time, but when a man is clean
without hope of life, and shall in no wise escape the death: nor ye may not
thereby understand, that after this sacrament of extreme unction, no other
Sacrament, at any time else, can be ministered unto the person so anoyled. For
in deed this sacrainente may be minystred in the entrye of the syckenes, and
also many times else, whenever any great maladye or peryllous syckenes,
shall come to any man, in so much that he who is daungerously sick, and
there fore anoylynge and anointed, receiving and using this sacrament, may
(if he escape the danger and after fall into it again, or into any other
such like) have ministered unto him again this laudable and notable sacrament
of extreme unction, which of it self is both iterable (as Penance
Euchariste, and Matrymonye is) and not always mynystred in the catholyke
church, that the sick person so sone as he has received it should
incontinentlye depart out of this world, and want his life. But contrary
wise that the said person both in soul, and also in body may (if it so be
seen good unto (...) God) recover and get health agayue. And this to be so
those notable prayers full of all godlynes and sauourynge antiquity used now
in the catholyke church agreinge with the counsel and commandment of S.
James in the last chapter of his epistle, do evidently, and playnelye declare
and show unto us.

And although in our wicked time small is the number of them that do escape
death, having received this sacrament of extreme unction, yet that is not to
be ascrybed unto the lack or fault of this sacrament but rather unto the
want and lack of steadfast and constant faith, which ought to be in those
that shall have this sacrament mynystred unto them: by which strong faith the
power of almighty God in the prymitiue church, did work myghtely, and
effectuallye in the (...) persons enoynted, receyuynge this holy and
comfortable sacrament, and now for the lack of like faith in our time, does
not work after like sort. According where unto we read in the. vi. chapter
of S. Mark after this sort, Et non poterat ibi uirtutem (...) nisiquod (...),
impositis manibus curauit, and (...) propter incredulitatem (...). That is to
say.

And he (that is to say Christ) could not do any miracle there, saving that
he did cure a few sick persons, (...) his hands upon them, and he did
marvel or wonder for the (...) or unbelief of them. This sacrament (...) is
not called the sacrament of extreme or last unction for that that death
always does follow it, or for that that no sacrament can be minystcred after
to the person enoynted, but for that specially that all other unctions being
used in the admynystratyon of the sacraments, do go before, and this unction
does follow them. And here by the way forasmuch as we do speak of extreme
unction, ye shall understand, that there are (as the master of the sentence
in his fourth book and. xxiii. distinctiou does testifye) three kinds or
sorts of unctions, accustomed and used in ye church, the first vnctio^, in
time, is that where with yonglynges (coming newly to be instructed and taught
in the faith and religion of Christ, called in Latyne Cathecumini) are by the
preiste to be anointed with all upon the breast, and between the shoulders, and
this unction is made only with oil olyue, being, first sanctified or
consecrated by the bishop, and afterward used by the priest in mynystration.

The second unction is, that which is made or done, notwith oil alone, as
the former is, nor with balm alone, but it is made and done with Chrysme,
which is made of oil olyue and of balm, and so of two lyquors myngled and
myxte together, the oil to signifye ye cleansing and purging of the conscience
and ye balm to sygnifye the sweet savor of good name and same, required to be
in the party yt is there with to be anointed. And this unction, so made with
chrysine, is a principal, and a cheyfe unction, and the holy ghost
pryncipally, or chiefly, is given in or by it. And with this (...) the heads
of kings and bysshoppes are to be anointed, yea and the heads of the
chyldrenne baptized, are here with above their foreheades by ye preiste to be
anointed. (...) and finallye the children which by laynge on of the bishops
hands, are by the said by shop to be confyrmed, must also by the said
bishop be signed with the cross, and with the said Chrysme in their
forehead be also by him anointed. And the third unction, of which we now
have to speak and to entreat upon, is that wherewith sick persons in the
places accustomed are to be anointed withal. And this unction is made also of
oil olyue only, being sanctyfied or consecrated by the by shop which
commonly and customablye the said by shop according to the old tradition of
the church does in dic coenae domini As Saynct Cypryan in his sermen de
unctione does testifye. And Sayncte Dyonyse also in his book de (...)
hierarchia in the fourth chapter. And now concerning the institution of
this sacrament, we do read Marci. vi. how Christ calling unto him his. xii.
apostles, and sendynge them forth by two and two, did prescrybe unto them a
certain form of embassadge or message and did also give unto them a certain
power, which they should occupye and use.

And we do read also there, that the Apostles so goinge forth die preach unto
the people penance, and that they did cast forth deuyles, and also that
they did anoynte (...) oil many that were sick, who there by were healed and
cured. And we may not here think, as many vain folyshe persons, folowinge
their own fansyes and dreams, have reported and said) that these apostles of
Christ were in this behalf as commone chyrurgions, and that by (...) they did
heal and cure the sick, for as ye shall perceive anon by the testimonye of
S. James, this healynge and curyng was many times both concerning the soul
and also the body, wherefore the oil, where with the Apostles did anoynte the
sick per sons, was sacramental and mystycall sanctified oil, and therefore
did so work both in the body and also in the soul o; the sick person. And
after this sort the catholyke church even from the beginning has accepted
and taken this to be a sacrament of Christ's institution and ordinance, and
so always continuallye has retained and kept it, taking for a testimonye
of the foundation and ground thetof, the said. vi. chapter of Sayncte Mark,
so by the ancient fathers of the church most learnedly and godly expounded
and interpretated, where unto is adjoined the testimonye of Saynct James in the
last chapter of his canonical epistle, where he being a blessed apostle, and
clearly expressing and vtterynge the manner and form of the administration
of this Sacrament, which he had received of Christ, and delivered unto the
people to be of them observed and kept, does say thus. Infirmatur quis in
uobis iudic at (...) and orent super eum nugentes eum oleo in nomine domine, et
(...) fidei saluabit infirmum, and (...) eum dominus, and si in peccatis sit
(...) ei. That is to say: Is there any sick emonges you? let him bring in
(...) priests of the church, and let them pray ouerhym, anoin ting him with
oil in the name of our Lord and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and
our Lord will lighten or ease him, and yfhe be in sins they shall be remytted
unto him. Which words of S. James do manyfestlye declare this unction or
anoylynge to be a sacrament, as having a visible sign, and a promise of grace
annexed thereunto. And if ye besides the things before rehearsed, and
expressed in scripture, be desirous to have the testimonies also of the
ancient fathers of the church, concerning this sacrament of (...) unction,
as ye already have hadd in all the other, ye shall hear certain of them,
both of the greek and also of the latin church. And first I will begin
with S. Chrysostom, who in his. iii. (...) De sacerdotio and in the syxt
chapyter thereof, entreating of the great gifts and graces given by almyghtye
God unto his faythefull people by the ministerye of the preistes as well in
regeneration as also afterward in the (...) of sins, does incontinentlye for
the proof thereof bring in the saying of Saint James in the last chapter of
his said canonical epistle saying Infirmatur (inquit apostolus) quis ex
uobis? etc. Theophylacte also in his exposition made upon the. vi. chapter of
saint Mark, says thus: Quod (...) oleo Apostoli, solus Marcus narrae, quod
and frater domini lacobus, in Catholica (...) dicit, (...) tur, inquit quis in
(...) inducat, etc. That is to say. That the Apostles did anoint with oil,
only Mark (of all the evangelists) does show, which thing (meaning this
holy anoylynge) James the bro there of our Lord in his canonical Epistle,
does speak of, saying: Is any sick amon gest you. etc. Whereby also
appears this place of S. James, and that (...) S. Mark to be both under
stand of this sacrament of anoylynge.

And further in the same place, he (consequentlye declarynge the misterye of
the visible and materyall oil, used in the ministration of this sacrament)
says. Estigitur oleum and ad labores utile, and lucis fomentum, and
hilaritatis (...) fectiuum significatque misericordiam dei and gratiam spiritus
per quam a las bore liberamur, and lucem and gaudium hilaritatemque (...);
aceipimus.

That is to say: For oil being good against labor or wearynes, being also
the nourysshemente of light, and the cause or provocation of gladdenes does
signifye the mer cye of GOD, and the grace of the holy ghooste, by the which
we are delivered from labor or wearynes, and do receive light joy and
spiritual gladness. With which two places of Theophilacte, Oecumenius also a
greek aucthor fully does agree.

To these foresaid ancient fathers of the greek church shall now be adjoined
also other of the Latyne Church, and first saint Hierome upon ye said vi. of
S. Mark does say thus. Cum ungebant oleo aegrotos, infirmitatem, fidei (...)
corroborant, That is to say: When they (meaning the dyscyples sent fourth by
Christ) did anoynte the sick folk with the oil, they by the virtue of
faith, did make them strong. According whereunto Saint Augustyne also in
the. iiii. chapter of his second book Deuisitatione infirmorum. writing to his
Nephewe, lyenge on his death bed, gives him this counsel saying. (...)
praetermittendum est illud apostoli Iacobipraeceptum, infirmatur quis in uobis?
inducat praesbiteros ecclesiae ut (...) super eum, ungentes eum oleo (...), in
nomine domini I E S V, and oration fidei saluabit infirmum Ergo sic roges dete,
and protefieri, sicut dixit apostolus, Imo per Apostolum suum dominus. Ipsa
uidelicit olei sacrati delibutio, intelligitur spiritus sancti typicalis unctio
That is to say: That commandment of Saint James the Apostle is not to be
omytted or ouerpassed of the. Is any man sick amongst you? let him bring in
the preistes of the church that they may pray ouet him, anointing him with
ye holy oil in the name of our Lord Jesus, And the prayer of faith, shall
save the sick. There fore desire thou, that of the, and for the, so it may be
done, as Saint James the Apostle, yea rather, our Lord by his Apostle did
say for surely the anointing with the consecrate oil is understand to be a
typy call anointing of the holy Ghost.

Having now brought forth sondrye authorytyes both of scripture and also of
the fathers, we shall (to satisfye you so far forth as we can, and for the
plainer openyng of this sacrament of extreme unction) give unto you hear the
difinition of the same sacrament which is this.

The Sacrament of Extreme Unction, is the dew annoylinge of the penitent sick
person done by the preiste, with consecrated oil, for the remedy or easyng of
the said penitent, in soul, and for the recovery of corporal health if it be
so thought expedient to God. In which diffinition when we say (the penytent
sick person) we do mean thereby that this sacrament is mynistred frutefully,
only to those that be members of Christ's church, and to such as, being once
fallen out of the state of grace by deadelye sin, have been by penance
restored again to the said grace, and there upon by this sacrament are
strenghethened and conforted in their agonye and fight against the devil, who
in the time of syckenes and vexation of man's body, is most busye to
assault him. And albeit that this sacrament be of this notable effect, yet
no man ought to conceive this vain false hope of the effect of the same,
that he having lived in (...) and abominable sin and not caryng to be from
it delivered by true penance shall by the only mynystration of this
sacrament of extreme unction, have all his sins forgyuen him.

And where further, in the said dyfinition, is contained, (for the remedy or
easynge of the said penitent) ye shall note that concerning the soul, no man
may doubt, but that at all times the infirmytye thereof in the sick person
duly repentinge may the sooner by the virtue of this sacrament be eased,
according to the promise of the holy Ghooste in the above rehearsed words of
Saint James, And as concerning the infirmity of the body, it also may be
hoped and looked for the sooner by the worthy receyuynge of this sacrament, if
God (who knows our necessities, and can, and also will dispose all things
swetely and also pleasauntly to the attaining of everlasting comfort, which
all good men cheifelye desire and pray for) so think it expediente for the
sick person. And here to knytte up the matter, where an end is made of all
the. vii. sacraments, we can do no less then of christen charity to wyshe
that all those (who in this late scismaticall time have undoubtedly by ye
instigation of the devil, either utterly contempned or little regardrd these
sacraments, and emongeste them specially this sacrament of extreme unction,
will now after our joyful reconciliation to the unity of the catholyke
church, regard all the said sacraments as they ought to do, and so live
hear in this transitory world, that they conunynge to there extreme passage,
which at one time or other they can not escape, may from death come to life,
and from death of the body have everlasting life of the soul, and in
conclusion after the general resurrection, have the body joined unto the
soul, in bliss everlasting which almighty God grant unto us all.

Here now do follow the ten commandments of almighty God, which are taken
out of Exodus the. xx. out of Leuiticus the xxvi. and out of Deuteronomie
the. v. chapiters.
.i. Thou shall not have strange Gods before me..ii. Thou shalt not make to
the any graven thing, nor any likeness of any thing that is in heaven
above, and that is in earth beneth, nor of them that be in the waters (...)?
der the earth, Thou shall not adore them, nor honor them with godly
honor..iii. Thou shall not take the name of thy Lord God in vain..iiii.
Remember that thou keep holy the Saboth day..v. Honor thy father, and thy
mother..vi. Thou shall not kill..vii. Thou shall not commytte adultery. Thou
shall not steal.. viii. Thou shall not utter or bear false witness against
thy neighbor.. ix. Thou shalt not couette thy neighbors. x. house, nor
desire thy neighbors wife nor his servant, nor his maiden, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing that is his.
The preface of the. x. commandments.
THree parts of our promise, being now performed, it is to wit, first
what faith is, and how it is to be taken in this book, secondly the exposition
of the twelve articles of the christen belief, theyrdely the declaration of
the. vii. sacraments, the promised order nowerequyreth, that in this fourth
place, the ten commaun dementes, with their declaration, be set fourth unto
you, for an introduction unto which ye shall note four points: First, what
is the law, or the commandment of God, Secondelye, how the commandments
of God must be observed, to the plea sure of God, and our salvation: Thyrdely,
what gre uous punyshmentes God, does in holy Scripture threaten and manace
vudoutedlye to be inflycted to the breakers of his commandments, and
fourthlye, what great rewards the keapers of his law, and commandments,
shall receive at Gods hands. Touching the first point, which is, what the
law and commandment of God is you shall know that the law of God, is a
rule given to us, of God for the good guydynge of our selves. Which rule
declares, and shows to us, what is the will and plea sure of God for us to
do, or not to do, in thought word. and deed. And when I call it a rule, I
mean that as the bryckelayer cannot make a wall even and strayghte, without
the direction of his line nor a mason can not hew any coygne or assler stone,
with (...) the direction of his squyre and rule, nor the (...) master can guide
or styre his ship safely to good haven, or harborough, without the direction
of the compass, so neither man nor woman can order, guide, and rule their life
euenly, dyrectly, and streightlye, to the will and pleasure of almighty God,
without the knowledge and direction of his law, and commandments, which are
the line, rule, squyre, and compass, whereby we may rear our works
vpryghtly, frame our selfs in virtue constantly, and govern the course of
life into the haven of felicity prosperouslye. And where I say, that the
commaun dementes are given to us of God, I declare thereby, that only God
has, both (through the law of nature) in our hearts prynted them, and also
in the law of Moses with his own finger, (that is to say, by the virtue of
the holy spyryte) in two tables of stone written them. And last of all our
savior Christ, being both God and man, has ratified and expounded them in
the new law of the Gospel: to the intent that with all diligence we should
study to observe and keep the said commandments, not only because they are
so expediente and profitable unto us, but especially because that they are
given to us of God, who thereby does declare to us his godly will and pleasure,
unto whom both we, and all creatures else, are bound to be obedient.

And as touching the second point, which is how we must observe and keep
the commandments of God to his pleasure, and thereby obtain of him reward
in heaven, ye shall here note, that we must keep the (...) three manner of
ways, first holy and (...) in their perfect number, being ten, according
whereunto in the first chapter of S. Luke, in the high and great commendation
of Zachary and Elyzabeth, the parents of Saint Ihon Baptyste, it is written.
Erant autem iusti (...) de um, incedentes in omnibus mandatis et
iustificationibus domini, sine querela That is to say: And they both were just
before GOD, walkyng or lyuyngem all the commandments and iustifications of
GOD without any complaynte against them.

And I do say those words Holy and fully, forasmuch as it is not enough to
keep part or some of the said commandments of God, and to leave part of
them vnkepte: But as in a harp, a lute, or a vyol (being instruments of
(...)) every string with other must be tuned, and none left untuned, lest
thereby some unpleasant soundes, and discords might be uttered, so we must
put all and every the commandments of God, to their tuneable fashion and
practyse, lest that if any be left unused or (...) of us, there might to the
pure and clean ears and judgment of Almyghtye GOD, come thereby some
unpleasant sownde, and vnswete report of our lives and doings.

According whereunto Saint James in the. ii. chapter of his epistle says.
(...); totam legem (...) rit, offendat autem in uno, factus est omniu^ reus.
That is to say: whosoever shall keep the hole law, and yet offend in one
point or part thereof, is become gyltie of all.

The second way by which we must keep ye commandments of God, is that we
do keep them with a right intention: that is for the love, for the honor, and
for the glory of God only, and not for any honor or glory, to be given to
us, of man in this life.

For whosoever in doing of his good deeds, intends principally to get honor,
glory or reward of man, has a wrong intention, and his deed so done (yea
although it be commanded of God) is not pleasant or acceptable unto God. And
of this right intention speaks our savior Christ in the vi. chapter of
Saint Mathewe saying. Lucerna corporis tui est oculus tuus, Sioculus tuus
fuerit simplex, totum corpus tuum lucidum erit. Si autem oculus tuus fuerit
nequam, totum corpus (...) nebrosum erit That is to say: The light of thy body
is thine (...). (...) thine eye be simple or (...), then all thy body will be
bright or clear but if thine eye be evil or naught, all thy body will be full
of darkness.

Hear by the eye is understood the intent, the regard, or purpose of man's
heart, and by the body, is meant the words, acts and (...) of man, procedynge
from the heart, and by that intent directed and ordered.

Therefore Saint Paul agreing hereunto does exhort us, in his first Epistle
to the Corynthyans, and in the. x. chapter, saying thus. Sieve manducatis, sieve
bibitis, sieve aliud quid facitis, omnia in gloriam dei facite That is to say:
Whether ye do eat, whether ye do drink, or whether ye do any other thing else,
do ye all things unto the glory of GOD

Now the third way whereby we must observe the commandments of GOD, is with
constancye and perseueraunce to continue in the doing of the^. For as our
Savior Christ says in the. x. of Mathewe. Qui persevere auerit usque in
finem, hic saluus erit. That is to say: He that does persevere, or continue,
until the very end shall be saved. And in deed so constantlye we should keep
Gods commandments, that no temporal pain threatened or put unto us in
this world, should move us to break any of them. Such a constant servant to
God was Susanna of whom we read in the. xiii. chapter of Danyell, that when
she was provoked to ye sin of adultery by two old judges, under no less
pain then to be accused in open judgment, which was death by the law, she
would not grant to that synnefull deed, but said these words. Angustie
sunt mihi undique, sienim hoc egero, mors mihiest: siautem non egero non
effugiam manus (...). Sed melius est mihi absque opere incidere in manus
hominum, (...) peccare in conspectu domini. That is to say: Alas I am in
trouble on every side, for if I commit this deed it is death to me, and if I
do it not, I cannot escape your hands. Well it is better for me to fall in to
the hands of me^, than to sin in the syghte of GOD.

We will pass over the honorable ancient father Eleazar mencyoned of in the
second book and the. vi. chapter of the Machabees. We will not stay upon the.
vii. brethern and their mother, spoken of in the. ii. book and seventh chapter
of the Machabees, of which one of the children said. Parati sumus magis mori.
quam patrias deileges preuaricari. That is to say: We are ready rather to die,
then to break or transgress the laws of God which our fathers kept. But of
late days, in the time of our pestiferous scisme, the new broched brethern,
rather would tumble to hell headelonge, then they would do as the catholyke
Church from Christ's time hitherto has done, concerning the laws of GOD,
and the rytes of the said catholyke church. And yet forsooth they will chaleng
martyrdom, but those seven innocents do condemn them in this case. And
this now have ye heard how ye should keep the commandments of GOD to his
pleasure, first in keeping them all and every of them, and not in keeping some,
and to offend in the other. Secondly in keeping them with a right intention,
which is for the love of God, and eternal reward, which is God himself. And
thyrdly in obseruyng the same with constancye and perseueraunce to the (...) of
our life. In which doing, ye keep (...) to the pleasure of God, and to your
eternal (...) and without keeping of them ye neither can please him, nor have
life everlasting, according to Christ's own sentence and judgment, when he
said. Si uis ad (...) ingrediserua (...). That is to say: (...) thou will
enter to life, keep the commandments.

Now to come to speak of the third part or point of our division, made in
the beginning of this preface, it is to wit, of the grievous pains
punishments, and afflictions that God in scripture does threaten and menace to
be inflicted upon such as break his commandments, ye shall understand first
that the trangressours of Gods law, and commandments are generally
accursed of gods own mouth, as the Prophette Dauyd in the. 118. Psalm
declarethe, saying: Maledicti qui declinant a mandatis tuis. That is to say:
Cursed be they which do declyne or (...) from thy commandments. And of the
particular, sharp, and dreadful scourges, punyshmentes, and plages, which do
light upon the trangressours of these commandments, ye may read in the.
(...) chapter of Leuiticus, and in the. xxvii and. xxviii. chapiters of
Deuteronomy. And how that (to the terrible example of other) almyghtye God
has from time to time executed his Justyce upon as well pryuate men and women,
as also upon mighty rulers, princes, kings, and emperors, besides the^ upon
Towns, Cities, ye, and hole countries and kyngedoms, in scourgyng, (...),
afflyetynge and plagynge them, for breaking and trangressing of his laws and
commandments, the scryptures most habundantly do testify. As that some were
of the earth swalowed up quick even unto hell and everlasting pain, and that
other some (yea fine hole Cities) with fire and brymestone, poured down from
heaven were quyte brent up and consumed, and ferther that a great number of
children by bears sent by God suddenly were devoured, for their lewd and
wicked behauioure, with very many other such like terrible examples in the
Scryptures at large sufficientlye expressed, which were to long, particulerlye
here to rehearse, and are easy there to be found. Wherefore to conclude this
third part, we advise all men to have contynually before their eyes, that
dreadeful saying of S. Paul in the. vi. to the Romans. Stipendia pecca
timors That is to say. The stipend or reward of sin is death. Meaning
thereby, not only here in this world, temporal death of the body, but also
after this life, death eternal and pain in hell fire.

And as concerning the fowerth and last part of our first proposed division,
it is to wit, of the great reward and blessings which shall come to them
that in such sort as before we have expounded keep the laws and
commandments of allmightye God, first ye shall note those comfortable words
of almighty God in ye twentyth chapter of Exodus, where he says of himself
thus. Faciens misericordiam in millia, (...) qui diligunt me (...) custodiunt
precepta mea. That is to say: Doing mercy unto thousands, to the^ that love
me, and keep my commau^dements. And again in the. xxvi. of Leuiticus, he
says, Si in prae ceptis meis ambulaueritis. and mandatamea custodieritis and
feceritis (...): dabo uobis pluuias temporibus suis, and terragignet germen
suum, and pomis Arbores replebuntur. That is to say. If ye walk in my
precepts, and keep my commandments and do them. I will give unto you raynes
in their due seasons: and the earth shall bring forth her sede, and the trees
shall be replenished with fruit. In the. vi. chapter also of Ecclesiasticus, it
is written, Cogitatum tuum habe in praeceptis dci, and in ma^c datis illius
maxim assiduus esto, and ipse dabit ubi cor, and (...) dabitur tibi, That is
to say: Have thy thought in the precepts of God, and be thou contynuallye
occupied in his commandments and he will give the a heart, and desire of
wisdom shall be given to thee. Which thing is well proved by the testimonye of
king Dauyd, who says of him self in his. cxviii. psalm. Super senes
intellexi, quia mandata tua qu. esiui. That is to say: I have had
understanding more then the old men, because I have sought thy
commandments.

And here omittynge infinite testimonies of scripture, which declare, that not
only in this world, all health, wealth, and prosperity is promised to the
kepers and obseruers of Goddeslaw, and commandments, but also after this
life acrowne of immortality, and eternal joy and bliss: we will here
conclude repeatynge again one short sentence of our savior Christ in the.
xix. of Mathewe, where he says thus. Si uis ad uitam ingredi, serua mandata.
That is to say. Of thou wylt enter into life, keep the com maundementes.

Thexposition or declaration of the first of the ten commanndementes which is.
Thou shall not have strange goods before me.
HAVINGE in this matter first set forth unto you the number of Gods com
maundements, that perfectly knowinge them ye may both keep them your selves,
and also of christen charytye teach them to other, especyally of your family
and household. And having in the pre face of these commandments declared
unto you, what is the law and commandment of GOD, how also the
commandments of God must be observed, what punyshmentes God does manace
and inflicte to the breakers or (...) of his commandments. And finally what
reward the kepers of Gods commandments shall at Gods hands receive.
Mete and conueniente now it shall be to expound and declare the said
commandments, according as heretofore in the preface of his book has been
promised unto you, and for the better knowledge of this matter, ye shall
understand that this doctrine of commandments contained in Dicalogo, that is
to say in ten sentenses, was first written in two tables of stone, by the
hand and power of almyghtye God, and delivered unto Moses in a mountain
Called Sauai, to be declared unto the Israelites or Iues, which were forbidden
to come up to the Mountain, and were beneth standing at the foot of the
hyl, the cyrcumstaunce of which matter is wonderful large and notablye set
fourth in (...). 16. and in Deteronomye. 4. where emongeste other things,
dotne clearelye appear, that in the gyuynge of this doctrine contained in
these two tables, there was a terrible or a fear full fire, a great smoke, and
notable thunder and lightening, partly to sygnify the stony hearts of the
Iues, partelye to declare the great burden and he uynesse of the law, not
hable of her self and by her own power to iustifye, and therefore neding
farther help of grace therein, and partelye also to put in fear the hearts
and conscyences of the people, and to stir them up to seek and labor for
help at goddys hands, to fulfill the said Law, which fashion and manner of
gyuynge the said Law in the old testament, does much dyffer from the
fashyon and manner of gyuyng the euangelical law in the new testa meant, and
yet in this there is a great agremente in both that as well in the geuynge of
these ten commandments in the old testament, as also in the gyuinge of
the evangelical law, in the new Testament, that was a high place in which
the law was given, and also there was fire. In the old testament the law was
given upon a gross and earthly moun tayne which was called Syna, or Synai,
taking the name of a precepts or commandment, in as much as the precepts
or commandments were given in it, to bridle and keep under the headye
rebellions and styffenecked people, not suffered to come up to it, but
commanded to be under it. In the new testamente the law is given in deed in
a mountain but yet not called Sina or Syani, but called Sio^, which by
interpretation does sound or sygnifye a beholdynge place, from whense al
(...), lie things may be considered or looked upon, and from whense being
high and nighe unto heaven, heavenly and celestial things may be holden.
And therefore the blessed Apostles being, in their conclaue, in the said
mount Syon, were of one mind and quiet, prayinge together and lokynge for the
heavenly gift promised before unto them by Christ. In the giving of the law in
Mount Syna, there was fire, light nynge, and thunder, and diverse other
things very terrible, to signifye the chief strength of the law to consist
in terror, and fearefulnes, according whereunto Saint Paul in the forth
chapyter to the Romans, does say Lexiram oper. (...). That is to say:

The law does work or bring fourth wrath. In the gyuynge of the law in
Mount Syon, there was a vehemente spyryte or blaste, but yet bringing with it
alacrity and Joy, and a fire there was, but yet not brennyng the body, but
light ninge the blind heart or mind of man, and kind linge his slothful and
dull will unto goodness, so that not by terror or fear compelled as in the old
law, but incited and moved by hearty love, he runs in the way of the
commandments, forgettyng the things behind, and stretchynge him toward
the things being before him, that pleasing God by keeping his commandments
he may according to christ's promise. Mathei Deeimo nono. enter into life and
reygne with Christ.

In the first of these two tables there are contained in effect all those
things which we ought to do unto god, and wherein we ought to be occupied
with god, that is to say the very true service of God as well internal as
external. And in the second table are contained, all those things which we
owe unto our neighbor, and how we on our part ought to behave our
selves to him. And yet hear must ye mark that this second table does issue
or comme from the first table, so that the works of the second table cannot
truly be done without the works and deeds of the first table. For then in
deed we may be seen ryghtly and well to love our neighbor, when without
consyderation of any private poffytte coming unto us, and without any
worldelye or carnal respects, we do only love him for Gods sake, and do
embrace and cheryshe him as our own selves, because that God, in whom is all
our hope and trust, and to whom in heart and mind, we have joined our
selves, does so will us and commaude us to do. The great clerk Orygen
(whom also Saint Hyerome follows) does allote or appoint unto the first of
these two tables (...) commandments, making of Non babebis deos (...) coram
me And of. Non facies tibi sculptile. two commandments (as we do)
understanding in the first to be forbidden al Idolatry spyry (...) or
internal, and in the second, all Idolatrye external or bodily. And unto the
second table he does allote or appoynte six precepts or commaundeme^ts
knittynge and putting together for one precepte or commandment, the
prohybytyon of (...) the wife, or Goods of thy neighbor. But Saint Augustyne
in his second book of (...), upon Exodus, in the. lxxi. chapyter, and as
many as do follow Saint Augustyne, do appoynte unto the first table, three
precepts or commandments only, joining our two first in one, and unto
the Second table, appoynting. vii. precepts or commaundeme^ts deuydinge (...)
ten or last commandment, which is concerning the unlawful desire of the
wife and Goods of our neighbor, into two special (...) dementes it is to
wit.

Non concupisces (...) proximi tui and Nec desiderabis uxorumeius, non (...)
ancillam non bouem non (...), ne comniaque illius sunt. Which dyuysion or
order Saint Augustyne doethe allow and follow, especially for that it
settethe fourth (...), and represents very lively the mysterye of the holy
Trinity, in that, that the first commandment is referred to the father, the
second to the Son, who is the name and word of God, and the third to the
holy Ghost, by whose workynge in us, we do keep a sabbath, and do rest from
all seruyle works, which the flesh, destitute of the spyryte, does ingen
(...) and bring forth in us. And forasmuch as saint Augustyne him self,
even in the same place before al leged, does declare that both these manners
of ioynynge, or partynge the two first, or the two last commandments, were
used and allowed in his time.

And for that also neither in the one, or in the other manner of deuydynge or
reckenynge these ten commandments, either the sense, the word, or any
one (...) of the matter is altered, no nor yet any more or less in either of
the said. ii. tables thereby contained. Therefore no man ought with this our
dyuisyon (wherein for certain good consideratyons, we follow Origene, and
Saint Hierome to be in any wise, offended.

Following then this ourorder, ye shall note that this commandment. Thou
shalt have no strange Goods before me. as it is the first in order, so is it
the most chief and princypall amongst them al, for in this commandment God
requires of us these four things in which consists his chief and
pryncipall honor, it is to wit, fear, faith, hope, and charity, and they
to be given of us unto him. as being our only and true God. And as
concerning the first, that is to say, fear, how necessary a part of our
secuyce and duty toward God that is, Solomon in the. ix. chapter of his
proverbs playnelye and breifely declares, saying, Principium sapientiae timor
domini, That is to say. The beginning of wisdom, is the fear of God. And
of this fear also our savior Christ (...), speaks in the. xii of Luke,
declaryng there that God chieflye and prin cipallye is to be dred and feared,
where he says thus (...) eum qui postque occiderit corpus, habet (...) mittere
in (...) hennem. I ta dico uobis hunc timete. That is to say. Fear him who
(...) that he has slain or killed the body, (...) power to put or cast into
hell, thus I say unto you, fear him. And this kind or sort of fear, is
commonly called seruyle. But there is an other kind or sort of fear due
unto god, where of the prophet Dauyd in his. xviii, Psalm, speaks saying:
Timor domini sanctus, permanet in seculum seculi. That is to say. The holy
fear of God, continues or abides for evermore.

And as concerning faith, which is the second part of our duty toward
God, there is written of it in the. ii. chapter of Ecclesiasticus, after this
sort. Qui timetis dominum, credit ille, and non euacuabitur mercis uestra.

That is to say. (...) that fear our Lord, have faith in him, or give
credit to him, and your reward shall not be frustrate. And to entreat further
offayth in god here in this place, we need not but do refer you to ye
declaration thereof, made before, both upon the acceptions of faith, and also
upon ye first article of the creed. And as touching the third part of our
bounden duty, required on our behalf toward god, which is Hope, there is
written of it in the said second chap. of Ecclestasticus, after this sort
Qui (...) dominum, sperate in illum, and in oblectationem (...). That is to
say: (...) that fear our Lord, do ye hope in him and his mercy shall come
to you, to your comfort, or delectation. And the prophet also in his. (...).
psalm. speaking hereof says thus. Beneplacitum est domino super timentis eum,
and in eis qui sperant super misericordia eius That is to say: Our Lord
has pleasure unto them that fear him, and in them yt do hope upon his mercy
Of which hope S. Paul in the. v. chapter of his epi stle to the Romans,
does say thus, Gloriam in spe gloriae filiorum dei. That is to say: We retoyce
or triumph in the hope of the glory, promised to the children of God. But
most notablye of this hope, the same s. Paul speaks in the. viii. cha. of
the same epi stle to the Romans, saying: Spe enim salui facti sumus, spes
autem quae (...) non est spes: Non quod uidit quis, quid sperat? si autem quod
non uidemus speramus per (...) expectamus. etc. That is Thorugh hope truly we
be made safe: but the hope which is seen is not hope. For where fore does one
hope or trust for that which he does se? but if we hope for that which we se
not, the^ do we look for or tarry by (...). etc Now concerning the fourth point
or part of our duty toward God, it is to wit, Charity, ye shall
understand that this is the most excellent and sovereign virtue that belongs
to any Christen man or woman. And of this virtue there is written in the
foresaid second chapter of Ecclesiasticus where it is said, Qui timetis
dominum diligite illum, and illuminabuniur corda uestra.

That is to say. You that fear our lord, love ye him, and your hearts
shall be (...). But how or in what sort we may or ought to perform this
true love and charity toward god, that does our Savior Christ him self
in the. x. chapter of Saint Luke teach us, saying. Diliges (...) minum (...)
tuum ex toto cord tuo and ex (...) anima tua, and ex omnibus uiribus tuis, and
ex omni (...). That is to say. Thou shalt love thy Lord GOD, with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength, and with all thy mind.
Which in effect is asmnche as if he had playnelye said, let all thy
thoughts all thy wits, and al thy understanding all the parts or powers of
thy soul, all thy strength, (...) and labor, be directed to the service and
pleasure of God, of whom thou have received body, soul, and all the gifts
wherewith the said body and soul are endued, yea and not only thou haste
received them, but also besides, thou haste received all thy temporal goods,
fruytes, and commodityes whatsoever. Wherefore the thing thus being, let us
now conclude with Saint Jhon in the, iiii. Chapter of his first Epistle
saying. Nos (...) diligamus deum quontam prior dilexit nos. That is to say.
Let us therefore love GOD because he first has loved (...). And for as much as
of bounden duty we do (...) to almighty God, the foresaid four things,
fear, faith hope, and love, or Charity, we may truly say that all they
do transgress this first commandment, who do not above all things,
fear, God believe in God, hope in God, and love God. And here for your better
and playner instruction, we will particulerly set forth unto you the most
notable trans gressoures of this commandment, wherein first shall be placed
the paganes, infideles, and the heathen which believe not in the only true
God, but in many false and strange Gods. Secondly the Jews shall be placed,
as they who in this behalf hyghly do offend God, not beleuyng in our savior
Christ cru cified, neither taking him for very God, whereupon follows that
they do not fear him, they do not put their trust or hope of salvation in him,
nor yet love him, but most spitefully, do hate and blaspheme him and his name,
to their endless (...), unless they in time do duly repent. Thyrdelye the
Turks shall have here their place, and all they also that do keep Machometes
abominable law being most contrary to the law of Christ, and against the
honor and glory of almighty god. Forthly shall follow all heretics, for that
they do not honor God with the true belief, as christen people are bounden
to do Fyftelye shall succeed all those, who set their hearts and minds upon
any worldelye thing above God. For whatsoever we love above God, setting our
minds upon it, more then we do upon God, or for the love of it, offending God
truly we make that, for the time, our God. As the covetous manne makes his
goods his god, according to the saying of S. Paul Col. 3. And the glottenous
man makes his belly his God, according to the saying of S. Paul Phil iii
And the fond parents many times, make their chil dren their God: in
conclusion fyndinge them no gods but deuylles, and given to all ungodliness:
And so of the rest who in any wise do commit any spiritual ydolatrye inwardlye
in their heart. Sixtely there shall be here a place for all them, as well such as
do presume so much upon the mercy of God, that they fear not his justice, and
by reason thereof do still continue in their sin and noughtinesse, as also
for them that do so fear the justice of god, that they have no trust or
confidence at al in his mercy and goodness. Seuenthlye they must here have a
room, that do use witchcrafte, Necromancie, enchauntement, or any other such
like ungodly, and superstitious trade, or have any confydence in such things,
or do seek help of, or by any of them: And without dout such witches
Coniurers, enchaunters, and all such like, do work by the operation and aid
of the devil, and unto him for ye attaynyng of their wicked enterprises, they
do service, and honor, of which abomination we are warned, and expressly
commanded to take heed, and fly from Leu. xix where thus it is written. Non
(...) ad magos. That is Turn ye not to the^, which do use magical acts, or
work with the devil. For with out al doubt most grievously do they offend against
the honor of God, who having in their baptism professed to renounce the
devil and all his works, do yet nevertheless make secret pactes and
couenauntes with the devil, or do use any manner of coniurations, to raise up
deuylles for treasure, or any other thing hid or lost or for any manner of
cause, whatsoever (...) be: for all such commit so high offense and treason to
God, that there can be no greater. For they yield the honor dew unto God, to
the (...), Gods enemy and not only all such as (...) charms,
withcraftes, and coniurations, trangresse this chief and high commandment,
but also those that seek and resort unto them, for any counsel or remedy,
according to the saying of God when he said. Deuterouo, xviii.

Let no man ask council of them, that use false diuinations, or such as
take heed to dreams or chatterynge of birds. Let there be no wytche or
enchaunter amongst you, or any that askethe counsel of them, that have
spyrytes, nor of southfayres, nor that seek the trougthe of them that be dead,
for god abhors all these things. Fynallye al kind of unfaithfulness,
vnpacientnes, murmuryuge and grudginge against God specially in time of
adversity, is a manifest and open breakyng of this commandment. And though
this much might seem sufficyente for declaration of this first commandment,
yet are there other things appertaynynge to the fuller understanding hereof,
not to be of us omytted. As first to declare what is meant by the words,
before me, expressed in this commandment. The exposition whereof in few
words is this, because nothing can be so secret, pryuye, close or hid from
god but that it is seen with his most persinge eyes, who (as the prophet
Dauyd in the seventh Psalm does say) is the sercher of manes heart, and of his
inward lusts, and desires, and who also eternally is present every where,
therefore we may not either in deed word, or in any secret thought, at
anytyme, or in any place: commit or offend against his honor and
omnipotente majesty. For if we so do, it is undoubtedly done, before him,
that is to say, in his sight, who will not fail, for our so doing, to power
his wrath and his indignation upon us. Secondlye you shall note that God
begins his law or commandments at him self, being the most worthy and
without all comparison, and afterward he proceeds to instruct us in our
duty toward our neigh boure. Thyrdely ye shall note, both touching this, and
the rest of the commauudementes, that they are for the most part uttered in
the negatyne and not in the affirmatyue speech, not only for that the
negatyue does bind ever and for ever, and is more vehement then is the
affirmitiue. But also for that the negatyue does accustomably require, on the
contrary side the affirmatyue, and denying or forbyddynge does imploye in it a
contrary commandment: and therefore in these precepts it is not alonelye to
be considered what is forbidden and denied unto us, but also what God (though
therein he (...) not use for mail or express words) does require in the
contrary of us. And therefore where in this precepte in the negatyue speech it
is said. Thou shall not have strange Gods before me There must by this
negatyue, be understand the affyrmatyue, that is to say. Thou shall only
have me for thy true God.

And in deed if this precepte hade been (...) and made in an affyrmatyue
speech only, then the Samaritanes would have gathered here of some excuse,
who though they worshypped one God, yet withal they worshypped many Gods
to, as appears: 4. Begum. 17. Like wise might the Jews the gentylles, the
heretykes, yea and the noughetye persons of the world, who though they did and
do know one to be God, as Saint Paul in the first chapter of his epistle
to the Romans does testifye, yet they did not honor and worship him duelye
as they ought to do, as Saint Paul in the said epistle and chapter does
euydently declare.

And fynallye ye shall understand and note, that where this first (...) is of
late diversely out of the hebrwe tongue translated, both into Laten and also
into Engiyshe, (every one of such translaters folowinge his own judgment
and fantasy therein) we have (as becomes us to do) followed the latin
translation commonly received throughout the hole catholic Church.

Thexposition or declaration of the (...) Commandment, which is
Thou shall not make to the any graven thing, nor any likeness of any thing
that is in heaven above, and that is in earth beneth, nor of them that be in
the waters under the earth, thou shalt not adore them, nor honor them, with
gods honor.
BEcause heretofore by diverse (...) and ungodly translations, this
commandment has been brought in and alleged, not only against images
set up in churches and used with due reverence of the people, but also against
the most blessed Sacrament of the Aultare, callyuge it an Image or Idol, and
other most (...) terms to bring the people into contempt, and hatred of it,
y e shall sire hear how almost eight score year agone our own country men
even in time of heresye did out of (...) translate this place into English,
and ye may the better believe me herein for that I have this book in
parchemente fair and truly written to be showed at all times to any well
disposed person that shall desire it, and thereby shall indifferent men
perceive that the procedynge preachers or rather praters, taking (...), and
dolum, for an Image, and confoundyng the one with the (...) have greatly
abused, and deceived the people, first in the xx. chap. of Exodus where the. x.
commandments are (...), and (...), thus is it written.

And ye lord speek all yts words, I am ye lord yi god, that hayt lad ye out
of ye land of Egypt, from ye house of yraldome, you schalt not have alyen
goddys before me ye schalt not make to ye graven ying, ne any like nesse ye is
in heaven a bown and yt is in eryt beneyt ne of hem yat been in waters under
eryt, you schalt not anoure hem he herye hem.

And so fourth, Moreover in the, xxvi. Chapyter of Leuiticus, where the
commandments be also tou ched, there is it also written thus. Ze schuln not
make to zou a mawmette and graven ying, netytles ze schuln rere, ne huge stone
zeschuln putten in zor ery, that ze honourit.

And so (...), Besides this in the, v, chapter of Deuteronomy it is written
thus. (...) shall not have have alyen Goddys in my syzt, you schalte not make to
ye graven yinge ne lyckenesse of all yinges yt in heaven been above. And in
ery byneye, and that dwellen in waters under ery, you schalte not honor hem ne
herye.

By these places so translated even in the noughtye time, it is euydeute that
men were not then so impudent and false as they in our time have been, for
they neither could nor durst as some in our time falsely have done, translate
an Idol or a graven thing, in (...) any Image, for you must understand, yt
between an Image (which is a name of reverence) and an Idol (which always
with the good is abhomynable) there is a very notable and great difference:
and the difference is this. The Drygynales, first forms and parents of
Idols, to represent by, are very untrue and clerelye false, for having the
inscriptyon of gods (as for example of god Jupiter of god Mars and of such
like) they are in deed the pyctures of deuyles, and not of Gods (god being
but one) and (as the Prophet says Psalm. cx) Ommes dii (...) demonia. That
is to say. All the gods of the Gentyles are dyueles and yet with folly she
erronyous people one taken for God Iupyter, one for God Mars, and so forth,
all being false. But the origynales first forms or paternes of the images, to
represente the very thing signified by them, are faithful and true this of
Christ, that of Christ's Mother, an other of Sayncte Ihon Baptiste, and of
every Sayncte a peculier Image, and so to be called, because in deed there is
a Christ to have an Image of, and likewise there is a mother of Christ to have
of her an Image, and so of the rest, which to be so, we can not deny, except
we will falselye say, that there is no Christ at all, nor no mother of
Christ nor yet no Sayncte. And that the catholyke church has always even
from the beginning, put great dyfference between an Idol and an Image,
utterly abhorryng and (...) testyng the one, and devoutly and godly receyuynge
and allowynge the other, it is most evident to the^ that will consider what the
church did in this matter about eight hundred years agoo: at which time
there was great controuersye in this matter where upon the chief and most
learned men of al christendom did assemble (...) of all parts of the world
to the city of Nyce in the country of Bethinia, being in Asye the (...),
where they, after long deliberatyon (...) searchynge, and most advised
persuinge of the books (...) by the ancient fathers, which were before those
days, did conclude that the use of images in the catholyke Church is in no
wise repugnaunt, which the second commandment, it is to wit, Thou shall
not make to the any gra uen thing. etc. Yea and further to open and confyrme
this point, they also did then playnelye declare that in the old testament
were many images and lykenesses or similitudes, not only without the
tabernacle and the temple, but also within the same made, had, and used by
Gods express command mente: at which assembly also was clearly proved
that there is a great difference between the Images, which Christen men do use
in their churches, and the Idols unto which the Gentyles and some times also
the Jews them selves did give Gods honor and worship. And that the images
used in the church were signs and memorialles of Christ and the holy
saynctes. And that the reverence which is done before the images, is not done
or mente to be done to the wood, stone, silver, gold, or any other such stuff
or matter where of any Image is made, no (...) yet to the workemanshyppe or
beautiful shape thereof as though there were any such worthynes or dignytye
therein, but we beholdynge the pyctures or Images, might be brought thereby in
remembrance of them, their lives, doings, and deaths, whose Images they are,
or whom they represente, and there upon imitate, and dilygentlye follow to our
power, all the same: as when we ernestlye and intentiuely do behold the Image
of the Crucifixe, we then have good occasyon to remember, the incarnation,
life, passion, and death of our Savior Christ. And when we behold the Image
of the blessed Uyrgyn Mary mother of Christ, we then are styrred up to think
in our hearts how that blessed mother being of our mortal humayne nature, did
in her womb conceive (by a means far passing the capacity of man or
angel, to comprehend) our savior Christ being both god and man, and that
therefore we do praise, magnyfye, and extolle her above all creatures, visible
and invisible: and that for like reason and cause, the Images of the Prophets
apostles (...) and other (...) and derely beloved seruauutes of God, are
certain signs, by which as in a glass, we behold their godly conversation,
life, affliction, and death that by the beholdynge of their Images we may
stir up and renew in us that affection, and love which we have to the very
Saynctes, for their godlynes and virtues sakes. And besides this in the said
asse^blye or general counsel, this similitude following was then thought
mete, to open and declare some what the matter and the manner of Images in the
Churthes of Christen men, with the use thereof. That (...) as when we do
receive letters from an emperor, a king or great prince, we do kiss the
seal of the said letters not for the wax sake, but giving thereby our dew
honor and reverence to the emperor king or prince whose letters we do
receive. Even so when Christen men are before an Image, (as for example before
the image of the crucifix) there knelyng, or kyssyng the same having in their
hearts, and minds godly intention and affection, they do not entende or
mind thereby to adore or worship the very Image self, being of wood stone
(...) other matter (which in deed being (...) mouldered a way, for the oldenes
of it, or other wise being consumed or defaced they do regard it nothing at
all, nor have it in any estimation) but beholding the said Image of the
Crucifix being as a seal, and a token or remembrance of the passion of
Christ, they are thereby admonished and (...) in remembrance, to salute and
adore him, who for alour sakes suffered death upon she cross, nailed and
crucified, as the Image of this (...) does effectually represent, and
therefore, that is to say; for Christ and his passions sake, that sign of the
cross may be, and is, set up and erected in churches, houses, markette
places, in hyghewayes and else (...), yea and wouen in garments or other
clothes for such godly purposes and intentes that by the often saying and
beholding of the same, we at all times and in all affairs may be myndefull of
our Savior and redemer Jesus Christ, and of his most bitter passion, which
he for our sins dydsuffer.

The same counsel also has this other example; that like wise as when we do
kiss the book of the Gospels, we have not such affection, and love, to the
parchement, paper or letters made with ynke, as for their sakes to kiss the
book, but having only respect to those wholesome comfortable and holy sayings
which are in the book contained, do for that respect and for their sakes, with all our hole hearts and minds kiss and embrace, the book most ioyfullye. Even
so when we do worship the Images of Saynctes, we do not worship those
outward shapes or fygures, but we do worship the gifts, graces, and virtues
which god has wrought in those saynctes whose Images they are: for we do
praise the godlynes of their lives and stir up our selves thereby, to
imitate and follow their footsteps, and there withal we do make prayer unto
almighty god that he wylbe merciful and bountiful unto us, through the
intercession and merits of them. And in deed we do not speak to, nor pray
unto the Cross of Christ, or the image of any sayncte in this wise.

Dijnostricstis. Exodus 32. cap. That is to say. (...) are our Gods. For we
know full well and are most assured what they are, and that they are not nor yet
can be Gods, being but only similytudes and images of Christ and
hyssaynctes, which saynctes we do reverence and worship for Gods sake, as
when we worship any martyr, we glorifye God and his gifts in the same
Martyr, and when we honor the blessed vyrgyn Mary, mother of Christ, we
honor, in her, Christ, whose mother she is. And when we honor the apostles,
we honor, in them, him that sent them. Besides al these foresaid things
expressed in the fore said ancient general counsayl, and there, with vnyforme
consent agreed upon, and decreed, you shall find in the same Counsel,
faithfully, and truly alleged a great number of testunonyes for this
purpose, out of Athanasius, Eusebius, Pamphili, Basilius Magnus, Gregorius
Nizenus, Gregorius Theologus, Isodorus Pelusiota, Cyrillus, Nilus, Asterius
(...), Theodorus Myrorum, A nastasius, Sophromus Euagrius, Theodorus lector,
Germanus, patryarche of Constantinople, being all ancient fathers of the Greek
Church. And out of the Latin Church, there be testymonyes, there cytcd and
brought out, as of Ambrose, Hierome, and Gregorye, of which fore said
testymonyes, we will, for your better contentation, and satisfaction, allege
some, out of the very acts and records of the same Counsel. And first of
Athanasius there is this saying noted and expressed. Qui in alicuius typum,
(...), aut effigiem, ignominiosus est, in illum cuius est typus, iniuriam
factam (...). That is to say. whosoever ever is ignominious, or spiteful to the
form, image, or pycture of any, we think that iniurye done to him whose
form Image, or picture it is. Second of Basilyus magnus. there is in the
said Counsel, this testimonye or saying recyted.

Quemadmodum adeo Christianam and inculpabilem nostram fidem, ueluti (...), Sic
confiteor, and in comaneo. Credo autem in (...) deum omnipotentem, deum patrem,
deum filium, spiritum (...) deum hec (...) adoro, and glorisico. Confiteor
(...) filij (...) (...): Deinde sanctam Mariam, (...) secundum (...) hanc
deiparam (...), suspicio ctiam sanctos apostolos, prophetas, and (...) tyres,
qui pro me apud deum supplicant, quo per illorum mediationem, pro pitius sit
deus noster benignissimus, and remissione peccatorum mihi gratis largiatur,
quam ob causam and historias imaginum illcrum honoro, and pala^ adoro, hoc enim
nobis, a sanctis apostolis traditum, no^ est prohibendum sed in omnibus
ecclesijs nostris eorum historias erigimus. That is to say. Even as we have
received of GOD, our Christian and inculpable faith, as it were by right of
inheritance, so do I confess it, and abide in the same. I verelye do believe
in one God almyghtye, God the father, GOD the son, and GOD the holy ghost,
these three being one God I adore and gloryfye. I confess also, the hole
dispensation of Christ, in carnate and next the holy virgin Marye, of whom
Christ took flesh, and was borne, I calling her mother of God. I reverence
also the holy Apostles, prophets, and martyrs, which do make intercession to
God for me, that thorough their mediation, our most benign god may be
merciful, and freely grant unto me remissyon of sins. For which cause I do
honor, and openly adore also their Images, for this thing being of the
holy apostles delivered unto us is not to be letten or bydden, but in all our
churches we erecte or set up their Images.

Besides all these, there was in the said (...) general counsel alleged
the authority of Germanus patriarche of Constantinople who said thus. Non
offendat quenqua^ quod ante sanctorum imagines, lumina and (...) accendu^tur,
Simbolice enim ista fieri, no^ lignis aut (...) bus, sed in honorem illorum
opinandum est, quorum cum Christo requies: quorum honor adipsum recurrit, hoc
ipsum testante sapiente Basilio, quod ergo conseruos bonos honor, erga ipsum
dominum, commune (...) signum exhibet. Sensibilia enim lumina (...) sunt,
immateriales illius (...) a deo datiluminis, Aromatum autem incensio, sincerum
and totum sancti spiritus afflatum in replitionem significat. That is to say.

Let it offend no man that before the images of Saints, Candels and (...)
sauoutyng encence are brent. For we must think that these things are done
mysticallye, not unto the very wode or stones, but in and for the honor of
the^ whose rest is with Christ, the honor of which saints repaireth or
comes again unto Christ, the sage Basyll testifiynge the same, and saying,
that the honor done to our fellow seruaunces being good does give or exhibit
a common (...) or sign of benevolence to our Lord, or master him self. For
the sensible lyghtes or candels, are a sign of that pure and immaterial light
given of God. And the burning of frankencense, does sygnifye the pure and the
full or hole inspiration, and (...) of the holy ghost.

There was also in the said assemble or counsel, an other testimonye or
saying of the said patryarche Germanus, and that is this. Deu^sepe (...)
designasse mi racula hominibus qui admonitione imaginum argente ergadeum and
sanctos eius affectu commoti fuerint. That is to say. God oftentimes (...) have
wrought or showed wonderful miracles to men, who, by the contemplation of
Images, have, with an ardent affectyon, or love to God and his saints, been
moved. and styrred. And the said patryarche Germanus amongst very many
miracles there by him recyted both say. yt in the ecclesiastical hystorye of
Eusebyus it is written how that in the (...) Panneada (called in the Gospel
Cesarea Philyppi) before the door of that woman which had the bloudye (...).
and was cured thereof by touching the hem of our saviors garmet (as Mark in
his. v. chap. witnesses) there was an image of brass erected, which was made
according to the form and shape of Christ, wearynge a long garment, and that
before the same image was set direct ye the image of the said woman knelynge
deuoutely and humblye holding up her hands to the said image of Christ, and
that at the fete of Christ's image a certain unknown herb and of a strange
form did grow, and that ever as it came in growing to touch the hem of the
said long garmente of Christ, then had it the power and virtue to cure and
remedy all manner of diseases. Further the fathers at the said seventh
counsel assembled, do in the acts and records of the said counsel
testify and re cord that this matter of images was entreated of and debated in
the syxt general counsel, kept, and holden at Constantinople, declarynge
how that in the said syxt general counsel, it was defyned and determined
that it was a christen usage to have the Image of the crucifixe, to the intent
that hereby we should be brought in remembrance of Christ, which took away
the sins of the world, And at length the said seuenthe general counsel,
concludyng does say, that the honor and reverence given to Images is not that
kind of honor which is call led Latria. That is to say. Gods honor.
which only is due to God, and must of us creatures be given to none other,
but only to our creature, but it is another kind of honor done in
remembrance of their virtues, godlynes, and conversation, and for other godly
respects before expressed. And this determination as concerning Images, with
all other things then and there agreed upon, was of all and every of the
Patryarches, and catholyke bishops then and there being, as well of the
Greek, as of the Latyne Church (being in all above three C. Bysshoppes,
besides other degrees of the clergy) with an uniform consent well allowed
gladelye received, and earnestly and obedientlye observed. (...) these
premysses duly considered and wayed, al men ought to conform them selves, to
the use of the Catholyke Church herein, and to follow the rule and counsel
of Saint Paul in his third chapyter of his epistle to the Collossenses,
where he says thus. Omne (...) facit is in uerbo aut in opere: (...) in
nomine domini (...) stri (...) Christi, gratias agentes deo and patriper ipsum.
That is to say: Every thing whatsoever ye do in word or in deed, do ye all
things in ye name of our Lord Jesus Christ, gyuynge thanks to GOD and the
rather by or through Christ. Which rule who that follows in the use of
these Images (as the hole Catholyke Church, heretofore has, and no we does)
can not iustlye, nor ought not to be reprehe^ded or misliked, nor rekoned to
have don a mysse, or to break this second commandment. For by the very
words therein contained, we be not forbidden to make or to have similytudes or
Images, but only we be forbidden to make (...) to have them to the intent to
give Gods honor unto them, or to take them as Gods, as it appears in
the. xxvi. Chapyter of Leuiticus.

And therefore although Images of Christ and his saynctes be the works of
men's hands: yet they be not so prohibited, but that they may be had and
set up both in churches, and in other places to the intent, that we, in
beholding and lokynge upon them as in certain books and signs, may call to
remembrance, the manifold examples of virtues which were in the saints,
whom they do represent: And so we may the rather be provoked, kyndeled, and
stirred, to yield thanks to our lord and to praise him and his said (...) and
to remember and lament our sins and offenses, and to pray God, that we may
have grace to follow their goodness and holy living. (...) for an example, the
image of our savior hangs on ye Cross of the rode, or in painted clothes,
walls or wyndowes, as an open book, to the intent that besides the examples
of virtues, which we may learn at Christ, we may be also many ways
provoked to remember his paynefull and cruel passion, and also to consider
our selfs, when we behold the same image, and to (...) and abhore our
fynne, which was the cause of his cruel death.

And furthermore consyderyng what high benefytes we receive by his redemption,
we may be provoked in all our distresses and troubles, to run for comfort
unto him. All these lessons with many mo, be brought to our remembrauuce by
the book of the (...), if we being first well enstructed and taught what is
represented and mente thereby, do diligently behold and look upon it. And as
our savior Christ is represented by this image of the rode, even so the holy
saints, which followed him be represented unto us by their images, and
therefore the said images may well be set up in churches, to be as books for
unlearned people, to put them in remembrance of those saints, of whom they
may learn examples of faith, humility, charytie, pacyence, tempera^ce and of
all other their vertuus and gifts of GOD, which were in them. For which
causes, images may be set in the church, and ought not to be despised, but
to be used reuerentlye, although we be forbidden to give goods hououre unto
them. These lessones should be taught by every curate to their parysheners.
And where as we use to sense the said Images, and to knele before them, and
to crepe to the Cross. with such other things: (...) must know and
understand that such things be not, nor ought to be done to the image it
self, but to God and in his honor, although it be done before the image whether
it be of Christ, of the Cross or of our Lady or of any other Saint. Again
this commandment did offend generally before the coming of Christ, al
gentylles, and people that were not of the nation of Israel, For they did give
gods honor unto Idolles, and worshypped false gods some one some another,
of the which forte there was a great number. For besides their common goods,
every country every city or town, every house and familye, had their
prayer and peculyer gooddes, where of is much mention made in authors, both
Christen and heathen. And these gentilles though they had knowledge of a
very god, yet (as saynct Paul says Romans (...)) they had (...) and vain
fantasyes, which led them from the truth, and caused them where they counted
the^ selves wise, to become foles. And against this commandment offended the
Jews also many and sundry times, yea almost (...). For notwythstandynge, that
they professed the knowledge, and worshyppyng of the very true god, yet they
fell to the adoration of Idols, and false gods, as the holy Scripture
makes, mention in many places. And here we make an (...) touching. this
second commandment.

(...) or declaration of the third Commandment, which is.
Thou shalt not take the name of thy Lord God in vain.
FOr the better and more (...) under standinge of this commandment, you
shall briefelye call to your remem braunce, that as in the first commandment
there was a prohybytion to have strange Gods, and therein employed that we
must have one God only. And as in the second commandment there is a
prohibition to make to the any (...) thing. etc. to adore or honor it with
gods honor, and therein employed that we must adore and honor God only,
with his due and peculyer honor. So likewise in this commandment being
also a negatyue, there is a prohibition to take the name of thy Lord GOD in
vain, and therein is employed this affyrmatiue that we must take and use the
name of God ryghtely, and reuetently. And hereby appears how one of these
commandments does depend upon another, in very good order. As first to
have one God only, the second to give unto him his due honor, and the
third to use his name with reverence.

And here you shall learn that albeit the (...) of God, being of itself
fully perfect and most holy cannot, in it self, either receive increase of
honor, and sanctification, or decrease and diminutyon of the same, yet
concerning the use, and abuse of it, amongst men, it may be taken and
counted on the one side for sanctified and honored as being well used.

And on the other side for polluted and dishonored as abused, and not well
handled. And here shall you note, that the p ythe and (...) effect of this
co^mau^demente does consyst in this, that we must ryghtlye use the name of GOD,
and in no wise abuse it, and ryghtlye we (...) and do use it, and (...), it by
nine special sorts and means, amongst other.

First by confessyng openly the name of God, and of our Sauyoure Jesus
Christ, opening and expressing, by our mouth, the says of Christ before all
me^ of what sort, state, or condityou they be, when the case so requirethe,
and not to cease (...) of the same, for any pleasure or pain that may grow
and be given to us, or inflicted by them. Of which sort and manner, our
savior Chrysts in the (...) chapter of S, Mathewe, does speak saying. (...)
me coram hominibus, (...) and ego eum coram, patre (...) qui in (...) est
saying also in the, (...), of Luke. Qui me (...) and meos sermones, hunc filius
hominicis erubescet, cum uenerit in maiestate (...) and patris, and sanctorum
angelorum, And Saint Paul also in the, x. chapter to the Romans (...). Cord
(...) ad iustitiam, ore dutem consessiofit ad salutem: The English of these
three sentences is this: Every (...) that will confess or acknowledge me
before men, I also will confess, and acknowledge him before my father which
is in heaven, And who is ashamed of me, or will not acknowledge me, and my
sayings, him also the son of man, when he shall come in his majesty, and in
the majesty or presence of his father, and of the holy aungelles, shall be
ashamed of, and not acknowledge. By heart or mind one does in deed believe to
justice, but by ye mouth confession is made to health or salvation.

According where unto the prophets Dauyd says. Confitemini domino and
invoke nomen eius, (...) gentes (...). psalm. ciiii. That is to say. Do you
make or give conseffion or praise to our Lord, and call upon his name, do
you show or declare among the gentyles or people his works.

The second sort and manner of right using, and (...) the name of God, is not
only with out (...) but also with our mouth to praise God, and gloryfie him at
al times, both in prosperity and in (...) saying with the Prophet Dauyd in
his. xxxiii, psalm. Benedicam dominum in omni tempore semper laus (...) inore
meo. That is to say. I will bless our lord, at all times his praise shall be
always in my mouth. And again the same prophet in the, C. ii. Psalm does
say. Benedic anima me a domino, and noli (...) etc. That is to say. O (my
soul) do thou bless our Lord, and do thou not forget al his gifts or
rewards etc.

Not disagreynge with the saying of (...) his second chapter. Sibona (...)
de manu domini mala autem quare non suscipiamus. That is to say. If we have
received good things at the hand of our Lord, why should we not also take
adversities or affliction? And of this second sort or kind, saint Paul in
the. x. Chapyter of his first epistle to the Corinthians, does write thus
Omnia in gloriam dei facite, That is to say. Do you all things unto the
glory or praise of God.

The third sort and manner of right using and taking the name of God, is
when his holy words, are truly set fourth both pryuately and openly.
Priuatelye I say, when the father teaches his children the master his
servants, the scholemayster his sco lers, and every one having governance,
does instruct them of whom he has governance, as well how to beieue the
articles of their creed, and to know and keep the commandments of God,
(fliynge from all sins) as how also to pray for grace, and to lead a
godly and a Christen life. And openly I say, when the true ministers of
Gods word do preach and declare it syncerelye, and (...), to the edifyenge
of the people, in faith, hope, and charity, so that the glory of God, and the
verytye of his word may be lively and frutefullye set forth to the people
After which sort Christ did saying, (Ioannis. 17) I have claryfied or
glorified thee (O father) upon the earth, And shortly after again, saying in
the said chapter. I have made open, or decla red thy name unto men, etc. And
after the like sort Saint Paul did sanctify the name of Christ, (Christ so
testifyeng and bearyng witness of him) Actuum. ix. where he says. Vas
electionis est mihi ut portet nomen meum coram gentibus, and regibus, and
filijs Israel. That is to say.

He (meaning and speaking of Paul) is unto me a vessel of election, or
choice to carye or bear my name before the Gentyles, and kings, and children
of Israel.

The fourth sort or manner of right vsyng and taking of the name of God, is by
adoration, and worshyppynge, or honourynge it, not only by inward, and
mental but also by outewarde and external ado ration. And of this sort and
manner, S. Paul in the second chapyter of his Epistle to the Phylypyans, does
mean saying. Dedit illi nomen quod est supra omne nomen, (...) in nomine
(...) omne genu flectatur, (...), terrestrium, et infernoru^ That is to say.
God has given to him (mea nynge Christ) a name, which is above all names,
that in the name of him, every kne may be bowed, of the celestial, of the
terrestial, and of the infernal.

The. v. sort or manner of the right using, and taking of the name of God,
is by invocation. And of (...) kind or sort, you have many times mentyon
made in Scripture, both in the old Testamente and also in the new, amongeste
other. ii. Regum. xxii. ye have Laudabilem inuocabo dominum, and ab inim icis
(...) saluus ero and there also ye have. In tribulatione mea (...) dominu^, and
ad (...) clamabo, and exaudiet de templo sancto suo uocem meam. That is to
say. I will call upon our prayseable, or laudable Lord, and I shall be safe
from mine enemies. I will invoke, or call upon our Lord in my tribulation,
and I will cry to my God, and he will hear my voice from his holy temple.
Like wise is it written Psalm. 4 7. Et inuoca me in dietribulationis, eruam te,
and honorificabis me. That is to say: And do thou call upon me in the day of
tribulation I will deliver the, and thou shalt honor me. And concerning the
new testament, ye have. Joh. vi. Amen amen dico uobis si quid petieritis
patrem in nomine (...), dabis uobis. usque (...) non petistis quicque, petite
and accipietis.

That is to say. Uerely verily I say unto you, if ye will ask my father any
thing in my name, he will give it you, hitherto ye have not asked any thing,
ask, and ye shall receive.

Likewise ye have John. xiii. Si quid petieritis me in nomine meo, dabo uobis.
That is to say. If ye ask me any thing in my name, I will give it you: And
here for the true understanding of this word invocation, I would ye did mark
that this laten word, Inuocare, if it be taken properlye, and in his straight
sygnification, then it is as much to say, as to call upon one, as ye chief and
principal author of health, salvation (and comfort and by whom, ye of his own
virtue, and power, one does receive comfort succor and help. And ye word
invocation, coming thereof, and being so taken and considered there ought no
invocation after ye sort, to be made unto saving to god alone: For he it is
(as saint James in his epistle and first chapter does testify) from wheme.
Omne datum optimum, and omne donum persectum. does come. And this is proved by
the. xix. and the. xxii. of (...) Apocalypse, and by the tenth and xiiii.
chapyter of the acts. In deed god may and ought after this sort, and in
this consideration be inuocated and called upon as the aucthor of al our
health, salvation, and comfort as our only refuge, and strength, as our
only helper, and socourer in tribulatio^s, and adversities, who alone, by his
own virtue and power, and none so beside him, can save, and protecte us,
who cane kill, and yet cause to live, who canue smite, and yet can heal, of
whom the holy man Job writethe thus in his first Chapyter. Dominus dedit,
dominus abstulit, sicut domino placuit, ita factum est, sit nomen domini
benedictnm. That is to say: GOD has given, and God has taken away, as it
has pleased GOD, so is it done, the name of our Lord let it be blessed. But
if this word inuocare, be taken largelye and out of his proper sygnyfycatyon,
then does it sygnyfye to make intercessyon or prayer to one, and humbly to call
for help unto him, as in any wise he can, by any manner of means, by
himself, or otherwise help: and after this sort and consyderatyon, we
without any offense, may make invocation to other then to GOD, as both to
his saynctes in Heaven, and also to his reasonable creatures, being here
memberes of his (...) church, in earth, as The (...), upon ye xv. chapyter of
Saint Matthew does plainly declare, and saint Augustyne in his book De cura
(...) es gerenda besides many other. The syxte sort or kind of right using
and taking the name of God, is by ye virtue and power thereof, to exorcise and
cast out devils and wicked spyrtes, and also to show and set forth by the
said power, and virtue, miracles and wonders. And of this kind or sort there
is mention made Marci. 16. where it is said. In nomine meo demonia eijcient,
linguis loquentur nouis, serpents tollent, and (...) quid biberint non eis
nocebit, super aegros manis imponent et been (...). That is to say. They
(meaning his dyscyples) shall in my name cast forth devils, they shall speak
with new tounges, they shall put or take away ser pentes, and if they have
dronken any deadly, or dangerous thing, it shall not hurt them they shall lay
their hands upon the sick, and they shall be well.

The seuenthe sort or kind of the right vsyng and ta king of the name of God,
is by the virtue and power thereof, to sanctyfye or bless creatures. And of
this Saint Paul in the fourth Chapyter of his first epistle to Tymothye,
does writ saying, Omnes creatura dei (...) per (...) bum et (...). That is
to say. Every creature of god is (...), or blessed by the word of God, and by
prayer. The eight sort or kind of the said (...) and taking, is by dew
(...) of thanks. And of this kind or sort Saint Paul in the third
chapyter of his Epistle to the (...) writes thus. Omne quodcunque facitis in
(...) in opere, omnia in nomine domini nostri Jesus Christi facite gratias
agentes deo, et patri per ipsum. That is to say: All thing whatsoever ye do
in word or in deed, all things do you in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ geuinge thanks to God, and to the father by him.

The nynthe or last sort of the right using and taking of the name of God, is
when we being constrained (and especially when we be put thereto by a
magystrate, or offycer, having (...) in authority) do swear by the name of
God (making him by our so doing, witness of the thing (...) we do swear)
the necessity or weyghtynesse of the cause, requiring the same. And this our
oath, besides judgment, must have ever concurryng and annexed with it (as god
him self by his prophet Ieremye does testify and command) veritye and
justice. For in the, iiii. chap of Jeremy it in written thus, Et iurabis, Viuit
dominus, in ueritate, in iudicio and iustitia, That is to say: And thou shall
swear, our Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in justice. Whereby
appears, that the first consydera tion of our oath must be the Truth, which
ought to be the chief cause, and (...) foundation of our oath, that by such
our oath taken, untruth (which is the work of the devil) may be destroyed,
and the truth be brought to light, and opened. The second consideration in
an oath is tl, at it be given in judgment, and when I do say in judgment, I
do not only mean how yt it is sometimes, and many times given before a judge,
but also I do mean yt when and whersoeuer an oath is given, the said oath
must be given with a great dyscretyon and delyberation, that is to say, when
we come to take our oath, we must first consider the trouths of the matter,
and then consider whether the weightines or necessity of the matter do
require an oath, with the due circu^staunce of the time, and of the place, and
withal, when we do give an oath, to consider whether we be hable, lawefullye
to perform it or no, not omyttynge to consider, whether any vncharytable or
partial affection, provoke and induce us thereunto. The third consyderatyon to
be had in an oath, is that we swear not but for Justice sake. Equytye, honesty,
and Ryghtewysenes.

And he that duly uses these three consyderations, when (...) he for the
infirmity that is in an other man, is forced to use gods name in testymonye
of his saying, or for charytyes sake, is required, or by lawefull authority
of Magystrates is compelled or put to swear any oath, either by the name of
GOD or by his holy Euangelies, etc. He shall not do evil or sin in
taking, or gyuynge the said oath, either in matters of religion, or else in
other worldelye affairs. Forasmuch as by such a needful oath, Truth, Peax,
Concord, and Justice, are maynteyned, and doubtefulnes, or (...) is taken
away, and dystroyed, upon which condityons, the manner (...) swearynge, has
been allowed to christen men, and borne withal. And therefore though in
daily or famylier communication, and speech our Savior Christ would not
have oaths frequented, whereupon saint James also in ye. v chapyter of his
epistle says. Nolite iurare omnino That is to say. Swear not at all Yet in
seriouse matter, and in things of importau^ce an oath is by Scripture,
allowed, to prove and make manyfeste, things, that need the testimonye.
According whereunto Saint Paul in the syxte chapter of his epistle to the
Hebrews, does say. Homines enim per maiorem sui iurant, et omnis (...)
cora^finis, ad confirmationem est iuramentum, That is to say. In deed men do
swear by their better, and the end of al their contro uersye, to confyrmation
is an oath. And the same Apostle him self (Galathi. i) does swear say ing Quae
autem scribo uobis, ecce coram deo, quia no^ mentior. That is to say. The
things which I do writ unto you behold before God that I lie not. Again
the same Apostle (ii. Cor. i) like wise swearing does say. Ego autem testem
deum inuoco in animam mcam, etc. I indede do call God unto witness upon my
soul. etc. And again (ii. Corin. ii. he says. Deus and (...) ter domini
noster Jesus Christi (que est been dictus in secula) scit quia no^ mentior, That
is to say. God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ (who is blessed for ever)
does know that I lie not. And again he says. To. i) Testis est mihi deus
cui seruio in spiritu meo. God is a witness unto me, whom I do serve in my
spyryte.

Thus sommewhat by the way we have opened after what sort and for what
consyderations an oath may be taken by gods name. And by the premysses you
may understand and perceive generally how the name of God may ryghtlye be
used and (...) ken. And albeit you may thereby have also a great furtheraunce
to know when the name of GOD is abused or not ryghtly taken, according to the
rule of contratyes of which heretofore, has been spoken and showed unto you,
yet nevertheless for the more euydente, and plain understanding hereof, ye
shall know, that diverse ways one does abuse and vnryghtly take the name of
God; and so does trangresse this commandment. And first, all such do it, who
either with fair words, and flattering intisements or for pain, tormente, or
other means, being overcome do deny the true God or Christ our Lord, or
his true, holy, and catholyke faith, unto whom Christ in the tenthe of
Mathewe, gyuyth thretning after this manner. Qui me (...) coram hominibus,
negabo et ego (...) patre meo. That is to say.

Who shall deny me before men, I will deny also him before my father. And it
shall not be taken for a good excuse, if they say, that in heart they did not
so deny, though by mouth or outward act they did it so in deed, for written
it is (as before is said) Cord creditur ad iustitiam, ore dutem confessiofit
ad salutem, (...) 10 And that ungodly by saying. Iurata lingua est, animns
iniuratus. That is to say: My tongue is sworn but my heart or mind is
unsworn, is cast out of doors and dyssalowed, abhorred, and rejected, of
all true and catholyke people. So that herein Solomon most greuouslye
offended, who for ye sake, and love of his wife did boylde a temple to the Idol
Moab, and also to Moloche the Idol of the (...) of Aminon. And secondly
against this commandment do offend alsuch, as do bear, and will have ye
name of Christen men, and yet in their manners, life and conuersatyon, do all
things contrary to a Christen man's professyon. For which cause, as saint
Paul (To. 2) does say, the name of God is blasphemed amongeste the (...) for
the Christen men, do say that they do know God, and yet in their doings
they do deny him (Tit. 1) (...) they transgress this commandment, who
(...) seek one ly their own honor, and glory, in their doings, and give
not god the praise, and honor, but ascribe only to them selves the goodness,
glory, and wisdom. Of whom the Psalmistc in the. 48. Psalm says. (...)
nominasua in (...) suis, That is to say.

They have called or pute their own names (...) their lands. Fourthly althey
do break this commandment, that do not thankefullye acknow ledge the
goodness, bountifulnes, and mercy of God, or call not upon his name, as they
ought to do, both in prosperity and adversity. Fyftely (...) such as throu
ghe their unpacience do curse and (...) them selves or almighty God which
thing specially amongst hasarders, and dyceplaers is frequented and used, Al
such the scryptur in the. 24. of Leuiticus, adiudgeth to death. Syxtely, all
they that do use to betake them selves to the diuii (as commonly diverse do)
in their talk, or do wyshe unto themself, a (...) at their heart, and that
they never may come in heaven, or other such like terrible things, if it be
not so or so as they say, they do greatly abuse and mystake the name of
God. Seventhly all they which do disho neste or dyshonor the name of God,
either their own selves doing it, or else not again saying and rebu king
other the doers. The commen flatterers also which frame their toungue to talk
as lykethe their lords and Masters, though it be in very balsphemy and
horrible vice. Preachers also, such as only be men pleaseres, and do omytte
to tell the people their faults, such also as being not lawefully called and
sent do thruste them selves in, to preach the word of God, yea and they which
wraste and mangle the scripture with untrue and vncatholike expositions. They
also that do deryde the holy mysteryes and sacraments of Christ. And
briefly al they that either do think or teach otherwise then the Catholyke
church (being decyued by succession from the Apostles unto our time) has
thought and taught, or else under the pretense of preaching Gods word, do
in their sermons and collations sow dyssensyon, tumultes. and rebellion,
especially against their governors, do grievously abuse the name of God, and
therefore worthy of great punyshmente. The like pu nishmeut or rather greater
the perjured persons are worthy to have, and they also (most offendynge and
worthy much punyshmente) who in their common take, by an ungodly usage, and
leude custom, do at every other word swear, either by god or his death or
other such like greatly blaspheming ye name of god And who so list to have this
matter of swering fulli and lernedly examined, dyscussed, and declared, Let
him repare to the chapyter, Et si Christus de iureiurando, and there at length
he shall find how the saying of Christ, Matthew v and the saying of Saint
James cap. v. with other places, that seem to forbydde swearinge, may stand
with other places of Scrpture, that do suffer and allow the gyuynge of oaths.

They (fynallye do offend) and that very greuouse lie against this
commandment, who do break their vows made to almighty God. For it is
written in the xxiii. chapyter of Deuternomye after this manner. When thou haste
made a vow unto thy lord God, thou shalt not slack or make delay to
perform or pay it. And in the fyfte of Ecclesiasticus, it is written thus.
Multo melius est non uouere, quam post autem promissa non reddere. That is to
say.

It is great deal better not to make a vow then after the vow made, not to
accomplish or do the things promised. And because amongst other things
which christen men do vow to God, one is chastity, you shall know,
concerning the same, that from the very beginnynge of Christ's church, such
kind of vow was taken, judged, and esteemed for lawefull, honest, and godly,
and that not only by the determination of man but cheifely also by the
determination of our Sauyoure Christ him self, as appears in the.xix.
chapyter of Saint Mathewe. And therefore they which of late contrary to their
vows did take women unto them, under the name, and color of Matrymonye, have
grievously, (...), offended almyghtye God as appearethe. i. Tymoth. v. where it
is written. Adolos centiores autem uiduas deuitd, cum (...) in Christo nubere
(...), (...) damnationem, (...) primam fidem (...) secerunt.

That is o say: The younger wydowes do thou refuse, for when they have played
the harlottes, against Chyste, they will then marrye, having damnatyon,
because they have frustrated or broken their first faith or promise. And here
to conclude upon this commandment ye shall note that the Hebrews, or Jews,
to express, and signifye, the ineffable, and wonderful majesty of GOD, and
his most high, and everlasting domination, and power, do use, and give
diverse names thereunto, with which being translated into English, we do use
to name, and call God sometimes saying, the God of virtues, sometimes ye Lord
of hosts, sometimes almyghtye, sometimes the maker of heaven and earth,
sometimes the king of glory, sometimes the king of kings, somtymes the Lord
of Lords etc. Of whose majesty both heaven and earth also are fullye
replenysshed.

Therposicition or declaration of the fourth Commandment which is.
Remember that thou keep holy ye sabbot day
FOr the better and more manifest understanding of this commandment, ye
shall know that this word Sabbotte, used in the English toungue, being
referred to the interpretation or understanding and co^ mon usage of the
Hebrews, or Jews, does sygnyfye rest upon the seventh day, which we call
Satur day, and (...): Is to take rest upon the said seventh day, in which
seventh day both they their children, there servants, and beasts, did take
rest, and (...), from all bodily sernyle labor, that they were wont to do.
This rest and quiet nes, with the said Hebrews, or Jews, was but the rest of
the body, insomuch that if an Hebreue or Jew did never so much occupye, or
exercise his mind in carynge, or thinking upon worldely busynes, yet if he
did not there with exercise and occupye his body with all, he was accounted to
keep the letter of this commandment. But with us christen men, there is
required a greater perfection in this behalf, for we must besides the due
obsering of the sabbote in abstainyng our selves from bodily labor, have also
our minds quiet and free from all such cares and give our said minds
intierly and holy unto god, and the contemplation of godly things, not only
prynatelye with our selves, but also publykelye, (...) duly to the church,
and being godly assembled with other, there to hear the deuyne service,
approved, used, and observed in the catholyke church and withal to give good
ear to the word of GOD being there preached, and to give thanks unto god for
his great benefyttes, which to receive we are most unworthy, considering
our noughty living and the abusing of his said benefyttes. And as in ye
churches we must in the time of dyuyne service on the sabbothe day thus
occupy our selves deuoutlye, So in all other places, during the time of the
said sabbothe day, we absteining from bodily labor, and other our (...) elye
busynes, by law not allowed, must occupye our selves in thought, word and in
deed as may be to the glory of God, with the spyrytuall edifyinge both of
our selves, and also of our neighbors. And amongst other things upon the
said sabbotte day we must visit the sick persons, and show and do the
works of mercy to them and other, both bodily, and ghostly, every one
instructynge and teaching his children, servant, and famyly in ver tue, and
goods. And albeit this commauddemente when it was first given to the Jews,
did first bind them, and their successoures, to keep holy the Saturday,
being then taken and accepted for their Sabotte day, yet to us christen men
the Sunday is our Sabbote day, called in latten Dominica dies, and so termed
and named by Saint Ihon, in the first chapyter of his Apocalypse, or
reuelatyon, where he says. (...) in (...), que appellatur (...), (...) uerbum
dei and (...) Jesus, fui in spiritu in dominica die, etc, That is to say.

I was in an Island, which is called Pathe mos, for the word of God, and the
testimony of Jesus Christ, I was in spirit on the son day, or the day of
our Lord,

Of this Sunday, or day of our Lord, Saint Au gustyue in his. 251. Sermon,
makes a very notable and godly process, as well concerning the right use of
it, as also of the altering of the sabbotte day, as it was used amongst the
Jews, upon the Saturday to the use and keeping of it upon the Sonnedaye, as
emogest the christen people it is observed and kept, And he the said Saint
Augustyne, speaking in his said sermon unto the people says thus.

Sciendum est fratris charissmi, etc. Which his sermon there (to avoid
superfluity, and tediousnes here, in first rehersynge the Latin, and then
afterward puttinge there unto the English) we will only English, and
faithfully translate here unto you, and most worthy it is to be hard and
learned. And it is this.

Most derely beloved brethern, it is to be known that therefore, of our holy
fathers, it is ordened and commanded to christen men, that in the solempnyties
of Saynctes, and most especially on the Sondayes, the said christen men
should take rest and cease from earthlye busynes, that they might be the
more redyer, and prompter, to the dyuyne service, as not having any
impediment, or incommodytye which might stay, or withdraw them from it, and
might leave or forsake, at that time, earthlye care or thought, to the intent
that more easily they might take (...) unto or consider, the will of God, of
which thing our lord himself by his prophet. Psalmo. 45 does say. Be you
still or quiet, and do you consider or see that I am GOD. But they who being
entangled with diverse cares, and busynesses, do despise this sentence, or
saying of God, and will not give, or aplye them selves, to dyuyne
contemplation, I fear me, that in the iudgmente to come when they shall knock
at the gate of our lord and require to be opened, our Lord will answer, and
say, verelye I say unto you, I know you not depart from me al you that do
work iniquity.

And such as now do neglecte to seek God, are the^ of him to be refused.
Therefore my brethren, let it not be paynefull, or greuouse unto you, upon the
Sondayes, and upon the festyuall days of the Saints, to give your study
unto the deuyne service. The apostles in deed, and the apostolical men, did
therefore decree, or determyne, the sunday to be kept, with devout
solempnitie, for that our redemer did upon that day, rise from the dead.
And that day therefore, is called in Latin. Dominicus. That is to say. The
day of our Lord. That in it we absteyning from earthely works, and the
enticeme^tes or flattering pleasures of the world, may bend our selves to
divine seruyces only, giving I say to this day honor, and (...), for the
hope of our ressurection, which we have in, or by it. For like as he (our
Lord Jesus Christ and sauyoure) did rise from the dead, so also we do
trust our selves to rise at the last day. And moreover it appearethe even in
the holy Scryptures, this day to be (...), or high, for it is the first
day of the world In it the elements of the world were made, in it, Aungeles
were created, In it also Christ did rise from the dead. (...) it, the holy
Ghost did from the heavens descend upon the apostles, and Manna, also in the
wyldernes was from heaven first given in it: And by these figures and such
like tokens this day of our Lord (called Sunday) is notable. And therefore
the holy doctoures of the Church have decreed, or determined, to translate, or
bring all the glory of the judicial Sabbote (kept on the saturedaye) into the
said sunday, that we might celebrate in the verity, or truth, that which
they did keep in figure, for then shall be our true rest, when the resurrection
shall be done, and perfect reward, in body and soul together: therefore
(brethren) let us observe, or keep the sunday or day of our Lord, and let
us sanctifye it, as it was commanded unto the^ of the old time concerning
the Sabbot, the law maker saying (Exodi. 20) From euenyng to evening you
shall celebrate your Sabbottes. Let us mark, or see, that our rest by not
vain, or frutlesse, but that we, being fequestred, or separated from all
rural works, and from all busynes, do from the evening of the Saturdaye,
until the eueninge of the Sunday, give our selves to dyuyne service only,
and after such sort we do duly or well satysfye the Sabbote of our Lord.
Our lord saying. Ye shall do no work in it. Therefore let every one to whom
it is possible, come to the euensonge, and noctunall service, and let him there
in the assemblye of the church, pray to God, for his sins, and he that
can not this do, let him at the least, pray in his house, and let him not
neglecte, to perform his vow, and to yield the dew or task of his service
unto God. And in the day let none separate, or absente, himself, from the
holy celebration of Masses, nor let any remain idle at home, when other do go
to the churches, nor occupye (...) in hunting, and be bounden or thrall to a
(...) she office, wandering or going about the fylde and woddes, lyftynge up,
or exalting with his mouth, crieng or shotynge, and (...) loud laughing, and
not vtterynge, from (...) bottom of his heart unto God sighinge, and words of
prayer. Moreover yet some (which is more detestable) coming to the church
do not occupye or give them selves to contynuall prayer nor with silence do
tarry out the holy celebra tion of Masses, but while dyuyne lessones are red within the church, they than without do apply, or set their minds, to
plead causes, or with sondrye false accusatyo^s, or sclaunderes to pycke
quareles, or forsooth at the dice, or unprofitable games, or sportes to swear
lustlye.

And some times also (which yet is worse) with overmuch wrath are set on fire,
and most bytterly do chide, or braule, insomuch yt they assault, or lay at one
an other with weapons, or clubbes: And often times do commytte murder. And
this thing is most of all, committed or done of those, who being replenyshed
with envy, and hatred, (the (...) being there guide) do goo to the assembly of
the church not for to help the^ selves but to hurt, or endamage other. Such
in deed, if they by murder there do peryshe, or be taken away by sudden
death, whyther do they goo else, but with him, whose stepes they have follow ed,
into everlasting torments. Do ye not these things my brether, do not deceive
your selves, do not in your assembly or coming together, give place unto the
devil, but rathere prepare your selves to be a ledginge, or dwelling place,
to Christ, do not you therefore give your selves without the church to (...),
but wtin it give your selves to psalmody. and prayers. Do not babble, or talk
to gither in ye church, but be ye still, or quiet, for there are very many
and specially many women, which do so chatte, in the church, and do so
babble, that neither they them selves, do hear the dyuyne lessones, or
service, nor yet suffer other to hear. Ought such coming together, with such
an order be in the house of God. Or is it so decente to stand, or be present
in the syghte of God, and holy Aungeles. Besides this also (which is greatly
to be lamented) I will with you compain that there are some, and specially the
great, or mighty men, of this world. Who when they come to the church, they
are not devout, or given to celebrate the praises of God, but constrain the
preyst to make short the mass, and to sing according to their lust or
pleasure, neither can he follow the ecclesyasticall manner or trade, for their
glotteny, and couetuousnes that one moment of the day might unto the service
of God, and all the rest of the day, with the night, be appointed, to their
pleasures. Do not these things my most derely beloved brethere^ do not
consent to the doers of the same, for not ouelye they that do these things,
but they also which consent to the doers shall peryshe. Wherefore above all
other things, Do you not upon the festival days plead nor here causes, but
at an other time, and that with justice, nor do you not with receyuyng gifts
subuerte just judgments, for according unto ye saying of our lord with what
judgment ye shall judge other, shall be judged of you. Let none of you drink him
self drounke^, for ye dronkard is most like to the mad man: do you not by
drinkyng among men put your names out of heaven. There are verylye many (which
is worse) who not only do drink them selves drunk, but also constrayne and
adjure other to drink more than is expediente: and thereof many times
amongst them do rise, brawlynges, and manslaughter.

Do you not consider, brethren, whose will these men herein do follow, for
dronkardes and manquel lers (says the apostle in the first epistle to the
Corinthians the sirt chapter) shall not possess ye kyngedome of heaven. I
beseech you most derelye beloved fathers, and Mothers, Brethren, and Systeres,
by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by his kingdom and judgment to
come, that you will withdraw yourselues, from every man walking
mordinatelye, and that you walk worthy of the vocation, with which you are
called, and that you neg lecte not your honor, nor little esteem the redemptyon
which is in Christ Jesus. Ye are called the children of God, because the true
son of God, has delivered you. Study you to please, with good manner, so
great, or mighty aparent: that he do not deliver you, as most wicked
servants, to perpetual pain but as most derely beloved children, do bring
you to the heavenly country above, that ye may be coheritours with his son
Jesus Christ, with whom he lives, and reigns God, in the (...) of ye holy
Ghost, for ever and ever. Amen.

Now leaving here Saint Augustyne (who of troth in this matter, does, almost
twelve hundredth year ago, speak of such sort, that he may be seen either
to have had as noughtye ordered persons in his time, as we have now in our
days, either else by spyryte of prophecye, to have seen our times and
doings. Let us return again to our process, and let us, by scripture,
declare how the. vii. day of the weke is peculyar, and specially appointed
unto rest, and therefore called the Sabbote: for proof whereof ye shall first
have the second chapyter of (...) where it is evident, that God did bliss the
seventh day, and sanctyfye it. Secondlye ye shall have for this purpose the.
xvi. chapyter of Exodus where we doorede that the rest or quyetnes of our
Sabbotte is sanctyfyed unto God, and likewise in the. xxiii. of the same book,
where it is commanded, that on the seventh day, both the Ox, and the Ass,
shall cease from work, and the son of the bond maid, and the stranger,
must be refresshed. And also of this we have in the. xxxi. chapyter of the
same book where almyghtye God did by Moses give commandment, to the children
of Israel to keep the sabbotte and that so strayghtly, that he commanded ye
(...) thereof to be put to death, the (...) whereof is expressed in the. xxxv.
of the said Exodus. And for example thereof, ye may read in the. xv.
chapter of Numeri. That a poor man having gathered a few sticks, upon the
Sabbotte day, was by the commandment of God, stoned to death: and besides
these places, ye have a great number of other places of scripture, but these
here already alleged are sufficient for this purpose, to prove that the
Sabbote day or Sunday, ought to be kept as is before declared. But yet
besides the foresaid Sabbotte day or Sunday, Christen men have always, even
from the time of the Apostles, used to keep holy sondrye feasts, as well of
our savior Christ, and of ye blessed vyrgyn Mary his mother, as also of othere
saynctes, in which feasts also men ought to cease from world lie busynes,
and occupatyon, yea and to spend the same in Gods service and contemplatyon
of heanenly things, doing such good works as are mete and convenient, for the
holy day, of which feasts you shall hea (...) certain ancient aucthorities
of ye ho ly fatheres, for your better instructyon herein. And (...) S. (...)
in his. 118. (...) written to Ianuatius says thus. (...) autem (...) non
(...) custodimus, qui quidem toto terraram orb obseruantur, datur intelligi,
(...) ab ipsis Apostolis, uel plenarijs (...), (quorum est in ecclesia
saluberrima authoritas) (...) atque (...) retincri, sicutiquod domini passio,
and resurrectio and ascensio in coelum, and (...) us de coelo spiritus sansti,
anniuarsaria solempnitate celebrantur. That is to say. Concerning those
things which we do keep, or observe, not being written, but by tradition
left unto us, being such which in deed are kept througheoute the whole
world, it is to be understood, the same either of the apostles themselves,
or of general cou^sailes (whose authority in the church is most wholesome)
commended and establyshed or decreed to be retained or kept, as that the
passion of our Lord and resurrction, and ascension into heaven, and the
coming of the holy ghost from heaven, are (...) anniuersarye, or yearelye
solempnitie, celebrated. And the same saint Augustyne in his. 244. sermon, De
tempore, Does there not only declare most mauifestly, that the feasts of
blessed martyrs, were in his time solempnysed, and kept holy, but also that
the people did, on such feasts, with great deuotyon repair to the
church, and for that their deuotyon, he there does declare him self hyghelye
to have reioysed saying. Magnummihi gaudium facitis, (fratris charissimi) dum
insolempnitatibus martyrum, tanta deuotione fidei, ad (...) cons (...). That is
to say: You (most derelye veloued brethren) make unto me great joy, whiles
you, on the solempnities of the martyrs, with so great devotion of faith do
come to gether to the church. And immediately after that he does further
instruct them, and in them us how they should use them selves on the
festyuall days, to the pleasure of God, and their own (...), saying iu this
manner. Sedsivultus deo auxiliante, and uestrum profectum, and nostrum gaudium,
spiritualiter adimplere, ita (...) uos, and pacem and charitatem, inspirante
domino, conseruare, ut contra hominem nullum odium habeatis in cord, probonis
orate, ut semper ad meliora proficiant pro malis assidue supplicare, ut cito se
corrigamt, and secundum ponceprum domini. Quecunque uultis ut faciant nobis
homines, he and uos facite omnibus. Tunc enim in veritate pax and iustitia,
and misericoraia, custoditur (...) non solum nullis hominibus malum facimus,
sed etiam vbicunque poterimus adiuuare contendimus. (...) go hec Christo
adiuuante fidcliter agas mus, beatos martyrs in hijs quae supra diximus,
praecipius et preclaris operibus imitantis, partem eum illis in eterna
beatitudine habere proterimus, Et tune pro nobis absque ulla dubitatione sancti
martires intercedunt, quando in nobis aliquid de suis uirtutibus recognoscunt
That is to say. If ye by Gods help will spirituallye fulfill or make
perfect, both your own profytte, and also my joy, so do you among, or be
twene your selves, keep peace and charytye, (God inspiringe you) that against
no man ye have any hatred in your heart, pray for the good men, that they
may always increase to better, and for the ill men make sup: plications
continuallye, that they may quic kely amend them selves, and according (...)
the commandment of our lord, Math. (...), Whatsoeuerye would that men
should do to you, do you the same unto al. For then in truth or verity, is
kept peace, justice, and mercy when not only we do not evil to any man,
but when we endeavor our selves, or labor to help whenever we may. So
that if we (Christ helpyng us do these things faithfully imitatinge or
following the blessed martyrs, in those principal and notable works, whereof
we did speak before we may have part with them in everlasting bliss. And
then with out any doubt the holy martyrs do make intercessions for us,
when as they do perceive or know any of their virtues in us.

To the foresaid places of S. Augustyne, we will here for the same purpose
now, join the testymonye of S Hierome, who in his exposition made upon the
epistle ofs. Paul to the Galathians (and declaring these words written in
the, iiii, chapyter of the same epistle. Dies obseruatis and mensis, and
tempore, and annos, That is to say. Ye observe days and months, and times
and years) does write in this manner. Dicat aliquis, si dies obseruare non
licit, and menses, and tempora, and annos, non quoque simile crimen incurrimus,
quarta^ sabbati obseruantes, and parasces (...), and diem dominicum, et icunium
quadragesimae, and paschae festiuitatem. and pentecoste lctitiam, and
prouarictate regionum diuersa in honorem (...) (...) tempora constituta. That
is to say. Some may peradventure say, if it be not lawful to observe days,
and months, and times and years, then we also (meaning Christen men) run
into like fault, observing the wednesday, and the Frydaye fasting days) and
the Sunday holy day, and the fast of Lent, and the festiuitie of Easter, and
the joyful solemnity of Whitsonday, and according to the diversity of
countries diverse times appointed in the honor of martyrs. By which objection
besides many other notale things this is most euydente that no man was so
lewd in those days, but that he did observe besides the sunday diverse other
holy days, also as well in the special honor of Christ him self, as of his
holy saynctes and martyrs, but because the self same objection of late time,
not by supposyng to be objected (as s. Nierome (...)) but in deed has by
deuely she persons, for abrogatyon of ho ly days been alleged: therefore we
thy nke it good (besides referynge the learned amongst you to the said place
ofs. Nierome, where they may find this objection answered and dysproued at
large by two manec of aunsweres) briefly to answer the same ob iection in
this manner. That is to say, that we christian men should not think our selves
in conscience bound to the ceremonyalles of (...) law, as the Galathians did
think, to whom sayncte Paul did write the said words before rehearsed. And
in deed to consider a day, in no other respect then as it does conteyne a
time, so no man ought to observe in religyon more one day then another. (...)
to consider a day in respect of a thing done in the day by God in christen
relygion, so we may and ought to observe and keep days. And so do we
observe and keep the Sunday for the resurection sake done in it, and likewise
Christmas day for the birth sake of Christ, being borne on (...) dai, and so
of ye other days, as well of Christ as of his blessed martyrs, and saynctes.
And to conclude in this matter, whosoever list to read the works of Cypryan,
Saint Bafyll Chysostome, and saint Augustyne, shall find most godly sermons
of theyrs, made by the^ in the Church to the people upon the festyuall days,
both of our Savior Christ, and the blessed Uyrgyn Marye, and of the rest of
holy martyes and Saynctes.

And against this commandment do they most grievously offend which in
their hearts hate yt divine service done in ye church, or the cath olyke
preaching of the word of God, and by reason of such hatrede, do absente them
selves from their paryshe Church in time of mattens, mass, euensonge, and
sermones, or other divine service used in the church, of which sort there has
of late been in this realm, a great number, and if any yet be left, God
give the^ grace hereby to know there (...) offense, and thereupon spedely to
convert them from such their wicked trade, and so to avoid the wrath of
God and eternali dampnation.

Secondly against this commandment they also do offend, who though they
do not hate the said divine service, yet for gain and lucres sake, they do
work on the holy day, not giving the^ selus holy to godly contemplatyon and
dyuyne service as they ought to do. Finally al they do transgress this
commandment of God, who in time of common prayer, or preaching, not only
do not them selves give dilygent ear and good attendaunce thereunto, but also
by walking, talkyng, and other evil demeanor, do let other that would use
them selves deuoutlye and Godly.

Thexposition or declaration of the fyfte commandment. which is.
Honor thy father and thy mother.
IN the four commaundeme^ts which are declared in the former process (being
the commandments of the first ta ble) you have hard yt duty, which we do ow
unto almighty god. In all these other following (which are the co^mau^ deme^tes
of the, ii, table) you shall be instructed of yt duty which we do owe to our
neighbor, in thought word and deed. And in the first of the^, we are
instructed how we shall do our duty to our parents, fathers and mothers, and
elders here in this world to whom next after God, and above al other neyghbors
we do owe honor and obedience. For the better understanding of this
commandment, you shall note that under the names of father and mother are
here sygnifyed, not only our natural parents, but diverse other also, as
first they which have cure and charge of our souls, who by their office, do
begette us to the faith of Christ, and do nouryshe, and bring us up in
the same, after which sort and manner, Saint Paul calls him self father of
the Corynthyans, in the fowerth chapyter of his first epistle to the said
Corynthians. And secondly we understand by those names (father and mother) all
civil or publyke magystrates and thyrdely al other who have in any wise power
authority, or government over us, as the master over the servant. etc. To
all these foresaid sorts being comprehended in this commandment under the
names of father and mother) we are bounden to give due honor, which stands
specially in three points, it is to wit, in love in obedience, and in
reverence. And herein, as touching our natural parents, our savior Christ
in the seventh of Mark does say thus. Honor thy father and thy mother. He that
does curse father or mother, shall dye the death. And Christ himself gave
herein unto us example, both of our subjection, and also of obedyence, to be
given and done unto our natural parents, as appears in the second of Luke,
where it is written thus. And he (that is to say Christ) did goo down with
them, and came to Nazerethe, and was subject or obedient unto them. and that
all (...) do owe unto their natural parents, obedyence and honor, Saint
Paul witnesses in the vi, chapter to the Ephesians saying. Children be you
obediente to your parents in our Lord, for that is just, or right. Honor
thy father and thy mother which is the first commandment in promise that it
may be well with the, and thou may be long lived on the earth.

The (...) whereof S, Paul also does write in his third chapyter to the
Collossians. And moreover it is written in the third chapter of
Ecclesiasticus, after this manner, Son receive with reverence the old age of
thy father, and make not him sad in his life etc. And in the same chapter
shortly after does follow this saying. Of how evil fame or name is he, that
forsa: keth his father, and cursed is he of God that (...), or angreth his
mother. And in the, xix of the Proverbs it is (...). He that does afflicte
his father, and does fly from his mo: there, shall be infamous and wretched.

And in the. xx, of the said Proverbs, Solomon says thus. He that curses
his father and mother, his light shall be put out of the myddeste of darkness.
In the, ix. of Genesis, Cham the son of Noe, brought the curfe of God, or
maledictyon, to him self, and his posteritye, for that he did dyshonoure and
deryde his father, and in the, xxxv. and, xlix. chapyters of the same book,
appears of the dishonor which Ruben, the first begotten son of Jacob,
did to his father, and how he therefore was accursed. And in the second book
of the kings, and the. xviii, chapyter we read how Absolon who intended to
have thrust his father out of his kingdom was by a notable, and most
miserable death plaged.

And of the duetye, that we do owe unto our spiritual fathers, we do read,
in the. xiii. to the Hebrews. Be ye obedient to them who have the ouersighte
of you, and submit your selves to them for they do diligently watch, even
as they, that must gene accounte for your souls. And in the. x. Chapyter of
Luke our our Christ says, touching his apostles, and (...) successors. Qui
uos audit, me audit, qui uos spernit me spernit, que (...) me spernit (...)
quimisit me. That is to say. He that hears you hearethe me, and he that
dispiseth you, dispiseth me, and he that dyspiseth me, dispiseth him who sent
me. And moreover Saint Paul, in his first Epistle to the (...), and the
first chapyter, says thus.

Rogamus nos fratres, ut noueritis cos quilaborant inter uos, et praesunt nobis
in domino, and monent uos, ut habeatis illos abundantius in haritate propter
opus illorum, et pacem habete cum cis. That is to say.

We do beseech you brethren, that you woll know them that labor amongst you
and are your overseers in our Lord, and do monyshe you that you will have
them more habundantly in Charity, for their works sake and have you peace
with them.

There are of spiritual diso bedience, Terryble examples, in the, xvi. (...)
of the book called Numbers where it is written, how the earth did suddenly
open, and swallowe up Chore Dathan, and (...), with their (...) and their
substance, for their disobedience, and rebellyon, against Moises, and Aaron
the high priest. And how also fire camme from God, and did dystroye. 350. men
which were of that rebellion. Further we do read in the (...) book of the
kings, and the Second Chapyter thereof, how that two and fortye children at
one time, were devoured of bears, suddenly sent of God, for that they did
mock Helyzeus, the Prophette, and mynyster of God. And how then can they
think, to escape the great wrath, and indignation of god which of late
most spitefullye, not only in (...) words, but in deeds, also most
unchristian like have despised, irreverently used, and dishonored the
mynysters of Christ's Church.

And as concerning the Civil magistrates, ye said Saint Paul in the. xiii.
of his epistle to ye Romans says thus. Let every soul be obediente to the
higher or super or powers, for there is no power but of God. And the powers
which be, are ordained of God, therefore he yt withstandethe the power does
tseist yeordinaunce of god. And they who do resist or wtstande that, do get,
or purchase unto them selves, damnation: for prin ces, or rulers, are not to be
feared for good worcester kes, but for evil works: will thou in deed not fear the
power? do thou that which is good and thou shall have praise, of ye same
power, for he is the minister of God, for good to yt: But if thou do evil,
do thou then fear, for he does not without cause, carye, or bear the sword,
for he is ye minister of God, auenger, and (...) of them, yt do evil.
Therefore you must of necessity be obediente, not only for wrath sake, but
also for conscience sake, there fore verelye do you pay trybutes. etc. A not
able example of ye obedyence and duty yt every subject owes to his
soueraygne, we have in the behauour of Dauyd toward king Saul written in the
2. 9. and. 2 chap. of the first book of kings. And S. Peter, in his first
epistle, and. ii. cha. spekyng of the obedience due to kings and magistrates,
writes thus. Submyt your selves to every creatur, or ordinance of man, for
our lords sake, whether it be to king as one that precelleth, unto or
gouernouresor rulers, as being sent of him, to the punishment of evil doers,
and the comme^dation, or praise of the good. And in the foresaid. xiii.
chapter to the Romans, it is written, Give you unto al men that which is due
unto them, to who^ tribute belongs, tribute, to whom custom custo^e to whom
fear, fear, to who^ honor, honor. And as concerning the duty of the
servant to the master, thereof S. Paul speaks, Ephe. vi. saing in this
manner. Ye seruauutes, be ye obedient unto your carnal masters, with fear and
trembling, in singlenes, or simplicity of your heart, as unto Christ, not
serving in the eye syghte, or presence only, as men plesers but as the
servants of Christ, doing the will of God, from the heart, with good will,
doing your service as unto God our Lord, and not unto men. The like hereof he
has also, in the third cha. to the Collossenses: and in his second chapter
to Tite, he does say thus.

Teach servants to be obedyent unto their masters, pleasynge them in all
things, not contraryeng them, not deceyuyng or defraudyng, but in all things,
showing good faith, that they may set furthe the doctrine of God our
savior in all things

Against this commauudemente first do all they offend, which think scorn
of their natural parents, for their pouertye, syckenes, adversity, or any
mysfortunes sake, or do deny unto their said parents necessary releyfe,
sustentation, or succoure, with food, clothe, or harber, in time of their
necessitye, if that they be hable to help their said (...) in this case. But
most of all they do break this commandment which do curse their parents
strike the^, backbyte them use contumelyouse, or opprobryouse words unto them,
and hate them. Secondly al they do break this commandment, who do not love,
reverence, obey and duly honor their spiritual parents, and governors, as
prelates, pastoures and all that have cure and charge of souls, nor payt unto
them their tithes, and duetyes, accordyngelye as they are bound. Thyrdelye they
do offend, and that grievously against this commandment who make sedition
against their prince, ruler or country, And they also that do rebel or cause
other to rebel, against any of them, they also that are false or negligent in
doing their commandments. And whosoever will not love, reverence, obey, or
serve them with his true, and vnsayned service, but will think Imagyne, or
speak any untruth, lie or evil against them (...) or consent unto the same, or
bear there with as (the more it is to be lamented) of late has (...) used
amongst us to the great offense, and displesure of almyghtye GOD, and the
dishonor of this hole realm, they all do break and transgress this
commandment.

Fourthlye all such servants are (...) of this commandment who do not
faythefullye obey their masters commaundemenees, and fulfill them, nor use
their masters, with due reverence, side litie, and diligence, both to please
them, and also in all their affairs, wherein they are charged, to be trustye
and faithful to the uttermost of their power. And here is not to be omitted
that reverence, and honor is due also unto such, as are aunciente, aged, or
(as we commonly do call them) fatherlye men. Although they have none of the
foresaid aucthorytyes over us: which cummelye and cyuyle reverence, and honer
GOD by Moses commanded us, to observe and keep, as appears in the nintene
of Leuiticus, where it is written thus. Coram cano capite consurge and honora,
personam seuis, and time dominum deum tuum. That is to say. Before the hoar
head rise thou up, and honor the per son of the old man, and fear thy
Lord GOD.

Thexposition or declaration of the sixte commandment which is.
Thou shall not kill.
ENtendyng now consequently to declare unto you this syxte command meant, we
think it good, first of all to note unto you, how aptelye and in how dew
place it follows immedi atlye upon those going before, for in the
commandments of the first table, we are taught and instructed of our hole
duetye toward god which of all dutyes'is pryncypall at man's hands
required, and in the first commandment of the second table (which is now
last expounded unto you) we are taught our duetye toward our patentes both
natural, spiritual, Civil, and other, to whom next unto God, before al
other men we ought to have respect to perform our duties. And in this syxte,
and the four other that do follow, we are instructed, and warned that by no
manner of means, we hurt or endamage our neygheboure. And because of all
hurtes and displesures that may of man to man be done, the greatest in some
dew respect, is murder therefore or all hurtes that thing is in the second
table, first and chyefelye forbidden us in these words Thou shalt not kill.
In which words we are not only restrained from Actual murder, and
unlawful killing of the Body, but also we are forbidden from commytting the
same in word or, thought yea and all the means leadyng or disposyng us
toward the same, as malice, wrath envy, disdain, and other like evil
affections of the heart, and as they are prohibited so also is all sclaunder
backebytyng, scolding, bannyng, raylyng, skornynge, or mocking, and all other
evil behavior of our tongue, against our neighbors, which all be forbidden
by this commannemente, as being the rotes and occasions of murder and other
bodily hurt.

And by the rule of contraryes (spoken of before) like as these things are
forbidden and prohybyted unto us, so are their contraryes employed and
commanded to be fulfilled and performed of us. It is to wit. To love our
neighbors life and health with all our hearts, and with our tongues to wyshe
the same, and with our acts and deeds, to maynetayne and defend it. Of this
commandment, and the duetye of us christen men by the same required, our
savior Christ does speak in the fyfte of Mathewe saying. You have hard
how it was said unto them of the old time. Thou shall not kill, he that
kyllethe shall be in danuger of (...), but I say unto you, that every one which
is angry with his brother shall be in danger of judgment, and he that says to
his brother Racha shall be in danger of Counsel, and he that sayethe unto his
brother thou fool, shall be in staunger of hell fire. By these words of our
Savior Christ ye do understand that hatred wrath, and Envy, are as gretlye
forbidden, and as greuoussye punyshed in us Christen men, as was emongeste the
Jews very bludshed and murder. For he that is wrath or angri against his
neygheboure in his heart and desire, does kill him. And here do you consider
well the words of this precepte, for God does not say, thy hand shall not
kill, or thy sword shall not kill, or thy gonne, or thy Crosbowe shall not
kill, or commyte murder, but he says Thou shall not kill, That is to say.
Thou thy self, what soever thou art, and which is properlye thine, and of the
as all the parts of thy body all thy inward thoughts, thy affection thy
words and thy deeds, shall not kill. But some man may hear say, why then,
what shall be done with thieves, traitors either against God, or their Prince,
and other such wicked offenders, shall they not, nor may they not lawefullye
be put to death. Yes, so it be done by magistrates thereto (...): for when
according to justice, they do ponyshe offendoures, they do not exercise their
own Judgment, but the judgment of God. For of Magistra tes it is written
in the thyrtene to the Romans. Non (...) gladium portat dei enim minister
est, uindex in (...) ei qui male agit. That is to say: For he (the magistrate)
caryethe or bearethe not the sword in vain he in deed is the minister of God,
an auenger unto wrath, to him that does evil. And though the magistrate
may do that, yet if any oother shall presume without lawful (...), or (...)
to kill, or bodily to hurt or grieve any man, the same undoubtedly does break
this commandment, and is to be judged a manqueller, according to the saying
of Christ, in the. xxvi. of Mthew, (...) qui acceperint gladium, gladio
peribunt. That is to say: Al they that take the sword, shall peryshe with
(...) swoorde, meaning hereby, that whosoever of pryuate (...), shall use any
manner of means to endamage other shall by just judgment peryshe himself.
And all that we hitherto have spoken, is specially by us meant, of such
damage, as by our words, thoughts, or deeds, may come to our neighbors
body: but because the soul, being the cheyfe part of man, does
incomparablye (...) the body, therefore ye shall here note, that, by this
commandment we are much more forbidden to kill or murder our neighbors
soul: which kind of murder and slaughter of the soul, they do commyt, who
by pernytious, heretycall, and ungodly doctrine, or by evil counsel, seduce
the soul of their neighbor, causynge it thereby to dye euerlastyngly in
hell. And specially they herein do offend, who not only in their life time,
with their teaching by mouth, do infect their hearers, but with their most
venomous books left behind them, do styng to death the souls of as many,
as by the reading thereof do consent to their deuelyshe doctriue, and so long
as such their books or wrytynges do remain, infectynge other, so long does
the dampnation of the aucthours of such books, and heresies, continuallye
more and more increase. The example whereof is put specially concerning the
dampnable and pernicyouse heresy of Arrius, the pain of whom shall not be fully
determinate, until the day of Judgment, but ever still does and shall until
that day, increase more and more. And here is not to be omytted, that they
also are manquellers, and most myserably, and lamentably offend against this
commandment, who in word, thought, or deed, desperately do murder them
selves. And having thus declared unto you three several kinds of murder,
forbidden by (...) commandment, it is to wit, the murdering of our
neighbors body, the murderyng of his soul and finally of the murder whereby
one does kill him self, it shall be convenient to recyte here unto (...) the
terrible pains which are in sundry places of Scripture, manaced for murders,
and upon several murderers. And the first shall be taken furthe of the. iiii. of
Genesis, where it appears that when Cayn had murdered his brother Abell,
almyghtye GOD said unto him in this manner. (...) voice of thy brothers blood,
does cry unto me from the earth, wherefore thou shalt be accursed upon the
earth, who has opened her mouth, and received thy brothers blood of thy
hand: when thou shalt labor or till the earth, it shall not give to the
her fruytes. Thou shalt be a wanderer and vagabunde upon the earth. And in
the. ix. also of Genesis it is thus written Whosoever shall shed the blood of
man upon the earth, his blood shall be shed, for man is made to the symilitude
of God and in the, xxi, of Exodus, almyghtye God does say. He that shall
strike a man, willinge to (...) him, shall dye the death.

Moreover in the third book of the kings, and the. xxi. Chapyter it is
written, how that when king Achab by the deuelyshe counsel of his wife
Iefabel had procured the death of Naboth for covetousness of his vyneyarde, god
sent the prophet Elias unto him, and bad him say these words.

This does the Lord say: Thou have killed yea, and moreover thou haste taken
possessyon. And shortly after follows how God bad him say. In this place in
the which the dogs have lycked the blood of Naboth, they shall lycke thy
blood, and shortly after there follows Thus says the Lord, I will bring
upon the evil or miserye, and will cut down they posterity, and will
destroy of Achabes, every one that pysseth against the wall. etc.

And touching wicked Iesabell his wife, it there follows, Dogs shall eat
Iesabell under the walls of Iesraell. And of Achab likewise is there said. If
Achab die in the city the dogs shall eat him, and if he die in the field,
the fowls of the air shall devour him. Moreover in the second book of the
kings, and the. xii. chapyter, almyghtye God said unto king Dauyd by the
Prophet Nathan in this manner. Thou have stricken with the sword or killed
Urias the Ethyte, and have taken his wife to be thy wife and have slain him
with the sword of the children of Ammon, wherefore the sword shall not
depart from thy house for ever.

These terrible threatenings and punyshmentes ought to move all men to be
delygente and warye in observation of this commandment, and in no wise either
in thought, word or deed, to commytte any kyude of murder, being assured,
that although they may chance to escape the due ciuyll punyshement of
magystrates, yet in no wise shall they escape the grievous punishment at Gods
hands for such their murder: yea they shall be most well assured, that (unless
they, by due means, do repent, and be reconcyled to God) they shall have
after this life (for their trangression) everlasting dampnation.

Therposition or declaration of the seventh Commandment which is.
Thou shall not commit adulterye.
AS the greatest iniurye which a man can do to his neighbor, is murder
whereby he takethe away his life from him, so the next injury or wrong is to
vyolate, or to defyle his neygheboures wife, which is become one flesh with
him, through the sacrament of Matrimonye. And therefore in good order does
here now follow this commandment. Thou shalt not commytte adultery. And
this commaundeme^te our sauyoure Christ him self does in deed expound in the
Gospel, as he did the syxte, teaching us in the fyfte of Matthew, that this
commandment not only forbyddeth all outward adultery, committed in deed,
but also all inward occasyons of adulterye, as lecherous thoughts, desires,
lusts of concupyscence, consentyuge in heart, and al other means enducynge
thereunto. And here ye shall note yt although this word, adultery, does
sygnifie properly the un lawful comixion of a married man, with any other
woman, than with his own wife, or else of a married woman with any other man,
then her own (...) yet in (...), it is not taken only for that, but also for
all manner unlawful copulation between man and woman, married and unmarried, and
all manner of unlawful (...) of those parts which be ordained for
generation, whether it be by adulterye fornication, in crest or any other
means.

And a man may even in lawefull matrymony with his own wife break this
commandment, and live unchaste, if ye do vnmeasurably or inordinatelye
serve his or her fleshly appetite or lust. And upon such persons the devil
has power, as the angel Raphael said unto Thoby (Thoby. ix.) They that marye
in such wise that they exclude GOD out of their hearts, and do give themselves
unto their own carnal lusts, as it were an horse or a mule, which have no
reason, upon such persons the devil has power. Also all christen people
ought hyghlye to regard the observation of this commandment, considering
how much God is displeased, and what vengeance he has always taken, and ever
will take for the transgression of the same. For confyrmatyon whereof you shall
understand, that God in the time of Moses law, commanded that whosoever
(...) adultery should be stoned to death. And that almygh ty God after the
children of Israel had committed adultery with the women of Moab, and Madyan,
commanded first, that the heads and rulers of the people should be hanged,
for that they suffered the people so to offend God. And afterward commanded
also every man to sle his neighbor, that had so offended. In so much that
there was slain of that people the number of. xxiiii. M. and (...) moo should
have been slain, had not Phinees the son of Eleazar the high priest, turned
the indignation of God from the children of Israel. For this Phinees when he
saw Zamry, chief of the tribe of Simeon in the presence of Moses, and all
the people, go unto Cosby, a notable man's daughter of the Madyanities, to
commit fornication with her, he arose from amongst all the multitude, and
taking a sword in his hand, went into the house where they were, and thruste
them both thoroughe the bellyes, whose feruente mind and zeal, God did so
much allow, that he did therefore both cease from the farther punishment of
the Israelites, and also granted to Phinees, and his successors for ever, the
dignity of the highest preisthod.

Also the trybe and stock of Benjamin was so punyshed for the mayntenaunce of
certain persons of the City of Gaba, which had contrary to this
commandment, shamfullye abused a certain man's wife that of. xxv. M. and.
vii. C. men of arms, there remained on live but. vi. C.

Moreover almyghtye God for the transgression of this commandment, caused
brimstone and fire to rain down from heaven, upon all the (...) of Sodom and
Gomor, and so distroyed the hole region, both men, women, and beasts, and
all that grew upon the earth, reseruyng only Loath and his two daughters.

These terrible examples and many other like, almighty GOD did show in times
paste, to the intent we should have the^ in our contynual remembrance, and
should ever stand in awe and fear so to offend god: for though be does not
presently punysh us hear in this as he did the persons before (...). Yet his
long pacyence and forbearynge, is no allowaunce, or forgeuenes of our
offenses, if we continue still in them but a soore accumulation, and heapynge
together of Gods wrath and indignation against the day (...) Judgment. At
which time instead of this temporal pain, we shall receive everlasting
pain, and be (as sayncte Paul. (...), says) Excluded from the everlasting
kingdom of heaven. And as Christ says in his Gospel, Math, ii. Luke. xxii.
and Saint Ihon in the Apocalypse. We shall be cast into the burninge lake of
hell, where is fire brimstone, weping wailinge, and (...) of tethe, without
end.

Furthermore in this commanudement not only the vices before rehearsed be
forbidden and prohybyted, but also the virtues contrary to them be required
and commanded, that is to say. Fedelytpe and true keeping of wedlock, in them
that be married, continence in them that be unmarried: and general ye in all
persons, shamefastnes and chastenes not only of deeds, but of words and
manners, countenance and thought. And moreover fasting, temperaunce,
watchynge, labor, and all lawefull things that conduce and help to
chastytye.

And therefore against this commandment they all do offend who do take
any syngle woman, or other manes wife, or that in their hearts do covet or
desire vnlawefullye to have them. For as Christ says (Math, the fyste.
Whosoever beholds a woman coveting her unlawfully has already committed
adultery with her in his heart. They also do offend against this
commandment that take in marriage, or out of marriage, any of their own
kynred, or affinite, within the degrees forbidden by the law of God.

They also do offend against this commandment who do abuse them selves,
or any other persons against nature, or abuse their wives in ye time of their
menstruall purgation.

They also that do nouryshe, stir up and provoke themselves, or any other,
to carnal lusts, and pleasures, songs, sightes, touchynges, gaye and wanton
apparel, and lascivious deckynge of themselves, or any such wanton,
behavior and intycementes.

And also all those, who do procure any such act, or that minister house,
license, or place thereunto. And all counsaylers, helpers, and consenters, to
the same, do greuouslye offend, and do transgress this commandment.
Likewise all they that avoid not the causes hereof, so much as they
conuenientlye may as surfeitinge, slothe, ydlenes, immoderate sleep, and
company, of such, either men or women, as be unchaste, and evil dysposed, they
I say be guilty of the trangression of this commandment.

Thexposition or declaration of the eyghte commandment which is.
Thou (...) not steal.
AFter that almyghtye God has in the. vi, commandment forbidden al hurtes,
damages, and iniuryes, to be done against our neighbor in his own person,
and in the seventh commandment has also forbidden all iniuryes, against
him in the person of his wife, which next unto his own body is, and ought to
be, most dearelye beloved unto him, here now in this eight commandment
which is. Thou shall not steal, he does forbid all iniuryes and wrongs to
be done to our neighbor, in his worldelye riches goods and Substance. And
for the better under standing of this commandment, you shall note that
under the name of theft or stealing, in this commandment, is understand
all manner of unlawful taking a way, occupying, or keeping of an other man's
goods, whether it be by force, extortion, oppressyon, (...), vsurye, Symonye,
unlawful cheuisance, or shifts, or else, by false bying and sellyng either by
false weyghtes, or by false measures, or by selling of a thing counterfayte
for a true as gylte, copper, for true gold, or glass for precyouse stones,
and generally al manner of fraud and deceyte.

And not only they that do these foresaid things do commytte theft, but
they also which either give counsel, consent, or aid, to such their doings
and they likewise which wink at (...), ededes done and reuele them not
accordingly.

And like as the vices before rehearsed be forbid den by this precept, Even so
sundry virtues contrary to the said vices be commanded by the same, as to
deal truly, and playnelye with our neygheboures in all things, to get
our own goods truly, to spend them liberallye upon them, that have need
to feed the hungrye, to give drink to the thrystye, to cloth the naked,
harborowe the harbourlesse, to comfort the sick, to visit the prisoners: And
fynallye to help our neighbors, with (...) learning, good counsel, and
exhortatyon, and by all other good means that we can.

Against this commandment they all do (...), who by craft, or violence,
upon sea or land, spoil, rob, or take away any other manes servant or
child, land or inheritance, horse, sheep or cattle, fie she foul, conneyes,
or dear, money Iuels, apparayle, or any other thing, which is not their own.

Likewise they al do offend against this commandment, who have goods given
to an use, and put them not to the same use, but keep them to their own
advantage, as Masters of Hospytalles, and false Executoures, who either do
forge councounterfeyte or else adulterate the last wills, and testamentes of
dead men, or do suppress, and hyde true made wills, or Testamentes, they
also who do convert the goods given to the sustentatio^ of the poor folks,
or to other good and charytable uses, unto their own proffecte. And also all
they who do receyuerent or stippend, for anyeoffyce spiritual or temporal,
and yet do not their office belongyng thereunto, they (I say) are
trangressoures of this commandment.

And so likewise all they who do take wages, or (...), pretending to deserve
it, and yet do not in deed, as laborers, and hired servants, who do loyter,
and do not apply their busynes. And likewise advocates, Proctoures,
Attorneys, Counsayloures in any of the laws, who some time, for little pain,
take much stipende, or by their defaulte and negligence, mar good causes, or
maynetayne false and evil causes, or do any thing to the hynderaunce of
spedye justice, for their aduauntages, they (I say) do transgress this
commandment.

Also all Idle vacaboundes, and sturdy beggars who being hable to get their
living, by labor, take such alms, where with the poor and impote^t folks
should be releued, and sustained, do offend against this commandment.

Moreover all they do trangresse this commandment, who do bye any stolen
goods, knowing that they be stolen, or that do bye things of them that have
none aucthorytye to sell them, or alyenate them, if they know the same. And
likewise do they offend this commandment, who do withhold goods stolen, or
that do find things lost, and knowinge the owner thereof, will not restore
them, or will not do their diligence to know the owner.

They also which do defraude their hired servants of their due wages, and
they that borowe any thing, or reteyne any thing (...) unto the^ upon trust,
and will not restore the same again And they that use false weyghtes or
measures, or deceytefull wares, or sell their own wares at an unreasonable
price, far above the just value.

And they also that do ingrosse, and by any kind of wares whollye into their
own hands, to the (...) that they may make a scarcenes thereof in other
men's hands. And sell it again as they list.

And generally also all covetous men, who by any means unlawfully do get,
or vnmercyfullye do keep their goods from them that have need, be
transgressors of this commandment.

And here (not to omit our accustomed manner in alledginge scripture for the
confyrmatyon of assertyons made in this book) ye shall have first some
testymonyes of holy scripture, speaking of theft in general, and afterward
some other speaking of certain partyculer and special kinds of theftes, and
as concerning theft in general, ye shall find thus written in the first
chapter of Ecclesyastycus. Super (...) est confusio. That is to say.
Confusyon or (...) does fall upon the thief. and in the fyfte of Zacharye
there is thus written. God said to me, what do thou see and I said, behold
I see a book flienge the length of it. xx. cubits and the breadeth of it. x.
cubytes, and he said unto me, this is the malediction or curse which goes
furthe upon the face of the whole earth, for every thief, as it is there
written, shall be judged. And in the second chapter of Thoby we do read how
that Thoby being blind, and hea ring the voice of a kydde cryinge within his
house (which kydde his wife had erned with her labor and he knowing that he
had no kydde of his own before did say. Lake head, least perchance this be
a stolen kide, restore him to the (...) owners, for it is not laweful for us to
eat, or touch any thing of theft. Moreover S. Paul in his first epistle to
the Corynthyans, and the, vi, chapter, does amongst other things say thus.
Another thieves nor pollers, nor couetouse men, shall possess the kyngedome of
God. And as concerning certain special kinds of theft, we do read in the.
x, of Esaye. Woo be to the^ who do make (...) or unrighteous laws, and writing
do write injustice, to oppress in judgment the poor, and do violence unto
the cause of the humble amongeste my people, that the wydowes might be their
pray, what will ye do in the time of visitation, and destruction, which shall
come from far? To whom wylyou run for help, or where will you leave your
honor, that ye be not made stope under the bond, and fall with them that are
slain. And in the, viii. chapter of Amos we do find this terrible saying. The
end is come upon my people of Israel: I will no more give my mind to come
amongst the^, and the hingles of the temple doors shall make a krykynge says
the lord God, many shall die, and in every place shall be cast forth secretly.
Hear this Oye, who do opresse the poor, and do destroy the nedye on the
land saying, when will this month (...) past, that we may sell our wares, and
the Sabbote, that we may hyde our corn, that we may make the busshell less
and may make the sicle greater, and that we may set up false weyghts or
balances to get the pore under us with money, and the nedy also for (...), and
may (...) ye chaf of the corn, And according here unto Salomo^ in the. xi.
chap. of his proverbs does say. He that does hide up his corn shall be accursed
amongst ye people, but blessing shall be upon the head of them that do sell.
And of another special kind of theft we do read in the, viii. of Iosue, a
terrible example how one Achan (which had contrary to the commandment of
almyghtye God conveyed certain things away at the destruction of (...)) was
stoned to death, and with all that ever he had burnt God commaundyng it so to
be. Further in the. xxiii, of Exodus we read of such as receive brybes (and
thereby commyt theft) in this manner. And thou shalt take nore wards, for they
do blind even the wise and subuerte the words, or judgments of the just.
And in the, xvi, chapter of Deuteronomye, the like is written. There is an
other grievous kind of theft, and that (the more is the pity) commonly used,
which is called Symonye taking name of Simon Magus, who first attempted with
money to purchase spiritual office or function (which either to sell or bye is
dampnable) and was most bitterlye reproved and accursed of the holy apostle
S. Peter who said unto him. Pecunia tua tecum fit in perditionem, quoniam
donum dei existimasti pecunia possidere, non est tibi pars neque sors in
sermon isto. That is to say. Thy monye be with the unto perdition, because
thou did think that the gift of God may be obtained with money. Thou have
no part or fellow (...) in this word. Now amongst other (...) kinds of
thief, none was ever more dread fullye punished in scripture, than sacrilege
(which is theft, spoil, and robberye, committed in such things, as are
dedicated or given to the honor of GOD specyallye, as are all churches, and all
the ornaments, plate, treasure, lands, and goods to the same belonging) as
appears in the. v. of Danyell, by the example of king Balthazar, and in the
second book of the Machabees, and the third chapter, of Helyodorus, who
going about the spoil of the temple of Jerusalem, for the threasores sake
of the same soodenlye was thrown down to the grouude, and being sore
stricken with blyndenes, was carried spech les also out of the temple half
dead. Which kind of punishment, if it had been used in England, so often as
sacrylege has been committed, what a number should there have been of them
that should have been punyshed. But the thing being of that sort that it has
been, and we not able to amend it, we will yet here admonish al men from
henceforth, to make, and keep their hands pure from al sacrilege And thus we
make an end of the declaration of this commandment.

(...) Thexposition or declaration, of the nynthe commandment which is.
Thou shall not utter, or bear false witness against thy neighbor.
Besides the foresaid iniuryes, which often times be done to (...) neigh
boures, this commandment being the. vi. of the second table, does admo nyshe
us to avoid and eschew tbe do ynge of an other great and grievous iniurye
toward our neighbor, which is in bearing false wytnes against our said
neighbor. And in this matter, there is here in kept a very good order for not
only we are bounden to forbear the huttyng or endamage of our neighbors
body, the mysusynge of his wife, and wrongefull taking away of his goods,
but also by the will, pleasure, and com maundemente of almyghtye GOD, we are
bounde^ not once to open our mouth, to dyffame, or misreporte our neighbor,
or to bear untrue wytnes or falsely to depose in any matter against our
said neygheboure.

And like as by this commandment al evil use of the tungue, to the hurt of
our neighbors, is forbidden, so o in, and by the same commandment (by the
often mentioned rule of contraryes) there is commanded the good and charytable
use of the tungue, all manner of ways, to the benefytte of our neighbonrs, as
to be true and plain in our words with him, and toward him, to be faithful
to him in all couenauntes, bargaynes, and promysses. To testifye the truth in
all courts, judgments, and other places, to report well of them that be
absente, to give true and faythefull counsel and exhortatyon to all goodness,
yea and to dysswade from all evil.

And here concerning this commandment we have most just cause to lamente
and to be sorry for ye malice and evil disposition that in these our days
raygnethe both in men and women, whose tounges are so venomous and wyeked, in
(...), lyinge backbytynge, and mysreportynge, as the like thereof has not
been hard sense the beginning of the world, in whom truly that sayiug of
S. James in the third chapyter of his epistle may and does take place. Omnes
natura bestiarum, volucrum, and Serpentium, et cetorum, domantur et (...) sunt
(...) humana, linguam autem nullus hominum (...) mare potest, inquietum malum,
plenum (...) mortifero. That is to say. All kind of beasts, birds,
serpents, and fysh of the sea, are tamed and have binne made tame by man, but
the tongue no man can tame, it is an inquyet or unruly evil, full of
deadlye poison.

And to thintente that such persons may hereafter (if theye will not for
Love of Virtue, and Charytyes sake, yet at the least for the fear of
punyshemente at GODS hand) refrain and forbear such their dampnable, and
wicked spe king, we will recyte here both in general, and also in special,
sundry the offenders of this commandment, and also the punyshmente hanging
therefore over their heads. And first in generaltye we will bring in the.
xiii. of the proverbs, where it is thus written. Qui custodit os suum,
cuctodit animam suam, qui autem inconsideratus est adloquendum sentiet mala.
That is to say.

He that keeps his mouth, keeps his soul, and he that is unadvised or rash
to speak shall feel hurtes or euylles. And in the third chapter of the
first epistle of S. Peter, it is written thus. He that does love life, and to
see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lyppes, that
they do not speak de: ceyte. Also in the. xii. chapyter of the Proverbs, the
wise Solomon writes in this manner. For the faults of the lyppes, destruction
or ruin draws nere unto the evil man. Moreover in the. xviii. chapter of
the same book, is this saying. Life and death lies in the tongue, and they
that love it, shall eat the fruytes of it. And in the. xxvi. chapyter of the
said proverbs Solomon says thus. A slipper toungue works ruins or
destructyons. And to speak somewhat more in particular of trans gressoures of
this commandment, you shall first note, that sum of them do bear fall se
wytnes in open judgment, and of them the wise Solomon in the. xix. chapyter
of the proverbs, does speak thus. Testis falsus non erit inpunitus, That is
to say. A false witness shall not be unpunished. And yet more terribly he
says in the. xxi. chapter folowinge. Testis mendax peribit. That is to say.
A lyinge witness shall peryshe. And further in the. xxv. chapyter of the same
book, it is written in this wise. (...), et gladius, and sagitta acuta, homo
quiloquitur contra proximum suum falsum testimonium. That is to say A darte,
and swoorde, and a sharp arowe, is that man that speaks against his
neygheboure false witness. How heinous an offense this is, appearethe in the.
xiii. Chapyter of Danyell, where the two false witnesses (who wickedlye deposed
against the Godly Susanna) were both myraculouslye detected, and also of the
people presentlye stoned to death. And no marvel though both they and all
other bearers of false wytnes be, by authority of scripture, punyshed in such
grievous sort, seeing that every one so offendynge, in bearing false witness,
does trespass against three sundry persons. First against almyghtye God,
whose presence the false witness bearer does contemn. Secondelye against
the judge, whom by lyinge he does deceive. Thyrdelye against the innocente
party, who^ by his false wytnes bearing, he does hinder and hurt.

Another sort, and special kind of transgressoures against this (...)
commaundememe^t is when a man does maliciouslye, backbyte, or sclaunder his his
neigheboure, though it be not in judge mente, of which sort and kind of
transgressors, the prophet in his 100 Psalm does say thus. Who that does
secretly backebite his neigheboure, him do I persecute. And in the. 24. of
the Proverbs it is said thus. Abhominatio hominum detractor. That is to say,
A detractor or backebiter, is abomination ainongeste men. And in the first
Chapter of ye book of wisdom it is written. A detractione parcite linguae.
That is to say Keep your tongue from backebytynge. And Sayncte Paul in the
fyfte chapyter of his epistle to the Galathyans does say thus. If ye bite and
devour one an other, take heed least ye be consumed one of an other. Besides
the foresaid special sorts of transgressors against this commandment,
there are other also and amongst them secret tale bearers, and sowers of
dissension between man and man, by their pryuye malicious whyspearinges, of
whom the wise Solomon does notablye speak in the. xxvi. chapyter of ye
Proverbs saying. Cumdefeccrint lingua extinguetur ignit and Subtracto
susurrone (...) conquiescunt: That is to say.

When wood wantethe, the fire will goo out, and the talebearer or whysperer
being taken away, stryfes or dissentions shall cease, and by and by after, the
say: e Solomon does say. The words of the talebearer, or whysperer seem
simple, but they pearce even to the heart (...). And in the. xxi, chapyter of
(...), (...) written thus. The talebearer shall defyle his soul, and shall be
odiouse in all his doings, Moreover in the. xxviii, chapy. of the same book
there is this saying. Susurro, and. bilinguis maledictus, multos (...), pacem
habentes That is to say. A talebearer, or whisperer, and a double tunged
person is accursed, for he has troubled, or set at strife, many, that
before were in peace or frendeshippe, And to conclude touching this
commandment, you shall note three or four places more of scripture, for
your further edifyenge in this behalf. First in the xxi, of the proverbs
Solomon does say. He that keapeth his mouth and his tongue keeps his soul
from trouble. Secondly our Savior Christ in the twelueth of Mathewe does say.
I say unto you that men shall give accounte in the day of Judgment, for every
idle word which they doospeake. Thyrdely in the said, xii, chap. it is written.
Ex uerbis tuis iustificaberis, et ex uerbis tuis condemnaberis. That is to
say. Of thy words thou shall be iu stified and of thy words thou shall be
condemned. Fourthlye. and fynallye ye shall note, yt in the, xx. of yt (...)
calipse it is written of all liars thus. (...) erit (...) no ardenti igne et
sulphur quod est mors (...). That is to say. Their part shall be in the lake,
or pole yt does burn, with fire, and brimstone, which is the second death.

(...) Thexposition or declaration of the tenthe commandment which is.
Thou shalt not covet thy neygheboures house, nor desyrethy neighbors wife,
nor his servant, nor his maiden, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that
is his.
FOr the better understanding of this tenthe, and last commandment, ye shall
note, that as the fyfte commandment (which is the first of the second
table) under the names of father and mother are understood al supe (...) rs,
and as in the syxt commandment, under the name of killing, is understood
all wrath and reuengynge, and as in the seventh commandment under the name
of adulterye, is understand all unchaste living, and as in the eight
commandment under the name of theft is understand al deceitful dealing
with our neighbors, and fynallye as in the ninth commandment, under the
name of false wytnes, is understand all misuse, and untrue use of our tongue.
So in this tenth and last commau^de mente under the name of desiring of an
other man's wife, servant, and goods, is understand all manner of evil; and
unlawful desire of anyething. Yea and as in this precepte all evil desires
are forbidden, even so in the same are employed and commaun ded al good
desires, and the perfect obedience of our hearts unto Gods will in all
payntes, which although we shall not fullye and absolutelye, attain unto,
while we be in this life, yet this commandment does bind us to enforce and
endeavor our felt there unto by continual fighting and resysting against
concupiscence and evil lusts or desires, (...) as by them man is contynuallye
tempted to evil deed and vytyouse living, (...) witnesses Saint James in the
first chapyter of his Epistle where he says thus. Nemo cum tentatur, dicat
quoniam a deo tentaturdeus enim intentator (...) est, ipse autem neminem
tentat, Vnusquisque vero (...), a concupiscentia sua abstractus, et illect us,
de (...) concupiscentia cum conceperit, paret (...). That is to say: Let no
man say when he is tempted to evil that he is tempted of God, for god
temptethe not to evil, neither tempts he any man, but every man is
tempted, drawn, and allurcd of his own concupyscence. Than when concupiscence
(...) conceived, it brings fourth sin. This concupyscence (whereof the
apostle Saint James does speak, which is a motion, stirringe provoking, or
alluringe of man to sin) is routed in man from his infancye, and contynually
does remain in him, more or less (during the hole state of this mortal life)
be he never so perfyte, and yet is it no sin, so long as he doethe not
delight therein, and consent thereunto. And therefore it is written in the
seuententh chap. of Ecclesiasticus, in this manner. Post concupisce^tias tuas
non eas, That is to say.

Do thou not go after thy concnpyscences, and in the same chapter it
follows. Si praestes animaetuae concupsicentias eius, faciette in gaudium
inimicis tuis. That is to say. If thou perform or fulfill to thy soul her
concupiscences, or lusts, she will make the to be a reioysyng stock to thy
enemies. So that though we do feel in our selves a motion or suggestion to
(...), either by evil thoughts remembrance, sight, hearing, smelling,
tastyng and touching, or by any evil counsayles, given unto us by our enemy,
or any other, yea and though we begin to have some pleasure in the said
motion or suggestion, yet if we do incontynentelye refrain our will, so that
it do not consent or grant thereunto, we then not only do not commytte
any deadely sin, but we please God, in so resistyng and suppressyng such
concupyscence, and by this manner of resistynge, we shall also put to flyghte
our enemy the devil in his most crafty or violent assaults against us,
according to the comfortable encoragynge and promise of almyghtye God,
declared by his Apostle Saint James, in the fourth chapter of his Epistle,
where it is written. Resistite diabolo and (...). Appropinquate deo and
appropinquabit uobis. That is to say: Resyste the devil, and he shall, or
will fly from you, draw you near or approach to God and he will approach
unto you.

And agreeable hereunto says Saint Paul in the, vi, chapyter of his epistle
to the Romans. Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that you obey the
concupiscences thereof.

But here may be moved a question, what should be the cause that concupiscence
being the mother and nouryce of sin, should remain in a christen man or
woman, after baptysine or penance, how good how holy, or perfect, soever
they be, seeing it seems to be an impediment to do the laws of God perfectlye
and full force to be again the will of good folk, who would feign be quite
of it, and can not, and therefore do lament and mourn daily for the
contynuall encombraunce they have by it: for answer to which question no
doubt ye shall know that almyghtye God by his ryghteous judgment and
infinite wisdom does permit concupiscens to remain in us after Baptysme,
and penance, not for our evil or bynderaunce, but for our good and
furderaunce, not to our destruction, but to be to us an occasion of saluatyo^.
For none shall be crouned in heaven with honor and glory, except in this life
they get the victory. 2 ad Timoth. 2. and vyctorye they can not get except
they fight stoutly and manfully, and no man does fight but with his enemy. So
if there be no enemy there is no battle, if no battle, no victory, if no
vyctory, no Crown, for this cause god has permytted concupyscence to remain
in us, that we through grace over coming the same, may obtain the crown of
glory in heaven. And yt you may the better avoid ye danger of concupyscence
(being always so busye with men) we will here declare unto you four special
means greatly aydyng to the auoydyng of the said danger. The first is to
use earnest prayer, the second to forbear al occasions of sin, as to fly
evil company, and to have regard to the use of our senses, by which as by
wyndowes death does enter into our soul, arcordynge to the saying of Job, in
his. xxxi. chapter. Pepegifoedus cum oculis meis ut ne cogitarem quidem de
uirgine.

That is to say. I have made a couenau^te with mine eyes, that I would not
once think of a Uyrgyn. The third is to tame our flesh and to keep it under,
and bring it unto bondage, according to the example of Saint Paul,
declarynge in the ninth chapyter of his first pystle to the Corinthyans where
he says of him self thus. Subigo corpus meum, and in seruitute redicd, ne cum
alijs predicem, ipse reprobus efficiar. That is to say. I chastyce or tame my
body, and bring it in subjection or bondage least while I preach to other I
my self become a cast away. The fourth is to avoid Idleness, for Idle
persons are full of lusts and concupiscence. And as it is written in the.
xxiii, chapyter of Ecclesyasticus. Multam malitiam docuit (...). That is to
say: Idleness has taught much evil. As may well be exemplyfyed in Sodoma,
of which it is written in the, xvi. chapter of Ezechyell. Behold this was the
iniquity of Sodom thy sister pride, saturitie, or eating to the full,
excessyue wealth, and the ydlenes of her, and her daughters. And here you
shall note that when we advise you to fly evil company and Idleness, we
imploye therein that you should always haunte the company of honest and
godly persons, and also ever to be ententiuelye occupied in some virtuous ex
excyse or meditation. And by ye way we think this good to note again unto
you as concerning concupyscence, that al be it not to have it at al in this
life, is a thing to us impossible, yet to consent unto it, or by the grace of
God to dissent from it, is a thing well possible unto us. And in deed to dissent
from or resyste concupiscence we owghte to the vttermooste of our power, and
vsyng the special means before rehearsed or some of them, we by the grace of
GOD shall be hable so to do. And to proceed further concerning the declaration
of this tenthe commandment, ye shall know, that all they be transgressoures
of this commaundemement who by delyberatio^ and full con sent, do cast, or set
their minds, and bartes, to accomplish the concupyscence, and desire which
they have to obtain, and get vnlawefullye an other man's wife child,
servant, house, land, cattayle, or any thing that is their neighbors.
Seco^dlye also they do transgress this commandment, who through envy be
sorry for their neighbors wealth and prosperity, or be glade of their sorrow
hynderaunce or adversity. Thirdelye and finally all they do transgress and
break this tenth commandment who doonot set their minds and studyes to
preserve maynetaine, and defend unto their neygheboures, as much as in them
lies, their wives, children, servants, houses, lands, goods, and all that
is their neighbors. And thus ends the ten commandments with their
expositions, which almyghtye God grant that we may observe and keep, for
then we shall be sure to have the kyngedome of heaven and to live eternally in
joy and felicity.

Here now does follow the prayer of our Lord, called the Pater noster
(divided into seven petytions) being written in the, vi, chapter of Saint
Mathewe.
Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.

Thy kingdom come.

Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

Give us this day our daily bread.

And forgive us our trespasses as we do forgive them that trespass against us.

And let us not be led into temptation.

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The preface to the prayer of our lord called the Pater noster.
BEfore we shall enter unto ye special declaration of the petitions contained
in the prayer of our lord called the Pater noster, we (calling to our
remembrance the godly counsel most needful to be followed in this behalf
written in the. xviii. chapter of Ecclesiastycus, in these words. Before
prayer prepare thy mind, will (for your good instruction) declare first of all
unto you in what sort you ought to prepare your minds before you begin to
pray. Know ye therefore that concerning our dew preparation unto prayer
three things are (amongst other) specyallye requisite on our behalf, the
first is, Faith, the second is Hope, and the third is Charity, and as
concerning, Faith, Ye shall understand that forasmuch as Prayer is an
elevation, or liftinge up of the heart to God, to ask of him all such
things as be necessary. And to lift up ones heart or mind is
unfruitful and impossible without faith, according to the saying of
Sayncte Paul who in the tenth, chapyter to the Romans writes thus. How
shall they invoke or call upon him, in whom they have not believed. Therefore
above all things faith, yea and strong faith must be in us, whenever we
do goo about to pray, for faith teachethe us, two things, the one to know
our own infyrmytie, and miserable estate both in body and soul, the other to
know the majesty of God his almyghtye power, and good will toward us. And
of faith with the great virtue thereof in prayer, our savior Christ
speaking in the xxi. of Saint Mathewe saying. Omnia quecunque petieritis in or
(...), credentis, accipietis. That is to say. All things whatsoever you ask
in prayer, beleuinge or having faith, you shall receive them.

And as concerning Hope, Sayncte James in the first chapyter of his epistle
writes thereof saying thus. Si quis autem uestrum indiget sapientia, postulet
a deo quidat omnibus affluenter, and non improperat and dabitur ei, postulet
autem in side nihil hesitans, qui enim hesitat similis est fluctui maris qui
auento mouetur. and circumfertur, non ergo existimet homo ille quod aliquid
accipiet a domino, That is to say. If any of you have need of wisdom, let
him ask of God (who gives to al haboundantlie, and does cast no man in the
teth) and it shall be given unto him But let him ask in faith, nothing douting,
for he ye douteth, is like unto ye wave of yt sea which is moved and tossed of
the wind. There fore let not that man think that he shall re ceaue any
thing at Gods hands.

The propertye of hope, in prayer, is to cause a man pa cientlye, with long
sufferaunce, to abide the will and pleasure of God in the obteynaunce, and
perfourmaunce of his request, and prayer. For we may not prescrybe to God any
determynate, or special time to accomplish our prayer, but we must commytte
unto his holy will, both the manner how and the time when to help us.
According as (...) prophet Dauyd does counsel us in his. xxvi, Psalm
saying:

Expecta dominum, uiriliter ageconfortetur cor tuum, and sustine dominum. That
is to say: Look for our Lord or abide the pleasure of him, do thou manfully
let thy heart be conforted, and pacyentlye do thou sustain our Lord. And of
this patyence in hope, and of hope in prayer, we have a notable example in the
seventh and, viii. chapyters of the book called Judyth, where it is written,
how that a certain town of Jewrye called Bethulia, was soore assaulted of
the Assyryans, in so much that the people of the said town, despayrynge of all
aid, and succor against their enemies, did ernestlye solicit, and move Ozais
their chief ruler, to render up the town to the Assyrians, who than
beseyged them.

And that the said Ozias did exhort then the people to be quiet and patiente,
and to abide the mercy of GOD, duringe the space of (...) days, promising
them that after five days if God did not succoure or aid them against their
enemies, he then would according to their desires, render up the town,
upon which answer of Ozias, the Godly wydowe Judyth mislikyng greatly the
same, did rebuke Ozias sharpelye for that he would and did presume to ap point
God any time, in which he should deliver them from the danger that they
were in, and how also she said to Ozias and to other that were with him, in
this manner. Quod est hoc (...) in quo consensit Ozias, ut tradat ciuitatem
Assyris, si intra (...) dies non (...) uobis (...) Et qui estis uos, (...)
tentatis (...)? (...) onest iste sermo quimisericordiam prouoces, sed potiut
(...) iram exitet, et (...) accendat. Posuistis uos tempus miserationis domini,
and in orbitrium uestrum, diem constitu istis ei? That is to say. What thing
is this whereunto Ozias has consented, that he would deliver the city to the
assyrians if within five days there come no succor or aid unto you? And who
are you, that tempt our Lord God? this speech or saying is not such as may
provoke the mercy of GOD, but rather such as may stir up his anger, and
kyndle his fury, have you put or set a time of the miseration or merci of
our Lord, and have appointed or prescribed unto him a day after your will or
pleasure?

Now concerning Charytie, which is the third thing required in prayer, you
shall understand, that without it, no prayer (...) be in any wise acceptable
before the face of GOD. And therefore our Sauyoure Christ says in the (...)
of Mathewe in this wise. If thou offer thy gift at the altar and there
dooeste remember that thy brother has any thing against the, leave thy
gift there before the Altar, and goo and be first reconciled to thy brother,
and than come and offer thy gift. Thus you see, how that if you will have your
prayer hard and accepted of almyghtye God, you must of necessity be first
prepared thereunto, by faith, hope, and charytie, More over in the scryptures
left for our instruction, and edifienge, there are sondrye examples,
teaching us that prayer, accumpanyed with fasting and alms deeds, is made
thereby a great deal the more acceptable in the syghte of almyghtye God, as
apearethe in the twelve chapter of the book called Thoby where the Angel of
God does say unto Thoby thelder, as follows. Bona est oration cum ieiunio and
(...), magis q^ thesaurus (...). That is to say. Prayer with fasting and alms
deeds is good, rather then to heap up threasures of Gold. Other examples also
there are (...), as of King Iosaphat and the Jews in the. ix. (...) of the
second book of Paralipomenon of Iudeth, and the children of Israel (in the,
iiii chapyter of Iudythe) of the Ninevites (in the third chapter if ye prophet
Jonas) and of Cornelius ye conturio^ in the x. chapyter of the acts of the
Apostles, but these are sufficient. And to proceed further Concerning (...),
ye shall note that when (when we do pray) our intent, and the hole desire of
our heart ought to be joined always with the prayer of our mouth, else that
reprochs, written by the pro phete Esaye, in his. xxix. Chapyter, (recyted also
in the. xv. chapyter of Matthew) may well be verified on us, which is. Populus
hic lahijs me honorat, cor autem little long esta me. That is to say. This
people honourethe me with their lyppes, but their heart is far from me. And
to draw nere to our purpose, and specially to speak of our Lords prayer,
called the Pater noster you shall understand, that amongeste all the prayers,
which a Christen man may make to God, there is none so worthy, and so
excellent a pray er as it is. For it was not made, and taught us by any
earthlye creature, no nor by any angel of hea uen, but by the very son of
God, our savior Jesus Christ, who is the eternal wisdom of God the father.
And the prayer is so compendions and short, that it may easelye be learned,
and borne in mind of all men, so that excuse of ignorance, or of not knowing
of it, or of omyttynge the frequente use and sayynge of it, is clean taken
away from all persons having the use of reason. And though this prayer be
short in words, yet it is exceeding long, and pro found in sense. For in.
vii. petytions comprysed in it, it does conteyne all things that we can
desire of God, whether it be for the welthe of our soul or of our body or
otherwise, and not only concerning this life, but also concerning the life
to come. And it does keep the self same order which we ought to keep in
alloure desires, and petytyons. For first and above all other things we
should desire that God be known, honored, gloryfyed, and magnyfyed, both of
us, and also the people of the world.

And that is it, which we do desire of GOD, in the first petition, saying.
Hallowed be thy name, Secondlye, we should desire at Gods hands, all
things that are good, and that do we in the three petitions next following,
for in the first of the three which is. Let thy kingdom come. we do ask
eternal good things, in the second, which is, Let thy will be done in
earth, as it is in heaven, We do ask spiritual good things. And in the
third, which is. Give us this day our daily bread. We do ask temporal
good things, appertaynynge to our bodily sustentation.

Thyrdelye as we ought to desire God, to deliver us from al evil, so do we
in the three last petitions, for in the first of them, which is. Forgive us
our trespaces, as we do forgive the^ that trespace against us. we do desire
God to deliver us from sin and eternal death, which is the reward of
sin. And in the second which is. And lead us not into temptation, We do
desire to be delivered from our spiritual enemies, and in the last, which
is. But deliver us from evil. We do desire (be sides other things) that we
may be delivered from euyles temporal. Breifely this prayer of our Lord is so
profound, so aboundaunt and so plenteous, that there is no prayer, whether it
be wryttrn in the old testament, or in the new; but the sum and effect
thereof is contained in some of these seven petytyons Wherefore we exhort all
people to say this prayet often, distinctlye, and (...); and well to note, the
particular declaration thereof, which here follows.

The exposition or declaration of the first petition of the Pater noster
which is.
Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.
WE cannot comprehend in our mind the great goodness of God toward us, in
that he has taught us here in the begynnyuge of our prayer; to call him Our
father. Of truth this was not used in the time of the old testamente,
amongeste the Jews, for they lived under the bondage of Moses law, as
servants, and durst not call God, their father, but Lord, which is a (...)
of majesty and power, but we Christen men are taught by our Savior Christ
himself the author and maker of this prayer, boldelye to call God our father,
which is a name of be (...), mercy gentleness, and great love. And if the holy
pa triarche Abraham (who was called the friend of god) did call GOD his Lord,
when he made his prayer unto him, saying in the. xviii. of Genesys, Shall I
speak to my Lord, seeing I am but dust and (...)? How much less durst we
have called God our father, except that he had so taught us, and commanded us
to (...). In why the his doing, he has given us right great cause to put our
hole con fidence in him, and to look and trust for all good, at his hand. But
ye will percase ask, how has almyghtye God made him self to be our
father? Truly it is not by natural generation, for after that sort he only
is father unto Jesus Christ but he has made himself to be our father, by
adoptinge us (...) him, through faith in Christ Jesus which thing he does in
the time of our baptysme, according as it is written in the first of S. John.
(...) eis (...) dei fierihijs (...). That is to say. (...) He (Christ) gave
unto them power to be made the sons of God, to the^ who believe in his name.
And in the. viii. to the Bomaynes S. Paul says. (...) have received the
(...) of Adoption, to be the sons of God, in which (...) we do cry Abba
father. And in the (...) to the Ephesyans S. Paul says. Be ye folowers of
God as most dearelye beloved sons, and walk in love as Christ has loved
(...). And in the fyft of Matthew, our savior. Christ says. Be ye perfect as
your heavenly father is perfect. And here is to be noted a lesson, that as
(...) word father, does declare the great (...), mercy, and love of GOD
toward us as well in creation as also in the redemption of man so it (...)
sheth us again of our duetye toward him, and how we be bound to show
again unto him our hole heart, love obedience, and redynes to fulfill with all
gladenes and humilitye all his precepts, and commandments. And therefore
whosoever presumes to come to God with this prayer, and to call him father,
and yet has not full intent, and purpose, to use him self in all things
like a kind, and an obedyente Son, he comes to him as Judas came to Christ
with a kiss, pretending to be his friend and his ser uaunte, in calling him
master, and yet he was in deed a traytoure to him, and a deadelye enemy. And
for this consideration every christen man that intends to make this prayer,
ought inwardly and thoroughly, to search and examyne him self, and if he find
in himself, any notable crime, for the which he ought to be ashamed to call
GOD his father, let him accuse him self therefore to God, and recognyse his un
worthynes, saying as the prodygal son said father I have offended the, I am
not worthy to be called thy son. And with due repentance (...) purpose, and
intent, to amend his naughtye life, let him lyte up his heart to God, and
calling for his grace of reconciliation, let him humbly say. Our father. etc.

Neither is it without great cause, that our savior Christ teaches us to
say. Our father, and not My father, For thereby he geuethe us clerly to
understand that as we our selves be the sons and children of God, by
adoption through faith, so are all other Christen men and women the children
of GOD by the same faith, and therefore we ought to love them all with
perfect love and charytye, as brethen and systers in God. Our heavenly
doctoure in this word does give us instruction of unity, concord, and
peace, and to pray to God for all christen people, known and unknown, for
and friend. And for that purpose and effect, he has not learned us to say.
My father which art in hea uen, but he has taught us to say: Our father
which art in heaven: Likewise we say not give me this day my daily bread,
but Give us this day our daily bread, nor we say not forgive me my sins,
and trespasses, but forgive us our sins and trespasses.

Likewise we say not deliver me from evil, but Deliver us from evil, To
sygnyfye that through faith in Jesus Christ, we are all the sons of God:
and therefore should not the gentleman despise the yoman, nor the rich the
poor, Malachye (Malach. 2.) does say. Nunqui non pater unus omnium nostrum?
(...) non unns deus creauit nos? quare ergo unusquisque nostrum despicit
fratrem suum. That is to say. Have not we all one father? has not one God
made us all? wherefore than does every one of us dyspise his brother?

The prayer in deed that the proud Pharisey made (Luke. 18) (...) not
acceptable unto God, because he despised his neighbor, the publican. Let us
al (...) know our selves to be brethren in god and through says equally to be
his children. And as concerning these words, which art in heaven. we may not
by them understand, that God is contained, and included within the heauenes,
as the aungelles, and holy saints are, for (as Solomon says in the third
book of the kings and the eight chapyter.) The heavens of heavens do not
comprehend or include him. But in this respect he is said to be in heaven,
because he, by his almyghtye power, does conteyne, keep, hold up, and
maintain, all the heavens, and also all other creatures, which are enclosed,
and shut under the cope, or compass of heaven according as S. Paul says.
Collos. i. Omnia in ipso constant. That is to say: All things in him have
their being. And therefore unto god only we do say, which art in heaven.
Because that god only as he has made heaven, and all things under heaven, so
he only is in all the heavens, and with his almyghtye power conserueth, and
kepethe them in all their being. And here must we note, that we may not
think, that god is so in heaven, that thereby he can not be, or is not in
earth also, as shall please him self. For truly he is in all places, by his
essence, by his presence, and by his power, according as he sayethe (Hieremye.
xxiii.) Nonne coelum and terram ego impleo? That is to say, Do not I fill
heaven and earth? and he is said specially to be in heaven, for as much as in
heaven, he is manifest, and shows his godheade, his dyuyne majesty, power,
glory, joy, and bliss eternal, which he has promised to give, as a
reward, to al such as do persevere in his faith, and obedience, according as
he says, Math. v. Merces uestra multa est in coelis. That is to say. Your
reward is great in heaven. And here do you mark that these words, which
art in heaven, are so placed and set forth, to stir up our hearts to God,
and to cause in us an inward desire, and a great care, and study to come to
the place where our heavenly father is: yea, and much to couete his syghte and
presence. For like as a loving child is ever desirous to be where his father
is, even so ought we ever to desire to be with our heavenly father, and to
endeavor our selves, that our conversation be al wythdrawen from the world,
the flesh, and the devil, and be set upon heaven and heavenly things, as S.
Paul teaches, Phil. iii. And therefore we should contynuallye wayle, and
lament, because we be not with our heavenly father, saying with the prophet.
Psalm. cxix. woeful am I, that my dwelling upon the earth, is so much
prolonged. And by these words should there be engendered in us, a strong
hope, of eternal glory. And how can we fail thereof, if we will, seeing
our heavenly father has both the will, and also the power to perform it?
His will we clearelye understand, in as much as he made him self to be our
father: his power is well known, for that he is a God of power, and glory,
and maker, and preserver of Heaven, Earth, and of all that in them is. And
here shall you further note yt these words. Our father which art in heaven.
are put like a prologue before all the seven petitions, (yea and every one of
them may have prefixed, before them the same prologue) declaryng plainly, that
no man can say this prayer truly, and duelye, that no pleasure of god, and
his own merit, except he have faith, hope, and Charytye, for without faith,
nor can say truly, O father, and wy thoute charytye to his neighbor, no man
cane say truly and meritoriouslye, Our father, and without hope, no man can
say truly, Which art in haven do thou remyt us our sins. And in these
words Hallowed be thy name, it is to be noted, that by the name of God, is
understand God him self, the power of God, the might, the majesty, the
glory, the wisdom, the providence, the mercy, and goodness of God, and all
such other good things, as in scripture be attribute unto God. And this name
is hallowed, when it is praised, gloryfyed, set furthe, honored, and
magnyfied of us, both in word and deed.

And where in this petytyon we pray that his name may be hallowed, it is not
to be taken or thought that this name of God, which in it self is evermore
most holy, most glorious, most merueylouse and full of majesty, can be either
advanced or dymynished by us, or any thing that we can do: but we desire
here, that this most holy name may (according as it is in it self most
holy) be so taken, used honored, and hallowed of us, and of all others as well
heathen as chrystened, like as on the contrary part, this name is said to be
polluted, and defiled, when we do either in word, or in deed,
contumelyouslye, and contemptuouslye, or otherwise dyshonor the same. We desire
therefore in this petytion, that all false faith, by the which men either
mystrust god, or put their confidence in any othere thing more then in him,
may be destroyed. And that all wytche crafts and false charms and
coniurations, by the which Satan and other creatures, be inchaunted, may
cease; and give place, to gods holy name: and so likewise, that all heresies,
and false doctrynes, may vanyshe away, so that gods holy word may be
truly interpreted, and purely taught and set forth, unto all the world, and
that all infydels may receive the same, and be converted to the right
catholyke faith, whereby al disceyte, hipocrisye, and counterfaytynge of
truth, of righteousness or of holiness may clearly be extincted.

Furthermore, we do beseech, and pray god here that his name may be hallowed,
so that no man should swear in vain by it, or otherwise abuse the same, to lie
or deceive his neighbor. And generallye that none should fall into pride, or
ambition, into desire of worldly glory and fame, into envy malice
couetousuesse, adulterye, gluttonye, sloth, backbytynge, sclaunderynge of his
neighbors, ne into any other evil or wicked thoughts, and deeds, whereby the
name of god may be dyshonored and blasphemed. In this prayer also we do
require god to grant us that in all perylls, and dangers, we ruime unto him,
as unto our only refuge, and call upon his holy name, and that in our good
word and works, we may please and magnifye him, and be by him preserved
from the most damnable sin of unkindness toward him. And also that we whoo
do all ready profess the right faith, may still continue therein, and may
do, and express the same as well in our outward conversation, as in
confessing it with our mouth, so that by our good life, and our good
works, all other may be moved to good, and that by our evil works and
sins, no man may take occasion, to sclauuder the name, or dimynyshe the
laud, and praise of God, but that all our works and doings, may redou^d to
the honor praise, and glory of Gods name.

The exposition or declaration of the second petition, which is.
Thy kingdom come.
This second petition very orderlye, does follow upon the first, for as in
the first we do ask of God our eternal father, that his glorious name may be
known through out all the world, and be of all people, (whether they be
turks, Jues, or heathen) loved, magnifyed, and gloryfyed always, as well as it
is of us Christen men, which is a thing aperteynyng to the dew honor and
glory of God, and which we ought of duty first and pryncipallye to desire, So
in this second petition we ask of God our heavenly father, that he will
vouchsafe to bring us to his eternal kingdom, evermore to be with him, and
partycypante of his enerlastyng glory, and heavenly enherytaunce, with Christ
Jesu our Savior (which is a thing of al other that a man may wysh to his own
self, ye chief and most greatest.) And for the declaration of this second
peticion, you shall understand that there are two kingdoms, the one contrary
to the other, it is to wit, the kyngedome of god, and the kyngedome of the
Devil. For as concerning worldelye kingdoms and dominions, they (...) they
be well governed, and guyded by order of Jystyce, do perteyne to the kyngoome
of god, as Saint Paul testifyeth in the. xiii. chapter to the Romans. And
(...) they be misordered, through want of (...), and vsyng Tyranye they do
pertayne to the kingdom of the devil. Now concerning the kingdom of god,
it is of two fortes, it is to wit, the kyngedome of grace in this world, and
the kingdom of glory in the world to come: and of the kingdom of grace, S.
Paul does speak in the. xiiii. to the Romans, in this wise. Regnum dei est
iustitia and pax, and gaudium (...) spiritu sancto. Qui enim in hoc seruit
Christo placet deo, and probatus est hominibus. That is to say: The kyngedome
of God is justice, and peace, and joy in the holy ghost, for he that in this
serves Christ, pleasethe God, and is allowed with men. Likewise the said
Saint Paul speaking of this kingdom of grace, does in the first chapter of
his epistle to the Collossenses, say thus. He has translated, or carried us,
from the power or kyngedome of darkness, into the kyngedome of his derelye
beloved son, in whom we have redemption, and remission of sins. And
moreover we do read in the fyfte of the Apocalipse after this manner, Fecisti
nos deo nostro regnum. That is to say. Thou haste made us a kingedome unto our
God. For doubtless so long as we remain in grace, god does raygne in us, as in
a spiritual kyngedome, and we as his faithful people, do obey him therein.
And as concerning the kyngedome of glory in the world to come you shall
understand that our Savior in his second coming, which shall be at do^es day,
shall give entrance and perpetual possession thereof, to (...) elect: whe^he shall
say unto them (as it is (...)) Comeye the blessed of my father, do you
posselle the kyngedome prepared for you, before the creation, or beginning of
the world! Now concerning the kyngedome of the Devil, which is clean
contrary to the kingdom of God, that in deed is a dominion, or rule, and
souerayntye, which the devil has in the hearts of the wicked men and women,
who according to his pernycious will and entycynges, do transgress the
commandments of God, and do make them self bond, and thrass to sin,
wyllyngly consenting to the denyles tentations, and drawn thereby to his
service, and holden also therein, by concupyscence of the flesh by
concupyscence of the eye, and by pride of life. And of this kyngedome of the
devil, S. Paul. Ephe. ii. does speak saying. He (God the father) has
reuyued you al at ones, when you were dead thorough your trespasses, wherein,
in times past, you did walk according to the course of this world, after the
prince of the king dome, or power of this air, the spirit which now works
upon the children of unbelief. According whereunto our savior also, Jhon.
xii. does call the devil the prince of this world, that is to say, of all
evil and wicked people, living in the world. And in the. xli. chapter of
Job, the devil is called the king of al proud men.

And forasmuch as it is not in our power to deliver our selves from the (...)
of the Devil, but only by Gods help (For our perdition and undoing is of
our selves, but our help and faluation is of God. as says the Prophet
Ozee cap. 13.) therefore it is very necessary for all true christen people, to
make this petition, incessantlye unto our heavenly father, and to beseech him,
according to this doctrine of Christ, that by his grace, and help we may
escape the dominion and power of the Devil, and that we may be made subject
unto his heavenly kyngedome. Therefore in this petytyon we dysyre God to give
us before all things, true, and constant faith in him, and in his son Jesus
Christ, and in the holy Ghost, with pure love, and charity toward him, and
all men, to keep us also from infidelity, desperation, and malice, which
might be the cause of our destruction, and to deliver us from dissensions,
couctuousnes, lecherye, and evil desires and lusts of sin, and so the
virtue of his kingdom to come, to reign within us, that al our heart, (...)
and wits, wythall our strength inward and outward, may be ordered and
directed to serve GOD to observe his commandments, and his will and not to
serve our (...), the flesh, the world, or the Devil.

We desire also that this kingdom, ones in us begone, may be daily
cucrcased, and goo forward more and more, so that all subtle and secret
hate, or sloth, which we have to goodness be not suffered to rule so in us that
it shall cause us to look back again and to fall into sin, but that we may
have a stable, purpose and strenghte, not only to begin the (...) of
innocencye, but also to proceed ernestly furthe in it, and to perform
according to the saying of Saint Paul (Colosse. i.) where he prays that we
may walk worthelye pleasynge god in all things being fruitful in all good
works, and growing and increasynge, in the knowledge of god. Also (Ephesians. iiii)
he does say. Work and do the truth in charity, and increase and goo forward
in Christ. Therefore in this prayer desiring the kyngedome of god to come. we
require also, that we being already received and entered into the kingdom of
grace and mercy of god, may so continue and persevere therein, that after this
life we may come to the king dome of glory, which endures for ever, and this
is that great and fervent desire, where with good men being mortyfyed from
worldely affections have been and be always kyndled and enflamed, as appears
by Saint Paul, when he said (Philip.)

I would be losed from this body and be with Christ. and he says (Romans eight)
We that have received the first fruits of thy spyryte, do wayle and mourn,
in our selves, (...) and loking to be delivered from the mortality and
miserles of this body, into the glory of the children of God.

(...) Thexposition or declaration of the third petition which is.
Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
AFter that in the second petition we do ask of God our eternal father
that his kyngedome of grace, may come unto us in this world, and that we may
finallye come to his eternal kingdom in heaven (which is the highest degree
of man's filicitye) there does by right order follow this third petition,
wherein we do ask of God our eternal father, that his will may be
fulfilled here in earth, by the fulfyllynge, and keeping of his
commandments, which is the best and most perfect means, to procure unto
us the foresaid high degree of our felicytie. And for the better and playner
understanding of this third petition, you shall note that by disobedience,
and sin of our first father Adam, we be, as of our nature only, without the
grace of God, unable to fulfill the will, and precepts of God, and so are
enclyned to love our selves, and our one wylles, that we can not heartily
love, neither god, nor man, as we ought to do. And therefore (we being once
christen men) it is requisite for us to pray, that like as the holy aungelles
and saynctes in heaven (in whom GOD reygnethe perfectlye, and holy) do never
cease, ne shall cease, to gloryfye him, to praise him, and to fulfill his will
and pleasure in all things, and that most readylye and gladely, without any
manner of grudgynge, or resystinge there unto, knowing certainelye and
clearelye, that his will is (...) the best even so that we the children of God,
in earth, may daily and continuallye praise God, and by our holy
conversation in good works, and good life, honor and groryfye him, and that
we may from time to time so mortyfye our own natural corrupt and synnefull
appetyte, and will, that we may be ever redye like loving children, humbly,
lowely, and obe dientlye, to approve, allow, and accomplish the will of God
our father in all things, and to submytte our selves with all our heart
unto the same, and to acknowledge that whatsoever is the will of GOD, the same
is most perfect, most just, most holy, and most expediente for the health
and wealth of our souls, we (I say) ought also for these things to pray.

Wherefore in this petition also, we desire of God true and stable patience,
when our will is let or broken. And that when any man speaks or does
contrary to our will, yet therefore we be not out of pacyence, (...) curse,
or murmr, or seek vengeance against our adversaries, or them which let
our will but that we may say well of them, and do well to them. We pray
also that by gods grace we may gladelye suffer all diseases poverty,
dispysynges, persecutions, and adversities, knowing that it is the will of
God, that we should crucyfye and mortyfye our wylles. And when any such
adversity chau^ceth unto us, to attribute al unto the will or sufferaunce of
GOD, and give him thanks therefore who does order all such things for our
weal and benefytte, either for the exercise and the trial of the good to make
them stronger in goodness and virtue, or else for the chastysemente and
amendment of the evil, to suppress their evil motyons and desires.

And also we pray that whansoeuer it shall please god to call us out of this
transytorye life, we may be wyllyng to dye, and that consyrmynge our will to
the will of God, we may take our death gladely, so that by fear, or (...),
we be not made dysobedyent unto him.

We desire furthermore, that all our members, eyes, tongue, heart, hands, and
feet, be not suffered to follawe the desires of the flesh, but that all may
be used to the will and pleasure of GOD, and that malycyouslye we rejoice not
in their troubles, which have resisted our will, or have hurt us, nor that we
be enuyously sorye, when that they prosper and have welfare, but that we may
be contented and pleased, with althing that is gods will.

The exposition or declaration of the fourth petition which is.
Give us this day our daily bread.
AFter that in the three former petitions we are orderly taught first to desire
and pray for such things, as do concern God, to gloryfye, and hallowe his
name Secondly to desire and pray for the chief and principal bliss that man
may have, which is the kyngedome of God. And Thirdelye to desire and pray for
such chief means, by which that (...) bliss is obtained that is to say by
the fulfyllynge here in earth of gods will and pleasure. Now next and fourthly
we are here taught to desire of God, things that be necessary for the food
and (...) both of our body and also of our soul, so long as we shall here
(...) upon the Earth. And first as touching the sustenance of the body you
shall note five things in this petition. The first is that our lord teaches
us in this petytyon, not to ask any superfluouse thing of pleasure, and vain
delight, but only things necessary, and sufficient and there fore he biddith
us ask only bread, wherein is not meant (...), great substance, or
habundaunce of things above our state and co^ditio^, but such things only as
be necessary for every man in his degree that it should be one ordinary and
daily manner of sustenau^ce (...), and trade of living, and nether inordinat nor
excessive And therefore if we Christen men have meat and drink and cloth,
that is to say, things suffycyente let us hold our selves content, for they
that set there minds on riches, and will have superfluities more than needs,
or is expedyent to there vocatyon, they fall into daungerouse temptatyons and
into snares of the devil, and into many unprofitable and noisome desires,
which drown men into perdityon and everlasting (...), for the spryng and
root of all euylls, is such superfluouse desire. The wyseman also making his
petition to our lord. Proverb. 35. says. Give me neither poverty nor
excess, but only things sufficient for my living, lest that having to
much, I be provoked to deny God, and to forgette who is the Lord, and on the
other side, lest that by poverty constrained, I fall into theft and forswere
the name of my God.

Whereby is declared that we should desire only things necessary, signified
here by bread, and refuse and renounce superfluities unprofitable, dangerous,
and noisome.

The second thing to be considered in this petiti on is, that we do desire and
pray, not absolutelye for bread, but we do desire and pray for. Our
bread. By which words appears, that, that bread only is ours, which we
do get, by true just honest and lawefull means, for if we do get ought by
deceyte, fraud, craft, or any unlawful or (...) ways, that is in no wise
ours, but other men's. So that in this word Our, is most euidentlye employed and
contained a great reproach to all those persons, which eat not their own
bread, but devour other men's bread: of which sort be all those that live of
theft, robbery, rauyne and spoils, extortion, or craft and deceyte. They also
are of this sort who neither do labor with their hands, nor otherwise apply
their study, their industry or diligence to some thing which may be good and
profitable to the common wealth, and to the honor of GOD but do live in
case, rest, ydelnes, and wanton pleasure. They likewise are of this sort, and
worthy therefore to be reproved, who being in any room, or vocation of
aucthoritye or service, do not fully truly and faythfullye fulfill and perform
the duetye of their vocation. The third thing to be noted in this petition
touching our corporal sustenaunce, is, that we must say unto almyghtye God,
(...), That is to say: Give thou, to the entente that we should not think yt
out meat drink, clothe, or any other worldelye sustenaunce is won or gotten
only by our own industry, wit, and labor (though we be bound by the law
of God, to labor and travail in our vocation, to the uttermost of our (...),
for the mayntenau^ce and sustenaunce of our selves and all ours) but that when
we have played and done our part, (...) we must firmly believe that all
things so coming unto us, are given us, by the liberal hands of almighty
God, who does feed both man and beast: for of our self, we can not (...) nor
assure or promysse our selves any thing, but whatsoever we have, we have it
in deed at the hand of almyghtye God, as the prophet David does say in his.
cxxx. psalm. All things do wait or look for at thy hand that thou
shouldeste give them meat in time. And when thou do give unto them, they
shall gather. And when thou do open thy hand, all things shall be filled with
goodness: and when thou do turn away thy face, they shall be in trouble or
distress. And the same Prophette in the. cxliiii. (...) does say. The eyes
of all things trust in thee (o lord) and thou geuest them food in dew
seasonne: Thou do open thy hand, and do fill every ly uynge thing with
thy blessing. Now the fourth thing here in too be considered, is the word
Us, which notes unto us that no man ought to say in prayer. Give me my daily
bread but Give us our daily bread. Being thereby taught that what things
soever. God does give or send unto us, he gives them not to us for our own
pryuate commoditye and use only, but that we also, should give to other, some
part or portion, and some fruit thereof, especially to such as (...) ways by
no menes possible can yerne or get their living. And therefore (...) such
wicked people do pray in vain, who knowinge this to be the petytyon, Give us
this day our daily bread. do not only refuse of that thing which God has
sent to them, to impart some what unto the the pore. But also will and do,
rather rob and spoil them, by fraud, deceyte, extortyon or otherwise, that
they them selves may increase their pryuate wealth, not caryng how
unjustly, or ungodly they come to goods, nor how they keep them, or spend
them, and this sort of people almygh ty God abhors greatly. The fyft thing
herein to be considered is this word. Hodie, That is to say:

This day. Whereby is meant, partelye the hole contynuaunce and time of man's
life, (...) inuste be referred to the disposition of almyghtye God, concerning
his bodily sustenaunce, and partelye, (yea and that most specially) that we
having things sufficyente for our (...) necessytie, should not be over
careful for the time to come. Of which thing our Savior Christ in the. vi.
of Mathewe does speak, saying.

I say (...) you, beye not careful for your living what ye shall eat, ne for
your body what clothes ye shall wear, is not lyte better then meat? and your
body, better the^ your clothing? (...) upon the birds of the air: they (...)
not, they reapenot, they bring nothing in ye barn, and yet your heavenly
father fedeth the^, are not you of more price the^ they? upon the lylies of the
field, how they grow they labor not, they spinne not, and yet I tell you
Solomon in all his glory, was not so clothed as one of them. Now if god so
clothe that, which to day is grass of ye field and to morrow is cast into the
furnace, how much more will he considre you, O ye of little faith: Wherefore
be you not careful or pensive, saying what shall we eat, or what shall we
drink, or where with all shall we be clothed, for all these things the
heathen do seek after. But your father, does know that ye have need of all
(...) things, wherefore seek ye first for the kingedome of god, and the
righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be given or cast unto you. Be
ye not then careful for to morrow. For the morrow shall care for it self.

And secondelye as concernyninge the sustenaunce of the soul which also is
meant and contained in this petition, ye shall understand, that this kind of
fode is of two sorts. The one is that incomperable and most excellent food,
whereof Christ makes promise in the. vi, of Ihon saying. The bread or food
which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the word.
Which bread or fode is contained truly, and (...) the blessed Sacrament of
the altar, wherein under the forms of bread and wine (as we have heretofore
sufficientlye declared) is the very body and blood of our Savior Christ, the
other food is the word of God: according as our Savior does testifye in the
fourth of Mathewe saying. Not only with cor porall food is the life of man
sustained, but with every word that proceeds from the mouth of God. And
agreeable to this exposytyon Sayncte Augustyne in his. 135, sermon, dc tempore,
expoundyng this fourth petition of the, Pater noster, does say in this manner.
Siquetur in oratione, panem nostrum (...) anum, da nobis hodie. Sieve
exhibitionem corpori necessariam petamus (...) patre, in pane significantes
quicquid nobis est necessarium, sieve quotidianum panum, illum intelligamus quem
accepturiestis de altar, petimus been ut det nobis eum. Quid est enim quod
oramus nisi ne male aliquid admittamus, unde a tali pane separemur, and ucrbum
dci quod quotidie praedicatur, panisest, non enim, quia (...) panis est
uentris, ideono^ est panis mentis Cum autem ista uita transierit, nec panem
illum querimus, quem queric fames necsacramentum altaris habemus accipere,
quiaibi, erimus eum Christo cuius corpus accepimus nec uerba ista nobis dici
habent, quae dicimus nobis, nec (...) legendus est, quando ipsum uidebimus quod
est uerbum dei, per quod facta sunt bmnia, quo pascuntur angeli. quo (...)
angeli, quo sapientes fiunt (...). etc.

That is to say. It does follow in our Lords prayer. Give us this day our
daily bread, whether we do ask of our father, necessary sustenaunce of the
body: in, or by bread, meaning, whatsoever is necessary for us: or whether
that by our daily bread, we do understand that, which you have to (...) from
the altar, we do ask well of GOD, that he will give it unto us. For what do
we pray, but that we commit not any offense whereby we must be separated from
such food, or bread? And the word of God, which is daily preached, is
bread, or food. For it follows not, that because it is not the bread, or
food of the belly, therefore it is not the bread or food of the mind, or
soul. And when this life shall be once passed, we neither do seek that bread,
which hunger seeks for, nor we have need to receive the sacrament of the
altar, for there we shall be with Christ whose body we have received, neither
these words are to be spoken unto us, which we do speak, or utter unto you,
nor the book is there to be read, because we shall see him who is the word
of God, by whom all things ar made, on whom the angels do feed, by whom the
angels are illuminated, by whom angels do receive wisdom etc. And hereby ye
do playnelye perceive that in this petition, our savior teaches us, not
only to ask our heavenly father for daily sustenaunce of the body, but
also to ask for the sustenaunce of the soul.

The exposition or declaration of the fyfte petition which is.
And for give us our trespasses, as we do forgive them that trespass against
us.
FOr as much as the end, and scope, of all prayer, is only to obtain things
which are good, or to be pourged preserved or delivered, from things which
are evil. And that this our Lords prayer, is not onley a most perfect,
fruiteful, and ample prayer in sense, but also a most perfect form, where
by all manner of prayers, either in part or in the hole, are framed, or shapen.
Therefore after the former four petitions, in which we do ask all that good
is, there does follow in very good order, the other three petitions, in
which we do ask the avoiding of all evil, as first of sin committed, and
pain due to the same (it being the greatest evil of all euyls). Secondlye of
tentation, which is the chief means, whereby man is induced to sin.
Thirdelye and lastly, we do ask the avoiding of all other things, that may
be hurteful, dammageable, or (...) unto us, and especially for the avoiding of
the devil, who is to us most daungerouse. And the order of the three last
petitions of the (...) noster, being thus opened unto you, mete it shall be
now to entreat of the first of them, which is. Forgive us our trespasses,
as we forgive (...) yt do trespass against us. In which peticion we have two
proffitable lessones given unto us. The first is that we should learn always
to be lowlye, and meke in heart considering that we are all sinners in the
syghte of God. Saint John so testifyeng, in the first Chapter, of his first
epistle, and saying. If we say that we have no sin, we do begyle our self,
and there is no veritye or truth in us, whereunto agrees Solomon in the. xx.
of his proverbs saying. Who can say my heart is clean, and I am pure from
sin. And again he says in ye. iiii. of Ecclesiastes. There is no man, so
good upon the earth, but that he synneth. And moreover, in the. 24. of the
pronerbes, he says. Aiuste man shall fall, seven times a day, and shall rise
again.

By consideration of which our own infirmity and (...) to sin, we should
humble our selves in ye syghte of God, knowing (as Saint James does say in the
fourth chapter of his epistle) God will resist the proud, and (...) the
humble (...) does give grace. The second lesson which we should learn in
this petition, is that the forgyuyng of other men's offenses done against us,
is a cause, and means to obtain remissyon of our sins, at Gods hands,
according where unto our sauyoure says in the. vi. of Luke. Forgive and ye
shall be forgeuen.

And in the sixth of. Mathewe, he says. (...) you forgive to men their
offenses, than shall your heavenly father forgive you, your offenses and
sins. But if you do not forgive men neither shall your father forgive you
your sins. And moreover in the. xviii, 'of Mathewe it is written how when
Peter came to our Lord, and demanded of him how often he should forgive his
brother, which had offended him, and whether it was not sufficient to forgive
him seven times. Our Lord answered him and said. I tell the Peter that thou
ought to forgive him not only seven times, but seventy times seven times.
Meaning thereby that from time to time, we must continually forgive our
brother, or neygheboure, with all our heart, although he trespasseth against
us never so often. And Christ also in the same place declares the same by a
parable. There was says Christ, a king, which calling his servants unto an
account, and finding that one of them did owe unto him the sum of ten
thousand talentes, and had it not to pay, he commanded that the said debtor,
his wife and his children, and all that he had (...) be sold, but when the
debtour came unto the king and prayed him on his knees to have patience whim,
promising him to pay al, ye king had pity of him, and forgave him ye hole
debte, Now it fortuned afterward (...) this man being thus acquitted, met
with an other of his fellows, that ought hun but one hundredth pence, and with
violence almooste he strangled him and said unto him. Pay that thou owe.
And the said servant his fellow, fell upon his knees, and prayed him to have
patience, promysinge to pay all, but his fellow would not, but cast him in
to prison, until all was paid. And when the rest of his fellows, saying this
crueltye, had told the king thereof, the king furthwith sent for this
cruel fellow, and said to (...). O wicked man, I Forgave thee thy hole debte,
at thy suit and request, it should therefore have beseemed the, to have showed
like compassion, unto thy fellow, as I showed to the. And the king being sore
dyspleased with this crueltye, committed him to tormenters, that should
roughelye and straitelye handle him in prison, till he had paid the whole
debte.

Upon this parable Christ infers and says. Even so shall your heavenly
father do with you, if you will not forgive every one of you his brother, from
the heart.

Thus it appears playnelye, that if we will be forgeuen, and will escape
everlasting dampnatyon, we must put out of our heart all rancoure,
malice, and will to revenge or to satysfye our own carnal affections,
referrynge the punyshmente of the offenders, which in their offenses have
transgressed the laws of God or of the prince, to the order of Justyce, where
of under God, the princes and rulers be ministres in earth, in which doing
we utterly forgive our own private grudge and dyspleasure.

And if any peradventure will think it to be an hard thing, to suffer and
forgive his enemy, which in word and deed has done him any
displeasures, let him consider again, how many hard storms our Sauyoure
Christ suffered, and aboode for us, what were we when he gave his most
precious life for us, but horrible sinners, and his enemies? Now mekelye took
he for our sake all rebukes, mockes, byndynge, beatynge crounynge with thorn,
and the most approbryouse death, It is undoubtedly above our frail and
corrupt nature to love our enemies that do hate us and it is a dead of
greater perfection then man has of him self, but GOD that requires it, will
give grace that we may do it if we ask and seek for it. And therefore in
this petition our Savior Christ teachethe us to ask this grace of our
heavenly father that we may forgive us our enemies, and that he will forgive
us our trespasses, even so as we forgive them that trespass against us.

It is farther to be noted, that to forgive our brother his fault, is also to
pray to GOD that he will forgive him and will not impute his offense to him and
to wyshe to him the same grace and glory, that we desire unto our selves and
also our self when occasion shall comme to help him, as we be bound to help
our christen brother.

And here we think it expedient, that like as in the former part of this
petition we have declared, the part and duty of him, which should for
charityes sake forgive, so to declare the part and duetye of them to whom
forgeuenes should, be made, least evil doers and noughtye minded people
might, by the former declaration take occasyon still to persevere in their
noughtye minds an d doings, and yet claim for geuenes of their neighbor.

Wherefore ye shall understand, that forgeuenes before spoken of, is not so mente
in scripture, that by it justice, or laws of princes, should be broken,
condemned or not executed. For although our Savior Christ in this petition
does teach us to remytte and forgive al iniuryes and trespasses, done against
us, yet he which has done the iniurye, or trespass, is nevertheless bound
to acknowledge his fault, and to ask forgeuenes therefore not only of God,
but of him also, whom he has offended, and to intend to do no more so. And
furthermore to recompense, and to make amends, unto the parties against who^
he has trespassed, according to his habilytye, and power, and as the
greuousenes, and greatness of the offense requires. And in case he which has
committed the offense, or trespass, be obstynate, and will not do these
things before rehearsed, which he is bound to do by the law of God: than
may the party which fyndeth him self grieved, not wythstandynge any thing
that is said before in this petition lawefully and without offense of Gods
commandments ask, and seek, recompense of such iniuryes as be done to him
according to the order and prouysion of the laws of the Realm made in that
behalf, so that he always have an eye and respect unto charity, and do
(...) for rancor or malice or for sinister affection, neither bear any hatred
in his heart toward him whom he sueth, but only upon a zeal and love, of
the (...) of (...), correction of vice, and reformation of the party that has
offended, remembrynge always that he excede not or goo beyond the lymyttes
and bonds of this general rule, taught by our Sanioure Christ in the
gospel (Mathewe. vii.)

As ye would that other men (...) do unto you, even so do you unto them, for
this is the law and the prophets.

And thus we christen folk, wayinge forgeuenes on the one party, and the
duty of him that is forgeuen on the other party (as here now we be taught)
(...) the better know how to endeavor our selves to observe both ways, in
such sort as we are bounden to observe and follow.

The exposition or declaration of the syxte petition, which is.
And let us not be led into tentation.
FOr the better understanding of this petition you shall note first that
there be two manner of tentatyons whereof one commethe, and is seen to us by
GOD, who sufferethe those that be his, to be temted by one means or other, for
there probation, or trial, albeit he so assystethe and aydeth them in all
such temptations, that he turns all at the end unto their benefyte, and
profytte. For as the wise man says (Eccl. xxviii) Like as the oven tries the
pottets vessel, so does tentation of trouble try the righteous man. And with
this manner of tentation, God tempted sundry wise, our holy father Abraham: he
tented also Job with extreme poverty, horrible sickness and sudden death of
his children, and daily he tenteth and proves all such as he loves.

The other tentation comes chiefly of the devil which like a furiouse and a
wood lion rages, and runs about perpetually seeking how he may devour
us. And it comes also of our own concupyscence, which continuallye inclines
and styrrethe us to (...), as Saint James says. (Jacob. i.) Every man is
tented, drawn, and (...) 'by his own concupyscence Of which concupyscence
albeit, we have somewhat spoken before, yet here in no wise we may omytte to
speak of it again. And therefore know ye that this (...) is an inclination,
and pronitie, of our inordinate nature to sin, which imperfection man has
by the fall of Adam, so that although original sin, is taken away by
baptysme, and the displeasure appeased betwixt God and man, yet there
remains a dysorder and debate, between the soul and the flesh, which shall
not be extincte but only by bodily death. For there is no man so mortifyed, so
sequestered from the world, and so rauyshed in spirit, in deuotyon or in
contemplation, but that sum concupyscence is in him, how be it by gods
grace and mercy it reygneth not, nor is of God accounted for sin, nor is
hurtefull, but only to them that by consent yield unto it. It will never
cease but one way or other it will ever assault us, and if we do not fight
with it and resist it continuallye, it will overcome us, and bring us unto
bondage, so that by this our concupiscence, and our consent, all vice, and
sins be engendered: according to the saying of saint James, (Jacob. i.)
Concupiscence (...) she does conceive, she brings forth sin, and that of
all sorts, that is to sai, first acts and deeds, contrary to the laws of
God, and after that use and custom of the same deeds, and at the length she
brings forth blindness and contempt. For so the wise man says (Prouer.
xviii.) The wicked man when he comes to the bottom of sin, sets naught
thereby. But blinded with evil custom either think the sin, that he
uses, to be no sin, or else if he take it for sin, yet he: cares not for
it, but either upon (...) trust of the mercy of GOD (which is in deed no right
trust, but a very presumption) he will continue still in purpose to sin; or
else upon vain hope of long life, he will prolonge, dyffer, and delay to do
penance for the same, until the last end of his life. And often times
prevented with sudden death he dies without repentance.

Wherefore considering how daungerouse it is to fall into sin, and how
hard it is to arise, ye chief and the best way is, to resist (with Gods
help) the first suggestion unto sin, and not to suffer it to prevail with
us, but as soon as may be, to put it out of our minds. For if we suffer it to
tarry any while in our (...), it is a great peril, lest that consent, and
deed will follow shortly after.

Secondly ye shall note, that our savior Jesus Christ does not teach us in
this sixth petition, to pray unto God our father, that we should be clearly
with out all tentation: but that he will not suffer us to be led into
tentation, that is to say, that when we be tented, he will give us grace to
with stand it and (...) us to be overcome therewith, according where unto
Saint Paul says (i. Corin. (x.) God is true and faithful and will not suffer
us to be teneed, above that we may bear, but he will so moderate the
tentation, that we may sustain and overcome it. And S. James says (Jacob.
i.) Think that you have a great cause to joy, when you be troubled with
diverse tentations. For the triynge of your faith brings patience, and
pacyence makes perfect works, so, that you may be perfect and sound
lacking in nothing. And almyghtye God also exhorts us, and callethe upon us
to fight against tentatio^s saying (Apo. ii.) He that gets the victory
against them, I shall give him to eat of the tree of life. And again he
says. He that overcomes them shall not be hurt with the second death.
And Saint Paul says (ii. Timothy. ii.) No (...) shall be crowned except he
fight lawefullye. That is to say. Except he defend him self and resyste his
enemies at al points to his power, and our savior gives us a good courage
to fight in this battle, where he says, Joan. xix. Be of good comfort,
for I have overcome the world, that is to say: I have had the victory of
all sins and tentations, and so shall you have if the fault be not in your
selves. For ye fight with an aduersarye, which is alredye vanquyshed and
overcome.

The exposition or declaration of the seventh and last petition of the Pater
noster, which is.
But deliver us from evil. Amen
WOncerning this, vii. petition ye shall note, that like as in the. vi.
petytyon Christ taught us to desire and pray our heavenly father that he
would preserve us from the dangerous tentations of the flesh, the world and
the devil, and not to be overcome with them, even so now in this seventh and
last petityon, he does teach us to pray that if by our fraylenes and
corrupt nature, we through tentation, do fall into the thraldom of the
Devil by sin, yet that he will sone delyner us from it, not to let us
continue in it, not to let it take root in us, not to suffer sin to reign
upon us, but to deliver us and make us free from it.

Sin is the excedyng evil, from the which in this petition we desire to be
delivered: and though in this petition, be also comprehended ail euylles in the
world as syckenes, pouertye, death, with other like adversity, yet cheifely
it is to be understood of sin, which only of it self is evil, and
ought ever without condition to be eschued. And as for other adversities,
neither we can ne ought to refuse when god shall send them, neither we
ought to pray for the eschuinge of the^, otherwise then with this condition,
if gods pleasure so be. Many things we suffer in this world, and take them
for evil but they be not evil of them self: All afflictions, diseases
punyshementes and torments of the body, all the troubles of this world: and
all aduersytyes, be good and necessary instruments of God, for our
salvation. For God himself, who can not say other then truth, says:
Apocalip. iii. Those that I love, I chastyse. And again the apostle, Hebre.
xii. says, He receives none but whom he scorgeth. This is a time of
scourgynge, and the time to come, is the time of rest ease and bliss. And
surely it is a great token, that we be in the favor of God when he does
scourge us, and tries and fyneth us like gold in the fire, whiles we be in
this world As contrary it is a great tooken of his indignatyon toward us to
suffer us living evil, to continue in prosperitye, and to have all things
after our will and pleasure, and never to trouble or punyshe us with aduersitye.
Therefore our sauyoure Christ Jesus (who knows what is best for us)
teaches us to pray and to desire to be delivered, not cheyfely from worldely
afflyctions, trouble and aduersytye, (which GOD sends habundantlye even to
them whom he best loves, and with whom he is best pleased) But the evil
which we most chieflye should pray to be delivered from, is (...), which of it
self is so evil, that in no wise god can be pleased there with.

And because our ancient enemy the devil, who is the well and spring of
iniquitye and is not only himself an homicide, a liar, and hater of the
truth from the beginning: but also is the very root, and occasion of all
sin, and the common prouoker and styrrer, of man to the same, yea and the
letter or (...), of all virtue and goodness, because this enemy never cesseth,
but continuallye serchethe by all crafts and wyles to enduce us to sin, and
so to (...) us, and to bring us thereby to everlasting damnation: Therefore
like as we desire here to be delivered from sin, so also we desire that our
heavenly father will save us, and defend us from this evil, the causer of
sin, that is to say, the Devil, and from his power, and tyranny, so that
he shall not by his malice and gyles, entyce and draw us into sin, whereby
we may finallye be brought unto everlasting dampnation, from the which also
we pray here to be delivered. And fynallye touching this word. Amen. ye
shall note that it is here, added unto the end of this most excellent prayer,
to teach us thereby, that if we do come so as we ought to be prepared for
to make this prayer (which due preparation we before have declared in the
preface of this Pater noster) that then undoubtedly we shall receive of our
Lord those things needful for us, which in this prayer of the pater noster,
we do ask, which that we may do, grant unto us the father the son and
the holy ghost, to whom be all honor and glory world without end.

Amen.
Here folowethe the Salutation of the archaungell Gabryell made to the blessed
Uyrgyn Mary, taken out of the first chapter of Saint Luke commonly called the
Aue Maria, with the exposition or declaration. thereof.
Hayle Marye full of grace, our Lord is with the, blessed art thou amongeste
all women. And blessed is the fruit of thy womb.
IT is not without great and weyghtye considerations, that our forefathers,
throughoute the universal or catholyke Church have next after the Pater
noster, set fourth and commended the Salutation of the Archaungell Gabryell,
where with he saluted the blessed vyrgyn Marye, mother of our savior Jesus
Christ, called the Aue maria, the same to be frequented and deuoutely used and
said of all (...). For seeing that the high messenger of almyghtye God, and
heavenly spirit Gabriel, did most ioyfullye with this salutation greet the
Uyrgyn Marye, being then a mortal woman living on the earth, and not
having then conceived in her (...), and chaste womb, our savior Christ, how
much more ought we mortal earthlye and synnesull creatures, with all
promptness and (...), to salute with the self same words, that (...) now,
when as not only she has brought forth our savior and (...) Christ, but
also she herself is exalted in heaven above all aungelles, and archaungelles:
Besides this also the matter it self contained in this Salutation, is of such
worthynes, comfort and spirytuall fruit to the faithful rememberer, and
devout frequenter of the same, that all good men have always found them
selves by meditation hereof greatly edysyed.

And this thing to no man can seem strange that will duly marcke the pythe,
effect and weyghtye sense in the same salutation contained, which (...) will
here (...) declare unto you. And first you shall understand how that it was
decreed of the hole (...) that after the fall of (...) first father Adam (by
which mankind was exiled out of heaven) the second person in Trinitye should
take upon him the perfect Nature of man, to redeem mankind from the power of
the Devil, and to reconcyle the same again unto his Lord God. And for this
purpose (as S. Luke in his first Chapyter declares) the angel Gabryell, was
sent from God to the Uyrgin Mari, with the highest message that ever was,
which was to treat and conclude a leage of peace, between God and manne. And
when this angel came unto this blessed Uirgin, he said these words.
Hayleful of grace our lord is with the, blessed art thou amongst women. And
truly this word Hayle or be joyful, is a word most mete and conuenyent
for the angel, coming on a message, to begin his Salutation wythall. For
never was there Creature, that had so great and Just cause, to rejoice for
any Benefytte, received at gods hands, as had the blessed byrgyn Marye, for
that it pleased almyghtye God to choose specyallye and appoynte her to that
most excellent and incomparable dignytye, that of her should be con ceyued
and borne, Christ being both god and man the savior and redemer of all
mankind. And not only for this cause or purpose, the angel began with
this word of high comfort, but also for that he perceived the virgyn being
alone would be much abashed and astonyed, at his marvelous and sudden
coming unto her. And therefore thought it expedient first of all to utter
this word of Joy, and comfort, which might also put away al fear from the
blessed Uyrgynne. And by these words Our lord is with the, is signified that
GOD, was in the vyrgyn Mary not only by essence, power and presence, (as he
is in all creatures) nor only with his special grace (as he is in all holy
men and women) but he was also in her by receyuynge of our nature and flesh
of her substance, yea the hole Trinity was with her by a singular and
special sort, for the son of god was with her in that she conceived and
bare him. The holy ghost was with her for that she by his power and virtue did
conceyne. God the father was with her, because she in time conceived his son,
being of him begotten by eternal generation before all time. And by these
words, blessed art thou amongeste all women, was mente that there never was,
nor shall be woman so blessed as she was.

And truly she may well be called most blessed (...) gest all women for that
she had great and high prerogatives which never other woman ever had, has,
or shall have. Is not this a high prerogatyue, that of all women she was chosen
to be a mother to the son of God? And what excellent honor was she put to
when not withstandyng the decree was made of Christ's natyuitie by the holy
Trinity, yet the thing was not done and accomplyshed, without or before her
consent was granted, for the which so solemn a messenger was sent? and
also how high grace was this that after the defaulte made through the
persuasion of the first woman Eve, by whom Adam was brought into disobedyence,
and thereby all mankind to state of dampnation, this blessed Uyrgyn was elect
to be the instrumente, of our reparation, in that she was chosen to bear the
Savior and redemer of the world. And is not this a wonderful prerogative, to
see a Uyrgyn to be a mother and conceive her child without sin? the
archaungell might therefore worthily say that she the said Mary, was the
most blessed of all other women. And with these words the angel Gabryell
made an end of this salutation. But yet ye shall note that the words
following. which are And blessed is the fruit of thy womb. Be not the words
of the angel, but of S. Elyzabeth mother of Ihon Baptist, for when after the
departinge of the angel Gabriel the virgyn Marye being conceived (...) Christ,
came to salute her cose^ Elizabeth, she the said Elyzabethe being inspyred
with the holy Ghost, and thereby knowing yt the vyrgyn Mary was conceived with
Christ, spoke the aforesaid words of the fruit, being in the vyrgyns womb,
it is to wit, of our savior (...). And here is also an other wonderful
thing to be noted, for (as it appears in the first chapyter of Saint Luke)
the child in S. Elizabethes womb, that is to say, Saint Ihon Baptiste
(which yet had scant life) gave testimonye to this fruit, that it should save
him and all the world, and as a prophette he did lepe for joy, in his mothers
womb, and although he could not than speak, yet nevertheless he declared
by such signs, and tokens as he could, that blessed was the fruit of that
womb. And worth ly the thing is called ye fruit of her womb, in yt the
substance of the nature of man, which our savior Christ took upon him, was
taken of the nature of the most blessed vyrgyn, and of her womb. And so
therefore it is called the fruit, of her womb. And he may well be called the
blessed fruit, for that he has saved us, and given us lyte, contrary to the
cursed fruit, which Eve gave to Adam, by which we were dystroyed, and
brought to death: But blessed is the fruit of this womb, which is the
fruit of life everlasting. And it is here to be noted that although this
falutatyon be not a prayer of petition, supplication, or request, or suyte: Yet
nevertheless, the Church has used, to adioyne it to the end of the Pater
noster, as an hymn or prayer, of laud, and praise, partly of our lord, and
sauyoure Jesus Christ, for our redemptyon, and partelye of the blessed virgin,
for her humble consent, given, and expressed, to the auugell at his salutation.
In deed, lauds, praises, and thanks are in this (...) Maria, pryncypally
given, and yielded to our Lord, as to thauetor of our redemption: but yet here
wythall the vyrgyn lackethe not her lauds, praise, and thanks, for her
excellent and synguler virtues, and chyefiye, for that she believed, and humbly
consented, according to the (...) of the holy Matrone S. Elizabethe, when she
said to this vyrgyn. Luce. i. Bessed art thou, that dyddest give trust, and
credence, to the aungelles words: for all things that have been spoken unto
the, shall be (...). Who is there now that has a good Christen heart and
considers the meaning, the effect following the aucthor, and other the
cyrcumstances of the Aue Maria, that will not count, and judge them unworthy
of the name of Christen men, who of late years, not only have in all their
books, and other prynted papers, of purpose left out this godly salutation,
disdaynyng at the honor of the blessed vyrgyn Mary here in contained, but have
also to the vttermoste of their power, by their enuyinge against the common
commendable and devout: use thereof, gone about to pluck it clean ont of
men's hearts, and minds, and so for ever to abolyshe the memory (...) her
blessedness, most contrary to the determination of the holy ghost, by the
mouth of the same vyrgyn declared when she said (Luke i.) Fece enim ex hoc
(...) me dicent omnes generationes That is to say, Behold (...) from hence
forth all generations shall call me blessed, which thing like as the angel
of God, and the godly matrone Elizabeth then did, the vyrgyn Marye, as then,
being in mortal estate, and neither Christ of her then borne, nor man kind
then by Christ redeemed. So now, for that the son of this blessed vyrgyn,
has both redeemed us, and also all mankind, from eternal damnation, and she
her self now is most gloriouselye placed in heaven, in state of
immortality: And thyrdly that such notable examples also herein set before
our eyes, by the Angel and Elizabeth: And finally for that the holy ghost did
playnelye say that all generations should from thenseforthe call her
blyssed, for these respects, I say, the hole catholyke church does most
joyfully use and frequent the said salutation, and so must we do, if we will be
true members of the Catholyke church.

Of the, vii. deadlye sins, and of the. vii. pryneypall virtues, and also of
the eyghte Beatitudes.
Having according to the promysse which was made in the preface of this
book entreated of faith, as it is to be taken and considered, in this book,
having also set furthe the sumine and uythe of our christen faith, which
in effect is comprysed in our common Creed, making also declaration
thereupon, (...) thyrdelye set forth the seven sacraments, with their
expositions. And like wise fourthlye having entreated of the tenne'
Commandments, and made their declaratyon. And consequentlye after that
having set furthe first the pater nocter, and afterward, the Aue Maria,
with their (...), and declarations, and thereby (for so far forth, and
forsomuche) accomplyshed the promysse, made in the said Preface, there
remains only now specially to be spoken, of the seven deadly sins, and
the seven princypall virtues, with the eight beatitudes which here shall be
set furthe (bnt yet briefelye) because good hope is conceived, that at this
next Parlyament, which (God willing) shall begin the. xxi. day of the
monethe of October, next coming, or at the Conuocatyon of the Clergy of the
Province of Canturburye, which is accustomed to follow immedyatlye the same,
some Godly order and dyrecty on, (...) be taken amongeste othere things, for
such matters of religion, to be so fullye set forth, as may stand both
with the laws of God, and also with the honor profyt, and wealth of this
realm, And bryefely therefore to knytte up here this matter, ye shall know
that there are seven capytal or principal deadly sins, it is to wit.

Pride, Envy, Wrath, or anger, slouthe, covetousness gluttony, and lecherye.

And also there are seven pryncypall, or chyef, virtues, it is to wit.
Faith, hope, charytye, prudence, temperaunce, justice, and fortitude or
strength.

Pride, is an inordinate love of our own aduauncemente and proper excellencye
of which do rise, bostynge, ostentation, hypocrisye, scysines, and such like.

Envy, is a grudge or hatred at another felycytie farynge well or good hap.
Of which do rise.

Detractation, Murmuration, dyssention perverse judgments, and such like.

Wrath or anger, is an appetite or desire of bengeaunce or other hurtes,
which appetite or desire if it do continue in the heart, is properly called
Hatred, Of which wrath or anger do rise, Brau lyngs, and persecutyons of
words and deeds and some times, Wounds, strypes, Manslaughter, and such
like.

Slouthfulnes, is a werynes or tedyousnes, of any godly or spyrituall thing,
which one ought for gods sake to do. Of which slouthfulnes, do rise,
Sluggishnes, pusillanimitie, or weakness of mind, disperation. and such like.

Covetousness, is an immoderate love oftemporall riches or goods, either in the
unlawful getting of them, or in the unlawful keeping of them, Of which
covetousness do rise deceyte, theft, Sacrilege, (...), usury, and all
filthy lucre or gain.

Gluttony, is an immoderate delcctatyon, or pleasure especially taken in
meats or drynkes. And in glottony one does specially offend in five sorts,
or manner. First concerning the time as when one does eat or drink, either
over earlye, or ouerlate, or to often. Secondly one does offend in qualytye as
when one does immoderatlye desire, over delycate meats or drynkes. Thyrdelye
one does herein offend in quantitye, as when one does eat or drink
ouermuche whereof the body is ouercharged and the senses thereof hyndered or
grieved, or the powers of the soul impeched or let the body being made more
unable to serve ye soul, and the soul made also moore unable to serve God.
Fourthlye, one does herein offend in gredynesse or voracitie, as when one
does over gredilye and over hastelye, take his meat and drink. Fyftlye and
last one does offend herein, when he to accomplysshe his delectation (...)
pleasure, in meats or drynkes doethe cause them to be prepared, over
curiouslye.

And as concerning Lechery, there is no need here to declare it, with his
branches and circumstaunces, in as much as it is at large opened before in the
exposition of the. vii. commandment, and sore it is to be lamented that it is
a thing so well known, and so much used in our days as it is, hindering
wonderfullye many godly affairs in the common wealth.

The seven principal or chief virtues are, Faith Hope, Charity, Prudence,
Temperaunce, Justice, and Fortytude, or Strength. And three of these, that is
to say, Faith, Hope, and Charytie, directly and immediately do tend to God
who is the end of all. And the rest, that is to say: Prudence, Temperaunce,
Justice and Fortitude, do tends directlye and immediatlye to the means,
whereby the said end is (...), and directly and immediately, to the aforsayde
end. And moreover the said three first are to be considered touching (...),
the inward motyon of the mind, and the other four remaining, are to be
(...) specially touching the outward acts, or deeds. And besides this the
three first do concern (...) doings toward God, and the four other do
concern our acts, both toward our self, and also toward our
neighbor, or even thrysten.

The office of Prudency, is to chose, or embrace the good refusing the evil.

The office of Justice is to do vpryghtlye and strayghtly.

The office of Temporaunce is not to be ouercomed or stayed or let, by any
worldelye pleasures or vanities.

The office of Fortitude or strength is not to omytte or leave undone, any good
thing, which ought to be done, for (...) worldely grieves or troubles.

And by the way we do here note that these four Prudence, temporance, justice,
and fortitude. are commonly called Cardinal virtues, for as much as they are
the pryncipall and do conteyne under them many other virtues.

Now concerning the eight beatitudes forasmuch as they are most playnelye and
orderly set forth in the. v. chapter of. S. Matthew, we will here rehearse the
same unto you, as they of him are rehearsed, desi (...) you seriouslye and often
to mediate the same, as whereby you may both know wherein felicity does
consist, and how also to attain and comme unto the same.

And concerning this matter of the beatitudes S. Mathewe in the said. v.
chapyter does thus (...) forth the process thereof

Videns autem (...) turbas ascendit in montem, and cum sedisset, (...) ad (...)
discipull cius, and apericns os (...), docebat (...) dicens. Beati (...)
spiritu, quoniam ipsorum est (...) celoru^. (...) mites, (...) ipsi (...)
terram Beati qui lugent, quoniam ipsi consolabuntur. (...) quiesuriunt and
(...) iustitiam, (...) ipsi saturabuntur. Beati (...), (...) ipsi (...)
consequentur, (...) mundi cord, quoniam ipsi deum uidebunt. Beati (...) filij
dei uocabuntur. Beati qui (...) patiuntur propter (...) ipsorum est regnum
celorum. That is to say.

And Jesus, (...) the multitude, did go up unto a hill, and when he was set
his dysciples came unto him, and he opening his mouth, did teach them
saying. Blessed are the poor in spirit. for theires is the king dome of
heaven. Blessed are the meke for they (...) possess the earth. Blessed are
they that do mourn, for they (...) receive comfort. Blessed are they who do
hunger and thryste the justice, for they (...) filled.

Blessed are the merciful for they (...) obtain, or get mercy. Blessed are
the pure, or clean in heart, for they shall see God. Blessed are the peace
makers, for they shall be called the sons or children of GOD. Blessed are they,
whoo do suffer persecution, for justice sake, for theirs is the (...) of
heaven.

And thus now having, for the time, done so much, as one man, with this
chapleynes, and friends could do, and wisshynge that it were much more
better, and more exactlye done then it is fynallye, submyttynge the whole,
unto the iu gemente of the catholyke church, and the sea Apostolyke, in all
points. I will now add hereunto certain Collectes, to be said, and
rehearsed dayelye by the preistes in their Mass, concerning both our holy
father the Pope, with his most reverend Legate, the Lord Cardinal poole,
and also concerning the kings and Queen's most excellent majesty's, whose
health and wealth, are our great sauegarde, and assurance. And yet over, and
besides this, a special collecte, or prayer, seuerallye, for the kings
prosperouse iorneye, both in going, in tarienge, and in well retournyng, to
be had, which the holy Tryny ye, the father, the son, and the holy Ghost,
mercifullye do grant, and bring to pass. Unto whom be all honor praise,
and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
The three Collectes, or orations for the most holy father the Pope.
DEus omnium fidelium pastor, and rector, famulum tuum Paulum papam eius
nominis quartum, quem pastorem ecclesie tue precesse uoluisti, propitius
respice, da ei que sumus uerbo, and exemplo, quibus pre est proficere, ut ad
uitam, una cu^grege sub credito, per ueniat sempiternam, Per.

Secreta.
Oblatis quesumus, domini, placare muneribus, and famulum tuum Paulum papam
eius nominis quartum quem pastorem populo tuo esse uoluisti, assidua
protectione guberna. per.

Poctcommunio.
Hec nos quesumus, domini divine sacramenti perceptio protegat, and famulum
tuum Paulum (...) nominis quartum, quem pastorem populo tuo esse uoluisti, una
cum commissio sibi grege saluat semper and muniat, per.

The three Collectes or orations for the most reverend Lord Cardynall Poole.
REge quesumus, domini famulum tuum Reginaldum Polum, Cardinalem, sacro sancte
sedis apostolice a latere legatum, and intercedente beata dei genitrici Maria
cum (...) sanctis tuis, gratiae tue in eo dona multiplica, ut ab omnibus
liberetur offensis, and temporalibus non destituatur auxiliis, and (...) ternis
gadeat at institutis. per.

Secreta.
Suscipe quesumus, domini, tibi munus oblatum, and intercedente beata dei
genetrice Maria, cum omnibus sanctis tuis, famulum tuum Reginaldum (...),
Cardinale^, sacro sancta sedis apostolicae a latere legatum, tua propitius
ubique miseratione (...), at que ab omnibus quas (...) aduersitatibus read
securum, ut tranquillitate precepta, ab omnium uisibilium, and inuisibilium
inimicorum (...) liberatus, deuota tibi menta de seruiat. Per.

Post communio.
Subiectum (...) famulum tuum Reginaldum Polu^ Cardinalem, sacro sanctae sedis
Apostolicae a latere legatum, quesumus domine inter cessione beatae dei
genetricis Mariae cum omnibus sanctis tui, propitiatio celestis amplificet, ut
and presentis uitae periculis (...), and perpetuis donis firmetur. Per.

The three Collectes, or orations, for the king, and Queen's majesty's, and
their counsaylers.
Oration.
DEus in cuius manu sunt corda regnum, qui eis humilium consolator, at fidelium
fortitudo, et protector omniu^ in te sperantium, da regi uostro Philippo, and
reginae nostrae, Mariae, eorumque consilitatis, and populo Christiano triumphu^
uirtutis tue scienter excolere, ut perte semper reparentur ad uenian. Per.

(...)
Suscipe quesumus domine precis, and (...) tuae, quas pro salute samili tui,
regis nostri Philippi, and Regine nostrae Mariae, eorum que (...) rum, ac
protectione fidelium populorum, tuae maiestati offerimus, sut plicantes, ut
antiqua (...) open rante miracula, super at is inimicis, secura t. by (...)
Christianorum libertas Per.

Postcommunio.
Presta quesumus omnipotens deus, ut per (...) steria sancta quae sumpsimus,
rex noster Philippus, and regina nostra Maria, (...), ac populus Christianus,
(...) rationabilia meditantis, que tibi placita su^t, and dictis (...) a^tur
and factis. Per.

The three collects, or orations for the prosperous voyage, and safe return
of our most noble king Phylyppe.
Oration primo.
APesto domine supplicationibus nostris, and uiam (...), ac pij famuli tui,
Philippi regis nostri, et omnium (...) qui in eius sunt comitatu, in salutis
tuae prosperitate dispone, ut inter omnes (...) and uitae (...) marietatis, tuo
semper protegantur auxilio. Per

Secreta.
Propitiare domini supplicationibus nostris, and has oblationes, quas tibi
offerimus, pro deuoto, and (...) tuo, Philippo rege nostro, and omnibus illis,
qui in eius su^t comitatu, benignis assume. Vt uiam illorum and precedente
gratia tua, dirigas, and subse quente comitari digneris, ut de actu atque
incolumitate eorum se cundum (...) die tue presidi agaudeamus. per,

Postcommunio.
Sumpta quesumus domine celistis, mysterij (...), ad prosperitate^ iteneris,
deuoti, and pij famuli tui, Philippi, reges nostri, and omnium eorum qui in
eius sunt comitatu, proficiant, and eos ad salutaria cuncta perducant. per.

The three Collectes, or orations, for the bishop of London.
Oration.
COncede quesumus, domine (...) tuo (...) episcopo nostro, ut predican do, and
extendo, quae recta sunt exemplo bonorum operum, animas suorum instruat
subditorum, and eterne remunerationis mercedem, a (...) pastore, perciplat,
per.

Secreta
Munere nostra quesumus domine placatus suscipe and famulum tuum Edmundum
Episcopum nostrum (...) sibi. co^missum, benignus se^per, and ubique
misericorditer protege per

Postcommunio.
Hec nos communio domine purget a crimine, and famulum tuum Edmundum, episcopum
nostrum, and commissum sibigregem, benigna quesumus, pietate, co^serua. Per.

A prayer in verses, for the prosperouse voyage, abode, and return of our
most excellent and noble king, king Phylyppe.
1. Prosper eat noster, terraque, marique Philippus Prospera sint, ut iter, sic
mora, sicreditus. 2. Prosper eat noster, maneat, redeat que Philippus Prospera
sint terra cuncta, mari, atque polo 3. Sit tibi rex noster, terraque marique
Philippe Tam been, quam tua, quam nostra Maria, cupit.
Ad lectorem.
Viue, uale and siquid nouistis rectius istis,
Candidus imparti, sinon, hijs utere mecum.
ED E MVNDVS ESTO, BONVS ESTO BONIS, DAE GLORIAM DEO.
FINIS.
EXCVSVM LONDINI IN EDIBVS 10 hannis Cawodi, Typographi Regiae Maiestatis.

HOMElies set forth by the right reverend father in God, Edmunde Bishop of
London, not only promised before in his book, entitled, A necessary
doctrine, but also now of late adjoined, and added thereunto, to be read within
his diocese of London, of all persons, vycars, and curates, unto their
parishioners, upon sondayes, and holidays.

Anno. M. D. LV.

I. C.



The Table.
i. Of the creation and fall of Man. ii. Of the misery of all mankind and of
his condempnation to death. iii. Of the redemption of Man. iiii. How the
redemption in Christ is apliable to man. v. Of christen love and Charity. vi.
How dangerous a thing the break of Charity is. vii. Of the Church what it
is, and of the commodity thereof. viii. Of the authority of the Church. ix.
Of the Supremacy. x. Of the Supremacy. xi. Of the true presence of Christ's
body and blud in the sacrament of the Aultare. xii. Of transsubstantiation.
xiii. Of certain Aunswers against some common objections, made against the
sacrament of the Aultare.
The Bishop of London to all persons, and curates, within his dioces of
London.
FOrasmuch as the people of my dioces, being within your several cures, and
charge, do (as in deed of reason they may) look for to have at their pastors
hand, or at the least way, by his provision, and mean, good instruction, and
teachinge, especially how to serve and please God, and how also otherwise to
do their duty, as to any one of them in their degree does appertain. And
forasmuch also as there is not now a days that multitude, and plenteth of
preachers, which in times past has been, and by Gods grace, hereafter shall be.
And fynallye, for that every one of you in your own person, is not able to
discharge the office of preaching, which many good folk do greatly wyshe, and
desire ye could, and would. Therefore desiring to have somethyng dove onward,
til God of his goodness provide something better, I have labored with my
chapleyns, and friends, to have these Homelies prynted, that ye may have
somewhat to instruct, and teach your flock withal, requyrynge, and charginge
every one of you, that diligently, upon the sondayes, and holidays, ye read
to your flock, frutefully, and deliberately, one of the said Homelies. And
thus fare you well. Given at my house in London, the first day of July. M. D.
LU.

An Homely, of the creation and fall of man.
THe Prophette, David in his fore score and ninte^th psalm, exhortyng all
people to sing praise to almighti god, to serve hi^ in gladness, and re ioyse
in his sight, alleges this as a sufficient cause thereof. Scitote quoniam
ipse est dominus, ipse fecit nos, et non ipsinos. which is to say. Psalm,
cxix.
Know you that he is our Lord, it is he that made us, and we made not our
selfs. And in deed, who yt diligently wayeth ye creation of man, can not but
therein most highly laud, and praise almighty god, his creator. For where in the
creation of al other visible things, he did but only command, and will that
they should be made, and incontine^t they were made; in the creatyng of man, he
used great solempnitie, and many notable circumstaunces. First touching man, he
said, let us make man, which words Genes. i.
be as it were the words of god the father, to God the son, and to the holy
ghost, spoken after the manner of men, when they go about some great matter, at
what time they take good aduisement or they begin, and do join with the best,
and wysest counselors, that they can get. This circumstaunce (not being
necessary of gods part, as without the which he might have created man)
does most manifestly declare the special favor, of almighty god toward
mankind: but that next circumstaunce, which does immediately follow this
first, is a more surer proof, and declaration of gods tender love, toward
man, when he says, Let us make man to our own similitude and likeness, Now
mark, good people, how much god did for us in our creation. He made us in very
deed like unto himself; and in so doing what could he have done more for us?
A wonderful excellent benefit and comfort is it unto us, to consider that man
was made like unto god. And to understand this thing the better, you shall know
that the similitude, and likeness of man to god, was not in the body of man (for
this you must most certainly believe, yt the godhed is a spirit, and not a
bodily substance) but this similitude and likeness was in ye soul, which was
endued, with most heavenly and godlike qualities, as understanding, memory, and
will; with sundry gifts also of grace. And here is to be noted by the way; that
where almighty god says, Let us make man to our own similitude, and lykenes,
he gives us to understand, yt there be three parsons in trinity, and yet but
one god. For in that he says let us make man, therein is signified, a
plurality, or number of persons: again, in that he says to our similitude
and likeness, and not to our similitudes and lykenesses, by this is signyfyed
the unity also of one nature and substance. But to proceed further concerning
the creation of man; ye shall understand, that the second chapter of Moses
(...). 2.
book, called (...), in special manner does record the several making, as
well of the body of man, by it self, as also of the soul by it self. And as
touching the body, scripture does there say, that. God fourmed, or shaped it,
of ye earth Noting thereby the excellency of man's body, above the bodies of
other living creatures. For we read not of any other living creature, that
god shaped, or fourmed, the body of it, but only that he made it; and that at
the co^ maundement of almighty god, the earth brought Genesis. 1.
fourth four foted beasts, and the water, in like manner, brought fourth
fysshes, and fowls. Only of yt body of man scripture wituesseth yt God shaped
it. And as concerning ye soul of man, it is written of it, in the said second
chapter of genesis, how yt god bre Genesis. 2.
thed it into the body; which. ii. circumstaunces, as they import a marvelous
excellency of man, above other bodily creatures, so they most clearly declare
thexcedyng great goodness of God, toward man. Now when god had, in such a
singular fashion, creted man, he gave him souereigntie over all the fysshes of
the sea, over the fowls of the air, and over the beasts of the land, yea
and made him a King, and Emperor on the earth. And yet not satisfied with all
this, he placed man in Paradyse, that is in a most pleasant garden, where he
had planted all kind of fruit, beautiful to behold, and delicious to eat,
for man to feed upon; only one kind of fruit he charged him on pain of
death, (and that not of the body alone, but of the soul also) utterly to
refrain from; which was the fruit of the tree called in scripture, the tree of
knowledge of good, and evil. And like as in a most marvelous sort he made Adam
the fyrsteman, so in as marvelous, and strange a sort he made Eve the first
woman, even of a rybbe taken out of Adams left side; and her he made parfytte,
and furnyshed her with like gifts as he had done Adame the first man: What
can we then think, or deuyse, that God might have don more for us in our
creation, then herein he did: He made the soul immortal, that is such as
should continue for ever without end. He furnished it with most singular
gifts both of nature and of special grace also The body of man, in the estate
of original innocence, had in it health, strength, (...), and other like
qualities, in the highest degree of perfection; it had in it self then, no fond
lust, or concupiscens; no pronitie or inclination to evil; no (...) in doing
good, no infirmity or wekenesse, no lack or want of any quality fyt and
decent for it. The body of man was then obediente to the soul; the soul
altogether obedient to God. So that on Gods part, our maker and creator,
there is nothing toward us but all perfection, all great kyndnes, al fatherly
love, and favor, Holy scripture most euydently affyrmeth yt al creatures were
made good in their creation, saying. Vidit deus (...) fecerat et erant ualde
bona, (...). That Genesis. (...).
is. God saw al things which he had made, and they were very good. Which thing
as it is generally true in all creatures concerning their creation, so is it in
a certain degree of excellencye to be verified in man touching the estate of his
original innocence. Thus we may perceive yt in the creation of man, al was
excellent and parfytte; which ought greatly to inflame us the more to love
and serve almighty God our most loving creator. But for as much as that
blessed estate is lost, and mankind by yt loss thereof, fell into extreme
misery and wretchedness, it is consequently to be well considered of our part,
by what means man was brought from so good and blessed a case, to so evil
and miserable an estate; which point well wayed, is a sufficient ground to
cause us on the other side utterly to detest and abhor al sin. For that
grievous fall of man came of sin. Sin it was, for which God thrust man out
of paradyse; sin it was that caused the flesh to strive against the
spirit, and the spirit, against the flesh; sin it was that brought unto
mankind necessity of bodyly death, and all the infirmities and diseases,
which man in this transitory life sustayneth; sin finally it was, that cau
sed all the posterity of Adam and Eve to be borne in state of dampnation. But
some perchance are desirous fardar to know, by what means man was first
brought to commytte sin. For the understanding whereof, let us have
recourse to the Genes. 3.
iii. chap. of Genesis, where it is written: how that yt wyly serpent the
devil came unto Eve and said unto her: Why has God given you commandment
not to eat of every tree in paradyse? where unto the woman answered and said,
of the fruit which is in paradise we eat, but of the fruit of that tree yt
grows in the myddest of paradyse, GOD has charged us not to eat or touch
it? lest, per chance we dye. Then said the serpente to the woman: Nay, you
shall not dye. For God knowethe that whatsoever day you shall eat thereof,
your eyes shall be opened, and you shall be like Gods, knowing good and evil.
The woman therefore saw that the tree was good to eat of, and beautiful to
the eye, and pleasant to behold, and she took of the fruit thereof and d d
eat, and gave part to her husband, who also did (...).

Thus through the provocation of the devil, man first fell into sin.
Wherefore as we must always abhor sin and forbear it, because of the
great misery it brought us unto; so should we no les (...), and to the
uttermost of our power, fly the (...) and all his suggestions, knowing that
thereby we (...) first induced to commytte sin. For as this our adversary
was busy at the (...) with our first parents; so is he no les, but rather
more busye with us at this present; as (...) Saint Peter Peter. 5.
in the v. chapter of his first (...), saying. (...) the devil as a roryng
lion goes about, seking whom he may devour. This adversary of mankind,
disdaynynge at the great (...) that Adam and Eve were in, never ceasyd
questyonynge, and craftyug with the woman, being the weker and frayler vessel,
until he (...) made them disobey gods commauudement: by which their doing,
they lost, the oryginal great innocence which they had at there creation; which
being lost, nether the body would be obedient to ye soul, nor the soul to
god, but al was in man turned vpsidoune: yea thereby they fell also into
necessity of temporal death of body, and (which is worst of all) into the
estate of eternal damnation, and everlasting death, both of body and soul.
But now, because it may paraduenture seem in some man's judgment, that seeing
the thing that Adam and Eve did, was but the eatyuge of an appell, therefore
their faut was not great, nor deserved so grievous punish meant; (...) us
consider the cyrcumstaunces, and we shall sone perceive the offense not light,
but very sore and heinous. First the thing which god commanded man to
forbear, was a thing most easy for him to forbear, and so much was his
fault the greater. Besides this, when a man is told before of great peril and
danger that shall light upon him if he do this or that, in case after such
warnyng he offend therein, his fault is thereby made the (...). Thyrdly, the
less inclynatyou a man has to any sin, the more he synneth yfhe do the
same, Now Adam and Eve, had in them no inclynation at al, another to one vice
nor to other. Fourthly, when a man has late received great benefits at his
soueraygns hands, if he incontmently break his express will, the contempt
and dysobedience is made thereby the greater. The thing that Adam and Eve did
eat, was in deed but an appell, yet the eating thereof in that case, was an
high disobedience against god, and the corrupting of al mankind, for as much as
they two were the very route, whereof all men must rise; and the route being
once naught, how can the tree or branches, cummynge of that route, be good?
Therefore S. (...) in his Epistle to ye To (...). 50
maines in the. v. chapyter thereof says. By the of fence of one man, sin
came upon all men, to condempnation, and in the same chapter (...) after, he
says to iyke (...), through the disobedience of one man many became sinners.
And within a little after he says. Sin came into this world by one man, and
through sin came death, and so death passed to al me^. Thus have you hard
first the (...) kyndnes of God to man, in that he created him in so worthy a
manner; next ye have hard the myschefe that comes to mankind by sin; and
thirdly what an extreme enemy (...) the (...) is unto us. In an other homily
hereafter, ye (...) hear of the exceeding great mercy of god, in (...) mankind
by a marvelous manner, out of the estat of this dampnatio^. Wherefore to conclude
for this present time, this shall be to exhort you, that you fail not daily
and howtelye to give most hearty thanks to almighty God, for that he of his
mere goodness created you; and created you, not without sense, as the stones,
not without reason as the brute beasts, but has given you, all notable
qualities and powers that other corporal creatures have, and besides, has
perticularlye planted in you reason and understanding, and (...) goodly
qualities of body and soul, several to the nature of man only, and not common
to man, and other erthly creatures. This is furthermore also to exhort you,
that remembryng what miserye came to mankind by sin, and by such a sin, as
in some men's judgment might (...) to be but very small, it is to wit by
eating of an appel, you will be circumspecte in a uoiding of al kind of sum,
and disobedience, be the thing in his own nature never so small a (...),
which is by God him self, or by such as we owe obedience unto commanded.
Fynallye and last of al, this is to exhort you, to consider dilygently that
we have a deadly cnnemy, which is yt devil, who de fyreth our destruction, and
does most craftily and busely travail by all means with us, to work the
same; of whose most subtyl and wilye traynes, we must principally take heed
of; which grant unto us all, the blessed trinity, the father, the Son, and
the holy ghost; to whom be all honor and glory world without end.

Amen.
Io. Harpesfeld sacrae theologiae Professor Arch. London.
An homely of the misery of all mankind and of his condempnation to
everlasting death, by his own sin.
THe holy ghost, in writing the holy scripture, is in nothing more dilligent,
then to pull down man's vain glory, and pride, which of all vices, is most
universally graffed in mankind, even from the first infec tion of our first
father Adam. And therefore, we read in may places of scripture many notable
lessons against this old rooted vice, to teach us ye most co^me^dable virtue
of humility; how to know our selves, and to remember, what we be, of our
selves. In the book of Genesis, almighty God gives us all, a title and name
in our great graunde father Adam, which ought to admonish us al, to consider
what we be, where of we be, from whence we came and whyther we shall, saying
thus. In sudore (...) tui vesceris pane tuo, donee reuertaris in terram (...).
3.
de qua su^ptuses: quia puluis es, (...) in puluerem reuertcris. That is to
say, In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread, until thou
retournest into the earth, out of which thou waste taken: for dust thou art,
and into dust thou shall return, Here (as it were in a glass) we may learn
to know our selves, that we be but ground, earth, and dust. and that to
ground, earth, and duste, we shall return again; which name and title of
earth, and duste, appointed, and assigned by God, to all mankind, the holy
Patriarche Abraham, did well remember: and therefore he calls him self by
that name, when he makes his earnest prayer for Sodom and Gomorre, saying in
the. xviii. of (...). Genesis 18.
Cum sim puluis et cuius. that is to say, seeing I am dust and ashes. And we
read that Judith, Hester, Job, Hieremie, with other holy men and women, in
Judith. 3 and 9.
the old testament, did use sack clothe, and did cast Job. 13.
duste, and ashes upon their heads, when they bewailed Hiere. 6. (...). 23.
their synnefull living. They called and cried to (...) for help, and mercy,
with such a ceremony of sack clothe, duste, and ashes, that thereby they
might declare to the hole world, what an hum ble, and lowlye estimation, they
had of them selves, and how well they remember their name, and title (...). 7
aforesaid, their vile, corrupt, frail nature, duste, earth, and ashes. The
book of wisdom also, willing to pull down our proud stomakes, moves us
diligently, to remember our mortal, and earthly generation, which we have al
of him, that was first made: and that all men, as well kings, as subjects, do
come into this world, and do goo out of the same in like sort, that is, as
of our selves, full miserable, as we may daily see. And almyghtye God (...).
11.
commanded his Prophet Esaias, to make a proclama tion, and to cry to the (...)
world: that all (...) is grass, and that all the glory of man, is as the
flower of yt feilde, the grass is withered, and the flower does fall away, for
the wind of our Lord blows upon it. The people sure ly is grass, which
dries up, and the flower fades away, but the word of our Lord abides for
ever. According whereunto, the holy prophet Job, having in him self great
erperience of miserable and synnefull estate of man, does open the same to the
Job. 14.
world in these works. Homo natus de muliere, breui (...), repletur multis
miserijs, qui quasi flos egreditur, et conteritur, et fugit velut vmbra, et
(...) in eodem statu permanet et dignu^ ducis super (...) aperire oculos tuos,
et adducere cum (...) in iudicium? qui potest (...) mundum de immu^do conceptum
femine? That is to say Man beyngeborne of a woman, living a worte time, is
full of manyfolde miseries; he spryngeth up like aflower, and fades again,
vanyshyng away (as it were) a shadow, and never contine weth in one state. And
do thou judge it mete (O Lord) to open thine eyes upon such a one, and to
bring him to judgment with thee? who can make him clean that is conceived of
an unclean sede? In deed all men of their euylnes and natural prones, were
so universally given to sin, that God (as the scripture testifyeth) repented
ye ever he made man. And by sin, his indygnatyon was so much Gene. 5. and. 7.
provoked against the world, that he drowned all the world with Noes fludde
(except Noe himself and his little householde.) It is not without great cause,
that the scripture of God, does so many times call all men here in this
world earth, saying. (O thou earth, thou earth, thou earth, hear the word
our Lord.) Hiere. xxii. This, Hiere. 22
our right name, vocation, and title: earth, earth, earth, prouounced by the
prophet, shows what we be in deed, by what soever other style, title, or
dignitye me^ do call us. Thus, he plainly names us, who knows best, both
what we be, and what we ought of right to be called. And thus he dyscribeth us,
(...) king by his faithful Apostle S. Paul to the Romans the. iii.
Chapter, saying. All men, Jews Roma. 3.
and Gentiles, are under sin: there is none ryghteous, no, not one; there is
none that un derstandeth, there is none that seeks after God, they are all
goone out of the wai they are all unprofitable, there is none that does good,
no not one, their throat is an open se craft and deceyte, the pyoson of
serpents is under their lips, their mouth is full of cursinge and
bitterness, their fette are swifte to shed blood, destruction and wretchedness
are in their ways, and the way of peace have they not known, there is no
fear of God be fore their eyes. And in an other place, that is to Gala. 3. i.
wit, Galathians. iii. S Paul writes thus: (God has wrapped all nations in
unbelief, that Roma, (...)
he might have mercy on all. The scripture concludes all under sin, that the
promise by the fath in Jesus Christ, should be given Gala. (...)
unto them that believe. S. Paul in many pla ces, paynteth us out in our
callours, calling us the children of the wrath of God, when we be (...);
saying also, that we cannot think a good thought of our selves, much less,
we can say well, or do well of our selves, And the wyseman says, in the book
Pro, 24.
of Proverbs the just man falls seven times a day. The most tried and
approved man Job, feared all his works. S. John the Baptist, being sanctified
in his mothers womb, and praised Luce. i.
before he was borne called an aungel, and great before the Lord, replenyshed
even from his birth with the holy ghost, the preparer of the way for our
savior Christ, to be more then a Prophet, and the greatest that ever was borne
of a woman, yet he plai nely grants, that he had need to be washed of
Christ, he worthily extolleth and glorifieth his lord and master Christ, and
humbles himself, as un worthy to vnboukle his shows, and gives al honor
and glory to God, So does sayncte Paul both often, and euydently, confess him
self, what he was of him self, ever geuinge (as a most faithful servant
ought to do) all praise to his master and savior. So does blessed saint
Ihon the John. i. and (...)
euangelyst, in the name of him self, and of al other holy men, be they never
so just, make this open con session. If we say, that we have no sin we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. If we knowledge our sins, God
is faithful and just, to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from al
unrighteousness: If we say. we have not sinned we make him a lier, and his word
is not in us. Wherefore the wysema^, in the book called Ecclesiastes, openly de
Eccles. 7.
clareth, that there is not one just man upon the earth, that does good, and
sy nneth not. And saint Psalm. 2
David is ashamed of his synue, but not to confess his sin, How often, how
earnestly, and how lamentable does he desire Gods great mercy, for his great
offenses, and that God should not enter in to judgment with him. And again,
how well wayeth this holy man his sins, when he confesses, that they be so
many in number, and so hid, and hard to (...), that it is in manner
impossible, Psalm. 19.
to know, utter, or number them. Wherefore he having an earnest, and deep
contemplation, and consideration of his sins, and yet not coming to the
(...) of them, makes supplication to god, to forgive him his prinye, secret,
hid sins, to the knowledge of the which, he cannot attain.

He wayeth ryghtly his sins, from the origynall root, and spryng head,
(...) inclinations, prouocations (...), stynginges, budes, branches, dregs,
infections. tastes feiynges, and sentes of them, to continue in him still.
Wherefore he says. Psalm, 2.
Mark, and behold I was conceived in sines He says not sin, but in the
plurel number, sins: for asinuche, as out of one, as fountain, spryngeth
all the rest.

And our savior Christ says, there is none good Math, (...).
but God, and that we can do nothing that is good, without him, or no man can
come to the father but by him. He commands us all to say, that we be
unprofitable servants, when we have done all that we can do. He prefers
the penitente Publican, before the proud holy, and gloryouse Pharysey, He
calls himself a physician, not to them that be hole, but to them that be
sick, and have need of his salve, for theyrsore. He teaches us in our
prayers, to reacknowledge our selves sinners, and to ask forgeuenes, and
deliverance from all euyls, at our heavenly fathers hand. He declares that
the sins of our own hearts, do defyle our own selves. He teaches that
an evil word, or thought, deserves condempnation, affyrmyng, that we shall
give an account, for every idle word. He says he came not to save, but the
sheep that were utterly lost, and cast away. Therefore, few of the (...),
just, learned, wise, perfect, and holy Pharisees, were saved by him, because
they justified them selves, by their counterfeyte holiness, before men.
Wherefore good people, let us beware of such Hypocrisy, vain glory, and
iustifienge of our selves, Let us look upon our feet, and then down our
Pecockes feathers, down proud heart, down vain claye, frail, and brittle
vessels. Of our selves, we be crabbe trees, that can bring forth no Aples. we
be of our selves, of such earth as can bring forth but weeds, nettels,
brambles, briars, cocle and darnell. Our fruytes (...) declared in ye fyfte
chapter to the Galathians. We have neitherfayth, Charity, hope, patience,
chastity, nor any thing else that good is, but of God: and therefore, these
virtues be called there, the fruytes of the holy ghost, and not the fruits of
man. Let us therefore, acknowledge our selves before God, (as we be in deed)
miserable and wretched sinners. And let us earnestly repent, and humble our
selves heartily, to cry to God for mercy. Let us all confess with mouth, and
heart, that we be full of imperfections. Let us know our own works, of what
imperfection they be, and then we shall not stand folyshly, and arrogantly, in
our own conceytes. For truly, there is imperfections, in our best (...): we
do not love God, so much as we are bound to do, with all our heart, mind,
and power: we do not fear God so much as we ought to do: we do not pray
to, God but with great and many imperfections. (...). 5,
We give, forgive, believe, love, and hope vnper fectlye, we speak, think, and
do imperfectly, we fight against the devil, the world, and the flesh
imperfectly, Let us therefore, not be ashamed to co^ fesse plainly, our (...)
of imperfection, yea let us not be ashamed to confess imperfection, even in all
our works, Let none of us be ashamed, to sai with holy S, Peter: I am a
sinful man. Let us all say with the holy prophet David. We have sin Psalm, 190
ned with our fathers, we have done amiss and dealt wyckedlye. Let us all make
confession with the prodigal son to our father, and say Luee. (...)
with him: We have sinned against heaven, and be fore thee (O father) we are
not worthy to be called thy sons. Let us all say with holy Baruche:
Baruch, (...)
O lord our God, to us is worthily ascribed shame and confusion, and to the,
righteousness. We have sinned, we have don wicked ly, we have behaved our selves
ungodly, in all thy rightousnes. Let us al say with the holy prophet Danyell.
O Lord, righteousness belongs to thee, unto us beldngeth confusion. Daniel, 9
We have sinned, we have been naugh tie, we have offended, we have fled from
the, we have gone back from all thy precepts and judgments.

So we learn of al good men, in holy scripture to humble our selves, and to
exalte, extol, praise, magnifye, and glorifye God.

Thus ye have heard, how evil we be of our selus: how of our selves, and by
our selves, we have no good nes, help, nor salvation, but contrary wise, sin
dampnation, and death everlasting; which if we depely weyghe, and consider,
we shall the bet ter understand, the great mercy of God, and how our salvation
comes only b y Chyst; for in our selves, as of our selves, we find nothing,
whereby we may be delivered from this miserable capti uitie, into (...) which
we were cast through the envy of the devil, by transgression of Gods
commandment, in our first parente Adam. We are al become unclean: but we al
of our selves, are not hable to cle^se our selves, nor to make one an other of
us clean. We are by nature, the children of Gods wrath: we are not hable of
our selves, to make us the children and inheritours of Gods glory, We are
sheep that (...) astray: we cannot without gods grace, and help, come again
to the shepefolde: so great is our imperfection and weakness. In our 1. Peter 2
selves therefore, may not we glory, which of our selves are nothing but
synnefull; neither may we brag of our works that we do, which all be so
imperfect and vnpure, that they are not of them selves, hable to stand before
the ryghteous throne of GOD, as the holy Prophet Dauyd says. Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for no man that lyuethe: shall be found
ryghtuous in thy syghte. To God therefore, must we stye, or else shall we never
find peace, rest, and quyetnes of conscience, in our hearts. For he is the
father of mercyes, and God of Psalm. 126
all consolation; he is the Lord, with whom is plen teouse redemption. He is
the God, which of his own mercy saves us and sets out his charity, and
exceading love toward us, in that of his own voluntary goodness, when we were
peryshed, he saved us, and provided an euerlastyuge kyngedome for us. And all
these heavenly treasures are given us of his mere mercy, freelye. And for whose
sake: Truly for Jesus Christ's sake, that pure, and (...). Lamb of God. He is
that dearly beloved son, for whose sake, God is fullye pacifyed, satisfied,
and set at one with man. He is the Lamb of God, which i. Peter. (...)
takes away the sins of the world, of whom it may be truly spoken, that
he did all things well, and in his mouth was found no craft, nor subtyltye.
Likewise he may say, the prince of the world came, and in me has nothing.
He may say also: which of you shall reprove me of any fault. He is that
high and everlasting preiste. which has offered him self to God, when he
instituted the sacrament of the Altar, and once for all, in a bloudye
sacryfyce, done upon the cross, with which oblatyon he has made perfect for
evermore, them that are sanctified. He is the mediatoure, between God and man:
which paid our ransom to God, with his i. John. 3
own blood, and with that, has cleansed us from sin. He is the Physician,
which heals all our dyseases. He is that savior, which saves the people
from all their sins. To be short, he is that flowing and most plenteous
fountain; of whose fulness, all (...). (...).
we have received. For in him are all the tresures of the wisdom, and
knowledge of God hydden. And in him, and by him, have we from God the father,
al good things, perteyning either to the body, or to the soul, O how much
then, are we bound to this our heavenly father, for these, his great
mercyes which he has so plenteouslye declared unto us, in Christ Jesus our
Lord, and sauiourer What thanks worthy, and sufficient, can we give to him.
Let us all with one accord, burst out with joyful voices, ever praysynge, and
magnifying this Lord of mercy, for his tender kindenes showed to us, in his
dearelye beloved son Jesus Christ our Lord. Let us now iearne to know our
selves, our frailty, and weakness without any ostentation, or vnastynge of
our own good deeds, and merytes, Let us also knowledge the exceadynge mercy
of God, toward us; and confess, that as of our selves comes all evil, and
dampnation, so likewise of him, comes all goodness and salvation, as God him
self says by the Prophet Oze. O Israel thy Cze. 13
destruction comes of thy self, but in me only is thy help and comfort.
If we thus humbly submytte our selves in the sight of God, we may be sure,
that in the time of his visitatyo^, he will (...) us up, into the kyngedome of
his derely beloved sonne-Chryst Jesus our Lord; to whom with the father, and
the holy ghost be all honor and glory, for ever.

Amen.
Io. Harpesfeld sacrae theology professor. Arch. London.
An Homelye of the redemption of man.
IT was declared unto you, good christen people, in ye last homelye, how our
first parents Ada^ and Eve, were by the synguler goodness, and especial
favor of almyghtye God, created right worthy creatures, and in the estate
of parfytte innocencye. It was also showed how thorought disobedience to their
creator, they brought them selves, and al mankind, into the estate of
everlasting damnation. Now shall you consequentlye hear, of the delyueraunce
of man, out of that dampnable estate, that is, of our redemption. For the
understanding whereof, you must perfytlye bear in mind that the whole nature
of man, both in body and soul, was thorough orygynall sin, greatelye
defiled. For the soul (which is the cheyf part of man) lost thereby the
especial gifts of grace, with which it was endued in the creation; and
besides that, it was also (...) in the gifts of nature, as in memory,
intelligence, will, and other like. And the body (which is the inferior part)
it also was by the means of orygynall sin, brought to the necessary estate
of mortality, so that it must needs die, and was through that sin of our
said first parents made weke, and brought to be subject, to (...) dry
kinds of infirmities, and syckenes: and another could God, of his justice,
receive man again to favor, and state of eternal life (being thus in body
and soul, by his own defaulte desyled) vules he were first made pure, and
clean again: nether man was able to help him self herein, no, nor yet any
angel at al. Wherefore, almighty God (whose mercy excedeth all his works)
pytienge the wretched case that mankind was in, did appoint, even from the
beginning, his only son, the second person in trinity, to be the savior
of the world, and to restore man again, to perfect clennes, both in body, and
soul; and that by the way of very justice, in making a sull amends, and
payinge a sufficient ransom for sin. And this son of God (according to
the will of his father,) did take upon him the nature of man, ioynynge to his
everlasting Godheade, the whole, and (...) nature of manhood; not making that
nature of man, which he took, a new of nothing as he did heaven and earth; nor
yet making it, of a clod of earth, as he did yt body of Adam, but he (...) the
nature of man, of the very substance of the vyrgyn Mary his mother; that like
as Adam and Eve, brought them selves and all their posterity, through sin,
into the estate of eternal dampnatio^: so Christ taking upon him, the very
self same nature, being descended from Adam and Eve, unto the (...) Mary, and
of her being taken, and joined in him to the (...), in (...) of person, should
by his in, nocency, and through death, wyllingly suffered in that his most
innocent body, not only him self, become immort (...), and have glory
everlasting, but make so many also, partakers of like blessedness, as should en
joy the merits of his passion. Wherefore, it is a very pernicious error, to
think that christ took not his flesh, of the very flesh of the blessed
Uyrgyne Mary his mother. How could his death have done me good, if it were not
of the same nature that I am of? and therefore S. Paul in his second chapyter
of Heb. ii.
his Epistle to the Hebrews says. Qui sanctificat, et qui sanctificantur, ex
vno omnes, that is. He that santyfyeth, and they which are sanctified, are all
of one. and within a little after he says farther, Debuit per omnia fratribus
assimulari, vt misericors fieret, fidelis (...), ad (...), (...) repropitiaret
delicta populi, that is Christ must in all points, become like to his
brethern, that he might be a merciful and fruithfull Bishop to God ward, to
procure merci for the sins of the people. If Christ took not the flesh of yt
Uirgin Marye, how is that promise fulfilled, which God made immediately after
the fall of our first pare^tes, when he thrust them out of paradise, at which
time, he said unto the serpente (as it is written in ye third Gene. (...).
chapter Genesis.) I will set (...) betwixt the, and the woman's sede, and it
shall tread down thy hedde: Lo, how mercifully God deals with mankind, He
promised that one should be borne of the sede and stock of Eve, which should
banquyshe our ghostly enemy the devil. Now in that he calls him the sede of
the woman, he most plainly declares, that he must needs have in him the
self same nature that the woman had. Again God making the second promise of
the same sede, to come of the stock of Abraham the patriarch said unto
Abraham, (as is wytnessed in the. xxii. of Genesys) In thy sede shall all the
nations of the Genesis 122.
world be blessed; and many hundred years after yt, he promyssed like wise to
(...) Dauyd, that, the sede should come of him to. Which promyses of al mighty
God, were not to be verified in Christ, if he took not yt substance of his
flesh, of the Uirgin Mary his mother. But here it may seem strange to some,
yt almighty god (seeing he intended from ye beginning, to se^d his son into
yt world, to be incarnate for man's redemption) did defer the sendinge of him
so long, that is, the space of four thousand years or theraboute. To whom
it is to be answered, that the long taryinge of Christ, before he was
incarnate, came not of lack of good will in god, toward us; but of vnredines,
and lack of good disposytion, to (...) him on our parts. For if Christ
should have commen in the beginning of the world, men would have thought,
that if God had suffered them to use their own natural powers, they would have
attained (...) well enough, without any other help on Gods part. Again,
though after long experience, and travail of man, following the only
light, of nature, it was euydente, that he ne ded a special aid from God, to
the attaynynge of everlasting life, yet the world might have demed, that in
case God of his goodness, had given unto manne some special light, and
knowledge of his will and pleasure, that then vndoughtedlye, without farther
help, he following such special light, and knowledge, might be able well
inoughe to attain to everlasting life. Therefore, to take all such excuses a
way, and that we should plainelye understand, that after we once fell into
sin, neither the light of nature in us neither the knowledge of the will of
God, by special revelation opened unto us, was able to help us; god suffered
mankind to travel, first by the light of nature, secondly by the law of
Moses, and yet man ran still farther, and farther, into damnation. Whereby
it appears, that though knowledge of the truth be necessa ry, to the
attayning of (...) life, yet such knowledge (be it never so great) being in a
man cor rupted with sin, is to feeble and to weak to purge him of sin. For
purgation and clensing of sin, comes by some other means, besides yt
knowledge of the truth: and therefore S. Paul in the first chapter of his
epistle to the Romans, most plainly (...) meth, that in the time of yt law of
nature, men knew enough of God, but yet, not withstanding their kno ledge, they
fell into abominable idolatry. The words of S. Paul, in that place are
these. So much as may be known of god, is manifest in the^ (that is to say,
in those which lived under the law of nature, from Adam unto Moses) For his
inui sible things, even his eternal power, and godhed were seen of the^, being
understood by the works of the (...) of the world; so that they are without
excuse, because, that when they knew God, they gloryfyed him not as god, nether
were thankeful, but becam full of vanity in their imaginacions. And as yt light
which men had by the laws of nature, was not of force, to keep them from
sin, so nether the law of Moses, being opened from god him self by special
revelation could suffice to ride man from sin (as S. Paul in the second
chapter of his foresaid epistle Roma, (...)
testifies saying) Behold thou art a Jew, and thou do rest in the law, and
do glory in god, and do know his will and plea sure, and being instructed
in the law, thou do allow that is best, and do trust that thou art a
guide of the blind, a light to the^ which art in darkness, an instructour of
the folly she, a master of the ignorante, and that thou know by the law the
fourine of sciens and truth: but yet thou that teach other teach not thy
self; thou ye prechest against aduoutri, art an aduoutrer thy self, thou that
dooest defye Idols, commyttest (...) thy self; thou that do glory in the
law, through transgressing of the law, do dyshonor God, for the name of
God, through you, is blasphemed amongst the gentyles.

Thus it is (...), by the doctrine of Saint Paul, that another by the common
law of nature, nether by the special knowledge of the law of Moises, man was
able to avoid eternal da^pnation; but that he neded, besides such ko^wledge,
of some other help, that is, of amends, to be made for his sins, and
thereby, to be reduced into the favor of god again, and to have abundance
of grace (...) unto him, by which grace he should both in his know ledge be yt
better established, and be able also, according to knowledge of ye truth, to
walk in the truth. For this amends to be made, the second person in trinity,
being god immortal, became mortal man, and was made in all parts like unto one
of us (sin only ex cepted) (...) he did unite unto his godhead, the body and
soul of man, in unity of person, in such a merue lous sort, that as in us,
the body being of (...) nature and the soul being of an other nature, do make
yet but one person, so in him the nature of God, and the whole perfect nature
of man, do make but one person. Of this (...) union of yt godhed, and manhed
in Christ, S. John speaks in the first cha John. (...)
piter of his gospel, saying. (...) factum est, ethabitauit in nobis, the
word (that is the son of God) was made flesh.) (that is man) and dwelt
amongst us. he dwelt here on the earth, (as scripture declares,) above.
xxxiii. years, and when he had fulfilled al things, according to the sayings
of the holy prophets, which were to be fulfilled of him before his passion,
then he suffered death willingly, yea the death of the cross, by such pain,
(wrongefully procured of the devil again him) to ransom man kind out of
captivity, which it sustained under the devil most justly: and that this
ran^some should be perfyt, he suffered sundry sorts of most spytefui wrongs,
and intolerable pains, and torments, in his most pure, and innocent body; as
buffeting, bindinge, scourgyng, plattynge on his head, a crown of thorn,
hanginge on the cross, pearcynge of his hands and fete with nails, opening
of his side with a spear, and shedynge of his most precious blood; which
passion of his, as it is a most parfyt myrrour, and glass for us, there in to
behold the excedyng great love of god toward us, which spared not his only
son, but for us all gave him to dye, so it is a sufficient occasion, to
bring al men in extreme hatred of the devil, and sin: from danger of
whom, mankind could not be rydde, but only by so playnefull a death, of the
son of God.

What can we look for at gods hands, if we sin from hence forth, but wrath
and vengeance, seeing he has once delivered us from sin, by so merciful a
means: All that our sauyoure Christ suffered, he wyllingely suffered for our
sins, him self having never deserved any whyt of pain, as who never
sinned. And yet his passion, though it be in it self a sufficient ransom,
for the sins of the whole world, yet it takes not place in all men: not for
insufficiency in it self, but for defaulte in them, that should condignely
receive the merits thereof. For this you must know; that God requires in us
certain things, to be accomplished by our own wiland consent, without the
which, we can not ve saved, no more, than if Christ had never dyed for us. What
things these are, shall be hereafter declared unto you. In the mean season,
lift up your hearts, and open them awyde, to receive in unto them, a great love
toward God, who so nobylye created us and when we, through our own default
were fallen into the estate of endless miseri, and wretchedness, so mercyfully
redeemed us, by the passion, and death of his only son our savior Christ.
Remember that sin, and naught else, brought us first out of Gods favor; and
that to take away sin, the son of God was incarnate, and suffered most
paynefull death on the cross; and therefore hereafter, flee you all kind of
sin, and fight incella^tly against your ghostly enemy the devil, who being
vanquished by Christ, is not able now to overthrow us, if we, in the right
faith of Christ, valiantly with stand him; which to do grant unto us, the
blessed (...), the father the son, and the holy ghost, to whom be all
honor, and glory, world without end.

Amen.
Io. Harpesfelde theologiae professor. Arch. London.
An Homely declaring how the redempti on in Christ is apliable to us
ALthough the death and passion of our savior christ be in va lu a sufficient
ransom for the sins (...) the whole world, yet i effect it takes not place
in ye whole world. For neither Turk, Jew, nor infidel, wanting belief in
Christ, can take good by the death and passion of christ, ye scripture (...).
16.
most manifestly affyrming in the. xvi. chapter of s. Mark, that, Whosoever
dothnot believe shall be dampened, Again, evil life, brings to the evil
liver, eternal death, believe he never so well. As Gala. 3.
S. Paul wituesseth, in the. v. chapyter of his Epi stle to the Galathians,
where he says: Walk af ter the spirit, and fulfill not the lusts of yt
flesh. For the flesh lusts contrary to the spirit and the spirit contrary to
the flesh. These are contrary one to another, so yt you do not what ye would:
But and if ye beled of the spirit, then are ye not under the law. The de des of
the flesh ar manifest which are these aduoutry, fornication, uncleanness,
wa^tonnes ydolatry, witchcrafte, hatred, variau^ce, (...), wrath, strife,
sedition, sects, envy murder dronke^nes, glotteny, and such like; of which I
tell you before as I have told you in time past, that they which commit such
things, shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven. Thus you perceive that to ye
enjoying of the death and passion of Christ, these two points are requisite of
our behalf; the one, to believe rightlye, yt other to live vpryghtly; which two
points, no man is able otherwise to know (except it be by special revelation
from God) but only by the catholic church; which catholic church, our
savior Christ has appointed to be the only scoole, for all men to come and
repair unto, to learn such truth, as is mete for them to know, for the
attayning of euerla styng life. This catholic church, and no other company,
has yt true understanding of scripture, and the knowledge of all things
necessary to salvation. To John. 16.
this church. Christ makes promis, in yt xvi. of Tho^ saying, When that
spirit of truth shall come, he shall teach you al truth. To this church also he
makes that other promis, written in the, xxviii, of Mathewe, where he says.
Behold I am with Math, 28
you, to the end of the world. This Catholic church, thus governed by the
holy Ghost, and assured always, of Christ him self, never yet failed, from yt
time of the Apostles, hitherto, ne shall fail to ye worl des end; nether can it
be deceued in any necessary truth, (...) as Christ promyseth in the. xvi. of
Mathe we saying. That hell gates shall not pre Math. 16
uayle against the church. where by hell gates he means error, as if he had
said, that the catho like church shall never be overcome with error. For
this cause S. Paul in the third chapter of his first epistle to Timothe,
calls the catholic church (...) 1.
the pillar and ground of truth. This catholic church, must in all ages needs
be an open known church, and such a company as among which the truth is
openly preached, else Christ would not have said. (as it is written in the.
v, of Matthew) Math. 5.
A city that is seton a hyl, can not be hid, ne there do men light a candle,
and putit under a bushel but on all ca^delsticke and it gives light unto all that are in the house. Wherefore they do great injury to Christ, which say,
that the catholyke church is an unknown church, saying it is that city, which
our savior there mente, and that candell, of which he there speaks. So many
as deuyde them selves from this open known Church of Christ, and refuse the
doctrine thereof, though they be never so diligent in reading ofscripture, yet
shall they never truly understand scripture, but run continually farther
and farther into error and ignorance; cue^ as a man that is once out of his
way, the farther, and faster he goes forth the more (...). Peter 1
he loses his labor. Saint Peter therefore in the first Chapter of his second
epistle, gives us a most certain an. sure rule, which if we follow, we shall
not fail, ryghtly to understand scripture; his rule is this. We have (says
he) A right sure word of prophecy, whereunto if ye take (...), as unto a light
yt shines in a dark place, you do well until the day dawne, and the day
star arise in your hearts. So that you first know this, that no prophecy in
ye scripture has any private interpretation, For yt scrip ture came never by
the will of man, butholy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the holy ghost.
Here you se, how S. Peter wills every man, first of all, to know, that
scripture must be understood after the general meaning of Christ's church,
and not after the private interpretation of any several man, or company. And
in 2 Peter. 3
the third chapyter of the same Epistle, he says further, that in S. Paul's
epistles, are many things hard to he understood, which they that are
unlearned and unstable, do peruerte, as they do also the other scriptures to
their own destruction, ye therefore beloved (seeing you be (...) before hand)
beware, least ye with other men, be also plucked a way through the error of
the wicked, and fall from your own steadfastness. Lo here. S Peter tells the
(...) cause, why men my svnderstand scripture, which is lack of knowledge, and
lack of constancy, when men either through ignotaunce, or thoroughe
inconstancy, swerue from the catholyke meaning, and follow private
interpretation. Such men, he says, do peruerte the scryptures to their own
destruction. Saint Paul also writing to Tymothe, and willing him to be
earnest i. Timo 9
in the study of scripture, gives him withal this foresaid rule, saying in the
very end of his first epistle: O Limothie, keep sure that, which is committed
to thy custody, and avoid new fangled terms, and bosting of science, falsely
so called which science while some did profess, they have erred from the
faith. The thing, which S. Paul says was committed to (...) custodye, was
the truth of the catholyk faith, which he says, some fell from, by reasonne of
new fangeled terms, and by reason aiso, that they took upon them knowledge,
being in deed ignoraunte. And in the third chapter of his second epistle to
Timothy, he farther says. Continue (...). Timo 3
thou in yt things which thou have learned which also were committed unto the.
S. I reneus also (a blessed martyr, and very nyghe to the time of the Apostles,
a man of great learning, and no less virtue, and such a one, as by the
consent of all men, had the perfyt knowledge and understanding of scryptures)
in his third book (...) the arche heretyke, and in the fowrth chapter (...). in
his third (...) as
of the same book says, touching the catholyke church in this manner. We must
not seek ye truth among other, seeing we may easily take (...) V (...) tine chapter
(...)
it of the church, for as much as the Apostels have fully left with it (as in
a rich tresury) all truth, ye who so lists, may thence take the drinks of
life, for this is the enter to life. All other are thieves, and robbers,
wherefore them must we avoid: and that doctrine that the church teaches, we
must love, and with great diligence embrace the tradition of the truth For
what and if a controversy should happen to rise upon never so (...) a
question; ought not men in that case to have recourse to the most ancient
churches, in which the Apostles were conuersaunt, and there learn the truth in
that controversy? ye, what and if the Apostles had left behind the^ no
writing at al, must we then not have followed the order of tradition, delivered
by them to such as they committid the churches unto? to which tradition many
barbarous nations, believing in christ, do give credit with out any other
writing, then that which is in their hearts written. All this writes Irene us;
and within a little after he says. If to these barbarous nations, any man
(...) preach in their own language, these inuentio^s of heretics, by and by
they would stope their ears, and (...) as far as they could from him, and
not once here his blasphemous talk, thus says S. (...). Now if christen
people at this (...), would follow this trad, which this blessed (...) here
speaks of, the^ should no ma^runne into heresy, but al men should cleue fast
unto yt wholesome doctrine of the catholic church, and abhor and detest,
whatsoever any precher would utter to the^, contrary to the same. For whosoever
precheth any doctrine, not agreeable to yt general (...) doctrie in the open
known church, he it is, and such as be like to him, of who^ our (...) bids
us to (...), sa (...), 7
yng in yt. vii. of Mathewe. Beware of false prophets, which com to you in
shepes clothing but inwardly they are rauenyng wolves. Our savior calls them
wolves, for yt they devour yt souls, of so many as give credit unto the^; he
says farther of them, that they come in lambs skins, because they pretend the
word of God, and therewith bleare the eyes of pore simple men, and make them
believe, that it is as they say, where in (...), whatsoever is taught contraty
to that, that al (...) openly teaches, and from time to time has taught, is
false, and cannot possible be true, (...) les we would (...), yt christ hun
self were not true. For he promyseth yt him self will be for ever with ye church,
and yt the holy ghost, shall for ever govern the same. Forasmuch than, as there
is no other schole on the earth, for men to learn their duty, toward god,
and the world, but the catholyke church, nor no other doctrine, auay leable to
eternal life, but that which the catholyke church teaches, therefore all
christian people are required, to make a sole^pne vow at their baptism, to
believe the catholyke church. And he that so does. is in an assured trade
(...) salvation, if in his conversation, he follow the same; but contrary wise,
he that (...) it not, is in a most certain estate of everlasting dampnation.

(...), that you may know, what the (...) church does in all points
believe, there shall be hereafter particulerly, set forth unto you the several
matters, requisite to be believed, and practiced of all Christen people, that no
man, may have just cause hereafter, to pretend ignorance; but al men being
sufficiently instructed, may, by following such doctrine, attain to
everlasting life; which send unto us all, the blessed (...), the father the
Son, and the holy (...), to whom be all honor, and glory, (...) without
end.

Amen.
Io. Harpesfelde, sacrae theologiae professor, Arch London.
An homely of Christian love or Charity.
FOrasmuch as yt pith, and sum, of al things, which be contemed, either in
the law, or in the prophets, does stand and consist, in ye love of God, and in
the love of (...) neighbor, as our (...) Christ does (...) stifye, in the.
xxii. Chapter of saint Mathewe saying. (...) of the Math. 22.
Pharisees being a doctor of the law, te^ping, did ask him and say, master,
what is the great co^man^deme^t in ye law? Jesus, (...), (...) unto him. Thou
(...) love thy (...) God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with althy
hole mind this is (says he) the greateste, and first (...). And the second
is like unto it. Thou (...) love thy neig hboure, as thy self and of these two
commandments all the law does (...), and the Prophets. And forasmuch also,
as we can not love God well except we do love our neighbor, in a due order
ne yet love our neighbor, well, except we do (...) God, in that due order,
that we ought to do, (Saint Jhon the evangelist so testifyeng, and
declaryng, John (...) and. (...)
in the third and fourth Chapiters of his first canonical Epistle.) And
finally, forasmuch as he that loves not after this sort, is (by the
testimonye of the said saint John, in the said third Chapter) judged to be
in death, therefore it is right expediente, and necessary, to have alwyes this
love, which now in our vulgar tongue, and common talk, is often named, by
the name of Charity, but ve ry megerly, and coldely practiced, and set fourth
in deed, as it should be. And of truth, if we would judge vpryghtly, and
well, we ought to say, that of all things that be good, to be taught unto
Christen people, there is no thing more necessary to be spoken of, and daily
called upon, then charity: as well for that al manner of works of
righteousness, be contained in it, as also, that the decay thereof, is the
(...) of the world, the banysh ement of virtue, and the cause of all vice. And
forasmuch, as almost every man makes, and fra^eth to him self a charity,
after his own appetyte, and how (...) so ever his life be, both unto God, and
man, yet he persuades with himself still, that he has chatitye: Therefore
you shall here now a true, and plain descryption of charity, not of men's
ymagination, but of the very words, and example of our savior Jesus
Christ. In which description, every man (as it were in a glass) may
consider him self, and see plai nely, without error, whether he be in the true
Charity or not. charity is to love God, with all our heart, withal our life,
with all our powers, and with all our strength With all our heart. that is to
say, yt our hearts, mind, and study, be set to (...) his word, to trust in
him and to love him above all other things, which we do love best, in heaven
or in earth. With all our life that is to say, that our chief joy, and
delight, be set upon him and his honor, and our hole life given unto the
service of him, above al things, with him to live, and with (...) to dye, yea,
and to forsake all other things, rather then him. For he that loves his
father or mother, son, or daughter, house or la^d, more (...) me (says
Christ) is not worthy to have me. (...) all our powers. that is to say, that
with our hands, and feet, with our eyes, and ears, (...) and tongues, and
with all other parts and powers, both of body and of soul, we should be given
to the (...) pynge, and fulfyllyng of his commandments. This is is the
first, and the principal part of chariti but it is not the whole. For charity,
is also to (...) every man, good, and (...), friend, and fooe: And (...) cause
be given to the contrary, yet nevertheless, to bear good will, and heart unto
every man, to use our selves well unto the^ as well in words, and
countenance, as in all our outward acts, and deeds. For so Christ him self
(...) and so also he performed in deed. And of this love that we ought to have
amongst our selves, each to other he instructs us thus. (Mathewe. v.) You
have hard it taught in times past? Thou shalt love thy friend, and hate thy
fooe: but I tell you love your enemies, speak well of them that diffame you,
and do speak evil of you: do well to the^ that hate you, pray for the^ that
vex and persecute you, that you may be (...) children of your father, that is
in heaven. For he makes the sun to rise both upon the evil, and good, and
sends rain to the just, and to the unjust. For if you love them that love
you, what reward shall you have. Do not the publicans likewise? And if you
speak well only of them, that be your brethren, and derely beloved friends.
What great matter is that? do not the heathen yt same also. These be the very
words of our saui our Christ him self, touching the love of our neigh bour.
And forasmuch as the Pharisees (with (...) most pestilent traditions, false
interpretations, and gloses) had corrupted, and almoost clearly stopped up,
this pure well, of Gods iyuely word, (...) that this love, and charytie,
pertayned only to a man's friends, and that it was sufficient for a man to
love them which do love him, and to hate his fooes: therefore Christ did
open this well again, purged it, and scourged it, by giuinge unto his god lie
law of Charity, a true and clear interpretation, which is this: that we ought
to love every man, both friend, and fooe: addyng thereto, what commodity we
shall have thereby, and what in commodity by doing the contrary. What thing
can we wyshe so good for us, as the heavenly father, to repute, and take us,
for his children? And this shall we be sure of (says Christ,) if we love
every man, without ex ception. And if we do otherwise (says he,) we be no
better tha^ Phariseis, Publicans, and heathen persons, and shall have our
reward with them: that is, to be excluded from the number of gods elect
children, and from his everlasting inheritance in heaven. Thus of true
Charity, Christ taught, that every man is bound to love God above al things
and to love every man, friend, and fooe.

And thus likewise, he did use him self, exhortyng his adversaries, rebukynge
the faults of his adversaries, and when he could not amend them, yet he
prayed for them. First he loved God his father, above al things, so much,
that he sought not his own glory, and will, but the glory, and will of his
father: Iseke not (said he John. v.) mine own will, but the will of him that
sent me: Nor he refused not to dye, to satysfye his fathers will, saying. Math.
xxvi. (...) it may be, let John. 5
this cup of death goo from me, if not thy will be done, and not mine. He
loved also not Math. 26
only his friends, but also his enemies, which in there hearts did bear
exceeding great hatred against him, and in their tongues spoke all evil of (...),
and in their acts, and deeds, pursued him with al their might, and power, eue^
unto death. Yet all this notwythstanding, he with drew not his favor from
them, but still loved them, preached unto them, of love rebuked their false
dortrine, their wicked lynynge, and did good unto them, (...) accepting
whatsoever they spoke, or did, against him When they gave him evil words, he
gave noue evil again, when they did stryke him, he did not (...) again. And
when he suffered death, he did not (...) them, nor threaten them, but prayed
for the^ and referred all things to his fathers will. And as a sheep that is
led unto the shambles to be slain Esai. (...) Act, (...)
and as a lamb that is shorn of his flese, did make no noise, nor resistance,
even so went he unto his death, without any repugnance, or opening ofhys
mouth, to say any evil. Thus have I des cribed unto you, what charity is,
as well by the doc tryne, as by the example of Christ him self, whereby also,
every man may without error, know him self, what state and condition he
stands in: when there he be in charity (and so the child of the father in
heaven) or not. For although almost every (...) persuade) him self to be in
Charity, yea let him ex amyne none other man, but his own heart, his (...),
and (...), and he shall not be deceived, but truly decerne, and judge, whether
he be (...) perfyte charity, or not. For he that follows not his own
appetite, and will, but gives him self earnestly to God, to (...) all his
will, and commandments, he (...) be sure, that he loves God, above at
things, and else surely he loves him not, whatsoever, he pretend, As Christ
said, If ye love me keep (...). 14.
you my commandments, For he that knows my commandments, and does keep
them, he it is (says Christ) that loves me. And again he says. He that
loves me, will keep my word, and my father will love him, and we will both
come to him, and dwell with him. And he that loves me not will not keep my
words. And likewise he that (...) good heart and mind, and uses well his
tongue, and deeds unto every man, friend, and fooe, he may know thereby, that
he (...) charity. And then he is sure also that almygnty god takes him for
his dear beloved son, as Sayute (...) says, in the third Chapyter of his
first canonycall Epistle. Hereby, manifestly are known, the children of God,
from the chiloren of the dcuyll. For who soever does not love his brother,
belongs not unto God. But yt perverse nature of man, corrupt with sin, and
desti tute of Gods word, and grace, thinks it against all reason, that a man
should love his enemy, and has many persuasions, which induces him to the
contrary. Against all which reasones, we ought as well to set the teaching,
as the living of our savior Christ, who loving us (when we were his
enemies) does teach us to love our ene myes. He did patiently take for us
many reproaches suffered beatynge, and most cruel death. Therefore we be no
memberes of him, if we will not follow him. For as S. Peter says, Christ
suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should i. (...). (...)
follow him. Furthermore we must consider that to love our friends, is no more
but that which thieves, adulterers, homicides, and all wicked persons do: in so
much that Jews, Turks, Iufidels, and all brute beasts, do love them that
be their friends, of whom they have their living, or any other benefits.
But to love our enemies, is the proper co^ dition only of them, that be the
children of God, the disciples and folowers of Christ. Notwithstanding man's
froward and corrupt nature, wayeth over depely many times, the offense and
displeasure done unto him by enemies, and thinks it a burdenintollerabel, to
be bound to love them, that hate him. But the burden should be easy yuoughe,
if (on the other side) every man would consider, what dyspleasure he has done
to his enemy again, and what pleasure he has received of his enemy. And if
we find no egall recompense, neither in receiving pleasures of our enemy, nor
in rendryng dyspleasure unto him again: then let us ponder the dyspleasu res,
which we have done against almighty God How often, and how grievously, we
have offended him. Whereof, if we will have of God forgyuenes there is none
other remedy, but to forgive the offenses done unto us which be very small in
comparison of our offenses done a (...) God. And if we consider that he,
which has off (...) us, deserves not to be forgyuen of us, let us consider
again, that we much less deserve to be forgyuen of God. And although our
enemy deserve not to be forgyuen for his (...) sake, yet we ought to forgive
him, for gods (...), (...) how great, and manifest benefytes we have received
of him, without our deserts, and that Christ has deserved of us, that for
his sake, we should forgive them their trespasses, committed against us.

But here may rise a necessary question, to be dyssolued. If charity require to
think, speak, and do well unto every man, both good and evil, how can
magystrates execute justice upon malefactoures, with charytye? How can they
cast evil men into prison, take away their goods, and sometime their lives,
according to laws: if Charytye (...) not suffer them so to do? Hereunto, is
a plain and brief answer, that plages and punishementns be not euel of them
selves, if they be well taken of innocents: and to an evil man, they are
both good and necessary: and may be executed according to charity, and with
charity should be executed. For declaracion whereof, you shall understand, that
charity has two offices, the one contrary to the other: and yet (...)
necessary to the used, upon men of contrary sort, and dysposion. The one
office of Charity, is, to cherishe good, and innocent men. Not to oppress
them, with false accusations, but to encourage them with rewards to do well,
and (...) in well dooynge: defending them with the sword, from their (...).
And the office of Bishops, and pastors, is to laud good men, for well doing,
that they may persevere therein, and to rebuke and correct, by (...) word of
God, the offenses, and (...) of all evil disposed persons.

The other office is, to rebuke, correct, and punysh, vice, without
acceptance of parsons, and this is to be used, against them only, that be
(...) men, and malefactors. And it is as well the office of charity, to
rebuke, punyshe, and corrocte them, that be evil, as it is to cheryshe, and
reward them that be good, and innocent. Saint Paul so declares, writing to
the Romans, and saying, the (...) poweres are ordained of GOD, not to be
dreadefull to (...). 13.
them that do well, but unto Malefactoures, to draw the swoorde, to take
vengeance of him that commytteth the sin. And sayncte Paul byddethe
Tymothye constantlye, and vehementlye, to rebuke sin, by the word of GOD.
i. Timo. (...)


So that both offices should be dylygently executed, to impuge the kingdom
of the devil: the preacher with the word, and the Gouernoure with (...)
swoorde. Else they love neither God, nor them whom they govern, if for lack
of correction, they wylfully suffer God to be offended, and them whom they
govern, to perish. For as every loving father corrects his natural son,
when he does amysse, or else he loves him not: So all gouernoures of Realms,
Countries, Towns, and houses, should louynglye correct them, who be
offenders under their governance. And cheryshe them who do live innocently:
if they have any respect, either unto God, and their office or love unto them,
of whom they have gouernauce,

And such rebukes, and punyshementes, of them that do offend, must be done
in due times, least by delay, the offender fall headlinges into al manner of
myschiefe, and not only be evil them selves, but also do hurt unto many
men, drawing other by their evil example, to sin, and outrage, after them.
As one thief may both rob many men, and also make many thieves, and one
sediciouse person may allure many, and noye a hole town or country. And such
evil persons, that be so great offenders of god, and the common wealth, charity
requires to be cut of, from the body of the common weal lest, they corrupt
other good, and honest persons: like as a good surgeon cutteth away a
putrified, and festred mem ber, for the love he has to yt hole body, least it
infecte other members, adioynynge to it. Thus it is declared vuto you, what
true charity, or christan love is, so plainly, that no man need to be
deceived.

Which love whosoever keeps, both toward God (whom he is bound to love
above al things) and also toward his neighbors, as well friend as fooe, it
shall surely keep him from al offense of God, and just offense of man.
Therefore bear welaway this one short lesson, that by true christian charity
God ought to be loved, above all things, and all men ought to be loved, good
and evil, friend, and foo, and to al such we ought (as we may) do good those
that be good, of love we ought to encorag, and cherysh, because they be good:
And those that be evil, of love, we ought to procure unto them their
correction, and dew punyshement, that they may thereby, either be brought to
goodness, or at the lest, that god, and the common welthe may be the less
hurt, and offended, hating always, the vice, or offense, but loving the
person always, as the creature of God, and as one who by nature is joined in
kynred unto us. And if we thus direct our life, by christian love and
Charytye, then Christ doothe promise, and assure us, that he loves us, and
that we be the Children of our heavenly father, and reconsiled to his favor,
being very members of Christ, and that after the short time, of this present
and mortal life, we shall have with him, eternal life, in his everlasting
kingdom of heaven: There fore to him, with the father, and the holy Ghost, be
al honor and glory now and ever

Amen.
E. B.
An Homely declaryng how dangerous a thing, the breach of Charity is.
Ur Saiyour Christ in ye. v. of Matthew, sets forth an universal Math, 5
doctrine, that is, a doctrine, apper teyning indifferently to all Christen me^
and there he declares, how great per fection of life, ought to be in one of
us, saying in this manner. Nisi abundauerit iustitia uestra plus quam
Scribarum, and pharisaeo rum, nonimrabit is in regnum (...). That is to say:
Except your ryghtuousnes excede the ryghtuousnes of the Scribes, and the
Pharyseis, ye cannot enter into the kyngedome of heaven, For the right
understanding: of which words, it is to be noted, that righteousness in this
text, does signisye all kind of virtue, and goodness, and that by the Scribes,
and Pharyseis, Christ does here mean, certain companies, which were among
the Jews, and did live according to the letter of Moses law, so vpryghtly,
in the face of the world Oecumevpon the fifth of Ma (...).
that they were commonly taken for parfyt men. Decumenius, an ancient father
of ye greek church does so declare the foresaid words. Wherefore, when our
savior requires of us, that we, in righ tuousnes, should pass the Scribes
and Phariseis, he means, that we Chrsten folk should not only outwardely,
seem good in the sight of the world, (as did the Scribes, and the Pharisees,)
but inwardlye also in our hearts, should be like wise good, in the sight of
almyghtye God, which they were not. And because no fault is more greuouse,
then the breach of Christen Love, and Charity, therefore immediately after
the foresaid general sentence, he instructs us, after all other things, in
our durye, touching Charity, saying: Dictum est antiquis, non occides, qui
(...) occiderit, reus erit iudicii, Ego autem dico uobis, (...) omnes qui
irascitur fratri suo, reus erit (...). That is to say.

It was said to them of old time, Thou shalfe not sley whosoever does sley,
shall be in danger of judgment. But I say unto you that whosoever is angry
with his brother, shall be in danger of judgment. Behold, good Christian people,
how perfect a charity Christ requires in us. For to us he makes the least
breach of Charity, as dangerous, as in old time, was the greatest breach
to the Jews, The greateste breathe of Charity, is murdre, and the (...)
thereof amongst the Jews, was judgment. The least breach of Charyty, is
anger, and yet the punishment appointed for it to us Christians, by our
sauyoure him self, is like wise judgment. How great dyfference of life then,
I pray you, must be between us, now living under the new law, and them that
of old time, lived under the old law, that is under yt law of Moses, when
as, the self same pain that was then prescribed unto them, for the highest
degree of uncharitableness, is now dew to us, for the lowest degree thereof?
How is it that me^ flatter them selves, with the pleasant name of Christian
Math, 11
liberty, and think that, because Christ says in the xi of Matthew. Iug in
meum suaue est, et onus meum leave. That is to say. My yoke is sweet, and my
burden light: that therefore such streytnes of life, and playnefull travel
is not required of us, as was before time of the Jews? True it is in deed,
that Christen men are not at this present, bound to be cyrcumcysed, or to
offer up unto almyghtye GOD, calves, oxen, sheep, and Gotes, or to goo thryse a
year to Jerusalem, or to forbear swynes flesh, or to keep other like
observations of Moses law, but as touching the ten commandments, and
all mortal Precepts contained in the old testament, we Christyans are bound
to the observation of them, and of all other things, belongyng to the estate
of the new testamente, and so bound, as that in perfourmance, and fulfyllyng
of them, we must be much more perfyt, and more exact, then ever was the
Jews in obeyng Moses law. Nether is the yoke of Christ called sweet, nor
his burden light, for any ease or remission, that we may take in our
condition, but for two other consyderacions, of which the one is, the
abou^daunce of grace, given now in the time of the new testamente, far
exceeding, the measure of grace given to the Iewees, folowinge Moses law: the
other is, the greatness of reward, promised to us, above the Jews, as
witnesses among many other ancient Oecume^ upon the fifte of Matthew
fathers, Oecumenius also, who writing upon the v. of Matthew, says after this
sort. Quonia^ infantia in ^irilem iam transierit etate^, et copiosa hominibus
data sit gratia et maxis maproposita sunt premia (neque eumiam possioterrae
terrenorum, quem bonorum, aut prolis faecunditas aut long a vita, seu victoria
contra hostas premittitur, sed reguum caeloru^, adoptio et victoria contra
damones) me pi^o magna exiguntur certamina^. That is to say. For as much as
now infancy is passed into man's age, and grace is plenteouslie given to men
and most greatest rewards are promised (for now nether possession of earth,
and earthelye goods, nor long life, nor fecundite of children. nor victory
against our mortal enemies, is promised, but the kingdom of heaven, adoption
to God, and victory against deuels therefore of good reason, great fyghtes are
required of us. Thus says Oecumenius co^cludyng that we christen men must more
paynefully, and manfully, fight against our ghostly enemy, then did the Jews,
because we receive more grace then they receued, and have promise made to us of
greater rewards, the^ they had made to the^. For these two causes, we christen
men must think the yoke of Christ, sweet, and his burden easy, be the things
which are required of us, never so hard to do, as this is one, that we may not
break charity, so much as in the lowest degree that can be, that is in
anger, which word, in the foresaid place of Matthew, does sygnify a violation
of breach of charity, not uttered or showed forth by any sign but only
conceived secretly in the heart, and there lyenge hyd, from knowledge of man,
but open, and manifest to the eye of almighty God, who seith eue^ the inward
thoughts of the heart: this breach of charity, though it seem to many a
small fault, yet Christ declares it to be a greuouse fault, and makes it in
the pain, equal with murder, committed of old time by the Jews. Now if
Christen men, having conceived anger in their hearts, do not by and by
suppress the same, but proceade to a fardar breach of charity, that is, to
utter their anger by any sign or token, than is this there faut greter then the
other, and the punyshemente due for the same, greater also, according to the
words of Christ who in the. v. of Mathewe says. Qui aute^ dixerit Racha
^eus erit concilio, that is to say. He that says to his brother Racha, shall be
in danger of counsel. Math. 5.
Where, by Racha, we must understand an outewarde sign, uttered by the mouth
with breach of charity, and yet such a sign as does sygnifye, no express or
particular reproach, as to thou our brother or to tushe at him. And by council
we must understand agreat punyshmente, then was judgment After this our
savior proceeds to the third degree M^^^^ 5.
of uncharitableness, which is in word to call our neighbor, by any evil
name, as to call him fool. Of this third degree, Christ says. Qui autem
dixerit fratri suo fatue, reus erit gehennae ignis, that is to say. He that
calls his brother fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. behold Chrystian
people, your life in this lesson, as in a glass, and you shall see what
danger you stand in. Who is there almoost amongst us, but yt uncharitably
calls his neighbor fool, or some like evil name? yea who is there in manner
that does not far pass this degree of uncharitableness? And yet our savior
names no mo degrees, partly, because the pain of this third degree being
hell fire, no greater pain could be named, for such as should pass the same
degree: partly, because the Chrystyan man should at the least be so wary, and
circumspecte, in keeping brotherlye love, and charity, yt though he did,
perchance so far forgette himself, as to call his brother fool
vucharitably, yet fardar than so, he should not so much as think thoroughout
his Cicero (...) his oration for sexte Roscius, Amerinus
whole life. It is written of one Solon an infidel, but yet a very polityke
man, how when he made laws for the government of yt famous city of Athe^s he
in all his laws, appointed no punishment for a parricide, that is for such a
one, as should kill his father or mother: and when he was demanded, why he
provided not for that case, he answered, yt he verily, thought and believed
that no one being brought up in Athens, under his laws: would at any time
attempt such an heinous sin. Even so may we say of our savior, that he
speaks but of those fore said three degrees of (...), for that it is not
lykely, christen men, being traded in Christ's most parfyt religion, would at
any time proced in the violatyng of (...) charity, fardar then so But here may
be moved a question whether our savior has so forbidden us to be angry, to
say Racha, or thou fool, one to an other, yt in no wise any man may so do,
but thereby he falls in danger of judgment, of council, or of hell fire. For
answer to this question, it is to be noted, that our savior in this place,
forbids us al kind of uncharitableness, and nothing else. For as much then, as
in yt third of Mathewe. S. Ihon Baptist calls the scribes Math. 3.
and pharisees, adders broad, and S, Paul calls the Galathians fools, and
men without vndersta^ ding, in the second chapyter of his epistle written to
(...). 2.
them: yea Christ himself in the. xxiiii. of Luke calls his dear beloved
apostles, fools, and (...) of belefe, Luc. 24.
and the thing which they did, cannot be judged uncharitable, therefore we must
say, that when such as have authority, upon a good and Godly zeal, rebuke
trespassoures, and offenders, thereby to make them ashamed of there evil
doings, and the rather to leave the same, that this kind uf rebuking is
lawful, and in no wise meant in the foresaid talk of Christ. But the only
thing that is there forbidden, is the breach of charity, when one man means
ne good at all, to an other but for the only satisfyeng of his uncharitable
heart, wyshed him hurt in his heart, or vtteryng his secret vncharita ble
mind, does thou him, or tush at him, or finally speaks contumelious words,
expressly unto him calling him fool, idiot or by other like opprobrious names,
Wherefore to conclude, saying you now know what parfytte love and charity,
our savior Christ does require to be in us, let al accustomed tancour and
malice from henceforth be utterly banyshed from amongst us, that we dwelling
in cha ritie, may dwell in God, and have here in this life, GOD dwell in us,
and in the world to come, dwell in heaven with him for ever, which grant unto
us, the blessed trinity, the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, to whom
be all honor and glory world without end.

Amen.
Io. Harpesfeld sacrae theologiae professor, Arch. London.
(...) An Homely of the church, what it is, and of the commodity thereof.
Whosoever (good people) will call to his remembrance, yt inestimable good nes
of almyghtye God, and his inesti mable mercy, toward us nothing deserving the
same if there be any spot of heavenly grace in that person, he shall be ashamed
of his own unthankfulness, and disobediens, and be compelled to fall down in
body and soul, before our Lord, to ask pardon for his tra^sgression. Of the
which goodness, and mercy of god, you have a sufficient, and most evident
declarati on, in these godly, and devout homelies, that are set fourth to you,
of the creation, and redemption, of man Nevertheless, for your further
instruction, and gostlye comfort in this behalf, I have thought good to let
you understand, an other hye benefytte, given to us, by our savior, and
redemer, Jesus Christ, that we, having perfyt knowledge of God, may evermore
praise, and magnifye him, according to our most bounden duetye. And this hye,
and heavenly benefyte, is the holy catholyke church, whi che our dear, and
dreadefull Savior, both before and after his paynefull death, did ordeyne,
and ap point, to be for ever to us, a most louinge, and tender mother, a
perpetual preservation for our soul health and a pyller of truth, in all our
doutefull dangers Which church, for so much as he has been latelye assaulted,
by sundry sects, and heresies, and so sore shaken, that many (more is the
pity) had separate them selves from the same, and wylfully have rune astray,
being led, and carried with every wave and wind of new lerning, I purpose,
by Gods grace, to open shortly to you, what this church is, what manner of
church it is, and what commodity we have by it.

First, the church is a convocation of all people throughout the whole world,
professyng one faith of God, and one use of all the holy sacraments, whi che
church, because it is purchased, and sanctified, by the death of our Savior
Jesus Christ, it is most derely beloved to God the father, and is called in
holy Scripture, by most hie, and excellent na mes, as Corpus Christi, Sponsa
Christi, Regnum celorum. etc. that is to say. The body mystical of Christ,
the spouse of Christ, the kingdom of heaven. Ephesians. 4.
For S. Paul, speaking of Christ, says, That he has appointed sundry
officers, to maintain the holy ones, into the work of ministration, to the
edifieng of the bodi of Christ. And king Solomon, taught by the holy ghost did
forsee the dignity, and beutye of his holy Church and said in the name of
GOD thereby. (...) est (...) mea, perfectamea. That is to say: One is my dove,
and my perfyte one. With many Cantic. 4
other such loving words: as my sister, my spouse, etc.

And Saint Paul byddeth husbands to love their wives, even as Christ loved
the church. Likewise in the holy Gospel, our savior Christ (...). 5.
does compare the (...), to (...) things, under the name of the (...) of
(...), as unto a king which made o marriage for his son: sometimes to ten
Uyrgynes, and many such other by all which (...). 20
names, and callings, we may learn that the church is a high and excellent
thing, and derely beloved to almighty God, who for his church sake, did give
(...). 25
his only son, to most vile death, and for yt which also he has prepared
the kingdom of heaven.

Now forasmuch as we read of an other church in the holy scripture, which is
called. Ecclesia malignanti um. The church of the malignaunt and nough (...).
25
tie people. And yet of late, a great number of scismaticall persons, being in
very deed members of this malygnaunt church, have usurped to the^ selus the
name of the true church: I intend to give you sufficient instruction, to
dyscerne and know the true church of Christ, from all heretical and
scysmaticall congregations. First this holy and true church of Christ, is
called in our Creed, as it is in deed, the catholyke church. That is to say,
the universal church, because it is not lurkynge in any corner, or any one
country, but is in all countries dyspersed, neither is this catholyke church,
hyd (...) us, or invisible, or unknown, but we may ease ly dyscerne, and know
the same. For christ does call it. Ciuitatem supra montem. A city upon an hill.
And Math. 5,
in the Gospel of Saint Mathewe also, teaching the order of brotherly
reconciliation, he says. If thy brother trespass against the, go and tell him
his fault, between him, and the alone, Math. (...)
but if he hear not the, yet take with the one or two, if he hear not them,
than tell the church. Oh Lord, how shall he tell yt church if it be not
known, as the evil do contend Likewise Saint Paul speaking, to the
preystes and elders at Ephesus, does warn the^ to take head to them selves, and
to all the flock, among whom (...), (...)
the holy ghost (says he) has placed you to rule the church of God. Thus
plainly the scripture declares that the catholyke church is and ought to be,
manyfestly (...), yet lest you should any thing doubt of the understanding of
these scryptures, hear I beseech you, how plainly, Saint August Contra (...)
til lib. 20 Cap. 13.
(...), does write hereof. Sicut per (...) nonimus ubi sit pla^tatus paradisis,
sic per uerbi (...), ubi (...) didicimus.

As by the words of God, we know where paradyse was planted, so by the words
of Christ, we have learned, where the church is. Mark here (good people) that
Saint Austen in this place, does write, against an heretic being one of the
donatyste sect, who denying the catholyke church, did ascribe the faith, of
Christ, and al salvation, to them selves only, being a small part of Aphrica,
like as al scismatical congregations, in this late time, have done: some saying
in germany here is Christ, here is the church, some in Heluctia, here is
christ, here is the church: other in Bohem, here is Christ, here is the
church, and we in England, here is christ, and here is the church. Where of
every one dyssentyng, from an other, and that in matters of great weight, does
declare, that the spirit of God, which is the spirit of truth, and unity
promised by Christ, to the catholyke church, does not lead nor govern such
sects, neither ought they to maintain, and set forth, false (...), to the
people, under the name of the church, yet saint (...).
Austen in ye same place, adds his, or rather gods threatnyng saying. Ab isto
uniuerso, ad partem, quamlibit, quis quis separat hominem ille diaboli filius,
and homicida conuincitur, whosoever does separate one man, from this whole, to
any part, he is proved to be the son of the devil, and a very manqueller.
Alas than in what heavy case, are those, that have separate from the catholyke
church, not one man only, but many thousands? surely in heavy and
miserable case: unless, they do speadelye and in due time repent, and do
penance. Moreover to know more manyfestly, the catholyke church of Christ, we
ought to consider what Saint Paul writes, of the foundation thereof. For all
scismati call congregations, though they (...) themselves, apparently, upon the
holy scripture, yet have they there profession, severally, taken, of some noug
hty man, as saint Augustyne says. They are called every one by proper names,
which they dare not deny. But the catholyke church though Aug. (...)
utilitate. cred. Co 7.
heretics have named it papystycall, yet received it never any other name, but
catholyke, and christian, but al me^ that read, may se how gloriously some have
used the name of (...), Ebion, Arrianus Manicheus, (...) Donatus, and in our
time likewise the name of Luther, Zwinglius, Carolstadius, with thousands such
other,, which heretical fashion S. Paul does rebuke, in his epistle to the
Corinthyans, who were even in like case, and bostyng upon men said. Ego Pauli,
Ego apollo. I hold of Paul, and 1 Cor. (...).
I of Apollo. But the holy apostle rebukes them saying, As long as there is
among you, envying and strife, or (...), are you not carnal? So that every
christen man, and woman, may plainly se by the scripture, that these having
such division, and sundry sects among them selves, are by S. Paul,
accounted altogether carnal and far unworthy to use the name of the church
which is the only, and chaste spouse, of Christ. But Ephesians. (...).
of the catholyke church, saint Paul says. Now therefore, ye are not (...),
and foreyners but you are citisens with the saints, and of the household of
God, and are builded upon the foundation of the Apostles, and prophets Jesus
Christ him self being the head corner stone. And further, because saint Paul
through the holy Ghost in him did forsee, that all heretykes would callenge to
them selfs the authority of the Apostles, and prophets, and that they (...)
without authority or knowledge, wrast their wri tinges, every one to there
own sense, therefore this (...). 4.
holy apostle, in the same epistle, tells us the order which Christ has
appointed to be observed in his church, for he says, that Christ ascendyng
(...), did give gifts to men, and that he made some apostles, some prophets,
some Euangelystes, some shepardes, and teachers, declarynge thereby, that in
the catholyke church, there are orders, and officers some hyer, some lower,
whom the rest ought both diligently to hear, and humbly to obey (...). Timo.
4
So did the same S. Paul, before his death, apoint Tit. 1.
Timothe, to the office of a Bishop, and also (...) he did leave in Creta,
that he should ordeyne prestes in every city, which preistes, and Bishops
should not be disdained, or little regarded (as in this time of many they are)
but they should (doing there duetye) have double honor, and faithfully
(...), 20
govern the church, as S. Paul (...). And writing Tit, 2.
to Tite, he byddeth him exhort, and rebuke with all seruentnes of commau^ding,
by these places of the holy scripture, you may easily se, and under stand,
that in the catholyke church, there are and ought to be degrees and orders,
and that whosoever does break, contemn, or deny the same he denies and
forsakes the very truth, and ordinance of Christ, and his Apostles.

Now further, we ought to consider, that as S. Paul (...) ordeyne Timothe,
and Tyte, yea and other bishops, and Preistes, in his time, ordeyne other,
delyuringe also to them, the doctrine which they have received of Paul, and by
contynual discurse of time every one has delivered the faith, that they from
the Apostles have received, and so even from Christ, to this present day,
one faith has ever stand steadfast. Which though it has sundry times been
assayde, and sore pynched, yet ever has it prevailed at the last and had the
up per hand, according to Christ's promise, neither Math. (...)
ought any man less to credyt the catholic church because there are in the
same, diverse evil, and wicked sinners. For Christ him self, does compare the
(...). (...).
church to a net, cast into the sea, which takes both good and bad fyshes,
but at the end, the good shall be reserved, and the evil cast away. Was not
twelve chosen by Christ, yet one of them, he calls a devil: Does not
Christ allo say, that Scribes Math. 23
and Phariseis, do sit in Moses chair, nevertheless, he wuld the people
should obey their lessones? Even so though some members of Christ's catholyke
church, do not live according to their vocatyon, yet ought no man therefore
the less to regard the faith and doctrine of the same church. These things,
good people, though they are suffi cient, to declare the holy Church, what
it is and how it may be known, yet I beseech you most diligently, to note, and
carry away one rule, which shall never deceive you, but is a sure trial of the
ca tholyke church, and the faith thereof. This rule is not mine, but taken out
of a learned, ancient, and right godly father in Christ's Church. He says.
(...).
There are three means to try a church, or (...).
doctrine the first is antiquity, the second, is universality, the third, is
unity. By the first we are taught, that a true doctrine must be known by
that it is not lately spronge up, or risen, but comes from Christ, and his
apostles, and has co^tynued still in the church. By the second, we may
understand, that a true faith, or doctrine, of the church is that only,
which universally, in all countries has been taught, and believed. By ye
third we ought to learn, that a true doctrine, or faith of the church, does
always agree, and is always one Now those three things well noted, may
instruct and teach any Christian man, to know the catholyke church, which
euersynce the Apostles time and in all countries, with one consent (in all
things concerning our faith) has showed her self the worcester thy spouse of
Christ. Contrary wise, false doctrine and heresye, euerhath done, and shall
do to the worlds end, (...) arise, and (...) in private cor ners and never
agree with it self. Which things I might easily at large prove, and open to
you by plain and manifest demonstration. But because (...) the next homely, I
intend to speak of the auctho city of the church, and also of the
commodity, and profit that we have by the same, here I will make an end,
besechyng al you (good and godly people) Roma. 13.
to give your bodies, and souls, an humble and holy sacrifyce to almyghtye
God, prayinge evermore that we may be altogether lively members, of our
savior Jesus Christ, and of his catholic church here upon earth, and after
this life partakers of the joyful kingdom of heaven, through the same our
(...) Jesus Christ, to whom with the father, and the holy ghost, be all honor
and glory world without end.

Amen.
H Pendilton sacrae theologiae professoris.
An homely, of the authority of the chutche declaryng what commodity and
profyt we have thereby.
Likewise, as in the last homelye, it was declared to you (good christen
people) what the church is, and how it may be known so now ye shall learn,
the authority of the same catholic church, and the commodity, or profyt
that ensues to us all, being members of the same church. First, when our
savior Jesus Christ, did send forth the twelve apostles to preach, who were,
and are, the cheite, and principal pyllers of this catholyke church, he did
give to them great power, and authority, as saint Matthew bears (...). 10
wytnes, saying: Jesus, did call together the twelve disciples, and gave to
them power over unclean spirits that they should cast them out, and should
heal al manner of diseases, and infirmities. And sundry times we do read in the
holy Gospel, that our Savior Christ does speak to his Apostles, after this
manner. Qui uos (...), me audit, and qui uos spernit me (...). That is to say.
He that hears you, hereth me and he that (...). (...)
dispiseth you, does despise me. Meaning, and John. 130
wyllyng thereby, that all the world should know and confess, the
authority of the catholic church which Christ him self did buyld in, and
upon these his holy Apostles. And to the same purpose he said John. (...)
to the^. I am non dicam uos seruus, sed amicos etc. That is to sai. Now I
will no more call you servant, but friends, for all things that I have herd
of my father, I have declared to you. And again he says, As my father sent
me, even Ichn. (...)
so I send you By these, and many such other places, we may see, that our
loving (...), did give great authority to his apostles. But now it is
expedient, and needful, to declare, in what special points this authority
does consist, and that the same authority was not only given to the Apostles
of Christ, but also to their (...), in the catholyke church, ever to endure.
Which authority, The (...) chc (...) true (...) of the (...) prure and is
(...) thereof
though it be great, and manyfolde, yet these are the chefest parts thereof,
that (...) do follow. First, almyghtye God, has given power, and
authority, to the catholic church, to have the true sense, and
understanding, of the holy Scripture, yea, and to approve also, or reprove al
writing as Scripture, or no Scripture. Which thing. good christen people, you
may well understand to be most true, if ye call to remembrance, who is ye
guide, and governor of the church that is to wit. the holy Ghost, as Christ
did promise, saying. Ego rogabo patrem et alium paraclitum dabit vobis, vt
maneat (...) ineternum, that is to say, I will ask my father, (...). 14.
and he will give to you an other comforter, that he may a bide with you for
ever. And after that our lord and savior had risen from death, he did breathe
upon his Apostles, and said A ccipite spiritum sanctum Take you the holy ghost
and also, (...) 20.
after his ascension into heaven, according to his merciful promise he did
send down the holy Ghost upon his Apostles, as sayncte Luke writes. Now that
the holy ghost was not given to the Apostles (...). ii.
only, but also to the catholyke church, to the worlds end, it is manifest:
forasmuch as Christ did promise the conforter, vt maneat uobiscum ineternum.
That he should abide (says he) with you for ever. Now we are most (...),
that the Apostles of John. 14
Christ did suffer death, for the faith of Christ, and that within few
years, after they thus had received the holy ghost. Nevertheless, Christ
sending furthe his Apostles to preach, and baptyze, said to the^: Ecce ego
vobiseu^ sum omnibus diebus vsque ad co^summatione^ seculi That is, Behold, I
am with you at al times Math 28.
even to the end of the world. Wherefore we may plainly see, that the holy
ghost being promised to the Apostles, to abide for ever, and to the very end
of the world, was promised and given to them and to their successors in ye
church, where he does and shall abide for ever. Now forasmuch, as the holy
ghost is the governor and ruler of the catholyke church, we ought there
only, and in no other corner, to search the true understanding, and
discernynge of the scryptures. And for this cause, the ancient fathers (were
they never so godly, and so well learned) yet would they never presume upon
their own judgments, but ever referred them selves, to the understanding, and
interpretation of the catho lykechurche before them. Therefore the godly learned
and ancient father (...), writing against schismatic (...) li 3. cap 4
here syes, says thus Quid enim si qui de aliqua modica, questione
disceptatio esset, nonne oporteret, in antiquissimas recurrere, Ecclesias. etc.
that is to say, but what and if there were contention concerning some small que
stion, were it not necessary to return to the most ancient churches? and
immediately after he says: Quid autem sineque apostoli quidem scripturas relis
quissent nobis, (...) ordinem sequitraditionis quam tradiderunt hijs, quibus
committebant Ecclesias? what (says this holy father) if the Apostles had
left to us no scripture at all, had it not been necessary to follow the order
of that tradytion, which they delivered to those, to whom they did bequethe
the church? Alas (good people) how far are many in these days gone from
this old, and ancient rule? this blessed martyr, here exhorts or, rather
commands, that if any small dyscorde, (though it be in a matter of little
importance) do chance, that we would not, according to our (...), judge
therein, but though we have no scripture for the same, yet (says he) we ought
to follow, keep and observe the tradition of the ancient churches Where as in
these late days, the impudent (...), baue taught the zely people, that every
man should, and may be a judge of controuersyes, and that we ought to observe
no tradition, nor ceremo nigh, other than we find in the holy scripture. Of
such, the same holy Ireneus does speak thus, after Ireneus.
many other notable lessons to the same purpose Librt 4.
Omnes autem hij decidunt a veritate, et (...) quidem alienum (...) (...).
(...).
afferentes ad altar dei, idest, altenas doctrinas, a celesti igne
conburentur. etc. All these (says he) do fall from the truth: and the
heretykes truly. bringing straung fire to the altar of God, that is to
say, straung doctrine, (...) brent with the heavenly fire. With such like
thrratnynges in the same place, to those that disobey ye (...) of ye church.
Likewise saynct Augustyne speaking of the baptysine of children, and now that
sacrament can profyt them, seeing many die before they know August de li, arb
lib, 3 Cap 23.
the effect of the same, affyrmeth, that the faith of those that bring the
child to christenynge, shall profit the child that is brought, but for his
proba cion, he brings thus. Hoc commendat ecclesie saluberrima (...)
thoritas. This thing the most wholesome authority of the church doethe
commend. And even with like reverence, the same saint Augustyne, does many
times submytte all his judgments, (...), 7 Inproemi o liz. De Tri.
and works to the catholyke church. And finally to declare his iudgemene,
concerning the authority of the catholyke church. He says. hus Ego (...)
non (...) nisi me catholicae Ecclesiae (...). yt is to say Truly, I would not
believe August. comra cp Manich.
the Gospel, onles that the aucthoritye of the catholyke church did move me
thereto. Capi. 3.
And we ought here to consider, that after the ascension of our savior
Christ, for the space of certain years, there was no gospel at all written:
but all things, concerning the faithful christians, were (...), and governed
by the disciples of Christ, being than the heads of the church. Afterward, we
read that diverse of the dysciples of Christ, did wryght Gospelles: as saint
Bartylmew Nicodemus, and an other Gospel was called Euangelium Nazarcorum^ But
the authority of the church, did only admite those (...) evangelists: which
now the whole church does retain Which thing might well seem mar uelouse,
seeing that both sayncte Bartylmew, and Nicodemus, were present, and did see
the works of Christ, and also did here his doctrine, where as saint Luke did
learn his gospel of saint Paul, and other, and so kewyse did S. Mark but
hereby it does most plainly appear, that the catholic (...) only has this
hye aucthorite, to (...) scriptures, and that scriptures allowed by yt church
should not be refused of any particulare persons. Now therefore, seeing that
the catholyke church, both has delivered, to us the scripture, and in all
ages and times, has been taken of al Godly learned men, for the true judge
thereof. I exhort, and beseech all you (good christen people) that in all
doutes, (...), and (...), ye would resort to yt (...) church, and there learn
what the (...) church has believed, and taught, (...) time (...) time
concerning doutes, or controversies, and (...) with lowly and meke hearts ye
will so do, surely the ho ly ghost will instruct you, he will comfort you,
and he will lead you, into al truth. But if in such case, ye will fly from
the catholyke church, and ask cou^ sell of your selves, or of any that does
swerve from the said church, than for so much as the holy ghost is not your
gyde, you shall fall from ignorance to error, and from doutyng, and
dysputing, to plain An other. (...) of the chu rch
herely, and so from one, to another, to the utter con fusion, of both body and
soul. Yet besides this great authority of the church, whereof you have heard
there is an other given by God, of most hye excellencye, that is, power to
forgive, and pardon the pe nitent sinner, and to punyshe, and correct, the
obsti nate or fro ward sinner, which power and auctho (...). 13.
ritie, as it was fygured in the preesthode of the old law, as in Iudgyng of
leprose persons, and in punyshyng to death, those that did not obey the
preeste (...). 17.
eue^ so is it given by our savior Christ in very deed in the (...), to his
Apostles, and to all their succes soures. For after that our savior had risen
from death, he came among his Apostles and brethed upon them and said.
Accipite spiritum sanctum, quorum dimi seritis (...), dimittuntur eis, et
quorum retinueritis, (...) sunt. (...). 20,
(That is) take you the holy ghost, whose sins you shall forgive. they are
forgyuen to them, and whose sins you do retain, they are retained. Which
authorite, by (...) words given by Christ, though some has or do, contemn,
and set at naught, yet saint Cyrill byddeth them cease to merueyle, that
Christ should give Cirill in John Libe 12 cap 20
such power, for he says, Certe absurdum non est, (...) ab illis, qui
spiritum sanctum in seipsis habeant Surely, (says he) it is no obsurdyte yt
sins are forgyue^ by the^ which have yt holy ghost in the^. Now if you will
mark that not the priest only, but also the holy Ghost does work in
remittynge, and pardonyng sins, than I trust you will see, and grant, this
authority of Christ's catholic church, which thing every christen man does
(...) daily in his creed, saying not only I believe the holy catholyke church,
the communyon of saynctes, but addyth also, the remissyon of sins, to be in
the i Timo, (...)
same catholyke church. Do not we read that saint Paul did (...) this
authority, when he did excommunycate Hymeneus and Alexander? did not the
holy Bishop saint Ambrose, use this authority in every point, upon the
emperor Theodosius? Theodori Liber. 50 hist Eccle caput. 18
Which holy bishop perceiving the Emperor had greuouselye offended, did
not spare to excommunicate him: yca and though he offered him self obedyentlye
to be received, yet was it after long penance, that he was absolved, this
holy bishop did use the authority given to him by God, and this christen
emperor, knowing the same, did with all humility obey. If the bishopes and
preistes in time past, and also the (...), had learned and practiced their
duetyes and vocations, by this (...), surely the church of Christ, should not
have come to such great disorder as we see, neither should vice and wyckednes,
so freely have been vsid, but because this matter, is largely and lernedly, set
forth in the sacrament of penance, I will cease to speak any more hereof, and
now it remains to declare, what co^ moditie and profytte we have by this
catholyke church, our lord and master christ in the gospel of saint (...),
does compare him self to the vine tree, and all us to the branches and
says, (...) is (...). 15.
me, et ego in vobis Abide you in me, (that is to say, in the faith of my
church) And I will abide in you. Oh mercisul Lord, what comfort, and
commodity is this, for a christen man, to have (...) to abide with him: And
farther he saeth. If you abide in me, and my words abide in you, ask what you
will, and it shall be granted to you. Here are we sure, yt if we abide in
christ's catholic church and embrace the faith, and doctrine thereof, both
christ himself by grace, will abide in us, and also our prayers, shall
evermore be heard. And without al doubt, there is no abidyng in Christ, unless
we abide in the unity of his catholyke church. For as saint Ciprian says.
Non porest habere deum patrem qui non (...) Cipria^us de simpli. (...).
(...). He cannot have God his father yt knows not the church to be his
mother But a child of God, knoing yt church to be his mother, and lying in the
bosom thereof, may be sure that Gene. 78
Christ the spouse of the church, will never forgette his needful requests.
And as no lively creature, was saved from death, but such only as were in
the arcke of Noe, so is there none saved Gen, 7. 8
from dampnatyon, but those that are in the unity of Christ's church. And
therefore, to give us warning, the holy doctoure Saint Augustyne, speaks
in this manner most plainly. August. cpist. (...)
Quisquis ergo ab hac catholica ecclesia fuerit seperatus (...) libet lauda
(...) uiuere existinet, hocsolo (...) quod a Christi (...) tus est no^ habebit
uita^, sedira (...) super (...). that is in english Whosoever therefore shall be
(...) this catholic church, although he think him self to live never so
worthily, yet for this only crime ye he is separated from yt unity of Christ,
he shall not have life, but yt wrath of god abides upon him. But what (...) is
it, to allege saint Augustine, or any other ancient father herein, seeing
almighty God by his prophet Esaias, has, set furthe Esai. (...)
to us a little picture of his church, under the name of a vyneyarde, and the
house of Israel? There may we see, that thing that we by experience do
know. For almighty God, in that parable declares by his Prophet, how much
he had done for the house of Israel, a figure of Christ's church, in that he
had planted to them in a batsome, and frutful country, and had given to them
good gouernoures, and orders, wherein they might have lived, and pleased him,
but forasinuche as they did wylfullye break the laws of God, and his
ordinance, he thereat ned them saying: Auferam sepem eius, et crit in
direptionem. etc. I will (says our Lord) take away the hedge of my (...),
that it may (...). Even so has our samoure Christ dealed with us, yt people
of his church. For where as by his preciouse death and passion, he did
purchase us, and left us in the custodye of his catholyke church, as is before
said leaving also to us, laws to obscrue, and sa cramentes wherewith we
should be preserved. And we naughty people, have despised all his most godly,
and wholesome decres, and ordynaunces, he has of his justice and according to
his promise, even in our time punished us: and has suffered the wicked to
pluck down the pale or hedge of his vyneyard: I mean all good order, as well
in the church, as in the common wealth, and that for the space of many years
paste. Now here christen people though you do not consider the plage of
sundry sins, that has in this late seysme, possessed many men's souls, yet
do not dyssemble, nor forgette the miserye, that we all have suffered
outewardelye, since we were separate from the church of Christ: alas, what
Christen blood within this Realm, even by our own countreimen, has been
shed? Oh Lord, how many poor wydowes without comfort have been left? Now
many fatherless children without soccoure? I leave here to speak, of the
vnshameles breaking of the dead men's testamentes, and their most godly
intentes, and ordinances: Abbais, are poulled down: Collegis, and Chantrees
are overthrown: churches are robbed, and pore Christ, (that is to say,) the
hungry and needful people, famishe, and cry out therefore. Al these surely,
with many mo, have come upon us, because we have been out of the house of God.
Wherefore, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, let us all together lament,
and be sorry for our going astraye, let us com, and fall down before God our
father, and confess our, LKc. 15.
transgression, and humblye desire, that we may be received into his house,
which is the church, though we should all the days of our lives, be but
hyrelynges. Quiamelior est dies vnus in (...) tuis super millia. (...). 8;
One day (Oh Lord) is better spente in thy house, than a thousand otherwise.

Fynallye if we contynew obedyente children, in the bosom of our mother, the
holy church: we shall be fed with lively faith, our of which will spring
in us, much holiness of life, and quietness of conscience: and if at any time
through our frail nes, we hapen to fall, we have ready, to raise us vpagayne,
the holy Sacraments: through the comfortable help whereof, we be made
sironge: and so day by day more able to proceed in all kind of virtue: and
thus having upon earth our mother, the holy church, which is the spouse of
Jesus Christ the Son of God, we may be bold to call upon GOD our father:
and be assured, that he will hear us, as his dearebeloued children, and give us
the inheritance of heaven, which is prepared for us, through our savior
Jesus Christ. To who^e with the father, and ye holy ghost, be honor, praise
and glory, world without end.

Amen.
H Pendilton sacrae theologiae professoris.
An Homelye of the Primacy, or supreme power, of the (...) governor of the
militant Church.
AS in every natu rall, and polytyke (...), so in the church milita^t, (which
is a mystical body) superiority, and inferioriti, must neds be amongst yt m
mbers thereof, or else it cannot endure.

And for this cause specially, our Savior Christ, when he was here
conuersaunte, on the Earth, did, himself, appoynte his Apostles, and
Disciples, and there successors, to have the ouersyght, cure, and high
government of his church, to the worlds edde. And to the intent, that no man
should contempne their authority, he does say in John. 13.
the thyrtenth of Saint Ihon, Amen, Amen, Dico vobis, quis accipit si quem
misero, me accipit. Qui autemme accipit, accipit eum qui me misit. That is to
say. Uerely, Uerely, I say unto you, who that receives him whom I send,
receives me. And he that receives me, receives him that sent me. And in the
tenth of Luke he sath, Quiuos audit me audit and qui uos (...), (...). 10.
me spernit. Qui autem me spernit, spernit eum qui misit me. That is to say:
He that hears you hearethe me, and he that dispiseth yon, dispiseth me and
he that dispiseth me, dyspiseth him that sent me. Of the Apostles also and
their successors, and of their charge over Christ's flock, does Saint Paul
speak, in the fourth chapter to the Ephesyans, saying. Ephesians. (...)


Ipse dedit quosdam quidem A postolos, quosdam autem Prophetas, aliouero
Euangelistas, alios autem pastores, et doctores, ad consummationem sanctorum,
in opus ministeru^, in edifieationem Corporis Christi donec (...) omnes in
unitatem fidei, and agnitionis filii dei, in uirum perfectum, in mensuram
etatis plenitudinis Christi ut (...) non simus paruuli flue tuantes, neque
clicuferamur omniuento doctrine, in nequitia hominum, in asturia ad
circumuentionem erroris. That is to say:

He (meaning Christ) has given or appointed some to be Ipostles, some,
Prophets some Evangelists, some pastores, and teachers, to the perfytynge, or
consummating, of the holyons, to do the work of the mynistery, to edyfye the
body of Christ, until we all come together, in one unity of faith, and
knowledge of the son of God, unto the estate of a perfect man, after ye
measure of the age of the fulness of Christ, that from henceforth, we should not
be as babes, waueryng, neither should we be carried about with every blaste of
doctrine, in the wicked nes of men, in the wylynes of them, who go about to
deceive us.

This place of Saint Paul most playnelye sets before our eyes, the
aucthority, and government which our savior has appointed, to continue to
the end of the world, in his church, and how the Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Preachers, and teachers, are given of Christ, to his pleple, to
govern them. And therewyth al Saint Paul, in the said place, she weth to
what end, such government, and authority is instituted, it is to wit, for
the spiritual edifieng of the hole body, in the faith, and for the defense of
the hole body, from the poison of heresye. And in deed no one thing can so
much suppress heresye, as if the Anthoritie, and government (...), be
accordyngly thereunto esteemed, and obeyed, as (...) Saint Ciprian, the blessed
Ciprian, (...). i (...), (...)
Martyr, in his first book, and third Epistle saying. Neque (...) bereses
obortae sunt, aut (...) sunt scismata, (...) lnde, quod sacer (...) dei non
obtemperatur. (...) unus in ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos, and (...) tempus
iudex, uice Christi cogitatur, cuisi sneundum magisteria diui (...), (...)
uniuersa, nemo (...) sacerdotem collegia (...) moueret. That is to say:
Neither other where, or hy othere means, are heresies (...) up, and scisines
risen, than hereof, yt obedience is not given to the preiste of God. Nor one is
considered, or thought to be in yt church, for the time, the priest, and for
the time the judge, in Christ's stead, unto which one, if the hole fraternity
did (according to the heavenly commandments) (...), no man would stir, or
move any thing against the Colleges or companies of preistes. Hereby you may
perceive, that saint Cypryans conclusion, or judgment is, that the government
Ecclesiastical, and especially of one, to be caken, and reputed as Christ's
vicar, is the best mean, to let and suppress heresies, and that such one
governor, is (...) be o beyed, of all christen people, which thing may be
proved very plainly, and evidently, by the holy scriptures them selves. For
the scryptures do witness, that our (...) appointed S. Peter, to this high
rowme, and charge, over his hole flock, and no one of the Apostles (...). In
the. xxi. of S. John John. (...).
it is written, how, our savior, after his resurrection, appearing at ye sea
(...) Tiberias, to certain of his Apostles, amongst whom was Peter, did first
take bread, and fyshe, and gave unto them, And when they had (...) them
selves, he fayde unto Peter. Simon Johannes diligis me plus hijs? (...) ei,
(...) domine tu scis, quia amore. Dicit (...). (...) as eagnos meos Dicit ei
iterum, Simon (...). (...) diligis me? Ait illi. Etiam domine tu scis quia amo
te Dicit ci Pasce (...) meos Dicit (...). (...) amas me? Contristatus est
Petrus, qui a dixit (...) tertio, amas me? and (...) ci. Domine tu omnia nosti,
tu scis, (...) amote. (...), (...) oues meas. That is to say: Simon the son
of Ioannes, (...) thou love me more then these do? He answered unto him, Yea
Lord, thou (...) that I love thee. He said unto him. Feed my lambs. (...) he
spoke to him again, and said, Simon the son of Ioannes, doeste thou love
me? He answered: yea Lord, thou knoweste that I love thee. Hesayde unto him
again Feed my lambs. Then spoke he unto him the third time, and said: Simon
the son of Ioannes, do thou love me? Peter was sorry, because Christ said
unto him now the third time, do thou love me, and he aun swered and said:
Lord thou knoweste all things, thou know that I love thee. He said unto
him feed my sheep. This process of Scripture, has in it, many circumstaunces
to be noted. The first is, that (other Apostles being than present, and
amongst them, eue^ he of whom Christ did eue^ make very much of, that is to
say, S. John) yet our Savior Christ, did dyrecte his speech, and talk, but to
Peter only, sygnifyenge the matter, whereof he did speak, to appertain to
Peter chieflye, and pryncipallye, and not in so special a sort, to any one
of the apostles else. Another, and second circumstaunce to be here considered,
is that our savior, did ask Peter most earnestly, whether he loved him,
more than did the other apostles. And the third cyrcumstaunce is, in that
Christ did commytte both his lambs, and his sheep, unto him. These
cyrcumstaunce (I say) and other such like, well considered, do convince, and
clearelye prove, that the high charge, ouere all the church militant, was
especially committed to Peter.

(...) savior Christ had not intended to give un to Peter a special
authority, above the rest, what need was there to speak this, seuerallye,
unto Peter, seeing he had spoken it generallye to them all before. (...) what
thing meant he else, when, in yt pre sense of all the twelve, he promised to give
unto Pe ter the keys of the kingdom of heaven sainge a spe ciall (...), or
prerogative to Peter: Our savior Acts. (...)
through his heavenly wisdom, perceiving, that it is most necessary, one to
be over a hole multitude, specially being a multitude congregated of so
infinite a number of people, and of so sundry nations, as is the catholyke
church, did appoynte S. Peter, to that office, and Peter having received such
charge at christ's hands, did incontinently practyse and exercise the same,
and all the rest of the Apostles did give place unto him. And therefore in the
first of the Acts it is written, hawe that after Acts. (...)
Christ's ascension, incontinently S. Peter rose up in the myddest of the
faithful, and (...) them to goo to the election of one, that should succeed in
Iu das rowme, with office he undoubtedly would not have taken upon him, but
that oursauiour Christ had Authorized him in such sort, as is before declared.
In the. ii, of the Acts it is written how that Acts, (...).
in the presence of all the Apostles, S. Peter took upon him to speak in all
their names to the people on whitsonday in the mourning, straight after that
they had received the holy Ghost, in the lykenes of cloue^ tunges: In the
third of ye Acts, it is written, how yt s. Peter healed a lame man, which was
lame his mothers womb, and that when the people wo^dred at so strange a
myrycle, the said Peter made an oration unto them.

In the fourth of the Acts, and in the fyfte, and syxt Act. 4, 5 9.
there is the like, and in many other places of the same book. All which
places of scripture ought to persuade every godly heart, to think that our
savior did give unto saint Peter, that aucthorite above all the rest of the
Apostles, upon his hoole church, for an unity, and good order, to be kept in
the same. And yet for your better contentatio^ here in, you shall here the
authorities of the ancient fathers in this behalf.

Origin, a greek writer, which was within Origenes
two hundred years after Christ, in his exposition made upon the. vi. Chapter
of S, Paul's epistle, to the Romans, writes thus. Petro cumsumma reru^ de
pascendis ouibu straderetur, et super ipsu^ tan qsuper terr am fundaretur (...)
clesia, nullius confessio uirtutis alterius, nisi charitatis exigitur, That is
to say: When the highest authority, orfeedinge of christ's sheep, was omitted
unto Peter, and the church was builded upon him, as upon a sure ground, there
was required or exacted of him, the profession of none other virtue save only
of charity.

The blessed martyr, saint Cyprian, in many pla Ciprian.
ces, affyrmeth the same. and amongst other, in his epistle written: Ad
inbalanum says, Manifestum est, (...). ct per quos, remissio peccatorum dari
possit, (...) dominusprimum petro su per quem edisicauit ecclesiam suam, et
vnde unit at is origene^ institute, (...) ostendit, potestatem istam dedit?
That is to say, It is manifest where, and by whom, remission of sins may be
given, for our Lord first unto Peter (upon whom he builded his church, and
from whom he did ordeyne. and show, the beginning of the unity, to proceed)
did give that power, or authority. And in the same Epistle, (within a while
after) he says. Ecclesiam, que una (...), sundauit super unum, That is to
say, He did founbe his chuche, which is but one, upon one.

Saint Basyl, in his book against Tauonius, writes (...)
thus. Perhanc uocem intelligimus (...) filiu^, qui fuit ex Bethsaida, An dreae
(...), qui expiscatore, in Apostolatus ministeriu^ uocatis est Qui quoniam
fide, prestabatecclesiae in se aedificationem suscepit. That is to say, by this
voice, we understand the son of Jonas, which was of Bethsaida, the bro there
of Andrewe, which son of Jonas was called from a fyther, to the ministerye of
the Apostleshyp, and because he excelled in faith he had the church buy (...)
upon him. Ambrosi.


Saint (...) in his fourth sermon says. Petrus denique pro (...), ecclesiaru^
petradicitur, sicut ait dominus (...), et (...) hanc petram aedificabo
ecclesiammeam Petraenim dicitur, (...) in (...) fidei fundamenta posuerit (...)
immobile, to (...) operis Christiani compagem (...) co^ tineat (That is to say)
Fynallye, or for a conclusion, Peter, for the soundenes, or substa^cialnes of
his devotion, is called' the rock of the churches, as our Lord says. Thou
art Peter, or of a rock, and upon this rock will I build my church. In
deed he is called a rock because he was the first that did lay the foundation
of faith amongst the gentiles, and as a stone, or a rock, that cannot be
moved, he docth contain or keep, the frame and weight of the hole christen
work. (...)


S, Augustyne has the like in his six and twenty sermon, de sanctis, and in
his xvi. sermon de tempore, but most notably in his, 124. sermon de tempore
where he makes a large process of saint Peter, and emo^gest other things,
speaking of Peter's denial of his may ster, he writes thus of him, Totius
corporus morbum (...) capite cura: ecclesie, et in ipso (...) componit
membrorum omniu^ sani tatem. That is to say. He (meaning Christ) does cure in
the very head of the church (mening Peter) the disease, of the hole body, and
in the very crown, or top of the head, he frames the health of all the
members. Here ommyttynge infynite, other authorities of the ancient fathers,
touching the primacye, or highest anthoritie ecclesiastical, to have beue given
unto saint Peter of our sauioux Christ himself, I exhort you in con
sideratio^, partly of these testimonies, some whereof are taken out of the
very, scripture, some out of the ancient and famous doctors of the church,
and partly, and most especially, in consyderation of the consent of the hole
catholic church herin, nothing to dout in this matter, but that yt holy
Apostle S. Pe ter was Christ's vicar on earth, and had higher, and more
authority general, then any one of the Apostles else, and that the special
purpose, why that Christ would have such authority to be in one man, was, and
is, for thepreseruatio^ of unity in his church, which church, is but one, and
thus much for this time, shall now suffice you. In the next homely, you shall
here further of this matter.

Io. Harpesfelde, sacrae theologiae professoris. et Archidiaconi London.
An other Homelye of the Prymacye.
IT is written in the. viii. chapter of Acts. 8.
the acts, how Si mon Magus, did offer unto Saint Peter money togiue him
power, that on whom soever he should lay his hands, the same parson might
thereby, receive the holy Ghost. But being for this his most wicked request
grievously reproved, and fearyng withal, to continue any longer, in those
parties, that is to say, in Sa maria, so nighe thappostles, he the said Simon
Magus fled to Rome, and there by his enchau^te mentes, did greatly delude the
people, as Iustynus Justinius (...),
the martyr, a very ancient writer, in his second Apology, directed, or
sent, to the Emperor Antonius, does plainly testifye: Ireneus also in his
first book Contrahereses does record the same. Ireneus,


And the said Simon Magus, did so delude and blind the people, that they did
esteem him for a God, and did set up his image, in the City, with this inscrip
tion. Simoni de sdncto, That is to say. To Simon the holy God. But it was not
long, after those (...), played by Simon Magus, thus seducing yt, (...) there,
but God sent his great (...) saynct Peter thither, (that is to say, to Rome)
who both did confound the said Simou Magus, and did also convert a great
number of the people there unto the faith of Christ, as is at large, set
fourth (...).
in the. xiiii. chapter, and second book of Eusebius, (...) historye. Now
this Apostle sayncte (...)
(...), by the will, and providence of God, being brought to Rome, did there
continue, bishop of that Sea, xxv. years, and there also did suffer a glorious
martyrdom, in the last year of the reygne of cruel Nero Themperoure, which
things Saint (...)
Hierome in the very beginning of his work, De (...) scriptoribus, does
wytnes in this manner. Simon Peter the son of Ioannis, of the province of
Galile, and of ye town of Beth saida, the brother of Andrewe the Apostle af
ter his byshopricke in (...), and after his preching in Po^tus, (...), Asia and
Bethinia to the Jews which were dyspersed abroad in sundry contries, came to
Rome, to over throw Simon Magus, and there did keep his sea, five and twenty
years, until the last year, it is to wit, the xiiii. year) of the reign of
Nero, by whom he was crucified, and so crowned with a crown of martyrdom, his
head being turned down to the ground, and his feet upward, because he
said, or accounted him self unworthy, to be eruci fyed in such form, and
manner, as his master Christ was. (...). (...).


S. Ambrose in his lxr. sermon, speaking of yt matyrdome of saint Peter, and
saint Paul, at Rome, sai eth thus. I think it not done without a great cause,
that in one day, in one place, and under on (...), they both did suffer. In
one day, for that they should come to Christ together. In one place, that
neither of them both, should be destitute of Rome, and under one persecutoure,
that like cruelty should slaye them both. The day was for their merit, the
place for their glory, the persecutor, for their virtue. And in what place I
pray you did they suffer martyrdom? Even in Rome, which is the head, and
cheyfe city, of the world, to the intent that where the head of
superstition was, there should rest the head of holiness, and where the princes of
the heathen did dwell, there the princes of the church should lie.

Thus says saint Ambrose, whereunto agrees Egesippus, an ancient writer, in
his third book, of (...)
the destruction of Jerusalem, and like wise Dionisius the bishop of Corinth,
and Caius also which lived in the days of Zepherius the Bishop of Rome, as
more at large appears, in the xxv. Chapyter, of the fore said second book
of Eusebius, Ecclesiastical hystory. Now that we have in the homely, going
next (...).
before this declared, that our savior did appointe Sayncte Peter to a
greater, and higher office then he did any other of his Apostles, and have in
(...)
this homely entreated, of the abode of saynct Peter and martyrdom at Rome, we
will consequentlye prove, that the Bishops of Rome, have always in the
catholyke church, been esteemed, judged, and taken, for saint Peter's
successors, even in that his special, and highest office, and that to him,
and the^ by the will of God does appertain the government of Chyst es hole
stock, on earth. And first I will begyne with the (...) Authoure (...), who in
the third Chapter of his third book against (...). (...). (...)
heresies, does say, that the church of Rome is the greatest, the eldest, and
the best known, of al churches, and that it was founded, by the most glorious
Apostles, Peter, and Paul and that through the succession of the bishops of
Rome, from samct Pe ter, until his time, the truth was deryued, from hand to
hand, and that it might there easily be found and had. And hereupon he says
further these (...) des. (...) hane enimecclesiam propter (...), necesse est
omnem conuenire ecclesiam, hocest eos qui sunt ubique (...) That is to say. For
unto this church (meaning, and poynting the sea of Rome) for the more mighty
principalty of it, al yt hole church of Christ, yt is to say, all the
faithful, wheresoever they be, must assemble, or repair unto.

And saint Augustyne, agreably hereunto, does (...)
in his. 192. Epistle, say, that in the church of Rome, the primacy of the
Apostolyke Sea, did ever flourish And the same saint Augustyne, writing against
one Petilianus, which did blaspheme the sea of Rome (as heretykes do now a
days) does more over writ in this manner, (...) all the bishops of the
world, were such men, as thou dooest most falsely report, them to be, what
has the sea of Rome hurted the, where Peter did sit, and now Anastasius
syttethe? or what has the sea of Jerusalem hurted the (...) James did sit,
and now at this present Joan nes does sit, with whom we are in the ca tholyke
unity joined and from whom ye have divided your selves, in your wicked rage
or fury why do thou call the Aposto like sea, the sea of pestilence? If thou
do it for the men's sake, who^ thou think to preach the law, and not to
fulfill the law, did our savior I pray the, any such iniurye to the sea or
chair of the scribes, and Phariscis, of whom he says. They say, but they do
not, etc.

Moreover, the holy Martyr, saint Cipriane in Ciprianus
the third Epistle, of his first book, speaking against certain, which did
disobey, and (...), Cornelius, the bishop of Rome, writes in this manner.
Neque enim aliunde heresis oborte sunt, aut natasunt seismata q inde quod
sacerdoti dei no^ obtemperatur, nec vnus in ceclesia ad te^pus sacerdo, et ad
tempus iudex, vice Christi iudicatur? Cui si secundum magisteria diuina
obtemperaret fraternitas uniuersa, nemo aduersus sacerdotu^ collegium, qule
(...) moueret. That is to say. Of none other cause are heresies spronge up, or
scysines ry sen, than of this that the preiste of GOD (meaning Cornelius, the
bishop e of Rome) is not obeyed, and one is not taken in the church, to be
the high priest for the time, and for the time in Christ's stead a judge, or
Christ's vicar, unto whom if the hole fraternitye were, according to Gods
commandments, obedient no man would any thing move, or stir against the
colled ge or company of preistes.

Saint Augustyne also writing against the Augustinus
Epistle of a Maniche, which Epistle is entitled, or called (...), gives to
the sea of Rome, a mer uaylous prerogatyue and does build his faith, amongst
other things, upon the succession of the Bishops of Rome who after saynct
Peter did fo low orderly, even to his time which was, 300. years after
Christ. And he writes in this manner Multasum. que (...) eccle sic gremio
iustissime teneni, Tenet me consensio populoru, atque (...) tenct authoritas
mlraculis (...) a, sperinutria charitate aucta vetustate firmata, tenet ab ipsa
sede perri A postoli, cui (...) post resurrectione^ suam dominus comm endauit,
usque (...) present (...) episcop (...), successio (...), That is to say. there
are many things, which of very good reason, do keep me, in the laws of the
catholyke church. The consent of so many people, and nations, or countries,
does keep me, the authority of the church, begone (...) miracles, nouryshed
with hope, increased with charity, and confyrmed with antiqui tie, does keep
me: the succession also of bysshoppes, from saint Peter the Apostles seat, or
time (to whom our Lord did after his tesurrection, commite his sheep to be
fed) unto this present Bishopric (meaning Rome) does keep me in the
catholyke church. (...)
Sainet Hierome also in his Epistle to Damasius, does set fourth very notably
the premacye, and supremitre, of the bishop of Rome, as being sainet Peter's
successors, and amongst other things he says thus, Si quis cathedrae Petri
iungitur meus est That is to say. If any man be joined to Peter's chair or
hold of Peter's seat (meaning yt sea of Rome) he is mine, and I receive and
join with him.

Saint Ambrose also in his third book, of the Ambrosi,
sacraments, and in the first Chapter, does say thus. Ecclesia Romana hane
consuetudinem non habet, cuius tipum in omnibus Sequimur. That is to say. The
church of Rome (whose form or trade we do follow in all points) has no
such custom. Other like auctorities of the ancient fathers, for the primacy
and suprymacy of the Sea of Rome, there are, and yt infinite. But what need
many autorities either of scripture, or of the fathers, in this behalf, seeing
very experience, has this thousand years, proved, that such, as dysobeied the
sea of Rome, did fall sone after into abominable heresye, and thereupon into
deui sion amongst them selves, and (...), to de structio^, or else, in process
of time, were glad, and said, to return to there dwe obedience again. If
you be desyrouse to have example in this matter look but one those countries,
and those parsons, yt now be in captivity under the great Turk, who in time
past, agreeing with the sea of Rome, did florishe in christen religyon, and all
welthe, look also upon Germany, and take example thereby, how they prospered
among them selves, since they declyned from yt obedience of the sea of Rome.
And it is a world, to see how those, whom they took for their greatest
doctors, have abused, seduced, and mocked them, even in this matter of the
prymacye, for where as Luther, especially, and above all other, was their (...)
ryngleader in this matter: yet when he was emon gest learned men, and should
talk of this matter, with them, he was so driven to the wall, that open lie in
writing, to be showed at this day, he did in a book of his entitled,
Resolutio Latheriana super propo sitione sua. (...). de potestate (...)
confess and say playnelye, as hereafter does follow. (...), (...), To,
pontificem esse alijs omnibus, quos (...) se pontifices gerere, superiorum, est
(...) voluntas dei, qua^ in ip so (...) uidemus. Neque enim sino voluntate dei
in haenc monarchia^ inquam (...) potuisset. To, po^tifex. At uolu^tas dei, quo
quo modo nota fuerit cu^ reuerentia sulcidienda est, ideoque non licet temere.
To, pontifici suo primaturesistere. Hec autem ratio (...) est, ut si etiam
nulla scriptura. null la alia causa esset, haec tamensatis esset ad compescendam
temeritatem resistentium, et (...) sola ratione gloriosissimus martyr
Ciprianus, permult (...) epistolas co^fide^tissime gloriatur co^tra omnes
episcoporu^ quoru^ cunque ad uersorios sicut 3. Re. legimus, quod dece^tribus
Israel discesseru^t a roboa^ silio Salomonis, et tamen quia uoluntate dei, sine
au toritate factu^ est, ratum apud deum fuit, Nam et apud theologos omnes,
uoluntas signi, quam (...) operationem dei, non minus quam alia signo
uoluntacis dei, ut prae (...), prohibit etc. metuenda est, Ideo non uideo,
quomodo sint (...) ascismatis reatu, qui huic uoluntati contrauenienses, sest a
To pontifieis autoritate subtrahu^t, (...) est una prima mihi in superabilis
ratio, (...) subijcit To pontifici et primatu^ eius co^fueri, cogir. yt is to
say The first thing, which moves me to think or believe, the Romayue Bishop
to be superior to all other. whom at the least wise we do know to account
them selves for Bishops. is the very will of God which we do see even in the
very fact or matter. For in deed without the will of God yt Romayne Bishop,
could not at any time have comme^ to this monarchy, or supreme rule, and the
will of God, by what mean soever it be known is to be received, or taken with
reverence, and therefore it is not lawefull folyshly, or hedelye to make
resystence unto the said Romayne Bysshope, in his Bysshoppryke. And this reason
is soogreat, or of such force, that although no scripture, nor no other
cause were, yet this were sufficient enough to bridle, or keep under the
temeritie, or madness, of them, yt make resistance. And by this reason alone,
the most glorious Martyr Cyprian, in many Epystles does most boldly glory or
rejoice, against all the adversaries of any of the Bysshoppes, according as we
do read in the third book of the kings. Where allthough the. x. tribes of
Israel, did depart from Roboam, the son of Solomon, yet because it was done
by the will of God, it was without other authority firm, and stable. For also
amongst all the deuines, the will of the sign, which they do call the
workyng of God, is to be feared no less, the^ other signs of the will of God
as precepts and things forbidden etc. And therefore I do not se how they be
excused from the offense, or sin, of scy sine, who doing, or coming against
this will, do withdraw, or pull them selves, from the Authority of the
Roman Bishop.

Thus much says Luther himself, and so shall you find it, if ye read his
said work, in the place aforesaid: and the thing so being, you may se, what a
holy father that merchant was, to deceive the people as he did, and to bring
them to that wonderful calamity, that the third or fourth generation (if yt
world so long do continue) shall feel, and smarte for it, as other also
shall, that be in the same case. And now to return to our own country of
England, this may be truly spoken, that of all (...) christen, there is none
that has (besides the general duty) so special cause to favor the sea of
Rome, as England has. For from that see, came the faith into this Island, in
the days of king Lucius, about an hundredth and fyftye years after Christ.
And vi. Cyere after Christ, when the Saxons were spread Bid. (...). hist, Angl.
li, i,
over the hole realm, and were infidells, there were sent most notable, and
godly preachers, hither into England, who converted and turned many
thousands, to the faith. And what benefits we have in our days received of
that see of Rome, al men do (...), and feale in them selves, and do thancke
god therefore, or else the devil has wonderfullye blinded and seduced them.
Now on the other side, what miseries have be falen amongst us, since our
disobedience against the sea of Rome, and since the time, that temperall
princes did take upon them, that office, which is spiritual, and not
belonging to the regali power, but greatly distant, and dyfferent from the
same, I need not in words to declare, (...) as you have felt the smart thereof
in deed. and to this day are not quyte of Gods plage for the same. Wherefore to
conclude in this matter, this shall be to exhort you, and in Gods name to
require you. to esteem the primacy, and supremitie of the sea of Rome, as an
authority instituted by Christ, for the quyetnes of the christen people, and
for the preserua tion of chrystendome, in one catholyke, true faith, and for
the defense of it, against all heresy, and whereby quyeting your selves, to
serve God, in the catholic truth, you shall sonest appease his wrath, and
purchase his favor and grace, in this life, and hereafter obtain the
everlasting life, which send unto you: all, the father, the (...), and the
holy Ghost, to whom be al honor, and glory, world without end

Amen.
Io. Harpesfelde, sacrae theologiae professor. Arch London.
An homilye declaringe that in the blessed Sacrament of the aultare, is the
very body, and blood of our Savior Christ.
AFter that men are once graft in Christ and be made partakers of his death and
passion, among other their duetyes, one of the chief is, diligently to
prepare them selves to the worthy receauyng of yt blessed Sacrament of the
aultare where unto are two things on our parts requisite Basil in (...) rules.
(as says saint Basell, and good reason confyrmeth) the one, fear, the
other, faith. The fear which men must have, when they prepare them selves to
come to this sacrament, ought to be grounded upon that terrible saying of saint
Paul, in the. xi, chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, where he
aCorin. II
says that whosoever does participate thereof unworthily, does eat and drink
his own dampnation: The faith, which we must have in our hearts, when we come
to Gods board, is to be builded like wise, upon the vndonted aucthorities of
scripture, which declare most plainly unto us what meat it is, that we there
eat. For the parfit understanding whereof, let us consider, that our savior
Christ, being here on earth, did first make a solemn promise of a meat,
which him self would give unto us, and afterward in deed, he did give the
same, according to his promise. In the promise making he said (as it is
written in the. vii, chapter of S, Jhons gospel. The bread (...). 6.
or food that I will give unto you, is my flesh, which flesh I will give for
the life of the world. and in the same chapter he also says My flesh is (...)
meat, and my blood is ve rely drink. And as he then promised, so he after
ward performed, even the very last night that ever he companied with his
Apostles, before his death, at which time, he took bread into his hands, and
gave thanks, and break it and gave it to his disciples, and said. Take eat,
this is my body, which shall be given for you. If we co^ pare the words spoken
by Christ, when he made the promise of a meat, to be by him given unto us, with
those other words, which he uttered in giving of yt same, we need not doubt of
the things which he gave. In the promise making, he said, that he would
give us his flesh, in the perfourminge of the promise, he gives the same,
saying, take eat this is my body. Again, in the promise making he affirms,
that the flesh, whith he would give us to feed on, should be the self same
flesh, yt should be given for the life of the world, and in the perfor maunce
of his promise, he said, that the thing which gave, was his body, which
should be given to death for us. Now the circumstaunces being well considered,
which our savior used in the institution of this most blessed Sacrament, shall
greatly co^fyrme al godly hearts, in the true be lefe of the same The time was
the night before he suffered death, to signifye unto us, that this meat,
being differred to the last day, that ever our Savior was conuersaunt with his
Apostles, must needs be his very body, and blood in deed, and such ameate as
no other can be in any wise comparable unto it. Again, in that our savior did
eat of the pascall lamb with his Apostles, immediatli before he did institute
this sacrament, it most plainly declares unto us, that this sacrament is a
marvelous worthey mysterye and that very thing, which the eating of the
paschal lamb, in the old law did prefygurate, for which cause, when this
was instituted that was abrogated Nether is it without a meruelouse
consideration, that Christ at that heavenly banquet, would of purpose, another
have the blessed Uyrgin Mary his mother, present with him, nor any other of
his dyseyples, save only the. xii. Apostles, whom he appoin ted to be the
head ministers of al his misteryes here on the earth, and specially to be the
ministers of this most blessed sacrament, and the iustructours of al other,
touching the same. Now what meneth it, that our Savior was not content to
offer them this sa crament only, but with the offering thereof, he said also
unto them. Take eat, take and drink? Do me^ use, to offer to other, meat and
drink, for any (...) purpose, but only that they should eat and drink
thereof, but because it was his body, and his blood, therefore he first
byddeth them take, and not fear to eat and drink the same.

Besides this, it is to be well noted, that yt three Euangelystes, Matthew,
Mark, and Luke, did al three agree in the manner of the institution of this
sacrament they writing all three their gospels at so^ dry times, as Mathe we
eight year after the ascencion (...) and The (...) philact (...)
of our savior Christ. Mark. x. years. Luke xv. years. And where in
doubteful speeches of our savior Christ, some one or other of yt Evangelists,
evermore opens plainly the very meaning of the speches, yet touching these
words, this is my body, no one of them, makes any declaration upon the same,
but they all leave them to be taken of us, as they sound, and (as of most plain
words) they make no exposition or interpretation of them at all. Which point
must be well considered, And therefore note th at where Christ said. It is
impossible for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. (because yt
meaning of these words may be dyuersly Mark. 10
taken, thereof) S. Mark in his tenth chapyter declares the very meaning of
them, saying: It is hard for them that trust in there substance to be saved.
Again Christ at another time said to the Jews, loose you this timple, and in
three days shall I build it again, Andfor that the sense of these words is
doughtfull, S. Ihon there expounds them and says, that Christ by the te^yle
meant his body, which should be by the Jews put to death, and by him the third
day should be raised from death to life. In the, viii. of Ihon, our savior
says: He that believes in me, as the John, 7.
scriptnre says, there shall, ryuers of quyck water flow out of him, And
because this saing is obscure. S. John to make it open, says, that he spoke
those words, of the spirit, which they that be leued in him should receive. In
the. xii. chapter of S, Ihon, our savior says in this manner. If I be John.
12.
lift up from the earth, I will draw al thin ges unto my self. And S, John by
and by gives us the exposition, saying, that hereby he signyfyed, what kind
of death he should suffer. Many other like places are there in the new
testamente the matter of which places, is not so high, nor so needful to be
ryghtly understood, as yt meaning of these words, this is my body, and yet
of these words, no one Evangelist makes any exposition because the words are
plainly, and symply to be taken as they were spoken. Besides all this, we have
in S. Paul in the, xi, Chapter of his first Epistle, to the Corinthians, a
goodly, and a large process touching this Sacrament, and yet in that whole
process, no matter to instruct us otherwise to be leave of it, than that there
is in it the very body and blood of our savior Christ. For first he utters
the words of oursauiour, even as the Evangelists do, as that he said this is
my body. and he makes no declaration upon ye same. Secondly where none of the
Evangelists make mention, of any pain due to the unworthy receauer. S Paul
affirms that the unworthy receyuyng of this Sacrament brings judgment,
and dampnation, Thirdly, he tells, that for the unworthy receiving hereof,
God plageth cities, and cuntryes, with sondrye grievous plages, as with
infirmitye, with syckenes, and with death also. Forthely, he gives us counsel
dylygentlye to examine and try our selfs, before we come to gods board. If
the very body and blood of our savior Christ, be not in deed in the
sacrament of the aultare, why should our savior so speak as he spoke in the
promise made thereof? why did he, as he did in the instituting thereof? why did
none of the Eua^gelists so declare christ's words? why did sayncte Paul so
terribly pronounce of the unworthy receauynge of it, and so ernestly warn us,
of due preparation to be made therefore? It is then most undoubtedly to be of
all christen people believed, that in the Sacrameut of the aultare, there is the
very body and boulde, of our savior Christ, worthy of all honor and glory,
the self same in substannce, that is in heaven: which thing for Christ to
bring to pass, is a thing most casye, he being God almighty, maker of heaven
and earth: and for him to do, is most semely, that as he gave that body, 'to
death to redeem us, so he should give the same in this heavenly bankitte, to
feed us, that he might be all in all. The body of our savior Christ to be in
very deed in heaven, in the visible form of a man, and in the Sacrament of
the Aultare, invisible under the visible (...) of bread and wine, nether is
impossible to his power, that made all things of naught, nether unseemly for
his exceadynge great love toward us, who so loved us, that for us, he did not
refuse to suffer death, and that the death of the cross: neither yet is it
against his will, who of his only mercy, so promised, and with his omnipotent
word, so instituted it, another is it finally vnfytte for his wise dome, seeing
he has so ordained, that every natural mothere, nouryshe her children, with
the substance of her own body. And why then should christen men refuse to
believe it? why do we not rather embrace it, and give God most hartye thanks
for it, being the greatest jewel, that ever was among mortal men, why do we
not prepare our selves worthily to receive it, and as in all other points of
the christen religion, so in the belefe of it, give credit to faith and bring
reason, and our senses, in subjection under faith, but suffer our ghostly enemy
by carnal reasons, to bring us away into heresy, and quite and clean to pull
the right faith out of our hearts? Let us all, good people, from hence forth
be constau^t in the truth, and as all the catholyke church believes, and has
always believed, let us undoubtedly persuade our selves, that in the blessed
sacrament of the Aultare, there is under the fourmes of bread and wine, the
seife same body of our savior Christ in sub stau^ce, which was borne of the
Uyrgin Mary, and suffered death on ye cross for us, to who^ with the father and
the holy ghost, be all honor and glory, world without end

Amen.
Io. Harpesfelde, sacrae theologiae professors. Arch London.
An Homelye of Transubstantiation.
THere are in the sacra meant of the aultare, ii. things specially to be
considered, the one is, the body and blood of our savior Christ, there really
co^ teined, yt other is the fourmes of bread and wine, under which the said
body and blud are contained. Of the first part ye hard in the last homely.
Touching yt second, the general belefe of the catholyke Church (if there were
nothing else) ought, and may be a sufficient ground, for every godly man, to
build his conscience upon, which church, does believe, that there is no
substance of material bread, and wine remai ning, but only the fourmes of
bread and wine, and the substance of Christ's body and blood, there so
contained. And yet, because some have vainly, and curiously, of late years
talked of this second part, and have put many fond doutes, and scruples into
peoples heads, concerning the same, ye shall now at large, and fully (I
trust) be instructed therein, And first this is to be noted, that God has (...)
the beginning of the world, many times appeared to man, some times in one
sort, and sometimes in an (...)
other. In the. xviii. Chapter of Genesys it is written how God and two
Aungelles with him, did apeare unto Abraham, in the likeness of men, and how
Abraham feasted them. How vain a matter were it, (I pray you) for us here
buselye to reason, how God or Angel, could appear like man? and whether
they had true bodies or no? and whether they did eat in deed or no? and if
they had not true bodies in deed, how the appearaunce of bodies could be,
where the substance of bodies was not? In the third chapter of the book
called (...) 3.
Exodus, we read, that God appeared to (...) in the lykenes of flamynge fire,
and that out of a bushe. In the. v. of Iosue it is recorded, how one suddenly
appeared unto Iosue like a man, having a Iosue. 5.
sword drawn in his hand. What can any manne say, how God should appear
in a flame of fire, or what substance of a sword was, in that which appeared
to Iosue: Hereby it is easy to understand howdaungerous a thing it is, to go
about by man's wit or reason, to discuss yt manner of yt works of almighty God.
Who seyth not, that by the mean of such presumptuous (...), men have of late
fallen into most detestable errors, touching the most blessed Sacrament of
the aultare, and have most spytefully rayled against the same, and with most
vile terms have gested thereof, and (...), most vily have used the most
precious body and blood of our savior Christ in the same: In which doing,
how can they look for any favor at the hands of their heavenly father, seeing
in such dispituous manner, they entreat the Body and blood of our sauyoure
Christ his son. But now to proceed forth, touching t declaration of the
second thing, to be conside red in the blessed Sacrament of the aultare: Ye
must know that the presence of our sauyoure Christ in this sacrament of the
altar, is not to ye intent, that Christ should be conuersaunt with us here
in this Sacrament, in such sort and manner, as he was with his Apostles when he
lived here on earth, that is to say: in the visible shape and form of a man,
but his presence in the Sacrament, is to the intent to be to us an heavenly
fode, and therefore he is present in the sacrament, under the fourmes of bread
and wine so that our outward eyes and senses, are certifyed with the outward
fourmes, and sensyble qualityes, and the whole man with all, receaueth the very
Auguste (...)
body and blood of our savior Christ. S. Augustine (as is written in a book
called (...) prosperi) does say, that christen men do honor under the for mes
of bread and wine, which they see with their bodily, eyes, the body and blood
of our Savior Christ, which they do not see. Eusebius Eusibius (...).
Emissenus also, an ancient father of the Greek church, speaking of the
foresaid two parts contained in the Sacrament of the altar, says in this
manner. This is the thing which by all menes we intend to prove, that the
Sacrifice of the church does consist, and is made of two par tes that is, of
the (...) of the eleme^ tes, and of the (...) and blood of our Savior
Christ. S Cipryan in his treatise en tituled. De coena domini does most
plainly say, that Cipriane de coena domiui
the bread whrch our Lord did give to his dis ciples, was by the omnipote^cie
of god made flesh, and was changed in nature, but not in form. The
forenamed Eusebius in a sermon of his made of the body of Christ, does farther
say: that Christ the invisible priest does tourue visible Euse bius Emissenu
in a sermon os the bodi os Christ.
creatures (...) his word, through his secret power, into the substance of his
body and blud. Now for to signify this chaung, to turnyng of bread and wine,
into the substance of Christ's body and blood, the catholyke church uses
this word, Tra^ssubstanciatio^, which is as much to say, as the chau^ging of
one substance into another: Neither is it to be counted unfit that there
should in the Sacrament of the aultare, (...) the form of bread, and yet not
the (...) of bread, seeing God is the doer and worker thereof, to whom nothing is
impossible. We read Exo. 20.
in the (...) Chapter of Exodus, how yt when God came down from heaven unto
Mount Sinai, there was heard a sou^de of a trumpet, and yet mate rial trumpet
was there none. In the fourth book of vii. chapi (...) of the fourth of the
king.
the Kings, and the. vii. chapter, God caused a sound to be heard in the
tents of the Sirians, as if it had been of horses, charets, and of a great
army, and yet was there another horse, charet, nor army. In the third
chapter of Daniel, it is recorded, how the three children were in the myddest
of the flamynge furnes, and yet felt no heat, so that there was the
substance of fire, and yet it did not bourne which to nature is impossyble,
but to GOD is an easy matter. In the. xvii. of Mathewe we read Math. 17
how that Christ was transfygurated, and that his face did shine as the
Son, and that his apparel was made as white as snow, In the. xxiiii. of
Luke, Christ appeared to two of his dysciples Lu. 34,
going to Emaus, like a stranger. In all these foresaid examples, we see as
strange a work as is transubstantiation, and yet no man douteth of them
because God is the worker, nor any man askethe how this, or that could be,
but beleuethe it, and so ought we to do, concerning the change of the
substauuce, of bread and wine, into the substaunde of Christ's body and
blood, and not ask how it may be. The blessed martyr Justinius, affyrmeth
Justinius (...).
that this questyon, how, is a token of unbelief, and S. Ciril, writing upon
the. vi. Chapter of S. John, blamethe the Capernaites, because they Ciril upon
the Vi of S John,
did ask how Christ was able to give the^ his flesh to eat. The words of
saint Cyryll be these.

They ask not without great impiety how can this man give us his flesh and
they remember not that nothing is impossible to God, but let us (says (...))
have firm faith in the mysteries, and let us never in so high mat ters. either
think, or ask this how. When God is the worker, let us not ask how, but let
us leave the knowledge of his work to Chrisost ome upon Ioh (...) V
him self. S. Chrysostom likewise upon the said. v. Chapter says, that
when this questyon, how anyethyng is done, comes into our minds, then with
all, there comes vnbelyfe also But because in scripture the thing that we
receive, when we come to the sacrament, is called bread, therefore men have
fansied with the^ selves, that there must be the substance of materyal bread,
deceauing them selves, by mystakyng, the signification of this word, bread.
For though in our common speech we use to signify by this word, bread, that
one kind of material substance which is made of corn or grain, yet in
scrpture, it signifies all kind of fode, whether it be the fode of the body,
or the food of the soul, and so does also the latyne word, Panis, else
when we desire god in our Pater noster, to give us our daily bread, we should
make an vnperfytte petition, which yet is a most John, 6.
perfyt petition, whereby we ask of our heavenly father, all necessary fode. In
the. vi. of Ihon, Manna is called bread, and yet was it made of no kind of
corn, or grain, and in the same chapyter Christ is called bread because he
is the food of the soul, and there likewise the flesh of Christ in the
sacrament, is called bread and not there only, but in S. Pau les Epistle also
to the Corinthians, for that it is the fode, whereon we feed, when we receive
the sacra meant. Again it is a commen trade in scripture, to call things by the
name of that thing, which they (...). (...),
once were, as Adam is called earth, because he was made of Earth, and Christ
says, the blind see, the lame walk, yt deaf hear, the dumme speak,
meaning by the blind, lame, deaf, and dumme, such as before had been so,
but then were otherwise. Thyrdelye, for that the form of bread does
remain, it is in that respect too, called bread. For these causes, good
faithful hearts, are nothing gre ued with the calling of it bread in the
scripture, but groundynge them selfs upon the words of our savior Christ,
when he said, this is my body, and knowing that it to be both bread, and
his body also at once is impossible, they undoubtedly believe, that by the
power of GOD, the substance of bred, is turned into the substance of Christ's
body, and so mnste al men believe, that will be lively members of the
catholyke church, and in that there belefe, they must honor the body and
blood of our savior Christ, in the sacrament of the Aultare, as always
christen people have used to do.

Saint Austen in his exposition made upon S. (...) stin upon the. 99. Psalm.
the. 99. Psalmesayth, that it is sin, not to ho noure the body of Christ,
meaning in the Sacrament of the Aultare. And (as it is before in this Homily
(...)) he also says in the name of all men. We do honor under the fourmes
of bread and wine, which we se, the body and blood of Christ, which we do
not see. Wherefore, good christen people, knowing now what is the right belefe,
touching the Sacrament of the aultare, embrace, and follow the same, and
cleave fast to the catholyke church, the spouse of Christ, that you may be
true (...) of Christ, to whom with the father, and the holy Ghost, be al
honor, and glory world without end.

Amen.
Io. Harpesfelde, sacrae theologiae professor. Arch London.
An Homely wherein is answer made to certain common objections, against the
presence of Christ's body, and blood in the sacrament of the Aultare.
MEte it were, dearly beloved in our savior Christ, that we all should so
fully, and wholly cleave to the faith of Christ's catholic church. yt no
appearau^ce of reason to ye co^trari thereof, should cause us once to doubt or
stagger, in any part of the same. For such a kind of faith, does god require
of us, and for such kind of faith, good christen people, are in scripture
called Abraha^s children: which Abraham (as it is written in the fourth Romo. 4.
to the Romans) contrary to hope, believed in hope, that he should be the
father of many nations, according to that, which was spoken. So shall thy sede
be. And he fainted not in the faith, nor yet co^ sidered his own bodi, which
was now dead even when he was almost an hundred year old: nether yet that Sara
was past child bearyng, he staggered not at the promise of god, through
unbelief, but was strong in the faith, and gave honor to god, fully certified
yt what he had promised, the same he was able to make good. If we then will be
the children of Abraham, we must not faint in faith, nor consider gods words
after the course of nature. Saint Paul in the. x. chapter of his second
epistle to the 2 Corin. x
Corinthians, gives us an example in him self, how we should always bring
reason in subjection to faith, saying. The wepons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty in God, to overthrow strong holds, to destroy counseles,
and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God,
and to bring in captivity unto the service of Christ, all understanding:
What (think you) is the cause why the Jews believe not in Christ? Uerelye
first, because he was borue of a Uyrgyn, which is contrary to the course of
nature. Secondly likewise, he was in unity of person, God and man which how
it may be, no man's wit is able, by natural power, to conceive, thyrdly,
because he being God and man, suffered the death of the cross, which for God to
be content to do, seems to natural reason a thing most absurd, but good
christen folk geuyng place to faith, do most undoubtedly believe in Christ, God
and man crucified, according to yt s. Paul writes in his first Chapter of his
first Epistle to 2 Corin. 1
the Corinthians saying. We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumblyng
blhcke. to the gentels, a folishnes, but to so many of yt ie was and ge^tels as
ar called, Christ the power and wisdom of God. And agreably here unto, he
says also in the next Chapter following.

My talk, and my preaching was not in yt per suasible words of man's wisdom,
but in showing of power, and of the spyryte, that your faith should not rest
in the wisdom of man, but in the power of God. This general advise and
counsel of S. Paul, may and ought so to stay us in the faith of the
catholyke church, that nether carnal reasons, grounded upon the feeble
intelligence of man's natural wit, nether the de ceatfull judgment of our
senses, should make us once to doubt, of any one truth in Christ's religion,
were it never so contrary to the course of nature, never so far above our
capacities, and never so absurd to the appearaunce of our outward senses.

But forasmuch, as through the iniquity of these later evil years, diverse
have had sondrye fond dowtes and scruples, put into their heads,
especyally, against the presence of Christ's body and blood, in the Sacrament
of the aultare, and through such dowtes have swarued from the true belefe
therein, therefore here shall follow aunsweres, and solutyons to such dowtes as
have been most commen, that from hence for the no man shall need to be seduced by
(...)
them, or other like.

First it has been objected, yt our savior Christ, immediatlye after that he
had instituted, and delivered to his Apostles the sacrament, did say unto
them. Do this in remembrance of me. Upon which words some have concluded,
that the body of our savior Christ, cannot be in the sacrament.

But let us duly way yt words, and meaning of (...)
the same, and we shall most plainly perceive their error, and
mysvnderstandyng. Saint Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, and in
the. xi. (...). xi
chapter of the same Epistle, entreating of the institu tion of the Sacrament
of the altar, and there open nyng the true sense of that commandment of
Christ, says in this manner. As often as you eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup, you shall show forth the Lords death until he come So then the
remembrance which our sauyoure there requirethe of us, is the remembrance of
his death, which is past, and not present, and therefore after most proper
manner of speech, may well be remembered. Now this remembrance, can in no wise
possibly be so lively, and so effectually work in our hearts, as when we most
certainly believe, that in yt sacrament of the aultare, is verily, the self same
bo die in substance, which died for us, and therefore yt Prophet David,
foreseyng in spirit, this so excellent a memory, says in his (...). Psalm.
Our merciful Psalm. 110
gracious Lord, has made a memori of all his marvelous works, and by and by,
decla (...) in what manner he makes that memori, he adds those words, he
has given a food to such as fear him. This fode (which (...) Prophet
says, that Christ should leave in remembrance of al his marvelous works,
that is, of his incarnation, his passion, his ascension, and glory in heaven,
and other like works) most chiefly is to be verefied of the body and blood of
our savior Christ, in the sacrament of the aultare. Besides this, the body
and blood of our savior Christ (as it is in the sacrament under the fourmes
of bread and wine) may in that respect also very weli be a remembrance of it
self as it honge on the cross, in the vysyble form of a mortal man, and as
it is now in heaven, in ye form of an immortal man. Farthermore, when our
savior said. Do this in the remembrance of me, he meant they should do the
whole ministratio^, which he then did in remembrance of him, which whole
ministration, cannot be accordynglye, done otherwise, but that there must
needs be present the very body and blood of our sauyoure Christ. (...) Math.
26


Another common objection, there is gathered of the words of Christ. Matthew.
xxvi. when he said: Poor men ye shall have always with you, but me shall ye not
always have with you. Some have upon these words concluded, that the body and
blood of our savior Christ, cannot be in the sacrament of the altar, for
then (say they) Christ (...).
should be always with us, whereof himself says the contrary. But if those
me^ so concludyng would no more, but confer saint Mark, and sayncte Ma thew
together, tonchynge the foresaid words of Christ, and by yt the one
Evangelist says, would sincerely judge what the other meant, they should sone
perceue this there objection to be of no force or strength at al, to prove, that
they thereby goo about to prove. For saint Mark iu his. xiiii. Chapter,
first tells Mar. 14.
the story of the woman, which came to Christ, and brought with her an
Alablaster box of most precious ointment, and poured ye ointme^nt on his head
next he tells how certene of the disciples did murmr, and grudge at that
fact of the woman, and said: What means this loss, and waste of ointment?
Might it not have been sold for more then three. C. pence and given to the
pore? Thyrdely he tells, how our savior being offended with the
dysciples, for their murmuring against the woman, and how withal he allowing
and commending her fact, did say iu this manner. Let her alone: Why are ye
greuouse unto her? she has done a good deed: for always shall you have poor
men amongst you and when ye shall please, you may bestow your charity on
them, but me shall ye not have always amongst you. This woman has bestowed on
me that she had, and she has prevented to anoint my bodi, against it shall be
(...). By this process of S. Mark, it is euydent, that our savior in all that
his talk, had a respect to the charity, which that womau then showed upon
him, when she poured the precious oyntmente on his head, the like whereof, he
sayethe, no man should be able to show on him in time to come, meaning, that
when he should once rise from death to life, and have an immortal body, that
then he would not look to (...) the like at any man's hands, but that then
men might at their pleasure bestow on the poor, who always are in the world
in the mortal estate, and may by charity of good folk, be releued and
comforted. In such sort in deed, our savior is not now amongst us, but the
being of his body and blood in the Sacrament of the altar is atter another
sort. For in the Sacrament he is, to feed us with his body and blood, and not
vysyble to show him self unto us, as he the^ did to his apostles, nor to have
ointment poured on him, as he then had. Another objection is there (...).
gathered, partly of S. Paul in the. x. of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians (where he speakethe of a 1 Corin. (...)
spiritual meat, and spyrytuall drink) partelye of Christ's words in the.
vi, of Ihon (where he says that It is the spirit which gives life, and
(...) 6.
that the flesh (...) nothing) partly upon the common manner of speaking, used
of the Catholyke church, which calls the Body and blood of our Savior
Christ, in the sacrament of the aul tar, a spiritual meat, and a spiritual
drink.

For answer to which objection, it is syrste to (...)
be understood, that one self thing may be both spiritual, and yet
nevertheless of a corporal substuunce to, As for example, the body of man
after the (...), shall (as S. Paul wytnessheth in the. xv. chapeter of his
first Epistle to the Corinthians) be spiri 1, Cor. 15
tual, and yet it (...) then the same in substance, that it is now. Again,
Manna a meat which God (...) to the children of Israel in the wyldernes, is
both in Scripture, and of the catholyke church also, called a spiritual meat,
and the water likewise which god gave them out of a rock, is called a
spiritual drink, and yet as well Manna, as the water, were of a bodily
substance. In the. vi. to the Galathians, saint Gala. 6.
Paul calls mortal men, living then on the earth, spiritual. Wherefore
spiritual, is not so to be taken always, as to exclude corporal, but that
thing whatsoever it be, may be called spiritual, wherein is a work wrought
by god, above nature. For as god is a spirit so are his supernatural works
called spi rituall, and the things also, on, and in whom, such works are
wrought, are named spiritual things: and therefore. Manna, though it were of a
bodily substance, yet for that it came myraculously from above, by the only
power of God, and not of nature, is, and may well be called, a spiritual meat.
And the drink which issued out of the rock, albeit it was in substance
very water, yet for that God by his omnypotency, made it suddenly to issue out
of a rock, it is armed a spirytuall drink. (...) bydyes likewise after the
resurrection, shall have in them immediately of God, above yt power of nature,
immortality, incorruptibilitie, (...) other like supernatural qualities, and
for that cause, they shall after the ressurection, be spyrytuall bodies. Now
then what necessity is there, that because the body of our (...) Christ in the
Sacrament of the Altar, is a spiritual meat, therefore it should not be
also the corporal substance of his body; When the catholyke church does
say, that the body of Christ in the Sacrament is a spirytaull body, it
means, that it is there only thoroughe the almyghtye powere of God, and not
by the power, or manoure of nature, Likewise, when the catholyke church
says, that the body of Christ is to be received there spirituallye, it
means not that therefore the very body of Christ is not there to be received
really and in very deed. For this word, spiritually, does signifye only the
manner of the receauyng, and does not importe the substance of the thing so
received.

Besides this, the catholyke church, beleuynge that in the Sacrament of the
aultare, is always reallye the body and blood of our savior Christ, does yet
put a difference in the manner of receauynge thereof, and uses to say, that
when good men receive the sacrament, that they receive the body and blood of
Christ, both sacramentally, and spiritually to, but when evil men receive
that, they receive the body of Christ sacramentally only, and not spiritually,
because they come unto it unworthily, and therefore do they procure thereby, to
them selves dampnation. But now to open fardar the very meaning of those
worses of Christ. It is the spirit that ge ueth life, the flesh profits
nothing, you shall understand, that these words are taken of the catholyke
church, in two most godly senses, the one is, to mean by the spirit, the
godhed, and by the flesh the nature of man, as if he had said, it is the
godhed that causes my flesh to be able to give life, ne there is my flesh the
flesh of a bare man, for then it being eaten could not profit you, but my
flesh is united in unity of person to the godhed, so that it is thereby able
to bring life to the worthy eater thereof. Cirill.
Thus does Cyryil upon the. vi. of Saint John expound these words, And to
like purpose saint Augustyne sayethe upon the. vi of John, that as Augussin
knowledge being separated from charity, makes men proud, but being joined
with charytye does edyfye: even so man's flesh not united to the Godhed, and
byng eaten does not profytte, but the flesh of Christ, which is in him, in
unity of person, inseperably united to the godhed, being worthelye received,
must needs hyghly profyt. The other sense of those words, to mean by the
spirit, a spiritual understanding of Christ's promise, made in Caper naum
when he said, the food that I will give John 6.
unto you is my flesh: which words be then un derstanded spiritually, when
they be taken, to mean that thing which passes the power of nature to do and
manes wit by natural reason to comprehend likewise by the flesh, is to be
meant, a fleshely under standing of the said promysse, as to understand
without faith in Christ's deity, as the Capernaites did, which took Christ
but for a bare man, and so conceived no otherwise of the eating of his flesh,
then of commen meat bought in ye shambles. This sense that S. Chrysostom
writing upon the. v. of Chrisosto
John, and S. Augustyne writing upon the same Chapter. An other objection is
there, by occasyon that this truth is not expressed in the comme^ creed,
Objection
Which objection does proceed of an ignorance, and lack of knowledge of the
first institution of yt creed. Answer.
For in the primatyue church, when men of all ages did suddenly turn from
gentility, to the christian religion, and yet then were not by and by, upon
such there turn, admitted to any sacrament, but first were instructed in
artycles, necessary for them to believe, before they were baptized, this common
cread was taught them, and they were for that time called Catechumni, that is
younglynges in Christ's religion, and begynners admytted, but to the first
principles of the chrystyan faith, during which time they were not suffered,
so much as to be present at the mass, but after the gospel, were quyte
excluded from the same, as by the undoubted wrytynges of the ancient fathers in
christ's church may most evidently appear: So that this reason is fo^d and to
no purpose to say, that because it is not in the (...) creed expressly set
fourth, that in the sacrament of the aultare, is the very (...) and blood of
our savior christ, therefore no christian man is bound to believe it so to be.
S. Chrysostom, and S. Augustyne having occasion many times in (...) sermones
Chrisosto (...).
made by them, to speak of this Sacrament, for as much as among their audience
were as well youg lynges, not yet baptized, as other fathfull, already
christened did use often tosay. Quod (...) nora^t, yt is, which yt faithful, or
they yt be already baptized know or such like thing, and would not then
expreslye declare the truth, touching the sacrament of the aultare, for that
it was not the manner to reueyle such mysteries to those yonglinges: but to
them was in general, as sufficient for salvation, prescribed in that common
creed, that they should believe the catholic church: which not only was
sufficient tha^ for the^, beleuynge the othere artycles of there creed, but is
sufficient at this present also for us, co^firminge our selves in all points
to the common belefe of the catholke church, which is the surest pyller that
men may lene unto, be they learned, or vulearned, and such a pyller, as who
that most strongly cleueth to. Objection
is in most assured state of everlasting life. There are othere obiectyons
upon. iii. partyculer artycles of our creed which are, that Christ is
ascended, and sytteth at the right hand of God the father, and from thense
shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Which articles yet being ryghtly
understood, (...).
should rather confyrme us in the true catholyke belefe, of the presence of
christ's body in the sacrament of the aultare. For as it is above nature for a
manes body to ascend, and above the worthynes of manes nature, to sit at the
right hand of God the father, that is, to be of equal power, and glory with
God the father, and fynallye, as it is above the authority of man's nature, to
give sentence of eternal death, and life, upon all mankind, and yet every
good manne stedfastlye believes al these supernatural powers in Christ,
touching his manhed, because he is both God and man, and to god nothing is
impossible, even so should we with like belefe, knowinge that Christ is
omnipotent, credit all othere things done, or spoken by Christ, and be most
certain, that how so ever they seem in apearaunce to our reason, yet in very
deed they agree, and stand right well with those foresaid. iii. articles of
our creed, and that though we cannot by our wits conceive, how Christ is
ascended, and is nevertheless in the Sacra meant also, yet they must needs be
both believed, because gods word does affirm them both, and the catholyke
church does believe them both, which church has always taught that Christ
is in heaven, in the visyble form of a man, and in the sacrament, under the
(...) fourmes of bread and wine, his wisdom so ordeyning, that with our
hearts we would behold his golry, as he syttethe in, heaven, at the right
hand of the father, and wythall should feed on his very body in the sacrament,
to re ceaue the more grace, and there upon so to be governed with his spirit,
that hereafter we also might be partakers of the like glory in heaven.

And albeit these solutyons might suffice, and instruct sufficientlye the
unlearned people, to answer, both to these, and all othere common (...),
made against the Sacrament of the Aultare, troublynge much the heads of the
simple people, by there folly, in crediting evil, and per nicious schole
masters, to their destructyon, where giving credit to the catholyke church,
they might avoid all (...), and merit a great deal, yet to open further the
(...), and noughtines of the heretic teachers, in our time, and how glad,
and willinge they are to (...) the symplicitie of the unlearned people, ye shall
have here added, some moo objections, and solutions given to them, to this end
that if the said simple people have been infected with the said objections, or
such like, they may be well satisfied in their conscience, and thereupon adhere
unto the catholyke faith, maynteyned, and observed in the catholic church,
out of which, there is no salvation. And to prorede herein, this is one othere
common objection that much troubles the ig noraunt people, it is to wite. How
can yt bodi and Objection
blood, of our Savior Christ, be in the blessed sacrament of the altar,
seeing that not only evil men do many times receue the same, but fire also may
consume it, and other like chances may happen un to it? For (...) to which
objection, it is first and (...)
principally to be said, that this objection procedethe of a vain curiosity
of them which rather delight, fondly to talk of this high mystery, theu to
prepare themselves to receive the same accordyngly. Sure we are that our
Savior Christ is now man incorruptible, and impassible. and nether by fire,
nor by ought else, can suffer violence, and therefore where it pleases him of
his tender mercy and goodness, and for our great comfort and soul health, by
his omnipotent word, to turn the substance of bread and wine, into his most
prerious body and blood, in the sacrament of the aultare, and yet so to make
this turn that nevertheless he sufferethe the fourmes and sensible qualities
of the bread and wine to remain in there nature, as they were before the
consecratyon, it is to be vnderstauded, that the vyolence or force that is, or
in ye be (...) to this sacrament, is done only to the fourmes, and qualities
sensible, which in deed are subject to passibilite, and corruption, but in no
wise, to the incorruptible bodi and blood of our savior Christ, under them
contained.

Do we not read, I pray you in the fourth of Matthew, how that our savior
suffered the devil, to take him, and carye him up into the pynacle of the
temple, and afterward to the top of an high mountain, and yet who does not
know that he suffered no vilany thereby at al? The son beams also many times,
do shine on things impure, and unclean, yet are they no whit thereby defiled.
The body of man is with a greter union joined to the soul, then are the
fourmes of bread and wine, to the body and blood of our sauionr Christ, in the
Sacrament of the altar, and yet we know that (...), putrefaction, and other
such like things chauncynge to our body, the soul has in it no such
passion, for that it is immortal. The very Godhed of our savior Christ, was
in unity of person, united to his manhod, and yet none of the passions,
pains, or griefs which he sustained in his manhod, brought vyolence,
alteration, or change to his godhed. For the godhed is in alterable, and
impossible. The simplicity of Christen people, in the primatyue church, was
such that they beleuynge most certainly the body and blood of our savior
Christ to be in the sacrament of the altar, under the fourmes of bread and
wine, did without al curious talk of the fourmes, and accidents, bend the^
selves to be (...) at mass where in the mighty work of consecratyon is
wrought by god, and wherein our savior Christ also is, in fourmes of bread and
wine, offered up to the heavenly father, by the priest, for the sooner obteinyng
of mercy, and favor toward us, and the said people being at mass, they
with most fervent devotion, did pray, and did honor, the blessed sacrament
of the altar, the body and blood of our savior Christ: and besides this
they did oftentimes, with fear and trembling, prepare them selves to the
worthy teceyte thereof, and by such their godly behavior, they did purchase to
them selves great abundance of grace, where we by the contrary, and most
unchristian behavior, provoke gods wrath daily, more and more, upon our
selves, and yt whole realm. For nothing (...) God to auengeaunce, then the
presumption of such as (...) curiously enter into his hidden secrets, and
thereupon do contempne all that, which by their feeble wits, they are not
able to understand.

Another objection is of the words of our savior, Obie ctio^
in the. vi. of John, where ne says. Qui (...) Iho^, 9.
(...) earnem et bibit (...) habet vitam eternam That is to say. He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has everlasting life. Upon these
words they gather, that ii in the sacrament of the altar, be really the body
and blood of our sauionre Christ, then whosoever receueth the sacrament must needs
enjoy everlasting life. But the scripture witnesses, (...). Cor. xi.
that Judas received it, and (...) Paul in the. xi. of his first Epistle to
the Corinthians says, that. Whosoever receueth the sacrament unworthily,
receaueth it to his dampnation.

To this objection, it is to be au^swered, that many (...)
sentences of scripture, are to be understand, with a certain restraynte, or
limittation, (...) for example the scripture says, Qui credit in me habit
vitam eternam.

That is to say. He yt be leueth in me, has euerasting life. And in the first
Epistle of S. John, and 1 John. 4
the fourth chapter it is written. Quisquis confessus (...) est filius dei,
(...) in (...) et ipst in deo. That is to say Who soever shall confess, that
Jesus is the son of God, in him dwells God, and he in God. There have been,
and are thousands which believe in Christ, and that Christ is the very son
of God, and yet shall not for all (...) saved, but either for lack of true
(...), in other arti cles of the chrystian religion, or for lack of good life
shall be dampened. This condition than is to be added to the forsayde sentences,
if in such belief a man dye, and therewith is faithful, in the necessary
articles and out of state of all dedly sin, he shall then with out any doubt
inherit the kingdom of heaven.

So in this present objection, we must make a lymitation, Augu. (...) mon xi,
De (...) domini
and say, that whosoever eats, and drynketh worthily etc. To the confirmation
hereof. Saint Augustine says, in his eleue^th sermon. Deverbis domini. (...)
Profecto est quidam modus mandueandi illam (...) quomodo qui (...), in Christo
manet, and Christus in eo. Noner go (...) modo quisquam mauducauerit carnem
Christi, (...) biberit (...) Christi, (...) in Christo, et in illo Christus,
sed (...) quodam modo (...) (...) vtique ipse videbat (...) is it a (...). That
is to say. Uerely, there is a certain manner of eating that flesh, after
which manner, he that shall have eaten it, does dwell in Christ, and Christ in
him. Wherefore, not in what manner soever a man does eat Christ's flesh, and
drinks his blood, he dwells in Christ and Christ in him, but he that
eats, and drynketh after a certain special manner, to which manner Christ had
respect, when he spoke (...) words. The same saint Augustine in his first
book. Contra Chrescouium gramaticu^ Idem con (...) Cresco (...) cumli, i.
and the. xxiiii. Chapter says thus. Quid de (...) corpore et (...) domini,
unico (...) pro (...) nostra, qua^uis ipse dominudicat (...) hominis etc non
(...) docet (...) hoc perniciosum male (...) fieri? That is to say. What of
the very body and blood of our sa uiour, the only sacrifyce for our
salvation? though there of our Lord does say, unless ye eat yt flesh of the
son of man. etc. does not yt same Apostle (meaning Paul) teach that it
also is pernicious to them, that do Objection
use it not duly, and ryghtfully?

An othere objection there is also, and it is this, Iho^ 10. 15
Christ. (John. x. and. xv.) does say, I am a door (...). Cori. (...)
I am a vine, and (...) Paul. ((...). ad. Cozi. x.) uses such like speech,
which speech of Christ, and of saint Paul, in those places, does not import
that Christ in every deed, by that saying was a door or a vine, or such like,
but speaking after that figuratyfe speech, or manner did mean that he was a
figure of a door, of a (...), and such like, and that he had the property, of
a door, of a vine, and so forth Semblably (say they) when Christ at his last
supper (taking bread, and (...) it) did say. This is my body, And taking the
cup, and gave thanks, did say, this is my blood of the new testament, etc,
his speech so pronounced, and uttered, did not importe, that Christ thereby
does make of the bread and wine, his body, and blood but either he meant, that
the bread and wine was signs, and tokens of his body, and blood, or else
that they should be (...) of his body, and blood (...) not his very body, and
blood in deed, and con sequently therefore, they say, that in the sacrament
of the aultare, there is neither the body, nether the blood of Christ, but
bare material bread and wine being only signs, tokens, and (...) of christ's
(...)
body and blood there. For solutio^ of this objection this may be said, that it
is truth, that Christ and saint Paul in the places before alleged, do so
say, as is deduced in the (...) of this argument, or objection, and truth
it is also that the speech of Christ I am a door, I am a vine, etc. does not
importe that Christ, by that speaking was in very deed a door, or a vine, but
that he was a figure of a door, and of a vine, and had the (...) of the door,
and of the vine, But when it is said that the semblabe is of Christ's words,
This is my body, this is my blood, that is neither true, nor does follow,
either by the rules of reason, or of scripture, for concerning reason, either
must we reason, and say, that Christ always in his speaking did use
fygures, metaphores, and tropes, (which to say, is most false, as it appears
(...), 16,
in the. xv. of S. John) either else we must say, that Christ did but only
sometimes speak in fygures and not so always, which being true, and there
fore to be granted, it follows not in reason, that though Christ in the. v.
and xv. of saint Ihon. etc, did speak fyguratyfiye, that therefore, here in
these (...), (...). (...) 16,
words of Christ. this is my body this is my blood. he did also speak
fyguratyfly, wherefore let these sely souls, that have been seduced by this
kind of arguments, ask their teachers, whether they can maintain, and
defend this their own argument, with so feeble a consequent, or no And if
they can not, then tell the^ yt they be very (...) lettes in deed, and as for
the rule of scryptures, that is of the circu^staunce of yt letter, and (...)
other places of scripture, (...) with the same, to gather thereof yt very meaning
of the thing, an example, whereof we (...) 2. (...) 16,
have Johan, ii. and. xvi. And here the unlearned at to be taught, that
although in the prophets, and the histories of the old testament, tropes,
and fygures are received, and allowed, forasmuch as by such tropes, and
fygures, the thing spoken, is more vehemently declared, and set forth, yet (as
the excel lent prelate, and notable great clerk, the Lord bishop of
winchester, now most worthy Lord chau^celet of England, in his learned book of
confutacio^ of heresies, against the sacrament of the altar, does prude^tly
advertise us, and clerly affirm) in ye doctrine and precepts of the now
milita^t church, al things of our religion, and faith, ought to be taken
simply, and plainly. And in very deed, if in the sacrament of ye altar were
not ye true bodi of Christ, but a figure, and a signification only of it, tha^
ye sacraments of ye new testament should have nothing more but rather less,
the^ ye sacra me^ts of ye old testament had, which is against ye catholyke
doctrine of the church, and against al good reason An other objection is this,
Christ at his last supper, Obientio^
taking the chalice, or cup into his hands, did after yt he had blessed it,
say. This cup is the new testament, in my blood. And seeing these words
must needs, as they say be taken fyguratiuely, inasmuch as the very material
cup it self, was neither the new testamente, ne yet the blood of Christ,
therefore likewise, these words also which Christ, taki^g bread into his
hands, blessi^g it, saying. This is my body. must needs be taken figurative ly.

For answer whereunto, we may say, as we did Answer
say before, to the same objection, yt this argument is naught, and very evil
framed, for though we did admit a figure to be herein ye cup, yet it follows
not thereby, yt we must needs take ye other speech, touchi^g ye body to be
fyguratyue also, especially for yt in ye one spache, it is to wit, touching ye
body, all the circu^st a^ces of the text, and course of scripture, do enforce
us to take the speech, properlye wherein ye other speech touching the cup, all the circumstances of the text, and course of scripture does importe the
contrary.

An other objection is, that Christ has but one Objection
true natural body: now (say they) one true natural body can not truly be but
in one place, therefore say they, seeing Christ's body, is truly in heaven, it
can not be truly also in the sacrament of the altar.

For answer whereunto may be said, that in Answer
deed it is true, that Christ has but one true natural body, and where they
say, that one true natural body, can not be, but in one place, it is also
true, after one, and the self same manner of being, but after diverse manners of
being, one body, may be sondrye where, yea, and at one time to, it is to wit,
in heaven, in the visible form, and manner of man, and in the sacrament of the
altar, under the form and manner of bread and wine, and in eueryche of them,
really and truly to, in those respects, God being therein the doer, who is
omnipotent.

There is also another objection, and that is this, Objection
GOD can make man, but man cannot make God: now say they, if the true body of
Christ were, really, and in deed, in the sacrament of the altar, then the
priest which is a man, should thereby make God, but man cannot make God,
therefore in the sacrament of the altar, there is not the very true body of
Christ For answer whereunto, is to be said, that this Answer
objection proceeds of a great ignorance, for he that makes this objection,
takes that the priest saying mass, and pronouncing the words of
co^secracion does make God, where in very deed, the priest goes about no
such things, and if he did, nether be, ne yet god himself c^n make God, but
the truth is that the priest being the minister of God, and god being there the
worker with his word, by the priest pronounced there, is caused the very body
of Christ to be there present, where it was not there before, and yet no new body
there made, but that body there present which long ago was borne of the Uyrgyn
Mary, the same (I say) in substance, is there present only under the forms
of bread and wine.

An other objection there is, and that is this S. Objection
Luke, in the. xvii. chapter of the acts, does testifye that S. Paul, being
at athens, and in mars street, before the council there, did say, amongst
other words, that God does not dwell in temples made with hands, where upon
the (...), vnlernedly does gather, that seeing the material temple is made with
hands, and the sacrament of the altar is in ye said material temple, it
follows (say they) that the body and blood of Christ, can not be in it,
because God does not dwell in temples made with hands, And this objection has
been so much iiked, and commended amongst the procedyng prechers abusing ye
ignorant, yt they thought it inevitable, and therefore abusyng the said people
they caused it to be set up, and painted for a gaye show in the temples.

For answer whereunto, this is to be told you, yt there is a great dyfference
between being, and dwelling (...).
in a place, for a great many of you, (I (...) not) have been both in the
(...) side, in Paul's church yard, yea and Paul's church to, where ye have
not, with most due reverence, used and behaved your selves, and yet I am sure
that ye dwell not there. In deed, God is properlye said to dwell in heaven,
because he there does show, and manifest his great glory, and in the hartcs of
just, and good peo ple, he is also said to dwell by grace, but as for other
places, he is in them being, but not dwelling. And as concerning the being of
God in the sacrament of the aultare, forasinuch as there is the very substance
of christ's natural, and true body, and blood, taken of the Uyrgyn Mary, and
that the di uinitie is, in unity of person, inseperably united, and joined to
the said body and blood, therefore we must say and believe, that the godhed
of Christ is in the sacrament of the altar, with his humanity, in a very
special sort, and does not thereby dwell in the said sacrament, and so
this objection is not worth a (...) butten, for all the bragges that has been
made of it.

Other fond, and folishe objections, there are, which are not worthy to be
answered unto, and therefore are not needful to be touched, exhortyng you
therefore in Christ, (...), and steadfastly, to believe the doctrine of the (...)
church herein, and so shall you avoid danger, please God, profyt your self,
and (living well) come at the last to joy everlasting, which grant unto us the
father, the son, and the holy ghost, to whom be honor and glory for ever.

AMEN.
Tetrastichon in immodicam praesentis temporis pl^uiam.
Obsecro quid sibi ^^lt ingensque ab aethere nymbus
Noctes atque dies sic sine fine ruit
Mortales quoniam ^olunt sua criminia fler^
Coelum pro nobis soluitur in lacrimas.
A Dialoge between man and the Air of like effect.
Man.
These (...) showers and ragyng (...) yt daily us molest.
Alas ye heavens, what may this mean, is Nature now oppressed?
The Air.
Thou man thy case, thy wicked state, why will thou not lament.
And spedely gods grace receive, and duly do repent
Thy sins so great, and eyes so dry, thy woeful ruin nyghe.
For the our sircmes down cause to power, this plauge does cause us sighe
Al creatures cke with us now mourn, thy recheles stubourne heart.
Alas weep thou, that we may cease, and thus ease thou thy smarte.
Domiat saluos facregem, et reginam et (...) been (...).
Imprinted at London in Poules churchyard, at the sign of the holy Ghost, by
Ihon Cawoode, Prynter to the King and Queens Majesty's.

Cum priuilegio maiestatis.


