THE CARNAL PROFESSOR. Discovering The woeful slavery of a man guided by the
flesh. Distinguishing A true spiritual Christian that walks close with God,
from all Formalists in Religion, rotten hearted hypocrites, and empty
powerless professors whatsoever.

BY That faithful Servant of Christ, Robert Bolton, B. D. late Preacher in
Northhampton Shire.

LONDON, Printed for R. Dawlman, at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's Churchyard.
1634.

TO THE GODLY WELL AFFEcted Reader.
Christian Reader.
THe Father of all Spirits having taken this worthy Author to himself, pity
it were to entombe his labors in the grave of silence together with him; the
rather considering how useful a member he has always been to the Church of
God, and what prosperous success his endeavors have found in the hearts of
Christians. The thing he chiefly aimed at, was fruitfulness in the place
wherein God had set him; which often he enjoyed experiment of (to the cheering of
his spirit) in no small measure. It cut the very heart strings of his righteous
soul, to see many dry and withered branches (fit for nothing but the fire)
cumbering the precious ground of the Almighties garden; and possessing the
room of more growing plants. He was wonderful active in the cause of Christ,
and desired as well to do good as to be so, where ever he came. It was not
the least of his care, not to live unto himself: He knew he served a good
Master, which made him studious of improving every talent for the best
advantage; well may he be called good, that makes others far the better for
his goodness: And indeed setting this aside, what has the creature to commend
him to God, or releeve his soul in any distress?

Thou have here in brief the soul of man unbowelled before thine eye, and
that mass of corruption lodging in a carnal heart (together with its power
and plague) discovered unto thee, wherein is plainly demonstrated the
miserable condition of a man guided by the flesh, and the happiness attending
such as are led by Gods Spirit; as also the bitter conflict of these two
opposite inmates in a believing soul, with the means of victory.

Our life is nothing but a daily warfare, every moment we are more or less to
encounter with adversaries; Satan always labors the destruction of the
Saints, though his ways to effect it are not one and the same; sometimes he
inticeth men to sin by allurements, sometimes by vexing and disquieting their
inward peace, at least he aims to make the life of a Christian uncomfortable
by his manifold assaults; he is vigilant to corrupt upon all occasions as he
can espy opportunity, and will not cease to assail, though he be overcome;
when he cannot prevail by flatteries, he seeks by force and violence to
overthrow the poor servants of Christ.

Amongst his many snares to entrappe our poo^e souls, this is not the meanest,
that he labors to divide the kingdom against it self, and to use men as his
instruments for their own destruction; Satan well knows that coming in his
own likeness, he would seem very odious and soon be resisted, therefore he
maskes under a veil of humility that he may the more securely withdraw us from
our hold in God.

But we have a valiant leader, let us stick unto him, even Jesus Christ the
righteous, who is a Lion of the tribe of Judah, a mighty Prince able to tread
all our enemies under foot; well may Satan bark and roar but he can stir no
further then God gives him liberty; he cannot tempt whom he will, nor when he
will, nor how he will, without permissio^ from above; he may desire to sift us
as wheat, but the Lord will make choice of the temptation, and set bounds to our
enemies malice, thus far you shall go and no further.

If a child have his father by the hand, though he be in the dark, or sees any
danger approaching yet he fears no hurt; neither shall we be dismayed with any
temptation, whilst by the eye of faith we see that invisible one ready to
support us; the chiefest strength of soldiers lies in their captain, who yet
must fight for themselves and him, but our whole strength lies in Christ, who
by his Almighty power subdueth all things for us; of our selves we have no
ability to prevail against the strong one in the world, all our victories come
from God; we are too weak to withstand the least temptation through our own
strength, but relying upon the Lord we shall be more than conquerors over the
greatest.

It had been much to be wished that this holy man had survived the publishing
the residue of his worthy labors, that so they might have come more refined
and polished into the worlds view, however, pity it is that goodly children
should be brought to the birth, and there perish for want of help to bring
them forth. These things in their delivery found much acceptance and wrought
effectually in the hearts of many, who knows whether a further blessing does
not yet attend them?

Dear Christian next unto the glory of God, thy good was chiefly aimed at in
bringing this work to light; be not therefore wanting to thy self, and thy
souls bliss. Remember the day cannot always last, the night will come, and
thou know not how soon: This may be the last book that ever thou shall
read, and this the last hour that ever thou shall spend here on earth; Oh use
it conscionably, and bless God for any furtherance in thy way to happiness.
While thou have the light believe in the light, and walk in the light, that
then may be the child of light. Occasions are headlong, being once past,
they cannot be recovered. The five foolish virgins came too late, and were shut
out of heaven. Thy time is short, the art of well doing long: on this moment
depends eternity, of blessedness if it be well, of misery if it be ill
employed. He that is not ready for God to day, will be less sit to morrow. It
is no time to begin to live, when thou art ready to dye; then to seek after
heaven, when thou come to thy Crutches; At length grow spiritually wise, let
the best things have the best place in thee. It will be too late when thou art
in hell to say, oh that I had been more religious and provided better for my
soul; be exceedingly abased for thy former neglects; let it wound thy soul
that thou set out no sooner, and art yet no further in the race of
godliness; get ground of thy corruptions now daily; count that a lost day, in
which thou art not somewhat bettered, and labor for such infallible evidences
of Gods love, that no reprobate under heaven (...) possibly attain unto* get
such truth of grace in thy inner man as may distinguish thee from all outside
professors (mere empty caskes of Religion) and such as is not common to
hypocrites, and castawayes together with thy self. To which end seriously
peruse this following treatise, wherein thou shall find sufficiency of real
worth to commend it self. Look up to heaven for a blessing upon it, and
desire the Lord to go along with thee in it, and prosper the same for thy
souls good, which he heartily desires who rests,

Thine in the Lord Jesus, I. T.

THE CARNAL PROFESSOR.
ROM: 8. V. 13. For if ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if through
the Spirit, ye mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
IN the Chapter going before, the Apostle having delivered the double use of
the Law: first, the proper use to show men the way to live, if in case they
were able to fulfill and keep it: Secondly, the accidental use by reason of
Sin, which is employed in condemning us, by discovery of our transgression,
to comfort the distressed heart of a poor sinner: he describes in the latter
end of the former Chapter a special means to shun this inevitable danger;
namely, the righteousness, obedience, and sufferings of Christ: And in this
Chapter further enlarges the same by way of confirmation unto the 5. verse.
After which lest it might be thought that a Christian may live as he list,
being freed from sin by the merits of Christ's death, or that a profane person
should claim any interest in that blessed sacrifice of Christ, he further
proves by many pregnant reasons, that every Christian ought to endeavor after
holiness, that thereby he may prove himself to be truly ingrafted into Christ,
by participating of the fruit of his Spirit, and that he is in deed (and not
in word only) a true Christian by his unblameable life and conversation, as the
goldsmith is known by his costly pieces, or any mechanical artificer by the
works which his hands accomplish.

In the verse I have read unto you, the Apostle concludes very effectually
amongst the rest of his arguments, that we must live according to the spirit,
and not according to the flesh; seeing the one designeth and notes unto us
life, the other death, both most infallible tokens of our future estate and
condition: So that if any man or woman be desirous to know what shall betide
them after this life, If any be desirous to know even the secrets of God* I
mean his determination as touching themselves, their wives, their children,
friends or foes after death, let them resort to the Holy Ghost speaking in this
place, and converse with their own hearts, if they find the quickening spirit
but as a lively spark raked up amongst the great heap of their own
corruptions, they shall assuredly live for ever. If they find only mere flesh
and blood to be their guide, then woe to them, they are in the state of
Castawayes and lost creatures, be they Prince or Peer* noble or ignoble, rich
or poor, there is no difference nor exception with God; and therefore they
ought speedily to sue for their deliverance through favor by the Son of God,
lest death prevent them to their everlasting misery.

But it may be these titles of Flesh and Spirit are unknown, or at least not
observed through the subtlety of Satan, thickning the eye of dexter and right
discerning; and therefore that we may thoroughly kenne the flesh in despite of
the flesh, and judge in the spirit of the spirit, let us for our furtherance
herein consider these six profitable observations.

1. What Flesh is. 2. What it is to live in the flesh. 3. What that death is*
which is here threatened as a just punishment to such as live after the flesh.
4. What the Spirit is. 5. What it is to mortify the deeds of the flesh. 6.
What is meant when he says they shall love.
1. The word [ Flesh] Cor. 7. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of the flesh and spirit; that is, of soul and body.

2. For the humane nature 1 Pet. 3. 18
who was put to death concerning the flesh.

3. For this present life, If thou take a wife thou sinnest not, 1 Cor. 7.
nevertheless such shall have trouble in the flesh.

4. For the outward aspect Gal. 1. 13.
Ye know how through the infirmity of the flesh I preached the Gospel.

Gal. 4. 29. He that was borne after the flesh, etc.

All flesh is grass, etc. Esaias 44. 7.


7. For natural corruption, and inclination of the mind, will, and affections
to that which is against the Law, and so it is taken in this place.

The reason why the holy Ghost terms this natural corruption inherent in the
soul as well as the body; by the name of flesh* Reas.
is, because so strict is the Union betwixt the one and the other in an
unregenerate man, that as a loving couple they seek the preservation of each
others estate, and like Hypocrates twins, they laugh together, they weep
together, and are alike affected: A bloody heart, and a bloody hand, a false
heart and a false tongue, a lascivious mind, an adulterous eye; yea and which
is more, so strangely sometimes is the soul overcome with the love of the
body, that whereas by nature, reason should command (and rule the flesh* as the
weaker vessel) the belly and back so subtly insinuate and creep into favor
with the understanding, that as the foolish wife with her beauty and composed
devices, over-ruleth her husband, though a man of understanding; So these
importunat cravers never give over their suite unto reason, they make it a
drudge to sensuality, and an attorney to solicit the cause of mere gross and
carnal pleasure.

In consideration whereof (I mean because of this mutual intercourse of the
soul and the body in accomplishing of sin,) many learned Divines have made
this a question, Whether the soul be first infected with the contagion of the
body or no? but of that I will not stand, it being besides our present purpose,
only thus much I note, that therefore the Holy Ghost names the flesh to
intimate the mutual confederacy betwixt the soul and body of man, how that by
reason of sin he is now wilfully made a slave and vassal to fleshly desires.

And therefore likewise it may be supposed that the Holy Ghost names the
flesh only, as a man that blames the provoking Wife for the lewd action done
by her husband. For albeit, sin lies principally, in the soul as poison in
the teeth, yet it sheddeth and disperseth it self at his pleasure actually
into the members of the body, of whom it is aptly accomplished as occasion is
offered. And as the whole toad is called a venomous creature because of some
one part preserving poison, (the rest being capable of the same virulent
infection:) So the whole man is said to be sinful; not as if the body of it
self, as it consists of bones and sinnewes and living arteries can properly
be said to be sinful otherwise then as the house is said to be wicked because
of the wicked dwellers. Albeit I grant as the serpent was a fit instrument for
the devil because of his subtilty, so the body and all the parts thereof being
corrupted, are become unto the wicked soul, as the convenient tools for the
artificer, or as a picklocke, or fitted weapon in the hand of a thief, and
therefore Paul calls them (...), Weapons of unrighteousness; or as a
shrewish servant to an upright Master (...); Servants to uncleanness.

For the soul sealing up every evil action with voluntary consent, may be
said to be the thief and the body the receiver, both alike culpable before
God, seeing each in his nature and place has stricken a stroke in the
committing of sin.

That our whole man is naturally corrupt appears by the verdict of God
himself, who says, that he is but flesh, Genesis 6. 3.
a very heap, and lump, and bundle of iniquity. Genes* 8.
The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth, and so accordingly his
whole disposition and estate even from his subsisting to th^s present. I know
that in me (that is in my flesh, or nature) dwells no good, says the
Apostle. There is not so much as a thought of time betwixt a man's natural
being, and his sinful being. So soon as ever we are borne, we are borne
sinners, being guilty of Adams transgression before God, which is therefore
called Original sin in regard of the auncientnesse of it, continuing
eversince Adams fall, accompanying the nature of man from his very first being,
and having the source and fountain of all sinful practices in it. Our first
parents being once corrupt, how could any clean thing be brought out of their
filthiness? John 3. 6.
Of flesh nothing could be borne but flesh; Adam begat children in his own
likeness; If the root had been holy so had the branches been, but the tree
being once corrupt the fruit could not choose but be according.

How should this startle and affright the secure worldlings of our time? saw
thou ever a leprous person whose body is bespred with sores and scabs: Such and
a thousand times worse art thou in the sight of God. Knew thou at any time a
man in debt for some hundreds of pounds more than he is worth, for whom the
Bayliffes and Sergeants lie in wait at every corner: see the shadow of thy own
estate in him. A world of actions has the Lord against thee, and his justice
is ready to attache thee, and seize upon thee every hour. Could we seriously
think on this, it would make us unsatisfied in abasing our selves, and cause
us never to rest, till we have made our peace with God. Thou beholdest abroad a
vain person, fairly set out to the eye, tricked and trimmed in the best
fashion, and it may be thou know of some secret foul disease he has, or of
some great debt he is in: Do thou not in thy thoughts now scorn such a one
of folly; Do thou not say to thy self, no marvel (sure) he should be so
proud, that has such a deal of filthiness underneath his gayness, that lies
in every bodies debt, and owes more than he is able to discharge. Turn this
home to thine own soul and wonder as much at thy self that can be so
careless, so fearelesse, so presumptuous, when thy soul has such need of
washing, and there are against thee such Bills of iniquity, and for ought thou
know not yet blotted out before the Lord. Can thou think well of thy
self that have by nature such a filthy soul? Oh bewail that spiritual
thraldom wherein thou art plunged, commune with thine own heart and say, Into
what misery and bondage have I brought my self? Thou Lord made me holy,
pure, and upright; but by sin I sold my self unto the service of Satan, from
which to this day, I cannot get deliverance. My mind is blind, vain, foolish,
my will perverse and rebellious, all my affections out of order, there is
nothing whole or sound within me. Night and day I am pestered with sinful
motions. The desires of my deceitful heart be so strong and prevailing, that
I am carried headlong to that which is evil. The cursed earth is not so apt to
be overgrowne with weeds, briars and thorns, as this soul of mine with
lusts, passions, distempers, worldly cares and sinful thoughts, the law of the
flesh rebelleth against the law of my mind, and diffuseth its venom into
every action I perform, and carries me violently to the committing of sin
against knowledge and conscience. The Gally-slaves condition is very hard and
miserable, but mine is far worse! No drudgery so base as the service of
sin. No Tyrant so cruel a^ sin, which allows no respite, or time of
refreshing. Rom* 7.
O miserable man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of death? I have
deeply defiled my self by transgression, but have no power to cleanse my
heart O Lord. I have defaced thine image, but cannot repuire it. I have yielded
the powers of my soul to the obedience of sin, and now I would cast off that
subjection, and break those snares, I am altogether unsufficient for it. Ro^.
7. 21.
When I would do well, evil is present, and I know no means to perfect my
desire. I want no strength to perfect that which is evil, and I am ready and
apt upon all occasions to go astray, but I am not able to do any good, such
is my feebleness. I am environed and beset with sin on every side. Oh when
shall I be set at liberty, that I may run the ways of Gods commandments?

Hitherto of the phrase of speech used by the Holy Ghost, namely, the flesh for
the whole man body and Soul, the particular corruption of either: which that
we may shun as far as we may we must learn to know the^ in their special
heads, that so with some certainty we may kenne our own stepps and discern
our own hearts whether we walk according to the flesh, yea or not.

Concerning the corruption of the soul and first as touching the fleshly
understanding.

As the fierce dragon brings not forth the innocent dove, or the roaring
Lion, the harmless sheep; no more did Adam in the state of his impurity
beget children suitable with his condition in the state of innocence, but having
defiled the holiness of his nature by eating the forbidden fruit (as a little
levin levineth the whole lump so) he imparted the same nature to his son, as
most evidently appeared in Cain, and from him to all the rest of his posterity,
even unto our selves, being all of us begotten in sin and conceived in iniquity.

So that whereas before the mind was endued with a perfect actual knowledge
of God, (so far as the humane nature may be supposed capable) yea and which is
more, was enriched with power and ability of knowing more than as yet he had
actually attained: Now as the clear sunshine overwhelmed with a cloud; so is
the mind of man overcast with palpable darkness, being destitute not only of
all real knowledge excepting that natural knowledge he has of God taught him
by the creatures (which is rather a light and wavering opinion, the^ a grounded
and settled persuasion) but also of all ability, of attaining the true knowledge
of God by any faculty, virtue, industry, or means whatsoever inherent in
himself.

That the Mind is thus fast bolted up in the dungeo^ of ignorance appears
plainly by the Apostle, which affirms, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
that the natural man perceives not the things of God: and that The wisdom
of the flesh is enmity against God. Rom* 7. 45.
Nay, reason and experience manifests this truth, for as the birds behold not
the things which betyde in the depths nor the fishes acquainted with the
dwelling in the air: No more does a poor natural man go beyond the co^pass
of his sense, or know further with any certainty then experience (the mistress
of fools) directs him. And therefore howsoever by reasonable discourse he
may gather as Paul speaks, The invisible things of God, Romans 1. 19.
as his eternal power and Godhead, from the consideration of the creatures,
yet little or naught does he truly know either concerning God or his worship,
as appears by all ages, and nations who have acknowledged as much, and yet
every one have chosen a God of their own making, and worshipped him also in
their own manner.

Moreover, that man by nature has disabled himself and is become impote^t,
indocible, and not capable of instruction, appears by the Apostle who
affirms that we are not ((...)) sufficient of our selves, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, and
therefore our Savior Christ opened the understanding of his disciples that
they might understand the Scripture. Luke 24. 45
From hence it comes that the pictures in the Church are as much affected*
and taught by the Word, as the common sort of hearers, which areas a goodly
company of images in a carvers shop, having eyes and* see not, ears and hear
not, beholding the Preacher with outward reverence and attention, and yet not
able with all their wit and endeavor to perceive any thing that is spoken, if
it contradict sense, or to conceive it, if it seem impossible in nature.

It is observed in the Church of England, that many thousands have lived twenty
years together under a preaching Minister, yea and that minister sometimes
very painful and diligent in the discharge of his calling; yet scarce a man
among them all able to give an account of his faith in any one article,
otherwise then he has learned it by roate out of his English Credo in Deum;
or to give any testimony of his profiting more by the Word, then in the time of
that Popish and blasphemous Idolatry. The reason whereof is, that (...) or,
inability of nature before spoken of, through which he is as unable to conceive
of the incarnation of the Son of God, the miraculous conception of Christ,
the spiritual regeneration of the faithful, the resurrection of the body,
eternal glory, and the like; as an horse to fly in the air, or a dead man to
rise out of the grave by his own power. If your apprentice in ten years
being actively taught, be not able to attain the mystery and science of his
trade, you count him an ass or blockhead; why then may we not term the
master an incapable sot in the mysteries of God, which has spent twenty or
thirty years in the knowledge thereof, Sabbath upon Sabbath, Sermon after
Sermon, and yet like the mill wheel turning all the year, is yet in the same
place where it was in the beginning.

It may be you will ask me, Quest.
what is this to the purpose, or at all concerning my text?

It is very material if you mark it: Answ.
for you must know, that to be fleshly minded, is not only to be a
whoremaster, or an adulterer, as the world imagines; Oh say they, he is a man
given to the flesh, he is a bad liver, as if there were no fleshly corruption
but that; Yes beloved, if thou be ignorant of God and his worship, walking
after thine own inventions, dead-hearted, secure, and careless, vain in thy
imaginations, content with thy natural estate, etc. thou art as fleshly as the
wretchedst whoremaster, and as carnal as the most wicked liver, in Gods
account: Remember that flesh is here opposed against Spirit; whatsoever is not
Spirit is flesh, and therefore ignorance is flesh, unless thou will
blasphemously affirm that it has his original from the Spirit. Now as he
that is desirous to seat in his mind the true frame of the body, must view it
in an anatomy consisting of bones and sinews: so he that would learn the true
description of the body of sin, must see it in his original, both in the
mind, will, and affections, after this he shall easily perceive how by veins*
it disperseth it self like a net over the whole soul, and distills into act
both inward and outward, to the final destruction of the whole man. Thus much
of the Understanding.

2. Concerning the Conscience.

In the next place we are to consider of the Conscience, which is a part of
the understanding in all reasonable creatures, determining in all particular
actions either with or against a man. This in the state of innocence did only
excuse, to accuse is a defect in the Conscience following the first Creation.
Now the fleshy infection of the Conscience is the impurity thereof. Tit. 1. 15.
Either it is dead, or living and stirring* The dead conscience has two
degrees, either of slumber, What a dead conscience is.
which does not accuse a man for his sin unless it be capital, and not for
that always, unless in some grievous calamity. S^ared, which accuses not for
any sin, and this is compared in Scripture to that part of the body which is
without sense, life, or motion, scared with an hot iron, 1. Tim* 4.
this comes not to a man by nature, but by increase of the corruption of his
nature.

These two are caused 1. Chiefly through defect reason in all crazed brains.
2. Through the affections overcasting the mind and swallowing up judgment. 3.
Ignorance of

The stirring Conscience, What a stirring conscience is.
accuse men for doing evil. 2. To excuse for doing Splendida peccata, glistring
or shining sins.

3. Concerning Memory.

As a loving father setting his son to school, gives him a chest to lock
up his books and whatsoever he has, of price and value, that he may there
preserve them till need requires: So the Lord in the state of innocence,
revealing himself and his will unto man, gave him a good memory and strong
treasury, wherein he might lay up whatsoever his mind truly conceived, and
fetch it again to be meditated and thought upon as occasion was offered. But
this also being tainted with the flesh in spiritual matters, will hold
nothing; but being already furnished with diverse impressions of worldly
matters, is no way able to embrace the principles of Gods truth, or to retain
that which may be his only comfort longer then a dynt struck in the water;
from whence it comes that a carnal man entertaineth the word at one ear and
lets it out at another, his whole religion consisting in hearing, not
binding himself firmly and effectually to remember any thing, unless it be a
matter which he thinks either clears him in his sin, as, God is
merciful, and, at what time soever a sinner repents: or else that touches
his neighbor in the next seat, but as for the knowledge of God and his nature,
a saving faith in Christ, or the like, teach him every week, nay every day for
the space of twenty years together, he will not remember so much as a beast may
be taught in some active sleights in an hour. I know what I say, a dog or
horse may sooner be taught to remember a toy whereof his nature is capable in
one hour, then a mere natural man the true substance of religion all the
days of his life.

4. Concerning the Will.

The former faculties of the soul are called speculative; there is another
kind called practical, which are, the Will and affections, and these are
exercised in action, as the other in Contemplation. The Will is the absolute
Monarch in a man, and the Understanding is his Counselor. Now whereas before
the Will was counseled and guided by true reason and understanding and so was
both able and willing to be conformable unto God* now it is both impotent (as
was said of the understanding) not able in any sort to desire or will heavenly
things, Phil. 2. 3.
as also rebelleth against that which is good, and wills that which is evil.
And no marvel, for if the understanding, which should be the guide thereof
be gross and carnal, the Will cannot be spiritual. It must needs be a
miserable State where the Prince wants wisdom, and the people due moderation.

5. Concerning the Affections.

The affections likewise which are diverse dispositions of man's soul stirred up
by diversity of objects, are more stained with fleshly corruption then any
other part of the creature besides, which in regard of their violence, make a
carnal person to be carried like a mad man upon a wild horse, so as he can
neither stay himself, nor be staid by others. Which fleshly corruption
consists in this, that they are moved unto contrary objects; for those which
should be stirred up by the evilnesse of an object to abhor it, do in that
respect, embrace it and move toward it; and those which should be moved by
the goodness of an object to embrace it, do in that respect abhor and shun
it. For which cause they may fitly be compared to a bedlam, who rages and
raileth against his keeper, or unto a sick body, which loathing that which
would work the cure, hankereth still after that which engenders corruption
and increases his disease. For example, whereas man should love God, and
embrace each thing as incites thereunto; contrariwise he hates God and his
Ministers, yea and embra^ceth from his heart each thing which may most soundly
and effectually kill and slay that affection in him, soft apparel, sweet
meats, fair building, outward pomp, rich coffers, merry company, sleep,
ease, (what if I say whores and harlots) these be his loves, these be his
mistresses, these be his Paramours, and all these in a carnal man are like
entising minions, laboring to divorce his affection from his maker. You cannot
love God and Mammon, Luke 15.
God is a jealous husband, he will not communicate the pleasure that he takes
in an honest heart, married to himself, unto any stranger.

Again, whereas at the first, man joyed in the fruition of the presence and
favor of God, in serving and meditating of him and his works; now he takes
no pleasure therein at all, but if by the Law, or for shame he be drawn to
some spiritual exercise, nothing is more tedious unto him, his body is
imprisoned in a seat, his mind walks about all the while, either he
climbeth up unto one of the scaffolds, viewing his friends, defying his foes,
or else is in his shop counting his ware, plotting some bargain, or the like.

Moreover, whereas we should be sorrowful for our sin, we are sorrowful
that we cannot sin, poverty, sickness, danger, prison, displeasure, strike
us down dead: but the poverty of the soul stripped naked of Gods graces, the
sickness of the mind, able neither to see nor know the Almighty, grieveth us
not at all. Whereas in the time of innocency man relied himself upon God for an
happy estate, and gave credit to his promises; now though he protest and bind
it with a solemn oath, no man believes him; though he has sent his beloved
Son from his own bosom to ransom us out of our spiritual captivity, and
left it for ever in perpetual record, witnessed by men and Angels, yet who
regards it in his heart? or blesses God in his soul for the same? Jesus
Christ of Nazareth the Carpenters son, was too base a fellow to gratify the
stately personages of our times: No, the Gods of England shall deliver us, wit,
learning, beauty, strength, friends, riches, nobility, sin, Satan, this
present world, any thing save Jesus Christ. So that hereby it is manifest that
man is so far from having affiance in God, that he is at defiance with him,
refusing and renouncing his patronage and protection.

By this therefore which in cursory wise has been uttered, you may easily
perceive how fearfully this fleshly poison has dispersed it self, over our
whole man, and made every faculty of soul and body swell with pride, and
ambition against God; yea and like a mad dog, to byte and snatch at every
hand, even them of his own nature. As a light Chariott drawn with wild
horses, and driven with a blind man (willing to give the raines whither soever
the horses will run) must needs be in great danger of shattering all to
pieces; So the understanding being deprived of light, which should give notice
to our blind will, and wild affection, must needs in the end overthrow both
soul and body, with the final calamity of the whole man; unless the Lord
give a better guide, and take the whip out of the hand of our corrupt will, and
govern the affections and faculties of our souls, with the restraint of his
saving Spirit.

(...), Original sin is an hereditary disease, which in time breaks out in
whole mankind, it is the match that discharges the pealing pieces of all our
infamous actions; It is the husband which begets on us his wife (the
faculties of our souls and bodies) many bratts, many actual transgressions,
as Paul notably allegorizeth; Romans 7*
which that I may more fully lay open and work your hearts to a holy
indignation against and detestation of, consider (but in a few particulars) the
many and great evils which accompany the same.

1. It is an universal

2. It cleaves as fast to Ethiopian, which cannot possibly be washed out; thou
may loppe the branches, but the root will never die, till thou expirest
with it. As long as corn is in the field, it will have chafe about it; so, as
long as thou continuest in this miserable world, the remnants of old Adam will
still abide in thee: A man may as easily shake off the skin from his back, as
rid himself of this evil inhabitant, we bear our snare with us, and carry
our enemy about us where ever we go.

contagion and pestilentiall humor that follows this sin, it derives venom
upon every action that comes from us. Sin in the soul, is as poison in the
fountain, that sheds infection into every performance we take in hand. Romans 7.
Whenever thou art going about any good, this evil will be present with
thee. This is that which in thy prayers deads thy Zeal, humiliation and
importunity with God, causing thee to rest in the work done, never enquiring
after the truth of thine own heart, or Gods blessing thereupon. This is that
which fills thy mind with impertinent thoughts, and wrong ends in religious
duties. This is that which in thy calling makes thee so unmindefull of God and
his service, so froward, vain, and unprofitable in thy Christian course, aiming
at nothing but thine own advantage.

A man is tempted of his own lusts* (says S. James) when he is drawn away
and entised. James 1. 14.
If a man shoot an arrow against a rock, it may be broken but can never
enter; No more can Satan's temptations prevail against the soul, without
something within to give them admittance; when he tempted Christ he could not
hurt him, because he found nothing in him to receive his darts; Joh. 14. 30.
but in us the flesh holds treacherous compliance with Satan, and this wicked
world, and is ready to let them in at every assault. Seed will never grow in
any creature, without a womb to foster it; temptations may vex, but they
cannot defile us, without our own sinful entertainment. It may grieve a
chaste woman to be solicited by base Ruffians, but it cannot corrupt her whiles
she retains her chastity. If we can keep in our hearts from embracing
Satan's offers, and show our distaste of them, the sin is his then, and not
ours: but here is the misery, Satan knows how our inclination stands, he
searches out our dispositions, and thereunto frames his temptations;
therefore we have great need of spiritual wisdom, to observe where we lie
most obnoxious, where Satan does most plant his forces, and ever to apply our
strongest watch, our most importunate prayers to those gappes.

war, and rebellion of this sin, the flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal.
5. 1 Pet. 2.
and fleshly lusts war against the soul, says the Apostle; whilst we are
in this militant condition we shall have hourly experience of this traitor in
our bosoms. And this war is not at a distance, but an intimate and close
contrariety in the same part, the same soul that commands obedience does it
self resist it; in the same will there is a delight in the Law of God, and yet
a counter-motion to the law of sin; In the same heart singleness and
sensiblenesse of sin, and yet much secret fraud and hardness in the
apprehension of wrath. In the same affections love of God and love of the
world, fear of God, and fear of men, trust in God, and doubting of his
favor. Mar. 9. 24.
Lord I believe help thou mine unbeleefe, was the cry of the poor man in the
Gospel, and such must be the complaint of the best of us. Lord I remember
thee, help my forgetfulness; Lord I press toward thee, help my weakness.
Lord I rejoice in thee, help my heaviness. Lord I desire to have more
communion with thee, help my strangeness. I am dull and dead hearted, do thou
quicken me. I desire to please thee, help my failings; We must not only
wrestle with God, by strong and importunate prayers, but with the lusts and
frowardness of our own hearts.

6. Consider the strength Romans 6.
it reigns like a King, and has the strength of a law in our members, Romans 7.
23
and a law without strength is no Law, for Laws are made to bind and keep
men in order; therefore the wicked are called servants to sin, Romans 7.
and the best of us all are captives, that is, unwilling servants. So much
flesh as remains in any man, so much disability he has to withstand sin.
The choicest vessel of mercy and most peculiar Saint of God, is no way able to
keep his standing as of himself, for this is certain, that to be preserved
from the strength of our own lusts, we have not only use of the good graces
which God has given us already, but of a continual support and underpropping.
Grace in the best (here) is but like the putting of hot water into cold, which
may be warmed for a time, but yet presently returns to its former temper,
cold is predominant, however the preserving of fire under it keeps it hot for
the present. It is not the Grace which any of us receive can overcome sin in
us, if God should there stop, and leave us to our selves, without a fresh
supply; that which preserves us is his promise of never failing us of healing
our back slidings, Heb. 13. 5.
and following us with his mercy all our days. Hos. 14.
For grace does not only prevent a wicked man to make him righteous, but
follows him, lest he become wicked again.

7. Consider the indefatigablenesse If we resist the devil, James 4. 7.
he will fly from us, but this fleshly heart of ours will never sound a
retreat, it is like a wounded wolf that runs up and down to do mischief;
a man that has in some measure overcome his lusts, will be far more
sensible of their stirrings and struglings, then another in whom they rule
without disturbance. Sin is kindled by that which quenches all other fires,
and surely grace which extinguisheth other temptations does occasionally enrage
the flesh, though in regard of exercise and actual power it dye daily.

The reason is, because a thing in its proper motion is never tired; who ever
knew the Sea give over raging, or the stream grow weary of running? Now
corrupt motions are as natural to a man as the course of a river. Though there
may be difficulty in fulfilling lusts, there can never be any in the rising and
sprouting of lusts. It is no pains to conceive seed, though it be to bring
forth a birth; the longer any man lives in sin, the sweeter it is to him.
Eccles. 1. 8.
The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing; no more is a
sinner with his deeds of darkness, if he should live for ever, he would sin
for ever. Evil comes out of the heart, as sparkles out of the fire, which
never cease while the fire continues. Lust is like a furious rider, never weary
of the way, he may have enough to load him, but can never have enough to weary
him; he may quickly have enough to sink him, but can never have enough to
satisfy him.

Lust it self grows never old nor weary, when adultery in the heart has
worn out the body, so as it strength withers, yet even then it will find a
vent in a wanton eye, unchaste speeches and thoughts full of uncleanenesse.
Though a man may weary himself in the acting sin, yet lust is never
satisfied in conceiving sin.

Lastly, consider the propagation of this sin, which may well therefore be
called an old man, because it dies not, but passes from one generation to
another. A man's actual sins are personal, they both begin and end in
himself. But original sin is natural, and therefore together with our
nature it passes over to our posterity. It is an entaile that can never be cut
off, it has held from Adam, and so will continue to the worlds end. Every
parent is the channel of death to his posterity. Adam diffused damnation to
all mankind. Neither is it any wonder that from a cursed root, should proceed
branches fit for nothing but the fire.

What a watch then should we keep over our evil hearts, Use
what pains should we take by prayer and unweariednesse of spirit to suppress
this enemy? If there were any time wherein the flesh did sit still and sleep,
wherein the water did not run and seek for vent, we might then lessen our
care, but since it is ever stirring in us, we should be ever stirring against
it, using all means to diminish and abate the same. Since the heart is
unwearied in evil, we should not faint nor be weary of well-doing. Since the
heart is so abundant in evil, we should abound likewise in every good work.

Retain in thy freshest memory such quickening thoughts as these: If I commit
this sin, it will cost me unvaluably more heart-breake and spiritual smart,
before I can purchase assurance of pardon and peace of conscience, then the
sensual pleasure is worth. If I never repent it will be the ruin of my soul
for ever. When thou go to buy a commodity, if the price be great, thou
forbearest, and will thou venture up on sin, knowing what it will cost thee?
If Judas had known as much before he betrayed his Master, as now he feels,
he would never have committed that villainy. Alas, thy soul is incomparably
more worth then the whole world, and will thou for a little paltry pleasure of
some base and rotten lust, which passes away in the act, hazard the loss of
so precious a jewel?

Do not consider the smalnesse of thy sins, but the greatness of thy God,
who is displeased with them. Mortification is tedious, but heaven is sweet,
men are content to go all day after their hawks and hounds, enduring hunger
and thirst, for a little pleasure not worth the enjoying, why then should we
refuse any labor for the obtaining so rich a reward?

In lust a man wearieth himself and has no hope but here our labor is not in
vain in the Lord, we shall reap if we faint not. A little glory in heaven,
nay a little comfort in earth, will plentifully recompense all our travail and
pains in this kind. Look not always on Satan's temptations, the worlds
solicitations, and thine own sinful inclinations, these as clogs will press
thee down and much dishearten thee in thy Christian course, but look unto
Jesus the author and finisher of thy faith, who will carry through al
difficulties, and overcome sin in thee by his grace; call therefore to him,
he is within the voice of thy prayers, and will come to strengthen thee.

Job 31. 1.
Job would not trust his eye without a covenant, nor David his mouth without a
bridle, Psalm. 39.
so strangely and unexpectedly will nature break out. Ve^ture not on any
temptation presumptuously; be not confident of any grace received so as to
slacken your zeal. Genesis 39.
Joseph flung out and would not trust himself in the company of his Mistress,
company might easily have kindled concupiscence, and a little of Satan's
blowing might have carried the fire from one stick to another. David would have
no wicked thing to abide in his sight, Psalm. 101.
he knew how full of ill humors his heart was, how apt to catch every
infection that came near it, and therefore took special care to decline the
very objects and examples of sin. When men think there is least danger, then
the danger is greatest; sin and Satan are ever watching their opportunities,
which is, when we watch not. Security will rust us, undo us, and eat out all
that good is in our souls, if any thing will awaken the dead and drowsy heart
of man, it is some vexing sin or other.

Me thinks the consideration of this thorn in our flesh, Use 3.
(which we daily carry about us) should much humble and abase our spirits;
Alas, how long have we lived in an empty fruitless manner, barren of grace and
goodness, spending our precious days in folly and vanity, dedicating the
flower of our age to sin and Satan? How often have we despised mercy, and cast
the precepts of the Almighty behind our backs? What little growth in
holiness have we? What little improvement in the ways of God? How much
weariness and revolting of heart? How evil and unprofitable in regard of the
means we have enjoyed, and what we might have been? How many notorious
visible sins have thou committed, to the scandal of the Gospel and the
wounding of thine own soul? How should the consciousnesse of this humble thee
in secret before God?

Brethren, think of this, the more vile any man is in his own eyes, the more
precious he is in Gods. And the best way to bring a man to a base esteem of
himself, is to reflect his thoughts seriously upon his own estate, to view
himself in his natural condition; There is no good, so truly good but his
heart abhors it; No evil so extremely wicked, but there is an inclinablenesse
in him to embrace it; no servant so ready to do his masters will, as he is to
do the works of the devil, no rebel so desperately adverse to his lawful
sovereign, as he is to God. Oh that men were truly sensible of their carnal
condition.

The want of this, is the cause of all that security and deadness of spirit,
which seares up the heart of many thousands of people. This makes so little
care of being saved. Hence it is that the Gospel preached is so smally
reckoned of, the name of Christ is no more precious, the word of grace no more
honored, the promise of salvation no more laid hold on, and hearkened after,
the threatenings of hell no more stood in fear of then they be; it is indeed
one and not the smallest part of our native wretchedness, that our eyes are so
holden with self-love that we cannot perceive our misery, nay, we are
pleased with it, and think it a piece of our happiness to continue in it. We
have not only no disposition to go from it, but which is worse, a strong
desire to remain still therein. Where is the man that truly discernes he is
lost and undone, that sensibly groans under the weight and burden of sin,
that cries out with the Leaper, I am unclean, I am unclean, I have not in me
by nature so much as a grain of goodness, I am a very lump of corruption, I
am an enemy to God, and to my own soul: I cannot so much as frame a thought
tending to the furtherance of my best good, Every thing I meddle with, is
defiled by me, the very earth is weary to bear me, and according to the kind
thereof, both it, and all the creatures complain to God against me, I am a
burden to the times and places wherein I live, every man I converse with is
the worse for me, etc.

Lastly, to prevent surprisalls by this cruel enemy, study his policies before
hand; for howsoever the strength of the flesh be very great, yet the policy
thereof does far exceed it: for being not a professed enemy, but a secret
traitor, it is more exercised in cunning undermining of our safety, with subtle
slights, and politic stratagems, then in assaulting us after an open and
hostile manner. Satan cannot deceive us unless our own flesh assisting him,
do first deceive us. The danger whereof is so much the greater, because it is
so deep and disguised, that it can hardly be discovered and found out: it
displayes not its colors in open field, but lies hid in secret ambushments,
mingling it self with our own forces, and making a show of simplicity, and
sincerity, when there is nothing but craft and, deceit in it, persuading us
that we are nothing so evil and corrupt as indeed we are, and that those good
things which we seem to have are of far more excellency then in truth they
be, that our little mite is a great treasury, that we are in an happy and
blessed condition, whereas we were never nearer unto death and destruction;
that surely God loves us because we prosper in the world, and live civilly and
quietly amongst our neighbors, wronging no man, that so much zeal and
strictness is more then need, that the best have their failings, that great
sins are very small ones, and little sins are none at all, etc.

Infinite are the windings and labyrinths of the heart of man, the counsels
and projects of this flesh of ours to establish the kingdom of sin in it
self: What man is there who will not outwardly seem to spit at Satan, and
defy his works of darkness, and yet what man is there in whose bosom
secretly Satan does not plot and devise wicked enterprises. The more time a man
spends to make himself acquainted with himself, and begs of God to reveal the
hidden corruption of his evil nature to him, the more abhorrency and
condemnation will he have of himself, and the more adoration and wonderment,
at the infinite mercy of God, that he is not consumed; when once a man has
his evil ways discovered to him by Gods spirit, he will be abased and
confounded in his own sight. It is nothing but ignorance that keeps men in
pride. If to be wise to do evil, and foolish to do good, if to plead for
sin and Satan, If to receive good parts and abilities from God, and to fight
against him with the same, be matters to be boasted of, then there is a great
crop of pride in every man's nature, else we must all conclude that he which
gloryeth in any thing merely in himself, has chosen nothing to glory in but
his own shame. Alas, the best of our wisdom is but sensual and devilish,
fleshly deceit as the Scripture speaks, a man may be very wise, and yet
employ the same upon nothing but mischief.

You have heard the lineaments of original corruption, which in the wisdom of
the Holy Ghost is called flesh. Now as a body infected with the plague, does
not presently complain, or show the disease till afterward: So this venom in
children lies lurking, and works not till the faculties of the soul are
prettily well hatched up, and then like a charmed cup it fumeth up into the
brain, and fills it with idle thoughts; it enchanteth the conscience,
invenometh the affections, and makes the heart like a tippling house, full
fraught with ruffian-like passions Such strange and total disorder, such
contention betwixt the heart and the conscience, such raging in the affections,
such desperate unrulinesse in the will, such error and staggering in the
understanding; that a man may well be compared to a rude family consisting of
treacherous servants, al false and idle, of equal authority, being subject to
none, but Lords of themselves.

Understanding directed by the law of nature, attempteth to advise, the will
says she will not yield, but do as she lists; Affections prevail with
Will, and overcast judgment. Conscience cries out upon them all, and
threatens the Law: Fair spoken pleasure entreats it to be quiet, and that
all villainy may be committed without check. Lust by degrees entreats the
will to put out the candle and light of knowledge; then when ignorance, as dark
as hell, has invaded and overshadowed the whole man, the minions of Venus
court may walk dismasked without kenning; adultery, fornication,
uncleanenesse, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, envy,
murder, drunkenness, gluttony, etc. and the whole Crew of fleshly works may
creep out of the heart, Gal. 5.
like the serpent and her brood in the night, or as the Graecians out of the
Trojan horse, and go hand in hand securely and without reproof, seeing
Conscience being drowsy, through the strong wine of voluptuousness is laid
asleep, and therefore will not awaken unless the sins be too great and prick
him sore; or else dead and feared, being deprived of understanding, as the body
of vital spirits, which should quicken and direct her in both her actions of
testimony and judgment.

The whole man is full of disorder; trust not therefore any of thy members
alone without making a covenant with it. Job 31. 1.
If thou have occasion to use thine eye, take heed unto it, it is full of the
seeds of adultery, pride, envy, covetousness, there are lusts of the eye. If
to use thy tongue, set a door before thy lips, there is an hell within thee
that can set it all on fire, James 3. 6.
and fill it with rotten and stinking communication. Psalm 39. 1.
If to use thy hands or feet, watch carefully, for there are seeds of more
sins, theft, bribery, murder, uncleanness in them, then there are joints and
sinews in those members. Original sin is an universal corruption, it makes
us all over flesh, the mind a fleshly mind, the will a fleshly will, the
affections and lusts all fleshly, so that it is more difficult to root out
this one sin, then to overcome many actual transgressions.

That man or woman therefore of what estate or degree soever they be, noble, or
ignoble, bond or free, which are not transformed by the renewing of their
minds, Romans 12. 2.
but have their hearts full fraught with unbelief, and ignorance; whose
Consciences are benumbed, or dead, not able to accuse, or (if to accuse) yet
not able to excuse through the righteousness of Christ: They whose wills are
perverse and immeasurably unruly, not subject and conformable to the will of
God; whose affections are like to the Camelion, ready to turn themselves upon
every object, into any estate, except that which is holy: Lastly, those whose
bodies are the hardy executioners of every wicked practice, given out in charge
by these corrupt guides (the faculties of the soul) they most assuredly
without all contradiction, walk and live as yet after the flesh.

If therefore thou art Use.
desirous to know in particular, whosoever thou art in this present assembly,
whether thou be carnal or no, enquire of the word of God, what thou art by
nature in all the parts of soul and body, how unapt and incapable of all
holiness, how prone and disposed unto all manner of wickedness.

Secondly, examine thy thoughts, how thou have conceived of God and his
incomprehensible nature, how acute and sharp sighted in his ways. Hearken to
thy conscience, (if thou have any) and hear it speak, or if thou have none at
all, so set it down in thy examination. Summon thy will and affections also,
to be tried by the same word; if thou perceivest no difference in these from
the common estate of most men, no alteration from former times, it is
suspicious thou art carnal. But if thou find by the guide of the word (by the
word I say, for thou being blind can not see where thou art) that yet thou
remainest ignorant, and still walking in thy erroneous and presumptuous course,
both toward God and men, if thou find in thy mind these or the like thoughts:

That there is no God.

No providence, or presence of God.











If thou think God is

If thou think the

And upon these corrupt imaginations, not only find check (for that may be
performed in some men by the light of nature, enforcing the conscience to
accuse thee, yet thou never the nearer) but also no positive thoughts utterly
opposite, but rather growest resolute therein, committing all to thy will and
affections to conclude of thy spiritual estate. If thy mind be full of
vanity, wasting it self in childish and unprofitable notions, slippery and
unstable in all good matters, full of ignorance and darkness, so as thou
seek not after God in the way where he will be found, full of curiosity,
foolish and impertinent questions, full of pride and contradiction against the
word of truth, having fleshly reasonings against the spirit of God, full of
carnal wisdom, humane inventions, methods of its own to serve God, and come
to happiness by, thou may then assure thy self, thy mind is mere flesh,
thou being dead in thy understanding through the vanity, impotency andignorance
thereof.

Conscience.
If thy conscience (which God has placed as a sentinel or watchman in thee to
observe thy dealings) be full of impurity, and disobedience, full of dead,
rotten and unsavory works, full of false and absurd excusations. If it be
either so be nummed, and insensible, that it will not accuse (unless it be
for murder, adultery, the every or such like gross offenses) or dead as a
limb taken with a gangrene, that it cannot accuse at all; Or if it have life,
yet if it apply it self corruptly, as to acquit thee for doing evil, or to
condemn thee and hang thee up for doing good, fearing thee where no fear is,
then has the flesh prevailed over thy conscience, and thou art wholly carnal.

Memory.
Further, if thy memory be so decayed, that if one would give thee a thousand
pounds, thou art not able to imprint the doctrine of salvation were it never so
often taught thee, and yet able upon a speedy rehearsal to repeat a tale of an
hour long, with every circumstance concerning any thing done in such a Kings
days or reported to be done, as the tale of Robin Whood, Guy of Warwick, and I
know not what paltery stuff, thou may assure thy self, that flesh also is
the guide of thy memory, and that it is void of all holiness. For as clay
will not cleave to iron or brass; So the fleshly memory will retain no
spiritual memorandum, but that which is fleshly, agreeing with his nature, and
therefore the story of Gods will offered to the memory is like to quicksilver
powered upon a plain table which never rests running and dispersing it self
till it be harbored in a concavity fit to retain its substance: So the
principles of Christian science will not stay in a carnal memory no more then
an honest man in a brothell Inn or Alehouse; and therefore no marvel that
they light at the foregate, and take horse at the postern, come in at one ear
and out at another.

Will.
Moreover, if thy will be full of loathing, and aversation, so as it cannot
endure to hear or see any thing that is good, but pluckes in the shoulder, and
casts it behind the back: If it be full of enmity against holiness,
slighting and neglecting the best things: If it be full of obstinacy against
religious courses, thwarting and crossing the strict ways of God: If full of
disability to any good, so as it cannot hearken nor be subject to the Law of
God, but rebels against his blessed truth: If thou art resolute to commit the
wicked purposes of thy heart, stout and stubborn against admonition, turning
the deaf ear to the preaching of Gods word, loath to intermeddle with matters
of the Spirit, but willing to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, having thy hand
in every impious action, with this imperious style, sic volo, sic jubeo, I will
and command it to be so, not respecting whether the thing be crooked or
straight, right or wrong, good or bad; then is thy will merely carnal, and
does dominere like a blind King, or ignorant Pilot sitting at the stern of
the whole man, and yet not skilled in one star, nor knowing one point of the
card, nor respecting the Compass, nor regarding the point of the diamond, but
down the river with the full sail of affections, and tempests of sudden
passions, no regard to the country whither we sail, no respect of the hidden
rocks, no consideration of fearful gulfes, no casting of anchor, no notice
of the Climate, etc. no marvel then if blind will make in the end a sudden
and fearful shipwreck both of soul and body.

Heart.
To conclude, if in thy heart, as in a cage, thou find the unclean birds of
adultery and fornication, the viper of malice, and cockatrice of envy, the
hydra of covetousness consisting of many heads, having in their fronts the
superscriptions of thee very, violence, perjury, murder, and idolatry: If in
thy heart thou find infidelity, security, pride, confidence in the creature,
etc.

If it be full of hardness, so as no sins, no judgments, no hopes, no
fears, no promises, no instructions are able to awaken and melt the same: If
it be full of impotency, not altered by the invitations and entreaties of God
to return unto him: not persuaded by the fruitlessenesse of all sinful
lusts to forsake them: If it be full of folly and madness, so as all the
creatures in the world are not able to cure it, full of infidelity ready to
depart from the living God, under-valuing his precious promises, and
mistrusting his power, full of pollution and uncleanenesse, full of
unsearchable deceit and wickedness, a very forge and mint wherein all manner
of sins are framed in secret purposes and desires, from whence they spring
forth into life and action, then is thy heart also nothing but flesh, and thy
whole man nothing but rottenness and corruption.

If it be asked herein, how I distinguish betwixt the Elect and the Reprobate,
for albeit Gods children be purged through the blood of Christ, yea and the
force of sin in some measure weakened in them, Ephesians. 4. 23
and inherent sanctity begun in all the parts of their souls by the holy Ghost
even in this life; yet fleshly corruption is still harbored, and the root of
every sin remains in the best, putting forth the hemlocke of a wicked
practice in their Christian course.

I answer, yet can they not be said to live according to the flesh, seeing the
substance as it were and principal tenor of their lives is directed according
to the Spirit. As the air in the dawning of the day is not wholly so dark nor
wholly so light as at night and noone day: So is the estate of the regenerate,
not all flesh, as the wicked, nor all Spirit as them that are glorified, but
partly flesh and partly spirit, grace and corruption, not several in place,
but in reason to be distinguished: yea the flesh is more in measure than the
spirit, and therefore Paul calls the Corinthians, otherwise justified and
sanctified, yet carnal, 2 Cor. 3. 1 Romans 8.
and we are said to receive but the first fruits of the Spirit whilst we are
here. Notwithstanding for all this, such is the power of the Spirit, that
albeit it be small like David, yet it is able ordinarily to prevail against
that uncircumcised Philistim the flesh. And further it is of such inestimable
virtue, that as one grain of musk gives a stronger perfume than many other
gross smells: So does that sweeten all our actions in the nostrils of God. And
as a man albeit all the parts of his body be dead, so that he neither knows
nor sees, nor can speak, yet if he have any life in a corner of his heart, any
breath, or any motion remaining, none will be so hard hearted as to pull him
out of his bed and bury him as a dead man: So although in this life we have
many a dead palsy; many a dint, many a dry buffet by the hand of Satan; yet
so long as the breath of God is in us and we keep the truth of the spirit,
like the star of a diamond, it will cause us to shine in this darkness of our
corruption, and like an antidote, preserve us against eternal death.

A word of application to two sorts, and I proceed.

First, Use. 1.
to the Ministers of Gods word, let me speak my thoughts with grief of
heart: Such is the universal impiety of this decayed age, so apparent to the
spiritual eye so weighty in the hand of him that wisely pondereth it, that I
fear me the Lord is near, and the day of visitation approaches. Is it not a
strange thing to consider our Ministers, how ignorant, how arrogant, how
dissolute and careless many of them are? (to omit the empty caske the idol
minister) what strange children does our mother the Universitie nourish in her
bosom, how wanton, how unbroken, proud, and licencious? Theology a science of
living well and blessedly for ever, is made a stepping stone to promotion, a
matter of disputation and idle speculation, and the mere stuff wherewithal
to make a sermon: Practice and obedience is commended to the people, but as for
the Clerk that belongs not to him. It is well if he reprove sin soundly in
the pulpit, though he be utterly dissolute in his own person: Beloved, to
speak according to the spirit, and yet live after the flesh, is an infallible
note of an hypocrite; let men make what they can of it. Not that I byte the
faithful shepherds of Gods flock in any place whatsoever seated in this our
Church, so far is it from me to touch the Lords anointed, or to harm his
Prophets: But the licencious preacher is the man I tax, as being the shame and
discredit of the Lords Ministry.

As concerning the people, Use 2.
to undertake to single out all the fleshly and carnal professors of the
Gospel, were to number the drops of the great Ocean, to tell the stars, and
to cipher the sands of the sea shore: The sons of Adam have so covered the
earth, that a righteous man is scarce to be found, a man that indeed warreth
against the flesh, grieveth at the times, and sigheth for our sins. Are there
not many among us which begin in the Spirit and end in the flesh? that faint
in the race and embrace the world? hot in the beginning, key-cold in the
ending, stayning their names and defiling their souls? I speak of the better
sort which (as it seems) think the Lord too long a coming, and therefore
will fall too, and stay no longer. Is it not a grievous thing to behold many an
ancient in Israel to be so sowly overseene, as to sell their birthright for a
mess of pottage, their God for a piece of bread, and the unspeakable peace of
a good conscience for outward peace, liberty and freedom?

Where is the spirit of Paul become, which esteemed all things as dung and
dross to win Christ? Phil. 3. 8.
Are we yet children, to be woonne with a toy, and lost with a trifle; are we
no more faithful in our love toward God then to prostitute our selves at the
entisings of the world, and to become a fitmate for every fleshly companion?
Christ pronounces them blessed that hunger and thirst after righteousness,
Mat. 5.
not they that hunger and thirst after good cheer, gay apparel, fair houses,
outward pomp, and fleshly vanities. Christ forbids us to love the world, or
the things of the world, because the fashion thereof passes away; and yet how
many have plighted their hearts to the world, as if it were the only good and
true felicity. O fearful times, O fleshly corruptions, O the lamentable
estate of this our land and country. Is there never a watchman to discover this
danger? Or prophet left to bewail our transgressions? The gappe is great who
can stand in it! The breach is like the breaking out of the Seas, and the noise
of our sins like the roaring of many waters: The atheism and the hypocrisy
of our land, her pride, covetousness, and adultery, shall justify the
spiritual whoredom of Spain and other Countries which never enjoyed those
means, and mercies as we have done. Oh how that outward peace and abundance
which we have had lulled us asleep in sinful security!

We go to Church, pray, Quest.
and hear, I hope that is sufficient.

Yea Answ.
(enough indeed to one whose stomach is scarce able to digest that) but where
is the man that in all the ways of his ordinary calling labors to walk in
obedience and fear of God, to carry always the affection of a servant, as
considering he is doing the Lords work? That consecrates and sanctifies all his
courses by prayer, that beggeth strength, presence, and supplies of the spirit
from God, to lead him in the ways which he ought to go, and to preserve him
from those snares and temptations, which in his calling he is exposed unto?
That is careful to redeem all his precious time, and to make every hour of
his life comfortable and beneficial to himself and others? where is the man
whose particular calling does not trench and encroach upon his general
calling, the duties which he owes to God? That spares sufficient time to humble
him to study Gods will, to acquaint himself with the Lord, and keep a
constant communion with his God? Nay, that does not steal from the Lords own
day, to speak his own words, to ripen and set forward his own or his friends
advantages? where is the man whose heart is ready pressed to obey every of Gods
Commandments as well as any of them? That cleaves to Christ and his blessed
truth, when they go alone severed from all outward credit, pleasure and profit
whatsoever? where is the man that denies himself in his most beloved sins,
that bears wrongs and injuries patiently, that is willing to be trampled upon,
and to be set light by, for the cause of Christ, and the testimony of a good
conscience? Ah fearful times, what last and worse age of the world is this we
are fallen into? Kill and slay, whore and tavern, swear and game, revell and
rout, live as we list, do any thing, so it be done manfully, warily, and with
the mind of a gentleman, who dares control it? Yes hear what the Spirit
says, Ye shall die.

But I am free from any gross enormity, Object.
happily some small sins may cleave to my nature, but these I cannot avoid
nor shake off so long as I continue in this earthly tabernacle.

True it is, Answ.
that heinous sins are more terrible, because they waste and destroy the
conscience at once, and cast men into hell with headlong fury: but little
sins unrepented of are no less dangerous, seeing they cause a consumption of
piety, and bring men by degrees to eternal condemnation. Do but gather the
least things together, and they will make a great heap. Drops are but small,
yet they fill great Rivers; though thou lightly esteemest them, while thou do
weigh them, yet fear when thou beginnest to number them. Though thou
contemnest small sins, yet fear the great punishment which attends them;
Does not every sin by prevarication, dishonor the Lord, how dares then a
sinner call any sin small? A little thing is little, but yet faithfulness or
unfaithfulness in a little, is a great matter. Acts 5.
Ananyas and Sapphira told but a lie, and were presently struck dead in the
place in a fearful manner. Vzzah put forth his hand but to stay the Arc, and
was smitten with sudden death. We must not consider what we have done, but
how great he is whom we have offended. It is not the least thing in man's
life, to neglect such things as seem to be least, and I know not concerning
what faults we may be secure, seeing we must be judged even for sins of
ignorance, and give an account of our idle words and thoughts. The less
discernable a vice is, the greater care we should have to avoid it. We soon
come to the sight of great sins, and so to repentance for them, whereas we
persist and go on in the lesser without control. It is good therefore to
take heed of the least, as though they were the greatest; for so much the more
easily shall we abstain from any offense, by how much the more we are afraid
of committing it: that man seldom falls fowly, that is fearful of falling at
all; sin is Satan's livery, which who so ever willingly wears, acknowledges
his sovereignty, and their own servitude. Though the most sanctified men have
still their imperfections and frailties, yet to live in the least offense
against knowledge and conscience, is an evident sign we are in the devils
bondage, for he that truly hates one sin, will hate all of the kind. There
is not any sin committed but leaves a poison in the soul behind it. If the
gate be set open the enemy will soon enter in. Witness the many experiences
of Gods children, who winking at smaller sins, have been plunged into
greater. If once thou give leave to thy corrupt affections to play their
parts, thou shall hardly make them give over. Little sins usher great ones
and bring them into the closet of thy heart. How dares then a sinner call any
sin small, when as the Son of God gave his life for it, above which nothing
in the world can be esteemed?

The holy Ghost uses the future tense here, Ye shall die, to intimate thus
much, that albeit for a season the theater of iniquity is much frequented, the
actors favored with great applause, and every carnal man plays his part
with grace, to the admiration of the beholders, although the wages be not paid
so soon as the work is done, nor the dislike which God has of sinners
declared presently by the execution of his fearful judgment upon them, yet
shall they escape no more then a beast taken in a trappe, or the prisoner
included in a strong tower. When the Lord shall come in the clouds with his
holy Angels, the assizes shall be kept in the air, the prisoners of the
earth, notwithstanding their boasting among their fellows shall all be
arraigned before him, and then shall ensue the verdict of the conscience upon
them, even that fearful sentence of death, Mat. 25.
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and (...) angels.
This may teach us to give small credit to the glittering face and flattering
countenance of outward things. Let us cheer our selves never so much in our
youth, and walk forth-right in the ways of our own hearts, and sight of our
own eyes, yet for all that God shall bring us to judgment. Eccles. 11.
The waters are deepest where they are stillest, upon a hot gload there
follows a violent storm; the terrors of Gods wrath shall assault the wicked
man, as a sudden tempest, and carry him away by night. Job 27.


In this one word Ye shall die, is contained the infinite volumne of all
misery; the great Ocean of all sorrow, it being an Epitome of man's future
calamity. Did a man certainly know that he should lose all his goods,
friends, honor, and credit, if he committed this or that particular action. I
suppose he would shrink from doing it. If the adulterer should know that he
was watched, and that one behind the door stands ready with a polaxe to
choppe off one of his legs or arms, me thinks the fear of that mischief
should be too strong for his brutish affections, and conquer his lustful
passions. If the drunkard should know, that in such a tavern whither he
usually goes posting with his cup companions, there stands in one of the
drinking places a man with a pistol charged with white powder of purpose to
shoot him through; I imagine how gladly he would leave his wine and sugar and
betake himself to his heels, yea and account him his friend that would push
him over the threshold and thrust the door after him. And this not without
reason; for as a man would be willing to give all that he has, yea and to
lose some of his limbs to redeem his life. ( Skin for skin and all that a
man has will be give for his life) Job 2.
So will he be contented to deny his pleasures, and profits, if in case they
prejudice that; unless it be those, wherein the temerarious rashness of
affection preventeth reason, and enforces the body to commit the action before
the mind has given any counsel.

Now if reason can thus prevail against corrupt passions when hurt is intended
against the body, why should it not much more persuade the understanding,
conscience, and will to endeavor themselves against fleshly corruptions, which
are pernicious to the soul, and not only temporal, but eternal death to the
whole man.

By death, in this place is understood, not the first but the second death, as
appears plainly by the antithesis and opposition of eternal happiness
against this everlasting death and misery: And so it is taken in many places of
scripture: Rev. 2. 11.
He that overcommeth shall not be hurt of the second death. Rev. 21. 18
The fearful and unbeleeving, etc. shall have their part in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. What need many
proofs as if every scripture were not given by divine inspiration? Here we
see the Tragedy, that must follow the pleasant Comedy of worldly joys, and the
hard reckoning that is given after all the junkets of fleshly pleasure.

If you ask me what this death is, Quest.
I thus define it?

When the aforesaid ignorant and unconscionable wretch has played his pageants
in City and Country, Answ.
upon the scafffold of this present earth, and perhaps has gotten him wealth,
wife and children, builded a fair house, borne office in the parishwhere he
dwells, purchased much land, engrossed sundry commodities, and mounted upon
the proud foaming steed of all stumbling vanity; of a sudden, when he most
wishes and hops to live; as a fish taken with a hook, or a bird with the
snare, he shall be entrapped with death: His fleshly body shall be cast into
the earth for a time, and his soul into the bottomeless pit of hell.

Now after that the soul and body has for a certain season made their abode
in the said places of the grave and hell, as a Malefactor in the prison until
the Law day; then shall they by the unspeakable power of God be united again
into one man, at the voice of an Archangell and trumpet of God, 1 These. 4. 16.
and be summoned together with the rest of the dead to make their appearance
before the Almighty, to hear that fearful sentence of condemnation
pronounced against them. Depart from me ye cursed, Mat. 25.
etc. This is the truth which the Lord has spoken; let all flesh cover their
faces, lay their hands on their mouths, and stand aghast hereat. Mock not at
Gods judgments as commonly thou do at the devil in a play. It is fearful
jesting with thy maker, or playing the fool with edged tools.

If further you demand what shall be the state of this creature, Quest.
thus cursed of God and condemned to death?

I answer, Answ.
if men may be deceived in judging of the creature subject to sense, and
outward being; much more hardly are they able to conceive of things invisible,
and made purposely of God in his wisdom to exceed the apprehension of any
creature. For which cause as the joys celestial do far surpass all
earthly melody (and therefore cannot be conceived truly, because man wants a
clear spectacle wherein to behold them) So the sorrows of everlasting, torment
being transcendent, all the glass of humane misery cannot be sufficient in
full conceit to express it, or come near it, neither can it be known of any
fleshly creature, saving only of such as feel it.

Yet least any man herein should be utterly ignorant, and so wax secure,
esteeming death eternal as a poetical fury or vizzard to be played withal,
thereby fearfully derogating from Gods power, wisdom, and glory in inflicting
justice; the holy Ghost has given us some secret items concerning this point,
and slightly, in comparison run it over, as a Painter with a little white
lead drawing forth the great Elephant; not so much teaching us what it is, as
what indeed it is not.

The first thing touching of iron, hung up on the top of an hill, debarred of
all mortal help, set apart to be consumed with famine night and day, fills
the hills and dales with his restless moanes, and stays the most speedy
passengers with the hollow cries of his extreme misery. Or as a Princes
daughter set on shore by a perfidious shipman, where is naught but trees and
wilderness, lions, bears, and antilopps, debarred of all comfort, within the
hearing of the grovelling dens, compassed about with seas: So and much more
fearful is the state of that man whosoever he be, that is banished from the
presence of God in regard of the graces of the spirit, which are the infallible
pledges of his love and favor, however he enjoys many outward good things,
as the stranger in a Princes Court may make him self glad with his wine,
though altogether unknown, or at least without any special notice taken of
him by the Prince.

But when God shall 1. strip him of all temporal blessings, as riches, honor,
health, wealth, friends, peace, etc.

2. When he shall make himself known to his blind soul with a more manifest
and apparent resemblance of his glory in justice, declaring the detestation he
has of his supposed knowledge, his unconscionable conscience, his devilish
will and corrupt affections.

3. When he shall first shut the door upon him that leads unto life, and
then also for ever cast him out of his presence, as a man that throws a toad or
serpent out of his garden, and that into the place of everlasting torment
(Lord) what tongue can express, or heart conceive the heavy estate of this
forlorn or abject creature? To be out of favor with a Prince is much, but to
be out of favor with God, who can abide it? There is no man living unless he
be desperate, but either he thinks himself high in Gods favor, and
therefore is still peaceable within himself, or else is possessed with such a
spirit of slumber, that the faculty of due pondering the pretiousnesse of Gods
presence is taken from him; as in a dru^kard which neither regards his frendnor
his foe, but when the drink shall be out of his head, as at the departure of
his soul, then shall he strike his knees together, and his heart shall be
cold as a stone; like that of Nabal, when the feast was past, and he had heard
the judgment denounced: then shall he open his eyes as the man which has
been blind from his birth, and behold the vengeance of God upon him.

By the Presence of God in this place I do not understand a bare local
residence with God: Job 1.
so Satan may stand before God; neither can any thing created go from his
presence, he being in heaven, Psalm. 139.
in hell, and in all places: but by his Presence I understand as the holy Ghost
teaches me, the comfort, the joy and bliss which betydeth the Creature
through his presence. Now what the loss hereof may be, I leave to thy own
heart: and yet it being fleshly, may happily err, or not esteem so highly as
the thing requires. To help thee in a word; Adam after his offense fled from
Gods presence, and the Lord ratified it, for indeed he cast him out of the
garden where he had communion and fellowship with God, yet so, that he left
him certain signs and tokens of his former dignity both spiritual and
temporal in soul and body: from whence it comes that we his children do
yet retain some resemblance of our former happiness, though our holiness is
quite lost: We have Lordship over all the creatures, we are fed with the
fruits of the earth, we have some co^linesse of person, and impression of
majesty, beyond the beasts, yea we have a smack of God: And in political
matters, yet preserve some slender and slight footings of his wisdom and
providence: the King rules, the people obey: the heaven, the earth, and the
stars yield themselves according to the will of the Creator, propitious unto
man, he enjoys their light, their influences, their fruits, and sundry
commodities: And all this because man (albeit out of the garden of Eden the
place of delight, yet) is still as long as he lives in the Cooks garden:
being thrust (as it were) out of a most pleasant parlour, where God appeared in
glory, into a more obscure place of less communion with him.

Now when the first death comes as a sorerunner to the last judgment, man is
deprived in an instant, of all pretended comforts and outward favors, and
plunged into an infinite depth of woe and bottomless gulf of wrathful
misery, his body strangely altered, being severed from his soul which gave it
both life and reason, yea and deprived of all earthly succor excepting a ditch
in the earth to preserve his bones and Cinders unto the time of the
resurrection. All which (mark it) by the decree of the just Judge of heaven,
shall for ever be deprived of all show of favor, or the least drop of mercy,
and be exiled the Courts of the Almighty, world without end.

Here the Kings of the earth shall be degraded, the Lords and Ladies of the
Court abashed, and each rich and stately person utterly disherited of all his
substance.

To be out of favor with the world is troublesome to weak flesh, but to be
discountenanced with God, this is the Ocean of all misery: Every creature then
beholds with a threatening face, the heavens lower, the earth frowns, and
withdraw themselves from our comfort. For as he that loses the good will of
the Master, loses also the heart of the true and trusty servant; So he that is
once discountenanced with God, all creatures in heaven and earth make head
against him. Oh that our great landed men (as we call them) which have seated
themselves for ever (as they suppose) would consider of this tragical ruin;
they are so shamefully beguiled with the composed countenance of the harlot
voluptuousness, the strength of pleasure, arising from worldly wealth has so
dispossessed them of their wits, that they rave in the pride of their hearts,
not considering their latter end. Out beggar, I scorn thee, my land is worth
three hundred pounds by the year, and will thou presume to keep me company,
etc. Ah consider that thou art carnal, and live according to the flesh, and
therefore must dye. All outward things shall forsake thee, thy wealth and
credit, thy pastime and acquaintance, all shall be abandoned, God himself
will strippe thee of these robes, and clothe thee with shame for ever; In vain
do thou presume of mercy, thou caryest the bag for a season, but it shall
one day be rent from thy side, and God shall be glorified in leaving thee
naked.

The second thing to

Little Children abide in him, 1 John 2. 18.
that when he shall appear we may be bold, and not be ashamed before him at
his coming. If a man come and publish a hidden crime, we are ready with our
action to clear our honesty, and defend our reputation by challenging the
benefit of the law, in a case not sufficiently proved against us. But at this
time the skirts of thy pollution shall be discovered before the sun, and though
thou wipest thy mouth (like the harlot which Solomon describes) yet thy sin
shall be written in great Characters in thy forhead, so as he that runs may
read thy chambering and wantonness, thy whoredom and uncleanness, thy
theevery and oppression, yea all thy cradle sins, which never yet were set on
foot, (thy wicked and abominable thoughts I mean) which lie lurking in thy
heart as in a den, not daring to come abroad, for fear of losing thy credit.
Oh the fearful reproach ensuing hereupon, when many a sober man and virtuous
matron, so falsely esteemed of in the world, shall have their vizzards plucked
down from their faces, the ulcer of their hearts launced, and all the buried
corruptions of their childhood, of their youth, and riper age, plainly before
men and Angels, Saints and blessed Spirits, devils and reprobates laid open,
to their eternal shame. Imagine that thou being a man of great credit and
esteem, should have all the vanities of thy heart, whereunto thy conscience
gives testimony, and all the night practices of thy youth comme^ced against
thee, even in the high Court of Parliament, before thy Prince and nobles, how
could thou show thy face? Now thou pluckest thy garment about thee to cover
thy shame, but then thou shall be stripped naked and unclothed, to the reproach
of thy self and thy whole family: now thou shelterest thy iniquity in a
closset or secret chamber from the eyes of him that cannot pierce the walls:
then shall thou stand before the face of the heavens, in the presence of him
whose eyes are as a flaming fire, knowing the secrets of thy parlour and
polluted bed, thy words, thy thoughts, the place, time and every circumstance
of thy sin: Now thou overlayest the dross of thy heart with a gilded
outside of joy and meriment, but then the Lord shall blow upon the paint of thy
face, thy withered deformity shall then be espied: now like Ieroboams wife,
thou disguisest thy self with pretended holiness; but at that time the Lord
shall defeat thee, and display thy hypocrisy.

To conclude, what causes a man having one foot on the earth, and another in
the grave, half dead and half alive, to acknowledge some capital sin,
which in his health he would not for all the world? The Lord will make thine
own conscience impeach thy self, and discover thy transgressions: Thou
think not so, so thought Judas, but as then with him, so also with thee, the
case will clean be altered.

The third appendix of Mat. 25. we account it a fearful thing to see a
Spectrum or diabolical delusion, and so it is to our weak nature; but to be
really present with Satan world without end, a companion in torment, what
earthly man can abide it. To be in a prison full of Murderers, it is
horrible, but in that bottomless pit with thousands of condemned spirits
abject and forlorn creatures, a heavy heareing. The thief before he be
attached and carried to the jail, perhaps he frequenteth the house of many a
worthy person. It is not thy stock and kindred, thy pomp and outward bravery
that will serve thy turn when thou art arrested with death, all the world will
not be of sufficient credit to bail thee. Think seriously of this and lay it
to heart: To be taken out of the fields of pleasure, and to be thrown into
the dungeon of hell, there to be guided with that cursed crew is no
jesting-matter; Oh that all carnal livers of our age would consider hereof; no
doubt it would somewhat restrain them in their wilful course, and gash their
hearts amidst their pleasures. O that that the curious and nice women that
cannot abide the noise of a canon, or the sudden flashing of fire, could ponder
the misery whereunto they are born, namely to* dwell in darkness with those
blasphemous spirits world without end. In the night season or in a dark place,
thou art ready to run away at the sight of a shadow, or at the reciprocal
imagination of thy own thought, upon the noise of a Scritch owl* or the like;
and think thou that thou can abide the sight, nay the company, and
continual familiarity of that hellish Cave? The Lord give thee a heart to
consider of this fearful horror before it betide thee, and to go out of thy
self to behold the strange change which is wrought by the grave and sepulcher.

They shall go forth and look upon the carkases* of men which have
transgressed against me, Esaias 66.
for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they
shall be an abhorring to all flesh. In respect whereof the punishment of the
damned is likened in holy Scripture to fire, Rev. 22. 8.
to a Worm, Mat. 13.
to gnashing of teeth, to utter darkness and the like. Not as if these were
sufficient to describe it, for what can declare the depth of that which has no
bottom; but only by these most fearful creatures in a superficial manner
to proportion that which nothing favors. For as the joys of heaven are
unspeakable; So are also the torments of hell, and therefore why does my
barbarous tongue endeavor to decipher them? Dear Christian, esteem of my
words not as the full size of the thing it self, but as a slight picture, or a
brief draught of that unutterable volumne of all misery. I am not able
possibly herein to show the mystery of this wonderful work made by the Lord,
of purpose to set forth his glory in justice. Yet to help thy consideration,
which is nothing serious in regard of the thing (I speak it also to the shame
of my self) I would feign imprint some conceit hereof in my heart, that might
make way to a second thought.

We esteem horror of Conscience a matter of great importance, because the
most of us in these fearful times* are possessed with secure hearts and
benumbed spirits. But when conscience shall once be thoroughly wakened, like a
wild beast it will then show his fiery eyes, and take thee by the throat. No
torment of ten thousand tyrants like unto it. Do but remember in what fear
and dread sometimes thou seem to be, when in a sleep or vision, a glimpse
of hell flashings are presented unto thee, oh how thou strivest and strugglest,
how thou cryest and ravest with pain? Nay, how glad art thou thou awakest and
find it to be but a dream, how thou tellest thy friend as much as thou
can, (but alas, nothing in respect of what thou feltest) what think thou
this to be? Certainly the grovelling of the Conscience, stirred up by Satan of
purpose to overwhelme the godly, to solicit to despair, and in the wicked to
torment them before their time; yet in respect of God, a most friendly
admonition for by this a man is suffered in a vision to see and feel the
torment of hell, to know the price of Christ's blood, to labor by all means
possibly to make sure his election. In the wicked also it has this use. I
could never have thought it possible for a mortal man to have been capable of
that measure of distress, had not the Lord in his mercy, for the further
subduing also of my bedlame flesh, suffered me sometimes to behold and feel
the flashings of hell through his grace, causing me as a child to be stilled by
the view of fearful beasts. If then in a dream, or in a man's life time there
may be such an incredible horror, that it may cause the eyes to stare, the
tongue to rave, the hair to stand an end: How much more hideous will it be
when really and in deed with perfect knowledge and sense broad waking, we
shall feel the strokes of the Almighty, the terrors of God shall lay hold of
us. In consideration whereof, in the name of God, as you tender your eternal
welfare, enter into the examination of your selves, and discern of your
estates whether they be carnal or no; cry out for the spirit, you hear what
the Holy Ghost says, If you walk after the flesh, ye shall dye, How strangely
does the sentence of Corporal death appall a man though pronounced by a wretch
like himself, and shall not the doom of death eternal, given out by the Holy
Ghost at all astonish you?

Oh let not Satan harden your hearts, resist the devil, and he will fly from
thee: It is a Commandment and a promise; What fair warnings does God give
unto men by himself and Ministers, by the motions of his Spirit, and checkes
of our consciences from time to time, and shall we be so void of grace as to
make our selves a booty for Satan, to stand still while he deprives us of our
lives and souls and all? Me thinks reason should something prevail with us in
things so nearly concerning our best good: But alas, a hardened heart like
Pharaohs, a flint, an adamant, a marble spirit: no admonition will serve its
turn, where grace is wanting, no impression takes any root: Men will make
trial and then believe. A fearful experience this is, thou may first try in
an earthly cause and then be warned; but from hell thou can not return.
Remember Dives, credit not the multitude, Old Tophet is wide and large, humble
thy self therefore betime, and repent of thy grievous sins.

(...). But if ye mortify: As before the Apostle described an infallible token
of death; so here he proceeds to show in like manner a teckmerion or a
certain sign of life, and that is the killing and slaying of sin, which is
called Mortification. 1 Cor. 15.
For as seed which thou sowest is not quickened before it die: or, this
corruptible body glorified before it be for a season dead and buried: So
neither is the new man ^ramed in us, which according to God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, until the old man be wounded and laid for
dead in us; which like a giant stands up to expel and oppose the prosters
and means of all holiness.

And this is the cause that the holy Ghost makes mention only of this
weakening of the force of sin, through the death and burial of Christ, not
excluding the other part of sanctification, which is vivification, What
vivification is.
viz. a virtue flowing from the resurrection of Christ, causing us also to rise
to newness of life. It were to small purpose to bring place upon place to
prove that, which through the whole book of God is so clearly apparent. Romans
6.
How shall we that are dead to sin live yet therein? Gal. 5.
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts
thereof. What can be plainer than this? As the Physician first purges before
he gives a restorative, so every one that shall be saved hereafter, must
first receive an allayer of his corruption here; he must first be launced
before he can be healed.

You may know the body of sin in all his particular members, by that which
has been spoken touching the Flesh. Let every man and woman here present
examine himself from top to toe what cure is wrought by the spirit in his
soul, whether the kingdom of sin and Satan be demolished and weakened, and
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ advanced and built up in him; whether corruption
dies, and grace lives in his heart, I beseech you deal faithfully with your
own souls, and answer me directly to these interrogatories. Are thy words
which heretofore have been full of profaneness and worldliness, now
directed to Gods glory, and the good of those among whom thou live? Are thy
thoughts which heretofore were loose and ungodly, now bounded within a sacred
compass, and spent wholly on heavenly things? Is thy understanding informed of
the mysteries of Christ's Kingdom? Is thy memory which heretofore has been
stuffed with trash and toys, now capable and greedy of divine knowledge? Do
thou order every passage of thy life, by direction out of Gods word? Art thou
inwardly conscionable in the performance of holy duties? Does the tenderness
of thy conscience smite thee, not only for gross and open sins, but even
for vain cogitations, and the least appearance of any evil? Art thou watchful
against all occasions and temptations of sin? Do thou feel thy self grow
and increase in the ways of holiness? Have thou such a gracious taste of the
glory of God, and eternal life, that thou desire to meet thy Savior in the
clouds, not so much to be rid out of the miseries of this life, as to be freed
from the heavy burden of sin which hangs so fast upon thee? In a word, do
thou so judge of things now, as thou would do hereafter, when thy soul is
best able to judge, as in the hour of death, and the day of distress? Do
thou approve of things as they further thy last account? as they commend thee
more or less unto God, and will bring true peace or sorrow to thy soul at last
and no otherwise; then blessed and happy is thy condition, and know this for
the comfort of thy soul, that thou art dearly beloved of God, yea his
peculiar one, and precious in his eyes; Satan and all the powers of darkness
are fast chained up for ever doing thee any hurt; Thou shall never more be
afraid of evil tidings, though the earth be moved, and the mountains fall
into the midst of the Sea, yet thy heart shall abide strong and comfortable; I
dare boldly pronounce that God is reconciled unto thee, and that his sweet
love which never changes has seized on thy soul.

What will it avail a man to say he is rich (like the bragging Laodicean) and
yet be extreme miserable, Revel. 3.
poor and naked? what will it further any of us to say we feel the decaying
of sin, when as the Kingdom of Satan still flourishes in us? Away with
this glozing and deceitful dealing, hypocritical holiness, is worse then
professed wickedness; this, it is so odious in Gods eyes that he will plague
those in whom it rules, with his severest judgments, those very good works
wherein the hypocrite seems to make have to heaven, carry him post to hell.
Nothing brings the soul more into a general consumption then this sin; it
deprives a man of true peace of conscience, hardens his heart, and fills him
with such inward perplexity that he dares not look God in the face with any
comfort.

The deeds of the body.

The meaning of the holy Ghost is not, that we should cut off the outward acts
of sin only (like many a dissembling hypocrite which has the gift of
restraining his affections that they break not out) but that we should kill
sin at the heart and in the cradle, then shall we make sure work and never
hereafter stand in fear. The next way to drench the conduit, is to dry up the
fountain: In vain do thou loppe sin unless it be deprived of its master
root. It may be thou will say, that is a thing impossible. Indeed to thee
which art wholly evil it is, mark therefore what follows.

(...). By the Spirit: This is that little David which takes the Goliath of our
corrupt nature and choppeth off his head: this is he that brings light out
of darkness, life out of death, which shines as a star through the watery
clouds of humane infirmity.

As there be diverse acceptations of the word flesh, so also of the Spirit;
sometimes it is taken for the soul, sometimes for natural reason; but that is
not here meant. To omit all other constructions, the word Spirit in this place
is taken for that created quality of holiness which by the holy Ghost is so
wrought in the mind, will and affections of a man whereby the power and force
of sin comes to be abated, and the faculty of holiness and inhere^t sanctity is
renewed in us.

But why does the Apostle say if ye mortify, Quest.
is it in our power to deprive sin of its life and being?

It pleases God to speak of things, Answ.
as done by us, when as indeed they are wrought in us. Such is his fatherly
wisdom that often he ascribes those things to us, which he himself secretly
effects. We mortify the deeds of the body, but it is by the spirits help:
the strength to subdue sin is put into us from heaven. We are as able to
shake the foundation of the earth with our little finger, as to shake our sin
by our own strength. Nature will not slay our lusts, it must be the Spirit of
Christ: corrupt nature labors by all means to preserve its own being.

He that goes among Lions must needs be torn in pieces; sins are Lions and
will soon destroy us, if God help us not. Mortification of sin is possible,
through the Spirits assistance, otherwise impossible. When therefore thou
feel pride, covetousness, lust, growing upon thee, look for power from
above or else thou art undone. Pray in the words of Iehosaphat, 2 Chro. 20
Lord there is no strength in me to stand against these sins, neither do I
know what to do, but mine eyes are toward thee. Alas, how are we overcome of
evil, whereas we should overcome evil with good; we shake at the very noise
of temptation, and give in presently, we have power over our eyes, tongues or
thoughts, but let sin pass in and out at pleasure: All which shows how
nothing we are in our selves, Satan and the world are too strong for us,
standing in our own might, but by leaning on the power of God we remain
invincible, whatsoever inordinatenesse a true Christian espies, he presently
endeavors the killing through the efficacy of Christ. Indeed passions are not
so bridled, nor corruptions so quelled, that they do not stir, but the force
and power of them is so far subdued, that they shall not reign, or hale us
ordinarily to that which is evil. Have thou been long kept under by some
customary vice, against which thou have resolved, and resolved, but can not
prevail? Get thee to Christ by the help of his Spirit, thou shall get victory
over all thy infirmities. Die to thy self, renounce the broken reed of thine
own freewill, which has so often deceived thee, and put all thy trust in the
grace of Christ, that will crucify thy old man and give him his deaths wound,
be weak in thy self, and strong in the Lord, and through his might thou shall
be more than conqueror. As faith increases, the power of corruption will decay
and languish; this fires the heart with such an unquenchable love to God, that
in comparison of obedience, it contemns the whole world besides. It puts into
us both courage and constancy, to fight against the strongest lusts, and set
upon the practice of the most difficult duties, notwithstanding all opposition
from the world and devil; yea though we have been foiled, or taken the
repulse. He will not fear the subduing of the most headstrong passion, who
rests upon God for power and ability: nor be dismayed because once he has
received a foil, who depends upon God for strength to recover: nor dread the
might of his greatest adversary, who knows that God will be at his right hand
to sustain him, nor start aside in the most difficult duty, whose heart is
fast linked unto the Lord, and relyeth upon his grace to be enabled to
whatsoever he is pleased to call him. In the affairs of this life we love to
excel, and outstrip others: and in matters of Religion to be dead and
lumpish, is it not abominable? would we reign with the Saints hereafter, and
not labor with them now? receive the price and not run the race? divide the
spoil and not fight the battle? The Merchant undertakes dangerous adventures
to raise his estate; yet alas what is the gold of India to the joys of heaven?
a fading possession to an eternal weight of glory?

When once we discern what love the Lord bears to us, we cannot but return
love for love; when a man considers, has Christ given himself for me,
forgiven me so many debts, conferred favors of all kinds upon me, what then
shall I retribute to him again? O my soul, why do thou not resign thy
self to the pleasure of his will in every thing, run when he calls, and do
what he requires at thy hands? what do thou fear? wherewith art thou
entangled? God is thy Father and Sovereign, to him thou owe thy self and
all that thou have, thy honor, wealth, life, or whatever is more precious then
those. Thou can not love thy self as is meet, if thou deny not thy self to
follow the Lord in all things. Is there any thing too hard tobedone for his
sake? too dear, or good for him? what have thou in heaven or earth worthy to
be affected but thy Savior? What is to be dreaded but his displeasure? Is
there any recompense to the joys of heaven? any danger to the torments of
hell? any pleasure to the sense of Gods favor? Resolve then with thy self,
and say, I have fully purposed to observe thy commandments, for they are the
joy of my heart, but Lord I lean not upon mine own strength, but upon thy
grace, who give both to will and to do; thou have commanded me to keep thy
testimonies, give me I pray thee to do what thou requirest. Psalm. 119.
Teach me the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it to the end.

Some understand by the mortifying of sin, not only the first wound which it
receives at a sinners first conversion, but also the whole practice of
repentance renewed through the whole course of a man's life, for a man after his
conversion, is continually to lie in arms against his own flesh, and to stir
up the spirit with the forces thereof, which otherwise will be overwhelmed
with the adversary, not able to maintain the fight.

For Christians (whilst they are here) are not wholly flesh, nor wholly
spirit, but a part of each: God has placed in our bodies two inmates of
contrary dispositions, two strangers of diverse natures and qualities (not in
the highest degree, for then they would utterly expel one another, but) in a
remiss manner, which causes this bickering and skirmishing in our inward man.

Now whereas every one whose understanding is renewed, sees the drift of his
flesh (however through the deceit thereof he does not always feel it) give me
leave to prescribe some few directions whereby he may come to have his
corruptions subdued, and temptations vanquished, that they triumph not over his
spirit to the disquiet of his conscience.

That which I shall principally complete armor of God; Ephesians. 6.
we must not fly away. from Satan; a runaway never makes a good conclusion
of his temptations. Some sins indeed are best conquered by flying, 2 Timothy 2.
but from satan it is neither possible nor lawful to fly. However stand it
out, what if we quake? better tremble every vein than sin, better die in the
place than fly from the place. Resist the devil and he will fly from you: 1
Pet. 5.
we are sure to conquer if we keep our ground. Satan will play his part to
hold his hold, and will never out unless he be forced. When a man comes to
abhor his lusts, then he gives sin its deaths wound. It is the nature of sin
not to be driven away without force and violence. A few angry looks and sharp
words will not do it: you may rate away your dog, but sin is not so easy
removed, as appears in many who will speak bitterly against their lusts,
calling themselves, beast, and wretch, but presently they return to their
former courses. When thou have therefore to do with sin, have no compassion,
fight against it with all thy might, never leave till thou have got the heart
blood of it out; so much as thou sparest sin, so much thou hurtest thy self.
Saul spared Agag, 1 Samuel 15.
but it was his ruin; and if thou sparest sin it will cost thee the Kingdom
of heaven: kill therefore thy sins or they will kill thee. It is a case of
life and death; be careful, old wounds must have strong medicines. What ado
have we to bring under our unruly lusts? he that favors these let him want
favor: we weed our gardens, and are ever weeding: sins are ill weeds and grow
apace: our hearts are a stepmother to goodness, and a natural mother to vice,
therefore be always dealing with it. The Captain that batters the enemies
fort a day or two, and then gives over, gives the more courage to his enemy,
and loses his labor. In this life thou shall never want something to be
mortified. Have thou begun to repent? never give over so long as thou have a
heart to sigh for thy sins. Satan that strong man will not yield possession
suddenly; look how much power we get to resist sin, so much power Satan
loses; there is never a prayer we make, nor act of resisting that we do
use, but gives the devil a knock, and sin a mortifying blow, by fighting
against our lusts; what ever we see and feel at first, we do and shall
conquer corruption at last.

Repel evil motions at their first onset, if we resist at the beginning the
work is half done, we shall find Satan a coward, but if we resist not we
shall find him a lion; we must trust neither our selves nor satan with any
temptation. Begin as soon as the temptation begins to peep, and where satan
begins do thou begin, despise not the least sin, a small wound may kill a man
in time, little gashes make way for greater. If the enemy assault one way, and
the garrison defend another way, the town is lost. Satan will try his skill,
and do his uttermost to prevail against us, why should we not then improve
our graces to make head against him? we may preserve our selves from being
conquered by him, though we cannot utterly subdue him. There is no possibility
of remaining safe without resistance; they are much deceived who think though
they have no spiritual armor upon them they may rest secure.

Alas what can a naked man do? he can no more free himself from the power of
the devil, than a poor silly lamb from a roaring lion: If we be foiled the
fault is our own, for God gives us means to stand fast; Who would not be kept
from spiritual wounds and hurts, from eternal bondage to sin and satan?

2. Beware of pride, swelling in the body is dangerous, so is it in the soul;
when a man pleases himself with his own weldoing, his heart is soon puffed
up. He that thinks to stand by his own strength shall suddenly fall; the
weakest shall be able to overcome their greatest enemies being under-propped of
the Lord. In every strong encounter we must look for supply from above. It is
dangerous to look for that from our selves, which we must have from Christ.
All our strength lies in him, as Sampsons did in his hair, therefore dependant
spirits are always the best. Nothing is stronger than humility, that goes out
of it self, or weaker than pride that, rests upon its own bottom. Satan
knows that nothing can prevail against Christ, or those that rely upon him,
therefore he labors to keep men in self dependancy.

If you would in truth mortify sin, represent it to your thoughts as the
most hurtful, hateful and most loathsome thing in the world, and represent to
your mind the obeying of Gods will, as the most sweet, profitable, and
excellentest thing whatsoever, and then you cannot but shun the one and
embrace the other: for,

surety.

fiend in hell, or the devil himself; for sin made him a devil and sunk
him into hell, and whatsoever makes a thing evil, is it self much more
evil, the Sun lightens all other bodies, is it self much more light. Hence
it is that in Scripture it is compared to the filthyest mire in which a sow
lies down and wallowes, 2 Pet. 2.
to the pollutions and impurities of the world singularly so called, sin
being indeed the transcendent filth of the whole world; How are the bodies and
souls of men stained and defiled with this gangreene?

It is likewise very infectious, corrupting every thing comes near it. The
first sin that ever the Sun saw, was so pregnant with soule-killing poison,
that it polluted all the sons and daughters of Adam that ever were since: At
the first breaking out thereof it suddenly blasted (as it were) both heaven and
earth, staining the beauty of the one and the brightness of the other, so as
from that hour the whole creation has groaned under the same. If but one
sin be doted upon and delighted in, like a lump of leaven it sowres all the
soul.

Yea, it is the greatest ill that can befall the creature, greater than
damnation it self. A man would think it a lesser ill to tell a lie, than to
lie in hell. But what says a Father; though we think hell to be the forest
of all evils, yet I think it is far bitterer and more grievous to offend
Christ, then to be tormented with the torments of hell. Who would for a space
of pleasure here, deprive himself of eternal bliss hereafter? of the unknown
pleasures of an appeased conscience, a Jewel of such infinite value, as that
all humane glory is but as dust in the balance to it? In the day of trial the
comfort of a good conscience will be worth ten thousand worlds; never was any
sound joy or sanctified peace without this.

Who art thou that liftest up thy proud heart against the Almighty, a base and
unworthy worm, the vilest creature that ever God made, next unto the devil,
who when thy breath is gone (which may fall out many times in a moment) thou
turnest to dust, rottenness, and filth. Oh let the consideration of the
immortality and dearnesse of that precious soul that lies in thy bosom, curb
thy corruptions and make thee startle at sin. Only sin wounds the soul,
filling it with the pangs of death though it never dye, and with pain, not
only above all patience, but all resistance.

Consider the infinite and inestimable price that was paid for sin, I mean
the heart blood of Jesus Christ, blessed for ever; and when ever thou art
tempted to do wickedly, suppose thou seeest thy Savior coming toward thee,
besmeared with goare blood, and speaking thus unto thee; Oh go not forward
upon any terms, commit not this sin by any means, it was that which drew me
down from the fountain of all bliss, to put on this corruptible and
miserable flesh, to drink off the dregs of the bitter cup of my Fathers wrath,
to wrestle with all the forces of infernal powers, to lay down my life at the
gates of hell with intolerable pain: what an heart have thou, if thou dare
go on against the sweet entreaty of so sweet a Savior? in every sin thou
committest, thou layest (as it were) the blood of Christ in one scale, and some
worldly preferment, or sensual vanity in the other, and shall these things
outweigh that?

tender and wakefull conscience, which may be sensible of the least offense,
and apprehensive of Gods wrath attending the same; what hope is there of his
repentance whose conscience is seared? and yet how busy are many to increase
their own woe, by putting sin out of their remembrance? Certainly, a lively
conscience, that shall faithfully present us with an exact view of our estates,
is a great blessing; if it were not so, why should God threaten the Israelites
to smite them with blindness, Deuteronomy. 28. 18.
and with a stony heart, meaning, that he would inflict such a kind of brawny
and insensible dullness upon them, that in doing evil, they should be utterly
without any apprehension of their misdoing; well is he that has a conscience
stirring him upon the least sin, that will awake at the least blow; and
perform its office. David could have no peace till he had made his peace with
God, Psalm. 51.
he did but cut off the lap of Saul's garment, 2. Sam. 24. 10.
and his heart smote him and brought him upon his knees, and made him cry, Lord
I have sinned exceedingly, take away the trespass of thy serva^t, for I have
done very foolishly. Had his conscience been dull and hard, what security
would have crept upon him? what carelessenesse to become a petitioner to God
for mercy? Never therefore turn thine eyes from beholding that which
conscience offers to thy view. Alas, conscience does nothing of it self, but
by special authority and commission from God, whose deputy it is.

Yet it is possible to turn that which of it self is a blessing, into a curse:
It is a blessing to live under a faithful Ministry, yet if a man be not a
doer of the word, but a hearer only, he may increase his own judgment
thereby. When men come to the Ordinance, their consciences are many times
wrought upon more strongly than they would, now it is good simply for the
conscience thus to run and it is a token of Gods great love unto man to furnish
his mind with such a reflecting faculty upon himself. But here lies the
mischief, many deal with their consciences as rich men do with an earnest
beggar, or as great men with an importunate petitioner, whom they will make as
if they did not hear, and pass along by without regard, when their heart
smites they will not answer, when it brings sin to their sight, they turn
their heads aside and will not behold it. If they find by experience that when
they are alone their conscience use to encounter them, they furnish themselves
with vain and wretched company, such as will be sure to give conscience no
leisure to speak. If the word of God any whit awakens them and stirs up
conscience to do its office, they thrust it from their remembrance by worldly
thoughts and cares, or sleep it out that they may not be disquieted. The poor
conscience must be conscience off till another time, (as Paul was when he
disputed with Faelix) Acts 24. 26
such variety of tricks does the devil teach to decline and shun the workings
of conscience upon sinful persons. By which means that which in it self is a
great blessing, becomes a wonderful curse unto them, the using of conscience
in this unkind manner, is the next way to move the Lord to silence it for
ever. Look as God deals with whole societies of men in taking away the
benefit of a powerful Ministry from them, when it is not hearkened unto; So
deals he with particular persons in striking a dumbness upon their
consciences, when the voice thereof is not regarded. Listen therefore to its
secret checkes and smitings, though men will not be brought to repetition of
sermons in their families, yet they have a repeater in their bosoms, that will
be at private repetition with the in spite of their teeths, and tell them, This
is not according to that you have been taught, you have been reproved and
convinced of this sin in the public Ministry, why do you not leave it? for
shame reform this pride, hypocrisy, lying, swearing, formality, if religious
courses will bring true peace at last, use them to purpose, rest not in outside
shows, without the power and life of godliness. How many times does
conscience press us to repentance and better obedience? How often does it
startle us in our postings to hell, and call upon us to settle to amend our
lives? Conscience speaks to us, as the Lord to Jonah, Jonah 4. 4.
do thou well to be angry? Do thou well to be thus carnal and earthly,
thus eager upon the world, thus cold and indifferent in holy duties? conscience
gives privy nips and secret checks. It 1. points with the finger and gives
direction, if it be neglected, it smites with the fist and gives correction.

Therefore if ever thou desire that sin should dye, and grace flourish in
thy heart, despise not conscience when it speaks; does it press thee to any
works of piety, reformation of abuses, self-denial, etc. in any case embrace
his counsels. Hearken to this preacher whom thou can not suspect of
partiality or ill will, conscience cannot be suspected to be set on by others.
Does it chide and reproach thee of thy ways? does it punctually arrest thee of
thy particular beloved sins, do not extenuate, much less defend thy crime,
but accuse thy self as fast as that accuses, acknowledge thy folly, abase thy
spirit, and covenant with thy conscience a full and speedy reformation. If this
were done, how soon would Satan's kingdom be demolished, and all corruption
weakened in us.

But alas, how few regard the voice of conscience, or once hearken to it? the
very want of this sets open a floodgate of wickedness in the world. If men
cannot stop consciences mouth, they will at least stop their own ears. If
Conscience offer to be talking with them, they shuffle it off till their better
leisure. Alas poor soul, God will one day strippe thee of all thy
employments, and turn thee loose to thy conscience, and it shall have liberty
to bait thee and bite thee at pleasure. How much better is it to be willing to
hearken to the voice of conscience here, than be forced to hear it in hell
hereafter? Hearken to the reproves and admonitions of it now and thou shall
not hear the doleful clamours of it then.

Further, set faith a work that will do wonders if we apply the victory which
Christ has made for us: though we be cowards he was not, and what ever he did
it was for us. He stood in our place and beat Satan to our hands. What if
Satan beat me may a Christian say, since Christ in my stead has beaten him
all to pieces? I have long ago overcome Satan in my head: In Christ my
Captain he is a vanquished enemy; faith makes his victory ours, and sets him
against every tentation; we are not so weak in the hands of Satan, as Satan
is in the hands of Christ; therefore is faith said to be our victory, 1 John
5. 4.
because it makes Christ ours, who is our victory. A Christian is never safe,
except he can by faith lay fast hold on Christ, and set up him and his power
against the gates of hell and powers of darkness. Faith must have one to side
with it against Satan, who has absolute command over Satan. If Christ do
but say the word, the Devil is soon said, and his temptations die. To him then
who is our refuge and strength let us repair in all perplexities, by applying
him to our selves by a lively faith, and making him our sword and bucklar: Say,
I of my self am weak as water, not able to vanquish the least temptation, or
subdue any fleshly lust or corruption whatsoever, but in Christ made mine by
faith I am strong and can do all things. The promise is that if we resist
Satan, steadfast in the faith, he shall fly. Romans 4. 7.
Believe then that thou shall overcome, and thou shall overcome; war against
sin and sin shall die; faith is our victory and nothing else, because that
alone apprehends and applies the promise. Reason can do no good, because the
temptation is spiritual and reason carnal, a natural thing has neither
stroke nor force against that which is spiritual; beside, Reason is a secret
friend to Satan, and takes part with him against our selves. Can a man conquer
the devil with a wisdom that is divellish, that has him for its damme?
down with flesh and blood then, away with our own wit, let faith do all,
else it will do nothing. Faith never works so well, as when it works alone;
it is no more but believe the promise and Satan is gone.

If Christians be not persuaded that God will mortify their corruptions, they
will very much at their manifold slips, be off and on, and coldly embrace
religious courses? Alas, our own strength is too weak for the work of
holiness, to repress and vanquish the lusts of our rebellious hearts, which
are by nature and custom so deeply polluted with sin. If we have not faith
to believe that God will aid and bless our endeavors and do the whole work
for us, what courage can we have to go about it? What shameful foyles and
repulses shall we sustain in it. He will manfully fight against his lust,
that is assured of victory from God in the end. It is a great heartning to
resist evil, or to do any good duty, when we believe God will be with us,
and help us therein.

Faith acquaints a man with his emptiness of grace, how unable he is to
crucify his inordinate affections, or to repair the decayed image of God in
him, and that he is in a woeful case, unless the Lord put to his helping. What
profits pardon of sin, to one that lies under the power and dominion of
sin? Therefore a true believer fights courageously against his corruptions,
and cries instantly to the Lord for help: though the combat be never so hot,
he will not yield, because he apprehends victory; for grace does flow from
Christ into our hearts more or less, as our faith is weaker or stronger,
though we have no grace of our selves, yet if we cleave to him we shall want
none. Does the streaming fountain deny water to the thirsty traveller? No more
does Christ to the empty parched soul, that comes unto him. He is an
overflowing fountain, his grace is unsearchable, his store can never be
diminished. He fills the empty, and satisfies the poor, that he might be
acknowledged the wellspring of all grace and goodness.

the flesh under, by stopping all passages of provision for it, clear thy
mind of sinful cogitations, blot out of thy memory ribald speeches, and
obscene jests, preserve thy heart from unlawful lusts, wicked desires, and
unruly passions. Keep thine appetite from intemperance and excess, thy tongue
from corrupt communication, thine ears from ungodly and dishonest discourses,
thine eyes from waton and wicked objects, and finally, thy body from sloth and
idleness, effeminate delicacie and carnal pleasures. It fares with the flesh
and the spirit as with two mortal enemies in the field, he that by any means
aideth and strengthens the one, does thereby make way for weakening of the
other. He that joyneth with the flesh does oppose the spirit, and he that
stands on the spirits side, does bring the flesh into captivity. Who would
strengthen an enemy to oppugn himself? we give stings and weapons to the
flesh, arming it against the spirit, when as we pamper the body with delicacy,
inflame it with wine, handle it daintily, and nourish inticements and
provocations to lust in it. If the flesh be full fed it will despise the
Spirit, and commit many outrages in a Christian soul. Yea it will wax proud
and insolent, foil the regenerate part, and force it to live in miserable
slavery. Better to become a swine-heard with the prodigal, than to be a
servant to our base lusts. The heathen could say, he was borne to more noble
ends, than to be a slave to his own body, and shall not our spirits be
elevated to a higher pitch of excellency than his, as having God for our
Father, and Christ for our elder brother? which of us enobled by birth, and
liberally brought up, being clothed with loathsome some rags, and defiled with
noisome excrements, would not hastily strippe them off, and with indignation
cast them away? This flesh of ours does us more mischief than the devil
himself, alas, he could never hurt us, were we not first betrayed by this
inbred enemy, yea it is worse then hell and damnation, as being the cause of
both, without it hell were no hell, neither could destruction fasten upon us.
All the outrages and horrible crimes which are committed in the world, may
challenge the flesh for their chief cause and author. It was this that pierced
our Saviors hands and feet, and which moves men daily to crucify him
afresh, and trample his precious blood under their filthy feet; and can we
find in our hearts to have any peace or truce with such a malicious enemy?
shall we not rather with implacable rage, and constant resolution, assault,
pursue, and wound it to the death? shall we not rather take part with the
Spirit, in warring against the flesh, and disfurnish all provision and munition
from the one, that the other may be furnished with all necessaries? Our spirit
is the better part, and should be most regarded; Who would deprive his soul
of so sweet a guest, to entertain inordinate lusts? The more familiar Sampson
was with Dalilah, the more was God a stranger to him. For the weakness of the
flesh increases the strength of the spirit, even as contrariwise, the strength
of the flesh brings weakness to the spirit, and indeed what wonder is it,
for a man to be made stronger, by the weakening of his enemy? who would
purchase the pleasure of a base sin at so high a rate, as to lose the
comfortable society of Gods blessed Spirit? what meanest thou to admit such a
mate into thy heart with which Gods spirit cannot sort? It may be thou will
not rudely bid him get out of doors, yet thou may weary him forth, by
welcomming such guests into thy soul, as he can no ways brook. Ought thou
not much rather to crucify the flesh, and walk in the spirit, that so thou
may not fulfill the lusts thereof? does not God call upon thee to slay thy
corruptions, to do thy best, not only to subdue them, but to put them to
death; encouraging thee thereunto by a gracious promise: that if through the
spirit, thou do mortify the deeds of the body, thou shall live, both the
life of grace here, and of glory hereafter?

What is the use of all this but to stir us to look about us, Use.
seeing we have so secret and subtle and adversary to circumvent us. Think
not the Christian combat ended when some few battles are fought, and that thou
art now out of danger, rather expect and prepare for more. Many stout Captains
have been overthrown, because after a conquest they feared no fresh assault.
The flesh is restless in its assaults ever besieging us: we can neither fly
from it, nor chase away that from us; it is not therefore sufficient to make
good onsett, nor yet to hold out the brunt of some assaults, but all must be
finished (how bitter so ever) ere we can look for victory. Heb. 12.
We must resist unto blood, and be faithful unto the death, if ever we expect
the crown of life. He that prevails in some conflicts, and is at length
vanquished, cannot be said to overcome. Saul fought many of the Lords battles
valiantly, but he withdrew himself, and the Lord forsook him; though thou
have done much, yet give not over so long as there remains any thing to be
done. Consider not what conflicts have been endured, as how many are still to
be encountered: Regard what is to come, rather than what is past; timerously to
cease from resisting temptation, is dangerous to our selves, and dishonorable
to God; it makes Satan to insult over us, and get advantage against us; let
us not think if we yield the field, the devil will be contented. It is not
the glory of conquest that he seeks so much as our destruction; which when I
consider, I cannot but bewail the naked condition of many persons, who suffer
their armor to hang on the walls and rust, never putting it on to any use.
Alas, what benefit can come by a thing that lies dead? do we think we stand
in no need of it? or that God made this defense in vain? experienced Christians
find the contrary. Bellum est, non triumphans.
Our life is nothing but a continual warfare; so long as we are in this
mortal body, carnal motions will rise in our hearts; though we cut them off
they spring out again; though thou quench them, they are kindled again, will
thou, nill thou, they soon return; they may be subdued, but cannot be rooted
out. It is no easy work to lead a christian life, considering the continual
conflict of these two parties (the flesh and spirit) of so contrary
dispositions within us. It is impossible we should ever walk after the one,
unless we resist the other. Satan will be sure to take part with corruption,
and keep grace low, and look how much we detract from the flesh, so much our
spiritual part will prosper and be in good liking.

How may a man know that grace has gotten the upper hand, Quest.
and that the power of sin is abated in him?

Do thou loath nothing more than thy former spiritual bondage? Answ.
Have thou a secret dislike of thy natural estate? see a necessity of
reforming it, and watchest over those things which are most pleasing to it,
this cannot proceed but from a work of grace in thee; for Nature is a lover of
it self, and seeks by all means its own preservation; when a man is come to
this, that he does not approve his sinful inclination, nor willingly give way
unto it, but studies rather which way to curb and restrain the same, it is a
manifest sign of some higher hand, by which the flesh shall be more and more
over ruled. I doubt not but a man after there is some change wrought in him by
grace, may in some particulars receive a foil by his own corruptions, and by
that law of his members, which fights and rebels against the law of God; hardly
may a man say he is truly changed, unless he be sensible of the struggling of
nature against grace; but yet still it is a pledge of such a work begun, as
shall never be broken off, when Nature in the proper disposition thereof is
become a burden to the soul, and a man would feign be better, and have it
otherwise with him than it is.

Grace cannot stand with the regiment of sin: That person in whom grace is
truly wrought, desires to be furnished with the complete armor of God, that
he may resist the devil; the strength and bent of his will and affections are
for God and goodness; he chooses holiness with a full purpose and resolution
to walk in it; he turns from his former evils with a detestation of them, and
leaves them with a resolution never to take them up again; he daily prays,
and cries earnestly to God for strength against corruption, and wishes, O that
my ways were so directed, that I might keep thy statutes. He is not for God
to day, and the devil to morrow. He is no Morning Saint, and evening Devil,
but desires continually to walk with God in all well pleasing. A Gracious
heart keeps a constant war with his lusts, the law of his members is
evermore rebelling against the law of his mind. Romans 7.


Howsoever upon the assault of some furious temptation, (happily) he may be
wounded and taken prisoner by some raging lust, which imperiously treads and
tramples upon him; yet does he not yield and give himself over to the power
of lust. Grace within bestirs it self, the heart sighs and groans and seeks
to God for succor. If thy case be thus, that thou abhorrest Satan and his
snares, that thou delightest in the law of God concerning the inner man, Romans 7
22
that thou ponderest with care and diligence willingly and setledly to follow
the things of the Spirit, (that is) such things as the spirit prompts and
suggests? Do you grieve inwardly for that dominion which the flesh exercises
over you, lessening the power and practice of sin all you can? not leaving
the reins to corruption to carry you whither it will, but rather holding it in
with a bridle of righteousness.

Does not the fear of God in you (though sometimes driven from its station)
still dwell as controuler in your soul, repress refractory thoughts and
affections, and sway your heart against the natural inclination, that you may
keep Gods word, that though you be interlaced with the flesh, yet you give
the guidance of your life to the holy Ghost, loving that he may have the
principality in you? 1 Pet. 4.
Do you chiefly attend your spiritual being, Col. 3.
and principally affect things in heaven, and not things on earth? Do thou
submit to the commandment with pleasure in it, so as thou can truly say:
Psalm. 40.
I am content to do thy will, yea thy law is within my heart.

Do thou lay hold upon good thoughts and desires so soon as they offer
themselves unto thee, welcomming them in the kindest manner into thy heart, and
constraining them by a respective usage to stay still with thee? so soon as
any good motion arises, do thou (fear the deceitfulness of thy heart, and)
pray with David, knit my heart; this fickle fugitive heart of mine is always
ready to steal from thee, knit it O Lord, and tie it fast unto thy self, that
as it is now with thee, so it may still continue. O Lord keep this frame of the
thoughts of thy servants heart for ever.

Are thy failings, matter of daily humiliation unto thy soul? Do thou find
and feel that nothing under the Sun, more stings and pierces thy soul, than
to be now and then overtaken with sinful passions, or carried away with the
swinge of any corruptions, against thy godly purpose and resolutions?

Do thou love righteousness it self, as righteousness, be the thing and
subject of never so small a nature? And do thou hate sin, as sin, be it
never so little in thine eye? Is the one precious to thee for his sake whom it
resembles, and the other loathsome because it opposes the Almighty? Do thou
obey God out of a love of goodness, seeing a beauty in the ways of holiness,
being humbled when thou have done thy best, that thou can bring no more glory
to him, and do thou love righteous men for righteousness sake? Is thy
service ready and cheerful, without repining and delay? Can thou be content
to obey against profit, pleasure, credit, liberty, ease, the liking of the
world, or carnal friends, preferring Gods commandments above all things, yea
life it self? Mat. 16. 25
Art thou sensible of the dishonor done unto God, and more vexed for that,
than for any disgrace or injury offered to thy self? it is a good sign.

But art thou quick sighted into the faults of others, and indulgent toward
thine own, it is an ill symptom.

The best men are most severe against themselves, and tender over others. A
gracious heart dislikes sin in any, but in himself most of all. He is very
backward in censuring others, but exceeding forward in accusing himself. None
can say so much against him, but he is ready to say much more. He loves
goodness in the greatest enemy, and hates sin even in the greatest friend.

Art thou conscionable of the least offense, as well as the greatest, cherishing
an universal hatred of all sin in thy soul, whether secret or open, without
exception, and carrying a constant purpose and resolution in nothing willingly
to sin against God; but whatsoever thou know to be a sin thou will not
deliberately do it for all the world, at all times, and in all places, though
no eye sees thee, and it may be beneficial unto thee? Here is a notable sign
that grace has gotten the upper hand, when as thou preferrest virtue before
vice, even then when in humane reason, virtue will be the loser, and vice the
gainer. An unsound conscience is large, and can swallow down any thing; the
sincere conscience is strait, and the least bone, though but such as are in
little fishes, will stick in her throat. Neglect of smaller matters may justly
bring our obedience in greater matters in suspicion; the same God that requires
our fidelity in the one, requires it also in the other. A gracious heart, is
like the eye, troubled with the least more, and certainly he that is unjust in
a little, will be also unjust in much.

Is the uprightness of others of Gods servants, more highly esteemed by thee
than thine own? Do thou see greater excellencies in them than in thy self?
Feel thou no bottom in other men's praises, when thy heart tells all is not
well within. An humble Christian hides himself in the closet, and as in
prayer, so in all good duties shuts the door, he is much affected with a sense
of his own infirmities, resting it self wholly upon the power of God, to be
perfected in her weakness, and is many times more humbled, for the mixtures
and defilements of good works, than for some works simply evil in
themselves; he desires to be good, rather then to be thought so.

Are the sins of others, and the sorrows of the Church, as sensible and
bitter to thy soul, as thine own? Can thou forget thy self, and thy
particular business to lay these to heart?

Do thou rejoice always to be crossing and thwarting thy self in those
succors, and supports of sin which thy corruption suggests?

Is that experience which thou have of sin, and of grace, no dead but a
stirring experience, quickening thee to duty, and mortifying corruption in
thee, so as not only knowledge, but conscience also swayes thee to Christian
duties? and art thou as careful to persevere in grace, as once to embrace it,
these are good signs.

Cheer up therefore thy drooping spirit, the Lord by the power of his grace
has took possession of thee. Nothing but grace alone, is able to keep the
love of sin out of the heart, though peradventure some other thing may keep
it out of thy hand. Civility and hypocrisy may a little snib sin, or bid it
for a while stand aside, and give way to better things, but it is only grace
that strikes this Goliath dead. It is only the spirit which subdues the flesh.

But we must know, there is a great deal of difference, between forsaking of
sin, through the strength and power of grace, and for other carnal ends and
by-respects; for an hypocrite may sometimes forsake sin, (not out of any love
to God, or hatred of ill, but) because sin leaves him, happily he fears it
will be some loss or discredit to him, or else fit means and opportunity of
committing it, serve not his turn, and therefore he forbeares. It is nothing
for a man to be chaste, where there is no provocation to uncleanenesse. Here
was the trial of Joseph's integrity, that though the occasion were offered by
his own Mistress to do the deed, in such secrecy and security that no eye
perceived it, yet the fear of God overruled him. Many seem to be meek and
moderate men, while they are well dealt with, but let some injury be offered
and the contrary will appear: That we are indeed, which we are in
temptation; Examine thy heart then in this particular, what is the ground of
that divorce which seems to be betwixt thee, and thy old lusts? If it flows
from any thing in the world, but the love of God and goodness, thou art in a
wretched condition, be thy thoughts of thy self never so pleasing.

Art thou one whose heart likes well of sin, though thou can not or dare
not commit it? Art thou one who when thou art convinced and rebuked of thy
failings, thy heart rises against the reproof, though for thy credit, and
profit sake, thou seem to welcome, and thankfully entertain the same. I
tell thee thou art in a dangerous condition, thou have but weak and slender
evidence of the spirits prevailing in thy heart.

But why says the Apostle here, Quest.
ye shall dye, and not, ye shall be damned; in as much as that is chiefly
meant?

Because the Spirit of God would drive men from sin, Answ.
by that which is most fearful, to their present apprehension; the
remembrance of death does more forcibly move the mind, than the remembrance of
Hell, though hell be a thousand times more grievous then death for our
affection is moved according to our knowledge of the thing: that which most
ways is known, affects most, we know hell only by faith, but we know
death to be fearful by reason and sense, because we feel it growing upon us
every day.

The opposition made here by the Apostle warnes us, that a necessity lies upon
us to mortify our sinful lusts. It stands upon our lives, unless we slay
sin, sin will not fail to slay us. It is like a Serpent in our bosom
which cannot live, but by sucking out that blood whereby we live. What
pitiful folly is this? we hate them which pursue our bodily life, we eschew
them by all means that would spoil us of our worldly goods, only we cannot
hate Satan to the death, who seeks by sin to spoil us of eternal life.

That same commandment which was given to Adam and Eve, Every sin is as the
forbidden fruit.
If ye eat of the forbidden tree ye shall dye, is in effect here given to us
all, If you live after the flesh you shall dye; let not us make an exception
where God has made none; every sin to us is that forbidden tree to Adam, if
we meddle with it, we shall find no better fruit than he found: Bitter death
grows upon the pleasant tree of sin, for the wages of sin is death.

It is therefore a point of great wisdom to discern between the deceit of
sin, and the fruit of sin. He that would rightly know the face of sin
when it stands before him, to tempt him, let him look back to the tail of
that sin which he has already committed, and the sting which it leaves
behind it. The perishing pleasures of sin are paid home with everlasting
perdition; it is done in a moment, but brings forth death, and breeds a worm
that will never die. Men may sleep in their sin, but their damnation sleeps
not.

Every man's state in this life, is a prediction of that condition which he
shall have hereafter. He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption, but he that sows to the spirit, shall reap immortality and
life. No man comes to heaven, or hell, but by the way that leads thereunto. A
wicked life is a thorow-way to the place of darkness. But a godly life is the
direct path to salvation. As the tree falls, Eccles. 11.
so it lies, and it commonly falls on that side, which did most bend toward
the earth before: if the greatest growth of our affections and actions, spring
out after the spirit, no doubt, we shall fall on the right hand and be blessed;
but if otherwise they grow downward, and thou live after the flesh, assuredly
thou shall fall on the left hand and perish irrecoverably.

We shall not be judged according to the particular instant of our death, but
according to our general course of life; (...) according to our deeds in that
present, but according to the desires of our hearts before.

But seeing they who walk after the flesh are dead already, Object.
why does the Apostle say, You shall die?

I answer, Answ.
both are true, every ungodly person is now dead, but yet a more fearful
death abides them. For albeit they be dead in sin, and deprived of the favor
of the Creator, yet the vain comforts of the creature do so bewitch them,
that they know not how miserable and wretched they are, but when the last
sentence of damnation shall be pronounced against them, they shall not only
be banished from the presence of God, into everlasting perdition, where the
fire of the Lords indignation shall perpetually torment them, but they shall
also be stripped of all comfort and refreshment from the creature whatsoever.
The least degree of their punishment shall be a fearful famine of worldly
supportments.

He that knows any thing of the narrow way to heaven, of the nature of Gods
justice, and the cunning sleights of Satan, of the difficulty of true
repentance, and how fearfully man's heart is hardened, by custom and continuance
in sin, would not delay making peace with God, till his last hours, for ten
thousand worlds.

Which when I consider, Use.
I cannot but deplore the iniquity of our times, wherein not only carnal men
have set themselves to work all manner of sin with greediness, but even
they which heretofore have probably seemed to mortify the deeds of the body,
do now renew the battle, and are in outward view reconciled and shake hands
with the flesh: Now are the days wherein the love of many shall wax cold,
when men shall be lovers of themselves, lovers of pleasure more then lovers of
God. Oh how is the Spirit quenched, and the flesh inflamed every where? show me
the man that truly endeavors the suppressing of sin. Oh this is a hard
task, it requires much patience, and vigilancie, and will bring no small
pain and sorrow to the flesh in the end. What then? be not dismayed, thy
future peace will more then recompense thy present trouble. What availes a
little outward flashy joy, when the conscience is disquieted and vexed within?
who would redeem a moment of pleasure, with eternity of pain? All is but
bitter sweetes, so long as sin reigns. What is the reason of these fearful
outcryes, and desperate conclusions of Christians, concerning their spiritual
estate? Whence is it that they taking Satan's part in accusing and condemning
themselves, do utter such doleful exclamations as these; when conscience is
thoroughly awakened.

Alas, I have most wretchedly spent the prime and strength of mine age in
vanity and pleasure, in lewdness and lust: The best of my time has been
woefully wasted in obeying Satan and serving my self, and therefore though I
be weary of my former ways and look back upon them with a trembling heart,
and grieved spirit, yet I am afraid God will never vouchsafe to cast his eye
of compassion upon my soul. Though I have been a professor long, yet many
times my heart is full of doubting when I call to mind the heinousness of my
unregenerate life, and see since I was enlightened and should have behaved my
self in forwardness and fruitfulness for God answerable to my former folly
and licentiousness in evil, so many slips and imperfections every day, and
such weak distracted discharging of duties commanded both toward God and man,
that my very spirits sink within me. Many times when I reach out the hand of my
faith to fetch some special promise into my soul, for refreshing and comfort,
comparing advisedly my own vileness and nothingnesse, with the riches of
mercy and grace shining therein, I am overwhelmed with admiration, and think
with my self, how is it possible that this should be? Can such glorious
things belong to such a wretch and worm as I am? I cannot deny but there is
mercy enough in God, but for me, such a notorious wicked liver as I am, mercy
for me, surely it cannot be. Alas; I have been no ordinary sinner, my
corruptions have carried me beyond the villainies of the vilest creature you can
name, the enormity of my ways have set an infamous brand upon me in the sight
of the world, besides those secret pollutions and sinful practices which no
eye ever beheld save God alone. Had I not been extremely outrageous, and gone
on thus with a high hand, I might have had some hope, but now all expectation
fails me; I despair of salvation, etc.

Oh the fears and perplexities which pursue the soul when sin is once
committed, conscience unpacified will rave, and dragge a sinner before Gods
tribunal. The sting of an accusing conscience is like an Harlot, Prove. 7.
more bitter then death. Who so pleases God shall escape from it, but the
sinner shall be taken in it. Conscience being disquieted, no earthly thing can
assuage and mitigate it.

Ye shall live.
After that God has called, justified, and sanctified a poor sinner, he
glorifieth him at last with himself in eternal bliss. Death is but a sleep
to such as are in Christ, wherein the body is separated from the soul, rotting
in the earth a while, that it may be the more capable of glory hereafter; but
the soul is immediately transported into heaven, and there remains unto the
last judgment, praising God, and expecting the consummation of the Kingdom of
glory.

Before the coming of Christ, the powers of heaven shall be shaken; Sun and
Mooone shall suspend their light, the stars shall seem to fall from heaven,
the Elect shall rejoice, the reprobate shall tremble; the whole universe shall
be consumed with fire, and depart with a noise of the chariot wheels, the
earth and elements, with the works thereof, shall be consumed in a moment, and
brought to nothing. At the same time shall the trumpet be heard, sou^ded by an
archangell, and Christ shall come in the clouds with great power and glory,
with a troop of angels. Then the Elect which were dead, at the hearing of the
trumpet, shall rise with their bodies, and the rest alive shall be changed in a
moment, and all of them shall be made like the glorious body of Christ. After
which, they being gathered before the throne of God, shall be separated from
the reprobate, and carried in the air, and set upon the right hand of God,
where they shall hear this sentence; Come ye blessed, etc. After which they
shall enjoy everlasting happiness: the parts whereof is eternal life and
perfect glory. This eternal life is that fellowship with God, whereby God of
himself is life unto the Elect. They shall not need meat, drink, sleep, air,
heat, cold, breath, physic, apparel, the light of the sun, or moon; for the
spirit of God shall be instead of all these, from whom immediately they shall
be quickened for ever. Their glory consists in this that they shall
continually behold the face of God. 2. They shall be like unto Christ, just,
holy incorruptible, glorious, honorable, beautiful, strong, nimble. 3. They
shall possess the new heavens, and the new earth, they shall joyfully praise
and laud the name of the Lord world without end.

FINIS.
A Table of the principal heads.
A
DIsorderly Affections discovered. Page 41 Misery of being guided thereby. 47
Antidotes against sin. 65
B
BEginnings of sin to be resisted. 190 Better be in hell than offend Christ.
197 Body not to be pampered. 220
C
HOw a man may know whether his heart be carnal. 87 Conscience corrupted, and
how. 33 What a stirring conscience is. 35 Carnal men indocible. 38 Corrupt
motions natural to a carnal heart. 61 A fleshly conscience described. 93 The
distress of conscience that betides the wicked. 154 The estate of a creature
cursed of God. 131 Rejoicing to cross a man's self a sign of sincerity. 244
D
DEath, what is meant by it here. 127 What the first death is. 141 The second
death described. 133 Then the most secret sin shall be discovered. 149 Danger
of being unarmed. 191 and 218 Discovery of a true Christian: or, infallible
marks to try himself by. 236 Christians should discern betwixt the deceit of
sin, and the fruit of sin. 252
F
FAith a special means to overcome temptations. 212 How it does this. 213
Nothing hurts us so much (...) our own flesh. 220 Forsakings of sin different.
246 Flesh, what it signifies. 7 It disperseth sin into the whole man. 11 Why
natural corruption is called by the name of flesh. 8 It cleaves close to our
nature. 50 What it is to be fleshly minded. 31 It derives venom upon every
action. 51 It tempts daily. 52 It continually wars against the spirit. 55 It
is unwearied in sinful follicitations. 59 It reigns in natural men. 57 Not
so in the godly. 100 They are part flesh, and part spirit. 101 We must fight
with Satan, if we would overcome him. 186
G
GRace abides not in a carnal memory. 96 How a man may know whether grace has
got the upper hand in him. 230 Grace cannot stand with the Regiment of sin.
232 Nothing but grace can subdue sin. To be deprived of Gods favor, an
unspeakeable misery. 141 246
H
HEart narrowly to be watched. 64 An unsound one discovered. 99 The thorn in
our flesh should humble us. 70 Want of Humiliation very prejudicial to the
soul. 73 Symptoms of a good heart. 237 Hypocrites speak after the spirit,
and live after the flesh. 107 Hypocrisy, the danger of it. 170
L
LAw has a double use. 1 Little sins very dangerous. 117 Lust grows never
old. 62 Loss of Gods presence, what it is. 138 Loathsomeness of sin described.
194
M
MIsery of being under the flesh. 16 Memory corrupt through sin. 36 How
discerned. 94 No member to be trusted alone. 85 Man by nature incapable of
goodness. 27 He has nothing in himself to glory of. 80 Mortification
described, discovered. 165 and 183 How we are said to mortify sin. 174 Means
to subdue the flesh. 185 Marks of a spiritual Christian. 239 Jealousy over
our hearts, a means to keep out sin. 69 Licentious Ministers reprooved. 106
O
Original sin a hereditary disease. 48 It overspreads the whole man. 88. and
49 It is full of propagation. 63 Its manner of tempting us. 81
P
FLesh powerful to bring about its projects. 57 Policies of the flesh, to be
studied. 76 Pride, disableth to resist temptations. 192 Provision for the flesh
must be hindered. 219 Peace with the flesh dangerous. 226 Carnal Professors
reproved. 109 Discovered. 112 Our present condition, a prediction of our
future. 253 Price of sin infinite. 199
R
SInners shall be exceedingly reproched at the day of judgment. 146 Root of sin
must be killed. 171 Reason, a weak thing to expel temptations. 214
S
Soul, corrupted by sin. 23 Sin must be slain, or it will slay us. 250 Signs
of a fleshly mind. 50 Sin the greatest ill. 197 Heinous sins waste the
conscience. 116 To live in any sin, a sign we are under Satan's bondage. 120
Many begin in the spirit and end in the flesh. 109 Impenitent sinners shall
surely be damned. 122 Society with the devils, every sinners portion. 151 The
Spirit only can mortify the flesh. ^5 Sin is not driven away with an ^^gry
lock. 186 Signs of the Spirits prevailing in us. 235 A Christians strength is
in God. 216 and 193 Severity against our own sins, a blessed sign of grace.
240
T
TEmptations of the flesh undiscernable. 77 Tenderness of conscience a
special preservative against sin. 201 It is a great blessing. 202 Yet may be
turned into a curs. 203 Trial of a true Christian. 166
V
Voice of conscience to be hearkened to. 206 Universal hatred of sin,
discovers a gracious heart. 241
W
WIll since the fall corrupted. 39 A corrupt will discovered. 96 Men weak in
themselves. 176 Every sinner underualues the blood of Christ. 200
FINIS.

