TWO LETTERS OR EMBASSIES.

The one Sent by the States of Bohemia, to the Elector of Saxony: The other
from the Popes Holiness to the Emperor, concerning the Troubles of Germany.

Printet, at Amsterdam. 1620.

To his assured Friend, H C. at his Lodging near Bishops-Gate in London.
Sr. If I should send you over the Relations both in Latin, Dutch, and French,
which come to this Town concerning the variety of News about the troubles of
Europe, I should weary you with the multiplicity of Books, and my self with
the cunning of transportation: Besides, I am sure to be prevented in sending
you News, because it will be stale ere it come to your hands by my means:
Therefore I desist from either troubling you or my self in that kind, and yet
have I chanced on something, which I am sure none can help you to, but by my
means: So it is then, that there, came to my hands two several Coppies of
several Letters, one from Wittenberg, as the sum of an Embacy from the
States of Bohemia to the Duke of Saxony, concerning his Desertion of the King
in these tumultuous times: another from Mr. Fodringham in Vienna, written by
the Pope to the Emperor, concerning the pacification of the Troubles, and
admission of a Peace (if the motive might be correspondent to his Honor)
rather then adventure to be terrified with so much effusion of Blood, or
hazard the Dignity of the Empire, by letting the Wars go forward. And these
as you see I have Printed here in Amsterdam, and they are so pleasing to the
Inhabitants here, that I presume, they will be as acceptable there to all the
welwillers of the Bohemian Affairs: and so wishing your Contentment in the
ouerreading, be bold that whenever any thing comes worthy of you, you shall
not fail of it. For I am still your Friend:

WILLIAM BARLOW.

The Introduction.
RVmor having played a true woman's part through the City of Prague, concerning
the Duke of Bauaria's coming to Lintz, and the Duke of Saxonyes declaratiue
Letters to the Emperor, that the Marquess Spinola was approaching with a
formidable preparation to assist him, and he himself would not be behind in
any duty, which belonged to his observation, or the Dignity of the Empire:
thrust herself at last into the presence of the King, and the greatest
Counselors of Estate, but in such a manner, as if she durst justify her
lavish tongue, and took a pleasure in the ampliation, which yet briefly had
these maine passages:

1 First, that Saxony and Bauaria combined themselves to illustrate the glory
of the House of Austria, and by no means to leave either Emperor, or Empire
in the cruel hands of reuolters, if either they could procure their delivery,
or by any providence conserve their renown:

2 That the Marquess Spinola had more forcible reasons in his approaches, as
resolving to reduce the Subjects of Bohemia (whom he termed Rebels to the
Emperor) to their pristinate obedience, wherein if he found any retardance,
he would show them the angry faces of 20000. men, so provided out of the
storehouse of Power and Policy, that the world should record it as a
remarkable president, and they be confounded to understand, what their
wilfulnes had incurred.

3 That presently Don Lewis de Velasco, having fortified Wesell, and left a
sufficient Garrison both in it and other Towns subject to surprises upon the
advantage of his absence, should follow him, as a second in the prosecution of
greater Designs.

4 That the Catholic Bishops, and other secular Princes, would fill up this
well bound sheafe with their Arrows, and make the Hierogliphick an absolute
resemblance of indissolluble and irresistable strength.

5 That these free Cittyes of the Empire would open their Gates, yea break
down their walls, rather then this Sinons Horse should stand without, and not
offer sacrifice in the Temple of Pallas.

Thus was this Mattachene of report danced even in the Kings Castle and
Palace, and if mischief had had a trick to affright them indeed, or startle
their resolutions from standing in their firmness, it so fell out, that it
ran like a voice of Thunder, and meant to follow one another in sequence. But
it should seem, no arm of Flesh could turn the frame of Heaven about: and
there was a stronger hand ready to throw a stone to strike Nabuchadnezars Image
in pieces: For they were all so far from being daunted, or terrified with
imposturing apparitions, that they were rather exasperated, and encouraged to
Opposition: Yea it is said, that the invincible and Heroyick Queen kneeled
down with lifted hands to Heaven, desiring God to accept of her, as a
propitiary Sacrifice, rather then his Justice might not have her prosperous
course in the punishment of sins, or the now glory of her Husband suffer
diminution, or so much as a control from the Enemies of the Gospel, and
adversaries of the Kingdoms prosperity: To this (besides the admiration at her
magnanimity) both King and Nobles, Citizens and Commons, Gent. and Soldiers,
Protestants and Papists, Priests and Clergy men, yea all that had
participated with the particulars, combined themselves to shake off these drops
of threatening rumor, and be sheltred from the greater storm of a public Enemy.

Notwithstanding it was thought convenient to send an Embacy to John George
Duke of Saxony, and Prince Elector, to put him in mind of the ancient League
and amity, which ever continued between the Bohemian State and the House of
Saxony, and to know from a personal information, how he stood affected in
this War, or disposed to the assignation of his Forces, or what might be the
cause of his desertion in this so great a business, which concurred with the
propagation of the Gospel, and the Liberty of oppressed people. Whereupon
there were two out of each of the three States of Bohemia deligated to this
employment with an orderly proportion of attendants, besides a Secretary of
eminency, who came in good time to Presula, and there found the Duke.

It is said, that at the first, there was some difficulty in their
entertainment and admission, as from a King indeed: For 1. whether private
emulation against the Palsgraues advancement, whom before he held in equal
rank with himself. 2. Or sinister occasions like untoward weeds choked up
the growth of better Corn, 3. Or neernesse of Consanguinity drawing his love
to the Emperor. 4. Or a jealousy concerning the diminution of the greatness
of the Commonwealth, being thus dilacerated and divided. 5. Or a
superstitious blindness in the case of the Roman Religion wrought him out of the
possession of better thoughts, or diuerted him from that respect so meritorious
a Prince excited, I will not now dispute: only I am sure he would neither
willingly allow them the titles of such a Kings Ambassadors; nor afford them
that audience, which their message both imported and deserved, till at last his
Council being most of them well affected to the King, and his Religion, over
wrought him to condescend to the Law of Nations and Liberty of all royal
Provinces: So they had a Day of audience, and the Duke for all his mind was
entangled with an intricate business, and far reaching Proiects, yet heard
them the sooner, the sooner to be rid of them, and so the Secretary thus
began:

FREDERICK by the grace of God King of Bohemia, Duke of Bauaria, Palatine of
the Rhine: and so as follows in his Majesty's just Titles, with the three
States of the Commonwealth of Prague, and Protectors of the Incorporated
Provinces, sends greeting to the High and Mighty Prince JOHN GEORGIUS, Duke
of Saxony, Iuliers, and Cleues, Elector of the Sacred Empire, etc.

Most Mighty and Illustrious Prince,
We cannot Conjecture, except it please you to enlarge your self, wherein any
aspect of ours has been maleuolent toward you, or occasion raised it self to
such an height, that you think it meet, either with a rough hand to keep it
under, or forcible arm to bring it to humiliation.

As for the particulars of the Kingdom, and all our suffrages in this so well
contrived Election, I hope you expect not more at our hands now, then you have
received diverse times by private Letters, or daily read out of justifiable
Treatises: As for the secret of preservation, which comes from instinct of
nature, and glorious manumition of distracted subjects; I hope you make no
question of the lawfulnes, and necessity of our well begun Courses. As for the
grieuances of the Commons, and convulsions of the Provinces, wherein no man
lived secure, while the tyranny of our Governors lasted: The opening of our
graves, the disquieting of buried souls, the displacing of settled offices, the
tears of Widows, the cries of Orphans, the wringing hands of Matrons, the
rauishing of Virgins, the outrages in every City; and in a word, the
complaints of rich and poor have long before this, Ecchoed in your Ears, and
drawn commiseration from your Heart.

As for the secrets of Government, what can be more employed out of all
prescription, then the glory of God, 2. The honor of a Kingdom, 3. The good of
the People, 4. And the renown of the Prince. In all which, it is well known
our Princes have failed; As 1. dishonouring God by a manifest approbation of
things contrary to his word, 2. Disgracing the Kingdom, by violating her
Laws, abrogating her Privileges, threatening her Peace, subiecting her to
strangers, and tying her as it were to the whipping-Poasts of cruelty and
injustice, 3. Abusing the People, by affrighting them with the rages of
exorbitant actions, and suffering no man in the security and benefit of his
own possessions, 4. As defaming themselves, by the scandalous Imperiousness
of wicked Counselors, and weakness of Judgment to be ouer-awed in all their
actions, by the passionate wilfulnes of such as were enemies to God and men.

As for the cause of Religion, Remember I pray you what the Statist Steephen
King of Poland was wont to say, That he was a King of men, but not of
Consciences; A Commander of bodies, but not of souls: And what unheard of
mischiefs have the Jesuits bred, the Inquisition procured, the Pope contrived,
the Emperors continued; and all long of that terrible Vow the Jesuits caused
him to make; rather to loose the Dignity of his Title, the benefit of his
Diadem, and the comfort of his Life, then a Protestant should enjoy the
liberty of his Conscience, or a Church publiquly opened for the exercise of
true Religion.

As for the Emperor himself, if your Love were never so great, or your passion
transported beyond limitation; what government did ever admit of the Usurpation
of strangers? and how dangerously have the hearts of all Kingdoms been eaten
upon by the hungry teeth of mercinary Soldiers?

Were not the Goths and Vandales brought in as auxiliary to the Emperors of
the East, and when they learned their Discipline, and had possession of their
Arms, they learned also to turn their Pikes into the breasts of the weaker
side, and so was Europe subjected? Thus again was Brittany diverse times
Conquered, Spain overrun by the Mores, and the rest brought unto all unrest
by this course.

For what can we expect less then desolation and dissolution of Government and
Religion? If either the Emperors had continued in their former outragiousnes,
or Ferdinand who does now attempt to fill your free Cities with Garisond
Spaniards, or allow of the usurpation of such as would deride our miseries, and
triumph to see us feed upon one an others bowels, with a ravening desire of
confusion.

As for reputing us Rebels, or the diminution of the Emperors Tytles and glory
of the Austrian Famely, we have only from being slaves, made our selves
subjects of a Lawful Prince, wherein the proofs are extant from all times and
authority; and neither that, nor any thing here spoken, need illustration
from the Laws of our Country, or the credit of Authors, who have diverse times
seen a King of Hungary, a King of Bohemia, and an Emperor of Germany, in
several distinct Persons: Nor do we see why Austrias few years of
possession, should debar all other Famelies from the Empire it self,
especially damme up our encloasures, that we shall not give liberty to our
own immunities and Privileges.

And therefore is there neither such cause of repining in you, nor cruelty in
him. For alas, what must be the end of these dissentions, but the pulling of
Germans peace and prosperity in pieces, and the filling our fields with the
slaughtered Carcasses of Innocents, whose Fatherless Children will cry for
vengeance, till the heavens power it down upon the heads of the delinquents.

As for any thing else, which either you have, or can object; it has been long
since answered: and although Princes need not give an account of their
actions, yet have we published our iustifications, and written both to your
self, the Emperor, and Bauaria: So that if the war continue, God knows, we
are mere defendants, and our King is his substitute for Religion and the
Commonwealth, and would be loath to see you bring fuel to the flames of this
disturbance, or make the tyranny and ambition of another a pit to praecipitate
your self in without recovery.

Therefore (Most Illustrious Prince) seeing these things are so, and
autentically approved by all sufficiency; why should your disallowance either
manifest a willingness to infringe the amity, and Confederation with the
Bohemian State: or show a tumor of some private passion against an immaculate
Prince, and loving Neighbor, or the Union of other Princes, who have combined
themselves to withstand a public Enemy.

So that if neither the general cause of the Empires peace; the blessed work
of the Propagation of the Gospel; the private respect of our grieuances; the
ancient combination of the Provinces; the extraordinary worth of our King; nor
any other motive be the thread, to lead you out of the Laberinth of this
disquiet, yea manifest seduction to eternal confusion: Remember your own
Ancestors, and the glorious actions, whereby they have shined like fair moving
Planets in perspicuous Orbs, from whose influence could proceed nothing but
sweet presages.

O what a Story is registered of your FREDERICK Duke of Saxony, about the year
1520. for Luthers security and defense against the then malicious adversaries
of the Gospel! even when the Popes indulgences and Pardons brought remission
of sins, and plenary freedom out of Purgatory! when the Dragon watched the
woman, that her birth might be devoured! when fire and vengeance was threatened
against the Heretics, and the Emperor himself proved the Churches Champion,
and took upon him for Romes sake, to Curse and fulminate against Zealous
professors, or any innouators of the Papisticall Hierarchy.

Then did the Noble Frederick guard Luther to Worms, and in the presence of
the Emperor demanded of Erasmus, whether his reasons and arguments were
consonant to the word of Truth? and they might (as the Bereans did) try the
Doctrine by the Scriptures. Then were the Prophesies of Hierom of Prague, and
John Hus remembered and Disputed upon, as if even now they had their time of
expiration. Then was John Hilton a Monck imprisoned for discovering the abuses
of the Roman Clergy, and released again for continuing constant in the case
of the reformed Religion, both against the will of the Pope and Emperor, and
all by a Duke of Saxony. Then was Veselus, Picus Mirandula, Laurentius Valla,
Erasmus of Roterdam, and many others acceptable to your Ancesters, and they
gloried in nothing more, then the protection and patronizing of such Saints of
God. Then could that worthy Prince hearing of a storm, that struck the Angel
on the top of the Popes Palace to the ground, praesage, it was an ominous
sign of the fall of Babylon, and decay of the Popes glory; and when not long
after he heard of 31. Cardinals made at a time, yea in such a time, when a
Lightning and Thunder struck the Child out of the Virgins arms, and the Keys
out of Peter's hands, being both Images in the Church, his Zeal and devotion
burst out, that sure God was offended with them, and would reduce their
ambition, and profane Ceremonies to a better humiliation and conformity: And
this was Frederick of Saxony.

After him succeeded John Frederick, of whom the Emperor was as suspicious as
the other: and therefore as it were to serve him into the amity and league of
Spain and Austria, they contrived to marry him to Lady Katherine the Emperors
sister, and so thought themselves secure of him: Notwithstanding when he was
sent for to bear the Sword before the Emperor at Mass, he would not go,
till he was resolved of diverse Divines, whether he might or no with a safe
Conscience: I will not (says he) make a president of immitation of Naamans the
Syrians going into the Temple of Rimmon with the King, to pollute my self with
an unlawful mixture: whereupon they resolved him, that he might go, because
he was sent for, but not endure Mass, because it was so gross a sin, and
filthy an Idol.

I will not name the release of the Lantsgraue of Hesse, nor other
disceptations against the Emperor, and all wrought by the House of Saxony,
even to make sad again the hearts of elated men, who at last grew disaffected
with their own glory: So that when Charles the 5. saw their resolutions to
deny him a succession in the Empire for his Son Phillip, he took a calmer
course, and left his Brother Ferdinand to wrestle with the Germane Protestant
Princes, and went himself directly into a Monastery.

With what a fair and even course were the affairs of Rodulphus Emperor
carried, as advised by your Princes to proclayme the Confession of Auspurg,
which they had bought out with great sums of money of Maximilian and
Ferdinand his predecessors? whereby the Protestants had many sweet entercourses
to hear the word of God, and thought no pleasure of the world comparable to
the blessed society of Gods people; but to nearer times.

How careful was your Brother Christian the 2. late Elector of Saxony, of the
peace of the Empire, and in a manner iealious of the liberty of the
Protestants, least it might fall into the hands of Violence? This made him
write to Mathias King of Hungary, concerning the elevation of the House of
Austria, that sure he took a wrong course both with the Church and
Common-welth, especially our selves, whom he found startling from the
obedience of a tyrannous Government, and affrightings of unconscionable
Usurpation. For said he, what will you get by your Spanish Garrisons, and
Spanish factions in those Kingdoms, but an unwilling and enforced obedience to
your present Authority, and utter rejection to your future Posterity? what will
the tyranny of the Inquisitiue Jesuits come to, but a plain infatuating and
imposturing of your Zeal and Devotion, and the peoples manifestation of
murmurings and grudges against so fearful a work? what will the bringing in
of the Inquisition it self contriue, but in the beginning, cursses and
repinings from every man's mouth, and in the end hate and rebellion in every
man's heart?

To this effect were your Brothers Letters, and what has followed, I need not
enlarge; seeing now the clamours of War on every side echo out the same, and
our iustifications have been as a Bonarges, or the sound of many waters.

Nay, did not Duke John Ernestus not long a go send to his own University of
Iena, and then they of Iena to the University of Wittenberg, and therein to
persons of name John Mayor Superintendent, and John Gerrard, Doctors of
Divinity for the sollution of certain difficulties in (...) Designs,
especially the waging of (...) of Forces? who returned answers, that (...) to
the word of God, either to assist the Papists against the Protestants and
professors of true Religion, or according to your own State positions (which
you would now have the business of the Empire) to bring in Strangers to
tyrannize over the peace of contracted Neighbors, wherein the Law of Nations
have been always so preualent, and the Customs of Germany so powerful, that
even opposite Princes have laid aside for the time all ill will and unkindness,
to unite their Forces against a common Enemy, or propulse unusual innovation.
This act was played by the Triumuiri at Jerusalem against the Romans, by the
dissentious Brittons against Caesar, by your own Provinces against the Goths
and Vandalls, till they were quite driven into Italy and Spain.

And what unkind hand has now thrown filthiness or dirt into the pure stream
of your former resolutions? or what fearful incantation has unbound you from
the mast of constancy, to hearken to the Sirens song of ambitious deceivers,
who are resolved to shed the blood of Innocents, and under the color of
revenging the wrongs, wherein we are supposed delinquents, and foraging the
Palatinate with pretense to divert the War thither, as by Spinola's
formidable approaches may appear, lie in wait for nothing, but the general
diminution of Germans happiness, and particular pollution of Gods altar with
the trumperies of men's inventions?

Oh hearken not to su(...): nor give way to a contamination, (...) wiped off:
For though you could be (...) to forget Us, yet remember your self: Though
you could give way to the desertion of Bohemians amity, yet there is no
forsaking of mercy, nor the love of God and heaven: Though you could rejoice in
the sincking and beating down of an enemy, yet be not an enemy to your own
soul, nor hazard the loss of eternal reward: For it is now Gods cause, and
the people will live and dye in the defense of their Religion: Oh that the
Emperor himself would hearken to the voice, that told Saul, there was no
kicking against the prick! and if a Lightning from Heaven struck him from his
horse and made him blind, what shall the armies of Gods Angels do, when he
means to deliver his people? Be not therefore transported to fight against
God, or with the old Giants to begin a new war, and throw the mountains
against Heaven. For I am fully persuaded, that you think, how Antechrist is
not only discovered, but know, he shall be punished, yea laid open in this
world to the hissing of all the passengers; and then woe to the Princes of the
earth, that have worshipped the Beast, and drunk of the Cup of the Strumpet,
that rides upon the Beast.

But leaving Religion, which yet will not be left out of Gods account, What
stumbling block of offense has been further laid, or who has cast these
rubs in your smooth walk to amity and former combination?

Is it the person of our King you malign? Oh say not so: For if ever Titus was
called Deliciae generis humani, He may well be proclaimed the Prince of
happiness and Peace, as a man composed by Nature, ordained of God, selected by
Prophecy, confirmed by Miracle, and established by all our suffrages, as if
the Dignity belonged unto him, as a Prince, and other blessings, as a happy man.

Is it our reuoltings you disalow of, as if either the rejection of Ferdinand
were not lawful, or ratification of this our choice suspencible? Why, we have
answered it to the whole world, that when Mathias had his own ends in the
adoption and inauguration of this man to the Kingdom of Bohemia, for which he
left him a pledge of his love the Town of Budwis: It was absolutely contrary
to his own Oath, and our immunities and Privileges. For neither did the
incorporated Provinces know of it, nor we our selves condiscended to the
agreement: but only certain Jesuits the firebrands of Hell, ran up and down
to set all in combustion, and with Meleagers mother took the torch of his Life
in a rage, and held it downward, till the flame was extinguished, and other
traitors of our own, molded to another Impression by the warming hands of
Spanish Papists, and all to let out the blood of their Mother, I mean their
Country and Commonwealth, to see her languish and perish before their faces
for private respects, or some praedestinated vengeance to fall upon their own
heads.

Is it the observation of the Emperor himself, or respect to his Family?
wherein has he deserved better of reputation, then your self, or other
Princes of Germany? or what has been done these 100. years for the good of
Christendom? or why shall this glowing meteor or exhalation darken the light
of truer stars, and more radiant Planets? Has he not abused the trust
committed unto him, by betraying all your Princely liberties into the hands of
Strangers, and setting up the Spaniards Monarchy in the Western world to the
terrifying of all Christian Princes? For what Nation have they not been
tampering withal, even to the placing of Soldiers and garrisons amongst them. I
hope Italy has known them, and the Islands of those Seas. Ireland has had
them, and felt some endurances for them. France bin tormented by them; the
Grisons have still their forte Fuentes: The passages of some Mountains are
kept by them. Sauoy is full of them. Hungary is not yet freed of them. Austria
swarms with them: our selves are but newly rid of them, some Imperial
towns, as Wesell and others possessed by them, and even at this instant is he
calling in of greater troops amongst you.

Is it the care of the Empire you shoot at? how can that be? when by these
Wars all Government must be turmoyled, and that native beauty of our peace
and prosperity made adulterate by Iesabels paintings and the thick laid
colors of wicked policy, when the slaughtered Armies of Christians shall
pollute your fields and Cities, and fill your swollen eyes with tears for the
loss of Parents, Husbands, Children, friends, etc.

Is it the Popes Curse you are afraid of? Why that's impossible, considering
that he now resembles a fire in a painted cloth, which neither yields
warmth nor luster. For his Fulminations are now made ridiculous, and his
Cursings prove like Balaams corruption, who for all the King of Moabs promises,
sang a Parable of blessings to Ifraell: nay you may be assured, that the time
of his desolation is coming faster on then the wind, and the Provinces are
falling away like untempered Mortar from a wall.

Is it Spaines mightines you stand in awe of? Be not amated! He has many
Territories indeed; but may thank the endeauours of other Princes, as also the
slacknes of some, who gave way to his own seruitors, when they had first
offered the West Indyes to themselves: He is rich indeed, but has much to do
with his money, and greater charges to defray, then present revenues can
supply! He is strong indeed, but is beholding to the Peace of other Kingdoms,
and the honesty of such Nations, as make a conscience in infringing of an Oath.

Is it the Marquess Spinola's Army which terrifies you? I answer briefly with
Elisha to his servant, there are more with us then with them: and it is but the
opening of eyes to see Chariots and the horsemen of Heaven on the mountain
tops: But I could say thus much further, that you have the more cause to
adhaere to the Princes of the Union, and propulse a common enemy, of whom I
will only apply that, which Count Meloun assured the English in the later time
of King John, that if Lewis of France had prevailed, he was resolved to
destroy all such first, as proved Traitors to their Country, and led him by
the Arm to trample on the bruised body of England: So say we even to the
Catholic Bishops themselves, whether War or Peace, they will repent this
hard bargain with disturbance, and when they see their exaltation depressed,
or liberty usurped, cry out upon the first cause of their troubles, and name
the Jesuits, as so many Incendiaries of a Commonwealth.

For had they not been better to have continued in their Elective powers for
the choice of their Emperors, and let the Confession of Auspurg alone to the
freedom of men's Consciences, and the quieting of free Cities? Then now to be
assured, that the Protestants will never be reclaymed, nor taught other lesson
then to Fight for their Religion, and the glory of the Gospel; yea to hazard
their own Lives and Dignities: So that whether we, or strangers prevail, it
lies in the will and choice of the Victors, to deal with the vanquished at
their pleasures.

Is there any thing else! you make a scruple of? Oh that there were nothing
else, then might these Objections be easily answered, and a judicious man
soon satisfied: Yet if you conceal the same, it must prove like the
Ointments shut up in boxes, which seldom are smelt to the refreshing of the
senses, till they be uncovered or powered out: Oh do not therefore Exaestuate
your griefs by suppression, but let the wounds be opened, and gently searched,
least they grow vlcerous, ranckle and prove incurable! And if any imputation
lie upon us, we will be bold to say (saving the Dignity of our King) we will
easily descend to acknowledgement, and you shall quickly find the benefit of
satisfaction.

Therefore for Gods sake, for Religions sake, for your own sake, for your
Ancestors sake, for your Countries sake, let there be a better reposednes, and
recollection of those contracts of amity, which ever were between your House
and Bohemia, yea with faster bindings, and more reciprocal observation, then
with any other Provincial Prince. Oh let the Liberty of the Germans, and the
glory of their Cities be exposed unto you; which must otherwise feel a kind
of torture by the racking hands of compulsion and hostility! Oh let the beauty
of Concord (if it be possible) shine, that begins to hide her head under the
thickning clouds of trouble, and mischiefs! I spare instances of modern
times, I spare examples of old times, I spare precepts of all times, I spare
your own relations from the rending a sunder, by disagreement; nay I spare to
put you in mind of the present necessity, concerning the good of all
Christendom.

For although he that holds the Winds in his hands, has also held the
rages of the Turk from those formidable extentions of ambition and tyranny,
which have formerly been displayed in the Countries of Asia, and Greece; in
the fields of Hungary; before the walls of Vienna; at the siedge of Malta;
and many other obsessions: Yet you hear, how he has of late visited Italy;
brought 80. Galleys into the gulf of Venice, landed 2000. Ianisaries, sacked
the Town of Manfredonio in Brutia, and carried away the inhabitants; so that
while poor Christians look upon one another, with longing hearts for the
pacification of these affrightings, he ouerlookes Us all with polliticke eyes
to pry into our weakness, and take advantage of our dissentions. Yea, for all
his League with Bethelem Gabor Prince of Transiluania, and praefixed day to
Crown him King of Hungary, yet without controversy does he make use of the
troubles of Germany, and is not to be trusted in his best reconciliation.

I could name and set down the very manner of gratefying our King, with
animating him in his best prosecutions, as if he had been distasted with the
Emperors vainglorious insulting over us; but they be things beyond our
C^mmission, and so impertinent to our purpose in hand?

For we only come to move your Princelines to the renouation of former
Leagues, and combination of a perpetual Amity, or manifestation of some cause
for this your desertion in the time of such expectation. Nay, we are ready to
attend you, though you exemplify no reason at all, but a glorious Spirit to
manifest your Greatness, or wilfulnes to prepare your liberty to support whom
you please? For if it be so, there may be some hope of the compassion which
will follow, when necessity shall whisper preservation in your ears, and draw
commiseration from your heart to prevent the slaughters of so many Christians,
and peradventure the captivity of your freest Cities: Whereas now there is not
so much as a thought of providence, nor a word of prevention, nor any
Positions of State, among whom this is Autenticall, that weak beginnings, and
the worst sort of men may be instruments to set mischief on work, but
troubles are not pacified without judgment, and men of approved wisdom.

Therefore once again (most Illustrious Prince) we beseech you, let us return
to our King, as the explorators of Canaan did to the Israelites: For although
ten of them did talk of Enakims and Giants of iron gates and high walls; of
strong Cities and formidable passages; yet did Caleb and Joshua assure them of a
plentiful Country and Vberant Vineyards, of sweet increases and many
blessings; of well erected Cities and rich Terretories; of pleasant Fields and
excellent Fruits: of all which they came to a division, and a the fulness of
time glorified God for their exaltation.

Now the same God work upon your heart to admit of some lenatiue impression,
and send us home with a happy message, that the public good of Christendom
has ouer-wrought you, not only to wish well to Zion, or peace to Jerusalem,
but to endeavor a pacification of these miseries, and some Noble prosecution,
whereby the Emperor may be cooled in the heat of his reuenges.

To his approved Friend Mr. William Barlow, now dwelling in Amsterdam. GOod Sr.
according to the reciprocal contract between us of Writing to one another,
concerning such things as may pleasure either, I thought good once again to
acquaint you with something worthy of your acceptance, and my report, which is
the Copy of a Letter written from the Pope to the Emperor, concerning the
pacification of the troubles of Europe: For although the counterchangeable
oppositions of these great Princes, have made Report flow like a sea with the
Accidents of the times, as in all Countries and Languages is apparent: yet for
any thing we either hear or see in Vienna, neither are the Pope, Emperor,
nor angry Jesuits, so confident of success, but if they could persuade their
polliticke Honors, as well as their affrighted Souls, they would be glad to
hide their eyes from effusion of Blood, and keep their hearts within the bounds
of some Charity and human affection, as by this Letter may appear, which I
wish with all my heart were published. For I am resolved the true hearted
Christian will make use of it to Gods glory, and his own comfort: And so I
refer it and my self to your kind admission of my indissolluble Love, which
sends you greeting from Vienna, this 26th. of October: and from your assured
Friend,

THO: FRODRINGHAM.

Pope Paulus Quintus sends greeting to the Emperor FERDINAND, and King of
the Romans:
Sacred and Imperial Son;
I Remember a speech of Tacitus, that it was a sign of Treason, or traiterous
disposition, when a General meant only to write to his Enemy, when with like
facillity he might have repulsed him by force of Arms: so may you object
against me, that you wonder at a Letter, when you expected both men and money:
But then you must wonder at the alteration of times too, and peradventure the
necessity of our Fortune: For it fares not now with us, as when the Empire it
self came as it were from our donation, and the Diadems of Princes were the
Vtensels of our Household, as when Charles the Great dissipated the cloud of
Vengeance, with the Goths and Lombards, thickened against the shining sun of
our Prelacie, as when the Provinces and Kingdoms of Europe were afraid of our
Curse, and Excommunication of our Church: as when Religion was locked up in our
Conclaue, and not opened without Peter's Keys, as when a Son for our sakes
would chastise the rebellion of a Father, and one Nation scourge another at the
intercession of a Legate: The examples are so plentiful, that even Heretics,
have gotten them in their mouths to spit in our faces: It fares not with us,
as when true devotion tied the Consciences of men to the observation of our
pleasure, and no vpstart Familist durst broach a strange Doctrine to our
prejudice: When Faith was predominant in our hearts, and honest simplicity
lived out our lives and actions, believing only what the Church did teach, and
practicing nothing but with modesty and obedience: then were the Halcion days
of our glory, and how ever Heretics have characterd them with ignorance and
superstition, yet questionles as in Martial discipline Soldiers must not be
acquainted with every secret, but simply yield obedience to their Commanders:
so in the matters of the Church, men were never at so much peace of Conscience,
as when they knew not how to trouble their souls beyond their understandings:
In a word, it fares not with us, as when the Unity of Church and
Commonwealths resembled a sheaue of Arrows, strongly bound together, which
was that way indissolluble, but divided a sunder they were easily snapped in
pieces one by one; then were the Kingdoms of Europe of one unanimity, and if
any vpstart Heretics brake out, or furious Scismatickes approached to the
holy Altar with violence, they were quickly enforced back, and taught a lesson
of obedience, either by general Councels, whereat many times 400. Bishops were
gathered together, or the power of an Army, which came at our beck from all
the quarters of Christendom.

But now, and in your own particular Most dear Son, 1. The times are
altered, 2. Religion is confounded, 3. And the Provinces are divided.

1 First concerning the times, you see, that Princes are so iealious one of
another Greatness, that neither law of Marriage or Conscience can detain them
within the limits of humanity, especially Charity, as rejoicing in the good
one of another, but they will confederate even with those, they hate, to cast
blocks and hindrances in the way of one another, if there be but a suspicion,
that he runs on too fast to Greatness: This began (for our modern times) in
the time of Charles the Fifth, with whom England and many other Provinces
joined against the French: but no sooner was the King taken Prisoner at Pauy,
but they fell back again to a commiseration of his affliction, and began to
assist him in a new recovery. This has continued against your House of
Austria, and my Son of Spain: For ever since Burgundy and ye have been
United, whereby Charles left the Empire to his younger Brother, you see the
world has cried out, that Spain would be the Monarch of the West, and the
Jesuits by his assistance usurp the dignity of the Church, and by a new
superintendency ouertop the Authority of the Papacy. This has made several
Kings oppose themselves against Spain, and now several Provinces fall from
your obedience, as if the Angels prophecy against Ismael, were verified; That
his hand should be against every man, and every man's hand against him. Yea this
will end against the Low Countries themselves, who fill the Seas with
formidable Nauies, and have such strong Cities, Ramparts, and Armies, that
already they begin to be feared, and already fall under the hand of watching
and ouerlooking. Believe it then, that in this point alone of suspicion of your
Greatness, not naming other collateral causes of hate, Cruelty, oppression,
defending our Supremacy, enriching your self and such like, there will ever
remain a trick of policy, if not to trip up your heels for running at all,
yet to pull you back as it were by the sleeue from making too much have, so
that I see no remedy, but that you must be contented to yield to the time, and
rather to keep something, then loose all: For howeuer the greatness of your
Spirit may command obedience, and the goodness of the cause plead possession;
yet necessity is a predominant mischief, and they are fools that will perish
in an obstinacy, repugnant to Fortune: Remember that Hanniball had possession
of Italy 17. years, and might have tryumphed in Rome, if he had taken his
time: but when Scipio diuerted the War, Carthage was besieged, and Carthage
knew not, how to be relieved, till Hanniball was recalled: so the great
Captain was disapointed in his Proiects, and compelled to yield to the Roman
glory. I speak not by way of Prophecy but precept, that in all extremities
the law of preservation comes from instinct of Nature, and to prevent a greater
mischief, men must, and may endure some inconvenience; and so much for the
time.

2 Concerning Religion, which yet is not the Emperors plea, nor the Empires
cause, you see the alteration: many good Mothers bring forth bad Daughters,
Truth begets hatred, Familiarity contempt, Charity idleness, and Knowledge
presumption, with such like. For ever since the common people have been
licenced to read the Scriptures, and make their own interpretations, they
have startled from the obedience of the Church, and cried out upon liberty, as
though their Consciences like untamed Heyfers were let loose, and they tied
unto no rules and Laws but of their own devising: this has made so many
mechanicke men presumptuous, and silenced women audacious; that a poor
ignorant Cobbler dare compare with a Father of the Church, and a tatling woman
instead of being instructed by her Husband, take upon her to rule both husband
and family: This has set on work certain strange spirits to rail upon order
and conformity, even in the Churches of Heretics themselves, that they have
denied them to be Churches, but the unswept rooms of Antechrist, because of
some enormities, and imperfections in men and Government, which are, were, and
shall be in this militant Church, till the coming of Christ to Judgment. This
has divided the Countries of Europe, and taught hipocrites and foolish
Libertines a glorious lesson of defending the Gospel of CHRIST and his
Saints, whereby they have vaine-gloriously taken up Arms against the Church,
and their Prnces; so that if success have not smoothly looked upon them, but
Justice submitted them to the punishment of Impiety, they have confounded
Treason and Martyrdom together, and taught their blasphemous tongues to cry
out, Sanguis Martirium semen Ecclesiae, as though every rebel and raging
pesant, punished for transgression, must be therefore Charactered a Saint of
God; so that this Gangren is spreading over the whole body, and for any thing I
see remediles, unless we could cut off that poisoned joint where it began.
Again, if their commotions and Convulsions of the Empire it self have thriued
with advantages of victory, and prevailing; then have they dared to publish the
right of their Cause, and exclaim against Rome for Babylon, against our
Holiness for the man of Sin, against our Church for Antechristian, against our
Sons the Catholic Princes for the Kings that have drunk of the Cup of
abomination, and against your Imperial Majesty, as the Beast with 10. horns
spoken of in the aenigmaticall Prophecy of St. John: nay these things are so
imprinted in the minds of most men and Nations, that every man is almost so
far from retraction, or a seeming sorrow of doing amiss, that (so they may
have the name of Religion in their mouths) they are ready to take up Arms
against their native Lords, and think it a glory to color their hipocriticall
disobedience, with maintaining the cause of the Gospel, and taking part (as a
new devise of Rebellion) with the Princes of the Union: And so much for
Religion.

3 Concerning the Provinces: I cannot now compare them better, then to a Wall
set up with untempered mortar, ready to fall a sunder for lack of cementing.
For alas such is the impetuosity of rumor at this hour against you, that it is
more fearful and terrible, then the wind that shook the four corners of
Jobs houses, and threw them down on the heads of his Children. To begin with
the North, if we name Saxony and his neighbor Bishops to assist you: they
counterprize Denmark, Sweden, Brandenburg, Brunswick, and many of that side:
If we talk of Poland, they tell you, that all that way, there is Lusatia,
Silesia, Morauia, as a hedge between Bohemia and it; nay they draw a longer
shaft, and a stronger bow of Hungary, Transiluania, and the Turks confederacy
and combination: If we mention your Uncle the Archduke, or more familiarly
the Marquess Spinola his Liefetenant, they stop the gap with the Truce, with
the Peace with England, or else with the Armies of the States, the affinity of
the Prince of Orange, and the indissoluble love of a King to his Daughter, King
James.
which I only fear is unanswerable, and must needs say impossible to be
resisted, if he either remember what a Son in Law he has, or what Subjects
proportionable to his Greatness, that without imposition (if he give them
leave) long to be tampering with the Indyes themselves: If we expect Collen,
and the Bishops belonging to our obedience, they present us the Lantsgraue of
Hesse, Franconia, and the Palatinate it self: If we rely upon Bauaria, they
neighbor him with Wittenberg, and other Protestant Princes: If we resolve
upon Austria, they cry alas what is that to Bohemia, and the divided Countries
of your inheritance? If we boast of money, they answer directly, there is no
want in their Army, but your Soldiers repine for lack of pay: If we whisper of
France, they talk aloude, there is enough to do to answer their own
proportions. For Queen, King, and Princes gaze upon one another in the behalf
of Favorites, factions, and people: If we rejoice for Spain, they depresse
the insulting, with alas, what can Spain do? Spain is too remote, Spain can
spare no men: Spain has many Garrisons to tend, as so many Nurse Children to
pay for: Spain has many yrons in the fire, but as fast as one heates, another
cooles: Spain is tired with the multiplicity of business, and must be more then
tired, if he could come over the Alps: Spain is in hazard of love, and good
opinion in the world, as rather enuyed, then feared, and maligned then
observed: In a word, Spain has many millions and great Treasure: but I may
well compare him to a glorious Steward of a House, who must defray the charge
of a 1000.l. a year expenses, but the Lord will but allow his servant 800.
toward it. If we reckon up our own Provinces, I cannot liken them better, then
to Argos his eyes, whereof the one half wakes, while the other sleeps. For
Sauoy neither dares trust Spain, nor truly love us: must keep his Frontiers,
and watch Geneua, looks upon the Marquisate of Salusse with soar eyes, and
upon Province with a hungry heart; dares not speak aloude against France,
though he whisper for some indignities received: but either to succor you, or
our selves, he is both unwilling and unprovided. Mantua and Modena run the
same course, but with slower pace, and indeed because no body regards them, as
able to do either hurt or good, they are made the wiser to look to
themselves, and not to meddle with other folks business. Millaine is like a
bird in a golden Cage, that may sing to answer proportion with nature, but if
the casement be open, she will take the benefit of her liberty: so that
howeuer they seem Religious, yet has Spain much ado to ouer-watch them.
Genoa is not worth the naming for your business, for if it were as rich again,
it has much a do to pay the Merchants debts. Venice is a fearful and
polliticke State, makes use of our Religion, but loves her own Greatness so
well, that she is both jealious of Spain, and loathsome to Us: for we fear
her revolt daily, and because she is got into the number of the Princes of the
Union, will not number a man, nor a piece of Gold for your relief. Florence
and Leuca, will lend you what money they can, but alas they have neither men
nor Gallyes, and if they had, the Venetian is so dogged he will not let them
pass into the Gulf. Naples and Sicilia, could spare you men, though they want
money, and many of their Nobles are willing to assist you, but to come through
the Grison passages it is a long and terrible journey, and to pass into
Histria, pulls the Venetian Dust into their eyes. The Swisse are very
indifferent, and for money will serve either party, but considering their
combination, and confederacy with the Protestants, I do not see, how they are
to be trusted, or relied upon. In a word we our selves are yours, and ye
shall have our Men, if we knew which way; our Money as it comes every way; our
Prayers as true devotion inciteth; our Curses against your enemies, as their
Contentions increases; our Priests amongst your Subjects, as their affection
decays; our Pardons for your sins, as holy Church instituteth; and our
Benediction for your business, as your affairs concurreth: Only be patient
and overcome your disasters with wisdom. For to that end were Virtues framed,
or else why do we name Fortitude, Magnanimity, Patience, Temperance, and such
like Concomitants of glory and blessedness.

Seeing then your case so stands, and that Bohemia has put a trick of revolt
upon you. First grounding upon some fundamental positions of an Elective
Province, making the world believe they have a purpose to reduce it to her
pristinate Government.

Secondly relying upon Hungarias examples, whose inconstancy has yet as it
were dilacerated her Kingdom, and showed the Turk a way to prey upon her
prosperity, as you shall read of Prometheus on Mount Caucasus, on whose entrals
a Vulture continually gnaweth, so that he is ever dying, and ever living.

Thirdly, emboldened by Bethelem Gabor Prince of Transiluania, with whom you
see the Turk has contracted a Truce and covenant of Peace, that he might the
better make War against any disturbers of his friends and confederates: For
when at first the Bohemians cast themselves into his embraces, he would not
close his arms, but gave them leave to return to faster holdings, and in
amanner nominated the Palatinate for their Prince.

Fourthly pretending some grieuances from your self, and Mathias, not only
that you took a wrong course with their obedience, playing the unskillful
Surgeon with them, to fear, cut, and Cauterize their wounds, which might have
been fairly healed with lenatiue Cataplasmes, but also that you ouer-stretched
your own stringes to a higher tune then the instrument would bear, and so
presuming to command all, you came at last to enjoy nothing, according to our
Italian proverb, Chitutto a braccia nessuno strenge.

Last of all, proiecting the youth, bravery, and alliance of this man
(especially that the King of great Britain, a nominated Prince in all
Prophecy, and conference for the enemy to Papistrie) would never stand still,
and look upon those rude hands, which should pull down the frame of so goodly
a building, they came at last to this maine point of reiection of you; which
must needs be their fault, and electing him, which cannot choose but be his
fortune: so that in a word considering what I have said, Believe it, they that
dared once to conceit the starting aside from your authority, were not so
barren of understanding, but to consider what might happen, either war or
peace, and so have prepared both to shut you out of their walks of their love
and submission, and to keep you off as far as they can by a steely arm and
forcible detention, whereat you cannot be dismayed, for this maine reason, that
they which will confess themselves adversaries to God, care not to profess
themselves enemies to men.

Now in this point alone all our hopes are disappointed: For first, they have
traced our supremacy after Luthers own steps, and placed the stout Heretics:
that though with Hercules in his Cradle they did not strangle the Serpents, yet
with Hercules in the Tragedy, that killed his own children, they have like
refractary delinquents set upon their father and their mother. Me their father
the supreme Bishop, and the Church their mother, the blessed spouse of Christ.
2. Secondly, they have denied our indulgences, and scorned our Pardons, not
caring for their sick souls, but willing to dye in desperation, as a frantic
man in a Fever, that strikes his Phisician, and casts the Potion on the
ground. 3. Thirdly, they have pulled down our Images, and abrogated that
constitution of the Church, as if they meant to be Anathemataes, and enemies to
Religion, by taking away all the means of devotion. 4. Fourthly, they have
banished the Jesuits. It may be they are suspected amongst our own Priests,
and have imputation rather of policy, then piety: but what is that to the
cure of souls? and the estate of Lay men? I pray God I may not say by them, as
Demosthenes tale is between the Sheep and the Wolves, who were offended at
the Sheep entertaining great dogs amongst them, whereby they lived secured
from their ruin: but when they had betrayed them to their dimission, then did
these cruel Wolves, more cruel by the advantage of exasperation, return to
their former prey and violence. Last of all, they have bewitched the foster
spirited men with manswetude and good usage, whereby the Priests themselves are
grown to commend their government, and the Catholics in general to show
their obedience: so that they, which in former times repined to pay our
Officers the tribute of the Church, disburse both money and Arms to the
sustentation of our enemies: and whereas we had ever much ado to work upon
their souls, these Bohemians (though of a contrary Religion) have brought both
souls and bodies to their beck, and authority.

Thus (Dear son) for any thing I see, the matter is remediless, and to
complain against God, men, fortune, treasons, and such like, will rather
discover a distemperature of passion, then magnanimity of spirit: nay, though
there were hope of reformation. Therefore be advised by me, though patience in
some things be a poor virtue, and only fit to draw on heavier burdens: yet
in other business, and most occasions it reduces the mind to consideration,
and setleth the judgment for the prevention of greater mischief. It brings
the senses to order, and keeps both soul and body in temperature: as for
imputation of cowardice, and baseness, when high and glorious designs propose
themselves to prosecution, remember the story of Fabius, and Minutius, against
Hanniball. The Senate indeed gave ear to the aspersions of his retraction and
delay, as if either he durst not fight, or knew not how to proceed, and so
divided the Generalship between them, but that divided the success of the
business: for Minutius failing in the heat of his forwardness, was glad to
retire under the shadow of Fabius his moderation: For as sometimes the
doltishnesse of an adversary does animate weak troops to give the onset: so
at all times the wisdom, and discipline of an enemy, does keep in awe even
equal forces for aduenturing too far, and being too forward.

This is your case, and my fear: your case, For what can you now get by this
war, considering the mightiness of your foe, and the division of your
people; but in the prevailing an eternal hate against your house and family?
and in the failing, such contumely and disgrace, that how ever you are sure of
me and my Bishops, yet the name of Emperor shall be but a titular dignity, and
the obumbration of your glory bring forward at last oblivion of your
greatness; nay, peradventure the loss of that Character of Emperor it self:
For it fares with the fortune of unfortunate Princes, as with ruinous walls;
when a man perceiues their decay and weakness, every one runs aside for
mistrust of falling upon them: or else they are compared to a man's tumbling
down a pair of stairs, who if he once loose his first footing, commonly
never stays himself, till he come to the bottom. Again say, your adversary
be subject to a defeat, as his friends increase, his forces will be renewed, and
then he returns with greater violence, as in those days the Soldiers were
wont to do with their machinations, who pulled back their rams and engines,
of purpose to run forward with the greater fury, and more impetuosity. But if
you (which God forbid) should be subject to the inconstancy of Fortune, or if
you will (as many good men have been) to the chastisement of divine
providence, and suffer dissolution of your Army: how will you renew the same,
considering the remoteness of your friends, the weakness of confederates, the
convulsion of your people, the infection of your Subjects with Lutheranisme,
the repining of Stiria, Curniola, and Carinthia: the murmuring of the Swisse
and Grisons; and in a word, the shaking of the whole frame of your government,
as you see a high and heavy topped tree loosened in the root, and standing on
vnfirme ground wavering, and ready to fall, and so much for your self.

Concerning my fear: say that success (for it is a wisdom to presuppose the
worst) should bring them forward into the walk of preuayling, would they not
run think you without interception? Nay could the Alps Barricado the way,
or the Venetian Gulf deny them transportation, the high Hills and white
Cliffes of Ancona would be a Sea mark to bring them directly to Rome, and the
Appenine is but a poor mountain in respect of those they have passed: But you
will say, our Friends about the Mediterranian Sea, will come in apace to
prevent this mischief, and a 1000. Ships and Galleys will keep the Ostia of
Tiber, after they have landed our Friends in our behalf; I think and hope so
too; yet I would be loath to put it to such an adventure. For the straights of
Gibralter are wider, then the Gates of the City that Sampson carried on his
shoulders, and they that cannot be detained from going to the Indyes, will not
be denied to come into the Leuant: Our enemies have more Shipping then our
selves, and our Friends are far fewer then our Opposites, they that know the
way for traficke, and commutation of Merchandise, will know the way to spoil
and getting of riches so easily: Again, our adversaries are constant, sure and
exasperated with zeal and fury against Us: They march like John the Son of
Nimshi, and cry aloude to cast Iesabell out of the window: our Friends are
wavering, unconstant, and fearful of alteration, so that to rely upon them
is but to trust Egiptian reeds, or a broken staff: In a word; they have
Prophesies and calculations in their mouths, wishes of revenge, and eternal
hate in their hearts, fury and bloody executions in their actions, and all
against Rome.

Some talk of the Scriptures, and compare the vomiting of the Priests at their
tables spoken of in the Prophets to the feasts of Cardinals, and banquettings
in our Court: some tell a tale of Bell and the Dragon, and when they come to
the devouring of so much meat, they say, that Daniel sifted Ashes in the
place, and discouerd the footsteps of the Priests, their Wives and their
Children, and all against Rome: some conjecture of Paul's Epistles to Timothy
and Titus, concerning the Doctrine of Devils, the man of sin, Antechrist and
Idolatry: some descant of the Apocalips, and dare name Iesabell, Babylon, Rome
in Italy, the Whore upon the Beast; the Cup of Abomination, and all against
Rome: some repeat the Prophesies of the Sybels, the Praedictions of Moncks and
Friars, the praedil;sages of Nuns and Saints, the foretelling of Martyrs,
and the persecuted under Tyrants, and all against Rome: Which though it end
with blasphemous inuectiues, yet has made such impressions in the hearts of
Heretics, that as they have set their black mouths on work with contagious
railing, so they long to set their soul hands on work, with our uncharitable
destruction, and is not this a just cause of our fear?

Therefore (Dear Son) for Gods sake, for my sake, for the Churches sake, for
your own sake, for our Friends sake, and in a word, for the general cause
sake both of Peter's Chair, and Caesar's Throne, Be contented to mingle a little
water with your Wine, and cool the heat of your passion with some sweeter
compounds, then rage and revenge: Hearken to a Treatise of pacification, though
it sound not such a Diapason of music, as will answer proportion, and
satisfy the cares of your Maiesticke greatness, Admit of a Peace in this case
of extremity, and remember how Abimelech though a Heathen idolater, when he
saw Abraham so prosper in his enterprises, descended to contracts of amity, and
came so low, as to allow him for a Prince amongst them.

As for the Aspersions of disparagement, and extenuating the worthiness of so
great a Monarch, let all be wiped away with the hand of Charity, and the
avoiding effusion of Christian blood: blot out the exaggeration of your enemies
mischief against you, or the conceit of their traiterous reuolts amongst
themselves: Be wise in your own harms, and for your own good: Let Spain
and your kindreds example induce you to immitation: they have pollitickly kept
their distances, and for advantage made Truce with their own rebels, I mean
the Low Countries, and contracted Peace with them, whom not long ago they
thought to swallow up: I mean England it self, which now to shoot against,
will return their Arrows in their own bosoms.

If this be harsh and unpleasant, as curbing the Heroycknes of your Spirit by
descending so low, as making the first proffer, we will go another way to
work, and rather then fail of this Blessing of peace, put on Esaus hairy
neck, and rough hands, and bring to Isaac his Venison, though the voice be
Jacobs: I will send a Legate: Spain an Ambassador: France an Intercessor:
England a Mediator, yea it shall be so contrived, that all the States of
Christend^me shall make you believe at least, they wish you prosperity, and
their own good, and how ever the Children of Edom will cry down with it,
down with it, yet shall the Natives of Judea speak peace to Zion, and wish
Joy to the gates of Jerusalem. You shall read amongst the Prophets in a
certain Vision, that there was a great Thunder and noise, but the Lord was not
in it; a great Lightning and earthquake, but the Lord was not in it; a great
wind and shaking of the Trees, but the Lord was not in it: A soft and gentle
murmuring of the Leaves, and the Lord was in that; so when you hear of Wars,
of the marching of Soldiers, of the raising of Armies, of the thundering of
Canons, of the sound of Trumpets, of the demolution of Cities, rauishment of
women, and the murdering of men, with thousand of other outrages unnamed:
Believe it the Lord is not in, or among them; but when they mention Peace,
quietness, love, charity, remitting of injuries, pacification of troubles, and
such like, the Lord is and will be there. As for the swelling tumor of
Greatness, loss of renown, disgraces, giving way to rebellion, diminution of
honor and such like, It resembles but the Imposturing incantation of Satan to
Eua, that made her taste of the forbidden Fruit, to the utter subversion of all
Mankind; so that I will say no more, but if God do come with this murmuring
sweetness of Peace unto you, hearken to his voice, that tuneth such pleasant
notes to your souls and Consciences. But if Satan wish you to be
understanding men, and like God himself to know good and evil, hearken not
unto him; your first Mother was deceived, and your last ruin is a contriuing.

FINIS.

