NERO CAESAR or Monarchy depraved. An Historical work. Dedicated with leave, To
the Duke of BVCKiNGhAM, lord Admiral. A.D. MDCXXiii.


NERO CAESAR, OR MONARCHY DEPRAVED. AN HISTORICAL WORK.

Dedicated, with leave, to the DVKE of BVCKINGHAM, LORD ADMIRAL.

By the Translator of LUCIUS FLORVS.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Thomas Walkley, at Britains Bursse. 1624.

SENECA AD NERONEM. Apud CORNELIVM TACITVM, Annal. XIV. Ego quid aliud
MVNIFICENTIae adhibere potui, quam STVDIA, vt sic dixerim, in VMBRA educata? e
quibus CLARITVDO veuit -- TO MY LORD, THE DVKE OF BVCKINGHAM, LORD ADMIRAL.
Most noble, my gracious Lord,
THe Office of an Historian is not more worthy then it is hard. But the
hardness, as it rises from the greater necessity of truth, then of eloquence,
is recompensed with an advantage above all other sorts of humane learning. For
each of those is but for certain natures; whereas History is a common study for
all. The nobility of the gift (for it is a gift from heaven, and a great one)
is manifest by the excellencies of persons who have labored therein: Saints,
Emperors, Kings, Gown-men, Swordmen; and whatsoever else is best, or for the
best. The difficulties grow out of the abstruse condition of causes, counsels,
facts, and their circumstances. And howsoever lights may fail, yet truth is
the supreme aim of every right narrationer. In this historical work of NERO
CaeSAR, I have so regarded verity, that in the same alone I have placed my
whole dignity. (...)

CHAP. XIII. NERO'S munificences, and liberalities. CHAP. XIIII. OF OCTAVIA,
NERO'S first wife, and of some other women, within his first five years. CHAP.
XV. THe death of AGRIPPINA AUGUSTA.. I. The causes for which NERO resolved to
destroy Agrippina, his own mother. Page 24.. II. Means thought, and agreed
upon, for the secret destruction of AGRIPPINA. Page 26.. III. The time and
place for execution of the deed, with a partil description of the trap-galley.
Page 28.. IIII. AGRIPPINA feasted by NERO at BAIAE, and put aboard the
trap-galley upon her return. Page 31.. V. The trap in the galley miscarrying,
AGRIPPINA regaines the shore; her two chief attendants diversely slain. Page
34.. VI. Doubts, touching AGRIPPINA'S escape, not to be cleared out of
TACITUS, SVETONIVS, or DIO, attempted to be cleared otherwise. Page 36.. VII.
NERO, after the news of Agrippina's escape, gives present order for her death,
in hope to make it seem her proper act. Page 38.. VIII. The manner of
Agrippina's murder exactlie described. Page 39.. IX. NERO'S behavior, and
words in private, upon the view of Agrippina's corse; where the same of their
incest is likewise scanned. Page 43.. X. A short speculation touching
Agrippina's pedigree, and death. Page 46.. XI. The peoples inward judgment of
NERO'S heinous fact against his mother, in what sort outwardly expressed. Page
48.. XII. Of Agrippina's colonie, and commentaries; and of her burial. Page 49.
CHAP. XVI. AN eclipse of the Sun; and the day of Agrippina's death observed.
CHAP. XVII. NERO'S part after his mothers end, toward the cloze of his first
five years. CHAP. XVIII. COnsiderations touching the premises, and
commonweal. CHAP. XIX.THe ghost of Agrippina, and other apparitions
afflicting Nero. CHAP. XX. OF the five yearlie Plays, and Prizes instituted at
Rome by Nero: and of his studies. CHAP. XXI. OF the Counsel of History for the
worser part of Nero's reign, after his first Quinquennium. CHAP. XXII. AN
address of speech to my Lord, touching that which follows in Nero's reign.
CHAP. XXIII. THe principal wonder of Nero's time, and of Princedoome.

THE END OF THE FIRST FIVE years of NERO, his most commended time.

CHAP. XXIIII. THe revolt in BRITAIN, and other troubles of war.. I. An
introductorie sum of affairs in Britain from the Romans first entrance under
Julius Caesar, till the present revolt under Nero. Page 72.. II. The Britanns
at bloody odds among themselves, upon Julius Caesar's invasion. Page 74.. III.
The effects of Caesar's two invasions, and of his final return out of Britain.
Page 75.. IIII. The Britanns, and the things of Britain, a part of Caesar's
triumph over the Galls. Page 78.. V. Of the Britanns, and the British chariot
of Maecenas under Augustus. Page 79.. VI. Of the peace of Britain, and of other
rarest matters there, under Tiberius. Page 81.. VII. Britain menaced by
Caligula. A touch of his follies, and tower. Page 83.. VIII. The conquest of
Britain under Claudius Caesar. A rare coigne of his, concerning the state
thereof. Page 85.
CHAP. XXV. THe intermitted narration of the revolt of Britain under Nero
prosecuted.. I. The title of the Romans to their conquests. Page 91.. II. The
estate of the Roman-Britanns immediately before the revolt. Page 92.. III. The
causes of the grand revolt. Boadicia's quarrel the chief. Page 97.. IIII. The
person, and quality of Boadicia, the warlick widow, curiously described. Page
101.. V. Of Suetonius Paullinus, Nero's lieutenant general in Britain: and of
his design against Anglesey. Page 102.. VI. Suetonius being absent upon the
conquest of Anglesey, what Roman forces, and friends resided behind for a stay,
and where. Page 104.. VII. Maine observations touching Cogidunus, a king at
this time in Britain. Page 106.. VIII. Boadicia, and the Britanns meet in great
secrecy, and resolve to rise in arms. Page 109.. IX. The Druids of Britain,
parties in this grand revolt. Page 110.. X. Wonders fore-show the ouer-hanging
evils. Page 112.. XI. Boadicia's musters, and attire; and of the place of the
rendeuous. Page 113.. XII. Boadicia's oration to her army, affording a most
forceable poinct to inflame the Britanns, by opposing their manners to the
Romans. Page 115.. XIII. The motions, and actions of this mighty body of
rebellion. And first concerning the Roman colonie at Camalodunum, and the
castles on the borders. Page 119.. XIIII. The Roman colonie at Camalodunum
destroid by Boadicia. Page 122.. XV. Petilius Cerealis, coming tardie to the
rescue, is encountered upon the way by Boadicia, and put to flight. Page 125..
XVI. Catus Decianus, Nero's procurator, leaves Britain without leave. Page
127.. XVII. Suetonius Paullinus, upon the news of Boadicia's rebellion, came
in have from Mona to London. Page 129.. XVIII. Of Nero's London before
Suetonius Paullinus was driven by Boadicia to abandon it: and first, whither it
were once a Roman colonie, or no. Page 131.. XIX. The quality and estate of
London immediately before the burning. Page 132.. XX. NERO'S lieutenant in
Britain abandons London to the rebels. Page 139.. XXI. London entered, sacked,
and set on fire, by Boadicia. Page 144.. XXII. Verulam sacked, and destroid by
Boadicia. An essential difference between the persons of a Municipium, and a
Colonie. Page 148.. XXIII. The most savage behavior of the Boadicians in the
use of their victories throughout. Page 151.. XXIIII. The course which
Suetonius Paullinus held in his retreat from London, and of his constraint to
resolve for fight. Page 154.. XXV. The number, and quality of the Roman
forces, provided for fight. Page 155.. XXVI. Of Julius Agricola, (the father in
law of Cornelius Tacitus) at this service. Page 157.. XXVII. The number of men
in Boadicia's army, their nations, qualities, and arms. Page 158.. XXVIII. Of
the place of the battle, and season of the year. Page 161.. XXIX. The order of
the Roman battle. Page 162.. XXX. The order of the Britanns battle. Page 169..
XXXI. The battle, overthrow, and death of Boadicia. Page 174.. XXXII. Of the
place of Boadicia's burial. Page 181.. XXXIII. A recapitulation of the
premises touching the affairs of Britain hitherto. Page 184.. XXXIIII. Free
thoughts, and notes upon the whole matter of Boadicia's actions, as by way of
public counsel. Page 187.
CHAP. XXVI. ONe of the Praetors in Rome guilty of an heinous libell against
Nero. Free touches, upon that occasion, concerning libels, and their authors.
CHAP. XXVII. THe worthy carriage of Domitius Corbulo, against the Parthians.
CHAP. XXVIII. NERO'S first coming upon the common stage. CHAP. XXIX. THe
burning of Rome by Nero.. I. Of the hugeness, and goodlinesse of Nero's old
Rome. Page 207.. II. The fire; and Nero's triumph over it in song. Page 209..
III. The work of the fire in spoil. Page 216.. IIII. Nero's use of the
burnings, or destructions of old Rome. Page 219.. V. Nero's new Palace, or
Golden House. Page 222.
CHAP. XXX. THe Christians persecuted by Nero, as the burners of Rome. CHAP.
XXXI.PIso's conspiracy against NERO. CHAP. XXXII. OF Seneca, and Lucan, two of
the conspirators. CHAP. XXXIII. MOre touching PISO'S conspiracy. CHAP.
XXXIIII. OF tyrants and treason, by occasion of this conspiracy against NERO.
CHAP. XXXV. THe death of Poppaea Sabina, the mistress, and second wife of
Nero: which occasions the rehearsal of Octauias Tragedy. CHAP. XXXVI.OF the
East-Indian trade in Nero's time. CHAP. XXXVII. SOme Roman antiquities
examined, seeming to give divinity to Nero. Honorable words of Poppaea Sabina
by Flauius Josephus. CHAP. XXXVIII.THe coming of Tiridates to Rome. CHAP.
XXXIX. OF Publius Petus Thrasea, whom Tacitus calls Virtues self: and of
Demetrius, his Cynick. CHAP. XL. THe general credit, and use of Stage-poetry,
and of acting upon Stages in Nero's time. CHAP. XLI. NERO resolves for his
voyage into Greece; but not as a right Roman. CHAP. XLII.THe provisions of Nero
for assuring Rome to himself, in his absence. CHAP. XLIII. NERO in Greece. His
hatred to the Senate of Rome, and other his doings, touching the maine of his
errand. CHAP. XLIIII. NERO'S attempt for cutting through the Corinthian
Isthmus. CHAP. XLV. THe end of heroic Corbulo; and the employment of Vespasian
against the rebellious Jews. CHAP. XLVI. NERO'S success at the Temple of
Apollo. CHAP. XLVII. THe choice antiquities, and all the prime monuments of the
Greeks culld, and carried away for Rome by Nero's authority. CHAP. XLVIII.
NERO'S return. CHAP. XLIX. NERO'S doings after his return. CHAP. L.THe last
act of Nero's persecution of Christians. CHAP. LI. HOly men the invisible
stays of the world. CHAP. LII. NERO destituted. CHAP. LIII. OF Nero's end; and
of Epaphroditus. CHAP. LIIII. A Free speculation on behalf of Commonweal,
upon the deposure, and death of Nero. CHAP. LV.THe line of the Caesar's ended.
SOLI DEO GLORIA:
Ancient short INSCRIPTIONS, vouched in this HISTORICAL Work, exhibited at
length.
PAGE I. NEro Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus Pontifex Maximus Tribunitia
Potestate Imperator Pater Patriae. PAGE VI. Nero Claudius Caesar Drusus
Germanicus Princeps Iuuentutis. PAGE XV. Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus
Imperator. Senatus Consulto. PAGE XIX. Congij Dati Populo. Senatus Consulto.
PAGE XXII. Nero Claudius Caesar Imperator Et Octauia Augusta Pia. PAGE LX.
Certamina Quinquennalia Romae Constituta. Senatus Consulto. PAGE LXXX. Marcus
Cocceius Nerua Triumuir. Asia Europa Africa. Senatus Populus Que Romanus. PAGE
CXXXIV........... OY BPETANNIKOS METPOPOLES ETIMINAIOV BALO. PAGE CLXIV. Legio
Decima Quarta. PAGE CC. Pontifex Maximus Tribunitia Potestate Imperator Pater
Patriae. PAGE CCII. Nero Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus Pontifex Maximus
Imperator Pater Patriae. PAGE CCXX. Macellum Augusti. Senatus Consulto. PAGE
CCXXX. Neroni Claudio Caesari Augusto Pontifici Maximo Ob Prouinciam Latronibus
Et His Qui Nouam Generi Humano Superstitionem inculcabant Purgatam. PAGE
CCXLVII. POPPAIAS...... SEBASTHS. PAGE CCLIX. Pace Populo Romani Vbique Parta
Ianum Clusit. Senatus Consulto. PAGE CCLXXXII. Castalius Innocentius Audax Viri
Clarissimi Praefecti Vrbis Vice Sacra Iudicans, etc.
Errata. The first number is for the page, the other is for the line of that
page.
2.2. after wrought, dele comma. 5. lin. penult. for might, lege would. 20.24.
for therein, lege therefore. 27. lin. antepenult. for scandal, lege scandal,
other. 41.4. dele who. 52.6. for eliciently, lege sufficiently. 59.17. for
provided, lege providing. 66.21. for others, lege other. 77.7. for relate, lege
rebate. ibid. 14. for acts, lege arts. 105.32. for VESPASIANS, lege NERO'S.
140.14. dele also. 143.31. for officers, lege offices. 150.25. for image, lege
imagine. 165.26. for but three, lege but of three. 168.10. for cause, lege case.
195.34. for corapped, lege wrapped. 203.13. insere else, between whatsoever,
and my. 214.25. for September, lege Sextember. 226.16. for some, lego same.
260.20. dele him. 267.10. insere own, between his and auersion. 268.26. the
parenthesis to end after also) 273.20. for deduction, lege reduction. ibid. 17.
insere in sense, between such, and as. 276. l. penult. for to lege of.

NERO CLAUDIUS CAESAR AUGUSTUS GERMANICVS.
I. NERO'S FIRST COMING TO THE EMPIRE.
NERO CLAUDIUS, the adopted son of TIBERIUS CLAUDIUS the late deceased
Emperor, in the seventeenth year of his age, obtaines that sovereign power,
by virtue whereof the Consuls, Senators, Tribunes, Captains, and all other the
officers, and active uerues of state, did execute their several charges, there
being now no fountain of motion but in princedoome only. For CAESAR had of old
so wrought himself into the commonweal, that the one (says SENECA) could
never be diduced from the other without the destruction of both: for as the
prince needs forces so the people needs an head. Nature had ordaind another for
the place, but heinous devises interuerted the proper course of succession, and
so BRITANICVS, the matrimonial issue of CLAUDIUS AUGUSTUS and of VALERIA
MESSALINA, was wronged, and ruinated. ONVPHRIVS in his description of the city
of ROME, mentions a golden statua erected to this BRITANNICVS in the tenth
region thereof, a moniment of NERO'S tyranny (if NERO did erect it) rather
then any amends for loss of his life, and empire. The principal agent in that
injury of disenherison, was violent AGRIPPINA, her incentiue ambition, her
instument that lordly freedman PALLAS; the means, incest, adultery,
paricidial poison, and murder.

II. OF NERO BEFORE HE WAS EMPEROVR OR ADOPTED.
THE omen, and sequel were conform to the worst of these. NERO came into the
world an agrippa, or borne with his feet forward (his own mother left it
written of him so in her commentaries) and turned the world vpside down before
he went out of it, which is every where known to be written. But that
praeposterous nativity foreboded nothing, in PLINIES conceit (who notes that
all agrippae were unfortunate) but the parties disaster. Horror, and terror
to the public were in that which follows. When the Chaldaeans pronounced,
according to their art, that he should reign, but murder his mother; she
submitted herself to that destiny, and in the fury of her pride fatallie
said alowd, and let him kill me so as that proves true. Acceptance, and consent
are dangerous poincts, in the poinct of drawing-on foretold events. Neither are
the sodein conceits of parents concerning their children, whither to the
better, or the worse part, always vain: for DOMITIVS AENOBARBVS, NERO'S own
father, vnpremeditately answered his congratulating friends, that nothing could
possibly come of AGRIPPINA, and him, but cursed stuff, ordaind to undo the
world, or words to such effect. An heavy doom, which DIO more probably reports
in milder terms. Fathers are naturally judges, and oftentimes prophets also;
and as well their blessings, as their maledictions weighty. DOMITIVS meant not
to read his child's fortune when he vtterd that conceit, but there is ever more
somewhat for the speakers to beware, and for children to fear, in the
whatsoever words of their parents. During his childe-hood ANICETVS had the
elementarie teaching of him, the same who was afterward emploid to murder
AGIPPINA, and falselie to accuse OCTAVIA; his pupillage, or minority was
gouernd by ASCONIVS LABEO, concerning whom we find to NERO'S praise, that he
thanckfully procured consularie ornaments for him; and one BERYLLVS (says
FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS) traind him up in the rudiments of the Greek tongue, but
LUCIUS ANNAEVS SENECA, under the most honorable title, and in the most useful
emploiment, was the master of his manners. And they in reason could not have
proved so vile, if his mother had not auerted his affections from the study of
all philosophy, as a thing unfit for a Souereign.

III. THE FAMOVS ERROVR OF HIS EDVCATION.
AN opinion worthy of a graceless woman, and originallie the most certain
cause of his overthrow. For his nature most vnboundedly affecting immortality
of fame (which was truly princely, and truly ROMAN in him) by this abducement
from the knowledge of honesty, and worth (the only true grounds of glory) he
pursued shows, and seemings, and sought not (says that excellent philosopher
DIO CHRYSOTOMVS speaking of NERO) for that which makes men good, or wise, but
for that which might enable him to winn crowns of leaves, or garlands, for
singing, fidling, piping, acting on stages, and the like ignobler trials, which
nevertheless through the error of his breeding, appeared to him such
transcendently heavenly gifts, that in their perfection he constituted chief
felieitie.

IIII. THE MIND OF AGRIPPINA.
ON the other side, to reign over the world seemed to his mother AGRIPPINA, a
thing so dazzling and divine, that all things else stood far to her on the
hither side thereof. Therefore in making her way, she never distinguished
either of methods, or efficients, for want of knowing that which is a much
greater thing then to rule the whole world, the ouer-ruling of herself for
higher ends. The study of true philosophy (for some philosophies are neither
fit for kings nor subjects being falsely called wisdom) would have taught her
to consider, how much more glorious it is, to affect honest things rather then
great, or to compass great things honestly. For there can be no pleasure in
the fruition of bravery and power, which in the least degree, can be worthy of
an evil conscience, end, and fame. She approved good precepts in SENECA, the
more securely to practice her own bad ones. Domination was her desire, and
she for that contemned all the laws of god, and man. Nor is SENECA without a
part in the blame, who kept him from solid eloquence proper to the ancient
orators, to hold him the longer in admiration of himself, Who taught him how
to answer readely, who much more profitably might have taught him how to
thinck deeply.

V. OF NERO, AS THE ADOPTIVE SON OF CLAUDIUS.
NERO had in marriage the sister of BRITANICVS, OCTAVIA, the root of his
fortunes, and in the lifetime of CLAUDIUS, their father, was courted, and
served as heir apparent to the empire. According to which highest hope, the
most flourishing title PRINCE OF THE YOVTH, or CAPTAIN OF THE YOUNG LORDS,
which regularly imported heir-apparencie, was assigned to him alone. Old extant
coigns, and inscriptions (in whose precious remains the most certain marks of
facts survive) make it evident.

CLAUDIUS adopted him for his eldest son, because BRITANNICVS (formerly
called GERMANICVS) was two years younger: so much it disaduantaged him with a
feeble father, to have been born but only so much short. In the year of that
unlucky adoption, which was when CORNELIUS ORFITVS was Consul with CLAUDIUS
CAESAR, three sunns appeared, as if the heavens, privy to impendent effects,
had by their mystical character reveled what a prodigy was in breeding.

VI. OF NERO'S FIRST FIVE YFARES.
SENECA, chief for learning, and power (says historical PLINY) and AFRANIVS
BVRRHVS (the more solidly honest man of the two) captain of NERO'S guards,
were deep of counsel in the edition of this prince, who though he was in his
birth the object of dire presages, and afterward in court the creature of
darkest practices, yet by the apposition of SENECA, like a benign starr among
many malignant, he came notwithstanding to be presented to ROME in the shape
of such an hope, as a fair fresh morning brings of a correspondent sunn-set.
But to mingle nothing in history, by the perplexing of times, or the
forestalling of judgments, this is confessed, that the first five years of this
young AUGUSTUS were generally such, as TRAIANVS himself is said to have
admired, if they were not rather the reign of his governors SENECA, and
BVRRHVS then, porperly his. Yet the inofficious entrance pleases not: for he
preoccupated good will to himself by his adopters disgrace, as may without
enforcement be conceived.

VII. SENECA INOFFICIOVS TO CLAUDIUS, CONTRARY TO THE MORAL GOOD OF NERO.
TWo orations pennd to his hand by SENECA, and openly pronounced by NERO, do
both of them carry the marks of their inwardly offended author, though they
were improper to the argument. For SENECA did not only not love CLAUDIUS, but
in a libell persecuted his memory also. The first oration of the two,
pretended by all sorts of praises to make him seem worthy the title of a god,
which together with all divine honors was accordingly decreed unto him: yet
this had some such passages in it, as publicly moved the hearers to laugh, and
so he went out ridiculous deity. The second speech (summd by TACITUS) while
it gave them an idea of what should be otherwise under him, and better then
before, did abatingly insinuate the wants of his predecessor. These beginnings
therefore thus understood, do seem to have conferred somewhat toward the
weakening of pious respects in NERO, who leauen'd with the scoffings of his
Master (for even LIPSIVS notes that evil spirit in SENECA) did show himself
afterward no vndexterous disciple, breaking sundry bitter jests (remembered by
SVETONIVS) upon his dead adoptiue father, the creator of his undeserved
fortunes.

VIII. A WORD OR TWO TOUCHING THE INSTITVTION OF A MONARCK, BY OCCASION OF
NERO'S INSTITVTION.
TO utter briefly somewhat, by way of francke speech, upon this just occasion,
in the most cheerful, and most careful province of the world, the institution
of a sovereign prince, whose good, or evil is the commonweals, there is
nothing in it which can be little, or of little moment, I do not say of that
which is directly ill (for that admitts no doubt) but of that which leads,
though but indirectly, toward it. Because great evils may grow out of the
smallest causes. But it was never a little matter, by all means, and at all
times, to maintain, and strengthen natural piety, and ingenuous
thanckfulnesse, which after some sort are all in all. Princes otherwise minded
undo themselves. For seeing imperial majesty does subsist by the veneration
which is owing thereunto, for the reason of fatherly, and lordly power, they
do make examples to their own harms who being hereditarie, or beneficiarie
princes minister the least suspicion of irreuerent affections toward their
proper parents, or founders. The most bottomly stone which can be laid for all
future felicity is dug out of none other quarrie then piety, and
whatsoever superedifide is not of like nature, will fall to ground, and in the
fall thereof will carry it self, and with it self all the rest, either into
oblivion, or infamy. To constitute CLAUDIUS divine, and to deride him, was
absurd in it self, as being against both their religion, and the clearness of
their reason. And let the insinuations of his disgrace be never so just, yet
they could not justly seem to spring from any other fountain of affections
then that which traitorously took away his life. And whither did not license
carry leuitie when that very fact which was absolutely worthy of all
detestation, and punnishment, was become the heinous subject of SENECA'S, and
NERO'S jests? Therefore, howsoever I heartily love what SENECA'S writings have
good in them, and do admire what is excellent either for wisdom, eloquence,
or conceit, yet I do freely profess to hate that, as all men certainly do,
who esteem the conscience of moral, and civil duties, above the flashes of
ambitious wit.

IX. THE SENATS USE OF SENECA'S OFFICES, AT NERO'S ENTRANCE.
But the Senate discouerd no such judgment of this course, for it greatly
conduced to their ends, as men who affected censureship over their princes, and
to remain the arbiters of things. SENECA therefore, not without some suspicion
of vanity on his part (as TACITUS observes) had the glory of wit, and
eloquence, in the grace of his scholars utterance, and their lord-ships
enacted, that the last oration, because it contained the picture of the
NERONIAN commonweal as there it was described, should be cut in a column of
silver, for everlasting remembrance, and yearly be read in full court, upon
the Kalends of IANVARIE, when the new Consuls took their oaths. And this was
done (says DIO in effect) that NERO who gave them the hope, should give them
the fulfilling also. A provision worthy of their wisdom, the commodity
whereof being put into their hands by SENECA, did causefully ennoble, and
endear him to the public. And though NERO afterward spoild all, by his
incredible excesses, yet the oration remained still, an evidence of his
engagement, a touchstone of his actions, and by the disparitie of premises, and
sequels, did draw the greater foulness upon his deformities. NERO'S fair
ouertures for winning goodwill at first, remain estreated in that most steddie
author, CORNELIUS TACITUS, though the oration it self (for what moniments will
not massy silver betray?) be quite consumed. The general notion of the
speeches fabric was, to give hope, that all those things should be avoided
which had been offensive before. Of this poinct the ITALIAN author of the
famous RAGVALIAS of PARNASSVS makes unfriendly use, in the imaginary
inauguration of CORNELIUS TACITUS, to the fained kingdom of LESBOS, smally to
the honor of TACITUS, whom he makes thrown out again for affectation of
tyranie.

X. THE POISNING OF BRITANNICVS.
But the eminent fame of NERO'S first five years is only to be understood, as
they were profitable to commonweal in the orderly correction, and
administration of the policy, by the special care of SENECA, and the service
of worthy patriots. For his own manners otherwise did soon begin to
putrify. His delights, some of them, not honest in any man, as wild maskings,
and riotous wanton women; and some of them, though not dishonest, yet being
pursued as chief emploiments were utterly unseemly in a prince. This
conniuent permission of him to himself (worthily reproved by DIO) as it
increased SENECA'S power, so it inflamed NERO'S vices. Therefore almost every
year of the five was staind with some notable foul fact or other: for which
notwithstanding, because there might be some defense in the reason of his
imperial rights, or personal safety, they would have been commiserated in
him as piacularie infelicities, rather then urged as criminal impieties, had
the world felt a continuance of common profit, or he not bewrayed his natural
immanity. Within the very first twelve month of his government he spotted,
and defloured the maiden candor of his fortunes by poisning BRITANNICVS, who
was his cosen german, his adoptiue brother, and testamentarie partner in the
empire, one so incapable of malicious crimes, that he was then but at the
fourteenth year of his age. This fact, considered in it self, though it
directly violated the maine foundations of the world laid deep by god in
natural piety, yet some other appellation would have been invented for
avoiding the proper of paricide (as I have said before) had not the carriage of
his part in it, and the horror of the circumstances made it wholly his own For
he curiously beheld the poison confected, and boild to a speeding height, saw
it experimented, and causd it to be secretly ministered in his own presence at
supper, in the presence of his wife, OCTAVIA (sister of BRITTANNICVS) and of
AGRIPPINA; who notwithstanding all other her nocencies, was innocent of this
treachery, though not innocent of the impulsiues to it; for her absoluteness
being crossed by SENECA, and BVRRHVS, she durst threaten to set up him as the
righter heir, and thereby dubbed him the object of fear, and danger. And when
the poor prince fell immediately down dead, NERO slighted it off, as but a
fit of his falling sickness, and after a short pause renewed the feast, the
carcass removed away. But neither his authority nor his art could hinder the
discovery of the crime, for the body at the funeral fire was so thoroughly
washed with sudden showrs, that the lime and whiting which were used (says
ZONARAS) to blanch it, for hiding the badges of poison, being from heaven
dissolved, rendered the homicide visible. The tame taking of it abroad flesht
his savage nature, and made him unfortunately understand, that he might do
more of that kind when he would. Howbeit some few civil restraincts (the
outwearing ties of decaying habits) kept him a while from yiedling utmost scope
to his licentious, and furious will. But the conscience of this murder was
costly unto him. For he shared houses, lands, and lordships among his friends,
as a booty, to counterweigh all constructions, and assure his party; nor do I
doubt but that SENECA, as a chief sharer, did now obtain no small proportion
of his huge estate; for the circumloquution which TACITUS uses at this place
may well be thought to name him without naming.

XI. NERO'S FORTUNE IN THE VERTVE OF CORBVLO.
THE following first scenes of his reign like a balm to cure his fame,
brought also forth a decree of the Senate, commanding triumphal arches, and
statuas to be reared for his honor and memory of that famous service which
DOMITIVS CORBVLO had performed in ARMENIA against TIRIDATES the brother of the
PARTHIAN king, endeuoiring to pluck ARMENIA from the ROMANS* But the coigns of
that time have better preserved both the testimony of that decree, and the
image of those magnificent works, then the marble of which they consisted.

Seeing therefore that coigns are so vital to memory, and that nothing under
heaven is so dear to a great, and noble mind, as to be remembered with
honor, I may much wonder why souereign princes (who do hold of glory in
chief) make either very little, or no historical use at all, no not of their
copper moneys. The present BATAVIANS (who live in a form of government most
unlike to monarchy) are brave and heroic in this, and do worthily put the
world in mind of the ancient GREEKS and ROMANS. I wish we had a current PAX
IACOBI, as there was a PAX AVGVSTI; a BRITANNIA REDVX, as there was a ROMA
RESVRGENS; a SALVS OCCIDENTIS, as there was a SALVS ORBIS; a FIDES REGVM, as
there was a FIDES EXERCITVVM. Arguments of coigns, and indexes of effects,
among infinite other most honorable, which having no relation to sides (the
special scandal of the LATIN world) are indeed most worthy a mint royal, and
do all of them belong, by his own right, to our most sacred SOVEREIGNE.

XII. NERO VAINLY DEVISTEH WITH HIMSELF HOW TO GO BEYOND ALL EXAMPLES, IN
MAKING MANKIND BEHOLDING UNTO HIM.
AFter this high atchieuement in ARMENIA, where CORBVLO had burnt to ground the
head-citie thereof ARTAXATA, NERO CAESAR lay houering for some brave color, or
occasion of raising himself to such a glory as might surmount all others
glories, and which (without owing for it to another merit) he might properly
call his own. A mind (to speak the truth) most worthy of a prince, and a
show of such a mind most necessary for him. For though it be most probable,
that the reflections of CORBVLO'S fame had inflamed him with a desire of
everlasting honor, and SVETONIVS TRANQVILLVS absolutely puts the love of
immortal renown into NERO'S character, yet did it otherwise also concern him
to affect popularitie. For having cruelly poysned his brother BRITANNICVS, and
discovered in his night-walkes, the most lascivious, and ruffianly faults of
his nature, intending likewise to murder his own mother (most heinous
handsels of more heinous sequels) he might easily believe, that without some
notable further sacrifice for expiation of what had passed vile (the same also
to be as a fine for license of future worse) it was not possible to make the
multitude (whom he served as his idol) sure unto him. Neither was it long
before the disorders of the time had furnished him for that purpose with wished
opportunity. CORNELIUS TACITUS has gone before me in the enarration, and I
may not ouerpasse it here, though it be in a most tender case, if between
prince, and people any other. The ROMANS, who for many years (says TACITUS)
had paid such moneys as were ratably assessed upon the portages, or sales of
wares, without any their reproofs, or repinings, could nevertheless not endure
their extortions who farmed, or gatherd them. This matter of general complaint
being most just, NERO was often, and openly called upon with a common voice to
afford redress; which would alone both have satisfied the duty of a prince
toward his people, and have acquieted the people in their utmost expectations.
But NERO, who thirsted for a more glorious occasion, did not hold it enough to
remove the abuse, unless withal he took away the subject it self, by
remitting all those paiments for ever. Which being intended as a divine
benefit, would have proved no less, could the commonweal have borne it. But
the ripe, and wise made it apparent to NERO, that he did not therein discharge
a burden, but ruin the world. For those paiments were among the sinews of
the state, and it was no more possible for ROME to have subsisted, had those
returns of supply been withdrawn, then for a good husband to hold all
together, where receipts do infinitely undergo expenses. In TACITUS another
worser pestilence is observed, that tributes (the maine stays of the state)
would also have been cryde upon to be forgiven, if those usual contributions
should have ceased, whose antiquity, and necessity, even while the tribes of
the people did most hotly predominate by their fiery tribunes, had made them
so familiar, that they were neither in truth, nor in estimation, any grieuance.
For like innumerable small pipes, or quills of succor, they did incessantly
help to replenish the public store, and though they rose in contemptible
quantities considered in parcels, yet they did not ammount to conte^ptible
heaps when met in gross, but abundantly served both for the uses of majesty,
and of martial affairs. Therefore NERO'S offer at glory was unfortunate
herein. The same nevertheless was praisd by the opposers, to the height of his
ambition, though his will and performances admitted a qualification, in which
consisted his truest glory. According whereunto he contented himself with
reforming the abuses of collectors, and other mischievous enormities. A part of
the good whereof, by virtue of his provisions, exte^ded it self in the
effects, even to the times in which CORNELIUS TACITUS did chronicle this. Vast
designs have sudden fails. Man's mind, like the regions of the air, has
somewhat in it at times which seems to answer the nature of meteors. This
puff of intention, and windy caprouch of NERO'S, was a kind of mental
typhon, or at best a mere image of vapor. Otherwise also, it can create no
envy to an orderly prince that NERO propounded somewhat to himself
incomparable. For denominations, and judgments of men are not made out of
single facts, but constant habits. That ROME took no harm, but reaped
special good thereby, shows her fortunes ancient friendship toward her, and
her better childrens discretions, much more then NERO'S merit. The purpose
notwithstanding considered in it self, which pretended common good, was well
worthy to have been the precious stone of his first five years golden circle,
which by reason of his disproportionated carriage stands for nothing now but
the vanishing gloss of a fucus, or various flitting bubble.

XIII. NERO'S MVNIFICENCES, AND LIBERALITIES.
But this most light, and most youthful Emperor to make up otherwise the full
pomp of his popular insinuations, was so manifold, and so extraordinary in his
public liberalities, that his coigns stamped by decree of the Senate, retain
their endless memory.

These two figures signify that kind of largess which was called a
congiarie, not altogether unlike a lottery, or a compendious way of delivering
the contents of a public dole. For the things, distributed of free cost, not
being all of them such that dispersions, or musses could be made of them,
little balls comprehending the lot did issue, and were ample warrants for the
receipt of the gift. The fortunate did not only become hereby the masters of
ordinary things in NERO'S congiaries, as measures of corn (and of the ROMAN
measure CONGIVS, the whole act was denominated) birds, beasts, all sorts of
household provision, apparel, bondslaues, and the like, but quantities of
silver, gold, and pearl, and at last also whole houses, ships, and estates in
land. Of these free lotteries at the most solemn games, SVETONIVS tells us
there were a thousand several parcels flung abroad every day, during the whole
festiuitie. And seeing the coyness of brevity will not permit, that things of
one kind should be handled more then once, I will pluck back into this
common place of his munificence, that most honorable shame, though declared
sundry years after the famous five, when SENECA offered to quit his fortunes,
as a secret mean to secure his life. NERO therein having acknowledged his
immortal debt for the benefit of his instructions (the gardenings, and
waterings of the mind) was so far from coveting his masters offered riches,
or thinking them great, that he openly answered, He had cause to blush, that
he who for the reason of his learned merits was of all men dearest unto him,
was not by his means in so long time become the richest also. A memorable
saying, though discredited by contrary effects.

XIIII. OF OCTAVIA, NERO'S FIRST WIFE, AND OF SOME OTHER WOMEN, WITHIN HIS
FIRST FIVE YEARS.
HIs giuings therefore being such as if he meant to alter the nature of his
tenure, and not any longer to hold of adoption, for his title to the empire,
but of bounty, he the rather presumed to neglect OCTAVIA. The honest and safe
delight of marriage was corrupted in him by unworthy change, for the love of
his enfranchised bondwoman, ACT, upon whom his dotage was so great, that he
subornd a pedigree, to derive her from that magnificent ATTALVS, who dying
childlesse in ASIA (where he was a king, and she was borne and bought) ordaind
the PEOPLE OF ROME his heir. This fiction in heraldrie, devised to enworthy
her, could not but strengthen AGRIPPINA'S jealousy, that NERO intended to
marry her. OCTAVIA less unhappy had she encountered no other then this
concubine, who by the misery of her fortunes was injurious to nuptial
benevolence, but not pernicious to her interest in majesty, and much less to
the safety of her life. He was of another mind toward OCTAVIA when he
published her for his CYNTHIA, and himsefe for her SVNNE, as in this coigne he
did.

But in respect of original right to power, his splendors proceeded from her.
Afterward by superinduction of that nobly borne, and beauteous Lady POPPAEA
SABINA, he first eclypsed her matrimonial light, and then extinguished her
vital, as will elsewhere appear in the due place. The wanton prince did at
this time begin to be so fast chained in affection to this POPPAEA, and she
so perilous in her workings, that both OCTAVIA, his imperial wife, and
AGRIPPINA, his imperious mother, were desolated and destroyed thereby. No
pleasures are more agreeable to health in youth, and height in fortune, then
femall society, though many be more warrantable: but that fond prince who
sayls by such uncertain stars, hazards his estate, and does more then hazard
his glory. ACT was secure in her lowly condition, and loved NERO when his
fortunes, and his life were ended.

XV. THE DEATH OF AGRIPPINA AUGUSTA.
THe great reason which TIBERIUS CAESAR might have to depresse, and extinguish
AGRIPPINA GERMANICI, may well be gatherd by the qualities of AGRIPPINA AUGUSTA,
her own true daughter for ambition. She was a mother (as VIND EX speaks in
PHILOSTRATVS) whom it was no shame for a son to ^kill, that son being NERO;
and she her self affirmed at her death no less. But the reason of that speech
may be almost assigned, because her self was rather an infernal fury then a
matron, who with such waste of all conscience, and of all common honesty,
affected supreme command. If one wickedness therefore might authorize another,
none could condemn him as impious, for killing that woman, who merely for
proud ends did most alluringly offer her body to the lustful embraces of him
who scarcely twenty years before was bred therein? This one curse was wanting
to the fullness of her other impieties, having formerly traded her self in
manifold incests with CALIGVLA CAESAR her brother, and with her uncle CLAUDIUS.
Violation of natural reverence between the mother, and the son was equal;
AGRIPPINA'S by prostitution of her self, NERO'S by destroying her. As for the
manner of her end, that busy APOLLONIVS of TIANA (whom PHILOSTRATVS would
feign belie into somewhat more excellent then humane) misstook the story,
where he says, she was drowned by an artificial ship wrack. For she
escaped the waves, and oars, and died at her sons commandment by the swords
of immissiue soldiers.

. I. The causes for which Nero resolved to destroy his Mother.
But the whole wide world from the time in which it first did rise out of
nothing till this instant, affording perhaps no such case as hers, I should
deal amiss to wrap the narration up in the like brevity as the rest, or not
to unfold the parts, that my readers may have her last act entire, as that
example of celestial justice, which euened all scores with wickedness, and
left no tally vnstrucken. The chief impulsiues therefore which moved the son
to hate and persecute to death the author of his life, and empire (concubinarie
love grown far more potent in him then filial piety) were securely to
bring about his marriage with POPPAEA SABINA, whereunto she was a constant
enemy, in favor of his present wife OCTAVIA, and then (as the lesser care) to
assure to himself the ROMAN scepter, which he feared lest AGRIPPINA in her
fury and offense would seek to wrest away. A Lady, not unlikely to effect it,
considering her spirit, friends, and blood, the daughter of GERMANICVS, and
heir general, by her mother, to AUGUSTUS CAESAR She had threatened it, and for
but threatening it, and that but only in an expostulatorie passion, she had
been formerly accused to her son, but she brought her self off from the
danger, with the mischief and ruin of her accusers, by her parentall
privileges stoutly urged, and such mitigations as SENECA, and BVRRHVS tempered
together on her behalf. Yet the impression, which that accusation left, was
not totally wiped out with her apologies. For a cowardly mind is evermore
credulous to the worse, and imagination multiplies fears when vitiated with
such suspicions as the malice of others will not suffer to be withdrawn. The
art of POPPAEA; who pretending care for NERO'S safety, plide him upon the
weak side with terrifying suggestions, and never gave over till their deadly
arrows (being helped home to their mark with her amorous enchantments) had
driven all regard to natural duties quite away, and left her with him in the
state of a most abhorred enemy. On the other side AGRIPPINA did rise, and swell
most violently against all bars to that sole tutorship which she affected
over her son. For SENECA himself, though a man of her own choice and
placing about him, was grown such an eyesore unto her, upon envy at his
authority, that she forbear not to vpbraide him with his professorian tongue,
as a comparatorie abatement. Which vnreuerent and foolish contumely sorted well
with the rest of her behauiours, and her former contempt of wisdom. POPPAEA
therefore could want no color to continue the pretenses of her care for his
persons preservation. And hereupon he finally determined to cut a mother off,
to please a stranger in blood, and I would add, not only a stranger, but an
adulterous lewd dame, saving as that is a circumstance which cannot aggrauate
the fact, considering AGRIPPINA worser. Nor was this determination made (some
think) without SENECA'S conniuencie, if not also with his consent and
impulsion, which TACITUS affirms not (as things to him uncertain all of them)
but DIO CASSIVS does.

. II. Means thought, and agreed-vpon for the secret destruction of Agrippina.
THe execution was undertaken by ANICETVS, who having been a bondsman, and put
about NERO to teach him GREEK, was afterward manumitted by him, and created
Admiral of the ROMAN navy at MISENVM. The plague of planting servile natures
about young Lords, and noble persons, to form their first educations (a thing
most worthily noted by QVINCTILIAN, in his conference of Orators, as a
pestilent error) fell upon the empress AGRIPPINA not unjustly. That execution
nevertheless was not needing to be by him undertaken, till three several
attempts to poison her, had first miscarried; her provisions, and discoueries
more active, then their practices available. Open force was with one consent
condemned as improper, and dangerous. From thence it grew that drugs were
employed about the work, and when they returned vain, their utmost
consultations could propound nothing for the purpose, but if there might be
somevvhat devised which should resemble, or imitate a casualtie. There were
therefore who in her own house contrived a loose or hanging roof, which
falling in a moment should pash, and oppress her in her bed. A most villainous
device, but having chincks to come out at, she escaped. After this, and while
invention stuck, it happened, that among the shows, and amphitheatral pageants,
a kind of ship-vvork, or nauall frame was presented to the people (who were
courted by their princes, and greatest magistrates with such like toys) so
cunningly ioincted, that the hold or body thereof suddenly flying open, did put
forth certain vvilde beasts alive, at the discretion of their master, and
readily closed again. This original produced upon dry land, was reputed a
pattern most fit to be translated to their uses at sea, for effecting, and
coloring the accidental drowning of AGRIPPINA. For it might well pass (the
secret being kept smotherd among themselves) without any probable scandal,
then only that which the common fortune of that unstable element would both
handsomely bear, and answer. And now there wanted nothing but convenient
time, and place, to conspire for their ends with the use of this pernicious
engine.

. III. The time, and place for execution of the deed, with a partil description
of the trap-galley.
AGRIPPINA, being out with her son, and he with her, was then upon
refreshment, and recollection of her self at ANTIVM, a pleasant sea-towne in
old LATIVM, and a ROMAN colony, about thirty small ITALIAN miles from ROME,
famous for sumptuous buildings, and for a goodly temple dedicated to equestrall
FORTUNE, the tutelary goddess of the place, and of the cheualry of ROME, but
specially affected for delicious retirements: where NERO himself was borne:
but that being no part of ANTIVMS glory was thus far profitable thereunto,
that having no good port, nor rode for ships, NERO (to his birthplace
indulgent, but to her who bare him vnherbarous) caused an haven to be forced by
hand at an huge charge. For what he did in that kind was rather excessive,
then not magnificent. At the same time, he remained at BAIAE; another, but a
more voluptuarie seat, situated also upon the sea, though sheltred in the
bottom of a bay, from the open rage of winds, and waves, about fourscore
miles from ANTIVM, where he meant to welcome the spring of the year, and to
keep those famous feasts of MINERVA, which for that they lasted five days
were styled QVINQVATRVS, or QVINQVATRIA. These considerations offering
themselves to be examined, it was agreed upon, that all of them served their
turn, if AGRIPPINA could be but won to come. A task not hard for NERO to
perform, who was a much greater master at malicious counterfaiting (an
inseparable property of base, and dangerous natures) then ever he took
himself to be at music. Therefore with most officious letters he inuiteth her
from ANTIVM thither, as to an entire atonement, to be sealed and ceremoniated
at the joyous celebration of those sacred solemnities, ouer-guilding his hooks
with religion. Meanewhile the trap-galley was prepared for the service with
such outward pomp, and bravery as became the majesty's of the host, and guest,
he CAESAR AUGUSTUS, and she AUGUSTA dowager. The form of a galley, or
row-barge may appear in this coigne, stamped in the name of the GENIUS of the
PEOPLE OF ROME, for gratulation of NERO'S coming home, and that cabin or
chamber hereof which is toward the stern, was the place in AGRIPPINA'S galley
where the trap was set. There her sumptuous couch was provided. The bales, and
supports were so fitted (for the whole room it self was nothing else but a
trap) that upon a sign given (they giving way) the roof should suddenly fall,
together with that end of the vessel, perpendicularly down into the sea. And
that the roof, when it fell, might both sink it self, and all the enginous
part, a vast weight of lead was secretly spread, and sheeted over upon the
conuex top of the tilted cabin. So that when the bolts, or pins were upon the
warning stricken out, she must either of necessity be braind (as they
conceived) with the unexpected ruin, or her body be devoured in the deepes, or
both. Nor in this consultation was it any part of their care, what should
become of the other people aboard, for a greater number would have been
sacrificed to the service without any remorse in NERO, and they who could swim
might so be safe, whatsoever became of the galley. This treacherous device
learned at first as a sport, but practiced here to do mischief, was afterward
used to a magnificent, and more innocent purpose. For XIPHILINE out of DIO
writes, that seven hundred wild beasts were enclosed in a like fabric,
raised upon the sandy floor of the amphitheater at ROME, which were put forth
out of the opening sides of the ship, at the pleasure of the keepers. Some have
written that the Emperor SEVERUS, (for it was in his days) did perhaps
represent the ARC OF NOAH herein. That a ship, or other vessel, may so be
built by the direction of an engineer, as upon a sudden to part in sunder, and
shut again, is apparent.

. IIII. Agrippina feasted by Nero at Baiae, and put aboard the trap-galley upon
her return.
But such was NERO'S impatience against his mothers life, that he could not
stay for an offered opportunity to deprive her of it, but must consult how to
hasten it; and his envy against her co^tentment was so great, that although he
was well pleased with her solitary courses, yet because he found it was a
solace to her, he must of force entice her to perish by his practices, under
show of infinite good affection. His letters therefore, falser then the gally
(as having a more hollow secretary to endite them, then this had cunning
ship-wrights to fashion it) coming quickly to her hands, did not difficultlie
allure her out of ANTIVM; glad, poor woman, of favor, and either crediting
his fair words (which seemed to breathe nothing upon her but the flowers of
delight and love) or as thinking it best to pretend credulity. Withal, in his
ordinary discourses, NERO gave it out (as if he were turned good child) that
the displeasure of parents ought to be born, and their minds appeased with
obsequious behauiours; to beget, and raise a rumor thereby that all was well
again between them, so to quash the contrary fame, of which the world was
full. Himself, upon notice of her approach, met her in person upon the shore,
and waited upon her to BAVLI, with all the shows of honor, and dear regards:
and while this face of amity lasted, went with her (says DIO) in the
deceitful vessel it self, to benumbe her all over with security. Nor did he
pause long upon the execution of his plot: for that very night she was invited
from her repose at BAVLI, to the fatal supper at BAIAE. But she, unfortunate
Lady, having secret intelligence that certain destruction lay quoild aboard (as
a snake in flowers) in that pompous preparation, resolud not to go to court by
sea, but commanding a chair to be mounted, avoided the voyage, and was
carried thither so. BAVLI (as PLINY describes it) was seated between BAIAE,
and lake LVCRINVS* and TACITUS contradicts him not, as placing it between cape
MISENVM, and the bay of BAIAE, where he says the sea winding inward does wash
the foot thereof. ORTELIVS, and MERCATOR do both of them understand it so, and
accordingly assign it in their mapps between the inmost poinct of the port of
AUGUSTUS, where the ROMAN navy rode at anchor, and the bottom of the BAIAE.
Which either TACITUS also says, or he is not understood of me where he
writes, that AGRIPPINA, in herescape from drowning, was carried into lake
LVCRINVS, and so to her manor. Upon her coming to court, she found such
exquisite welcomes, such cheer, and che^refulnesse, in refutation of
forewarnings (which NERO would have her think were malignantly instilled) that
all her iealousies were charmd fast a sleep by degrees, and she received down
deep into her as an infallible truth, that nothing at all was meant toward
her but good, and fair. And they verily who were not within the conscience
of the secret, but lived so safe, and happy as to sit spectators only, would
easily have sworn that all was gold in those shows of love which were so
double-guilded. But her cunning enemies (NERO their chief) having observed
with what distrust of the water she came to BAIAE, to make it sure she
should return in the trap-galley, he commanded the master of her own
LIBVRNICA, or private barge, to bruise, and boulge it (says SVETONIVS) as by
some mischance, that the same being thereby made unserviceable, he might in
sted thereof obtrude that unsound, and false-bottom'd bote at her departure.
And having foold her into full belief of his sincerenesse with viler
dissimulations then his trecheries were prodigious, he held her among meats,
and cups with varieties of entertainments till somewhat late in the night. When
now yet at last there was a kind of necessity to part, he most officiously
vshered her to her boats side, where ANICETVS (her assured foe) with all
humble reverence, took her in under his charge, without any other of her
people, but only CREPEREIVS GALLVS, and ACERRONIA POLLA. But neither the sea
(says DIO) was willing to concur to such an artificial parricide; for the
water proved wondrous calm at the time (a circumstance which no wit of man
could master) nor the heavens to conceal it; for the sky was awake with
store of starre-light (says TACITUS) as to convince the fact.

. V. The trap in the galley miscarrying, Agrippina regains the shore; her two
chief attendants diversely slain.
BEhold the success. The galley now had not long been off at sea, nor far
from shore, but the deadly sign was given. At which the engine immediately flew
off, and had performed the effects for which it was ordaind, but that the
props, and stays of the forepart being by chance more stubborn then to yield
to the crush (the life it self of the wicked mystery) AGRIPPINA, and her
woman of honor, remaind untouched. Their postures were the cause, for the
empress lying at length upon a pallet, and ACERRONIA leaning backward at her
feet, the timbers over head fell not low enough to reach her; to the sad
disadvantage of her easier end. An heavy hap surprised CREPEREIVS GALLVS, who
standing upright, not far from the stern, was instantly stricken dead with
the hinder end of the falling roof; it drove of it self so violently down.
ANICETVS beholding the fraud thus accidentally defeated, did nevertheless
without remorse, obstinately pursue his cruel purpose, and so both she, and
ACERRONIA were howsoever tumbled out into the sea, by ouerturning the galley,
but somewhat leasurably, as in a tumult where the most part being vninstructed
for the drift, hindered the forwardness of guilty parties. AGRIPPINA is now in
the sea, I cannot say the waves, for there were in it none other at all then
those which the motion of the galley, and the tragical uproar caused. And who
would imagine that her life's defense had not been a part of the special
constant care of heavenly providence, who had seen the deliverance of her out
of so dreadful danger? But it soon appeared by the vndelayed sequel, that
her unwomanly vices merited she should perish more tormentedly, and more
examplarly. The instant escape notwithstanding was worthily to be admired. For
she being full of wine (says DIO CASSIVS) as returning from a most imperial
feast (her last) consequently more apt to speak, yet nothing but silence in
swimming preserved her alive for the present, and she at last got to shore,
from out of the tempest of strokes, and blows aimed at her head erroneously.
She the rather escaped by the change of the air, which suddenly thickened at
that moment. An accident which they must grant, who would not make DIO
unnecessarily encounter TACITUS. ACERRONIA was beaten to death with poles, and
oars, and with what other ship-tooles came to hand, while crying out for
help, as if her self had been the emperors mother, she ignorantly did her
last best service for her lady, by giving her opportunity to slide away, using
that name for a protection, which was the mark it self of mortal hatred.
Neither did AGRIPPINA pass free from harm, for she had a wound inflicted upon
her shoulder, the certain badge, and earnest of her final, and
forthwith-ensuing murder. The darker parts of this matchless story I have
had a special care to enlighten, not without encombrance; because the text of
the CORNELIAN ANNALS is at this place holden somewhat depraved, and other
credible moniments are not to be sung at first sight within agreement to
TACITUS.

. VI. Maine doubts, touching Agrippina's escape, not to be cleared out of
Tacitus, Suetonius, or Dio, attempted to be cleared otherwise.
IN this water-scene of AGRIPPINA'S tragedy, nothing did ever trouble me so
much, with the show of improbabilite, as to conceive, how so tender, and
delicate a lady should save her self by svvimming, from among so many deadly
enemies, till the skiffes, or vvherries, came to the rescue, though the shore
(says TACITUS) was near at hand. For I never heard that the ladies of ROME
did practice svvimming since CLAELIAS time. This speculation moved one
TARCAGNOTA, an ITALIAN, to write in his histories, that she saved her self,
upon a piece of vvood. Nor was that a vvodden or poor device had he named
some other vvarrant for it, beside his own. I my self could think upon
other vvayes also, how to remove the scruple, but that it is not all one to
pen a history, as to write a poem; where all things are permitted to
fancy, and where nothing. JULIUS CAESAR says excellently well, that the
immortal gods (to speak his own words) have an hand or stroke in all
things, but specially in those which cannot be carried by reason. Which seems
to be verified in this strange escape, for I cannot answer to my self this
doubt of her swimming by any thing which remains in TACITUS, and do therefore
the rather incline to follow a poets authority of those times, who in my
opinion is not a poet in that particular. The tragedy of OCTAVIA (NERO'S wife)
passing among those of SENECA'S, affirms unto us, that when AGRIPPINA was
whelmed out of the galley into the water, she sunk, and rose again, padling
with her hands to keep her self aloft. In that estate some cheard her up in
her faintings with their voices, and held her up in her sinkings with their
officious hands, till (as that tragedian writes) she met with assured
succors by such of her servants who for her sake despised death and danger.
Her maruailous escape was enough a lone to make her seem doubly venerable,
both as AUGUSTA, and as preserved by the special favor of the immortal gods,
the peculiar friends (as TACITUS says elsewhere) of the CLAVDIAN family; whose
lineall offspring by the fathets side she was. Another greater point, not less
dim, or mistie then the former (for any thing which TACITUS has registered
for clearing it) was the fortune of the galley it self, which though by his
narrations it does well appear not to have been dissolved (at leastwise not
upon the sudden) yet DIO CASSIVS most credibly reports, that it was dissolved,
and the same ancient tragic poet (who was contemporanie to the fact, whither
he was SENECA or no) describes the foundring of the vessel, and a face of
manifest shipwreck, some upon planks, and rafters, others plying their arms
in sted of oars, these escaping, and others drowning. Nor could it in reason
be otherwise, even by that which TACITUS himself tells us, of ouersetting the
galley, so to turn AGRIPPINA out into the deepes, whereby ANICETVS, and his
accomplices being forced to provide for their proper safeties, she was the more
free to escape, under the protection of night, which came somewhat soon,
because the vernall aequinox was as then but newly passed.

. VII. Nero, after the news of Aggippina's escape, gives present order for her
death, in hope to make it seem her proper act.
AFter this sort therefore she came safe to land, where she prouides by
surgery for the wound received on her shoulder, and betakes her self for ease,
and refreshment to her chamber, from whence she forthwith sends her trusty
freed-seruant, LUCIUS AGERINVS, with a gratulatory message to her son at BAIAE,
to signify her happy escape. For she durst not seem to suspect any thing in
it, save mere mischance. But NERO CAESAR, whom expectation, and terror of
conscience kept awake, was fully informed by ANICETVS, (long before AGERINVS
could arrive) concerning the whole adventure, and had already authorized him,
as sherriffe, or superuisor of the execution. He took with him HERCVLEVS (the
master of the broken galley) and OLOARITVS (a sea-captaine) as his
slaughtermen, or executioners, strengthened with troops of mariners in arms,
(for he durst not trust his soldiers) directly to accomplish by force what no
finenesse could effect. That employment the servile ANICETVS, as in loyal
zeal to his Lord, and patron, did not less fervently undertake, then as if it
had been a thing most certain, that either she, or NERO must absolutely
perish. And to this most savage act SENECA, and BVRRHVS (I grieve to speak it)
were not only privy, and consenting, but SENECA the author also, upon the
same supposition of necessity. Meanewhile, as if luck did favor the design,
AGERINVS entering to deliver his message, ANICETVS impudently drops a naked
sword between his legs, and presently apprehends him, as transmitted by her
with that sword to murder CAESAR. So the poor fellow was immediately created a
property to countenance his ladies killing, and was executed ANICETVS, thus
instructed, and fitted, sets forward with all possible diligence, and where he
found such people in the way as had flockt to the shore in great numbers from
the parts about, with lights, or torches, clambring the rocks, and cliffes, and
pestering the shores, to gaze at the wonder, he drives them home, and left all
places solitary, saving where he went himself. And here it must not be
forgotten that notwithstanding any power permitted by NERO to this instrument
of ruin, and his brace of inhumane butchers, yet was it very far from his
intention to auow the fact, but to have it blazed, and believed among the
vulgar, that his ambitious mother, conspiring to vsurp the empire, sent
AGERINVS to murder him, and that upon his apprehension she finding her drifts
discovered slew her self, to avoid the shame of a public conviction for so
capital, and so unnatural a treason. Whatsoever therefore we read afterward
touching ANICETVS, and his carriage, must all of it be interpreted by that
chief intention. So there is no greatness of power, when it would extremely
abuse it self, which is not glad to think of means how to avoid the note of
wickedness. An illustrious proof of the hateful deformities which are
naturally seen in doing evil, and of the honorable beauties, and graces
which do as naturally shine in the contrary.

. VIII. The manner of Agrippina's murder exactly described.
ANICETVS therefore coming to the house, besets it round with part of his
entrusted forces, to prevent all euasions either of persons, or reports, which
might endanger, or publish the business till it was done. Finding the gates of
the palace shut, he breaks them open, enters, lays hold on such of the house
as he meets, and stops not, till by way of surprise he rusheth up to the very
doors of her private lodgings, which the ROMANS (for the majesty of such a
person) reputed sacred, and inviolable. There he only finds a few of her
night-watch, and those, as it seemd, not armed (for NERO had taken away her
guards of GERMANS before) the rest being fled for fear. In all which passages,
ANICETVS seems to have intended nothing more then only to hinder AGRIPPINA
from hearing of his approach, who mutually hating him, was known to her now to
be her mortal enemy. She who till this instant lay deeply musing with her
self, and grew more and more solicitous, that neither any messenger came from
her son, no nor that even AGERINVS, her own messenger, did return, suddenly
heard all silent about abroad, which happened, because ANICETVS had frighted the
people home, and then soon after molested her with this tumult, whereof as the
reasons were to her unknown, so they were the certain signs of some extreme
calamity at hand. In her chamber there was not any light at all but a small
one, which thing did even it self, make a show of somewhat in it like a
funeral gloominesse, nor was any of all her people about her but one
maidseruant only, and she (of whom there was no reason to look for more
fortitude then her men had discovered) being beckned out, did likewise forsake
the room, though her mistress had said unto her; And thou will also leave me.
But the just cause of her departure immediately appeared, for AGRIPPINA, casting
her eye back, sees ANICETVS enter with HERCVLEVS, and OLOARITVS. Their
merciless minds, euery-where transparent in the fact, were not slightly
foretold by their silence, for it is not remembered that any of one them spoke a
word. This ghastly dumb show, which was provided for perdition, not for parlea,
did not for all that make her speechless, but like a great lady continuing
mindful as well of the empress, as of the mother in her person, demanded the
cause of their so rude, and unseasonable entrance, saying by way of
preocupation, If their errand was to visit her from her son, they might
return, and tell him the joyful news that she was well amended, if to commit
the heinous deed, she did believe nothing bad, or hard of him, and was sure he
never signd their warrant for her murder. But nothing moved herewith they cast
themselves about her; HERCVLEVS with a short club (who notwithstanding the
affinity of name had nothing in him of heroic HERCULES) marshald himself at
the beds head (as I conceive it) the other two at the sides, for more are not
named to have entered. OLOARITVS, without further preface, beginning to
vnsheathe his sword, it is not found that she either shrickt, or wept, or
vainly begd for favor, but in retractation of her pretended better opinion,
laid her bare belly open, and challenged him to strike that, as deserving it,
for having brought forth monster NERO. Which while it gave perhaps some little
pause, or stop to the hand of OLOARITVS, troubled with the horror of such a
voice, and action, her self at the same time (for what time else more
agreeable?) stepping suddenly (says DIO) out of her bed, HERCVLEVS steyd her,
by discharging a blow upon her head with his churlish bat, and stonisht her,
and the sword then finished the work with many foines She made what wards, or
fense she could; for otherwise she needed not to have endured so many vvounds
as she did, before she died. And it sorted properly with the matchless
majesty of her blood, and the fierceness of her fiery spirit, to die as
vnvvillingly as she could, being it was that she could not die revenged. Her
deaths wound was in her breast, if the author of the tragedy of OCTAVIA does
not therein use his professions privilege.

. VIII. Nero's behavior, and words in private, upon the view of Agriprina's
corse; where the fame of their incest is likewise scanned.
THe murder thus committed, the body was left where the breath departed, and
NERO (waiting upon the event) had present word thereof. Many in those times,
and they not uncertain authors, says SVETONIVS (who does often covertly
encounter with the judgments, and inclinations of TACITUS) that he came in
person to the place where the corpse lay, and (as if the rest of his doings had
else been little, or nothing) beheld it crowner-like all over, praising this
part, and dispraysing that, as if he had been to censure a statue. Which
SEVERINVS BOETIVS in his book of consolation, worthily marshalls at the foot
of NERO'S inhumanities, as the greatest. And that he did not only distinctly
view, but both handle her limbs, and also tell her wounds, is testified by
ZONARAS. There goes a rumor also that he saw her body opened, to behold the
place of his conception. For which notwithstanding there is no authenticke
testimony that I can find; nor other ground of conjecture (if that may be a
ground) then a mere supposition, that she was embowell'd before her burning.
Sure I am, that no credible author has avouched it concerning AGRIPPINA,
whose funeral, and confusion were so near conioignd, as left small place and
lesser use for such a rituall office. They say moreover, that while he was thus
profanely emploid he grew thirsty, and in sight of that piteous object,
quenched his drowth with drink, who should rather have done it with his tears,
and at the end of this unnatural survey he gave out such an odd farewell as
was viler (says DIO) then the murder it self, for thus he impenitently said,
that He did not suppose he had had so fair a mother. The sentence
nevertheless does in part acquit him from her incestuous familiarity. For
how was it strange to him that his mother should be so handsome, if she had
been his concubine? CLVVIVS RUFUS, a consularie man, always at NERO'S elbow,
and in a most nocent court a most innocent courrier, was likely enough both to
know what he writ, and to write what he knew, and he has assured us, that NERO
was upon the point of yiedling to his mothers profane allurements, had not
SENECA found means to terrify him from it. How it happened, that his action not
concurring with his will, the rumor of the crime should hold, other worthy
authors have certifide. For into his college of concubines he had received a
common curtisan, only because she was reputed to be as like AGRIPPINA as like
might be, and thereupon he would boast himself to his companions, that he had
been with his mother* How far in true case of conscience it was differing
from actual commission is not difficult to decide, being every where esteemed
within a small degree equivalent. Those other particulars, touching the
inspection, are not therefore incredible because incomparably barbarous, or
because some writers (who^ TACITUS had seen) deny it; for other noble
authors, and constant fame condemn him, nor does the cruel curiosity hereof
ablude from the rest of his. A man who grew by degrees so infinitely wicked,
that nothing can be fatherd so horrible upon him, which his suitable manners
would not render credible. Though he was not therefore to be slanderd, for our
common proverb, A sin to belie the devil, is none of the worst. But his
usage of young BRITANNICVS in the very first bud of his empire, when he most
affected, and most had need to seem good, his usage afterward also of the
detrunked heads of his innocent wife, OCTAVIA, and of CORNELIUS SYLLA (to
speak of nothing else) are as so many arguments to tell us, that our authors
do not probably wrong him in these most infamous reports concerning his
behavior over his murtherd mother. The case of BRITANNICVS a most competent
parallel. AGRIPPINA was by nature NERO'S mother; BRITANNICVS by nature his
cosen german, and by adoption his brother: AGRIPPINA by her practices procured
the empire for NERO; BRITANNICVS ought to have had it as immediate heir:
AGRIPPINA was murtherd in the fifth year of NERO'S reign; BRITANNICVS in the
very first. Compare the good man to himself in both these examples. It was not
enough for him to poison this prince, but to make sure he should be
irremediablie sped, himself would see the hagg LOCVSTA, boil the stuff in his
own sight, and when the operation of the first confection was not found
swift enough, he buffeted her with his own hand, for presuming to excuse
it, as in favor of his honor had it been made to work to presently, adding
words, in refutation of her vanity, nothing inferior in their horror to those
which were used over AGRIPPINA, for thus he replide, I am afraid belike of the
Julian Law, meaning the law enacted by JULIUS CAESAR against poysning. But to
assure us, that he even vvantonly affected the height it self of all damnable
deeds, we are to understand, that upon a second boiling, and trial of the
liquor, when LOCVSTA now had fully pleased him, because it was immediately the
bane of that beast to which they had given it, then lo, he far outwent the
licentious allegation of his privileged impunitie with other words, and
actions. For he did not only not punish her (therein after a manner just,
because himself was the author to her of the preparations) but highly
extolled her, as a special instrument of his uses; yea more, he enfeoft her in
lands, and lordships, and to provide that the art might not perish, caused her
to profess, and assigned scholars. Look upon this precursorie dramma of
BRITANNICVS, and then doubt of the truth of his behavior, and words, over
mangled AGRIPPINA.

. VII. A short speculation touching Agrippina's pedigree, and death.
THis was the end of IVLIA AGRIPPINA, the greatest, and most nobly borne lady
under heaven, united by consanguinitie to all the emperors, from her kinsman
JULIUS CAESAR downward: AUGUSTUS her great grandfather by the mother, TIBERIUS
her great uncle by the father, CALIGVLA her brother by the whole blood,
CLAUDIUS so near of kin unto her, that he ought not to have been her husband,
NERO her son, an emperor of her own creation, and which makes most for the
glory of her authority, able to dedicate her incestuous uncle a god; but this
went beyond all for endearing her to the people, that she was the lawful
daughter of GERMANICVS, who saving only as he was not consecrated divine,
stood otherwise adored in memory for the opinion of his worth, and pity of
his fortune. O height, then from which never any lady fell lower! O depth,
then into which never any fell more headlong! of filial impiety the most
horrible example; of motherly dignity the most terrible precipice! Her estate
at her death most comfortless, for having measured the degrees of felicity by
no other scale then the degrees of worldly fortune, and contemning every other
point in the sphere of things but the vertical, was suddenly thus bereft of all
together, without so much as an honest ethnicke conscience, which might be
supposed to usher her to the fields of bliss, ordaind even in their belief,
for a lasting reward to the virtuous. Euery-way therefore most unhappy, even in
this also, that by not being drowned, her name lost those altars, rites, and
temples, which her son had destinated to her memory, not so much for her honor,
as to hide his proper crime; but most of all because her soul was not of the
nature of an accident, whose separation is extinction, nor like the snuff of a
taper, to die with her body, but to remain immortal. The truth whereof NERO
felt, being continually haunted with her ghost, which no incantations, nor
sacrifices could appease till his own descended: for among his last words,
when he was to leave this life for a worse, he cried out in a sad Greek
verse, That his mother, wife, and father willd him die. A most famous warning
to do as justice would, and not to think dully of God.

. XI. The peoples inward judgment of Nero's heinous fact against his mother in
what sort outwardly expressed.
But whereas NERO calumniously intended to fasten upon his mother the fame of
her own killing, it found so small belief, that the fear of his power,
rather then the effects of his arts, prevailed for his safety. The secret
friends therefore of AGRIPPINA (for who else rather?) and if not they, yet even
the common quarrel of nature against such exquisite wickedness, found out
partakers on behalf of the world, to protest his guiltiness, and to vex his
fame with the covert exercise of freedom. For about the neck of one of NERO'S
statuas a leatherne sack was hung, to vpbraid his paricide, the punishment
whereof (in the ancient laws of ROME) was to be trussed into such a male, with
a cock, a dog, and a viper, and so to be thrown all four together quick
into Tiber. Another exposed an infant in the marketplace, with a scroll about
the neck, like the mott of an heroical device, or instructiue morrall, which
said thus much, that the parent would not foster it, for fear it should kill
the mother. And when his other evil deserts were come to such a swollen
excess, that the people forlornly bemoaned the fortune of their city, as if
the time were at that instant come, in which it was to be desolated, according
to certain blind prophesies which being masked under the venerable title of
the Sybils (though even the verses themselves pointed expressly to the nine
hundredth year from ROME built, which was above fourscore years off) NERO
proclaimed, that in the Sibylls oracles there was no such line, and therefore
it was a bastard; then they (as if sorrow had inspired them) universally
celebrated another verse, as truly one of Sibylls (nor any one of hers proved
truer) the fatal argument whereof was this: That the last of AENEAS line to
reign in ROME, should be his mothers murderer.

. XII. Of Agrippina's colonie, and commentaries; and of her burial.
ANd though she was, in all other respects, most unfortunate, yet in one point
she sacrificed luckely to felicity. For it was her act, during her ful-saild
fortunes, to deduce a colonie of ROMAN Citizens to plant them among the VBII,
upon the RHENE, which, being called of her name, The colonie of AGRIPPINA,
because it was her birthplace, while her father GERMANICVS served in those
parts, General of the ROMAN armies, does at this day freshly flourish; the
chair, and princely seat of the principal clergieman in GERMANY, and first
elector. As for her learned commentaries which she left written touching the
fortunes of her house, they are almost utterly lost, saving only as PLINY the
older, and CORNELIUS TACITUS have cited out of them a fragment, or two, which
are their only remains, (our misfortune more then hers) for any thing known
to me to the contrary. The very same night of her murder (such was the
odious haste) she was laid forth on a banqueting bed, and funerally burned,
without other hearse, or greater solemnity. So the old text of the twelve
tables, wherein it was commanded, that no man should plain, or polish the wood
used for the burning of bodies, seems not in her case infringed. Neither,
during all NERO'S days, was the earth which had been broken-vp to make her
funeral fire-pitt, cast in again, or the ground it self either raild about,
or otherwise enclozed. After his death, her houshold-people bestowed a simple
sepulcher upon her, in the place where TACITUS has described it, near the way
to MISENVM, and the high-seated house of the dictator CAESAR, ouer-looking the
bay of BAIAE. That very sepulcher, at this day extant, and called AGRIPPINA'S,
is figured on the roof, and sides with sphinxes, and griphons, but greatly
sullied with the smoke of torches, and lights borne in by such as enter.
GEORGE SANDYS, as an eyewitness testifies it, in his generous trauails. Those
figures seem to have been the badges, or symbols of her ancestrie. For
AUGUSTUS CAESAR (says PLINY, and SVETONIVS) used the sphinx in his signet, or
seal of arms; and ANTONIUS AVGVSTINVS (whom some have styled the prince of
antiquaries) has published out of his treasury a coigne with a sphinx, as one
of that emperors coigns, who was her maternall ancestor.

To declare what the griphons signify, some OEDIPVS, or oracle must be found;
unless perhaps they were the tesseras, or tokens of honor, belonging to the
CLAVDII, her paternal progenitors, as the sphinxes were of her mothers
kindered. If any would rather have them stand for AGRIPPINAS inuectiues against
POPPAEA SABINA, as a most fair, but a most cruel beast, and against NERO
himself, as a most griping biformed monster, or to lock up under them some
other allusiue, or moral sense, I will not dispute the matter. The Sun to
whom they were anciently sacred must give that more certain light. My first
divination pleases my self best, as that which I repute most probable And
here the marvelous story of AGRIPPINA AUGUSTA ends, which I have with alike
faithfulness as care, drawn out of the most authenticke testimonies, and the
clearest lights which the reason and nature of the things themselves would
eliciently bear.

CAAP. XVI. AN ECLIPSE OF THE SVNNE, AND THE DAY OF AGRIPPANA'S DEATH OBSERVED.
THis happened when VIPSANIVS, and FONTEIVS were Consuls, in the very year of
that grand eclypse of the Sun which XIPHILINE says was such, that the very
stars of heaven appeared. That solemn feast, QVINQVATRVS, in honor of
MINERVA, to the celebration whereof she was most officiously invited by her
son, with purpose to have her dispatched out of the world, was upon the fifth
day after the Ides of March (including the Ides, according to the Gruterian
Fragments of ROMAN inscriptions) and her plotted shipwreck was upon the very
night of that feast. Her tragadie therefore, by this computation, fell upon the
twentieth of March* but constituting the QVINQVATRVS (as some more warrantablie
do) upon the thirteenth Kalends of April, it was then the one and twentieth
of March. A greater argument of divine wakings over the doings of men, that
afterward upon the very same day of the month, upon which this mighty empress
perished, the news of the revolt of GALLIA, which drew on NERO'S destruction,
came first of all to NERO'S knowledge. This eclipse, and other signs, all of
them declarations of a just offense taken in heaven at a fact which far outwent
all aerie monsters, and common prodigies, gave occasion to noble TACITUS to
break forth into anger, at the long patience of his Gods, who sufferd NERO to
continue in life, and villainy, rather showing therein his sense of the
indignity, then to insinuate a carelessness in powers divine. Howbeit, his
words sound not well, and LIPSIVS, as well as SAVILE, notes to us an Epicurean
faith in them. Otherwise, what are a few years permitted to malefactors for
repentance, or to render them inexcusable at the iudgement-day, compared to
that eternity which shall punish them? Nor could gods forbearance of NERO
seem too long, for a thousand years are short, and the vengeance which
ouertooke him late to TACITUS, ouertooke him soon to the truth; the weight of
the vengeance considered. When the senate, and people sacrificed at his coming
to ROME, for joy of his preservation (for that was the name which office found
out to divert the note of crime) that grand eclips of the Sun, seen (says
PLINY) in ITALY between seven and eight, in ARMENIA between ten and
eleven, showed an horror at their offerings. Nor that the vnaptest divination,
for never were men so sold over to baseness of flattery, and irreligious
simulations as at this time they, to content, and assure their NERO. XIPHILINE,
out of DIO, befriends the Sun, in saying the whole face of his light was
darkened in that obscuration (which JOSEPH SCALIGER, and reason denies) for
that part was unhappy which was vnhidden, nor did this actual eclipse portend
these deeds, but mourn their doings, for it happened, according to MARCIANVS,
upon the eleventh Kalends of May, or the one and twentieth day of April, the
very month-day it self after AGRIPPINA'S death. The constant rule which
foreshowes eclipses led the learned to expect some dismal event, none more
unnatural then this mother-slaughter. He was then in the fifth year of his
empire, and so far within the fifth, as from within October, till the aforesaid
day of March.

CHAP. XVII. NERO'S PART AFTER HIS MOTHERS END, TOWARD THE CLOZE OF HIS FIRST
FIVE YEARS.
But the crime of NERO did not determine in the killing of her. For the
charging her as with highest treason when she was dead, and her life being
taken away without defense, or notice, upon that supposition, by the pro^pter
authority of SENECA then of BVRRHVS, added calumniation to paricide. Though
this was no improbable rumor, considering both her mind, and her menaces. But
SENECA from the very first entrance of NERO, strongly concurred to bar her
from svvaying in empire, and it was he, and his party in court which first
outed PALLAS, her principal instrument, and finally eiected her. And therein
he was not thought to have deserved amiss of mankind, or of the ROMAN name,
her nature being bloody, fiery, and busy, as altogether became the root of
such an offspring. But the fact once committed, and a wide passage set open for
the introduction of his dearest POPPAEA, through the deadly wounds of
AGRIPPINA, there rose a new care how to satisfy the world. A knot more hard to
untie, then the vnstringing of her life. At the last yet, among all the salues,
and remedies thought upon in a case so scandalous, a letter was divised by
SENECA in NERO'S name to the conscript Fathers, wherein with much preface of
sorrow, having declared his own certain danger, and the wonder of his narrow
escape from being murdered by her procurement, he also used these passionate
words, as QVINCTILIAN cites them, I do not as yet either believe I am safe, or
care whether I am or no. As if says TACITUS (probably reflecting upon the same
sentence) the man had been angry that himself had not rather perished. And
though it was held a mere dissimulation* yet could he say no less, and
nature might return with such a compungent quicknes after his mind grew
clearer (which always happens) that not only the sense of those words, but his
weepings for her might be also true. His gripes in conscience, and affrights in
his senses are euery-where confessed. The success of NERO'S epistle left a
grievous taxation upon the secretary who endited it, because while he went
about to show the reason, and necessity of the fact, he confessed the doing,
which was contrary to the resolution in counsel, certainly to the intended
quality of the fame, for that (says SVETONIVS) was diuulged as if she had
voluntarely slain her self to avoid an open condemnation.

CHAP. XVIII. CONSIDERATIONS TOUCHING THE PREMISES, AND COMMONVVEALE.
THese two terrible examples in the persons of BRITANNICVS, and AGRIPPINA, gave
all the world to understand, that there was now no hold, nor assurance in his
nature, for any dearness, or title, which could afford defense either against
his fear, or hate. And while the factions of a divided palace countermined
each the other, POPPAEA growing no less pernicious, then AGRIPPINA had been
turbulent, NERO got loose from all the modest ties of his breeding, and SENECA
found his authority shaken at the very bottom. For without a woman there was
no paramount working with NERO, after once he turned absolute, as now he
began to do. Therefore though SENECA was able by obsequious ACT to pluck
him from his mothers dire embraces, he could not use the poor wench to any
such purpose against the predominant POPPAEA. By those occasions a new side was
erected, consisting of such as had but little other hope then in CAESAR'S vices,
nor any other like scope as the serving of themselves. As for the Senate and
people, they had very small care, or feeling in general what the prince did
unjust for his own satisfaction, in some few particulars, upon what grounds
soever, so long as it went well with themselves. Though by the words in TACITUS
of such as detracted from the glory of PoeTVS THRASEA, in the case of the
SYRACVSAN plays, many points of estate might have been better ordered then
they were, even within the commended five years And though wicked deeds should
not be done at all, yet when they were don by him whom they could not punnish,
even good men were glad to make the best of that which neither could be
recalled, nor helped. A patriots, and a wisemans office.

CHAP. XIX. THE GHOST OF AGRIPPINA, AND OTHER APPARITIONS AFFLICTING NERO.
THe death of his mother in the spring of the year, brought forth a fresher
spring of popular delights, and as if her life, like an unseasonable bar, had
hitherto hindered the fulness of such benefit, the blessings of a golden age
immediately seemed to follow. Banished persons were recalled, other acts of
clemency exercised, and plays upon plays, for entertainment of general
affections, set forth, and celebrated. Her relics in the mean while remained
honor-lesse. Another scandal of NERO'S reign. But though her name, and
memory was thus of purpose ouer-borne, yet, as if that fellnesse of spirit
which she had alive, were grown more violent since she died, her appearing
ghost, and the furies of hell, with whips, and firebrands, by his own
confession haunted him at times, and tormented him ever after. For avoiding of
which infernal vexations, he consulted, and practiced with magitians, to come
to her speech, and entreat her forgiveness. A vain attempt, when it was his
conscience which formed his imagination, and acted in his senses; neither had
SIMON Magus whom he specially favored, but SIMON PETRVS, the proper receipt
of quieting souls, had he sought it. Guiltiness is the immortal fiend of
grievous crimes, and conuerts the conscience to an hell on earth; nor is there
cause for the wise or sober to repine at the seeming felicities of evil
princes, because their minds are incessantly tormented. Nothing can afford
sound peace but only innocence. This is the first, and only mention of NERO'S
use for magic, to which (says PLINY) he was extremely adicted. DIO adds,
that he presented to the people most magnificent shows, and plays to the
honor of his mothers memory, soon after her murder. But far beyond all his
princely doings in this jolly, and Iouial kind (if I may use those lighter
epithets) was the ordaining of his fiue-yearely plays, and prizes at ROME, in
emulation of those other, the most famous of Greece, and of all the world,
called of their place OLYMPIAN, and with universal confluence celebrated in
ELIS, a province of PELOPONESVS. His blossoming youth, and light opinions most
easily carried him to things pleasant, and in appearance glorious.

CAAP. XX. OF THE FIVE-YEARLY PLAYS, AND PRIZES INSTITVTED AT ROME BY NERO,
AND OF HIS STVDIES.
He had accomplished five years of empire, and as much more as from October
till January, when he entered his fourth Consulship, having for his fellow in
office CORNELIUS COSSVS LENTVLVS. In perpetual remembrance of which space of
years complete, he ordained Prizes, and Plays, which of his own name were
styled by him NERONIA, provided that upon every fifth years end they should
for ever be kept and solemnized. The compass of time between the OLYMPIAN
agons comprehended only four years full, and was termed on OLYMPIAD: these
other Agons (for that is the proper word) contained the finished revolution of
five years, which the ROMANS called Lustrum. Excepting that diversity, of
computation, the rest of the institution agreed with the Greek rule. NERO'S
Prizes, or Agons have three several titles, Music, Actiuitie, and
Horse-races; and in the word Music those trialls of wit which were made in
prose, and verse, and are mentioned in TACITUS, were undoubtedly understood.
This imitation cannot be discredited, because he was the author; for it
boasted noblensse in an high degree, and that also gloriously acknowledged by
decree of the Senate in this present coigne.

NERO himself had the honor of eloquence in these first agons at ROME: an
honor worthy for a prince to affect, specially, where not only the advancement
of language, and civil letters, but of wisdom, and virtue, and of the common
good are arguments, or final causes of that affectation. His principal end in
this foundation was the glory of his name. The garland belonging to the
victory of playing on the harp was his highest ambition. ZOSIMVS diuides the
agons of this festiuitie into only two sorts, scenicke and gymnicke, leaving
out the horse-races. Stageplayes certainly had now also their places here,
but not the pantomime, or mute actor, who by speaking gestures, and change of
postures did silently express what either the poet expressed in words, or the
music in notes. Wrestlings, runnings, driuings of chariots, Circensian races,
and the like, took up the remainder of the time. Succeeding princes vpheld
this institution, and when it was out-worne with neglect and time, GORDIANVS
the younger revived it, and by his best means, endeauor'd to make the
fiue-yearly custom everlasting; it was so pleasing to the multitude. Bread,
and plays (says IVVENAL) the only care of the common sort at ROME, nor does
TACITUS in his history speak otherwise of them in NERO'S time. For the
service of this magnificent foundation he finished upon the next ensuing year
his Thermae, and Gymnasium, which (as PHILOSTRATVS says) were most admirable
works. DEMETRITS the CYNICK (when CAESAR, the Lords, and people, kept the first
feast of the dedication of those buildings with all sorts of joy, and
sacrifices) had almost incurred a capital mischief, by openly reproving the
use of Thermae, or warm bathes, because it did soften manhood, and led to
luxury. His reasons were rather untimely, then untrue. The ancient GREEK
Gymnasium was divided into three chief spaces, or actiuitie-yards, fitted with
buildings, and beautified with images in a stately manner, those courts or
fields severally named the Xystus, the Plethrium, and the Maltho, and to them
belonged the Hierus and Tetragonon, two other courts, or places. These were as
the schools of such manly maistries, for which at the OLYMPIAN games, there
was either place, or prize. The judges, called Hellanodiki, were reputed
sacred, and so were likewise the trialls themselves. The estimation of a
victory was great above all belief, when CICERO (nor that ouerreachingly)
has left it written in one of his orations, that to have been declared best,
though but at leaping, wrestling, or the like exercises of manhood in those
public and general trials, was held a matter of as much glory, as it was at
ROME to ride in triumph. A thing never granted there but for subduing kings,
and nations in set battle with the slaughter of at least five thousand armed
enemies. Neither came they to be received into the cities of whence they were
but with admirable preparations and celebrities upon their return, as it well
appears in VITRVVIVS, but infinitely better in the prince of lyrick poets
PINDARVS. The judges (whose authority was most religiously reverenced) did
after the agon award the garland. The parties name was ceremoniously delivered
to the Kerykes, or as it might be among us to the heralds, and officers of
honor, to proclaim it with sound of trumpet in the full, and open theater. The
garland it self at the OLYMPIAN prizes was of Olive, and the honors, and
privileges of the victor incredible. EVTYMIVS, one of them, attained in remote
antiquity, to the opinion of a demigod. PAVSANIAS has the strange story how
he outwrestled the devil* such a champion he was reputed. To the honor
perhaps of this EVTYMIVS, for the more countenance (as I take it) and grace of
the NERONIA, was that gallant, and flourishing coigne, stamped at NERO'S
commandment. His victory was on foot, but NERO (as it seems) has mounted
him in his money to a triumphal chariot.

CONSTANTIVS LANDVS (Earl of Complana in Italy) explicates this pompous
figure otherwise; the person in it to stand for the emperor NERO, and the name
EVTYMIVS to signify secure; as if it were not EVTYMIVS in the coigne (which
after that manner of writing signifies (as I think) nothing at all) but
EVTHYMVS, the name of that demigodded champion in PAVSANIAS. That noble
gentleman's easy conjecture* I infringe not, for without reproof of the coigns
inscription I cannot make good mine own, no more then he can his. But I do
assure my self, and others, that coignes were published with historical
matter, and titles, to revive the memory of ancient stories for their more
venerations sake: and nothing can be truer then that false writing is sometimes
found in marbles, coignes, and other moniments. The common fault of un
ouerlookt artificers. This princely money minted by NERO in reuiuall of the
rape of the SABIN women under ROMULUS, may abundantly witness that custom
which I mention on behalf of my conjecture.

The study of NERO was versification, which TACITUS thinks he borrowed,
having no gift therein at all. But SVETONIVS (who in more things then this
disagrees with TACITUS though vn-named) both proves he had, and proves it
well. It was one of his exercises to translate Greek tragedies into Latin,
who made true tragedies in blood, such as even the GREEKS never fained. But
whatsoever his talent was that way, his admiration of it well deserved that he
should have made prerogative verses, according to his fortunes. His own
persuasion as well of ability, as of his long wind, was so magnificent, that
he meant to write in verse the affairs, and stories of the ROMANS, in four
hundred books. Such a reckoning as would have been much more conscionable,
had APOLLO, or the MUSES made it. ANNAEVS CORNVTVS (whom he intended to use as
a principal master in that faculty) durst say they were to many, and when some
one or other urged against him the example of CHRYSIPPVS, who composed as great
a number of books, CORNVTVS reioignd, and said, that the works of CHRYSIPPIVS,
containing wise discourse, were profitable. This distinction had almost
extinguished the speaker; for NERO'S surreioinder was a sentence which sent
CORNVTVS into banishment. The truth is, he had a vain in verse, and SENECA in
his Natural Questions cites him upon occasion, and highly praises one of his
lines; which is indeed a dainty one. In PLINY the argument of one of his
poems appears to have been the praise of his POPPAEA. And MARTIAL (who seems
to favor him) insinuates, that he wrote like a learned wanton. So there is no
doubt to be made at all of his poetical Genius, though it pleased LVCAN (in
CASAVBONS SVETONIVS) unmannerly to repeat an halfe-verse of his to the tune of
a loud report backward, where their goddess CLOACINA was served. There seems
not a grain of good salt in all his writings, but admirations, and defixions
of the soul upon beauteous outsides. A wit of the middle region, which only
served to sweeten his sensualities. The arts he delighted-in declare as much,
for though they were noble, yet far beneath the majesty of a princes mind. No
man discommends the true fingrings, or delicate touches of a master, upon a
well-strung instrument, nor the strokes of a skillful pencill in painting, nor
the art of grauing. These were his. But a prince ought to mount higher, and
think better. This objection was mot-with. Therefore, after supper it was his
custom to admit to his ear, and presence, such as TACITUS, (speaking
compass) calls Doctors of Wisdom, to avoid the word Philosophers, as not
being Latin enough. They were admitted so far. But his hearing (as it seems)
dealt enuiously with his understanding, for their sayings suncke not in. Yet
neither did they want gravity, nor he liberality. Those studies the chief
title which SENECA had to gather all his riches, as he himself acknowledged
to NERO. The riotous youths of these our times universally more studious of
witty then discreet, of odd conceits then solid. No title to access, and
copious cherishments with princes, more worthy then the study of wisdom, and
where it languisheth manners are evermore degenerous. A prince, according to
NERO'S garb (take him as he was popular, and not as a tyrant) would sort
rarely well with them, who do either not know, or not enough regard, that
with all his wast of wealth, and forms of vanity, he made to himself none
other friends but the vicious vulgar, and such lewd ignoble persons as lived
upon the times impurities, as TACITUS most gravely has observed in his
histories. Witty flashes do condimentally well; but, if that were their best
use, the gift of poesy were with little reason styled divine. There are who
lay other^ studies in the bottom to balasse the fiery leuities of conceit,
and only they do honor the Muses with their manners. Those other while they
unlearnedly, and miserably mistake license for freedom, are oftentimes
pleasant company, but never good.

CHAP. XXI. OF THE COUNSEL OF HISTORY FOR THE WORSER PART OF NERO'S REIGN,
AFTER HIS FIRST Quinquennium.
SVch was NERO, according to the brief I have given of him, during his first
five years; and wether the worst of that which follows should at all be
remembered, were a point to be argued, if the whole truth were not of the
necessity of history. FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS nevertheless draws a curtain over
his personal, and public exorbitancies, and leaves them vndisplaid. For I
hold it far better (says he) to bury their description in silence, then to
make known, in what measure out of measure he abused his power, through over
great prosperity, and riches, because I think it will be troublous, and
offensive. The same reverence makes me also willingly say, and think the
same. So much the rather, because all books are full fraught with particulars
which declare the great reason, why the name of NERO signifies now, by his
deserts, a tyrant in the excellency, who supposing all the world ordained for
his peculiar ends, regards nothing but the satisfaction of his own irregular
appetites, without respect to God, or man. And what monster was he not, who
though he made away the nearest of his friends, and the best of his people,
yet perpetrated such other things, as in parallel with which, those actions
though more then barbarous, do not seem intolerable?

CHAP. XXII. IN ADDRESS OF SPEECH TO MY LORD, TOUCHING THAT WHICH FOLLOWS IN
NERO'S REIGN.
SOme of the lesser matters shall not be unworthy my hand, or your Lordships
ear and view, which accustomed to most honorable objects shall avoid hereby
the horror, and offense which may rise by the contrary. For neither can the
modesty of your most noble nature delight in shameful wonders, nor stands it
with the dignity of those most royal infusions which fashion your heroicke
habits, to suffer such vices to approach within sight, which in their proper
station are far beyond the kenn of common villainies. Therefore men of tender
feelings in conscience had rather believe them to be fained, then done indeed.
JOSEPHUS (a most discreet and credible author) professiuely affirms, that the
evil will of some writers has painted NERO much more prodigious in his life
and reign, then truth would bear, but withal confesses him so bad, that
there needed no falsehoods to make him seem worse. There were also who wrote
highly in his favor, as the same JOSEPHUS says. CALIGVLA'S incest, with all
his three sisters was abominable, but the way of their use not unnatural, but
what NERO did in his male wife, SPORVS, or suffered by his titularie husband,
PYTHAGORAS (SVETONIVS calls him DORYPHORVS) are shameful wonders, and likely,
if any other else, to be of those whom JOSEPHUS singly thought were impudent
untruths, or (to use his own rough roundnesse) lies. But the best chain to
be used in the euolution of facts is composed of the linckes of time, in order
as they were done; To antedate, or postdate may be equally unequal. As for
them who delight in strange matters, they shall know what seems to me the
greatest marvel of NERO'S reign, seeing we are upon entrance into the
vvorst thereof.

CHAP. XXIII. THE PRINCIPAL WONDER OF NERO'S TIME, AND OF PRINCEDOME.
THat sacred monarckie could preserve the people of ROME from final ruin,
notvvithstanding all the prophanations, blasphemies, and scandals of tyranous
excesses, vvherevvith NERO defiled and defamed it, is the vvonder which no
other form of government could perform, and is the principal both of his
time, and of princedome it self. A vvonder of imperial majesty within the
vvonder of most extreme vnvvorthynesse. But the joints, and compactures of the
empires fabric under an head, were so supple, and solid that what SENECA
vvorthely praised in general, as the prerogative of monarckie, is exemplified
true in this. Neither is it baseness, or madness (says that famous Sage) for
thousands to take weapon in hand for the defense of one person, or with many
deaths to redeem the single life of an old perhaps, and feeble man, for they
tender their proper safeguard, while they fight for their princes, in whose
weal, or woe their own is comprehended. To this purpose he, with a great
deal more. But whereas the sentence points upon CLAUDIUS, who was that old,
and feeble man, it holds good not only to old, and feeble, but to all sorts of
princes persons, whether old, or young, tame or violent, civil, or savage. The
truth whereof appeared before in CALIGVLA, now in NERO, and after-wards in
other wicked rulers. Therefore it was possible, that the empire should be kept
together for the uses of the people of ROME, by permitting all power to one,
though it was to that inhumane SYLLA, who first of mortals taught his country
to feel (says Halicarnassian DIONYSIVS) that the Dictatorship was a tyranny;
it had not otherwise been possible. And if NERO, (in whom alone all the
corruptions which had been engendered in ROME, from the birth of ROME till his
own days, seemed drawn together into one apostem, or bile) could not
putrify those strengths which princedome gave more unto the state, then either
the commons, or the nobles when they ruled all, who can enough admire, or
reverence that sacred institution which virtue crowns, and vice cannot
dissolve? The excellencies of it speak their author: for so divine a good as
the fast connection of mankind together in one under one, could be the gift
of only God, who in his government of heaven, and earth, does use none other
form; himself a King and monarck.

THE END OF THE FIRST FIVE YEARS OF NERO, HIS MOST COMMENDED TIME.
CHAP. XXIIII. THE REVOLT IN BRITAIN AND OTHER TROUBLES OF WAR.
IN ROME there was nothing all the while but songs, and dances, and all sorts
of public shows, and iollities, some of them most desperately lascivious,
and impudent (NERO their author, and example) without much cause of fear, or
sadness to any but the good. But these were suddenly either sowr'd, or
marred for the time, with the news, and cumber of the maine revolt in
BRITAIN. To show how the ROMANS came to be in the way of so terrible a blow
as they received now, I will give a brief rehersall of their first arrival,
till the Consulships of CAESONIVS PAETVS, and PETRONIVS TVRPILIANVS, under
NERO, the year and time of this furious defection. And if I shall seem
somewhat more copious in recapitulation then for the occasion, it is
nevertheless within use and decorum, because it will compendiously serve for
all that was ROMAN in our Island.

. I. An introductorie sum of affairs in Britain from the Romans first
entrance under Julius Caesar, till the present revolt under Nero.
ONe hundred and ten years therefore were now outrunne, from the Consulships
of CNAEVS POMPEIVS and MARCUS LICINIVS CRASSVS, since CAIUS JULIUS CAESAR, in
the name of the Senate and people of ROME, transported certain legions, for
glories sake, and for the more quiet possession of his conquests in GALLIA, to
invade, and conquer BRITAIN. A thing which never any ROMAN had attempted, and
SCIPIO did at most but harken-after. If that at leastwise be the meaning of
PYTHEAS, the frivolous MASSILIAN in STRABO. To empeach this lofty purpose, the
state of the VENETI (that chief commonweal of GALLIA ARMORICA) had made a
puissant league arming out to sea above two hundred sail of men of war to
fight with CAESAR, because BRITAIN (says STRABO) was their principal mart; of
which his conquest would bereave them. It was the refuge also of the calamitous
people of the continent; who sought to be safe and free from the power of the
ROMANS, against whom the BRITANNS evermore relieved, and supported the GALLS.
Upon which strict assistence CAESAR chiefly grounded the pretense of his
invasion, truly persuading himself that he could not hold GALLIA firm,
unless withal he subdued BRITAIN. But the VENETI were solicitous for their
neighbors, and allies in vain. For their noble combination proved tragically
pernicious to their fortunes, lives, and liberties. CAESAR therefore
irresistably goes on. For the spirit of conquest, which moved thus forceably in
him, is a most vehement spirit, and stirs not at all, but for the higher ends
of the worlds supreme commander; as to bring back commonweales to monarckies;
to alter kingdoms from one family, and people to another; to make one kingdom
of many; to humble the insolent; to new mould and fashion the barbarous; to
blend and mingle nations; to confound, and extirpate others; or the like; at
his celestial pleasure. If it were otherwise, why should there be at one time
a CYRUS, long after him an ALEXANDER, or now a JULIUS CAESAR, rather then at
another?

. II. The Britanns at bloody odds among themselves, upon Julius Caesar's
invasion.
THe island then was full of civil wars, as well because it was full of petie
kings, as for other perplexiue respects, growing out of the distinction of
originals among the most early, or most ancient races, and the later ones,
CASSIBELINE in BRITAIN, head of the one, and, of the other, DIVITIACVS in
GALLIA, to whom king GALBA succeeded. Contrary to that preceptiue oracle of
HOMER, let there be but one king; for more then one do not well. The best of
APOLLOS oracles no truer. In this estate of things the weaker states of
BRITAIN could not otherwise preserve themselves then by the counterpoise of
leagues; till the endless iniquities of disagreeing princes enforced parties
to fly under foreigne guards as to avoid oppressions at home. This the
tragical case of that poor distressed prince MANDVBRATIVS, whose father (late
king of the TRINOBANTS) was slain by CASSIBELINE. MANDVBRATIVS himself (whom
domesticke moniments call by another name) compelled to quit his country, did
not therefore quit his claim. So notable an opportunity of the ilanders
intestine divisions (though not acknowledged by CAESAR, as a motive of his
attempt) could not but be a special hand to becken him over, and bring him in.

. III. The effects of Caesar's two invasions, and his final return out of
Britain.
CAESAR'S first invasion with only two legions did rather knock at entrance
then six a title. The second with eight hundred sail, and aboard of them above
thirty thousand ROMAN foot, and two thousand horse, in five whole legions (a
body of force somewhat proportionable to the enterprises quality) was
principally dedicated to the recovery of his shine of honor, endangered to the
darkning notes of rashness, and infelicitie in the year next before; from
which the death of IVLIA his only child, the wife of POMPEI, which happened
(says SENECA) during these BRITAN affairs, was not able to withdraw him;
though a matter of such infinite importance, that it dissolved the bar which
kept their emulations from encountering, and drew up the floodgate it self,
through the which whole diluges of humane blood shortly after rushing in, did
ouerflow the ROMAN world. In that most jealous point of reputation CAESAR
competently satisfied himself by those performances of his armies which the
compass of one summer saw effected, and his own incomparable commentaries
specify. Where nothing sounds more honorable or shows more conspicuous then
the restoring of MANDVBRATIVS to his fathers throne upon the petition of the
TRINOBANTS. Touching the general effects of his labors, STRABO speaks the
truth, that divine JULIUS CAESAR did no great thing in BRITAIN, though
(whatsoever CICERO sportingly says to the contrary) he returned enricht with
many captives, and store of spoils. It is withal most true, that it was not
an act of ordinary magnanimity, or felicity, to show the way over the
separating sea into such a most mighty and most populous Island. And yet he did
somewhat more then only show the way over. For the testimonial arguments of
conquests (hostages, and some yearly payments) were first by him ordained here
in part; and CASSIBELINES hands were tied fast (in the articles of his render)
from molesting MANDVBRATIVS. One only particular of all the spoils remains
remembered, a brestplate embroidered, or set with British pearls, which CAESAR
consecrated to mother VENUS, as to the most friendly patroness of his
fortunes, and the original of his family, in token whereof he ware a seal
(says DIO) with an armed VENUS in it. Pearls nothing clear nor ponderous,
but duskie, and small (says PLINE) and therefore altogether unworthy of such a
goddess. But as they were the fruits of our OCEAN, and the purchase of
CAESAR, they had a greatness of value, and a brightness of luster which might
easily make them exceed Oriental unions of the clearest water. As for the
BRITAN captives, CICERO is pleased to write, that he feared none would be
found among them either musicians or scholars, whereby to advance their
masters benefit by their sales in markets. A scorn to the rudeness of the
peoples breeding. No man of note taken prisoner, but LVGOTORIX, whom gloriously
enough CAESAR calls a noble captain. But the Druids, Bards, and Eubages, (the
three orders in AMMIANVS MARCELLINVS of the old BRITISH Academs) founded by
OSTHANES the second (as PLINY, me thinks insinuates) may sufficiently relate,
and blunt that scoff of TVLLIES. To be subdued by the more polite, and noble
is no infelicitie to the barbarous, so as corporal servitude, and real
injuries be forborne. For that wild freedom, or rangeing humor which is but
merely natural, how sweet and precious soever it be, the same, without the
fillings of liberal acts, and file of honorable manners, which constitute and
accomplish a worthy man, is but merely brute, and savage. Things thus ordered,
CAESAR presently retired into GALLIA and left nothing behind him to uphold his
fresh atchieuements here but the awefull majesty of the names of ROME, and
CAESAR. Neither did he greatly need more, seeing his harvest of glory was
not such as to deserve his professiue, and particular ascription, for among
those his five famous triumphs, recorded in VELLEIVS PATERCVLVS, the BRITAN by
special name was not any.

. IIII. The Britans, and the things of Britain, a part of Caesar's triumph over
the Galls.
But CAESAR who inserted our matters into his commentaries, would not wholly
leave them out in his GALLICK triumph. For I do not otherwise understand that
place in LVCAN, where he complains how much CAESAR lost in glory, by
conquering more then GALLIA, then that the captive BRITANS were mixed with the
captive GALLS at this show: consequently, the things, or particulars of
BRITAIN, with the things of GALLIA, as well as their persons. Therefore the
image of the ouerpassed Ocean; of the i will it self on a rock, the cliffes, and
downs of Kent (celebrated by QVINCTVS in an Epistle to his brother CICERO)
father THAMESIS; those chariots of war out of which (says DIODORVS SICVLVS)
the BRITANS fought like the old heroes of TROY, and which by a proper word were
called Esseda, CASSIBELINES forrest-campe, or fastness (misnamed a town) the
breastplate, or curace embroiderd with BRITISH pearls, and such other portable
small pageants (which by a proper word were called fercula, of being carried,
or borne about in that manner) could not be ungrateful spectacles, or not
singularly condimentall at ROME, already glutted and tired with beholding the
figures of eight hundred several towns as PLVTARCH reckons) forceably taken
by CAESAR in GALLIA, during there his ten years wars, and in one day all
presented.

. V. Of the Britans, and the British chariot of Moecenas under AUGUSTUS CAESAR.
HIs next successor OCTAVIUS, who, in the consularie registers of the Capitol,
is CAIUS JULIUS CAESAR OCTAVIANVS, second Emperor, and first AUGUSTUS, had
somewhat else to thinke-of, at his entrance into the empire, then the affairs
of BRITAIN. But when the ROMAN world, recovering out of those civil miseries,
into which the murder of JULIUS CAESAR had headlong plunged it, began to
flourish a fresh, by the benefit of monarchy (the only confessed remedy)
then came he down in person as far as into GALLIA, with a purpose to
re-assail our Island, so to force upon it the keeping of covenants (as DIO
CASSIVS insinuates) about eight, or nine and twenty years from his
predecessors invasions. At this HORACE points in his Odes. Some princes
therefore of BRITAIN beholding the near approach of so black a tempest, sent
special ambassadors to deprecate the effects, and (for such reasons as STRABO
commemorates) prevailed. JULIUS CAESAR assessed upon the BRITANS of
CASSIBELINES party, a certain yearly payment (three thousand pounds, says
GALFRIDVS A^turius) and it pleased AUGUSTUS to content himself with such
petty performances as did rather serve for tokens of subjection, or
acknowledgments of tenure, then meriting to carry the weight, or name of
tribute, being customs, or tolls upon iuorie ornaments for bridles, carkanets,
or chains of amber, vessels of glass, and other toys, which passed for
merchandise betweeene the GALLS, and BRITANS. But why CILNIVS MOECAENAS (that
most ingenuous favorite of AUGUSTUS, and everlastingly renowned friend of free
studies) did ride in a British chariot, it appears not. The thing is
mentioned in PROPERTIVS, and shows somewhat of a triumphal right, or glory,
that HORACE may not vainly seem to have cast upon AGVSTVS the annexing of the
BRITANS to the rest of ROMAN subjects, nor the Senate and people of ROME to
have vnwarrantably boasted of all the three parts of the then known world
under his dominion (as in their coigns they did) if BRITAIN (so famous a limb
of EVROPE) were not within his triple pretense, three worlds combined in one.

A submission of those potentates of BRITAIN (I call them potentates whom
CAESAR would have styled kings, and STRABO aptly terms Dynasts) is evident
out of the premises. Evident also their acceptance into special protection,
or society; for thereupon they consecrated their inscribed gifts, (...)
presents, in the Capitol, with tender of their fealty. And the example of
MOECENAS seems to convince, that AUGUSTUS, in gratulation to himself of so
fair a felicity, permitted the use of special honors to special friends. A
custom which following times frequented. If MOECENAS (as he was conceitfull)
took it not up only for a fashion, as others afterward did so fast, that
PLINY complains of the cost bestowed on BRITISH chariots, and CALIGVLA'S
friends used no other to attend him, over his admirable bridge, in SVETONIVS.
All this while the island was not yoaked down with garrisons. Not a ROMAN
soldier in it. And AUGUSTUS was so indulgent to the state thereof, or so
provident for his own, in having kings for instruments of their proper
servitude, that he bred up (as the BRITISH story says) king KYMBELINE (the
third from CASSIBELINE) and the same with CVNOBELINE whom GREEKS and ROMANS
celebrate.

. VI. Of the peace of Britain, and of other rarest matters there, under
TIBERIUS CAESAR.
TO divine AUGUSTUS (for that was the style of the time) TIBERIUS JULIUS CAESAR
(according to the title of his changed name) was surrogated by adoption who
having both the lively example of his adoptiue father, and his posthumous
warrant under his own handwriting also, to justify his forbearance to enlarge
the ROMAN empire (a thing agreeable to his proper judgment) attempted nothing
which might disturb our island. Whereupon, together with the priuacy of
situation, it securely enjoyed the blessing of quietness under him. For the
auerrment of VELLEIVS PATERCVLVS, that the peace of TIBERIUS AUGUSTUS diffused
it self into the west, and into all the angles of the earth, does undoubtedly
reach to BRITAIN, if it does not by circumlocution name it also. During that
deep calm, the most heavenly light of Christian verity shone over hither
(says GILDAS, the BRITAN Sage) soon after the passion, which happened under
TIBERIUS. His former cares (recorded in PLINY, and TERTVLLIAN) for clearing
GALL, and AFRIC from inhumane superstitious, could not but accidentally
prepare the BRITANS (among whom the Druids flourished) for a more holy
character. In the life which I have diligently written of TIBERIUS there is
more. Meanewhile, such was he to us during his almost three and twenty years.

. VII. Britain menaced by Caligula Caesar. A touch of his follies, and tower.
CALIGVLA affected to seem terrible to BRITAIN, and there might be somewhat
in his head to that purpose, when it was his pleasure that his troops of
friends should wait upon him (mounted as before-sayd) over the semicircular
bay of BAIAE. But there was indeed just reason why he should both seem, and be
terrible also, when his army on this side the Alps contained, as some report
in DIO, two hundred and fifty thousand fighting men. A multitude so huge, as
was alone enough to make him have nothing to do but within himself. For which
part of the world durst profess enemy to such a ROMAN force? While he lay
houering on the coast, eager of glory, and yet withal (as if the ROMAN eagle
had been transformed into a cowardly kight, or buzzard) unwilling enough to
find out just matter for it, our island vomited forth ADMINIVS (some would have
him written ARMINIVS) the rebellious son of CVNOBELINE a BRITAN king, with a
thin company of his fellow runawayes. A more foild, and reffuse ware then the
shells which his soldiers afterward gathered. But his ends were abundantly
served. For, upon taking the submission of those fugitives, he boasted himself
(says SVETONIVS) as if the whole island had yielded it self. But for a
complete conquest, as well over sea, as land, he embatteld his huge army upon
the shores, and bent his warlicke engines against NEPTVNE, and his TRITONS,
while he, and his selected friends lanched out in their galleys, as far
perhaps as to be sea-sicke, and then returned such a victor over the BRITAN
Oeta^, as he had bin over the BRITAN island. For upon a charge sounded (that
part of the ridiculous story is commonly known) the soldiers, at his
command, gathered the shelfish they found, and stored up the shells as the
spoils of the Ocean, due to the Capitol, and Palace. Which they could not do
but upon an ebb. A time chosen out (and that a circumstance, in which the
whole salt of the stratagem lay) as if the trembling element had retired it
self not of course, but for fear of him; the noise of his artillery, arms,
and trumpets able to out-clamour and deafen, not only a quiet, or murmuring
sea, but a fierce and raging one. There followed upon the service a real
largess in money, and the galleys were carried for a great part of the way,
over land, to ROME, as sacred moniments. CALIGVLA nevertheless did not fulfill
a triumph, though his wife CAESONIA (as PERSIVS satyrically notes) ordered the
preparations for it. But that the memory of such an exploit might never
perish, he built upon the place an exceeding high tower, the same to be also a
seamarke, with fire on the top by night, as if he meant to match the Pharus it
self of ALEXANDRIA. Most contend, that this was at Brittenhuis in HOLLAND; but
LAEVINVS TORRENTIVS (a worthy man) admonishes us, that others hold it to have
been at KERBVRG, or CHERBVRG in NORMANDY. Somewhat verily of KAISARS, or
CAESAR'S name seems to remain alive in the name of the place. Others suspect,
that the tower, called by the Dutch, and us, the old man of BOLEIN, by the
French, tour d' order, at this day standing very high upon the port of BOLEIN,
is either it, or out of it. The inhabitants entitle the same to JULIUS CAESAR
as the author; which does not hinder, but that he may well be CALIGVLA. For in
the rolls of the Capitol, CALIGVLA is expressly entered CAIUS JULIUS CAESAR
AUGUSTUS GERMANICVS. Thus, of so notorious a piece of masonrie, the very seat
is doubtful. The works of foolish princes as their counsels, come to nothing.
The fame of their folly is immortal, and that alone. Caliligula came to the
Ocean as to war in Britain. The words of DIO, and XIPHILINE out of DIO. And
they compared with his intention, seem to carry his encampment and towering
structure, far enough of from HOLLAND. For as mad as he was he could not but
know, by JULIUS CAESAR'S example, there were nearer cuts over hither then so.
BRITAIN in the mean while, sat firm upon her rockie foundations, as unshaken
with the brauado, as with billows. Not a ROMAN soldier in it.

. VIII. The conquest of Britain under CLADIVS CAESAR. A rare coigne of his
concerning the state thereof.
But CLAUDIUS CAESAR, who in the fasti of the Capitol (that noble moniment) is
TIBERIUS CLAUDIUS CAESAR AUGUSTUS GERMANICVS, about twenty years before this
grand revolt of the BRITANS under NERO, professiuely revived the example of his
divine predecessor, JULIUS CAESAR, and with all sorts of warlicke provisions,
made a voyage over in person: The vulgar BRITISH history (in which neither is
all unlikely, nor untrue) assigns the occasion which CLAUDIUS took for his
coming, to be the denial of the tribute by the son of KYMBELINE, who (if he
was the same with that royal person whom the GREEK, and ROMAN authors call
CVNOBELINE) was dead before. DIO CASSIVS for the time of his death affirms no
less. There was also a tumult in the i will, because (says SVETONIVS) the
fugitives were not sent back. ADMINIVS (as I suppose) and his adherents. So
the detention of tribute seems to have been in reprisall, to force their
restitution. And here the part of that BERICVS comes aptly in, who (as DIO
says) was expulsed out of BRITAN, for sedition. The cause not hard to find,
considering the premises, if BERICVS may be thought one of the ADMINIAN
faction. But of these things let others reason. Here certainly our island first
began to feel indeed the weight of conquest. CAESAR had a MANDRVBATIVS to
induce, and train him on, and CLADIVS a banished BERICVS. The computation of
force in AUGUSTUS time, fit to hold BRITAIN in obedience (according to STRABO'S
account) was extremely under the mark. One legion and some horse. CAMDEN (the
king of our antiquaries, and not of arms only) reckons up three whole legions,
the second, the ninth, and the fourteenth, imposed by CLAUDIUS to retain his
martial purchase. Sure I am, that when the BRITANS fell from NERO, there was
another called the twentieth; all four of them mentioned in TACITUS, where he
chronicles the defection, and all four few enough. Yet NERO was so far from
augmenting the ROMAN forces here, with extraordinaries, that but for very shame
(as SVETONIVS says) he had even revoked the ligiers. Howbeit STRABO'S
estimate, supposing equity, and AUGUSTUS, might be a full proportion. For the
odds are not small in the several natures of times, which extremely alter the
states of power. A few, under a wise and venerable prince, are vertually as
many as thrice their number under a vain, or violent. With injury no force is
not weak; with justice no fewness is not strong. Sentences verifide under
NERO in BRITAIN; under whom even the deity of CLAUDIUS was made a greater
burden to the BRITANS (as appears by that of which themselves complain in
TACITUS) then CLAUDIUS himself was when alive. Among those precious coignes
which the treasury of ANTONIUS AVGVSTINVS has afforded to the world, I find
one of CLAUDIUS concerning BRITAN peaceable, omitted by all men who have of
purpose handled our affairs.

What the left hand of the image held, vnluckely appears not, in that fair
printed copy, with which it pleased a great, and generous Earl to befriend
me. It might be a garland, a cornucopia, a little winged victory, or the like,
but I could think it was some round figure, the sign of tribute-money. The
whole may signify, that CLAUDIUS, the conqueror of BRITAIN, ciuilised the
subdued BRITANS. The persons gowned habit a manifest token of it, who is
otherwise wont to be represented martial, and unclothed. And though the rudder,
or helm of a ship, which here BRITANIA holds downward in her right hand as a
rest, does ordinarily signify nothing else, in ancient ROMAN coigns, but that
the country whose figure appears upon the metal, is an island, whereunto there
is no access but by water, yet here perhaps it further notes, that not only,
the navigations of BRITAIN flourished by his means, but that tillage, formerly
neglected, did also set up now, and prosper, if that which coucheth behind, be
not the half part of a ship, but the hinder end of an antique plough. A coigne
put forth into the world after the Southern BRITANS were prouinciated, and the
ROMAN government fully settled here. Nor improbably when the colonie of old
soldiers was drawn, and planted at CAMALODVNVM, in the twelfth year of
CLAUDIUS. For that was precisely the time, as that most modest, and ancient
good friend of mine, WILLIAM CAMDEN Clarenceux, has happily, and learnedly
observed out of another of CLAUDIUS medalls. CAMALODVNVM the place, upon which
the raging tempest of rebellion did first discharge the force of it self, as
the insolences of that colonie were among the heinous sparks which firde the
wronged natives. This in general was the case, and state of BRITAIN, so far
as the ROMANS intermedled, from the first entrance of JULIUS CAESAR thereinto,
who what he could not materiallie annex to the main-land, attempted to fasten
vertuallie to the empire, as an out-worke.

CHAP. XXV. THE INTERMITTED NARRATION OF THE REVOLT OF BRITAIN UNDER NERO,
PROSECVTED.
AFter the death of consecrated CLAUDIUS, BRITAIN, with the rest of the ROMAN
world, coming under the scepter of NERO, it was now of his reign the seventh
year, CAESONIVS, and PETRONIVS Consuls, when the incensed BRITANNS, led by a
woman and a widow, reuengefullie writ her quarrel in the blood of thousands
of enemies. For such they esteemed all who were either free of ROME, or of the
ROMAN party. The causes of which sodein fury, with the bitter effects, the
estate of things foregoing, and following (as affording great lessons) deserve
a narration suitable to the majesty, though not to the length of the
introduction. And first of all (that we may admiringlie know how large a place
the evil shook) it must not be forgotten, that presently before the terrible
blow, all the countries, now comprehended under the noble names of ENGLAND,
and WALES (excepting only the I Will of MONA or ANGLESEY) were either immediately
ROMAN, as prouincial, or indirectlie, and upon the by, as seeming social. A
goodly scope of habitable element, one thousand miles in circuit, and it self
the best and greatest part of BRITAIN, full of brave people, and of native
commodities; which the ancient equity of the ROMANS should have kept, and
cherished more carefully.

For the straightned Ocean which separates it from the continent, does not
separate it from the benefits, and blessings of the continent. And if the aer
of our i will be not always the most pure, and transparent, yet is it certainly
the most temperate. But without all other commodities (and the names of ours
would fill a long inuentarie) it was alone enough for an attractiue to the
ROMANS, that not only the inferior sorts of oar, but silver also, and gold it
self lay couched in the mines of BRITAIN, which their diligence would draw
forth into light, and use; the veins of mineral coals a tresure left for us,
whose improuident wastes of wood has made them as precious as metal. The
BRITANNS themselves, who by the right of their first coming hither were
natural Lords of the soil, a people easily fashionable to the noblest arts, and
not to that mean one of making cheese, the ignorance whereof stands upon some
of them in STRABO, as a special note of barbarism. Neither were the Romans now
in any such numbers here, that insolency might thereupon securely rest it
self. For to defend their own share they at most employed but four legions,
with their ordinary aids, consisting partly of GALLS, and GERMANS, and partly
of the ilanders themselves, the legions of none but ROMANS only. All which
together could not very much surmount forty thousand, according to common
proportions. An handful of men if compared to the natives. But of this more
properly elsewhere.

. I. Of the title of the Romans to their conquests.
ANd here it seems good, once for all, to make it understood, upon what points
in doctrine, and persuasions in conscience, the old moral ROMANS iustifide to
themselves their universal conquests. This I cannot better do then in the
words of DVBIVS AVITVS, a ROMAN captain in GERMANY under NERO, before this
revolt. The forlorn nation of the ANSIBARIANS (among whom BOIOCALVS was a
chief) for necessary sustentation of their lives, would have possessed
certain border-grounds, or wastes upon the ROMAN pale in GERMANY, but for
some reason in state were denied. BOIOCALVS, (a faithful old servant of the
ROMANS) becomes their advocate, and pleads in TACITUS, among other things; That
the heavens were for the gods, the earth for men; and whatsoever had not an
owner, was every man's. AVITVS hereunto answered. That the commandment of
betters was to be obeyed. And it was the pleasure of those gods whom BOIOCALVS
appealed, that the ROMANS should be Lords of the world, to award, or judge a
way what they thought good, without brooking any vmpires but themselves alone.
A most high pretense, and as full of natural piety, as majesty. Nor had their
title to empire any poinct so excellent unto which to refer it self, as to
the will of Almighty God, who in this great game, and chesse-play of the world
disposes of power at his pleasure. So CYRUS was called his. And this title
does not seem more transcendently noble, then honestly true in the case of
those old moral ROMANS, though they most grossly erred in the object of their
worship. For they, of all other people upon earth (says that matchless
Historian, CRISPVS SALVSTIVS) were the most devout, and religious. Nor does the
apostata, IVLIANVS CAESAR, in S. CYRILS works, ascribe the raising of the
ROMAN empire to any other immediate author but divine. This opinion therefore
which confessed a celestial providence, a goodness also in that providence
toward them who depend thereupon, and a necessity of such dependencie, merits
veneration simply in it self, to the just confusion of the godless. Thus
flew the ROMANS aloft over the heads of other mortals, and prosperd in worldly
power beyond all example. If they swarued from the rule of such a belief, the
correction cost them dear; as in the massacre of VARVS and his legions under
AUGUSTUS; and now by this Virago under NERO.

. II. The estate of the Roman-Britanns immediately before the revolt.
THe ROMAN-BRITANNS, on the other side, though ouerlaid with that power, which
by having subdued the rest of the world, removed the reproach of being
overcome, were nevertheless only conquered to obey, and not to be servile
base. Which greatly to their honor TACITUS testifies for them in his AGRICOLA.
They therefore suffered their people (whom CLAUDIUS, and OSTORIVS SCAPVLA his
lieuetenant-general, had upon the conquest disarmed for fear of rebellion) to
be orderly pressed out at their musters, for the service of the ROMAN empire,
in the nature and name of aids. This kept up martial spirit among them, though
it exhausted the able bodies of the province, when they were not farthest off
from the spirit of civility. The ROMANS their examples for both. For their
honorable, grave, and most decent fashions in peace worthily wann the BRITANNS
(a noble, and imitating people) to translate them to their proper use. The
chief men's children, who were wont to be traind-vp in the blundring, and
heinous schools of the DRVIDS, had now the life of the LATIN tongue, and the
shine of liberal knowledges. For the ROMANS conceived an higher opinion of the
wits of the BRITANNS for study, then they did of the GALLS. So, they who
before could not endure the conquerours language, did now both willingly use
it, and were also ambitious of becoming excellent therein. CLAVDIA RVFINA,
that chaste, and learned BRITANN Lady (very young in these days) demonstrates
the wits of the men, when she a woman could deserve the commendatorie verses
of so rare a ROMAN wit as MARTIALS. But they soon grew too much Romanised, by
frequenting warm bathes, costly banquets, and the like, which passing under
the title of fashion, were fetters indeed, and a bondage: For there is not a
worser mistress to serve, then voluptuarie waste, and vanity. Old rudeness a
friend of freedom. New forms while they pretend to polish parts, do
oftentimes file even manhood it self away. Old rudeness notwithstanding is
happily changed for fair humanity. The golden mean alone can take up the
matter so, that freedom may subsist by the force of a generous spirit, and yet
smooth arts retain their taste and luster. This I write of the tamer BRITANNS
in these days, by the warrant of that which AGRICOLA, not many years after,
persuaded to the fiercer in his own. For if he thought civility the way to
assure the wild; the ROMANS for the same purpose had undoubtedly induced it
upon such as were already humbled. Manifest in the former coign of CLAUDIUS.
The inhabitants of cities and towns, (the softest part of every nation) lived
willingly obedient. For they remained secure, and rich by the exercise of
civil mysteries, though charged with sundry duties. From which common burden
as they could not possibly be freed under their own Princes, or under any
other form of commonweal, so neither could they have been so well in lieu
defended, had not fond security charmed asleep all the eyes of ROMAN
circumspection. As for the people of the country; they also had their reason
of content, men for the more part indifferent whom they serve, but as the
conditions are diverse. They therefore by the familier rent-seruices of
plowghing, and grazeing (employments marked out in scorn by the warlick Queen
in DIO) or otherwise in paying their tithes (the usual proportion of tribute)
did generally erne protection, and sustenance. The ROMANS never took all the
land away from the natives whom they had conquered, but left them part. The
nobler sort, such of them as were stripped or disseised either of estates, or
authority, underwent therein the chance of war, and such unequal laws, as
liked their new Lords best. These wrecks, and waifs of fortune, were the proper
fuel of combustion, or rather the fire it self, always prompt, and always
putting for trouble. But from the yearlie payment of poll, or head-money, which
throughout the ROMAN world was modest, and tolerable (the value of a teston, or
some such toy) neither were the living nor the dead exempt. For that very year
wherein any one of them dyed was answered. NERO himself did neither urge, nor
enlarge grieuances, but rather sought redresses. For his constitutions in
TACITUS, the one against ouercharging the provinces with portage of corn to
the public granaries, the other to make ships tribute-free, were both of them
of that nature, and ought to have reached over hither, as to a famous member of
the empire, abounding with corn and merchants. The ordinary government of the
ROMANS was far from barbarous, therefore the warlick widow forecastes in DIO,
that they had wunn upon many with fair persuasions. If their favors were
unequal, that tended to nourish their party. But before this unlucky revolt,
the TRINOBANTS, and some other of the BRITANS stood possessed of so rare a
felicity, as to enjoy the peace of ROME, without any ROMAN judges among them.
For the ROMANS meddled not, but left them over to be wholly ruled by their
natural magistrates, and peculiar laws. TACITUS witnesses it, and the GREEK
historians (speaking of their condition before the rebellion) do call them
their own men, and free. Neither did the ROMANS envy the immunities, and
honors of their city to persons who could not enjoy them by any right of
birth; most magnanimously forgetting what they had at any time done hurtfullie
as enemies, and receiving them, both into her embraces, as bosome-friends; and
also into her lapp as children. CLAUDIUS so earnestly desirous to bestow the
franchise of the souereign city upon the RRITANNS whom he had conquered, that
SENECA (in his irreligious sports upon that emperor) vpbraids it. ROME
imperial a gracious common mother of mankind, and not a mistress only.
Therefore the fall of ROME, as Queen of the earth, was the common sorrow of
the earth, even in scripture it self. To the stubborn; sharp, and stern:
against adversaries; fierce, and brave. And if the subjects in the provinces
were unworthily violated, or villanously entreated, it was not because the
law allowed it. For the greatest Magistrate, during his whole time abroad,
might receive nothing of gift, but hay, four beds, and wood for fireing,
toward his provisions; and CICERO glories, that he took not all them
neither, when he was proconsul in CILICIA. There never was any common weal
which more diligently provided against wrongs, and rapines then the ROMAN, or
which more severely punished them. The times, even of TIBERIUS, rarely happy
for the provinces herein. PHILO (who himself was an eyewitness, and a
partaker of the benefit) does excellently note it in his AVILLIVS FLACCVS. But
the quiet estate of the ROMAN-BRITANNS, and the thriuing condition of their
arts, and trades under NERO, was sodeinlie blasted by the scandalous, and
wretched iniquity of some of the predominant (as it almost every where
happens) to the so great hazard of the whole, that TRANQVILLVS speaks of
BRITANN, as lost for the time.

. III. The causes of the grand revolt. Boadicia's quarrel the chief.
THe reasons which drew the BRITANNS to rise, and attempt the massacre of the
ROMANS were great and many. Profound contempt of NERO was the first. For that
did chiefly embolden the ROMANS to do wrong, and drove the sufferers to
despair of an orderly redress. To govern with the opinion of justice,
keeps officers from presuming, and the rest of subjects from ruin by rising.
DIO (a man of a most honorable place, and a like mind) assigns two principal
causes which prepared the BRITANNS for an open hostility. The confiscation of
goods, and (I blush to write it) Seneca's cruel vsuries. For whereas CLAUDIUS
CAESAR (which concerns the first point of the two) had graciously forgiven
such forfeitures and seisures as belonged to him in right of his conquering
sword (NENNIVS, the ancient BRITANN, writes, that they were the tributes
themselves) or had otherwise bestowed large sums upon the chief among them;
and for that, as for an act of celestial bounty; was honored as a god, while
as yet alive, CATVS DECIANVS, NERO'S Procurator in BRITANN, contended, that
extremity ought to be pursued, notwithstanding any show of discharge, or plea
of pardon, and notwithstanding good CLAUDIUS had caused a Decree of the SENATE
to pass for strengthening the favors he had done: thereby to inuit the more
to yield themselves. A solemn wise custom of the ROMANS, to winn upon the
first with favor, and humanity, as they did of old in GALLIA, where they
styled the AEDVI, their fellows, cosens, and brothers. On the other side
ANNAEVS SENECA (NERO'S chief counselor) having a stock going here at use,
of about two hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling, sodeinlie calls in
his moneys, (the loan whereof had been thrust upon the BRITANNS, whether they
would or no) where a rebellion would sooner discharge debts, then exhausted
means could. Yet this is he (o strange) who cried out, when he was at
ritchest; How unknown a good is poverty! But DIO is suspected by some of the
most noble clarks of our age, as somewhat too unequal to the honor, and
memory of famous SENECA, the sharpest wit of ROME. There are other injuries
named, which concerned the commons, and the rest in general; which touched by
TACITUS in his AGRICOLA, did principally consist in the abusiue assignation of
rates, and the carriage of corn for the armies. But if one only injury had
been forborne, the common grieuances (now the blathers of rebellion, and
evermore used to be blowne-out with words to their uttermost wideness, when
the discontented meet) might perhaps have sighed-out themselves without any
Champion, to wage a war on their behalf. But in the person of a Prince all the nation is stricken; and wrongs done to a chief are interpreted by friends
and followers as their own. Among all the BRITANNS there was not any of this
time so eminent as the Dowager of PRASVTAGVS, late king of the ICENI. Her name
in antiquity is very variouslie written. One and the same woman being in
TACITUS, BOODICIA, BOVDICEA, and VOADICA, who is in DIO, BOVNDVICA, and perhaps
in CAMDENS BRITISH moneys, BODVO. Her husband while he lived, remained in
amity with the ROMANS, as a social king: and having first devised his kingdom
ioinctly to NERO, and his daughters, he deceased. The BRITANNS excluded neither
sex from the crown, and it was the testators meaning, that his daughters,
having CAESAR for their guardian, and he for his favor having a childs part,
should either be Queens of their own shares, or in coparcenerie after their
mother. For both by her own words in her oration in TACITUS, it seems that
she reputed the kingdom hers, and in DIO it is expressly said, that she
governed in chief as souereign, at the time of her taking the field; and (as
far as can be gathered by all the marks of her spirit) even then also when
the king her husband lived. But the daughters (poor silly ladies) found a
sorry partner-ship, where the lion was to make the partition For NERO'S
captains, and officers, exercised intolerable license; the palace of
PRASVTAGVS their father, as also his riches (which were great and long in
gathering) together with his whole realm, not received into custody for the
good of the orphans, nor NERO'S part laid out as a bequest or legacy, but that
which was theirs ransackt and spoild as booty. They also of the blood roial,
the kinsmen of the king, were no better accounted of then as prisoners taken in
war, in the nature of bondmen, or slaves. A most grievous poinct, and yet
still worler was feared. Princes (by the fortune of their sovereign function)
do oftentimes bear the name of the crimes which others commit. These foul
ones pressing for the first place, were out-gone by other more villainous. For
the princely sisters (whether by force or fraud) were irreparablie dishonored
in their bodies, and BOADICIA her self (their most unfortunate mother) full of
most just grief, and wrath, and full of all the tempestuous passions which
nobility embased, or nature violated can suggest, did bleed and smart
vnderwhips, and cutting lashes. This the CORNELIAN ANNALS signify; worthy of
belief against the writers nation. But DIO (who is thought but to have
paraphrased upon TACITUS in this story) has no such particular, neither
touching the Dowager, nor her daughters. GILDAS certainly who was himself a
BRITANN, and lived in BRITAIN when his miserable countrymen had reason to wish
the ROMANS here again, is highly displeased, calling her (for of BOODICIA he
is thought to mean) a crafty deceitful lioness, guilty of the murder of
those who were left to govern her. She her self in her speech to her army
complains, that even old age was not free from the lust of the lascivious
ROMANS; as if her self had been that way wronged also. But she would not have
concealed it; and in DIO she does not appear old, or decayed, but a strong and
perfect woman. Her picture hangs up there in such words as show the person of
some martial Bosse, or AMAZONIAN Giantesse.

. IIII. The person and quality of the warlick widdowe curiously described.
BOADICIA'S body (that I may advance her image to the life in the top of this
history) was bigg, and burly, or rather huge: which some (translating the
GREEK into LATIN) not thinking to be a fit parcel in the bill of a ladies
praise, have turned tall. Her face naturally good, and full of dignity, was
of purpose set to the quality of the present service, after a most severe and
serious manner. Which moved famous DIO to hang [(...)] an epithet of such an
ambiguous sense upon her countenance, as like a double picture represents her
diversely to a diverse understanding; excellently comely, or incomparably
terrible. Her complexion very fair. Which who will wonder at in a Lady borne
in BRITAIN? Her copious tresses dangling in compass far beneath her waste,
were of a most bright yellowe. And though by her color her constitution might
seem to be cold, yet her doings declared, that choler had the maistrie in
her, even unto deceit and adustion. Her looks most eager, sharp, and
piercing. An argument perhaps that her eyes were disproportionablie small; and
that was a sign (if artists err not) of fraud and cruelty. They exemplify in
the fox, and bear. Nature finally to make the consort of her properties
complete, furnished her with an alarumbell for the country, and a deadly knell
for thousands; a tongue as harsh, and rolling as her self was high and great.
Her husband a potent king. Her progenitors kings in BRITAIN. Nor among them any
one more likely to be hers, then mighty CASSIBELINE himself. Certainly she
deriues (in XIPHILINES sum) to the expulsion of JULIUS CAESAR, as to a fact
and glory, descended hers. The ROMANS inexcuseable to themselves, while in
contempt of her sex they couple to the pride of oppression, the dull, and
blind absurdity of keeping no watch upon her.

. V. Of Suetonius Paullinus, Nero's Lieuetenant in Britain: and of his design
against Anglesey.
IN the mean while SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS, who commanded in chief over all the
ROMAN forces in BRITAIN as lieutenant for NERO, was far off in the i will of MONA,
or ANGLESEY, upon a most earnest desire to annex it to the rest of the empire.
Which ministered to the BRITANNS both an occasion and means of revenge, and was
to the widow an advantage diverse ways. For besides that some part of the
army did necessarily attend him in that service (which must needs leave the
province somewhat the weaker) his person was not only absent, but those things
also without the which even his presence had been to little purpose.
Attention, circumspection, the awe of souereign authority, and whatsoever else
are restraincts in common sense upon the unsure, and fickle, and which should
also have been in his deputies to the purpose of ruling the subjects, were no
less away with him then he himself. This great ROMAN Senator (for after
BOADICEA, it is reason to speak of him, her adversary vanquisher) was a
soldier of so victorious eminency, as well in AFRICA as in ALBION, that he
commonly went reported as a match for martial worth to NERO'S kinsman,
CORBVLO; between whom in their times the globe of warlicke glory seemed to
move. None of the safest commendations under such a feeble prince, whose
ignoble life was the clearer seen thereby. PAVLLINVS so able in observation,
and so wakefull in study, that PLINY (who afterward saw him Consul) does
cite him as a worthy author. So far from rash, that he was naturally a
prolonger. Arrogant nevertheless, and sour, in his own case (as TACITUS notes
him in his AGRICOLA) when once he had gotten the upper hand. Which vices of
mind, are familiar to armed might, and are as rarely found several from
deeply musing and tardy natures. The servants of glory do not always see
the moral helps they need. Nothing could prevent those blemishes but
temperance. Two years time he had already spent in BRITAIN with prosperous
success. But because the i will of MONA, by the common benefit of such a
situation, was a kind of natural fortress, as well to the natives, as to
those other of the enemies who fled, he resolved to make it the chief work of
that summer to conquer it, that common liberty might have no refuge any where.
An enterprise full of difficulty, both in respect of the mighty bars which
high and craggie mountains laid in the way, and of the salt narrow channel of
MENAI, which made that shire an island. But the love of glory smoothed all with
him to his hand. For, according to the usual saying; nothing seems hard to
the willing.

. VI. Suetonius being absent upon the conquest of Anglesey, what Roman forces,
and friends resided behind for a stay, and where.
But least the desire of renown might appear to be blind ambition rather
then wise courage, he left both the province, and borders full of legionarie
soldiers, and of their aides. For he is no discreet commander, whose looks are
only forward, and not like a bi-fronts, both ways. Three men are named to
have remained behind with command. CATVS DECIANVS principal, as being the
steward, attorney, or auditor general of CAESAR'S profits in BRITAIN. The ROMANS
called such a man Procuratour. NERO'S vast riots needed unconscionable
supplies. And CATVS, to gratify those ends at his proper envy,
instrumentallie converted the ICENIAN kingdom to a prouincial demesne of the
CAESAR'S. For to their imperial part all the countries where ROMAN armies were
in warfare, did by a most politic provision of AUGUSTUS, appertain. CATVS
therefore was among the ICENI, and with a force. Hence it was, that the colonie
at CAMALODVNVM, upon notice of their danger, sent to him for help: PETILIVS
CEREALIS commanded over the ninth legion, and quarterd nearest to the colonie;
for he was the first who made up toward the rescue. And where else should we
think his abode was but in those very camps about BANNAVENNA, which CAMDEN
poincts out unto us, at GILDSBROVGH, and DAINTRIE, in his ICENI? PAENIVS
POSTHVMVS, campmaster of the second legion (surnamed AUGUSTA) lodged upon the
neck of the SILVRES. And these two seats of legions, OSTORIVS SCAPVLA
ordained when he was General under CLAUDIUS here. TACITUS signifies it where
he mentions the rivers SABRINA, and AVFONA. The twentieth legion (in some
opinions) was not transported hither till after NERO'S days. But because I
find in TACITUS, that the vexillaries, or the old soldiers of that legion, or
as some read the place, the vicesimarians themselves, that is to say, they of
the twentieth legion it self, were with SVETONIVS at the battle, it is plain
to me, that the camp, or winter-seat of the twentieth, was already begun at
DEVA, to bridle the ORDOVICES. As for the fourteenth legion (of all other in
BRITAIN the most renowned) there is not the least word concerning it till the
battle with BOADICIA. No warrant for HOLINSHEAD to fain that it came over sea
for the purpose of that fight. For, as touching the number, king AGRIPPA is my
witness in JOSEPHUS, that four legions were the proportion allotted for the
custody of this island even in VESPASIANS days; and the former argument
satisfies, that the fourteenth had residence here before the battle. The
countries themselves were very full of ROMAN castles, holds, and forts, full of
inhabitants, full of dwellings all over, and not at CAMALODVNVM, LONDON, and
VERVLAM only, though only they are named for their singular misfortunes.
Thus we see that the absence of SVETONIVS entrusted it self for safety till
his return, to at least thirty thousand foot of all sorts, besides horse,
bestowed diversely: which in a land where all things seemed quiet, seemed more
then needed. Other stays, and affiances he also had, and those not founded in
armed power, but in amity. For the ROMANS were too wise to repose themselves
where they came, upon their own strengths wholly; and for that cause made all
the friends they could. Among us therefore, the TRINOBANTS, and the rest of the
nations within the TRINOBANTISH union (which was as ancient as from JULIUS
CAESAR'S days) were lovingly theirs (till BOADICIA secretly withdrew them)
COGIDVNVS specially, who could never be withdrawn.

. VII. Main observations touching Cogidunus, a king at this time in Britain.
THis COGIDVNVS was a king in BRITAIN, to whom, under CLAUDIUS CAESAR, the
ROMANS about eighteen years before, had given sundry countries for
enlargement of his dominions, which they themselves could not handsomely keep
upon their first conquests. In requital whereof, he continued a most constant
and faithful friend, and could not but stand them in great good sted in this
most perilous moment. For there is no doubt but he was now alive, because
TACITUS who was himself at this time not above six or seven years old (as
being borne but either in the first of NERO or in the last of CLAUDIUS) has
left it written that COGIDVNVS was so within his memory, as he took notice
of his unshaken faithfulness. For even kings themselves were so among the
instruments of servitude. The seat of his kingdom might be in middle-ENGLAND;
and the nations, which the ROMANS united to his crown, the DOBVNI, and
CATTIEVCHLANI. For they lay next north from the THAMES, and therefore the less
fit for the donours; who did at first prouinciate no parts of BRITAIN, but such
as that river, and the BRITISH sea (now of the resemblance called the Sleeue)
did southward bound. The place, when CLAUDIUS reignd, where VESPASIAN in
thirty several battles, and fights (some of them also very perilous) wann
twenty strong towns, and the i will of WIGHT by special name, having at that
time the second legion under his command. His scholars prize for the empire;
whereunto he came in conclusion. By the benefit of this friendship with
immutable COGIDVNVS, the ROMANS, while they were in action against the SILVRES,
and ORDOVICES, had him ready for all occasions. And by his authority these
mid-land parts do seem to have been so tempered, that SVETONIVS, after
BOADICIA was up, passed safe from ANGLESEY to LONDON, though the people on
every side were enemies (for so TACITUS expressly says) which otherwise then by
some such means (the BRITANNS being then victorious) could not possibly have
happened, without surprise, or blows. No common risings, or tumults there at
all. The BRIGANTS, and other northerlie nations carried a face of amity, but
were unsound at the kores, by reason of the late bloody strife about
CARTISMANDVA, their abandoned Queen, whom the ROMANS relieved against them, as
CAESAR'S friend. The ICENI were the top it self of danger, and as well they as
the TRINOBANTS (their nearest neighbors) dwelt eastward from COGIDVNVS as far
off as the GERMAN OCEAN would permit. These considerations are all of them
such, and so important, that without them our knowledge of the whole must
needs be very imperfect. Right history deals in particulars, and handles
limb by limb. Generalities are for summists. The odds full out as great, as
between a glimmering twilight, and a bright noonday; or as between a bare
nomination of parts, and their precise dissection. My diligence upon a ground
never heretofore beaten by any, will in others quicken greater. SVETONIVS
therefore, by this account, might carry with him about ten thousand to the
enterprise of MONA. And these provisions for retayning possessed purchase had
without all doubt been abundantly sufficient, if BOADICIA would have rested
quiet. For the BRITANNS very willingly obeid when they were not abused. But
here we behold (not without much horror at the giddie condition of humane
affairs) what a mighty body of men and matter one woman's wrath was able to
stir: or rather that usual sentence, patience too much moved, turns into
rage, made good to the world by a most terrible instance.

. VIII. Boadicia, and the Britanns meet in great secrecy, and resolve to rise
in arms.
But all the care which PAVLLINVS took could not make up the want of his
personal presence. In the worth of some one man alone there is sometime so
much weight. This absence therefore of the ROMAN General was interpreted by
BOADICIA and the BRITANNS, as a benefit sent from heaven, because it removed
the difficulty of assembling: the first degree always of a rebellion, next
after the inward matter is inclinable. Therefore at their meeting, the prime
thing which they gratulated to themselves was, that they met, though it were in
greatest secrecy as their estate, and cause required. And to quicken their
darings to an headlong, and desperate extremity, they vpbraided to themselves
in detestation, as if they were men who could do any thing rather then dye for
their country. A notion, or common place of incitement most apt to fire the
blood; In which sense TACITUS has it, and SAVILE; who was another TACITUS for
gravity and judgment. Some have turned the keen edge of that sentence by
turning it quite contrary thus; as if they were men who knew not to do any
thing else but only to die for their country. The wrongs, and dishonors,
which the most noble authors sustain oftentimes by many translatours, are
infinite and intolerable. Scarce one book among one hundred honestly done,
and not one of one hundred exactlie. But to our present task. The forwardness
of the Dowager Queen unlocked all hearts and tongues among themselves; and
while each one lays open his griefs (which in telling kindle) or would for
companies sake seem to have cause (as in such cases it evermore happens) they
all agree together to rise in arms with her. As for the sworn covenants
between the ROMANS, and the BRITANNS (which DIO calls their Symbasies) as also
the Senates decree for their confirmation, by virtue whereof they had title to
a lawful redress, they were all broken-through as cobwebs. The sword their
judge and vmpire. Right, and common liberty the names of their quarrel:
confusion, spoil, and thirst of blood the sequel. Instincted thus, and embude
by BOADICIA, the countrey-TRINOBANTS came in to the plot, and so the rest. Most
cunning and unavoidable, while the cold aer of fear (like a
counter-circumstance of qualities) kept together the heat of counsel. In
CAMALODVNVM it self they had their close correspondents among their
countrymen inhabiters.

. IX. The Druids of Britain, parties in this revolt.
THe head and members of this black agreement were fastened together in a most
bloody knot with special rites, and ceremonies. For a mystery so deep and
dark was never sealed up without most solemn vows, touched at by TACITUS in the
word pepigerant. Nor need we doubt that they were as horrible as could be
devised, considering the DRVIDS were the solemnisers, who besides the general
barbarousnesse of their superstition, had a special tooth against the ROMANS.
For if they preuaild, their profession must needs go down, because that wise
and civil people abhorred it as hellish. SVETONIVS therefore, after his
victory, felld their groves distaind with savage rites. The DRVIDS interest a
most inward cause of troubles. And how much they thought it concernd them to
beat off the ROMANS, who had forbidden their sect in ROME and GALLIA, did well
appear in their bedlam doings at MONA. Upon their altars they used to offer in
fire the blood of men; and that was their sacrifice: to know what should
happen, they did cut up an enemy quick; and that was their sooth-say. They
opened therefore some ROMAN or other alive, to read in his heart strings, how
they should speed, and intercepted his blood to offer to their goddess,
ANDATE. Blood was the seal of this coniuratorie secret, and this a season of
all other the most likely for the wives, and daughters in law of the wild
and ruder BRITANNS (of which sort BOADICIA'S forces did principally consist)
to celebrate those rites in which PLINY says they were wont to go naked,
their bodies colored over with oad. A grizlie ceremony for a gastlie purpose.

. X. Wonders fore-show the ouer-hanging evils.
TO the everlasting confusion of the impious, all times afford clear proofs
in facts, that there is one universal mind of things, whose foreknowledge is
seen in fore-warnings, and whose goodness is declared in giving them. God,
who is that mind, and from whom alone all good things come, in his ordinary,
and general care over all, and not over the elect alone, sends signs, and
wonders. Out of this fountain of pity toward his creatures, it proceeded,
that many great maruels fore-went the sodein change; and not without particular
respect to some in BRITAIN (for CHRISTIANITY even here had friends as then)
and never but for his own more glory. DIO, (himself an ETHNIC) ascribes the
same to God. The OCEAN between BRITAIN, and GALL, at the full tide did
ouerflowe, of a bloody color, and at a low water the prints of men's bodies
were seen upon the bare, and not the dead bodies themselves, which the
englished ANNALS of TACITUS mistakingly say. The similitudes also of the
broaken, and shatterd houses of a colonie were seen under water in the mouth
of the THAMES. These in that element. Upon the land; the image of victory in
the temple of CLAUDIUS, without any known cause, fell down with the back
upwards, as if it gave way to the enemy; women rapt with a sodein fury, sung
near destruction, or Woe and alas at hand. Moreover, in the common court-hall
of CAMALODVNVM, there was heard a strange hollow noise or murmr as of the
barbarous, by night (which DIOS Greek text notes) with much loud laughter, and
in the theater (the place of sports) a dreadful lumber, mixed with a sound, at
the same time, as if multitudes of spectators were weeping and howling together
therein, when there was not a man in either. Wonderful things and to
wonderful ends. Causes of greatest dread to the ROMANS, and of like
encouragement to the BRITANNS. In these descriptions I have helped my self by
comparing TACITUS, and XIPHILINES DIO together, and with the most corrected
readings in best Critics, which I thought meet to admonish, not for boast of
industry, but to keep blame off, where I shall be found to differ from the
vulgar. Though the subject be such as well deserves greatest diligence.

. XI. Boadicia's musters, and attire, and of the place of the rendeuous.
ONe hundred and twenty thousand men appeared now for war at BOADICIA'S
musters. An admirable effect of a close and sodein conspiracy. Those numbers
not drawn to an head out of the ICENI, and TRINOBANTS alone, but also out of
what other BRITISH nations soever. Some other else there were. TACITUS notes it
in general words even at this first assembly. For the earth of the ICENI
(according to worthy CAMDEN) was spread no farther then the compass of four
shires, nor they the greatest, and the same at this day inhabited with fewer
then fifteen hundred parishes; the country of the TRINOBANTS (the gemme and
flower of BRITAIN) with less then ten above six hundred; and it self but two
shires now. Impossible therefore that so huge a force should rise on a sodein
within so narrow a circuit, as six of our present shires; specially, where
very many thousands held loyal to the death, and where so many impediments of
free assemblies interposed themselves in the ROMAN forts, and garrisons about.
BVNDVCA, the head, and life of these revolted BRITANNS, came forth in state,
attended with the peers, and chiefes. Her body clothed in a deep, and full
gathered garment, embroidred with diverse colors all over; about her neck a
chain of great wreathed lincks of gold; her shoulders sustaind upon them a
military cloak, or a thick wrought mantle, buttond before, her goodly
tresses flowing in length down her back, served for a cover, or a golden
veil to all. Thus she went always attyred. But now more; she held with the
one hand in the lapp of her gown, a leueret or hare for a mystery; and in the
other, a lance for terror. HOLINSHEAD in her printed picture sets a crown of
gold upon her as a final ornament; and it displeases not; though authority
wants. An helm with a coronet, and a plume of feathers more proper, and they
also Romanesco, as her cloak, and somewhat else. In this wise fitted, and
adornd, she takes her stand upon a square hillocke of turfes, rising up about
with sundry steps of the same, altogether after the fashion of a ROMAN tribunal
in field. And by that quality which is assigned to the materials of this
military throne, it may be well suspected, that the place it self of this
camp was some where in Marshland, or the i will of Elie, as a place among all
other the ICENIAN countries, one of greatest safety. For those turfes were
cut up out of plashie, or fennie grounds, and she her self also assigns in
her speech a refuge to be had in the like, if the worst should happen. That
the very word Elie, only aspirated in the first letter, is used by DIO, is not
much to the purpose; because HELOS does not signify there the proper name of a
place, but is only appellatiue of a marsh, or moorish soil: though some there
be (says CAMDEN) who derive the name of that i will out of the GREEK, for the
probable significations sake. Her self in her own person most conspicuous,
had her natural tallnesse so helped out with the notable advantage of this
earthen stage, mounted upon the leuel flatnesse of the open land, that she
easily ouer-lookt all their heads, as they had their eyes on her.

. XII. Bunduca's oration to her army, affording a most forceable poinct to
inflame the Britanns by opposing their manners to the Romans.
Here DIO CASSIVS NICAEVS puts into her mouth a long oration, well worthy of
his eloquence, and the wit of a GREEK, who was so greatly delighted with the
wonder, and worth of this argument (the world has not a rarer) that he seems
to have made the exquisite handling thereof, his maister-piece. For there is
not any thing of that bright author extant, upon which he can be thought to
have dealt with greater care, or endeavor, then upon his BVNDVCA'S story,
which (by the special good fortune of our famous island) wrought so well in the
mind of XIPHILINE, that he seems not to abridge, but to insert it entire. That
oration I will not draw in hither, both in regard that HOLINSHEAD partly has
it already, and I have showed the causes of this revolt in a special chapter
before, (the principal matter of the speech) and also for that it is not my
purpose to translate, but to make all mine own. That which next is most of
force, and in the oration may be called a counter-comparison, or a confronting
of contraries (the received word in art is antithesis,) shall not escape my
diligence, the particulars extracted after my way, and couched pillar-wise in
table, for the readers clearer comprehension, without exceeding my written
warranties. An excellent glass of the ROMAN, and the revolted BRITANNS manners.

BVNDVCA says:
The ROMANS are few, and strangers. The BRITANNS many, and at home.

The ROMANS have their helmets, and curaces, which load them with their brazen
weight* and render them unapt to pursue. The BRITANNS have neither helmets, nor
curaces, but swords, bucklers, and darts, which are not burdensome.

The ROMANS trust to their trenches, walls, and parapets, which consisting of
oaken stakes, one fretted, and wreathed into another, do show them as shut up
in boxes. The BRITANNS have their tents in the open field, and for their
defenses their marshes, bogs, and mountains.

The ROMANS must have their shadie bowers, houses over head, bread of ground
corn, wine, and oil, or they cannot hold out. The BRITANNS brook hunger,
thirst, cold, and heat. Any herb, or root serves then for food; water will
quench their drowth, and every tree is to them a roof, or canopie.

The ROMANS sow corn, and are handicraftesmen. The BRITANNS have learned
nothing but to fight.

The ROMANS must have their warm bathes, their boys, their dainty fare, and
their bodies suppled with oil. The BRITANNS use none of these, but have their
wives, and all other things in common, and count all children their own, which
makes the females as valiant as the men.

The ROMANS are insolent, insatiable, unjust, and worthy to be the slaves of a
BVNGLING FIDDLER. The BRITANNS, by such as these, are wronged, and ouer-borne.

The ROMANS, who so long have endured the yoke of their lady, and mistress,
Madam NERO (for who can think him a man?) deserve to continue slaves still.
The BRITANNS had heretofore been free, and though others should be so base as
to spend their days in vassal villenage under a DOMITIA, or NERONIA (fitter
names for him then any of the masculine gender) it is certainly her last
resolution, either to live free, or die.

The ROMANS are foxes, and hares. The BRITANNS are wolves, and greyhounds.

At this (as at a cu in a players part) she for luck sake suffers the hare to
slip out, which all the while before lay wrapped in the foulds of her skirts. The
hare among the BRITANNS a creature unlawful to be tasted; and now (as if some
thing sacred were in it) the subject it self of omen. That proving luckie (the
poinct of fortune being in the way it took) all the soldiers spent their
mouths in an universal showt, crying a BVNDVCA. She accepts the luckie
sign, and after her thanks given to ANDATE (the goddess to whom she was
chiefelie devoted, and the same which Victoria was among the ROMANS) most
affectionatelie recommends her cause to her special protection. Her orisons,
and all other rites finished, she forth with rises, and leads them most
fiercely on to extirpate all that was ROMAN in BRITAIN, with sword, and fire,
and with all the extremes of war. Against which for the present, there was no
sufficient stop, the tide was in such sort out at unawares. CAMALODVNVM felt
the first great mischief of the tempest, and perished under it.

. XIII. The motions and actions of this mighty body of rebellion; and first
concerning the Roman colonie at Camalodunum, and the castles on the borders.
IN this famous place, CLAUDIUS CAESAR had planted that colonie of old soldiers
(as an help for curbing the rebellious, and a mean to inform, and fashion
others in the duties of laws) whereof there is mention before. But this
intention, by the faulr of the new inhabitants, fell out quite otherwise. For
being but lately brought thither, they did not only thrust the natives out of
their own permitted dwellings, and dispossessed them of other lands then such as
upon survey had already been allotted by the public officers to every soldier
in particular, (according to the custom) but sharpened these wrongs with
reuilings, terming them captives, and slaves. Wherein they foulie mistook. For
the BRITANNS were conquered to yield, and not to be trod upon. Force had
maistred their strengths, but natural indignation remained. STRABO therefore
foretold the truth, that if violence were used to the BRITANNS, there would be
danger. In the mean while, look how many the old soldiers, so many new Lords
there were. For the younger sort (of whom there was for a kind of garrison, a
slender band) partly through likeness of manners, and partly in hope of the
same licenciousnesse, did soothe, and uphold the older in their madness. This
bred so deep an hatred in the hearts of the natural CAMALODVNIANS, and of
their countrymen, the TRINOBANTS about, as it secretly drew them to side with
BOADICIA; so much the rather, because they saw it was not a short bondage which
they were likely to undergo, but in the purpose of the ROMANS a perpetual.
For whither the word which TACITUS uses in this case, were an altar, or an
earnest of tyranny, whither ara, or else arrha, or (as VALENS ACIDALVS reads
it) arx, that is to say, a capital fort, or keep of oppression, the TRINOBANTS
could never cast their eyes upon the temple of CLAUDIUS erected among them, but
as upon a dedication of their servitude to perpetuity. CAMALODVNVM, the
standing court or palace-roiall of their kings, while CVNOBELINE lived, was now
become the center of pleasant retirements for the ROMANS, not the rendeuous of
their power. And though it stood as far removed from all open enemies as the
eastern sea would suffer, yet did that temple, under the color of ceremonies,
suck and engorge the riches of the BRITANNS, not as a temple, but as if it
had been a gulf, or indraught of the neighbor OCEAN. The only worship of
such a kind of dietie as CLAUDIUS, the principal cause to ripen the wrath of
God, and to hasten fearful vengeance. The outward state of the town seemed
nevertheless very flourishing. For, besides the old palace, and other the
buildings of the BRITANNS (for the ROMANS (says SIGONIVS) did not use to
destroy the buildings they found) it had a senate house for consultations, a
theater for plays, that goodly temple of CLAUDIUS, and as well they, as the
rest, undoubtedly answerable in some measure to the ROMAN magnificence. But
the BRITANS of the town, whom the insolences of that colonie had utterly
lost, holding close correspondence (as is noted before) with those in
BOADICIA'S camp, for the hope and desire of revenge, did notably further it,
and as otherwise also, so specially by dissuading the ROMANS to fortify. For
the colonie lay open on all sides, the better to enjoy free walks, and aer
about, though it had not always done so. For this was the town which CLAUDIUS
assaulted, and took, and whose image he represented in a mock-fight at ROME.
TRANQVILLVS cannot be thought to mean it of any other. The old ditches
therefore filled with the ramparts thrown in, and all the fortifications rased
after it was wunne, yet safety was not altogether neglected, though pleasure
was rather sought then strength. It had no trench, no palisado, nor other
defense about it self, but it had the majesty of the ROMAN name (a reputed
wall of brass) the awe of a fresh conquest, and sundry strengths (though many
miles off) in the marches, or pale of the province (evident in the AGRICOLA of
TACITUS) where the ROMAN garrisons watched, and warded in castles, sconces, and
other presidiarie places. These together with the small force of soldiers
mentioned before, were the hopes upon which the colonie relied against all
sodein inroads or commotions, as the hope of those soldiers consisted in the
strength of the temple. Which though at other times they might have been
competent, yet now were vain. For BVNDVCA suddenly assailing such other of
the ROMAN soldiers as lay scatterd here and there upon the frontiers in forts,
and castles, and forceing the garrisons, rusht over them with such violence
into the bosom of the country, as the sea at a breach, making up with all
speed to the colonie it self, the object of their greatest spite.

. XIIII. The Roman colonie at Camalodunum destroid by Boadicia.
THe dark and thick cloud of war, full chargd with the lightnings and
thunders of revenge, was scarce any sooner before CAMALODVNVM (where their
correspondents expected them) but it was also within it. The ROMAN party
there, upon the first appearings of danger, had sent to CATVS DECIANVS for some
assistance, but he (as so bad a man must needs) misdoubting his own case,
only spared two hundred soldiers, and those not fully armed. The colonie it
self, with their wives, children, servants, all sorts of tradesmen (as in a
great flourishing corporation) and their families, could not amount to so few
in all as ten, or twenty thousand; though it was a colonie of but about
ten years standing. CAMDEN says it was that brave, and noble legion, the
fourteenth, surnamed Gemina Martia Victrix, which CLAUDIUS planted here, and of
the word Victrix styled the whole colonie Victricensian. This may be so; for
though we find a fourteenth legion in the field with SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS at
the overthrow of BOADICIA, yet might the numbers be new, though the name
continued. For by suffection, or supply, they lengthened out the names of
fortunate legions, not only far beyond the age of a man, but of many ages
also; as a ship, which though by new trimmings, and frequent reparations, it
be not the same in stuff, yet is the very same in opinion, by reason of the
name remaining. And this kind of entire plantation was suitable with the
ancient custom of the ROMANS, which (as TACITUS notes, and commends) was of
whole legions, with their captains, and officers. Every ROMAN colonie an image
of ROME their mother. CLAUDIUS ambitious to imitate the best and oldest. But
the colonie (how populous so ever) was manifestly weak in all respects; for
these ancient warriors had abandoned the use of arms, and being ouer-mellow
with ease and pleasure, held it enough to walk up and down with warders, or
truncheons in their hands. A fashion of honor (says LIPSIVS) which was common
to them by special privilege with captains, to whom alone it did regularlie
belong. Old, and young, the feeble and the able, men, and women, as in a time
of deep peace, mingled together. The BRITANNS who were natives of the city
(for colonies were reputed cities) always covert enemies, and ouert now, join
to their party The soldiers seeing no hope left for a common defense, quit the
streets, and marketplace, and throngd themselves up within the great temple,
neither safe in the veneration of CLAUDIUS, as a sanctuary (though the temples
of the CAESAR'S were sanctuaries) nor in their small forces. The name of NERO,
the present emperor, void of honor. Their only affiance this: that if they
could maintain the gates, and battlements, till PETILIVS CEREALIS came in with
his legion, they might perhaps escape. No third course could be devised (for
the enemy would not parlea) and this was frivolous. For BOADICIA becoming
mistress of all the town at an instant, did sodeinlie sack, or fire
whatsoever lay without the walls of the temple. The assault whereof was never
intermitted till it was wunne; which happened upon the second day of the siege.
All went to wrack therein, as in the rest. Sword, fury, and fire concurred in
the execution. There was nothing ROMAN, which force took not away, or revenge
devoured not. CAMALODVNVM, unfortunate in her kings, and colonie, though very
fortunate in the blessings of a seat, was thus betrayed, and destroid together.
Nevertheless the commodity of situation gave it life again very soon after:
for even in PLINIES time it was a town of special note. In our days, the
ancient name is not shorter by the syllables which MALDON wants thereof, then
the place it self is short of the former glory; though it otherwise be a
fair, and a famous borough.

. XV. Petilius Cerealis coming tardie to the rescue, is encountered upon the
way by Boadicia, and put to flight.
THe BRITANNS were so flesht with this bloody handsel, that BOADICIA, hearing
how PETILIVS CEREALIS, and the ninth legion, over which he commanded, were
marching up for the deliverance of the colonie, they could not but have cause
to deride his too late approach for bringing succor to his fellows; and to
gratulate to themselves, that he sought for a mischief too soon. Therefore
while they greedily caught at revenge, as if they would fore-lay, or take it
before hand up, they gladly set forward to his interception. A rashness in
CEREALIS, with so great a disproportion of numbers to encounter the first
heates of an huge incensed multitude, and censured for such by his General,
PAVLLINVS. Neither was BOADICIA deceived in her hopes. For all the probable
means of information being cut off from CEREALIS together with the colonie,
she meets him upon much the more advantage, giving in upon his squadrons with
so round and home a charge, that utterly unable to resist, he was beaten from
his ground, and compelled to fly away upon the spur, with only his troops
of horse. The infanterie of the legion, thus left naked, and immediately
ouerlaid, was driven to the earth, and cut in pieces, not any one taken to
mercy. That all the ROMAN footmen which were then in the field, lost their
lives is evident, but that they were more then two thousand may be doubted;
because the very same number ( two thousand just) was soon after sent over
hither by NERO, to fill up the breach of that unlucky legion. They of the same
who were not in the field with CEREALIS, served to man the camp, and to see to
things behind. So necessary a poinct of providence, that otherwise they had
perished all. For it will easily be thought that the BRITANNS pursued close.
But he riding for his life, got within the trenches, and by their help was
safe. Which kind of speaking in TACITUS, satisfies me, that CEREALIS was not
a days journey from his camp, and that the BRITANNS attempted to enter upon
the luckier remains of the legion, but prevailed not. Hither also is the
reason of BOADICIA'S change of course to be drawn. For to linger about the
winning of forts, and hard places (which as yet was vain) being found to be
loss, the counsel alters. In sted whereof, as a more compendious way to their
purposes, they fall upon such other places as had the fattest booties, and
least defenses. Men (as they are described in TACITUS) greedy, and glad of
pillage, but of all other long toils of war impatient. Lo here the natural
spirit of the tumultuous multitude, whose proper scope is to grow by robbery,
and not to restore common freedom. For of that noble desire they generally
have no feeling, because their more part has no honesty.

. XVI. Catus Decianus Nero's procurator, leaves Britain without leave.
THis overthrow of CEREALIS, and the deserved hatred of the ICENI against CATVS
DECIANVS, among whom he had exercised his covetousness, and cruelty, struck
such an affright, as he durst not abide any longer, but sped ouer-sea into
GALLIA. There is nothing so bad, or base, which understood to be spoken of a
covetous wretch or coward, will not readily be believed by others. Therefore
it is not hard to persuade, that he was the cause of all those molestations
which SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS afterward sufferd by the means of JULIUS
CLASSICIANVS. For CATVS (to whom CLASSICIAN succeeded in office) poisoning the
credit of PAVLLINVS, with all the ill reports he could, his own vile deserts
might the rather escape unseen, as in a troubled water. And if CORNELIUS
TACITUS were to be thought a man apt to believe at large, and that in some of
those particulars which he rehearses up among the causes of the BRITANNS
revolt (as the stripes of BOADICIA) he might perhaps be abused, there is not
any thing which would sooner offer it self to me as the occasion of
misleading him, then the conceit, that it was his fortune to light upon
CLASSICIANS accusations of SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS. BOADICIA also, by way of
stratagem, might tell the BRITANNS, that her body was scourgd, and a thousand
such other things, to create the more hatred against the ROMANS, though not one
of them were true; which as CLASSICIAN might urge in writing to disgrace the
times of PAVLLINVS, so might TACITUS find. DIO did not think her words in
those poincts credible: for he could not then have omitted them without blame.
That TACITUS should only tell of the scourgings, and not specify the cause is
strange. But he does little other in the case of king TIGRANES, who was put to
death under TIBERIUS. That so vehement a lover of popular party as he, could
have so reverent a conceit of royal majesty as to think that no cause was
sufficient to justify the violation even of underling princes (such as
TIGRANES, and BOADICIA) and that he might therefore forbear to insert the
reason, is by no means credible. All that occurs to me as the most likely
cause why the centurions, and other the ravenous, and outrageous officers of
NERO, laid violent hands upon her, is merely this, that it was an effect of
their quick, or captious sense of her words, upon expostulations in her
palace, and kingdom, when they oppressed her. Among which words, if there were
but the same, or the like, which she afterward used in her army (a matter not
improbable) the admiration is at an end. For they were so full of most just
scorn, and open contempt of NERO'S person, as could not but minister that
advantage which their covetousness, and cruel iniquity desired. Yea, so far
forth, as to make it seem a favor, that they punished her no more severely
then so: the blemishing of majesty, high treason among the ROMANS. The story
of TACITUS in that poinct failing us; our best persuasion must be, that his
writings are in those places imperfect, as LIPSIVS and other think they are in
very many, and without doubt do therein think most truly. CATVS DECIANVS was
glad he got whole away. That he fled alone, or that great numbers did not
follow his example, is not probable. The THAMES, and sea were open.

. XVII. Suetonius Paullinus, upon the news of Boadicia's rebellion, came in
haste from Mona to London.
WHile these things were in doing at the one side of BRITAIN, SVETONIVS
PAVLLINVS, the ROMAN General, was busied at the opposite other. As that
master of a family, who while he seeks a far off to enlarge the seat of
his abode with more outhouses, beholds his maine dwellings on a blaze in their
remotest parts. He had therefore scarce finished the conquest of the i will of
MONA, and let light in throughout the same, by felling the bloody groves of the
DRVIDS, when the news of this grand revolt violently plucked the fruit of his
fresh victories out of his hands. Other labors ask his attendance now, and
other cares. But they not such as to make him wholly negligent of MONA, upon
which he placed garrisons. Great ones undoubtedly, considering the remotenes
of place, the difficulty of relieuing, the ways almost impassible; enemies
round about, who though but very lately overcome, yet were strongly
re-encouraged by the example of BOADICIA. That he afterward withdrew those
presidiarie forces (the iron yoke of war) is very apparent. For TACITUS
elsewhere says, that PAVLLINVS was recalled from the possession of MONA, by
the news of the BRITANNS rising: and possession is not otherwise to be
understood to be kept in such a case, but by maintayning forces upon the
conquered land. His danger also did shortly need that he should call unto him
all the help he could. Lastly, JULIUS AGRICOLA using the counsel and service
of some of the auxiliarie BRITANNS themselves, did about ten years following,
bring that island back unto obedience, and therefore it had gotten loose
again, what course soever PAVLLINVS took, or the rulers between. From MONA
to LONDON (about two hundred miles divided) the way was for a great part
sharp, and rugged, and every where else either the length of the march, or the
perils of the passage made the smoothest of it rough enough. To LONDON
notwithstanding it mainely concernd him to come. Helped therefore by the
faithfulness of COGIDVNVS (according to my former grounds) he held on his
journey with admirable constancy, among swarms of enemies, and got safe
through.

. XVIII. Of Nero's LONDON before Suetonius Paullinus was driven by Boadicia to
abandon it: and first whither it were once a Roman colonie, or no.
Here the name of LONDON is first found in ancient authenticke writings, and
that for the calamities sake which at this time it suffered most extreme. But
that violence which could abate, and desolate happiness for the time, advanced
the name thereof to immortal remembrance by CORNELIUS TACITUS, her principal
historian, and witness. Tragical effects the most natural matter of renown.
Prosperous successes vanish in the warmth of their own fruition. His memory
therefore deserves a special honor there. And if ever the most civil,
pompous, and thankful uses of the magnificent arts of statuarie, founding,
mowlding, musiue, and grauing, prevail to come up here, as among the GREEKS
and ROMANS, both he and others shall undoubtedly enjoy it. London (says he)
is a town, which though it was not ennobled with the surname of a colonie, yet
was it most notable for multitude of merchants, and multitudinous passages;
that is to say; for great resort, or flocking to and again by sea. But if the
CORNELIAN word, Commeatuum, here, be called upon to bear a less proper
sense, then are we for these englishes to substitute, a town abounding with
all sorts of victuals, or provisions. Though voiages, fleets, embarkments, and
passages usually made, do necessarily imply an ouerflowing plenty in the
station. Both interpretations true. But there are two several translations
each of them in print, who out of that very place of TACITUS would make LONDON
seem a colonie. If there be any hope that he could have such a meaning; it
must shine from out of other words in his AGRICOLA, where summing the hurts,
and mischiefs of BOADICIA'S darings he speaks plurallie, as if colonies were
destroid, and not one colonie alone. That reading of the place being literallie
urged, LONDON then may best put in for that title, with CAMALODVNVM. But some
of the most learned neither read the LATIN word as in the number of multitude,
and there is also another commodious answer; figure of speech; which not
rarely admits a plural for a singular, as a graceful excess. LONDON was never
said to be a colonie. The honor so much the more, that having no such potent
support, it should grow so superlatiuely eminent. These are some few among the
infinite innouations of translators. Description of places is an express
office of history; as the clearing of doubts a necessary right of description.

. XIX. The quality and estate of London immediately before the burning.
THe seat of LONDON, one of the best of the world for local gifts, and
majesty, was more anciently inhabited then ROME it self, according to some.
Which may also well be true according to reason; though CAESAR'S commentaries,
and such as follow him in them may seem to infer the contrary; as if none
of the BRITANNS had any other towns, but woods or thickets, ditcht, and banckt
about. The clearing of which savage deformity, by competent proofs, and
reasons, would be an office of honor well bestowed upon the most noble of
islands. Nor should day be taken for the task but for avoiding to discontinue
the line of narration. It is therefore most of use for the present, and most
certain for the story, that the estate, and quality of LONDON, immediately
before the burning under NERO, was most flourishing; at leastwise comparatively
with all other places of BRITAIN, for the poincts of trade, resort, and plenty.
And those few words of CORNELIUS TACITUS formerly cited, confess somewhat
either of a wrong, or wonder; that LONDON being worthy indeed to enjoy the
title, and privileges of a colonie, it was left notwithstanding under the
inferior reputation of but only a town among the ROMANS. A city among the
BRITANNS and their principal. The very last ioincts in the composition of the
name LONDINVM (if nothing else) would prove it well. For the word Dinas in
ancient BRITISH, signifies (as they say) a city. Among CAMDENS ROMAN copper
coigns, touching our country, there is one in honor of BRITANNICVS, the son
of CLAUDIUS CAESAR, which has nothing legible upon it, but METROPOLIS ETIMINII
BA. that BA. (in short writing) standing for BASILEOS, or KING, THE CHIEF
CITY OF KING ETIMINIVS. the name of the city fretted out, and quite worn
away with age.

Camdens BRITANNICVS. But OCTAVIUS STRADA, a gentleman of knightly degree,
under the emperor RODOLPHVS the second, with the honorable title of being his
ANTIQVARIE, has published one of those inualuable medals much more entire.

Stradas BRITANNICVS. A most fortunate jewel to BRITAIN, better worth being
but copper, then obrize gold, or paragon stones; nor simply a single piece of
money, but it self an entire treasure. For without the least alteration of
characters, METROPOLIS ETIMINII BALO being the visible remain of the
circumferential inscription upon the reuerse, a most easy distinction (by
supply of poincts decaid) reads, METROPOLIS ETIMINAEI BALO that is to say,
METROPOLIS ETIMINAEI BASILEOS LONDINVM.

For in the very letter L. and much more in the syllable LO, all men (though
but slightlie conversant in antiquities) will readily confess, that after the
name of the king, the name of the place in BRITAIN did commence.

THE MOTHER-CITIE, or PRINCIPAL CHIEF TOWN OF KING ETIMINIVS, LONDON. Now if
great JOSEPH SCALIGER, wittily straining, or (as most think) directly
corrupting SENECA'S play of CLAUDIUS, to bring forth his Scoto-Brigantes, could
not contain himself from breaking out into a glorious joy, that he was now
the man to whom the noble SCOTTISH nation stood obliged for such a testimony
of their antientie in BRITAIN, then might I also (who endanger no man's
writings, but deal sincerely) gratulate to my self this discovery. And, if
nothing shall hereafter infirm it, Great BRITAIN must no longer incur the
barbarous note of being citie-lesse in CAESAR'S days; and then also must LONDON
undoubtedly owe the best proof, and clearest light, as well for dignity as
antiquity, that has hitherto been seen among us, unto me; who first of
mortals have duly asserted the honorable name thereof into the title of a
civil Metropolis, till this present hour overwhelmed in the rubbidge of
BRITAINS ruin. For though OCTAVIUS STRADA (to whose memory immortal thanks
are due) has afforded the medalia, he has not meddled with the life of the
thing, the meaning* that is only mine. Special history depends upon the rare
argument of the coign; for both the which one act of exposition shall serve in
their more proper place, and time. And that LO being the initial letters of the
name, should in STRADA'S coigne signify LONDON, cannot seem strange either to
the learned, or the ignorant, when in other coigns concerning BRITAIN, the
mere single L it self imports as much. Nor will it be the fortune of any man
to find a town in BRITAIN, whose name beginning with those letters, can be
fit to bear the stately title of a metropolis, but this alone.

London to say the truth (say those famous ANNALS) was not ennobled with the
surname of a colonie. The ROMANS therefore who had settled their households in
LONDON (for as wise SENECA observes, they made their country every place where
they overcame) were so many, that nothing wanted to erect it into a colonie,
but an act of the SENATE of ROME to authorize the title, and rights; their
numbers appearing to be already sufficient for support of the charge, and
dignity. They therefore and their fellows, the natural BRITANNS, together
with the ordinary sequels of their persons, and professions, who dwelt
therein, ammounted to an extraordinary multitude, which made the place not
more populous then full of houses. For the proportion of habitations answers
the proportion of inhabitants. How many the LONDONERS were of either kind, is
a matter less known, then how far every way the buildings went, which neither
could be narrow, nor ignoble; but large as forcopious merchants, and
magnificent as for magnifico's. For, as the most learned CAROLVS SIGONIVS
observes out of CICERO, the gentlemen, and knights of ROME, dealt in
merchandise at home, and abroad, and were members of the college of Mercury,
whose stately seat was upon mount CAPITOLINE it self, and whose limbs, and
parts were spread through the ROMAN world. One of the suburbs of NERO'S LONDON
abutted upon the fields which are at this day termed of the neighbor Spittle,
as NERO'S coigns, and the coigns of other emperors dig'd up there, among the
monuments of the dead, do abundantly witness. The very bigness of LONDON a
cause why PAVLLINVS forsook it the rather, as having not men enough to keep
it. So ancient a city of the BRITANNS, the same in like sort so new a seat of
the civil ROMANS, could neither want temples, bains, aquaeducts, courts of
counsel, and justice, nor other public works to render it complete in it
self, and a farre-off worth the beholding. The river full of ships (for
merchants and ships do always suppose one the other) the riuage full of
seafaring men, the inns full of strangers. Here was the staple of trade, and
the capital mart of BRITAIN, the bower of the noble (for they had no where
else to be so furnished,) the bliss of the thriftie (for they had no where else
to be so enriched) the delight of all. Here also, or no where rather, the
public storehouses, granaries, and magazines; the safest stowage of gotten
spoils, the soldiers packs, and baggage, the hostages of the BRITISH states,
the public records, (as at SAMAROBRIVA under JULIUS CAESAR, in GALL-BELGICK)
and whatsoever stuff, or provisions SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS in his aspiring
spirit, might design for a triumphall, or an ouant show at ROME. His care to
reach to LONDON before the cruel rebels, an argument of the premises, and of
this also, that it was the top it self of all the ROMAN interest in BRITAIN.
His purpose moreover to erect the same into the seat of war, makes it
credible, that it was not without a wall even then, but every way defensible;
had it met with a season more favorable, or with a captain as firm as the
faith of the people. Within it the splendour of arms, and the furnitures of
peace, which till the most fierce BOADICIA struck up for battle, was every
where most deep, and still. And whereas the place of store had evermore a
strong guard within it, as at SAMAROBRIVA before said, where a legion lay in
defense, so here (if my diuinations fail me not) either the valorous
fourteenth kept, or some large portion thereof, as in the main stay, or seat of
the empires part in BRITAIN, it self also the key or gate of the province,
which lay beyond the river from SVRREY-side toward CORNWALL. An argument
hereof, that though LONDON for the territory was Trinobantish, yet for the
jurisdiction was Cantian; at leastwise, in PTOLOMEAS days under ADRIAN. And
the infrequencie of soldiers which is alleged in TACITUS for a cause why
SVETONIVS did dislodge from thence, was the infrequencie (if conjecture hits
right) of that brave bold legion, whose bands and troops were not full as then,
by reason of absences upon leave, or far dispersion of the parts, which all
came in before the battle, though wanting at the musters. Thus rich, thus
populous, thus great, thus strong, thus goodly, and thus abounding with all
the necessaries, and pleasures of life, SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS possessed LONDON at
his return from MONA, for the service of CAESAR, and of CAESAR'S ROMAN-BRITAIN.

. XX. Nero's lieutenant in Britain abandons London to the rebels.
NOr did the place seem of less importance to SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS himself,
who (all other business set apart) underwent so much pain, and peril, to
reach and keep it. But LIPSIVS not without cause complains of the many wants
and imperfections of narration in this noble piece of the CORNELIAN Annals; the
blame whereof he principally casts (as commonly elsewhere) upon transcribers,
who while they should have given us true copies, have otherwise used their
pleasures in them, contrary to faith, and office. For in a matter which had
somewhat in it of a wonder, to tell us nothing but the name of the virtue by
which PAVLLINVS wrought, to bring himself from MONA to LONDON, yields slender
satisfaction. But if some part of his adventures; and some particulars of his
carriage had been withal unfolded, the competent reader (whose properly the
judgment is) could of himself have gathered out of them, whither it was
constancy, or rashness in the ROMAN General, to march through the middle of
his enemies. Which heroicke action, as now it stands declared, may rather seem
of one who had gotten a ring, or receipt, to qualify him with a gliding
inuisibilitie, then his who followed right reason, the only true guide of
valor. Moreover also, it would not have been impertinent, but very
satisfactorie, and useful, to have revealed what kinds of soldiers, and how
many went with him in guard along; where they rested upon the way; and among
what several nations; as XENOPHON in his excellent books of CYRUS his Ascense
has done. But the law of ANNALS, requires no such exactness, being properly
nothing else but summaries, or narrow registers. I for my part am glad to
behold so many poincts, and glimmerings of facts remaining in TACITUS for
accomplishing our countries history in this most memorable parcel. In him
therefore we find the subject matter of PAVLLINVS his main deliberation at
LONDON; his doubtfulnesse what to resolve; his general musters there; his
scantnesse of numbers; the capital motive of his wariness; his final
determination, and execution thereof. The question in counsel was; whither he
should choose and use London for the seat of war or otherwise abandon it.
Before the proposure whereof it must necessarily precede, that he resolved with
himself, not to issue out to fight with Boadicia; And both these poincts were
principally grounded upon the knowledge of weakness in the ROMAN party,
discouerd after his entrance at the musters. To persuade a stay, the reasons
were great and many. The preservation of so famous a place; the honor of the
Roman name; the certainty of aid from Nero; the danger of a retreat; the
necessity of giving a stop to Boadicia's fury. But without some competent
proportions of forces, he was warnd by the fresh disaster of PETILIVS CEREALIS
not to hazard battle. To authorize a departure there wanted not arguments, and
those most weighty. For, whereas SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS had here appointed the
general assembly of his side, now upon a view taken, his troops and companies
were not found full, but infrequent, and thin. The main prop therefore of
resistance failed, which whither it were by CATVS DECIANVS his example, fraud,
or baseness, or otherwise, did howsoever happen. A more compulsorie cause was
want of corn, which DIO notes. For neither without store of men could so great
a city be defended; nor men be kept alive without food. The fortune of LONDON
thus hanging in balance, and swaying mainly downwards for the present, the
news of BOADICIA'S terrible approach, drane them whither they would or no, to
a round, and present resolution. That seeing LONDON could not be made good
against the prevailing rebels, who were now in their ruff and utmost bravery,
the excellency of the place could be no color why they should wilfully
perish with it. The honor of the Roman name was doubly safe, both by the
monstrous odds now against them, and by a mere necessity. Besides that,
whenever they got the vpper-hand again, honor would acknowledge old
clients, and willingly return with advantage. And though aid would certainly
arrive to relieve them besieged, it would be more acceptable at Rome so to
order things here in Britain as not to need relief: and if there should be
need, Nero's succors would not come less contentedlie to find their fellows
in an open field, then shut up within ditches, and fortifications, as in a
kind of dishonorable pinfold. The danger of a retreat nothing comparable to
the mischief of a stay. And London was not lost gratis, but did a service
worth it self, if the riches, and pleasures thereof could perform that for
the present, which their armed powers were unable to do. The stop of
Boadicia's fury much better to be made with only the fortunes of a place,
then besides the loss of the best town with the remains also of all the
Roman-Britann powers together in one. Nor could any goods perish, which were
but sacked, or pillaged, and not quite destroid: for one victory would recover
both all their own things, and their enemies. It was therefore a loan or
license, rather then a desperate debt, or shipwreck, to permit the rebels to
make spoil, and booty; and merely a stale, or golden ball, such as Atalanta
stoopt unto. Therefore, while the greedy Boadicians spent their time in
sharing among themselves the wealth of the most famous merchant-towne of
Britain, the Roman party should have opportunity to gather head elsewhere,
without the shame of an open flight, and with the certainty of making a secure
retreat. Nor though Boadicia, perceiving the scope, should be willing to
suspend the sackage, and plie the pursuit, yet would she not dare to urge it,
because the cardinal mystery of her greatness was license to rob and steal
This benefit among the rest not the least, that even time it self would abate
the edge, and quantity of the present mischief, nothing violent being
permanent; ways would also be found, how to sunder the combined, thereby to
weaken the mighty knot* and if nothing else yet this would undoubtedly
happen, that every one as he had gotten most, would most affect to be gone,
each to enjoy his purchase, the end and fruit of their partakings; nor should
Boadicia be always able to hold them together. And to imagine the very least,
yet the commodity, to assemble, and enable the Roman party, would undoubtedly
follow; whereby the necessity to fight should bring no necessity upon them of
being overcome in fight, but a iuster hope of prevailing by the means of more
provisions. Thus was LONDON heavily condemned to be left for the time to the
lusts, or mercy of the rebels. In execution of which sad sentence, the ROMAN
General caused it to be proclaimed through the city, that he must rise and
leave the place, though not the people; for whosoever would depart and partake
with him the fortune of war under the ROMAN name, and standard, should be
received, the rest upon this warning were otherwise to provide for themselves
so well as they could, either by abode, or absence. The LONDONERS, the comfort
of whose lives, and hopes relied upon the issue of this counsel of war,
took desperation in at the same ear at which these news did enter. The
woeful estate, and face of a people and things, after such a proclamation,
cannot easily be imagined. And in historical narrations of calamities it is
unlawful to fain at all, or to make any other description then of only that
which was actuallie, and properly theirs of whom the speech is instituted.
Office^^ of invention, and imagination, are the proper of other MUSES; those of
reason, and consequent discourse the only ones of history. This we find in
textuall authority, that upon this dismal Oyez, Orators in the name of the
whole corporation besought the General with tears, and cries, not to forsake
them. But in vain; for against all batteries of passionate gestures, vows,
and adiurations, he continued inexorablie firm to his own decree. Of them
therefore who were at this instant time of LONDON, some resolved to stay
behind; being persons whom either weakness of age, or sex made unable to
fly, or such other as the sweets, and dearness of the most beloved place,
confirmed in a desire to stand, or perish with it. The residue being fitted as
well as the misery, and shortness of the time would possibly suffer,
increased (as CAMDEN observes) the forces of PAVLLINVS, and were received after
the signal of departure, into part of his host, or conuoy: The river
undoubtedly, though straightly beset, at leastwise upon London-side; befriended
many by affording means to escape. The ROMANS had a navy upon the coasts, as
appears in TACITUS at the end of the BRITISH affairs, where TVRPILIAN
succeeds in the charge.

. XXI. London entered, sacked, and set on fire by Boadicia.
SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS, having absolutely thus quit the place; there are some
reasons to persuade, that they who remaind behind, attempted to defend
themselves, without dying wholly unrevenged. For they besought not PAVLLINVS
of his stay, but of his help; and in the life of AGRICOLA there is mention,
after the burning of the ROMAN colonie, that BOADICIA forced a great fortified
ground, or castra, whereby whatsoever TACITUS means, whether a camp,
according to the nature of the word, or (contrary to the propriety of his
speaking, and of the Latin language in those days) some mighty castles, or
citadels; to look for such a thing any other-where rather then here, is
improbable: finally; the same grauest author writes, that they who remained,
were ouer-laid by the enemy; which argues a resistance; and DIO expressly
professes, that BVNDVCA did assail and take two cities by force. But of the
fort of LONDON, commonly known all in present by the nobler part thereof, the
Tower; and of DIANA'S temple (where the cathedral church of Saint PAVL does
thrust the head thereof into the clouds) which as the temple of CLAUDIUS in
CAMALODVNVM did, might serve as a castle for the time; as of whatsoever else
may in most likelihood concern this point of defense, there may be opportunity
to speak elsewhere more at large. BOADICIA, succeeding to PAVLLINVS with a
most different affection, was now become absolute mistress of LONDON, and of
all therein. The wild vplandish crewes of her beggarly kern, and savages,
with the rest of that rabble, spared nothing quick, or dead. Thirst of revenge
in her, and rapine in them banished all humanity. The streets and houses, and
all the corners were filled with miserable murders; the goods felt other ruder
owners then the right ones; nor did they content themselves with a simple
massacre; and when they had glutted their barbarous appetites with all sorts of
licenciousnesse, and outrage, they fired the spacious town, as if in the
smoke of the burnings the note of their carriage should vapor away. A most
horrible effect of the pretended recovery of liberty. But while they consumed
what things or persons it pleased them, they withal consumed time, to their
undoing, and fatallie cockerd themselves up with the hope of continual
felicity: the cause why they finally miscarried. GALGACVS wisely afterward
observed it in a speech, to his Caledonian BRITANNS. This destruction was
particularly foretold among the former wonders, by the images of shattered
houses under water; which being seen in the river of THAMES, belonged not in
the quality of the presage, to CAMALODVNVM, but to LONDON. Of those fourscore
thousand ROMANS, and ROMAN-BRITANNS, which were slain by the BOADICIANS in
this vast revolt (as DIO gives the account) fewer then forty thousand could
not perish here, according to the least proportion. That such was now the
fortune of the place, cannot be colourablie doubted; both because TACITUS in
general words has testified, that fire was among the common instruments of
BOADICIA'S revenge, and PAVLLINVS himself is my witness in DIO, that here it
wrought particularly, though he names not LONDON otherwise then by
circumstance. For of those two chief towns destroid in this dreadful
rebellion by firing them, the one (says he) was betrayed; evidently
CAMALODVNVM: the other was abandoned; the special case of LONDON. The
faithful town sitting utterly desolate in cinders, and ashes, among the dead
trunckes, and bloudlesse bodies of the late children and inhabitants thereof,
had no other comfort but the honorable conscience of constant loialtie; and
the noble hope to rise again more happy, and maiesticall; which afterward
proved so true, that for the greater dignity it came to be entitled AUGUSTA.
The nature of the merit immortal in the fame, and the imitation perpetual to
the people. Nor does any thing threaten the glory thereof so much, as the
halfe-brutish manners of the rascal multitude (the branne, and scurfe of all
societies) who darken the deserts of the worthy, by confounding their quality
in common estimation abroad. Or rather not they, but some disguised limbs of
such crewes as swarm forlorn, and desperate, about the city, without
profession of life, and who contriue for disorder. Full amendment the proper
and continual care of the magistrate; the wishes of that amendment common with
my self to all who love the honor of the realm therein, and LONDON.

. XXII. VERVLAM sacked, and destroid by BOADICIA. An essential difference
between the persons of a municipium, and a colonie.
THe same miserable fortune there was of the town called VERVLAM (a
municipium, or a free-borough of the ROMANS) as there was of LONDON it self.
And though in CORNELIUS TACITUS it be the last of the three famous places in
the order of naming, which were entered upon at this time, yet whither it were
also such in the order or suffering, may be doubted. For how does that reason
hold good which SVETONIVS rendered as the final cause of his quitting LONDON,
By the loss of one town to save the whole residue, if VERVLAM was overwhelmed
after? But being it is clear for the disorder of the fact, the strife, or
doubt concerning the order of the time, may very well cease, and we may follow
what we find. CAMDEN probably supposes this town to have been the very
same which JULIUS CAESAR wanne by assault from king CASSIBELINE,
Captaine-generall of the league of BRITAIN. VERVLAM therefore is now but a part
of the common calamity which was then the only all. Nor did any thing more
unmask the covetous, corrupt, and inwardly most vicious intents of the
BOADICIANS, then the injury done hereunto. For in CAMALODVNVM the maine body
and stock of the people were ROMANS, and LONDON likewise was full of them,
which ministered some color for merciless carriage; but why they should deal
in that manner with VERVLAM, the magistrates, and comminaltie whereof were
BRITANNS, no tolerable cause can be well assigned. True it is they had the
dignity and benefit to be free of ROME, but were not otherwise ROMAN. A
principal difference between the persons of a colonie, and those of a
municipium, this; that in a colonie they were evermore drawn out of the
corporation it self of the people of ROME, as members before; but in the
other, they were not any part of that imperial body till favorably received
by municipiall privilege into the freedom; men generally foreign else, and but
by admission capable. The VERVLANIANS therefore were BRITANNS, though now they
smarted as ROMANS, and found their riches to be their undoing. It might be
supposed (if histories were places for supposals) that king COGIDVNVS (of whom
there is already sufficient spoken) was Lord of the soil about, which being
upon the frontire of the revolted TRINOBANTS, the town for that cause suffered
mischief, in hatred, and despite of his constant friendship to his great
benefactors the ROMANS. And here among many other the like, in the CORNELIAN
Annals, the infelicitie of the text, corrupted by transcription, breeds
confusion. Nor does the surgerie of Critics so heal it, but that new galls
and blisters may still arise. What TACITUS would principally say is not
obscure: For he has told us; that the Britanns, omitting castles, and
garrisons, as tedious and troublesome to conquer, ranged loose about, and made
booty or hauock of that which was most of worth abroad; And although a very
commodious sense seems to lurk under the disordered shufflings of the vulgar
text, which is, that the Boadicians carried their pillage, and robberies into
places of safety (whither woods or bogges, or whatsoever else) and full of
gladness for their cheuisance, did then come again to fetch more (which every
man will repute reasonable to suppose) yet those learned masters frame other
conjectures; best to be seen in their own writings. The most judicious of
them agree in this to be the sense; that the Boadicians sought for that which
was most gainefull to themselves, and withal unsafe for the owners to defend;
a people forward to boot-hale, and consume, but backward to the duties of
war. A censure they well deserved, and extends to all others, who propounding
to themselves no laborious, nor honest means of life, long for civil
confusions, that they might have what to lavish, though for but never so short
a while, and with whatsoever lasting misery of the innocent and industrious.
Nations mark it well. The ruins of VERVLAM (soon afterward re-empeopled, and
reflourishing) a wall of flints and brickes, eaten down into the earth with
age and weather, and deep double trenches about, which remain at this day,
look sadly with an ouer-growne face upon the town of Saint ALBAN, and retain
the ancient name. That the syllable VER, the first in the word, should be
somewhat sounding honorable in the BRITISH tongue, because VER-GOBRET was the
name of a chief magistracy among the GALLS (whose language was the same with
the BRITANNS) and their most heroicke champion, was called VER-CINGETORIX, is
more easy to image, then to prove. But that it signified the same with Mawr,
is probable, if the sense of Ver, or VAWR, in some BRITISH dialect, be
likewise equivalent to Great in English, as MAWR is. Great an apt addition in
these particulars. HVMFREY LHVID, one of the most learned late antiquaries of
the BRITANNS, will have it, that the pretty stream which runs thereby was
denominatiue of the place, and VERLAM to have been Werlhan, the fane, or temple
upon the water Werr, he supposing that to be the name thereof; the same town
also afterward called CAER- municip, by occasion of the ROMAN franchise. It is
no great matter whither of the opinions be truer, or if neither. Here also
sword, and fire (the instruments of wrath and fury) devoured what rapine left:
nor fewer thousands then ten of those eighty, which the BOADICIANS slew in
all, could probably perish therein.

. XXIII. The most savage behauiours of the Boadicians in the use of their
victories throughout.
THus far the motions, and actions of that mighty body of enemies assembled
together under a most glorious title, the recovery of common liberty, and
commanded in chief by BOADICIA, prospered after their manner. The same being
now at the utmost height as well for success as wickedness, fell sodeinly to
ground. No wonder at all; considering how hateful they had made themselves in
the sight of God and man, by abusing their power, and fortunes: quite blotting
out all the splendours of their favorable cause, with the foulness of their
carriage. There was no taking to mercy (says TACITUS,) no quarter allowed, no
hope of ransom, nor any trade of terms, as in other wars; but blades,
halters, fire, gallows, and utter vengeance to all that was ROMAN, or toward
it; the Boadician BRITANNS not only striving to be even with their
oppressors, for the wrongs they had done, but also to get beforehand with
them, by worse, and greater. But not to accuse this course too far, because
their purpose was absolutely to root out all that was ROMAN; the unkindly
kinds of their savage practice in the works of revenge, and extirpation, are
hardly credible. BOADICIA, a most martial, bold, and mighty Lady, but not
woman enough; for led by infernal superstitions, or no less then infernal
passions, her BRITANNS took the most noble, and honorable dames among their
enemies, stripped them naked, sliced away their pappes, stitcht them to their
mouths as to make them seem feeding, and finally staked their bodies through
in length. Villainies at which barbaritie it self would blush, and which in
themselves most horrible, DIO'S credit makes credible. The men whom they far
more cruelly saved, then they could have simply slain, had their bellies ripped
open alive (says SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS in XIPHILINE) their boweles cut out: some
gored upon burning stakes, and others boild to death in seething water. Man is
to man a devil at times; no where rather verifide then here. The forms and
pains of these murders not to be out-gone for their invention, and execution,
savage wit found how to aggrauate by religious impiety, and irreligious
contumely. For it being not absurd to think, that they might aslo eat what
thus was dressed (the inference familiar from the shambles to the kitchen) these
certainly whether sacrifices, or games, were most spitefully presented, while
they offered in their temples, or reueld at their feasts, but specially in the
grove of their goddess ANDATE, the patroness of their proceedings, as
ANDRASTA, or ADRASTE was their deity of revenge. For DIO, and XIPHILINE, in
BVNDVCA'S oration, distinctly speak of them as of two several; if our copies
be sincere. Their great sacrifice of all, which CAESAR, and STRABO describe,
is rather not remembered here in particular, then likely to have been forborne.
The DRVIDS who dealt in blood, the authors, and actors of all; upon this one
ground of doctrine in their schools, that the wrath of the Gods could not be
appeased in a case of life, but with the life of man. And their inhumane
diuinations had not any other reason for their mystery. They composed a
colossus of wouen osyars, or a monstrous bigg giant of wicker, which stuffed with
men, was set on a fiery blaze, and burnt all. STRABO writes that they had an
huge image of hay, under which not only men, (shot first with arrows, or fixr
upright upon rafters) but cattle, and al sorts of beasts were packt and
consumed together. The general words in TACITUS, and the particular in DIO,
exclude not these figures of death from the acts of this tragic vengeance,
though they express them not. And a thing so solemn with the Druids of GALL
(whose mother-schools were in BRITAIN) which might answer in quantity to a
GREEK hecatomb, and was in very deed an holocaust, was not probably omitted
now, in such plenty of humane bodies, and so great wantonness of inhumane
butcheries. But this augments not the opinion of their cruelties, though it
adds a strange one to the forms. There is more then enough already said, to
show how justly the BOADICIANS perished. To fall into the hands of the wild
and vicious, is a wretched, and a dreadful thing.

. XXIIII. The course which Suetonius Paullinus held in his retreat from London,
and of his constraint to resolve for fight.
But while BOADICIA, and her people grew ripe for ruin, the ROMAN-generall,
after he had abandoned LONDON, maintained retreat, partly to gather more
strength, but specially to shun for the time the fury of a prosperous
hatred. For DIO plainly tells us, that he feared the encounter. Such were the
heats and darings of the victorious enemy. The way which SVETONIVS took, after
his departure, was in mine opinion toward SEVERN, where PAENIVS POSTHVMVS,
encamped with the second legion, among the SILVRES. A great accession of
strength in such an addition of number. Nevertheless it failed. For when
SVETONIVS commanded them to draw themselves up to his quarter, PAENIVS
POSTHVMVS, master of the camp, and of the company, utterly refused to come,
contrary to the duty of his place, and discipline of war. Of him BOADICIA
undoubtedly meant, where she glories in her speech before the fight, that of
those ROMANS who had escaped her sword, some covered themselves within their
camp, and the rest (SVETONIVS, and his powers then present in the field) did
but cast about which way to fly. But in his march toward that second legion,
the General, by crossing the THAMES at LONDON, could not but far away
provide best for his own more safety, and his peoples most sustentation. For
in keeping the river upon his right hand still, the water was both a deep
bar against the pursuing enemy, and between the same and the British OCEAN,
the province, which ran all along, was ROMAN. Thus houerd he aloof, in
obedience to his nature, which being slow, and weighty, preferred safe courses
with reason, above great good luck by chance. But when he beheld the
intolerable bravery of the woman, in maintaining a personal chase upon him
(for it was not long before she followed close, and quick) it was high time to
redeem his fame, or die in the quarrel. Away go all lingrings therefore;
evermore pernicious, when things are no longer to be debated, but done. The
necessity of action often begets felicity in action: and a state of fear is a
state of guard. Vain confidence destroid the other.

. XXV. The number and quality of the Roman forces, provided for fight.
COncerning the power which SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS had in readiness at this great
extremity; TACITUS is universally so understood, that the whole number is not
taken to have amounted to fully ten thousand, horse, and foot of all sorts
in arms. A dreadful disproportion against three and twenty times as many.
They are named in the CORNELIAN ANNALS, the fourteenth legion, with the
rereguard, or triarij, of the twentieth, as some do point the readings, and
aids, of the nearest at hand, drawn out as upon a violent need in haste: but,
as others do place the points, they are reckoned the fourteenth legion with
the Triarij, or rere of the same, and the vicesimarians, or soldiers of the
twentieth, together with aids as before-said. The word for that company is in
the text uexillarij, which some have translated standard-bearers. But any thing
(as it seems) is good enough in their conceits, for the common swallow. Some
expunctory volumes of such abuses would do well. The number of these choice
old soldiers (for they were veterans) the last hope of every battle, was upon
certainty six hundred, and never either more, or fewer in complete legions,
whose rere they always made; and in later times, for their ancient name
triarij, they came to be styled vexillarij, because they fought under one
vexillum, flag, or banner. They who would see more of this, may satisfy
themselves out of CLAUDIUS SALMASIVS, the SELDOM of GALLIA, if without creating
envy to my learned friend, John Seldom, I may compare them so. As for that
common understanding of TACITUS there, concerning the numbers, though no man
supposes any corruption of the text, yet may it well receive a trauerse in
common sense. For it will easily be credited that SVETONIVS brought some
proportion of soldiers with him from the i will of MONA, if but for his necessary
guard, unless he may be thought to have ridden poast from thence to LONDON,
where there also was an assembly of others, as is plain, because the view of
their thinness moved him to quit the station. Besides, he took into a part
of his troup all the voluntaries of LONDON, and each legion had store of aids
appertaining to it self. The fourteenth (whose fame is greatest) had belonging
to it eight cohorts of BATAVIANS, brave fellows all, and were, if full, about
four thousand, who would groan out in their graves if they should be put from
their share in the glory of this day. And if no part could belong to them
herein, the fourteenth alone which seems to have come entire; had six or
seven thousand beside the pressed aides, and the vicesimarians. All which that
they should not make ten thousand together, is strange. Therefore if the number
be true, the words of TACITUS may thus be understood, that to those forces
with which SVETONIVS parted from LONDON, there came now in the end and in all,
such, and so many more as ammounted to almost ten thousand. If the number be
not sincere, then the numeral word in the ANNALS, has had a maine limb lopt
away. And if it were nine above ten, the wonder of the victory would seem
great enough even with nineteen thousand.

. XXVI. Of Julius Agricola, the father in law of Cornelius Tacitus.
NEither was it the least honor of SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS, that JULIUS AGRICOLA,
(whose life his son in law CORNELIUS TACITUS (doubtfully whither with more
piety, or eloquence) has commended to all posterity) that he had his
breeding for war in his school, where he carried the honorable title of a
tribune, and exercised all the duties of his place. On the other side, it was
the special good fortune of AGRICOLA that he had PAVLLINVS for his master,
whose familiar friend he lived, and as well his companion in arms, as his
camerado. Here therefore did that noble gentleman learn, how to command by
having obeid, and what the wars of BRITAIN required, before he came (as he
afterward did) to be General himself in BRITAIN.

. XXVII. The number of men in Boadicia's army, their nations, qualities, and
arms.
BOADICIA, whose people had handled the quarrel of their country infinitely
worse then the sorest enemies which ever their country had, drew hastily up to
the fatal ground, upon which SVETONIVS necessarily resolved to ride out the
final fortune of a day while any hope remained. Her two defloured daughters
are the only persons particularly remembered to have attended in the service,
and yet even their names are lost. So inglorious are all whom the light of
letters retains not aloft in sight. Her numbers couerd the region over. Two
hundred and thirty thousand fighting men in field. Success, and spoil most
effectual means to multiply partakers. The ICENI, and the TRINOBANTS were
chief in the action, as authors. There were also the CORITANI, and other
Marshmen (BOADICIA shows it in DIO, where she speaks of fennes and bogges for
hiding themselves, if overthrown) there were the ORDOVICES (for who else had
such mountains to shelter them as they?) and whosoever else of the BRITANNS,
the BRIGANTS certainly were not absent. TACITUS expressly names them. And why
the greatest Critics should be so troubled thereat, as to substitute any other
word for that, seems to me a great marvel. For the speaker in that place is
GALGACVS, the rough Caledonian Prince, who under the one name of BRIGANTS
(being among his nearest neighbors, and therefore most known to him) does
seem to understand, and comprise all the more Southerlie BRITANNS, who were at
this time out in arms, upon this one woman's leading. To GALGACVS therefore all
were indifferently BRIGANTS, who were not his. And besides the authority of
TACITUS, the very description of the manners of some of the Boadicians in
XIPHILINE, does plainly convince, that the rudest nations were at this work,
and consequently the BRIGANTS, as neither the most polite, nor most remote,
and certainly not least populous. Wherefore the CORNELIAN text is sincere, and
decent. For GALGACVS is speaker, and not TACITUS. Nor can DIO'S text be
justified without this senses admission. For he was evidently too much in the
thought of the MAEATS, and CALEDONIANS, such as his own times saw them under
the emperor SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS, when he recorded his BVNDVCA'S oration, if he
meant the barbarous manners, which that oration boasts to be common to all
the BRITANNS who were in that martial auditorie. For nothing can be more
untrue: because, even in JULIUS CAESAR'S times some of them were much more
courteous then others, and the ciuility of many of the BRITANNS, now under
NERO, is confessed as a disadvantage. There is no doubt, nor cause of doubt why
the BRIGANTS should not be helps to BOADICIA as accomplices; upon whom soon
after the whole weight of war did fall; nor improbablie for this partaking.
For the ROMANS prosecuted the contagion of assistance as they did the maine
opposition it self. Their enemies succors, properly enemies. The most wild,
and barbarous therefore of the qualities which are deciphered in her oration,
are only to be understood of a part of the BRITANNS, and not of all; or of
the more Southerly. But amongst her strengths at this time, we must not reckon
the flocks of British wives and women, who were brought to sit spectators of
the expected utter ruin of PAVLLINVS (the cause and hope of their journey)
though the versifier in his Albions England, pleasantly encroaching upon the
poet, does furnish this Queene-Mother, and her martial daughters, with six
thousand armed Ladies, out of his Homericall hearsayes. A license of wit not
unbeseeming the music of rimes, but incompetent for the gravity of story,
which admits no fables. And though the CORNELIAN writings mention not the
nature of the Boadician arms, and weapons at this field, but repute them as
naked men, and do elsewhere before, deny, that the ORDOVICES (hardy BRITANNS)
had the use either of murrions, or brest-plates, yet DIO, and XIPHILINE make it
clear that she not only had soldiers completely armed, and light both horse
and foot, but charriots also of war, such as JULIUS CAESAR, in penning the
British affairs, does greatly celebrate, though of all these there is not the
least inckling, or touch in CORNELIUS TACITUS.

. XXVIII. Of the place of the battle, and season of the year.
THe level, or plot of ground upon which the army of BOADICIA, by the ROMANS
forestallment, came to be embatteld, was certainly upon a plain, of at least
five, or six miles over in breadth, between two woods; at either end of the
open field one. The quantity of the space shall be made apparent by the same
infallible demonstration in the Tacticks, by which POLYBIVS disprooued
CALLISTHENES, erroneously describing the field between ALEXANDER, and DARIUS;
as that poinct also of the two woods, by the best books compared. But
whereabout in these parts of BRITAIN, that very place was, unless it were upon
SALISBVRIE plain, where there is a black heath, and scope enough, is not for
me to imagine. Edmund Spencer, who was in his time, the most learned poet of
ENGLAND, lays it to have been further off; for he names besides SEVERN. But
without praying in aid of his poems, I seem to my self to have made it
vehemently probable, that the field was hereabout, by having showed that
PAVLLINVS was marched hitherwards. And somewhat perhaps it will fortify the
conjecture, that upon the brimme, or skirts of this most spacious plain, nor
far from Stonage, there survive at this hour three memorable arguments of
ancient camps, the greatest of which being over against WILLY, is doubly
environed with depth of ditch, and by the form (says CAMDEN) appears to have
been a ROMAN work, the other singlie; none of them far asunder, and all of
them distinguished, by the common people, with the several names of Yanesburie
castle, Dunshot, and Woldsburie. And admitting that VESPASIAN was the author of
Yanesburie under CLAUDIUS (as some do well divine) that cannot hinder why
SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS should not the rather make use thereof at this time under
NERO, both as a strength ready wrought, and fortunately hanseld by the luck
of so brave a commander. Concerning the time of the year; it was manifestly
in the stoop thereof, as declining toward the winter-quarter; which many
signs, extant in TACITUS, seem to discover: the expedition of MONA abruptly
ended; the mention of winter-campes; and the BRITANNS trusting for corn to the
ROMAN store or harvest, which they presumed should be theirs. So it may be
thought to have been at sometime or other in September, when these two
GENERALS, more opposite in affections then diverse in sex, encountered.

. XXIX. The order of the Roman battle.
THe ROMAN General, in marshalling his little army, did principally labor, to
keep all his enemies before him, that their unreasonable numbers might not
enclose, nor ouer-lay him. And in that one poinct the maine mystery of his
final hopes consisted. Therefore he selected a place with a wood at his back,
to serve with the help of art as a wall, or bulwark behind: from whence
forthright, and before the entrance into the open wowlds or plains, the whole
plot of ground between cheek, and cheek, but specially at the very mouth it
self, was narrow, and yet withal wide enough to contain his people, as being
half a mile broad, or so; the sides themselves secure, by whatsoever thickets,
waters, cliffes, or moors, or other advantages of nature, or provisions of
skill, by trenches, or barricadoes, with his carriages and the like, in which
the ROMANS were excellently ready masters. A ground well chosen for fight is
not a little onwards to a victory: and these straights, having the even
country for a prospect, and therefore true against ambush, were to the ROMANS
as a very camp or fortress. PAVLLINVS having thus devised for the best, and
fore-stalled the choice of the field, he drew out his soldiers, now thoroughly
refresht, and furnished. They were Legionaries, freemen of ROME, and
auxiliaries, their fellows in arms, and not otherwise ROMANS; and these of
all sorts, horse and foot, and as well heavy, as light armed men. His
principal hope, and strengths resided in the fourteenth legion, which was
there entire. The victorious standard, and ensigns whereof, thought to be
worthy of a particular memorial, were advanced in such form as this coigne
in LIPSIVS specifies.

The method of his proceedings was this. He divided the body of his force
within these straights, into three wards, or battalia's (for that is evident in
DIO) that he might the better keep himself from the mortal mischief of
circumuention, and oppression, and also by possessing the whole plot, fight at
once and in front quite through. And hereunto he was necessarily driven;
because the enemies, as to daunt him with the ostentation of their multitudes,
which threatened a most certain surcharge, took up in front five, or six
miles at least, as where their order of battle comes to be displaied will
appear. The legionaries how many thousands is uncertain. Fewer then six they
were not. Of them (upon whom the bloody sum, and weight of the work did
rest) the middle ward, or main consisted, commonly armed with helmets, raisd
higher with plumes of feathers, and substantial breast-plates, each of them
ballancing two or three piles, or darting iauelings in their hands. A terrible
weapon. For being about seven foot long, and plated with iron half way from
the massiue head downward, the head it self either round, and broad, or more
usually four square, the staff alone a pretty gripe about, they could in
hurling deliver it with such a violence, as to strike through a corslet, yea,
through the man himself sometimes, and armor together. For the use of combat,
each had a covering target, either ouall round, or square and hollow, in manner
of a roofe-tile, about thirty inches thwart, and above fifty long, with a
broad Spanish sword, which hung somewhat off behind, with the pommell toward
the right hand, not much above two foot long in blade, of an excellent temper,
fine and thin, to lop off limbs, but passing strong at the point to maintain a
thrust, or foine. Nor does CORNELIUS TACITUS mention any other sort of
legionaries in the infantery at this field. On either hand of this martial
phalanx stood the battles of the aids, with spears and greater swords, and
though they might have the titles, or properties of vann and rere, yet it is
clear enough in XIPHILINE, that they made all but one front with the
legionaries, from whom they were distinguished with certain spaces competent.
The troops of horse stood ready in wings. And they (in mine opinion) were
extraordinary many, because TACITUS, who makes but one battle of the steadfast
infantery in all, casting off the light-armed into clusters, and plumps about,
supplies the sides with cauallarie. The ordinary proportion of horse to a
legion was but three hundred, which they divided into two maine bodies, and
subdivided by thirties into cornets, which would make but poor weak wings, or
rather not wings, but according to the phrase of the CORNELIAN Annals, the two
other battalions for supply of vann, and rere, in regard that all the three
divisions of the army, in DIO, seemed after a sort to be put into one, by
placing them in one and the self same line of longitude. Their great use also
at this great service does alone demonstrate, that the numbers of the horse
were vnusually many, nor unlikely to be either all, or, the most part of the
cauallarie which belonged to all the ROMAN legions in BRITAIN. I for my part
have suspected and thought, that PAVLLINVS came from ANGLESEY to LONDON, with
none but horse, and those, them of the twentieth legion. And there is no cause
for us to think, why PETILIVS CEREALIS might not spare his horse-troups
hither, himself being shut up within his fortifications. So that let PAENIVS
POSTHVMVS enjoy his own fears, and withold his concurrence at this field,
yet (as we see here) SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS might be otherwise furnished with
extraordinary horse-troupes. What use or station the old soldiers, or the rere
of the twentieth legion had in this field, there is no particular mention any
where, I wish that there had been, because they seem to have done very nobly,
as well because their presence is singularly specified, as a very choice member
of the ROMAN forces here, as for that they wanne much honor to their proper
company, or legion. But because their special placings are not remembered, it
seems most likely, that they fought not apart, but were sorted among other the
ribs, and sinews of the legionarie forces. The forlorn hopes of foot, or
light nimble shot, of all sorts (DIO names archers in particular) whose part
was to take off the edge of the encounter, were cast off before the squadrons,
in careless and scattered companies. All the soldiers who expected in
battle-ray, but specially the legionaries were upon the least distance one from
another, which the use of their weapons would permit, that fighting all close
together, they might at once be bothimpenetrable, and invincible. The breadth
and depth of their battalia's, because the true measure of the ground is
unknown, cannot be certain; but supposing all the men were but well-near ten
thousand, the length of the whole front of all the three battles might
contain, at three foot space between man and man, about four, or five
hundred, and in file about seauenteen, or eighteen, leaving interuals between
battalia and battalia, for retreats and other uses, and room for the
horse-troopes upon the outsides. All which might together take up about that
half a mile over, in the mouth of the straights, which is mentioned before.
The ouer-plus of the soldiers (for upon the poinct of eight thousand would do
all this) may be thought to be in reserve for accidents, and other the sodein
exigents of war. And this conjecture of about four or five hundred in
rank, is somewhat supported out of TACITUS himself, where after the end of
the battle, he writes, that near upon four hundred were slain of the ROMAN
side, and not many more hurt or wounded. Which seems as much as if he had
said, that the fortune of the two first rancks dispatched the day. And this
might well be true according to the axiom of PAVLLINVS, in the CORNELIAN
ANNALS, putting his people in mind, that even where many legions fought, a few
hands did the deed. But as for the numbers in the ROMAN party at this battle,
I have elsewhere before tendered some reasons, which lead me to believe they
were rather twice ten thousand then only the moitie of twenty. Thus while
the General was busied, and as he past from company to company, he inspired
them with courage, by the life of his presence, and power of his words, calling
them sometime by the glorious name of Romans, and otherwhile by the more
familiar title of companions in arms and fellow soldiers. He sets before their
eyes the cruelties, and horrid dealings of their enemies, their own and their
countries honor, and their common danger in the most absolute necessity of
doing, or dying nobly. No hope but in victory; no refuge for runnawayes. Pure
Manhood, and the favor of their cause with powers divine, who use to incline
to the sufferers of wrong (such as he in DIO declares their cause to be) the
only means of safety to themselves, and of recovering Britain to the empire,
which was otherwise now in manifest peril to be utterly torn away. He sowes
withal every where about him, most certain hopes of good success, by
remembering their former valors, and prosperities against these very enemies,
whom he named contemptiblie, as men both unskillful, and unarmed; mingling for
a special ingredient toward the atchieuement of the victory, this precept or
rule of fight; that after they had most forceably thrown their piles home,
they should all then rush forth together in a run, and with their drawn
swords, and the bosses of their targets, press in round and close, and never
give over till they prevailed. His conclusion: that if the worst should happen,
yet he and they, by dying honorably on the place, should keep possession of
Britain, were it but with their dead bodies only. In these, and the like
exercises of speech and action, PAVLLINVS spent the whole time till the very
instant it self of joining. Nor fell his words, like burning sparckles upon
dancke and unprepared matter, but upon dry, tindry spirits, such as were most
ready to take, and kindle: which their countenances, and gestures testified.
The duty of a Chief toward the poinct of peril (says the greatest Captain
of the world in his invaluable commentaries) is to work upon that forward and
stirring humor, which being naturally in all men, is apt to be inflamed with a
desire of battle; accordingly to augment that eagerness, and heat, upon the
instant of encounter: but never to repress, or check it back in any degree.
The fatal error of POMPEI at PHARSALIA. But not of PAVLLINVS here. For that
rule of war was envred by him to the proof; who the more to assure his
fierce soldiers, affirmed, that not only their forefathers, but they
themselves also had often overcome many more enemies at a time then these. A
thing which otherwise then by the figure of excess can hardly have any
defense: for TACITUS, and the truth are clear, that the Britanns were never
before in so great numbers, unless it be admitted (which PAVLLINVS also says)
that the women at this field were more then the warlike youth. But that was
also another extreme of speech; another (as they call it) hyperbole. And thus
both he, and his, provided either for a grave or garland.

. XXX. The order of the Britanns battle.
ON the other side, Queen BOADICIA, full of present spirits, and martial
vigor, leads up her two hundred and thirty thousand men, and forgetting the
softness of her sex, performs in person all the duties of a most vigilant
and diligent Chief. For mounted in an open chariot, with her two orphane
daughters before her in the same, as the objects of compassion, and the motives
of wrath and revenge, she rides about the plain, and marshalls them to the
last man. The nations of BRITAIN, assistants at this need, as they were many
and diverse, so each of them was arranged by it self in a several battalion,
which TACITUS does not obscurely declare, where he mentions her access to
every of them apart; and ARIOVISTVS, in his array of battle against JULIUS
CAESAR used the same method. So it seems to have been a custom in these
parts, for the apparent benefit which comes by distinctions of worth, from
whence degrees of courage do manifestly spring. The noble ground of armories.
And these were the rowts and troops, who being ordered in several, are
mentioned in TACITUS to have euery-where vaunted themselves in the face of the
ROMANS with so great scorn and iollitie, because of a few smiles of mutable
fortune. And surely all sodein prosperity is for the more part a drunken
thing; much harder to carry well then either adueruersity, or a doubtful
state. Happier they whom it it ouer-turnes not, then whom it raises. It was
the BRITANNS bane. The front of her battle extended it self to five or six
miles out, at the least. For eight or nine thousand only, with the smallest
allowances of distance, take up alone in one rank so much ground; not
accounting the interualls between nation, and nation, by which they were
disparted, and designed. This proportion of extension is fully proved out of
DIO, who writes in plain terms, that SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS had not so many in
his army, as placed man against man, could equal the length in battle-ray, nor
the very first rank of the BRITANNS. Nor seems it doubtful, that the form
of her battle was semi-circular; the dilatation being to affright the ROMANS,
and the form to enclose them. But that speech of DIO'S, if taken precisely,
and according to the rigor of the letter, is either a confirmation, against my
former arguments, that the ROMANS had ten thousand in the field; or that the
BRITANNS had above that number in front. These nations had all of them their
several banners, or marks of conduct. For POMPONIVS MELA writes, that the
BRITANNS imitated the Gallicke fashion in arms; and CAESAR in his immortal
books does say, that CONSIDIVS partly discovered by their ensigns, that the
GALLS were masters of an hill of advantage. The GALLS had ensigns therefore.
But reason, much better then testimonies, conuinceth, that this was so among
the BRITANNS; because it must of force be so. For where order is, there is also
a necessity of directive signs; impossible otherwise to be preserved. What
their stuff, or arguments were, is unknown. They had their paintings, and
lineamentall purfles as is observed in the Elements of Armories. To say, that
the figures of a wolf, and greyhound were among the symbolicall notes of the
BRITANNS, because BOADICIA, in her auspicatory oration, may seem to allude to
their bearings, is but to say it only. And yet the conjecture dislikes me not
the more, that King HENRY the Seventh, who descended of these ancient
BRITANNS by the fathers side, did advance the greyhound in supporture. Before
the head of this huge, and wide-spred battle of the BRITANNS, the chariots of
war were planted, which (as MELA depourtrayes them) had sharp sithes
standing out, wherewith to mow down enemies. Among them the nimblest and the
lightest of her people were scattered at adventure: the horse upon either hand.
Against the maine body, or strength of the ROMAN battalia's, BOADICIA did set
her corslet-men, or such as were whole armed. DIO witnesses their use at this
service; and their means of furniture came in all probability from the spoils
of the legionaries, who rashly carried on by PETILIVS CEREALIS, were (as we
have heard before) defeated all of them, and slain, in the beginnings of this
revolt. Behind, she placed the carriages, walling the back of her battles
with wagons, waynes, and carts, where the wives and women of the BRITANNS
stood lookers-on. And least those impediments might not prove bar enough to
their then vnthought-of flight, there grew a wood also next beyond. Thus while
upon vain assurance they provided to create a spectacle for their women, they
emparkt themselves for slaughter; the game, and surfeit of the ROMANS; little
dreaming that they should become their own show. But overmuch boldness is
rarely any other then the common for-runner of a downfall. ARIOVISTVS,
General of the GERMAN league, against JULIUS CAESAR, had the same kind of
theater, and spectators, and because it was also with the like ill success,
the BOADICIANS lackt not the poor comfort of having an example, and parallel;
themselves not the first, nor the only unlucky that were. Obstinacy on both
sides fixed with trabal nails of necessity; the BRITANNS to maintain what
they had begun; the ROMANS to master their peril, or to die. No
possibility to hang the quarrel even upon the weighing beam of justice and
peace. BOADICIA therefore was not more wanting to her peoples encouragements,
then to their disposure for fight. Yet, by some words in the CORNELIAN Annals,
it may well be gathered, (notwithstanding all her great care and pains in
placing them) order was not kept so precisely, as their dangerous estate
required: for as well the cauallarie, as the foot, vaunted themselves
euery-where in the face of the enemy, flaunting, and brauing about in heaps,
and troops. BOADICIA her self deeply tainted with that selfe-flattering
pestilence: for from thence it was she told her army; the Romans would never
stand the ecchoing showtes of so many scores of thousands, or the bare rustle
of their arms, much less endure their shocke, and strokes: thereupon also
she boasted the defeat of PETILIVS CEREALIS, as a pattern of their warlike
workman-ship, and the earnest of their lasting good fortune; gloriously
affirming; fear did so benumbe their enemies, that they of them who were
absent, coopt themselves up within camps, and sconces, not daring once to peer
out (a thing not untrue with PAENIVS POSTHVMVS) and that these very men, whom
they had at last with so much trouble and travail found out and overtaken, did
not meditate fight, but flight, and how to run safest away. Evident in her
opinion, by the sheltring themselves within those straights; the lodgings and
denns of the timorous; not fore-casting, that it might in them be nothing else
but a point of warre-craft, to nourish foulest ouerweenings by the greatest
show of fear. Her person, conspicuitie, and postures in speaking, added
greatly to the life of her words. For riding about from one embattelld nation
to another, she turned her self on all sides in her open chariot, roially
appointed; presenting her fortunes, and the fortunes of her princely children,
who sat with her in sight there, as the most lively means for stirring up
extremest indignation, and revenge. Malignant humors thus being thoroughly
stirred, and the clouds of defiance impatiently striving to empty themselves
in a tempest of blows, BOADICIA at an instant struck of all the locks of
restraint on her side, by giving the word, and without God to friend, permits
her cause to brute trial.

. XXXI. The battle, overthrow, and death of Boadicia.
IMmediately hereupon, the BRITANNS raise universal showts, and cries, to
affright the ROMANS, and vainly chaunted out aloud their warlike odes, or
ditties; which devised by their Bards, or by each of themselves as his
boystrous wit would serve him, were filled with glorious braues, and irefull
threats. At the same time also they advance their battalia's, and continuing
their songs, and clamours, make the wide plains tremble with the stresse, and
strength of a general violent motion; men, horses, chariots, and all sorts of
arms and weapons stirring at once, render the noise as of a rough and angry
sea. A stately LACEDEMONIAN march toward the onset (as SYLBVRGIVS translates
the place in DIO) and not an headlong furious; only somewhat full, and round
at the instant it self of charging. The first assault therefore was with
shrill sounds, and voices; quickly to be dampt, and alaid with the groans and
shrikes of the dying. On the contrary, SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS, perceiving his
people fiery prompt, hoysed up aloft at a spears end the public sign of
battle, which was commonly the Generals purple fur-coat, in the nature of a
bloody banner. And first of all, the ROMAN legionaries, (thoroughly taught to
contemn loud clamours, as a terrible toy) kept close together within the
narrow outlet of their ground, as well to increase their enemies presumption,
as to prevent oppression and circumuention. But when the BRITANNS had delivered
their rouing shot, and were advanced within the reach of mischief, the ROMANS
(till that instant hushed, and silent, and observing fair regularitie) all on a
sodein join together in a martial showt at a sign, and most forceably
flinging their heavy piles into the thick of their coming enemies, they
presently drew their swords, and clashing them hard upon their shields, sally
out at once with all the force they could, and dealt their strokes and thrusts
to great advantage. The CORNELIAN Annals, where they speak of the fourteenth
legion at this field, do not mean by these words, velut cuneo erupit, any
thing else but a close and ioynct squadron, not the form of battle, called
pointed, and which bursting forth with an unexpected force, had the operation,
not the figure of a wedge, or of a long three square, with an obtuse angle
forward. All authority is against it. Nor only in this place of the best
authors is the Latin word cuneus interpreted, and understood so; for TITUS
LIVIVS himself does Latin the M^^^^^ONIAN Phalaux by the same. At the same
time they encountered every where all over. Out flew the auxiliaries (among
whom, according to CAMDEN, bands of LONDONERS were) and with no less bravery
of courage, and with as great violence as the legionaries, charged their cruel
adversaries home; the archers undertook the charioteers, and their cauallarie
attacked the other. The bloody confusion of this tumult is well set forth by
DIO and XIPHILINE: The violent giving in of the ROMANS upon the BOADICIANS at
their sodein rushing forth, did easily rowt, and disorder their rancks, though
their files could not choose but be very deep in regard of their necessity to
contract their length for fighting narrow, which made their vast multitudes
rather mischievous to themselves, and combersome, then useful. A maine reason
of BOADICIA'S overthrow. For the weight and work of the day was brought hereby
to rest but upon a few; and the ROMANS, (in regard of their discipline, skill,
and experience) had extremely the odds while they only dealt upon the even.
Nor had she patience to watch them, nor art to draw them out of their fortifide
ground. Venerable Moderation, thy coolings how necessary for the ouer-boylings
of prosperity! That defect a common cause of greater fierceness then good
fortune. And in the case of my dearest country, during this whole war, there
was nothing from first to last so unfortunately absent. The victory of the
ROMANS (as much as out of TACITUS may be gathered) seems to have begun at
the cornets of horse, who with their armed staves, or lances, charged in
flanck, and front, and every where as their enemies came to hand, or were
strongest. The fight nevertheless continued hot, and doubtful till the
evening, nor was the face thereof simple or uniform, but diverse. The
light-armed of the one side, lay fiercely at the light-armed of the other; the
well-armed oppose their likes; horse encounter horse; the Roman archers let
fly at the chariots of the Britanns; they again drive headlong upon the
Romans, and tumble them over. But for want of armor, wherewith to mock the
shot, they are enforced with the storms of Roman arrows to fall off again.
The foot trampled underfoot by the horse; and the horse beaten back by the
foot. Many close together make up with a ioynct force against the wagons of
war; they on the other side bear many down before them, and compel others
to fly. Here the Archers aduauncing ouer-forwardly, beyond the protection of
their cauallarie, are glad to save themselves by flat running away: there,
other keep aloof for fear of the peircing arrows. These things while they
were not acted in one place only, but in three at once (according to the
triple distinction of the Roman host in DIO) the conflict was long maintained
on both parts with equal boldness, and bravery. This is the table of the
battle, or maine meddlie between the BRITANNS and the ROMANS, as it stands
drawn with immortal words among the Greeks; which singularly help to open
the most weighty chronicle of TACITUS; where the acts of this great and bloody
business are all of them trussed up together in a lesser room, then the short
contents of a chapter. Briefs in heroical arguments, as they are the injurious
eclipse of mighty actions, so in all other kinds of learning where they are
insisted upon by truants as principal, they prove to be the very bane it self
of wits, and studies: On the contrary, whatsoever in narrations is for the size
thereof above the just length, does justly hear tedious; and whatsoever for
the nature of it is petie and poor, and beneath the majesty of story, is
worthily base and odious. In this famous conflict (where the natural liberty
of BRITAIN, and the title of the empire lay at stake) the ROMANS, by dashing in
with the whole breadth of their battalia so violently as they did upon the
enemies, though they drove innumerable of them down to the earth, tare their
rancks in pieces, and struck those other with amazement, and dismay, whom
their weapons could not reach, yet they plunged themselves so far off withal
from their ground, or stand of advantage, into the depths of the surmounting
multitudes, as they were after a sort enclosed, and compelled to fight all. In
the end notwithstanding (though so late first, that it was at least upon the
setting of the Sun) the ROMANS were every where, throughout the field,
victorious, while the barbarous sins of the BRITANNS, committed in the time
of their prosperity, fought not less against the guilty then the armed foe.
There is no regard, nor heed to be taken in this place what our domesticke
poets feign, in favor of Queen BOADICIA and her side; as if they were
overcome by the treason of some BRITANN Captains who revolted to PAVLLINVS; or
the like goodly, or honorable excusals. For they have no warrantie in
vnexceptionable moniments. But after the BRITANNS, in the head of their battle,
began to shrincke, and turn, that alone was a blow to all behind, who being
many scores of thousands, remained untouched, during the fight, because they
could never come up to handie-stroakes, for want of room, in the narrowings of
the field. So they who first did fall to running away, were among their own
fellows as irresistable as enemies, while they fearfully sought to open
passages for their own escape, bringing a strong necessity for all to
disband, and scatter, and wholly to rely on flight for present safety. The
Lady General, constrained to obey the authority of her disaster, got free
out, and fled. But the ROMAN party most bold in attempting, was also now most
nimble in pursuit, making execution of the overtaken flyers, and slaughter of
the very laboring beasts, and cart-horse. Yea, such was their hatred, and heat
of revenge, that their swords made no difference between sex and sex, but slew
even the women, who were seated aloft upon the waines, and carts, as upon
scaffolds, at the back of their army, to give their applause. A most certain
sign of the wrath of God for the punishment of insolency, and pride, that the
council which the BOADICIANS followed for a supposed triumph, was converted to
the piteous increase of their misery. For the carriages thus planted and
possessed, were like a wall against evasion. A vulgar writer, describing the
effect of this obstacle, has pretty smooth verses, wherein he says; that the
women, who were mounted in that manner to behold who bare himself stoutly, and
to control the coward; did now call in vain upon their sons and husbands to
turn the head, for they themselves, together with their sons and husbands
were mercilesly slain. This, and the dead bodies of cattle, did mightily
augment the heaps of carcases. They who got past the doleful barricado of the
carrs, were furiously followed into the wood (which by DIO'S description grew
beyond) and in no small number perished. Here it is apparent, that the place of
the field was betwixt two woods, according to my assertion elsewhere; the one
at the back of PAVLLINVS, the other behind the BRITANNS carriages. Unless
perhaps some would rather have it understood, that the BRITANNS, thus put to
the sword among the trees, were of those who had run up in the rage of charge
past the ROMAN squadrons, within their strengths, and so were followed through.
Many notwithstanding were saved alive after there was a glut of blood, and
victory assured. Multitudes also escaped away, either by their speed, their
early running, or by the benefit of night. These did prepare to re-enforce
their troops, and to put for another day. A lamentable fell of men; almost
fourscore thousand cut down into their graves with the sharpe-edged axe of
war. There are some (says TACITUS) who have delivered it for truth (and they
were but some) that of the Romans there died not full out four hundred, and,
(as once before has been occasionally mentioned) not many more then such a
number hurt. For which cause this victory was marked up among the famous ones
of old, and most worthily might be so; for, besides the glory of the day, it
brought back BRITAIN to CAESAR, and fixed it to endure for sundry ages after.
They who avoided the violence of this misfortune, while they were in
preparation for a new trial, lost their sovereign lady and mistress,
BOADICIA. Our ENGLISH poets present her, killing her self; one of them by
falling on her lance, as the most gallant form in his conceit, another without
naming the way, but all with admiration, as of one of the most noble
Shee-worthies of the world. TACITUS says she finished her life by poison, and
DIO and XIPHILINE, by sickness; which admit a reconciliation; she dying by a
sickness of poison. With her departing soul (as if it had been the soul of
the opposition) the flame of war went out by degrees, and the BOADICIANS, as
confessing themselves to be then quite vanquished, and never before, shifted
each for himself and fled. Her death was vehemently lamented of her suruiuing
friends, who honored her funeral with stately rites, and buried her remains
ambitiously brave.

. XXXII. Of the place of Boadicia's burial.
THis most great, and noble lady (the stay and last anchor of her party) thus
deceasing, the fortune of the miserable princesses, her daughters, lies utterly
unknown. That they also ended their lives, together with their hopes, about
the same time, remains therefore probable, because there is not the least
inckling left in the world, what afterward became of them. Concerning the
place of her enterrment, it will easily be collected out of the premises,
unto what opinion my conjectures do incline. For without auerring any thing
precisely, no other toombe seems to me so likely to be hers, as the admirable
moniment of the stones upon SALISBVRIE plain. The dumbness of it (unless the
letters be worn quite away) speaks; that it was not any work of the ROMANS.
For they were wont to make stones vocal by inscriptions. The common opinion,
touching that trophea, or whatsoever else it may be called, would have it
believed, that their structure was contrived in memory of the BRITAIN Lords,
perfidiously murdered by the SAXONS here, upon an interuiew. Of that heinous
assassinate, NENNIVS has a touch, but assigns not the place. GEFFREY Arthur,
or Monmouth, is the man, who fetches these marvelous stones (reported by him
to be medicinal) from out of IRELAND, for the pupose of a memorial, by
MERLINS counsel, and force of arms. That STONAGE was a work of the BRITANNS,
the rudeness it self persuades. And if that plate of mixed metal (mentioned
by CAMDEN) which found about fourscore years since near to that moniment,
and inscribed with such characters as were not legible to the learned of that
time, did appertain to STONE-HENGE, or (as it is more commonly named) STONAGE,
then may it easily be credited to have been some old BRITISH inscription,
dedicated to the immortal fame of some or other great Worthy, nor of any
rather then in my conceit of the most mighty BVNDVCA. To strengthen which
divination, the clear testimony of DIO, that the BRITANNS enterred her
pompously, or with much magnificence, cannot be better verified then by
assigning these orderly irregular, and formlesse uniform heaps of massiue
marble, to her everlasting remembrance. The name of the dance of giants, by
which it is styled in MONMOUTH, has nothing allusiue, no not so much as to the
tale he tells us. CAMDEN himself does bewray, that his judgment was
unsatisfied touching the reason of that moniments erection, notwithstanding all
he could find. The story of BVNDVCA (then which neither our own noble
country, nor the whole globe of earth has a rarer) was so little understood
of MONMOUTH, as it does not appear at all, that ever the bare sound thereof
arrived within his hearing. But had the precious volumns of the CORNELIAN
Annals, and DIO CASSIVS, and JOHN XIPHILINE, (where her heroicke deeds are
upon record to all posterities) been within the sphere of his studies, not
AURELIUS AMBROSIVS, nor those four hundred and threescore noblemen of BRITAIN,
murdered in VORTIGERS reign, should perhaps have carried away with him the
fame of this material wonder, but her magnanimous self. Higher then to her no
books do reach, with any probability of a person more capable of such a
testimony then she, and the profound oblivion which couers the author, and the
first intention of rearing them, where now they still defy the weather, does
strongly fortify my suspicion, that the stones were consecrated to the glory
of BVNDVCA, and of her captains slain in her quarrel, so long time since as
NERO CAESAR'S days, much above fifteen hundred years. And surely such a
calm, and patience of state, followed under PETRONIVS TVRPILIANVS, who the
next year after was sent to take charge of the ROMAN army in BRITAIN, as
successor of SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS, that might well permit such an office to the
BRITANNS in her honor, or if those would not, yet other ensuing seasons might;
her name for ever glorious among them. The ruins of that old fortress which
suruiuing not far from Stonage, are thought by some, whomsoever, to have
been a ROMAN work, afford no cipher for spelling out the founders of this
stony marueil. To grant, that it might be a common monument of the murdered
lords, and that AURELIUS AMBROSIVS, or AMBROSIVS AVRELIANVS, the almost only
BRITANN Prince (says venerable BEDE) of ROMAN race then left alive, and other
BRITISH kings do slumber there in their ashes, till the resurrection-day, is
no hindrance why it might not at first have been erected in honor of that
most heroical championess of BRITAIN, BOADICIA; since DIO and XIPHILINE
affirm, they funerally enterred her with much magnificence. The bones of men
dug up at times near this place under little banckes, convince it to have
been sepulchral; but armours of a large and antique fashion, upon which the
spade, or pickaxe are sometimes said to hit, do clear the owners from having
been in the number of those BRITANNS, whom pagan HENGIST wickedly slew: for
they came not armed, but weaponlesse. They are not the friends of honor, who
carry not a reverence to the memorials of the noble dead; or contemn
antiquities, the rewards, and records of virtue. My jealousy touching the
cause of STONAGE, concludes not others freedom to censure what they please.

. XXXIII. A recapitulation of the premises touching the affairs of Britain
hitherto.
BEfore JULIUS CAESAR the ROMANS knew us not, and he came twice over hither in
arms, with unlike successes; made MANDVBRATIVS king of the TRINOBANTS, or of
LONDON-land, as his father was; but left not a ROMAN behind. AUGUSTUS remained
exorable to the peace of BRITAIN. TIBERIUS was no way troublesome. CALIGVLA
would have been. CLAUDIUS made it his chief business, arrived, conquered
part, and planted ROMANS, and civility. NERO CAESAR hazarded all for want of
justice. The BRITANNS generally discontented, and BVNDVCA (the dowager Queen
of king PRASVTAGVS) shamefully wronged, she becomes their captain, and wrought
many wonders, while SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS, (CAESAR'S lieuetenant) was busy to
win the i will of MONA for the uses of the ROMAN Empire. Down went the ROMANS,
at CAMALODVNVM; down went CAMALODVNVM it self; down went the infanterie of
the legion which PETILIVS CEREALIS led up against her; and SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS
was himself so terrified after his return from MONA, that he left LONDON to
the spoil, which she sacked, and fired, and took VERVLAMIVM; destroying in
these three places upon the poinct of fourscore thousand, with a most firm
resolution to leave nothing ROMAN in BRITAIN, that (according to her words in
DIO, to her army) the example might with the terror of it, secure succession.
And while as yet the tide of her gallantrie was up, she pursued SVETONIVS
himself, as the capital object of her quarrel, upon whom the defense of the
ROMAN cause relied here. But the wanton, and bloody abuse of her fortune,
plucked infelicitie upon her; for while in confidence of a continual
happiness, by reason of her excessive numbers, she was ouer-forward to fight,
she encountered him in a set battle (upon terms of great disadvantage, in
regard of the place) was discomfited, fled and died. BRITAIN hereupon (like a
recovered sick body relapsing) came back to former sufferings, and to worser
far, till NERO (therein pittyfull) removed SVETONIVS, whose implacabilitie
(in regard he took it as his injury, that the rebellion happened during his
lieuetenancie in BRITAIN) endangered the province to a new insurrection: as it
was suggested by his enemies at court. With the death and burial of BOADICIA,
DIO CASSIVS concludes, and seals up the warlike troubles, and all other the
businesses of our BRITAIN, under NERO; and so do also I. There cannot be a
fitter stop, nor a fuller. For the hither parts of our island were never
afterward able to come into the like hope of freeing themselves (if merely to
change lords be to be free) because their sinews, by so dreadful a defeat,
were utterly dissolved. A most weighty poinct, which XIPHILINE out of DIO
truly notes. My recapitulation of premises (to which service this chapter is
singled forth) has together both example and authority in LUCIUS FLORVS, and
manifold uses in it self; because it is equally good for remembrance, and
manuduction, and those volatile spirits who covet all in a word, need look no
further then so. Nevertheless, the true children of historical knowledge, who
enjoy the bliss of studious leisure, they certainly, by comparing the riches
of narrations, delivered in a just length, with the beggerie of abridgements,
will clearly behold the notable odds between the one and the other. For the
spoil, and loss of things left out, or nakedly told, can be no way
counteruaild with the carcases, and stubbs of facts preserved standing in
narratorie moniments. Lastly, though now and then, and throughout this whole
historical web of NERO, there are sundry doctrines, judgments, and other
lights sparingly wouen-in of set purpose, which some would shoulder out into
marginall spaces, or blanckes at the end; yet this is the way of that excellent
master, and pattern of Historians, POLIBIVS, who speaks interposiuely, and
in his own person often. A skill, or cunning, in the noble craft of writing,
which most effectually conueighs the profit of directions with the delight of
narrations into the sober reader; and the better withal prouides for the
lasting of what is good.

. XXXIIII. Free thoughts and notes upon the whole matter of BOADICIA'S action,
by way of public counsel.
SVch was the issue and event of that great evil which the deep contempt of
NERO primarely caused, as has already been fully described. A lesson for
sovereign princes; by justice, and other the virtues of that super excellent
function, to sustain themselves from sodein slidings beneath their proper
values. On the other side (to take the whole matter into consideration) without
measuring BOADICIA'S enterprise by final success (for that were not to
measure, but to deprave the same) it may worthily appear, that feminine
impotencie of mind was chief therein, from the beginning to the ending. For,
transported with the desires of revenge, and sovereignty, she never
indifferently weighed the quality, and power of the empire, against which she
undertook. A grand, and ruinous error. The ROMANS at this time, had the
lordship of the world by the special purpose, and provision of God. For (as
the noble, and eloquent king, AGRIPPA, speaks in JOSEPHUS) it had otherwise
been impossible. The special devotion of their monarkes most remarkable.
AUGUSTUS CAESAR so religiously reverent toward that deity, which was adored
in the temple of HIERVSALEM, that he commanded the first fruits should be sent
from all the parts of his dominions, where the JEWS abode. Nay more; he
founded in that place it self, for a daily sacrifice in fire, the perpetual
constant allowance of a bull, and two lambs, honoring their synagogues, as the
schools of justice and temperance. Ask admired PHILO an account for what is
written here. The same pious institution was not only continued by his
dowager, the empress LIVIA, but by her son, TIBERIUS, and even in NERO'S
days. For the reiection of that customarie holocaust, by the seditious of
HIERVSALEM, was among the causes of the war which ruined it. So the ROMAN
empire did after a sort hold of true God in chief, by a kind of special rent
service, and acknowledgement: and as al honor, glory, and power do properly
belong to our Lord, JESUS CHRIST, so even TIBERIUS CAESAR (under whom it
pleased him to suffer) was most forward for his adoration (apparent in
TERTVLLIAN) that nothing (having the name of God) might among the ROMANS
remain neglected, for fear to endanger their empire, by offending any power
divine. But no man, sound in his brain, will exact such a transcendent
consideration at BOADICIA'S hands. Things subject to sense shall try her. The
state of the empire, as it was in NERO'S time, king AGRIPPA has described, in
that rarest oration of his, which for the natural piety, wisdom, and
weighty worth thereof, deserves to be written in a table of gold, or rather in
the hearts of all men, who would not forget their reason, while they pretend
for liberty. Nineteen legions, and above four and twenty cohorts, besides
the guards of the prince, and the standing watch of ROME, (both which together
contained about fifteen thousand,) and besides all other forces in ITALY it
self, and at sea, are particularly there found bestowed in the provinces.
These, with their ordinary aids, did not amount to so few as two hundred
thousand in continual pay and readiness. Of which number eight legions full,
and their auxiliaries lay near at hand upon the RHENE. Of these, certainly,
BOADICIA was bound to take knowledge, before she ran such an hazard of her
self, and country. And if her knowledge might excusablie have bounded it
self within the walls of BRITANN (as king AGRIPPA terms our Ocean) yet the
experience of former times would have informed her enough, concerning the
ROMANS. But even that knowledge was manifestly corrupted in her, when in her
first oration to her army, she does not obscurely vaunt, that the valor of
her ancestors had made our seas terrible to JULIUS CAESAR, and CALIGVLA, and
yet CLAUDIUS, in her own fresh remembrance, had passed them in person, and
prevailed. But the carriage of some of the ROMANS could not be endured: and it
is most honest, just, and noble to dye for common good. Therefore MARCUS CICERO
(of all the gowned ROMANS one of the best patriots that ever ROME Ethnic could
boast) oraculously pronounced, that no worthy man did ever foregoe his
freedom, but together with his life. For what other thing is life it self,
but a most fettred condition of humane being, and after a manner void of use,
or motion, when it only hangs upon a tyrants will? In such a case, the choice
of dying free upon defense, is sweeter then to remain in life a slave. Hence
came her arms, and hopes: which propounded to themselves the making of such an
example, as should for ever secure the island from invasion, and encourage the
rest of the world to follow. Most lofty propositions, and which failing, it
must needs be nevertheless confessed that she went upon highest darings. On the
other side, no action can ever attain true renown, whereunto reason is
foreign. For nothing is so peculiar to barbarousnesse as to be ouer-indulgent to
passions. And to be so deceived with the name, or sound of freedom, (the
ordinary misery of the common sort) as but merely to prove isntrumental to
particular ends, or reuenges, and not to obtain relief, is fit for none of
the wise. Then, then should the JEWS have concurred with one consent to defend
their liberties by manhood, when POMPEI first assailed them. So disputes king
AGRIPPA. The BRITANNS in like sort should have done their utmost to keep off
the ROMANS, and to empeach their setlings. For, until then, that was just
resistance, which seemed afterward plain rebellion. The same noble prince (a
creature, I confess, and client of the CAESAR'S) could find no hope of remedy
for his wronged countrymen by the sword, no nor by complaining of their
oppressor while he was among them with power. His counsel therefore was, to
expect his remove upon course, and then to accuse him. The admission, and
administration of which most sound advise would have preserved their city and
temple entire, whereas the refusal (a manifest operation of the curse of God
upon them for the death of his only son, our Savior) destroid them both.
BOADICIA had no course so secure as that, if either she her self meant to
survive, or would not cast her country into an absolute captivity, while she
went about to ease it of a partial. For, with two or three hundred thousand
bodies of men, and they of them who were armed, and trained, being neither for
discipline, art, or weapons, comparable to the victorious ROMANS, to defy, and
assail the whole empire, was a plain effect of a womanish fury. EGYPT
alone, having at once within it under NERO, seven millions of people (easily
known by their poll-money) besides the inhabitants of the goodly city of
ALEXANDRIA (which gathered ten miles in compass) was neuetthelesse yoaked
down with only two ROMAN legions. Yea, the three hundred and fifteen
several nations of GALLS (next neighbors to our island) under this very
emperor were all kept in obedience, with poor twelve hundred soldiers; being
almost fewer men, then they themselves had cities. Therefore it was not a work
of number, for BOADICIA to deliver the BRITANNS, from NERO, that she might
subdue them to her self (for that was the end) but of virtue, skill and
felicity. Her stout stomach disdained, or despaired to seek redress; which
if SVETONIVS PAVLLINVS would not have afforded, his next successors might. To
conclude: had that lady extended her wrath to none but to the nocent, and
rested then upon her guard, till NERO (who manifestly favored the quiet of
BRITAIN) had been advertised of the causes of her arms, that very middle
course it self (though middle courses are evermore misliked by the violent)
was not without hope, nor reason. For when the FRISIANS in GERMANY ran to
their swords, for resisting the rapines, and cruelties of OLENNIVS (such
another wretch among them, as CATVS DECIANVS was here) without exceeding the
right of a natural defense, TIBERIUS CAESAR stirred not against them at all,
but silently permitted them to enjoy their own satisfaction, as if in secret
favor of justice, and as a sharp lesson of modesty to others; though TACITUS
assigns another abstruser reason. NERO very likely to have embraced such an
example; if but for his own more leisure to sing and play. BOADICIA went upon
higher strains, resolving either for death, or domination. The people in the
mean time, do howsoever euery-where smart for the folly of their princes,
and their own. Accordingly, they support her quarrel, without being first
sure how themselves should afterward stand better, when the ROMANS were off;
and it was most certain, that upon their miscarrying, they must all of them
lie at the victors mercy, without so much as the right of an unattained
subject, the privilege to complain, whatsoever they suffer more extreme. The
case of her ICENI worthily harder then ordinary, because they had formerly
taken arms against OSTORIVS SCAPVLA under CLAUDIUS, after that first they had
voluntarily entered into the league, and amity of the ROMANS. Let me speak out
clear, as by way of counsel for the best, and in a common cause. Without some
very special feelings, or ends of their own, few or none of the mighty lead
onward to the remove of an evil for common relief. Therefore, after BOADICIA
was once enraged, other causes were diligently sought, to draw and increase a
side, for enabling her particular revenge: The names of liberty, and
reformation are the usual maskes of faction; and liberty it self, after a
short while is rarely any-where less then under the new lords rule. Things,
fit for all times, and nations to consider, lest too late they find true; The*
vniustest peace is to be preferred before the iustest war. BOADICIA
notwithstanding lives a name of glory among the fewest, for the great nobility
of her pretenses, and the most roial quality of her undertakings, such as
never any lady waged higher.

CHAP. XXVI. ONE OF THE PRETORS IN ROME GVILTY OF An Heinous Libell AGAINST
NERO. FREE TOVCHES UPON THAT OCCASION, CONCERNING Libells, AND THEIR Authors.
OTher sicknesses of the time brought forth a case at ROME, the next year
after the troubles in BRITAIN, which for that it has most near affinity with
the rank, and odious licenciousnesse of some in our own age, deserves in a
prime degree to be exemplified. ANTISTIVS SOSIANVS, who for his birth might
have had better manners, and for his place ought (as being a magistrate of
honor, and a senator) composed in his own house a railing inuectiue against
NERO, and divulged it in another. For at a famous supper with OSTORIVS SCAPVLA
(the generous son of that great OSTORIVS SCAPVLA, who died in BRITAIN) the
intemperate gallant, among his bits, and cups, did openly read the defamatorie
verses. But the auditorie was not staunch enough: for the fame soaking through,
arrived soon at CAESAR'S ears. The senate was hereupon acquainted with the man
and matter, as the proper auengers of their princes injury. This ANTISTIVS
(take him as he was in himself) had nothing of a discreet or honest man; which
fully qualified him for the writing of libels. It is worth the labor to scanne
him all over. He was therefore in his first times, a factious friend of
immodest, and idle quarrels; even so far forth as to engage his magistracies
power for their maintenance. For whereas VIBVLLIVS, a grave and honorable
officer of state, in the second CONSVLS of NERO, by virtue of his pretorship,
had cast certain persons into prison, for seditious partakings about common
players (the matter oftentimes of much offense) ANTISTIVS attempted to free
them by authority of his countermand, as he was a tribune of the people of
ROME. But VIBVLLIVS carried the cause, and the other the blame, by the voice of
the Senate. Afterward, when himself came to be a praetor, and increase of
dignity should have increased his gravity, he despising his proper
happiness, and station, and madlie supposing that neither any argument, time,
nor person was exempted from the license of his wit (a frenzy of false glory)
undid himself, and endangered others. A most headlong medler, apt for
mischief, and of an injurious spirit. For the Prince (though being NERO'S
self) was neither at the worst, nor had in particular given him any cause of
spleen: and CAESAR'S reformation could not any way belong to him, who was
himself so far out of all good order. They who are clear ought to be spare
in reprouals; but the foul should evermore be silent. The sentence (that I
mean which was executed upon him for this fact) took his honor, estate, and
liberty away. And of this milder doom, PAETVS THRASEA (the wonder of his time
for moral life) was the leading author. For others would have also had him put
to death after the most smarting and ignominious manner. But whom prosperity
made vnreuerent to her blessings, adversity perhaps recovered to soundness and
himself. Nothing less. For in his banishment (that was a branch of the
censure) he bewrayed the truth of a libellours nature; playing parts (when he
thought they would serve his turn) most abject, false, and base. CORNELIUS
TACITUS (with a pen which prints deeper then the hottest fearing-yrons) has
branded them in upon him for ever: nor does that pondrous author temper
himself from calling him vile. Among two-footed beasts, it is hard to say,
whither a delator, or a libellour be worst. And it is not an ordinary
infelicitie to be in company where such mis-behauiours happen. OSTORIVS
SCAPVLA therefore (the master of that unlucky feast) willing all he could to
preserve that sacred oblivion, under which fair conversation locks up
table-talke, gave in for evidence, that he heard nothing. And most happy had
it been for that magnanimous, and valiant gentleman, if in the voider the
memory of those heinous lines had been also corapped-vp. For the libellour
should then have afterward mist the means to ruin him, and others; by
counterfeit friendship, treacherous interception of doubtful secrets,
mischievous pilferie of papers, and their poisnous enforcements. Of all which
as ANTISTIVS was most guilty, so it did consummate his shame. For to the rest
of his bad qualities it added the foulest, and the sum of all, that he was
ungrateful. Thus much for the person of ANTISTIVS, in whom we undoubtedly
behold the image of his fellow-libellours, or privy true speakers of
scandalous things against majesty, with treasonable ends; and not in sorrow
for the public, or as a friend of virtue. The office of a sovereign is
sacred, his person for his offices sake: and though his vices be not more
exempted from hatred then from view, yet even the worst would have them hidden.
This accordingly was the endeavor and desire of NERO, who when he was
afterward most infamous, did hope notwithstanding, that what he did shameful
in the night, the darkness of night, in favor of the proper works of it
self, would fully cover. Therefore, when he found by the codicils of
PETRONIVS, that his lascivious secrets, (which he till then did suppose lay
hidden) were detected; SOSIA was banished, as the pipe by which they were
conveyed from CAESAR'S chamber thither. Nor could it but add to the crime of
ANTISTIVS, that the severe PAETVS THRASEA spoke very much honor of NERO,
before he delivered his opinion in abatement of the libellours punishment, and
styled NERO a right worthy Prince; for all this while was SENECA about him. It
is good for the world, that there should be some sharp declamers against vices
in abstract, or in general. The defamatorie noting of persons is not to be
permitted, but only to the magistrate. Take mutual reverence away; and you
lift the world from off the hindges. And it was no new provision which the
emperors VALENTINIAN, and VALENS ordained, but the interpretation of an old,
when they signified by their rescript, that not only to compose, and divulge a
defamatorie libell, against any honest subject of the empire, but merely to
publish the contents, though they destroyed the original, was by them declared
felony. And truly, if honor be worthily more precious then life (the touch
whereof, whether true, or false, is the common ground of bloody duells) can
there any thing be thought more unjust, then that a scandalous tongue, or
style, should pass with applause against whomsoever, not first condemned by
law? The same emperors notwithstanding made it free, by their explanation, for
any one who did subscribe his name, and at the peril of his head (for that was
the penalty) stood to maintain what his tongue and hand had published, should
both be secure, and receive, with thancks, reward. If therefore the honor of
subjects was so tender, what value can be assessed upon that of sovereign
princes? Yet the Christian moderation of the noble emperors, THEODOSIUS,
ARCADIVS, and HONORIVS, is the example of our sacred SOVEREIGN, whose
judgments in their own case was divinely high. For thus they said in effect:
That if any blasphemed them (the Apostle uses that word in matter of majesty)
being led thereunto, either by leuity, or madness, and not of malice, it was
their pleasures that such a delinquent should not suffer. Reserving always to
themselves the judgment of the spirit. ANTISTIVS, among all other his bad
deserts, most justly odious, for that by his vnseasonoble ouer-boylings against
NERO, the pestiferous extensions of the law of majesty (so pernicious formerly
to all affiance in conversation, and so calamitous to the noble) began upon
this occasion to be raised out of the grave again, to the bane of many worthy
Peers. An act of highest magnanimity, for a Prince to sit far above all
maledictions, unmoved, and not upon every revenge slightly to vncollar
indignation. The fault notwithstanding is not the less for being left
unpunished; and DAVID forgot not SEMEI. ANTISTIVS a miserable man during life:
for as his wild wit overthrew him, so his treachery stood him in little sted.
For having exceeded the limits of his banishment, and the SENATE misliking it,
MVCIANVS (in VESPASIANS days) to appease their lordships, did shut him up
again within his i will; their angry curse upon him. Such was ANTISTIVS in his
manners, and fortunes. His likes deserve to have a NERO for their prince, and
not a most mild king JAMES.

CHAP. XXVII. THE WORTHY CARRIAGE OF DOMITIVS CORBVLO, AGAINST THE PARTHIANS.
THe general body of the ROMAN power moved euerywhere substantially strong,
not only in the western world under SVETOFIVS PAVLLINVS, but in a leading
eminency under CORBVLO against the PARTHIANS, in the quarrel of ARMENIA, the
possession of which country was alike by both affected. NERO'S greatest
courage was only to think or talk of making a voyage in person to the
CASPIAN passages (a natural gate in the crown of mountains which separate
the PARTHIAN, and ARMENIAN territories) but CORBVLO (a severe commander, and
such as the work needed) redeemed the ROMAN name from dishonor, which
SVETONIVS, the historian, reports to have been much greater then it was; for
he absolutely says, the legions escaped by forking. The PARTHIANS had not
that advantage, or used it not, for TACITUS affirms it was only a fame, and
it was no more. THEODOSIUS (out of the perished parts of DIO) has the
particular, which though full enough of disparagement, did nevertheless not
amount to such a CAVDIAN infamy. Thus it was. LUCIUS CAESENIVS PAETVS,
straightned in RHANDAEA, sought conditions of peace for fear of VOLOGESVS (the
PARTHIAN king) and accepted such as were agreed upon, thereby to save himself,
and soldiers. The chief points in the composition were: that the ROMANS should
quit ARMENIA, and NERO should crown TERIDATES (the brother of VOLOGESVS) king
thereof. For performance of which (says THEODOSIUS) oath was given. But the
valor, wisdom, and singular diligence of CORBVLO repairing all by due
degrees, brought great VOLOGESVS himself to yielding terms, and his brother
TIRIDATES (whom PLINY notes for maistership in magic) to adore the ROMAN
ensigns, and deposit his diadem.

CHAP. XXVIII. NERO'S FIRST COMING UPON THE COMMON STAGE.
THese services of his Lieutenants general abroad, and in parts so oppositely
distant as east, and west, and in the utmost bounds of the ROMAN empire,
toward both those coasts of heaven, gave NERO boldness to despise all reports
of what he did vile, or beneath the majesty of CAESAR, among his own at
home. It was now the tenth year of his reign when first he came upon the
open stage, nor that at ROME first, but at NAPLES, meditating a new kind of
triumph, not over armed enemies, but over rimers, players, minstrels, and the
like. As if, to accomplish the glory of the ROMAN name, any thing was wanting
which NERO could supply. His ambition was so vehement, and strange in this
kind (as for an honor which he in his ignorance held to be worthy of the
lord of the world) that his coigns represent him in the habit of a cytharist,
or (if our word reach the fullness of the sense) an harper.

Till now, all his proofs, and essays of himself were only in his palaces,
or gardens, but, after long practice, presuming he might worthily go out
master, he aspired to public auditories. These were stronger means to
precipitate the People of ROME into old decrepit age, then all the cruelties,
and rages of the former times, for they properly tended to effemination, or
rather were effeminacies self. S. AUGUSTINE notes, that whosoever affects
superiority, and loves not glory, goes beyond beasts both in cruelty, and
riot; and he brings for illustration the example of this NERO; whose manners
were so corrupt, that none (says that holy Father) would ever surmize that any
manly matter was to be feared or expected at his hands, and yet his acts were
so tyrannically stern, that they who knew him not, would never believe there
was any thing womanish in him. In this unprincely ambition his fingers were not
so moveable, and swift upon the strings of the lyra, as the gripe of his
depraved power was heavy upon many, whose greater parts he maliced. This,
among his priuado's in court, was known to be so certain a way of doing
mischief, that they shot therewith even at SENECA himself when his partner in
authority, AFRANIVS BVRRHVS, was now lately dead. For then they accused him in
their secret whispers, that he had a disloyal desire to excel in eloquence,
and poesy; and therefore more often addicted himself to the composure of
verses, after once he found that CAESAR took delight in them, then at any time
ever before. The vanity, and weakness of all created power in court, not
more apparent, then miserable; when the foundations thereof are in any the
least degree subject to be sapt, and eaten through with so (...) feeble
suggestions, where the prince has neither forehead, heart, nor brain. NERO
unwillingly brookt any man, who might be thought to stand in the same line of
honor for those faculties, or did not adoringly admire his; esteeming it as
his most special glory, and felicity, that some way or other he could
securely destroy emulators. His seal, where these imaginations are not
obscurely professed, GVILLAVME du CHOVL (counselor of estate to some of the
late French kings) did find in ancient sculpture, and caused it to be cut and
printed. GABRIEL SYMEONI also, an Italian author, formerly published the same.
Out of whose extant work it is derived hither into mine. A strange invention
for an imperial signet. And my memory fails me, if it be not also in the
printed collections of ROMAN seals, imitated out of sundry rings, as they were
severally set with cornelians, aggats, onycles, and other the cheaper sort of
precious stones, engraven for the use of signature.

The argument of this cachet (so the French call it) is the famous fable of
MARSYAS, who was flayed alive, for presuming to challenge the harp of APOLLO
into a trial, against the music of his pipe. What NERO meant by assuming it,
or in what cases he was accustomed to seal therewith, is merely matter of
conjecture, not of certainty. For whether it were to terrify those who durst
compare, or contend in skill with him; or to justify his most high veneration
of musical agons, in regard they were the peculiar glory of so great a deity
as APOLLO, or whither it were that he arrogantly usurped a resemblance, or
whatsoever my part is sufficiently discharged in having delivered not what I
may devise, but what I find true.

To please the meaner sort of people was the poor chief poinct of his
policy. For in their affections he reposed his safety, and in their applause
his glory. Therefore, to entertain all their senses with their proper
delights, (there being no other way so sure of winning them) he lays hold of
their ears with songs and tunes; of their eyes, with public games, and
shows; and finally of the residue of the five, with the most voluptuous, and
impudent permissions of all sorts of gluttonous and venereous excesses in
public. That banquet, or Bacchanal, which SOPHONIVS TIGELLINVS provided in
the poole of AGRIPPA, or (as DIO has the place) in the amphitheater, where
nothing was chaste, nothing frugall, nothing honest, has the fame of the
maddest and most wild of all that ever were in his days. Lascivious naked
women, immeasurable cheer, wine, words, and nothing barrd, but abstinence or
modesty, which though it was the cause why the meeting ended in quarrels,
blows and blood, yet this was freedom in their estimation, being indeed
nothing else but an ouerflow of authorized corruptions and villainies. But some
few days after the feast, there succeeded an act more prodigious; the coupling
of NERO to PYTHAGORAS Doryphorus, as an husband. CARDAN excuses him upon those
flatterers, who while they did put him into a frolic for the honor of the
goddess ISIS, persuaded a sacrilege in stead of a ceremony, and so deceived
him. A fiction, and a toy, but not amiss for the scope of CARDANS writing, to
vent a witty wonder of his own devising, as if NERO were a Worthy. That most
inherent fire of lust, which all religion, and all good laws strive to quench
in the hurtful heats thereof, by making adulteries, rapes, and unnatural
violations capital, and other licentious intemperance shamefully criminal,
NERO inflames and enrageth with example and leave. The destroyer of health and
happiness, nor in any thing so mischievous to manners as in this his most
loathsome, soul, and monstrous practice.

CHAP. XXIX. THE BVRNING OF ROME BY NERO.
THe city of ROME, filled, and polluted thus, with his incredible vices;
behold, as if to purge the same, it sodeinly conceived fire, and vehemently
prospered toward an universal blaze. That NERO was the author of it seems
branded upon him for a truth, though CORNELIUS TACITUS (whose historical
justice is admired) reports it as a matter uncertain, because his authors
differ among themselves, some affirming, some denying it: and he himself does
elsewhere profess, to deliver nothing for undoubted verity, without common
concent of good books. A rule of narration much more tender, severe, and
scrupulous, then that often times of his censures. His inward judgment
notwithstanding does not obscurely incline to the affirmation. I for my part
will forbear to derive up this most depraved affection of NERO so high, as to
his first times; though, among his public entertainements of the people, he
presented one of the gowned plays of AFRANIVS (or such an one whose argument,
and dramaticall persons were ROMANS) entitled The fire, giving leave to the
actors, when (according to the plot) the house of the stage was on a flame, to
share the gorgeous furnitures among themselves as booty. And howsoever perhaps
he did not as then reflect upon the burning of ROME, yet might it afterward
very well seem a presage thereof, or a modle. Envy to mankind, wantonness
of will, and the absurd desire of glory, his most inward incentiues to a fact
so strange. He pronounced king PRIAMVS an happy man (says XIPHILINE) because
he beheld the end of his kingdom and country together. And when in ordinary
discourse one chanced to utter in his hearing, a tragic Greek verse,
importing, when I am dead, let the fire take all, or, let the earth and fire be
confounded together, he presently replide, not when I am dead (quoth he) but
while as yet I am alive. Voices, hard to say, out of which of the hels
inspired. And here, his desire of converting ROME into embers, does first of
all seem to have kindled. About which work he nevertheless went not so
closely, that his guiltiness did not glimmer through. He abode within his
birthplace, ANTIVM. From thence he slily lets slip into diverse parts of
ROME, a few odd fellows, counterfaiting drunken (says DIO) and would do
some other mischief, who began the consuming evil. Yea some of NERO'S own
chamber (as it is in the CAESAR'S of credible SVETONIVS) were seen to carrye
course flax, or toa, and torches about, the means of fiery mischief, and yet
most of those great, and consularie lords, into whose grounds they came, never
laid hand upon them. He wanted a city on fire, over which to sing the burning
of TROY. Thus he had it. And there is abundantly enough, even in the CORNELIAN
Annals, to convince NERO'S conscience of the deed, though their noble author
(pursuing his rule of uncertainty) even interprets those very reasons with a
temper. Many threatened thick at such as would have quenched the flames; others
openly hurld firebrands, crying, they knew what they did, or, there was one who
would bear them out. Besides, he himself did not set forward from ANTIVM to
ROME, till the fire had laid hold of that part of his house which ioignd the
palace and the gardens of MAECENAS. Finally, no art, nor bounty of his, could
induce the commons to believe in NERO'S innocence. For, do what he could, the
general persuasion went, that he commanded ROME to be set on fire. These, and
sundry other the like things the CORNELIAN Annals affirm. Alone sufficient to
prove NERO the principal party, though all other testimonies (which
nevertheless speak plainly, and come home to the question) were everlastingly
silent.

. I. Of the hugeness, and goodlinesse of NERO'S Rome.
MArble ROME (such as AUGUSTUS left it, and specially boasted of) was
comprehended within a wall of almost fourteen miles in circuit, enlarged
afterward to fifty, under the Emperor AVRELIAN, when stone was reputed a
part of the empires strength. But, that spacious body, and the suburban limbs
thereof, might together rather seem an whole country superedified, then only
a city. For the buildings ran out above thirty miles one way, and from the
milliarie pillar, fixed in the crown of the ROMAN forum, as a center of
measure, a line of seauentie thousand pases would not draw the praetorian camp
and the furthermost houses in. PLINY therefore in his contemplations of the
hugeness of ROME, may worthily conclude (as he does) that no city under
heaven could be compared thereunto, the height of the buildings considered with
their multitude. ITALY, (says the same PLINY) the foster-childe of all other
countries, and the same their mother also, selected by powers divine to make
the heavens themselves shine brighter, to unite dispersed commonwealths, to
soften their manners, to draw the differing and harsh-sounding languages of so
many nations, to a familiar conversation by the interchange of speech, to
bestow humanity upon human-kinde, and in a word, to make one common country
for all the people of the world; and sovereign ROME, a face most fair, and
worthy to be set on a neck so lovely. Her increases of habitations so
manifold, that the seven and thirty gates thereof could not let in more; and
ROME, for want of room, did shut out additions in suburbs, which answered in
quantie to so many several cities. For to OSTIA (the port of ROME, and mouth
of TIBER) the banckes were covered with buildings, twelve miles outright one
way. And all but needful, considering, that by the proportions of LIPSIVS,
ROME harbored not fewer then four or five millions of people. This moved one
of the ancient to write (as MARLIANVS voucheth him) that he supposed all ITALY
would in time be builded over, and the bounds of the city of ROME be the
shores of the sea. But the wonder of the seat did not grow from the greatness
only, but from the innumerable ornaments of public, and private works,
erected for use, delight, and glory, dispersed over all the fourteen wards, or
regions thereof. Temples, Forums, Libraries, Therms, Aquaducts, Theaters,
Amphitheaters, Circi, Porticus, Arches, Columns, Statuas, Palaces, and the
rest, whose bare names scarce remaining, do fill up volumns with their
inuentaries. Yet their young master, NERO, thought not such a ROME, either
good enough, or brave enough for his abode. For he was manifestly displeased
with the fashion of tenements, as not competently magnificent, nor less with
the narrowness and irregular angles of streets, and lanes, such as they rose
at adventure after the first burning of ROME by the GALLS. His own imperial
court within the walls of ROME, the most goodly part of the whole, did likewise
seem too mean and narrow. No remedy therefore but all must down; which
purpose of his, nor daring to profess, he meant to father it upon the
casualtie of fire, whereunto it was so often subject, though nothing so
mischieuously as now. For such a course was held, as if there should need no
more burnings; one burning to stand for all; and ROME to be her own no more.

. II. The fire, and NERO'S triumph over it.
THat the fiering of the city thoroughly was thoroughly studied, may in part
appear by the very place it self of the mischiefs original; which was
thickest builded, and upon the lowest ground. For in old times before, it had
been so surrounded with the watrie excursions of TIBER, that it converted the
soil into a rotten moore, good only for sallowes, and canes to grow upon:
neither was there any ordinary passage over it to mount AVENTINE, but by
ferrie. This whole large bottom, or vallie, enclosing the PALATINE hill upon
two sides, toward the west, and south, and called the Velabrum, being won in
time to be firm, was euerywhere now inhabited. Among all the magnificent
works which adorned it, the principal Circus, or Race-yard was one, being
about half a mile in length, of an ouall form, with rows of seats one above
the other, competently capable of all the people of ROME (as IVVENAL
ouer-reacheth in his Satyrs) but even, as sober men write, of at least one
hundred, and fifty thousand spectators, without uncivil shouldrings. Of this
Circus the whole quarter where it stood was denominated, and in that corner
thereof which abutted upon the PALATINE, and CAELIAN hills, where the oile-men,
and druggers dwelt, the first flames rose, which sailing with no slack wind,
fed upon the buildings so fast, as if they had been sensible of CAESAR'S
allowance. The fiery streams breaking further forth in the aer, ran speedily
through the scaffolds, and timbers of that most goodly work, full of the
irresistable fury which they found out among those fat and gummie trades. From
this level or plain, the combustion mounts with ease, and scales the hills.
NERO'S own house, called The transitory, (by reason of the passage over the
vallie from mount to mount, through a gallerie raised between, upon arches,
and pillars) was in the way of the fire; which he willingly suffered to perish,
that his losses being mixed with the common, the losses of private citizens
might appear the more tolerable, and his malice escape, the rather without
marking. From those hills the flames strike down again, upon the inferior
tops of houses, and rage without control. For least common help should
prevail against any single invasion, the burning blaze was kindled in sundry
precincts, and streets at once, making the work manifold. So while they
labored to quench and stop destruction in one place, new eruptions of fire and
flame took them off from thence, and did euerywhere frustrate endeavors. Nor
was there any surer sign that NERO was come from ANTIVM, then the open
assistance given toward the consuming of ROME. Other effect his presence had
not. Whereas gentle CLAUDIUS CAESAR (when in his time a mighty fire threatened
the city) issued out in person, brought forth his treasure, and both with
voice and bounty encouraged all men to the extinction. AVLVS VITELLIVS,
afterward emperor, a capital instrument of NERO'S in this burning: for his
enemies before they murdered him, among all other whatsoever their reproaches
and reuilings, added the title of incendiarie, which well became his interest
in NERO'S favor. But, over and above all underhand kindlers, and boutefeus,
the night-watch of the city, whose duty most immediately it was, to have
subdued the calamity by quenching, or pulling down of houses, did openly
cherish it. Nor they alone but the pretorian guards also. For I cannot conceive
how DIO should mean any other then the pretorian, where he speaks of other
soldiers besides the night-watch. A certain sign indeed that NERO was come.
The city seemed now (says XIPHILINE) like a mighty winter-campe, when it is
all-ouer full with fires, to warm the army. But the descriptions which
PINDARVS, and VERGIL make of AETNA, are in comparison but as of a great chimney
on fire. For what was that one barren hill of SICILIA to the most wealthy
seven of ROME? The fourteen wards or regions thereof, were not simply as
members of a division, but as if the same number of great cities had been
joined to constitute one: which while they are not all of them on fire at once,
and yet all of them in open danger, the crackling fate of parts did represent
to men's minds the burning of the whole. One of the least mountains was scarce
fully covered with buildings by her founders at first, but the powerful growth
of above eight hundred years had not only taken the other six hills in, and
hidden them with edificatures, but the lowest parts had so ouertopt them also
with magnificent spires, as they could not easily be distinguished, till this
fire deformed the imperial face thereof, and office afterward freed the
lamentable prospect from rubbish. The wind sitting southerly, and
southwesterly, conspired at this time with NERO, and converting temples, and
tenements into the likeness of glowing furnaces, carried the loud flame over
from the PALATINE hill to mount AESQVILINE. The fall of stones, timber, walls,
roofes, and whole palaces, assailed and embraced with the fire, not able with
their noise to bury the cry and shrickes of women and children. Nothing to
be seen but flashes bursting forth out of clouds of smoke, as it were out of
ambuscado's. One and the same raging fire becoming funeral and final to the
lives, and fortunes of innumerable thousands. Stealth, force, and rapine the
practice of the desperate NERONIANS. Which when it was generally perceived, and
that after many days, and nights opposition of the evil, the work was grown
too hot, and too great to be maistered, few men remained any longer careful
for their particular estate in goods, but lamented the doleful waste, and
downfall of their common country. Only NERO was not dismayed, nor troubled,
but highly pleased For, delighted (as he said) with the goodlinesse of the
blaze, he insulted over the public woe. Attired therefore in his theatrall
habit, with his harp in his hand, he ascends (says SVETONIVS) to the top of
MAECENAS Tower, upon mount ESQVILINE, whose stately fabric (as HORACE
describes it) was a near neighbor to the lofty clouds, or, to speak in the
language of conversation, ouerlookt the most part of ROME. BOISSARDVS writes;
that it is at this day called Fronton di Nerone, a goodly frontispice. There he
feeds himself with the sight of infinite burnings, and sings to his harp the
destruction of TROY, or rather of ROME (as it was plainly there to be seen,
says DIO) and not of TROY. Some think it was not any thing of HOMERS or
VERGILS which he sung, but a poem of his own, because SERVIVS HONORATVS, and,
before his time, JUNIUS IVVENALIS are witnesses, that NERO dealt in verse upon
that argument. For nothing under heaven could be more agreeable to his
disposition, then that he should not only set all ROME on fire, but even the
whole world it self, for giving the life of expression to his conceits, if his
power over the one had been equally much as over the other. It is not one
city, but all mankind which is in danger, when a NERO swayes. That humane
nature (howsoever corrupted, or depraved) should possibly have in it such a
thing as he, is fearful to consider. Therefore it cannot be less then
miserable, for any one to be absolutely left to himself, but chiefly for
young princes. In this example nevertheless, it does comfortably well appear,
what excellent service, religion, and all wise laws perform to man, by whose
restraincts the generation of humane monsters is hindered, or their malice
qualified. The moral of the fable of ORPHEUS, and of his brute auditorie
reaches to that observation. Every one has a tyrant in himself: and in most
people the unreasonable part predominates. The contemplation of this fire has
endangered me to a flowd of discourse. CARDAN feebly defends the innocence of
NERO in this fact, by the huge charge he was at, in the renouation and repair
of buildings. The raging evil contained it self within the walls, which
turned the cities seat out again into fields, and country; not so fresh as at
the first. Her ancient rudeness much better then vastitie in cinders. ROME,
the common home of mankind; the storehouse of conquests and spoils; the
habitation of the gods of the world; the confluent of arts and natures choice;
the supreme court where the pleas of all the earth were held without appeal;
the center of nations; the head and heart of empire; the seat of peace and
war; the mother and type of all civil majesty; in her own dwelling, and by
her own son, was frighted thus out of her sacred abode, and scorcht, and
miserably maimd. The secret name of ROME, VALENTIA, to the custody whereof,
(as it is in SOLINVS) the silent goddess, Angerona, was destinated, scarce
needed euocation by enemies with spells, and charms, as being almost ready to
reveal it self in this agony, and so to have dissolved empire. Most
remarkable of all; that this fire began upon the same day, upon which the
GALLI SENONES, many ages before, had sacked, and fiered it. CORNELIUS TACITUS
assigns the time to have been as upon the nineteenth day of our Iulie, or the
foureteenth Kalends of August, or so to say, September. A manifest error in
chronology (says JOSEPH SCALIGER) for it was the sixteenth of those Kalends,
or the one and twentieth day of July. Somewhat more for us to admire, that
there should be a concurrence of like infelicities upon like days. So FLAVIVS
JOSEPHUS notes, that HIERVSALEM was taken by TITUS upon the very self same
day, in which anciently it was captiuated by the king of BABYLON. The stop of
this flaming desolation was procured after six days continual waste, not by
quenching, but by casting to the earth a great number of houses, over whose
breach the flames could not stride to the abrupt. The place upon which those
demolisht buildings stood, was afterward consecrated; as the confessed means
for preservation of the residue. That most memorable inscription is partly
alive in LIPSIVS, and SCALIGER, and wholly in IANVS GRVTERVS, out of MAZOCHIVS.
The same is now in ENGLISH also fully here.

THIS FLOOR, WHICH IS CLOSED WITHIN THIS BOVNDER OF LITTLE HILLS, OBELISKES,
AND THE ALTAR SOMEWHAT BENEATH, IS DEDICATED, IN ACCOMPLISHMENT OF A VOW, WHICH
BEING UNDERTAKEN BY OCCASION OF FIRE, When the city burnt for nine days in
NERO'S times, WAS FOR ALONG WHILE NEGLECTED, AND NOT PERFORMED, AND IS
DEDICATED UPON THIS PROVISO, THAT NO MAN PRESVME TO BVILD AN HOUSE WITHIN THESE
LIMITS, OR REMAINS, BARGAIN, OR PLANT A TREE, OR SOW ANY THING, AND THAT THE
Praetor, TO WHOSE LOT THE GOVERNMENT OF THIS REGION SHALL HAPPEN, AND EVERY
OTHER MAGISTRATE MAY KNOW, THEY ARE EVERY YEAR TO SACRIFICE UPON THE FEAST OF
Vulcan, BEING THE TENTH KALENDS OF SEPTEMBER, WITH A calfe, AND A tame boar.
This vndisputable evidence testifies unto us, that the fire lasted nine days;
and not only six (though only six were enough to devour a mighty city)
as CORNELIUS TACITUS reconciliably reckons. For a second fire, which seems to
have held so long as to make the six days nine, immediately rose out of the
Aemilian gardens, belonging to TIGELLINVS SOPHONIVS. Greatly to the increase of
NERO'S infamy. For this was he, who, with the advantage of his masters bad
propensions, had prevailed in NERO, against all the honest infusions of SENECA,
and had utterly driven out all his precepts. The corrupter, and deprauator now,
and afterward the betrayer, and abandoner of his Sovereign. A crime, among
some few other, most inexpiable.

. III. The work of the fire in spoil.
TAke now a proportion of the harm done here. Of all the fourteen wards or
regions of ROME, only four remained entire, three burnt to ground, and the
other seven most fowly defaced, and half converted into embers and ashes.
Mount PALATINE, one of the fourteen, and the plot it self where king ROMULUS
auspicated the empire of the world, was laid bare, and waste all over. If
therefore any such fatal mystery had couched upon the place of omen, that the
desolation thereof must have wrought the dissolution of the fortune of ROME,
(as in the surreption of the Palladium of TROY) the dissolution had undoubtedly
followed. For Roma Quadrata, and Seeds Imperij were in those very words
religiously worshipped there, and the temple of Felicity it self escaped not
the infelicitie of burning. This region, notwithstanding it was the least of
all saving one, contained above two miles in compass: which being but a third
part of the consumings, and but a tenth of the deformations and marrings, what
an image and face of destruction, and solitude must needs rise out of the
whole together? But that hurt could not be worth the doing for NERO, whereof
there could either be a valuation, or an inuentarie. The particulars
innumerable; the damage inestimable. For giving the ruin of structures in to
the heap as a surplus (because he never meant they should stand) and the
utter waste of riches in plate, coigne, vtensils, and other goods (because they
were both valuable and suppliable) there perished such other things which could
neither be restored nor prized. TO CORNELIUS TACITUS, SVETONIVS, DIO, and the
rest of the old ROMANS, the temples of their gods, excellent maister-pieces,
and moniments of their triumphall Worthies, were of that kind, but that which
did not concern ROME only, nor those times alone, but all people, and ages,
and which for ever perished in this balefull fire, were ancient and uncorrupted
volumns stored up in public, and private libraries. In those other things it
was either profound antiquity, or reputed sanctity, which did set upon them
their highest or utmost value, but in the abolition of the works of wit,
immortality it self did suffer, and seems to have turned mortal. This was
indeed to destroy old ROME, and the empire also. For while those noble
cabanets, and treasures of memory remained, the ROMAN Worthies, and their
actions would for ever have been above ground, and suruiued. The soul, the
body, the fortunes, and all things of man, or belonging to him, have severally
their shares in such a privation, as the books consumed did severally in their
arguments concern them. And albeit those innumerable thousands, whom either
smoke did smother, the weight of ruins crushed, flames burnt to dust, villains
slew, or who desperately threw themselves into the fire, as if the end of all
were come, (which DIO testifies many did) and voluntarily perished, were for
the present more mist then whatsoever else, yet nothing concerned all men and
times but those books alone. For which and other his famous deeds, the common
justice of the world has crowned NERO with the proper reward of their merit.
His name the everlasting trampling-stocke, and hatred of mankind. These things
happened, CAIUS LECANIVS, and MARCUS LICINIVS, Consuls, in the year from ROME
built eight hundred and seauenteene. Howbeit the minds and tongues of the
people (as if the computation were falsified) ran wholly upon a prophecy in
SIBYLL, which threatened a general perdition upon the year nine hundred.
Concerning which I have long before said sufficiently in AGRIPPINAS murder.

. IIII. NERO'S use of the burnings, and destructions of old ROME.
IN fiering ROME he burnt in himself with a far worse fire; the absurd
desire of a name. His madness greater to hope for glory by the doing, then his
wickedness was in the fact. He was therefore so impatiently desirous to see
that new town, and palace, actually rise, according to that idaea of them which
he had drawn to himself within his own imagination, as he could not brook
the orderly taking down of the old. The top of his ambition, to be thought
worthy for such an instauration, to carry the name. ROME no longer to be
called ROME, but NEROPOLIS, or NERO'S city. And truly he did so much in that
respect, by making fair wide streets, and building in right lines, with
galleries and tarrales before the houses, that SENECAS TIMAGINES, had he lived
now, as under AUGUSTUS, would have had just cause of new envy. For nothing
vexed him when ROME fell on fire (as often times it did) but that the decays
re-edified rose ever much more beauteous, and brave then before their burning.
But so far is HIEROME CARDAN from the right, in coigning to us an opinion, by
way of trifling, as if the money which defraid the charge of these magnificent
reparations, had issued out of NERO'S cofers, that in SVETONIVS TRANQVILLVS the
contrary is manifestly true. And PAVLVS ORESIVS testifies, that he taxed upon
the Senate a yearly payment of ten millions of sestertium toward the expense.
A sum, which, reduced to our account, is hardly comprehensible within
numeration, when every such million makes up five and twenty millions of
crowns English. But howsoever that was; his gripes, and drawings for money were
so strange, and universal, as if he had set ROME on fire for a color to
gather the wealth of the world together, by public and private robberies.
This notwithstanding (as also some other base and horrible acts, which pass
for NERO'S) might properly belong to that traiterous caytiue, TIGELLINVS, who
durst do something in his masters name, which his master NERO never either
authorized, or knew. The CORNELIAN histories auerre it clearly. O faith, at al
times needful, and ever honorable, but in the near servants of sovereign
princes so absolutely requisite, that where it is wanting, they are not
servants but subuerters, and are accordingly to be left over to the hangmans
mercy. NERO, for certain, was so little an admirer of money, that he held
there was no other use thereof but profusion. TIGELLINVS and his accomplices,
ought in my belief to undergo the infamy of these extortiue courses. This
coigne of NERO'S, in the judgment of that excellent and famous Spanish
Praelate, ANTONIUS AVGVTSTINVS, concerns the house, or palace which NERO CAESAR
raised upon the ruins of his chief city. Therefore he reads not MAC. for
Macellum (which does not only signify a flesh-market, or butcherie, but a
place where all sorts of food are sold, as PLVTARCH and others do assure us)
but MAG. for Magna, in allusion to this new palace. Howbeit, (saved my
reverence to his learning) DIO forces me to dissent, who in express words
writes, that NERO reared a market-sted, and, for our surer satisfaction, gives
us in Greek characters, the Latin name, and calls it (...). Besides that, the
mansion which NERO erected, is no where signally called Magna, but Aurea, not
the Great, but the Golden one. Sufficient to show, this coigne was ordained by
commandment of the Senate (as the single capitals upon it, S. and C. do
signify) to acknowledge him the author of such a munificence. The memorial
thereof belongs to the city, not to CAESAR'S peculiar dwelling; and the word
meant by that literal note, is not Magna, but Macellum. But how much soever
NERO added to the outward majesty, and beauty of ROME, it was thought that in
the heats it was far less healthie then before; because the Sun had more
power upon it, by reason of the greater breadth and directnesse of the streets.
Nor did he obtain to have ROME called NEROPOLIS as he is said to have affected.

. V. NERO'S new palace, or GOLDEN HOUSE.
Having thus destroid old ROME by burning, he destroid it again (which you
will wonder at) by building. For making use of the soil, upon which so many
magnificent and goodly fabrickes (publickely consecrated either to religious
rites, or to the eternal memory of noble deeds) where also so many thousands
of isles, and other messuages lately stood (the harbors of private citizens) he
constituted in the roomth of them all, one maine abode for himself. The
extraordinary compass of this place met with such wits as answerably flew out
of all compass, the more fully to figure the same. That libell therefore in
verse, which SVETONIVS has registered in his common places of the CAESAR'S lives
(for so they rather are, then properly histories, whose method is natural, and
continuous, not broaken into dischronicall species) tells us; all the city of
ROME was now become no more but one house only. Yea PLINY also is more
pleased with dainty, and general notions, then with the solemnity and
particular propriety of historical phrase, in describing this monster of a
towne-seat. Therefore he freshly plays the young man again, and no way
inferior to that epigrammatist in excess of speech, writes; that all ROME was
set within NERO'S house, and that all the lands of some of the old Roman
Worthies were not so capacious, and large, as here the cellars only. Forms of
expression which become a poem singularly well, or a flourishing orator. Their
over common pursuit is in our own times grown the error, and vice of wits;
among whom nothing now has taste, but (as they are called) fine conceits: The
bane of all solid elequence, and more of solid studies. NERO loathed his former
palace. The transitory, as too small and mean, and therefore founded this
other, which comprehended that as a parcel, naming it, altogether, The golden
house. The hugeness better to be conceived by the rule of proportion in the
art of building (as the stature of HERCULES was found by the measure of his
foot) then by imaginatiue hyperboles, which leave no certainty, nor draw any
lines of truth within the understanding. Every just part discouers the just
total. This court imperial therefore, had a porch, or entrance, so
exceedingly wide, and receiptfull, that the more then gyantlike image of NERO,
one hundred and twenty foot high, was elevated within it. And SVETONIVS
further specifies unto us, for the clearer declaration of the spaciousness,
that it had porticus triplices milliarias. By which words, though no man (whom
I can find) does directly know what is meant, yet they represent to the mind
a wonderful argenes. I could suppose their sense to be, that three parts or
sides of a square, from the porch to the first front, or from the house
backward, were decked with walks or galleries, having in all a thousand
pillars. These, together with their equal distances, which could not be less
in art then the length of their own shafts, must needs take up a mighty
compass. This image of NERO, made by ZENODORVS, in emulation of the Colossus
of the Sun, at RHODES, between whose ouerstriding legs ships entered the
port, seems also to have admitted under it all sorts of things and people
here. A particular story belongs to this wonder of statuarie work. For
afterward when NERO'S vile deeds were publickely damned, the head was
removed, and in place thereof (says PVBLIVS VICTOR) the head of the Sun,
with a glory of seven golden beams about it, every beam seven foot and an
half in length, some say above twenty foot (which is more probable, because
more proportionable) was fixed and dedicated. The like COLOSSVS painted upon
linen cloth (an invention till then unknown) resembling NERO at the
proportion of one hundred and twenty foot long, when it was now finished in
the LAMIAN gardens, both the monstrous picture, and the gardens themselves were
consumed (says PLINY) with lightning But the marvel of NERO'S house consisted
not in the magnitude only, but in the materials, appurtenances, and
workmanship. Nor principally in them. For iuorie, pearl and gold, were grown
stale, because they were common ornaments. But the chief wonder of the
invention sprung merely from desolation. For he laid rogether great
depopulated places; turning them into woods, gardens, wildernesses, lakes,
fields, and vineyards, most curiously adorned with architecture. Things of much
more need, and value there then metal and gemmes. No man therefore ought
extremely to admire, that the epigram in SVETONIVS cries out, that CAESAR did
thrust so much of ROME forth of the native seat thereof, as if the inhabitants
must have been enforced to remove to the VEII, almost twenty miles off, and
every way round as far. Wild ways of description, which in right history
are little better then odious, they are so wandering and so general, creating
no constant or circumscriptible image in the mind of the reader. The real
course of giving satisfaction, would have told us in plain terms, what
quantity of ground the golden house and habitation took, and what was the
frame and face thereof in the most singular parts. I may briefly afford some
more certain light to this admirable argument. The PALATINE, and AESQVILINE
hills, which lay toward the north of the world, were the only places of which
he made most use for his new affected abode. Mount PALATINE ( the X. ward or
region of ROME) comprehended (according to ONVPHRIVS and others) XI.M.DC. foot
about. In which there were VII. maine streets; XXVI. temples and chapels,
great and small; ancient guildes, or common halls, IIII. the PALATINE bathes;
private baines XV.ii. public libraries; corne-mills XII. garners XVI.
palaces, or princely, and great men's houses, CXIC. ( among which, was that of
SENECA'S) and MDC. isles; or messuages (for that is here meant by isles) which
touched not one the other: besides BACCHVS meadow; the grove of the faeries; open
places; colosses; arches triumphall; altars; and many other most famous things.
Officers in ordinary for government of the ward: masters, XXVIII. curators,
and bedles (or denunciators) a like number, of each a pair. Mount AESQVILINE (
or the V. ward or region of ROME) together with the tower of MAECENAS, and
VIMINAL bill, was bounded within the measure of XV.M.DCCCCL. foot; contained
XV. maine streets; the temple of all the gods (PANTHEON) and about XXX. other
temples, and chapels great and small; VIII. consecrated groves; II. fields;
the Praetorian camp; great hot bathes, II. private baines, LXXV. curious
fountains, and conducts above CXXC. garners, XXIII. corne-mills XXII. palaces,
or renowned men's houses, CLXXX. and in them the poet VERGILS; isles, MMDCCCL.
besides an amphitheater; a circus; a park; most famous gardens; and besides
alother memorable objects of sight. Officers in ordinary: masters LX.
ouerseeers or curators, II. bedles, or denunciators, as many. Here also, VII.
cohorts, or MMM. and D. soldiers, part of the cities watch, had their quarter,
or station. This table will at once set before our eyes both the fiery spoil,
and the scope reserved by NERO. His phansies accomplished; he came to warm or
dedicate his golden house (though DIO PRVSIAS thinks his own native tenement
truly golden, and NERO'S but only in name) and upon beholding it at full,
approved the some thus far, that now at last he began to dwell like a man.
A noble speech for certain; and which might well have come from CAESAR; the
speaker not considered. To assure the continuance, he vainly included the
temple of FORTUNE, which builded all of a transparent stone, called phengit,
was internally as bright as day by selfe-reflections. Howbeit he did not so
finish his golden mansion, but that the very first bill which OTHO Caesar
afterward signed, was a warrant to the treasurer to issue out a eleauen
hundred and fifty thousand crowns for ending it. The true space of this
usurped habitation is certainly mis-reported; the flashes of hyperboles abusing
our senses. It was not a mile forth-right, in the opinion of that right
learned, and worthy man, LAEVINVS TORRENTIVS. For my part, I could think the
same, considering what VALERIVS MARTIALIS testifies of some particulars, so
short a while after, as in DOMITIANS days, who had his turn of empire within
thirteen or fourteen years from NERO. And yet that maister-poet runs on in
the vain of the rest, as if in the whole city there stood but one house: the
figure of amplification was generally so rife. In it appears, that where
NERO'S poole or pond was, which (by the report of SVETONIVS) being like a sea
for the bigness, and environed with buildings like cities (O vast excess of
words) DOMITIAN had made firm ground, and raised his amphitheater upon it. Out
of this I am satisfied that the water which is in SVETONIVS as great as a sea,
might be about some hundred and fifty yards over. The epigram is extant, and
touches many other poincts of this argument, but this one above all, that
DOMITIAN undid what NERO wrought, and laid open his injurious encroachments,
restoring ROME to her self, and one man's delights to all men's benefits.
Wisdom builds sure, because it chooses the heart of man for a foundation;
but what a NERO raises, a DOMITIAN overthrows, and one malignant tyrant,
destroys the others doings; as when the plague remoues a fever. Nothing stands
bold which has not virtue for the basis, but in stead thereof, vainglory and
wrong. The burning of ROME, and NERO'S buildings, are subjects of speech so
full of amazement, and admirable odnesse, as may worthily warrant my plenty,
seeing they well deserve a great deal more.

CHAP. XXX. THE CHRISTIANS PERSECVTED BY NERO, AS THE BVRNERS OF ROME.
NERO having thus played with the ruins of the sacred seat, and with the evils
of his nation, and in the practice of such tragical reuells, going far
beyond the malice, and darings of enemies, he nevertheless invented a way how
to excel even himself in wickedness, by raising the first great Persecution
against CHRISTIANS, as incendiaries. For when he found, that neither his
innumerable offices, or diligent offers at affording comforts, could deliver
him from the suspicion of the fact; in the necessity of accusing some, he
apprehended those innocent men, as guilty, whose free confession of their
faith was interpreted a full conviction of the objected crime. Such preiudices
reigned then against religion. There was at that present a flourishing Church
of Christians in ROME, even before Saint PAVLS arrival. NERO'S own court was
secretly garnisht, and enriched with some of those diamonds, whose salutations
the Apostle remembers in his epistle to the PHILIPPIANS. The bad man therefore
wanted no matter for his savage fraud to work upon, which he fulfilled so
industriously, that they who abhorred Christians for their religion,
commiserated their punishments as undeserved; and NERO, while with their blood
he sought to quench and cover his infamy, heaped upon himself new envy. Some
(says TACITUS) being cased in the skins of wild beasts, were wurried to death
with dogs, some were crucified, and others burnt in public, to furnish the
evening with bonefires. The martyr, like the staff of a torch, was packt up
within papers, stifned in molten wax, and other kindling stuff, with a coat
of sear-cloth about his body bound upright to an axeltree: which being
altogether pitched in a sandy furrow, wereso set on fire at the bottom with
bauins, or dry sear twigs, (which the LATINS call Sarmenta) to maintain
light for NERO'S night-sports in his gardens, upon which occasion CHRISTIANS
were by-named Sarmentarians. Some of rhem were gored in length upon stakes
(says IVVENAL, for of them he means) the one end fastened in the earth, the
other coming forth at the mouth. Here those new combats, crowns and triumphs
were dedicated by the tyrant, which prevailed to eternity, and mounted in time
the cross of CHRIST above all the arches, and tropheas of the empire. Nor did
this Persecution rage in ROME alone. For OROSIVS says it was general. The
credit of which affirmation is singularly vpholden by a most notable
inscription, found among certain ruins in PORTVGAL, and extant in GRVTERVS,
which pretends thankfulness to NERO; first for purging the province from
strong thieues, and then again (as he was Chief Priest) from those other who
sought to inculcate to mankind A NEW SVPERSTITION. None will doubt those words
to be meant of CHRISTIANITY, who are but meanly acquainted with the style of
those times among the ETHNICKS; that being the phrase it self of TACITUS, and
TRANQVILLVS. The famous inscription follows.

NERONI. CL. CAIS. AVG. PONT. MAX.

OB. PROVINC. LATRONIB. ET. HIS. QVI. NOVAM. GENERI. HVM. SVPERSTITION.
INCVLCAB.

PVRGATAM.

This moniment is doubly glorious to the Saints of that age, because it both
couples robbers, and them together (for unjust contumely increases dignity)
and because of the evidence which it gives of a more then particular agon. Most
happy, O, and most heavenly souls, whom divine election marshaled in the front
of that battle, and the like grace enabled to reach to the garlands which shall
never vade, and to wear them triumphant in glory, the stars themselves far
under. It could be no ordinary goodness (says acute TERTVLLIAN) which NERO
condemned, and we glory on behalf of our sufferings, that they had such a
dedicator as he. This was the first great Persecution, which like a blast did
spread the religion it blew. No excellency has foundation in delicacie,
whatsoever is soft and tender, never attaines to depth, or diuturnitie. Rough,
and manly are the only fit beginnings of things ordained to endure. The
original power of the ROMANS had no other sovereign properties but these: for
such was their founder, ROMULUS.

CHAP. XXXI. PISO'S CONSPIRACY AGAINST NERO.
GOd and all good men offended, the many years patience of ROME at NERO'S
license, turned it self at length (as it commonly happens) into cogitations
how to free the world from so profane, and dire an evil. PISO, a most popular
great lord, was the top in this work, as designed by the conspirators to
succeed, when NERO was deposed and killed. Yet PISO, having him open under PISO'S
own roof, and power thereby to destroy him at pleasure, pretended a religious
horror against it: as if the breach of the laws of private hospitality had
been fowler, then the breach of faith, and loialtie. A coulourable scruple.
For the truth was, their numbers were so great who were ignorant of the
treason, and would hold the murder of a prince (how wicked soever) a
detestable fact (says TACITUS) that he dreaded least LUCIUS SILANVS (one more
great then PISO) making use of their forces, would invade the empire, and
frustrate his hopes, had the plot been executed at the BAIAE, as the rest of
the conspirators desired, whither NERO came upon trust (laying state aside) to
feast, and revel in private. Look upon the motives of this knot, as TACITUS
himself has assigned them, and particular aims will be found the principal
ingredient, how much soever the public good was pretended: as in such cases
when is it not? He lives not in the world, who wishes well to mankind, and
would have a NERO live: and he on the other side is passionately transported,
who looks more upon change, then scope; and what they would move from, and not
whither they would move. This conspiracy should be unremembered here, because
it was only a prevented purpose, not an act, had it not swallowed up ANNAEVS
SENECA (NERO'S master) and ANNAEVS LVCANVS, the poet (SENECA'S brothers son)
two, above all other of their times, the most renowned in their several ways
of learning. LVCAN was so far guiltitie as priuitie, approuall, and vehement
encouragements in private (as it is in CASAVBONS SVETONIVS) but SENECA (says
DIO) was a principal, and PISO (says TACITUS) was only used (as it was
thought) for a stale: the Philosopher himself the man intended for the
succession. Happy ROME if the change had been for that! There had been a
jealous eye cast upon that PISO, some two or three years before; and SENECA,
even then, was accused of society with him: which so united their cases, that
SENECA professed, his safety depended upon PISOS. The CORNELIAN Annals are
clear for the age of this plot; and PLINY left it written, that PISO (for
framing a title to the empire) should have married ANTONIA, the daughter of
CLAUDIUS CAESAR. But this was the way, by which SENECA provided as for his own
safety against his danger by NERO; and for declaring himself innocent of his
scholars iniquities.

CHAP. XXXII. OF SENECA, AND LVCAN, TWO OF THE CONSPIRATORS.
DIO CASSIVS (in CASAVBONS opinion the most accurate Historian) is suspected of
partiality against SENECA, by LIPSIVS, and DELRIO. On the other side, it is not
impossible but that as he was of a most honorable degree in commonweal,
having been companion in Consulship with his own emperor, so also, that like
a learned, wise, and honest man, sincerely delighting in the harmony, which
words, and deeds produce when they agree, and detesting the contrary, he
forbear not corruptly, in favor of excellent wit, or of excellently witty
seemings, to utter what he found of SENECA'S manners, and carriage, as in
duty, and allegiance to the Muse and law of history, though it derogated
never so much from the credit of SENECA. Actions of life (to whose description
an historians pen is iniunctiuely tied) are of all other in the world, the
most apparently legible, and transparently intelligible book, in which to
behold any person, according to the truth of his qualities, distinctly, and
dispersonated. And although it may concern mankind, that the good which comes
by the writings of any great author, should not be empaired by the
contradiction of his deeds, yet there belongs no such privilege to words,
that for their sakes the report of facts should be falsified, or (which amounts
to a forgerie) that a part of the truth should be withdrawn, or smothered. The
sacred condition of sovereign majesty cannot exempt either kings or Caesar's
from the display of their vices of life, or errors of rule, when they come
under an account for them at the tribunal of history. Now, that the majesty
of those noble studies which can give immortality of fame among mortals,
should confer a more exemption upon their professors, is not reasonable. DIO
charge him with many poincts in practice of things contradictorie to his
doctrines, as with avarice, with incontinencie, with flattery. That in only
the first four years under NERO, he had gathered an estate of money of
fifteen hundred thousand pounds sterling, is neirher an argument that he was
covetous, nor a matter of wonder in it self, considering his place; and it
were to be wished that all the money of the world were at wise men's dispose. And
NERO'S reply to SENECA, when he offered to quit his fortunes, was full of most
princely sense; for in sted of accepting that offer, he professed to be so
far from repining at his riches, that he was ashamed to see some freed-men
more wealthy then his master. As for incontinencie, for which he was both
accused under CLAUDIUS, by PVBLIVS SVILIVS, and banished also, the same SVILIVS
affirmed under NERO, that SENECA was most justly sentenced for defiling the
house of the CAESAR'S, meaning the person of the lady IVLIA, the daughter of
GERMANICVS, and SVILIVS (not without SENEGA'S envy) was therefore sent under
NERO into exile, in extreme old age, as a calumniator. As for flattery, it is
plain that DIO does not wrong him, for he courted AGRIPPINA'S favor, and the
favor of freed-men, and streamed so far out in the praises of POLYBIVS, one
of the freed-men of CLAUDIUS, that LIPSIVS is himself ashamed of it, and
plainly confesses, that he was an enemy of SENECA'S glory, who published that
Consolation to POLYBIVS. Which sounds, as if LIPSIVS would have SENECA'S honor
remain entire, though it were against that wholenesse of truth which the laws
of history do exact, no less against the best wits, then against the
greatest kings. That noble DIO (for he only reports what he found, and is not
found to have fained any thing) has written how SENECA'S vsuries in BRITAIN,
were a cause of the terrible rebellion there, by calling in his moneys too
sodeinly, is a particular which wants not ground of credit by that which
SVILIVS urges in TACITUS against SENECA. Of his hauings, there is most ample
testimony; of his giuings none at all. Some have reputed him a Christian, but
TERTVLLIAN has all in a word, HE IS OFTEN OURS. They are in an error (as
DELRIO truly thinks) who father more goodness upon him then so. His extant
writings make TERTVLLIANS censure of him true, and his last words (repeated by
TACITUS) ending in a frivolous ceremony to IVPITER, conclude on behalf of
paganism. Saint AUGUSTINE says no more, but that SENECA was perhaps a friend
to Christianity. They therefore, who with LVDOVICVS Viues would have SENECA'S
laboring to NERO for leave of withdrawing himself from ROME, upon the
Persecution (as he seriously did) to be a sign of more then so, go too far.
And if other arguments were wanting, this one alone might serve in stead of a
multitude, that he had not the right spirit, who (besides the doctrine of
selfe-murther, by him commended) would meddle in the violent deposing of his
sovereign Lord. A certain sign that he profited little in his supposed
familiarity with Saint PAVL, who in these very times of NERO, and to these
very ROMANS taught quite the contrary, as also blessed PETER. As for LVCAN (the
other of those two famous writers) whose mortal quarrel to his prince was
nothing else but an indignity, forsooth, offered about verses, he stirred not
so hotly among the accomplices for incensing hatred, as he coldly suncke at his
arrest, into ignoble feebleness. For it wrought so far upon him, that in
unworthy hope to make amends for not disclosing the treason sooner, and to
win compassion from a paricidiall prince by endeavoring to imitate his
impiety, the miserable man appeached apace, and among all others his innocent
mother, ATTILLA. This shrillest trumpet of popular paritie, and the boldest
decryer of monarckie, brought to test in his own person, quails in courage, as
if at last he felt in soul the horror of vnder-valuing princely majesty, in
whomsoever resiant, and therefore touched with the sense of sacrilege, he
ceased to maintain any stiffness against the conscience of it. Wit and manners
are ouer-often divided. Most happy they when joined. To be an excellent master
in any kind, and a worthy constant man are two. Nor is this any secret, or
scandalous wonder at all, considering how grace and nature (the fountains of
those diversities) are frequently found several. Enough it is, that NERO
reapes no benefit by LVCANS immoderate praises, in the address of his
PHARSALIA. For NERO'S fame is not the fairer thereby, and the verses (full of
their makers admirable fire) shall warm the understanding reader, while LATIN,
and the world endures. LVCAN, otherwise a blab by descent; for his father
before him, ANNAEVS MELLA, bewraid a conspiracy against CALIGVLA (says
TACITUS) and was therefore himself the less pitied when he fell under NERO.
I return to the conspiracy.

CHAP. XXXIII. MORE, TOUCHING PISO'S CONSPIRACY.
THe conspirators with PISO were many, and many of prime quality, FENNIVS
RUFUS ( Prefect of the Praetorium, ioinctly with TIGELLINVS) and the
unthankful PLAVTIVS LATERANVS, NERO'S bounden beneficiarie, the designed
Consul, two of them. But SENECA alone was a mighty part of NERO'S danger, who
besides his private riches in lands, and treasure, and besides his Praeture,
had the honor also of Consulship, which he bare in extraordinary, and
suffectiuely, together with TREBELLIVS MAXIMUS, as MARTINUS DELRIO
authentically proves. Add to this the matchless fame of his wit, and worth,
and the taste he had given of the felicities, which the common weal enjoyed,
during his sway in Court. The meeting of the conspirators, to prepare for the
action, was in an old Temple of the Sun; therefore when the business was
accidentally detected, the first honor in the public thanks, was ascribed
to his golden godhead. After detection, and condemnation, SENECA (the uncle of
LVCAN, by the fathers side) died first of the two. But while CORNELIUS TACITUS
unfortunately neglected to preserve the last divine dictats of that expiring
Worthy, because they were in every man's hands, they are irrecouerably lost;
and supposititiously to revive them were no common insolency. LVCAN expired in
the rehersall of some of his own verses, which what they were, LIPSIVS better
notes then VERTRANIVS. The manner of death was the same to both: for they
opened their veins, and bled themselves dry in warm water. Multitudes
perished by occasion of this treason, but PISO (the chief therein) nothing
bravely; nor did any one of the conscious speak near to the height of such a
daring as the killing of a tyrant, but only SVBRIVS FLAVIVS, a tribune of
Praetorian soldiers, and SVLPICIVS AFER, a centurion: for when NERO demanded of
the tribune, why contrary to his oath, and duty, he made one against him, his
answer was: Because (quoth he) I hated thee: and yet there was not one in
thine armies more loiall then my self, all the while thou did deserve love,
but after thou had murdered thy mother, and wife, and had turned
charioteer, stage player, and boutefeu, I could no longer endure thee.
SVLPICIVS the second example of constancy (as TACITUS calls him) to the like
question, returned this blunt satisfaction; Because (quoth he) there was no
other way to help thee, but to rid thee out of the world. SVETONIVS, and
XIPHILINE out of DIO, celebrate these rough fellows as well as TACITUS, who to
show, that both sexes concurred to NERO'S destruction, tells us, that
EPICHARIS, a mean woman, but a maine embroiler, equald the popular glory of
those words, by saying nothing; for tortures could worm no secrets out of her,
and to make sure from being conquered with further pain, she found means by
strangling her self, to stop the passage of vocal discoueries. NERO, for
justification of his proceedings against the conspirators, called a SENATE, and
in a speech to the Conscript Fathers, laid open the cause. To leave the people
satisfied, he also published an edict, annexing thereunto the testimonies of
witnesses, and the confessions of the condemned persons. A truth of that nature
was not hard to prove, for the design of his deposure, and death was evident,
and all laws warranted his right revenge. But his amendment which had been
the greater satisfaction, and the surest way to his future safety, was so
little meditated on his part, that he could not think it needful. The attempt
had pernicious effects: for from hence his jealousy and hatred of the SENATE
(as the secret well-willers of his ruin) sprung; and he himself never after
spared to spill any blood, the countenance of this one real plot, so served
his turn to warrant him against the innocent. The fruit and use to him of his
escape. Neither was this all; for when in prevention of his possible danger,
he had topt the prime eminencies of the empire, his wariness (rising out of
this discovered danger) made him inaccessible to the like, no man being
suffered to approach his person, either weaponed, or unsearched.

CHAP. XXXIIII. OF TYRANTS, AND TREASON, BY OCCASION OF THIS CONSPIRACY
AGAINST NERO.
THey may be thought insensible of common, and natural freedom (the life it
self of all honesty and nobleness) who should but think toward the
impunitie of such a man as NERO; and it sounds both harsh and dull to propose
the counsel of such a patience. For it will undoubtedly be asked, what shall
become of legal liberty, and acts of goodness, if, according to all the old
schools of the ETHNICKS, it shall not be held a most fair, and honorable
deed to take away the life of a tyrant? To this I answer; they know not what
liberty, and goodness mean, who think those habits are subject to outward
force: for none are free but the wise, and none are wise but the good. As for
the general weal of the world (the highest and most considerable poinct upon
the whole matter) the author of all power, will certainly provide, that the
abuse of fiduciarie power (and there is none other upon earth) shall never
pass unpunished. Neither does it; for every Tyrant lives tormented within
himself, under the scourge, and knife of his inward feelings, and outward
fears; which no man better describes then TACITUS. A man so zealous for
Tyrannicides, that he calls it a most goodly and most honorable mind in
SVBRIVS FLAVIVS, when he was stirred up within himself to assassinate NERO;
and speaks of it as of a thing excellently glorious. But wherefore this? For
when was it seen, that the heavy hand of God did not finally infelicitate a
tyrant? For CORNELIUS SYLLA (who durst enstyle himself, THE HAPPY) died
miserably of the Lowzies. Even the sweet Muses themselves were most luckily
preserved by the fall of two such professors as SENECA, and LVCAN, from the
odious brand of being bloudely dangerous in state. For what has the dignity
of measure, or the innocence of liberal letters to do with active
mischiefs? There is in all generous natures a rising against great men's
violences, and who is he that can resist the first heats, and boilings of
indignation, or would not wish revenge? But they who account it liberty to obey
such uncorrected rulers, do serve but unruly masters, and rarely sit down
without repentance, if perhaps they perish not before. For what else made NERO
himself miserable, but the wild, and vndistinguisht pursuit of appetites? Or
what turned him out of a prince, into a tyrant, but captivity to passions? No
man becomes miserable but by such subjection. Tyrants, (and what a kind of
creature a tyrant is, I have touched before) are the worst of all wild broods.
Wolves, and bears, in regard of them, are meek and tractable. They therefore
are the special beasts of chase for celestial vengeance, in the forest of
the world; and when they fall, it is a favor from above; if worse come not
after. The pertense of all conspiracy, is the remove of a tyrant, as an
intolerable evil to the public, but the life even of a good Prince, is
thereby unassured. For he whomsoever conspirators kill, shall as well be
published a Tyrant, or Unapt, as the worst of the NERO'S. The safeguard of one
good, and profitable Sovereign is so to be tendered, that for him alone many
bad ones are to be permitted to stand, at the peril of their own account to
God, and fame.

CHAP. XXXV. THE DEATH OF POPPAEA SABINA, THE MISTRESS AND SECOND WIFE OF
NERO: WHICH OCCASIONS THE REHEARSAL OF OCTAVIA'S TRAGEDY.
THe death of her who had been his mistress, and was now his consort in
marriage, POPPAEA SABINA, grieved NERO more then all his sins. To enjoy her
he the rather murdered his own mother at her instigation; and at her like
instigation, first expelled his wife, OCTAVIA, the daughter of CLAUDIUS CAESAR,
then banished her into the uncomfortable island, PANDATARIA, and finally slew
her, though her portion was the ROMAN empire (which honest AFRANIVS BVRRHVS
durst urge) and her self in the flower of her youth; as being destroyed in her
twentieth year. Yet to effect a disorderly act orderly, his first objection to
induce a nullitie, was barrenness; which foundring in the passage, as seeming
insufficient, adultery was laid to her charge. PYTHIAS, one of her women, being
wrung upon the torture to force a confession (for the crime was first laid
against OCTAVIA, and proofs were sought for afterward) to the injury of her
imperial lady, gave this memorable example of loyal service. TIGEL LINVS (who
had NERO'S sword, says XIPHILINE, and was to NERO as an evil Genius, and to
men, and things as the handle of the scourge of the world) sitting in
commission at the rack, demanded some immodest questions touching OCTAVIA; but
PYTHIAS being raised above fear or pain by honest courage, did spit in the
commissioners face, telling him that her lady was honester in her woman's parts
then his mouth. And albeit the truth was unable to preserve OCTAVIA'S life, yet
her honor thereby remains entire. SENECA had urged in vain her births
prerogatives, and the virtues of her life, for a stop to his precipitations,
but the values which he did set upon the strumpets outward excellencies, and
her plesancies of conversation ouer-weighd in him (who never beheld, or
believed virtue) both his proper conscience, and the others greater
worthiness. More vain for hindering the wrong was the peoples unarmed fury,
which brake hereupon, and dragged into the dirt the images of POPPAEA,
preparing to fire even NERO himself out of his palace, if he took not
OCTAVIA again. But he easily withstood them by his guards, and tamed their
distempers with blows. This tragedy of OCTAVIA happened in the eighth year of
NERO, proving all those public vows and sacrifices vain, which not long
before were made in the Capitol by SVLPICIVS CAMERINVS, master of the College
of the Aruall Brethren, for the weal of NERO, and of OCTAVIA. But the small
success needs the less wonder, when the gods are understood to whom they
offered. For her Father CLAUDIUS was one (as the inscribed marble testifies) who
had most reason to hear them, unless he now found (as a God) that OCTAVIA
was not his daughter indeed, but the daughter of an Egyptian Piper, and of her
mother the Empress Messalina. POPPAEA durst suggest it to NERO behind
OCTAVIA'S back. So much it hurts the most innocent child to have a lascivious
mother; and so much it concerns worthy mothers to live in good fame; because
the blemish descends, and somewhat preiudicates the descendents undeservedly.
To this bloody violence was added such an indignity as doubled the cause of
commiseration. OCTAVIA'S head was brought to SABINA for a solace. But to come
into the secure fruition of this one bewitching woman, it was not enough for
him, that with the lives of his mother, and wife, he had removed from himself
all sound advise, as well as all respect to civil, or natural obligations,
unless he had also reached one hand to MASSILIA in the west of the world for
the head of CORNELIUS SYLLA (the descendent of SYLLA the Dictator) and the
other to ASIA in the East, for the head of RVBELLIVS PLAVTVS, who by the
mothers side was a branch of the imperial famlie, to fortify his iniquities
with prevention of rebellion. These two chief peers, his chief fears, being
thus dispatched, she was brought to NERO'S bed as his bride. Let us now behold
the end. In the fourth year after OCTAVIA'S divorce POPPEAS turn is come. She
was noble for birth, but by beauty more: for her mother, having the reputation
to be the fairest lady of her time, she kept that glory alive in her person,
augmented with the felicity of hereditarie fairness; so bewitching a seat
had pride, craft, cruelty, lust, and all high vices obtained, the more easily
to deceive, and damnifie the world by her. TACITUS describes her, gracious of
speech, nor without rare cunning how to seem modest in company, but playing in
private the lascivious wanton, always shifting her appetites, and applications
whither her chief ends led. She was in marriage with a fit, and worthy
husband RUFUS CRISPINVS, a worthy knight of ROME, and was by him the unhappy
mother of a son, whom NERO commanded to be drowned a child, because among
the pretty sports thereof, it would play (as one translates the place in
SVETONIVS) for dukedomes, and empires. But for the love of MARCUS SALVIVS OTHO
(afterward an usurper Caesar) she abandoned that husband, and fitting the
uses of OTHO, and NERO by turns, till all her own turns were served, she
finally abandoned OTHO also, for NERO, whose fruition was the height of her
wishes, to become thereby the top of woman-kinde in wickedness, no less then
in majesty of place. Thus far at least a fury of hell, in the shape of a
Venus: for there was no privilege of natural gifts, nor purchase of
artificial, which she either wanted, or would want, wherewith to work upon
the captive emperor. OTHO was at first NERO'S pandar, then his wittall, and
had been a sacrifice (because he still claimd partnership in SABINA'S society)
had not SENECA (as PLVTARCK says) preserved him, by suggesting an emploiment
for him into LVSITANIA, where OTHO remained with much honor, till GALBA rose.
In the tragedy of OCTAVIA, NERO pleads her praises, as of a lady most worthy
of his love, for her incomparable beauty, form, and graces, leaving nothing
out, but the relish of all praises, and that which TACITUS most truly notes,
was wanting in her, an honest mind. She was with child by NERO when OCTAVIA
was put away. Her curiosities, and delicacies about the care of her person are
so famous, that the finest dames, and ladies may derive up to her, as their
chief, in all their polishing mysteries. Her mules had bridles, and furnitures
of gold, and were commonly shod with silver, yea some of them (as PLINY says)
with gold. But what was that in so vast a fortune? Therefore that which
EVTROPIVS and his Metaphrast PAEANIVS note, among the chief arguments of
NERO'S riot, that he fisht with nets of gold, drawn with cords of purple,
rather seems such a vain singularity as this, then a wonder of waste. Her
five hundred female asses, in whose milk she bathed, were evermore about her
court. For the care of her skin was such, that she rather wished death then
the decay thereof. The Satyrist celebrates a fragrant paste, of her invention,
denominated Poppaeanum of her. But one verse of that author mistaken, has
moved some erroneously to write, for increase of the wonder, that her asinine
dayrie went with her into banishment; whereas she was never in banishment,
though himself, having first hung CAESAR fast at the lines of her eyes, most
cunningly threatened, if she might not be his wife, then to leave him, and to
wander over the world as a banished person. This hastened AGRIPPINA'S ruin,
there being no mean among such riuals. But the evil fortune of ROME denied
the remove of such a dainty pestilence as SABINA. She was wouen now into all
the secrets, and swayes of empire among the same threads by which she was
wrought into her lords affections. Therefore she sat with him in his counsel
of blood, upon the head of SENECA, none present but they, and TIGELLINVS.
Coignes represent that lady in this vnattired dress, and posture.

They who have seen the marble heads of POPPAEA, remaining at ROME, can best
judge how near the stone, and metal agree together in her picture. To me
there seems not in the coigne such an admirable loveliness of face, as might
carry the force of so strong and strange enchantment. NERO, in his amorous
songs, called her tresses amber. A translation which seemed to PLINY so
ambitious, and improper, as he marshalled it among NERO'S monsters: the same
trope of speech reputed in our doting age, but a weak, and cheap
commendation, among beauties devoted adorers. Celestial providence confessed,
that it now concerned the glory of it self to give an example in POPPAEA, what
a painted dunghill dishonest beauty is. Upon the wedding-night it self, she
saw in a fearful dream the horrible foulness of her ways, and had a fair
warning (for I do not think this particular in the tragedy of OCTAVIA to be
poetical) that NERO the author of her advancement, should be the minister of
deserved vengeance. It seemed to her, that the matrons of ROME with discheueld
hair, weepingly mourned at her marriage: that NERO'S murdered mother,
sprinkled with the blood of NERO, rushed forth at the terrible sound of
trumpets, brandished a flaming firebrand, and that POPPAEA for fear did follow
at a beck. Immediately the ground cleft, into the open hollownesse whereof her
marriage bed, and SABINA her self were sodeinly hurried together. There while
she musingly reposed her weary body, behold, her former husband, RUFUS
CRISPINVS, with her drowned son, and heir, and a throng of others entered:
CRISPINVS offers to renew intermitted embracements; when NERO in an affright
breaks into the room, and forces his bright drawn sword into her throat.
This was the inauspitious dream. The end whereof fell out accordingly touching
the actor, though it varied in the way. For NERO coming late one evening from
his chariot-sports, POPPAEA, then great with child, and as in such cases
sickly, upon confidence in the natural and customarie privileges of such a
condition, and of her predominant power, pertly pratled at him for being so
long abroad, nor forbear with reproaches, and taunts to incense that fierce and
savage lord so far, that with a kick of his heel on her belly, abortion
followed, and she her self died of the cruel blow. The vengeance therefore
forewarned to her, and ever to be expected of her likes, was thus paid
thoroughly home. My heart in the mean time is at good peace within it self to
behold the honor of heavenly justice thus fully cleared and settled. But the
dead body of POPPAEA was not burnt according to the custom of the noble
ROMANS, but emboweld, and embalmed like a foreign Queen, or Majesty. PLINY
therefore (who wrote the life of NERO) cannot be meant to speak of her
funeral cou'rfeu (if I may so term it) but either of her consecration, or of
some other rituall magnificence, where he in his Natural Histories, has left
it seriously written, that one whole years crop of all the cinamom, and casia,
which Arabia afforded, amounted not to so much as was alone consumed in solemn
fires and flames upon her final ceremonies. Though this was no common
madness, yet, as he did most firmly affect her while she lived
(notwithstanding the sodein frenzy in which he accidentally slew her) so, not
contenting himself to give her the rites of an Empress only, or AUGUSTA, he
procured her to be enstalled a GODDESS also. Which in the frontispice of this
volumne is expressed by a deificatorie hearse, or throne; the peacocke being the
same thing in signification there at the defication of a woman, which an eagle
was at a man's. Therefore his vast provisions to raise her by her name, and
picture, to his imaginary heaven was a bed of spices, and odours, like the
figurative nest of the Phoenix. Her adoration was hereupon obtruded with such
earnestness, that the honest, and genrous dislike thereof was criminally
objected to PAETVS THRASEA; that famous Senator, whom TACITUS admires for his
virtue. And this accusation ranckt by his enemies among the quarrels picked
against him, did help to bring him to his end. CALIGVLA had led to his cosen
NERO in this kind. For he had formerly consecrated DRVSILLA, his sister and
concubine, as NERO did POPPAEA. But NERO impatient of her loss, to uphold his
sensible solace, by force of imagination, sought to convert pretty SPORVS, a
delicate youth, into a girl, because he nearly resembled her. And there wanted
not those (says DIO Chrysostomus) who for reward durst undertake it. So that
even her dietie was mischievous. For it first cost SPORVS his sex; and when his
lord was dead, it cost him his life also, by his own hand reft under VITELLIVS
Caesar.

CHAP. XXXVI. OF THE EAST-INDIAN TRADE IN NERO'S TIME.
THis furious wilful waste of such precious wares, consumed by whole
ship-loades at once, in honor of humane carcases, which they offered to their
gods by crummes, and drams, leads PLINY, as a patriot, into such a
speculation, and complaint, as is worthy for other times to know. The
EAST-INDIAN Trade, a terrible drain of treasure even in those days. For
PLINY, by occasion of the aromatickes, and spices, which being used about
POPPAEA'S hearse, were imported commodities, speaking also of fishings for
pearls in the INDIAN Ocean, and of other vain riches, seriously affirms,
that the traffic thither did annually conueigh out of ROME in ready coigne so
much, as by our standard amounts to more then three hundred thousand pounds
sterling. One little slender neck (says TERTVLLIAN) supports whole forests,
and islands, and SENECA writes, that patrominies dangled in file by two's and
three's, at the tips of ladies ears: his own wife one of them. Nor was this
any wonder, when some one union was sold (says PLINY) for above a million of
gold. These mad valuations worthily incited merchants to travail up the river
of NILE, and from thence by carauans or conuoyes over land (as PLINY describes
their shortest way) to the Red Sea, and so to the INDIAN Ocean. The ordinary
returns, in December, or January, year by year (as he rates the profit)
yielded in clear gain an hundred for one. Prodigious excesses at ROME being
the reason of carrying such heaps of treasure abroad, were found, and felt to
be ouer-burthenous, and diseasefull even to ROME it self, though the riches
of all the world lay packt and piled there together. Those Oriental nations
did always (as it seems) understand the use and value of our mints, and were
so happy in the follies of the West, that while they sat in quiet at home, they
were sought unto from the farthest coasts by sea and land, through all sorts of
perils, to receive for their shadowie superfluities our substantial paiments;
and for wares either merely ornamentall, and voluptuarie, or not needful but
in a moderate measure, to emburse ready gold and silver, the material sinews
of commerce, and the best staple-ware of commonweal. But if profusion might
be tolerable in ROMANS, who had the mines of SPAIN (famous even in the
MACCABEAS) and all the means of the world to maintain the stock of bullion,
and to augment it, those other noble nations will undoubtedly beware betimes,
which want the like. For they intend not to return to such a condition as
CICERO speaks of, where he writes, there was not in all BRITAIN so much as a
scrap of silver. The translatour of PLINIES Natural Histories, has rendered
the original in such words, as if the place were not to be meant of treasure
conueighed away for trade, but only laid out to furnish a voyage. For what
reason I know not. Clear it is, that PLINY speaks of money not expended, but
exhausted.

CHAP. XXXVII. SOME ROMAN ANTIQVITIES EXAMINED, SEEMING TO GIVE divinity TO
NERO. HONORABLE WORDS OF POPPAEA SABINA BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
BEing in the argument of ROMAN deifications, the place does conveniently admit
a GRVTERIAN inscription, which in the hundred and sixteenth page of that goodly
volumne, seems to call NERO, Diuus, or a God. For there we find: D. NERONIS.

QVINQVENNALIB.



The coignes also of OCTAVIUS STRADA have one of copper with this sentence upon
it; AGRIPPINA AVG.

DIVI CLAVDII NERONIS MATTER.



But NERO is no where found to have usurped, or accepted divinity: in that
alone he used modesty. In IANVS GRVTERVS therefore, it should (as I think) be
D. D. that is to say, dedicated: the rest of the words also in the moniment,
favor that interpretation. As for that coigne in OCTAVIUS STRADA, the
inscription does infallibly belong to the piety of CLAUDIUS CAESAR. For he was
consecrated a Diuus, and did likewise ordain, in memory of his mother
AGRIPPINA, the wife of GERMANICVS CAESAR (put to death by her husbands uncle,
TIBERIUS) that her chariot of honor should be led in the CIRCVS upon the days
of show, her self named Augusta. This solues the doubt so, that NERO can have
no interest in the words, who was never either called, or written, CLAUDIUS
NERO, but NERO CLAUDIUS, nor was at any time named Diuus, or Divine. CEREALIS
ANICIVS indeed (as the register, or commentaries of the acts of the Senate
witnessed) moved openly for a temple to be erected to NERO as a God, at the
common charge, when the PISONIAN knot of conspiracy was cut in pieces. But
that sacrilegious flattery never past current; and was it self reckoned
afterward among the signs of NERO'S fall at hand; because that highest
worship was reserved for the dead departed. The immortality of the soul every
where convinced to be certain, out of the universal love and care which is in
humane nature, for the immortality of a name. The true formal cause of all the
old wonders in Towers, Mausolaeums, Pyramides, and the like, and at this
present the supreme ambition of the most wise CHINESE. But notwithstanding
the ROMANS never solemnized any deification, apotheosis, or enrollurent of
Worthies among the Gods, till the funerals; yet both AUGUSTUS, TIBERIUS, and
CLAUDIUS were honored alive with temples. Or rather not they, but either their
Genij simply, and solie; or some other of their adored objects, as goddess
ROME, or the like, ioinctly and together with the Genius of CAESAR. Therefore,
though no man was properly called Diuus till he was dead; yet sacrifices, and
celestial rites were usual in this other kind to the living. Nor could it
justly seem any usurpation in NERO, who according to the value at which heaven
went in his cosen CALIGVLA'S days, did as exquisitely earne the same for
himself, and his adored POPPAEA, by wicked deeds, as ever the mad CALIGVLA
did for his concubine sister, DRVSILLA. POPPAEA SABINA much more worthy then
NERO. For she was not otherwise without praise: at leastwise, when once she
stood possessed of her ambitious ends. For FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS (whom JOSEPH SCALIGER
is not afraid to commend for his diligence, and love of truth, above all the
GREEKS and ROMANS, and in those respects more safely to be trusted, even in
their own affairs, then they themselves) calls her a good lady, or pious
woman, and franckely celebrates her bounty, clemency, and promptness to
relieve the oppressed. Which though, as toward her, it might partly seem
thankfulness in him (being indeed her bounden beneficiarie) yet would not
he, for particular obligation, abuse public faith with any officious
falsehood; chiefly, when she her self had now been dead many years before.
For our JOSEPHUS was that noble ingenuous person, to whom his royal
countreyman, king AGRIPPA, writ above threescore several letters, all of them
testimonies of his truth in story; whose writings also in that respect TITUS
CAESAR honored with his own princely signature. And that his worthy studies
might neither want dignity, nor ease, the frugall emperor VESPASIAN gave him
fair lands; and his second son DOMITIAN (otherwise most unlike to father,
and brother) did make those Manours, which JOSEPHUS held of VESPASIANS gift,
free from all manner of public charge, and paiments. An honor which JOSEPHUS
himself does esteem paramount to all the rest. Such was the candor and favor
as well of the gentle, as tyrannical, toward the sober learned: neither was
his most opposite religion any bar to their enioyment. My reverence toward
his merits has gladly laid hold upon this occasion to celebrate his memory.
POPPAEA (for a certain) was somewhat, most delightful; because OTHO Caesar,
when he came to the empire, both restored her statua's, and published Greek
coigne of his own, with her image and name upon it, not as Diua, but Augusta;
though she had abandoned him, for NERO; that is to say, for empire. OCTAVIUS
STRADA has the coigne in print. Her most glory is our not unreasonable hope,
that she might secretly favor Christianity, because NERO came from their
martyrdomes, at such time as by chiding him she kindled his fury, and thereby
drew upon her self her own destruction.

CHAP. XXXVIII. THE COMING OF TIRIDATES TO ROME.
Soon after POPPAEAS deification, TIRIDATES, brother to the PERSIAN, or
PARTHIAN monarck, VOLOGESVS (for PERSIAN, and PARTHIAN were now indifferently
meant each of other among the ROMANS) and the same also a principal master in
his countries Magickes, came safe to ROME. His errand was to receive back
there at NERO'S own hands, the diadem of ARMENIA, which he was wrought by
CORBVLO to deposit before the ROMAN ensigns, upon condition to reassume it
so. An action of incredible cost, and glory. And not to rob NERO'S time of
the rights thereof, his sloathfulnesse had the felicity, by other men's
labors, to recover public losses, as formerly in our island by the valor of
SVETONIVS PAVLINVS, and finally now in the Orient, by his kinsman, DOMITIVS
CORBVLO. This did cost dear. For this one homager was allowed after the rate
of twenty thousand crowns the day, from his first setting forth toward ROME,
till his entrance there. He had in his company for hostages to NERO, not his
own children only, but the children also of his brother (that great king
VOLOGESVS) of PACORVS, and of MONOBASVS, and in his train three thousand
PARTHIAN horsemen, with store of ROMANS. A ready mean to consume so great a
sum; the travail being wholly by land. For it was against the rites of his
mysteries to come otherwise, least he should violate nature and them, with
vomits at sea. But those two most goodly horses of marble, which at this day
remain in ROME, among the principal wonders of sculpture there (the reputed
workmanship of PHIDIAS, and PRAXITILES) were conueighed at this time by ship,
by the provision of TIRIDATES (if drowzie BOISSARDVS be not deceived) as a most
acceptable and roial present. And, that BOISSARDVS is much deceived, I am led
to believe; because in the ONVPHRIAN descriptions, the two horses of TIRIDATES
are placed under that title, in the seventh region of ROME, and their stuff
is not of stone but of brass. Other two of marble are of ALEXANDER Magnus,
backing Bucephalus, situated in High-street-Ward, or in the sixth ROMAN region.
Besides the former expense, NERO in one days space, and in part of
entertainment, gilded POMPEIS theater over. The greatness whereof TERTVLLIAN
excellently expresses, where he says, that POMPEI was only not great when
compared with that Theater. Proportionably to these beginnings he bare all
other charges, and at departure, rewarded his new vassal with an hundred
thousand sestertium, which, according to the rates of our exchange, rise to
about seven times as many pounds; all, to set out the majesty of the ROMAN
empire to strangers, in the seat of the empire. A great and princely conceit.
By these matchless magnificences (for NERO in his gifts was not of a narrow
heart) he so enshrined himself in the minds of the PARTHIANS, that twenty
years after NERO was dead, his only name was so gracious, that a counterfeit
usurping it, they were hardly wunne to render him, or from not affording their
utmost assistance in his quarrel. The receipt of TIRIDATES was universally
applauded. NERO therefore, who was so auerse to all martial expeditions, that
but for shame he had drawn the ROMAN legions out of BRITAIN, and so timorous
of weapons, that TIRIDATES riueted his sword to the sheath thereof, for his
assurance (because he would not vnknightly yield to go ungirt, though it were
upon condition, to receive the diadem of ARMENIA) was now notwithstanding, with
as shrill, and joyous showts acclamated Imperator, as if in person he had
conquered ARMENIA by the sword. This was the outside of things. But NERO had
other, and those more inward ends, in his so ambitious inuitation, and pompous
entertainment of the PARTHIAN prince. For thinking it little, to be but a god
among the gods, his mind sored to command by magic over them all. Then this
one fancy he never had in PLINIES conceit any more generous, nor could
possibly mount higher. His mothers ghost continuing troublesome, there is no
where else any probability that he labored to call her up to a parlea, and to
appease her, rather then now, though also now in vain. Somewhat of magic
practices seems to be insinuated unto us, in the little image, or puppet of a
girl, which NERO so superstitiously adored, as likewise in the serpents
slough, found about the bolster of his bed, when as yet he was a babe, or
infant. Of both those sorcerous toys there is mention in SVETONIVS. But though
NERO was initiated by king TIRIDATES into the order of magicians at their
magic suppers, and to the gift of the kingdom of ARMENIA had bestowed as
much in entertainment as was worth another kingdom, yet the art would not
come. No surer sign in PLINIES opinion that the whole mystery was a mockage,
when NERO could not purchase it. But the friends thereof excused the fail: for
that the gods would not appear to a body which was pimply, and unclean. Such
was NERO'S, as SVETONIVS says. But those goblins who were auerted with foul
skins, and not with foul sins, were worthy of NERO'S orisons, and PLINIES
scorns. To this far extended glory of crowning TIRIDATES, NERO added another
greater. For there neither being war, nor remains of war within the ROMAN
world, he closed the gates of IANVS, in sign of universal peace. This coigne
was dedicated to the memory thereof, and gives us the ancient plain figure of
that famous temple.

By EVSEBIVS it may well appear, that it was about this time also that NERO
used the glorious prerogative of enlarging the bounds of the city of ROME,
because he had prouinciated the kingdoms of PONTVS Polemoniac, and of the
COTTIAN Alps, and enlarged thereby the territory of the empires demesne. A
thing recorded as the principal honor of AUGUSTUS, and of other the greatest
ROMANS.

CHAP. XXXIX. OF PVBLIVS PAETVS THRASEA, WHOM TACITUS CALLS Virtues self.
AND OF DEMETRIUS, HIS Cynick.
THese public joys were not pure, but mixed with sorrows; as all in NERO'S
days. As if his meaning had been, while the world was diuerted upon
delightful objects, to take his advantage, and time, for committing some such
notable cruelty, as might rather be ouerwhelmd, then justified. Such was now
the extinction of PAETVS THRASEA, whose reputed virtue made him seem the times
chief wonder, the parallel of MARCUS CATO. That BAREA SORANVS, the designed
Consul, was coupled with him in the calamity, added to the opinion of BAREA'S
worth, but took from him his fame: the others carrying most eyes, and voices
after it. The poincts of his indictment, and the deadly poincted inferences
which his accusers drew for his destruction, as against one who was too good to
live, are summed where they are likely to continue longest, in the CORNELIAN
ANNALS. Moral virtue is formidable to abused power. This noble ETHNIC was
most unhappy to have no better a counselor at his last wants then that
DEMETRIUS, whom TACITUS calls a Doctor of the Cynicke rule, or schools. That
sentence of his, which SENECA cites with praise, will speak that description
aloud. The words of the ignorant (quoth DEMETRIUS) are in the same account with
me as wind which the belly vents: for what are the odds, when such fellows
make a noise, whither they make it upward or downward? Golden sense in an
uncleanly resemblance, and worthy a Cynicks use, if for such a man as SENECA to
commend. And there is scarce another whom SENECA does equally honor,
wheresoever he has cause to induce, or mention him. Cynicks were cheap
acquaintance, costing little. But this ghostly Doctor was the only help which
dying THRASIA used to inform himself what to think of the Soul of man, and
of the Souls dissociation from the body. A corruptor of THRASEA, and of all
his other disciples, by breeding contumacie in them toward superiors. If at
leastwise this be that DEMETRIUS whom VESPASIAN the emperor, called a Curr,
for barking or grumbling out somewhat against him, without vouchsafing either
to rise up, or otherwise to reverence him, being then AUGUSTUS CAESAR, and a
prince, indeed borne to refound, and restore the ROMAN empire. SENECA by his so
much admiring this wise man, (and according to his institution he was
excellently such) does therein well enough show, that himself was far from
CHRISTIAN.

CHAP. XL. THE GENERAL CREDIT, AND USE OF Stage-poetrie, AND OF ACTING IN
PLAYS, IN NERO'S TIME.
But this very PAETVS THRASEA, as well as PISO, the head of the conspiracy,
could act a part in a tragedy, and did it in public. See what great examples
can persuade! After NERO began to delight in verses, SENECA more addicted
himself to their making, then ever before; and when SENECA (the most famous
professor of moral wisdom) wrote tragedies, NERO, and the lords, might with
less reproof be actors, or bear a person. For at PADVA, the place of his
birth, PAETVS THRASEA openly sung (that was the proper word of art for
tragedians, as to dance was the like for comedians) in a tragic habit, at the
plays anciently ordained there by ANTENOR the Trojan. OEDIPVS, HERCULES
furious, and THIESTES, are three of SENECA'S tragedies. And among those in
which NERO was an actor, those names of tragedies are in DIO'S catalogue.
THIESTES the chief of SENECA'S. The parties themselves whom those actors
personated were never so pompous in their lives, as their counterfects and
imitators were upon the ROMAN stage: for NERO studded their golden scepters,
staves, and visards, with oriental unions, and pearls of the most caracts.
Himself beheld the public sword-playes in a spectacle, or mirror of
emerald, perhaps to help his eyesight, which was orherwise imperfect, and
poring.

CHAP. XL. NERO RESOLVES FOR HIS VOYAGE INTO GREECE, BUT NOT AS A RIGHT ROMAN.
THe sad and heavy clouds which sat upon the face of the city for the loss
of her best citizens being wiped away by the chearefulnes, and splendour of the
late entertainment, NERO effectually meditated a triumph, of which never any
ROMAN thought before, most worthy of his crochets, and of his inglorious way to
glory. To gain from GREECE in GREECE, the fame of the best singer, the best
cytharist, the best player, the best charioteer, was the conquest he affected.
A vain man, among vain people, and they his vassals also, might well rest
assured of all the garlands which either OLYMPVS, or other places of trial
could afford. There was a time when he bravely debated of marching in person
with an auengefull army, one while into the CASPIAN entries, another while into
AETHIOPIA, whither, for his information, he emploid a tribune and certain
companies of praetorian soldiers, as to prepare, and accommodate his
enterprise. But these propositions proved embrions of vanity, for he never
proceeded further then to the discourse, and show of preparations, though the
matter was proper to his calling, and those other not. For the prince of LATIN
poesy in enumeration of the arts which belonged to a right ROMAN, omits
fidling, and faining, and excellently teaches, that to give laws to the
world, and to rule paramount in peace and war, according to justice; to spare
the dutiful; and beat down the rebellious; were properly theirs. High towering
thoughts did not sort with NERO'S soul. His poor one fluttered among the
lower flyers.

CHAP. XLII. THE PROVISIONS OF NERO FOR ASSVRING ROME TO HIMSELF, IN HIS
ABSENCE.
THe lives of worthy persons were sacrificed in preparatiue for his safe
departure out of ITALY, and to secure his abode in GREECE. Once before this
time, when he was in a mind to have sailed into EGYPT, but did not, he
chiefly promised two things by his proclamation; first, that his absence should
not be long, and next, that his provisions for the public should be such,
that all things should remain immovable, and prosperous till his return. By
the order taken now, the course at that time may be coniectured. For without
regard to the majesty of the ROMAN name, he left ITALY, in mere tenderness
to his peculiar, under the command of HELIVS CAESARIANVS, an enfranchised
bondsman, enfranchised by CLAUDIUS. As if imperial ITALY were now become but
some countrey-farme, or grange, which needed nothing else but only a servile
bailif. At the same time, and undoubtedly with a purpose to prevent rebellion
in the very seed thereof during his absence, he published an edict (mentioned
in PHILOSTRATVS) to the special credit of philosophy, by which he commanded
all doctors, or masters of that profession to depart out of ROME, and ITALY.
That part of philosophy which concerns moral wisdom, was deeply had in
jealousy, specially the Stoics, if not for SENECA'S sake, certainly, (as
TIGELLINVS speaks in TACITUS) because their opinions bred them arrogant,
turbulent, and affecting to be in action. And COSSVTIANVS (the son in law of
TIGELLINVS) objects the like against PAETVS THRASEA, defending his auersion
from those studies by authority of the old common weal. Words put, with good
advantage to that sect, into the mouth of such hateful men as TIGELLINVS, and
he. But PHILOSTRATVS has done what he can to justify their wits who were the
authors to NERO of that edict. For while he vauntingly makes his admired
APOLLONIVS, the oracle of all the chief rebellions in his time, particularly
of VINDEX, and GALBA against NERO, he shows withal that NERO'S counsel of
state foresaw the danger. Those doctors were perilous to empire, under the
pretext of freedom: CHRISTIANS were not, who knew a better freedom. Things
howsoever settled at ROME, he sets sail for GREECE, with such multitudes
of people, and provisions for atchieuing that conquest (by which (says
HERODIAN) he made himself a ridiculous spectacle) as might very well have
sufficed for the number, and quantities to subdue it, if it had not been very
long before subdued to his hand. And this was done with such damage to the
country, as it is a doubtful case with APOLLONIVS of TIANA whether XERXES did
more harm by setting GREECE on fire, or NERO by singing in it.

CHAP. XLIII. NERO IN GREECE: HIS HATRED THERE TO THE SENATE OF ROME. OTHER HIS
DOINGS, TOUCHING THE MAINE OF HIS ERRAND.
THis voyage into ACHAIA (for that province of GREECE had him most) afforded
many adventures, besides those of his frivolous trials; whose garlands how
fresh, and green soever in their leaves, were dry, and sere to glory, the
mystery of his errand. His meditations to destroy the SENATE (if that be not
among the scandalous fables of which JOSEPHUS on his behalf gives a general
caveat) began to ripen there. That most noble order of men most wisely situated
by ROMULUS, like a kind of starry firmament, between the fires of majesty,
and the unsteadfast waters of the commonalty, to attemper the heates of the one,
and the inundations of the other, a crystal screene, or sphere in the
midst of absolute power, and absolute obedience, the same which first drove
kings out of ROME, and soon after oppressed the people (as being it self
subject to corruption, as all other humane institutions) had so far incurred
the inward dislike of NERO, that he is charged to have given no slender signs
of a purpose to have abolished that degree. VATINIVS, to whom he was
ouer-indulgent, a fellow of a more mischievous nature, then his original was
base (which nevertheless was not more noble (says TACITUS) then a shoomakers
shop had bred it) in his rude buffonries would openly say; CAESAR, I hate thee
as thou art a Senator; and for that hatreds sake (as if it were freedom) was
easily in special grace. This auersion of NERO, how great or little soever,
was none other then the child of fear, begotten in him by the late
conspiracy of PISO. And of that conspiracy that was the worst effect. But the
mischief which he reuengefully meant against the SENATE, whatsoever it was,
aborted; himself shortly dying. Meane-while his delights (according to their
custom) moved in the lowest regions of popularitie. Nor was he fortunate in
them. For the best judgments held it true, that he was rather any thing then a
good singer to the harp (says VINDEX in PHILOSTRATVS) and yet rather that
then a prince. So poor an ambition, and not to prevail therein, was piteous.
He thought otherwise of himself. And that beggarly tragedian in SPAIN who
disdained to stoop to a comparison in his art with NERO, was luckily poor: for
no riches could have protected such an insolency. His bribing conquests were
interpreted by him, and his courtiers, so gloriously, that poasts were
dispatched over the ROMAN world to signify the same; that public sacrifices
might be made for gratulation. But APOLLONIVS excellently taught what others
were to think of NERO'S skill, and what NERO should have thought; when being
questioned (as to entrap him) what he conceived of it, fearelessely answered
the bloody TIGELLINVS, I think (said APOLLONIVS) better far then you, for
you repute him worthy to sing, but I to hold his peace. And so it plainly was.
For by all confessions it appears, that his voice was weak, and hollow. The
formal words of allotting the prize at the tourney of arts, and which he
himself (exercising the office of the common crier) pronounced in public,
after every bowt, or act, are in DIONS Epitome these: NERO CAESAR, victorious
in this trial, crowns the People of Rome, and his own world with this
garland. After this, or the like manner he obtained in GREECE, during his abode
there, one thousand and eight hundred green crowns, but none of them such as
incomparable PINDARVS did celebrate, whose vnreachable MUSE, HORACE worthily
admires. That which the Apostle observed (in his epistles to the CORINTHIANS)
touching their preparatorie abstinence, and sufferings, who were to contend for
one of those glorious rewards, does marueilously suite with NERO, who practiced
in private, and in public, under all the seuerest laws of those exercises.
PLINY notes two special poincts of his patience, for conservation of his
voice: to lie on his back with a leaden plate on his breast, and to fast
certain days in every month, with nothing else but oil, and syues, and not
so much as a bit of bread. There wanted nothing but prayer to have cast out
that devil of vanity. The Apostle uses the proper word of those PRIZES,
Agons; and CORINTH it-selfe (where he preached, and taught) and (as JOSEPH
SCALIGER notes out of DIONYSIVS, the Areopagite) not only he, but PETER also
stood upon that isthmus, or neck of land, where the games in honor of NEPTVNE
were celebrated. So the place and practice were neither unknown, nor probably
unseen of that heavenly man. But he never noted more industry in the
champions, and adventurers, for gaining the customarie reward, then NERO
Augustus used in his own person, being the first of men who most dishonested
sacred majesty with improper maisteries; yea, and that also, mischieuously, and
to compass vading ornaments, not immortal.

CHAP. XLIIII. NERO'S ATTEMPT FOR CVTTING THROVGH THE CORINTHIAN Isthmus.
ONe great work he entered upon during his abode in ACHAIA, which seemed
worthy of an emperor. For it was the enterprise of digging through the
isthmus, or neck of land, which like a natural bridge ioing'd the main of
GREECE to the most renowned penile thereof, PELOPENNESVS. The least breadth of
the straicts, from the two opposite havens, LECHEAE, and CHENCHREAE, was by
PLINIES commensuration five miles: and to conueigh merchandise about by sea,
from but one side of that bar to the other, took up in navigations above five
hundred. PHILOSTRATVS accounts the circuit exactly, six thousand, and twenty
stadies, eight of those stadies one mile of ours, which (admitting that scale)
produces another, a far greater sum of miles then PLINIES. Therefore many
princes had thought of making a nauigable channel between sea, and sea. But
king DEMETRIUS being one of them abandoned it, because the skillful
(PHILOSTRATVS says they were EGYPTIAN philosophers) informed him, that the
sea in the one bay was so much higher then the sea in the other, that if the
partition were removed, all the near islands, upon the lower level would be
surrounded; and (which seems to me the most probable objection of all) that
the cut it self would be of no use, the current, or waterfall, would be so
impetuous, swift, and strong. Reasons which preserved those two huge peniles of
AMERICA (naturally combined at the creation of the world, by a far broader
neck of earth then that which annexed PELOPONNESVS to GREECE) from being
sundred by the pickaxe, and spade; though that neck alone is the cause of
fetching a circuit from Nombre de Dios to PANAMA, many thousands of miles
about. So mighty a space there is between at sea. JULIUS CAESAR thought of
this disunion: CALIGVLA went somewhat further; for he sent to survey the
ground: but NERO made it a serious business, and for auspication, and example,
he himself played the pioner in person at the sound of a trumpet (which gave
signal to the Praetorian Guards for their general falling to work) and
digging up the first of the soil with his own hands, carried it off in a
basket upon his shoulders. So infinite was the desire he had to get
immortality of fame howsoever. Here MVSONIVS (the BABILONIAN Sage, and second
in fame to APOLLONIVS for philosophy) was found with his shouell, or spade
among NERO'S laborers, condemned (as it seems) to the work, and was so far
from being troubled, or ashamed, either of his bonds or obedience, that he
most ciuilly asked of his fellow Philosopher, DEMETRIUS (who took him in the
manner) what if he should find him fingring an harp, and singing as NERO did?
DEMETRIUS himself reported this of MVSONIVS. And what there was in it for
PHILOSTRATVS to mislike, but CAESAR'S barbarousnesse, I cannot see. For it
seems to me an example of a wise, and manly patience vnenforced. For if he
could have approved NERO'S courses, the words import that he should not have
needed to dig in the Isthmus. PAVSANIAS says, that those princes died
violently, who formerly attempted it; and DIO tells us what wonders happened at
this action, for a terror to NERO, who proceeded in contempt the rather. Blood
gushed forth of the wounded earth, hollow groans, and horrible noise were
heard, and many sprights, or wandering ghosts appeared. Presages of some
extreme infelicitie. But the reason which PAVSANIAS brings, to show the
offense of such an attempt is wise, and pious, and more worth then all those
wonders: It is hard (says he) for man to force the works of God; which is as
much in effect as to say, had God almighty, the most wise creator of the world,
seen it good, he would have made it otherwise at first. But neither these
reasons, nor examples, weighed so much afterward with that most magnificent
HEROD of ATHENS, the famous Sophist, but that he both thought the work a
thing of immortal renown, and wished also for the leave of doing. Which
nevertheless he feared to ask, though it was in far better times then
NERO'S. The laborers meddled not with the stony entrails of the Isthmus, and
having therefore only pared away the crust, or mould aloft, the place at this
present maintains the ancient, and original situation, not to be changed.
PHILOSTRATVS says, that the trench was cut half a mile up into the land, from
the haven LECHAEVM, when the work was abandoned. NERO conquered the GREEKS by
his bribes, and power, in their OLYMPIAN, and PYTHIAN exercises, but himself
was conquered by the Isthmus, which remained inexpugnable. It is a princely
thing for princes to desire to excel all men in doing nobly, as they excel
all men in sublimity of place: but to err (as this prince did) in the object
of endeavors, and in the means of atchieuement is miserable, and unlearned.

CHAP. XLV. THE END OF HEROIC CORBVLO; AND THE EMPLOIMENT OF VESPASIAN,
AGAINST THE REBELLIOVS JEWS.
ALl extraordinary eminencies in subjects, by an old axiom as well of single,
as of popular tyranny, are fearfully beheld as dangers, and cautelously
prevented as imminent, though never any tyrant was able to kill his successor.
Here therefore, while NERO demurred about his indecent victories, DOMITIVS
CORBVLO perished. He had deserved most excellently at NERO'S hands, and for
that cause was by him entitled his benefactor, and father. But jealousy
prevailing now above the memory of his deserts, he was sent for into GREECE
after the most honorable manner, but being arrived, and waiting for admission
to his presence, it was denied, and word sent out that he must dye, without
any cause remembered in histories to have been assigned, but only the will of
NERO. His great heart, full of indignation readily yielded, using none other
words but these, I am well enough served, and so ran himself upon his sword.
But it was not long before the ungrateful prince stood in need of such another
magnanimous leader. For while NERO was yet in ACHAIA, there arrived the
terrible news of the revolt of the JEWISH nation, and of the flights and
defeats of his armies, which had been led in vain against IERVLEM by GESSIVS
FLORVS the CLAZOMENIAN, and afterward by CESTIVS GALLVS, the President of
SYRIA. CAESAR, to seem a right CAESAR, appeared unshaken at the relation, but
remained inwardly afflicted. VESPASIAN, then in ACHAIA with him, was persuaded
with many sweet words, and promises to bear the stresse of that service, God
almighty beginning even then to make some new purueyance (says FLAVIVS
JOSEPHUS) for the relief, and better estate of the commonweal of ROME. For
the forces which were necessarily entrusted to this captain, for deduction of
the rebels to obedience, gave him means in time to attain the empire, which
his wisdom, and natural piety restored. From ITALY also his lieuetenant, or
viceroy, HELIVS CAESARIANVS, whom he trusted above all the free Peers of the
ROMAN world, as holding himself most assured of faith, and service there,
interrupts the solaces of his patron with frequent packets, calling upon him to
return; the state of public affairs requiring it. For HELIVS (who lorded it
intollerably) felt the ground of committed power tremble under him, and the
more stirring spirits, whom he improperly backed, grow perilous. That
maiesticall seat was not for a servant to possess subordinately, nor long
inordinately for his ill-aduised master. But when letters, and messages were
unable to pluck him from off the vanities of his glorious quest (for he wrote
in answer, that he had not as yet done enough to make him return worthy of
himself) HELIVS sped to him with such admirable celerity in person, that he
might rather seem to have flown, then only to have plide the switch, or
sail. The cause of such have was the just fear of a new, and great
conspiracy.

CHAP. XLVI. NERO'S SVCCESSE AT THE TEMPLE OF APOLLO.
NERO, in the mean time made that journey to the oracle of APOLLO at DELPHI,
where he liked his entertainment so ill, that (as DIO writes) he seized into
his hands the whole CIRRAEAN Hundred, which anciently belonged to the Temple of
APOLLO, as part of the land allotted in mortmain for sustentation of the
priests, sharing it as an escheat among his impious soldiers; nor resting
there, profaned the place it self, out of which the oracles issued, by
butchering men upon the mouth of the vent, or cave. What the usage was which
could kindle NERO'S anger, and disdeigne against his own most honored APOLLO,
whose name, and effigies himself usurped so confidently, that he stamped it in
his coigns, DIO professes not to know certainly. I partly think that I have
found it out. He came in pomp to visit the Delphian deity, his head crowned
with a garland (the reward, and ensign of his victory) his body attired in a
long flowing garment, such as parties at the music prize accustomed to wear
in their agon, with an harp in his hands. His welcome notwithstanding was so
cold, because he was promiscuously cruel, and had a mind immusicall, and
base, that the god of wisdom (says THEMISTIVS in his fifth Oration) would by
no means brook his sight, but trussed up his locks in an effeminate
hair-lace, and decrowned him at his exit: for he seemed unto him (says that
renowned Greek Orator) not as LYCVRGVS did at his coming, a God in humane
shape, but a wild bruit beast under the semblant of a man. And this it was
which probably enraged NERO: and this the disgrace, to which IVLIANVS Augustus
(for so Saint HIEROME calls him, who could have called him the Apostata)
alludes in the person of APOLLO, at the Satyricall banquet of the CAESAR'S.
IVLIANVS own words there are such as these. Then NERO enters next, with an
harp in his hands, and a garland of laurel upon his head. Here SILENVS,
looking aside at APOLLO, said: This is the man who would needs be thought to
be thy fellow. It is so (answered King PHAEBVS) but I shall soon deprive him
of his crown of bays: for neither did he make me his example in all, and even
in those things in which he attempted to be my parallel, he was no true
imitator. At this word, COCYTVS plucked his crown from his head, and drew him
headlong to hell. Thus far that emperor. But APOLLO was otherwise quit with
NERO, by his old deceitful way of riddles. For NERO enquiring after his final
fortune, the mocking spirit had advised him thus, BEWARE OF THE THREESCORE AND
THIRTEENTH YEAR, which he (as SVETONIVS says) understood to be meant of his
own ages date, but it proved GALBA'S, who dethroned him. So security disarmed
his person, and the wrong end of the double text ran through him. Superstition
is worthily fed with illusion, and irreligion as worthily punished with
credulity.

CHAP. XLVII. THE CHOICE ANTIQVITIES, AND ALL THE PRIME MONIMENTS OF THE
GREEKS, CVLL'D, AND CARRIED AWAY FOR ROME, BY NERO'S AVTHORITIE.
THe defacings of GREECE (that temple of civil glory) and of Greekish
countries, by selection, and transportation of their monimentall rarities,
chiefly upon occasion of NERO'S voyage, which gave him means to behold them,
and cause to covet their possession, were most offensive. For, besides the
murders, rauishments, extortions, and other the evils of such a tempest, as
NERO'S emulous presence, they were every where robbed of their principal pieces
of art. Inualuable all, because they belonged to the immortality of memory
(their civil felicity) irreparable also, because their individual
antientnesse could not be supplied, if their artificial excellencies might.
Their temples, sanctuaries, Therms, Hyppodroms, and all other their public,
and private buildings, OLYMPIA in ELIS, and DELPHI in BAEOTIA, the capital
seat of APOLLO himself, were subject to his general pillage, only RHODES
excepted. A fortune, not of the situation, which disioign'd it from the
Continent of ASIA, but to charter-fauour. For CRATON, or ACRATVS (as TACITUS
calls him) who had NERO'S commission, could not meddle there, because that
noble Sea-state living free to her own laws, by permission of the ROMANS, was
by special words exempted. In thankfulness of which privilege (grounded upon
their former good hap to have had him their patron under CLAUDIUS) it may well
be that this RHODIAN coign was published.

It represents a victory, to flatter NERO perhaps, when they, as the rest of
the empire, concurred in the applause of his Olympian revels. DIO PRVSIAS
(surnamed of his golden eloquence, CHRYSOSTOMVS) though otherwise a stranger at
RHODES, (saving only as every country was a philosophers home, and
philosophers would be thought the common doctors, and superuisors of mankind)
made a famous free oration there, in TRAIANS time, to rectify the decaying
opinions, and practice of honor among them. A most noble argument, and as
nobly handled. The RHODIANS, who abounded in brazen statuas, standing
consecrated to the everlasting names of their represented Worthies, were
injuriously grown, for sparing cost, to raze out old inscriptions to gratify
new deserts. Against this bad encroaching custom DION bent his engines of
reason, and speech, and objected NERO'S privilege. That College of Honor, for
which your Lordship in your excellently honest zeal to our country, openly
moved, meets every where with aids, and supports of authority, and reason; and
DIOS oration alone were able to introduce that sacred noursery of brave
encouragements; diuturnitie of remembrance for public merit, by statuarie,
plasticke, fusorie, and other the arts of magnificence. A secret, little
understood, but never to be too soon enured among the noble. It was for such a
mind as NERO'S (which enuide immortality of good renown to others, and was
deficient to his own) to violate the wonders of workmanship, and the greater
wonder of deserving such memorials. Images to life, and the names of Worthies
in arts, and arms, should be advanced in the most conspicuous civil places.
For there is no use to be instituted of them, but civil, and for civil causes
only. If any will contend, that these injuries to the depressed GREEKS were not
all of them done by NERO'S authority at this present, I will not strive, but
turn about from hence, with a short stop, to his returning home.

CHAP. XLVIII. NERO'S RETVRNE.
HELIVS, being arrived where CAESAR was, prevailed so far that he sodeinly
returned in such tempestuous weather, as it gave just hope, that the seas would
take to heart the cause of the land, and devour him with waves whom waters
could not wash white, nor deserved a graue-roome on earth. The train-sent of a
conspiracy which HELIVS did beat upon, seems to have been the fatal purpose
of that rebellion in GALLIA, the force whereof shouldred NERO, before it was
long, out of his imperial seat. For as the seas move of themselves with a
kind of horror, before some terrible tempest, and as certain signs do
always foregoe every great sickness in humane bodies, so, maine mutations are
never in the world without their sensible tokens, effects of heavenly
providence. It happened so now in GALLIA before the deadly stroke of change. And
herein I do not mean of those prodigies only, which PLINY commemorates as
forerunners of downfall, and whereof himself was a witness. Such were
rivers flowing back to their springs; oliue-gardens, and meadows, in the
lands of VECTIVS MARCELLVS (NERO'S attorney general) transported over the
highway between, and settling themselves on the further side; the decay of
that cypress tree which had lasted from the days of ROMULUS till then; the
pair of hermaphrodite mares (foaled in GALLIA, among the TREVIRI) which served
to draw NERO'S coach, or the like reputed wonders; But I also mean those
preambulatorie notes, by which it may suspiciously appear, that some mighty
business is in hand, when secret murmurs, and other marks of approaching
mischief discover somewhat, even to an half open-eye, and when common bodings
mis-giue.

CHAP. XLIX. NERO'S DOINGS AFTER HIS RETVRN.
IN the mean space (as if nothing else were needful) the unwise prince does
wholly tend to enter ROME in a fidling triumph, by breaking down her walls (no
contemptible omen of his own dismantlings) as he had done before at NAPLES,
ANTIVM, and ALBANVM, according to the custom of the Hieronickes, or sacred
victories. For with that adiunct the GREEKS adorned their deserts who returned
victors from their general prizes.

CHAP. L. THE LAST ACT OF NERO'S PERSECVTION OF CHRISTIANS.
But whosoever triumphed in sport, the champions of eternal verity triumphed in
blood. For, after NERO'S return, the two principal lights of the Christian
name, were by his commandment led to their martyrdom, both upon one day, both
with one glory of profession, though in a diverse kind of suffering, the one by
crucifixion reuerst, the other by decollation. So the fire of persecution which
had unequally flamed over the world, after about four years from the first
rising thereof, went forth in two most shining blazes, as dying lamps expire
with enlarged flames. The sum of Christianity being their care, and their
deaths being the sum of iniquity, EVSEBIVS dates the Persecution, not where
it began, but where it gave the sorest blow. Which if some had well considered,
they might have spared the reproof of EVSEBIVS, as if he had mis-placed the
time.

CHAP. LI. HOLY MEN THE INVISIBLE STAYS OF THE WORLD.
ANd though the Persecutor observed it not, yet did he thereby cut away at once
the two main anchors, at which the ship of empire, and the last hope of his
safety did inuisibly ride. Their prayers, and their presences mightily
preserved the estate of peace, according as they also did (in the opinion of
PAVLVS OROSIVS) under CLAUDIUS AUGUSTUS, that indulgent father of the world.
The persons of Saints are like secret pledges of common quiet, apparently seen
in the case of the five cities, for which ABRAM interceded, and their
meditations are as shields for the earth against the wrath of heaven. God
taught his most potent office of prayer in persecution, for preservation of the
civil estate, by his prophet JEREMY to the Jews, in their captivity at
BABYLON, and these blessed Apostles, enured it in their writings, and examples,
during their corporal abode in ROME. These cables, and stays being thus cut
off, NERO could not but be ouer-whelmed with the vengeance due to his crimes,
among which the greatest was the wilful effusion of Christians blood, under
injurious, and calumnious titles. For JOSEPH SCALIGER voucheth an old pagan
scholiast, affirming, that they suffered as sorcerers, or magitians, and to say
the truth, what could it appear to NERO (who knew not things divine) but an
effect of some notable enchantment, that women who in his days were invited,
and authorized to all sorts of lewdness, should be won to the quite
contrary? The sacred annals assign devout chastity as a cause among the causes
of that Persecution. His own persuasion was firm in this (says SVETONIVS)
that there was no such virtue; for he himself was defiled all over; and had
deflowred the Vestal virgin, RVBRIA. He could not therefore but be much the
readier to ascribe so strange a conversion to witchcraft. Again, the famous
case, and bloody downfall of Simon Magus (that most blasphemous impostor) in
the fight of ROME, and of NERO (as in SVETONIVS under the fabulous name of an
ICARVS) procured by the prayers, and adiuration of the Apostle (as in DAMASVS,
HIEROME, AUGUSTINE, EPIPHANIVS, ARNOBIVS, and others) had the rather sealed an
opinion of magic arts in Christians, according to the malice, and ignorance of
the times. IANVS GRVTERVS (to whose diligence the commonweal of civil
letters is not a little indebted) in his useful volumn of Inscriptions has a
testimony touching a place in ROME called The Simon Magus, where that memorial
which was (whatsoever it was) being taken away by the barbarous, the same was
restored by CASTALIVS INNOCENTIVS, Audax, at that time judge in sacred causes.
The Inscription transcribed hither, follows here. CASTALIVS. INNOCENTIVS.
AVDAX. V.C. PRAEF. VRBIS. VICE. SACRA. IVDICANS. BARBARICA INCVRSIONE SVBLATA
RESTITVIT. But NERO CAESAR persuaded himself, that this sacrifice which he
made of their captains as he was High Priest (for that function was also his)
would settle his own domination by his Auerruncan deities. But he committed
such an offense therein, as did consummate all his infelicities.

CHAP. LII. NERO DESTITVTED.
THe ETHNIC story (which I profess to prosecute) proceeds, and further
says, that the ulcer of his misgouernment, bred, and fed in ROME, by the
odious flatteries of the degenerous Senate, who without their least freedom of
reproof, held up his spirit, in the conscience of all his grand murders, in
which his brother, mother, and his nearest friends perished, was first begun
to be lanced by JULIUS VINDEX in GALLIA. The kore of that foul apostem (for
his times says AMMIANVS MARCELLINVS, were the colluuion, or sincke of the
world) was in himself, which himself was driven to incise. All friends
sodeinly forsook him, and in that just destitution he was glad to fly
barefooted, and muffled, upon as sorry a jade (says XIPHILINE) as his coat was
base, with only four left unto him, of so many scores of thousands. I take
delight to recount their names who retained faith toward their lord in his
last necessities. Which was piety in them, whatsoever his impiety was. They
were his freed-men; PHAON, to whose farm-house he fled, and EPAPHRODITVS,
Master of Requests, SPORVS his male concubine (called POPPAEA SABINA, and not
RHODOGVN, says DIO PRVSIAS) and another whom SVETONIVS names not, but
EVTROPIVS, and SAVILE (out of him) calls NEOPHYTVS. When NERO therefore
approached the village, in many fears and affrights, he was enforced, for
avoiding note (after al other difficulties, and miseries, for getting up to the
next wall of the place among underwoods, and briers, or through the path of a
queachie reed-plot) to creep like a beast on all four. Whereby Gods justice did
cast his body into that abject posture, which most resembled the state of his
unthankful, and savage mind. But thus he made shift at last to come unseen
where he was to hide himself, in such extreme want of all things, that for
quenching his thirst, he was driven to lade water with his hand out of the
next plash, saying, This is NERO'S beuerege. He meant thereby that drink of his
own devising, which PLINY celebrates as a most witty invention. It was only
fair water boild, and that being put into a glass, was set in snow, whereby
he enjoyed the coolness wthhout the contagion. Sodden liquor (says he) is more
wholesome, then raw; and water once heated, and cooled again, is by so much the
colder.

CHAP. LIII. OF NERO'S END, AND OF EPAPHRODITVS.
THe Senate in the mean space neglected not to concur to his speedy
depression, proclaiming GALBA, Emperor, and him the public enemy. But those
cornets of horse which they sent upon the spur for his apprehension, were
outstript by swifter means, which warned him of the nearenesse, and inevitable
certainty of his danger, besides the horriblenesse of the death to which he was
adjudged: for their sentence was, that he should suffer after the ancient
manner. In that most severe, and shameful execution; the body of the condemned
person was to be stripped stark naked, his hands fast bound behind him, his head
stockt under a forke, and himself in open view beaten to death with rods. Or
(to speak that more explicately, which SVETONIVS speaks congestedly) to be
beaten first with rods by the lictor, and then his head to be cut off with an
axe by the common hangman. For that was truly MORE MAIORVM in this case. Nor
does NERO seem to have understood it otherwise, when he was so earnest that
his body might be funerally burned entire, the head remaining on. NERO
hereupon, after many fearful delays, and abject lamentations, puts a poniard
to his throat, which EPAPHRODITVS did help to drive home, lest his capital
enemies should seize on him alive. This EPAPHRODITVS was indeed a very worthy
man, a great friend, and aduancer of honest studies. FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS honors
him with highest praises, as the person to whose patronage he dedicated those
his immortal volumns of the JEWS Antiquities. And it must not stand among the
least of his good fortunes, and commendations, that EPICTETVS (the most grave,
and renowned Stoic of the world) was his servant in household; a man more free
then his master. But DOMITIAN (a portion of NERO for cruelty, says
TERTVLLIAN) as in more provision for his own security, by the terror of such
a retrospection, commanded this noble freedman to die, because his hand had
howsoever assisted to NERO'S self-murder. Though it was no-otherwise then as
only to confer a benefit. The act had in it the show of good, and SVETONIVS
commends it for such But whither he was well overcome by his zeal, and pity,
may seem a proper subject for a controversy among rhetorical declamers. Thus
was NERO'S voice, and fingring marred, and these were among his last words; O
what an artist I die, or thus, O Jupiter, what a master I am in singing to the
harp, and yet perish! For DIO, and MANASSES in his chronicle, do fill up that
sentence in SVETONIVS so. Yet was he not such an artist, as he was an example
of terror to wicked rulers, who make music to themselves out of the miseries
of the public. To add to the sacred titles of Augustus, of High Priest, of
Tribunitial power, and of the Father of his country, which adoption, and the
commonweal bestowed, and he defiled, that one most vain new title of
PERIODONICK (by which he meant his victories in the Arts obtained from the
GREEKS in all their chief national games, and places of trial visited in
circuit) seemed to him a thing most glorious, and divine. A plain effect of a
most defective breeding.

CHAP. LIIII. SPECVLATIONS, On Behalf of Commonweal, UPON THE DEPOSVRE AND
DEATH OF NERO.
HEre nevertheless, if the freedom, and serenity of discourse, and censure
might have their full allowance, it would easily be found, by view of events,
that the People of ROME had been far better perhaps to have attended NERO'S
amendment, or what else soever of him, being so young (for he died not two and
thirty years of age) then to suffer a NYMPHIDIVS, a GALBA, an OTHO, a
VITELLIVS, and all the bloody confusions inseparable to sidings for the
imperial garland, which happened, all of them, within the compass of only one
year, and two and twenty days. DIO exactly notes that quantity of interim
from NERO'S end till VESPASIANS entrance. Within so narrow a circle those
infinite evils were enwrapped, which immediately ensued, and which brought
forth some more filthy monsters then NERO'S self; nothing being tolerable,
during that whole space of time, but only the shortness of it. Nay, it
imported the Senate, and People of ROME to have kept this sacred secret from
ever going abroad, That a CAESAR (who was also none of the CAESAR'S) might be
elsewhere made then at ROME, and among the swordmen in the provinces, no less
religiously then they kept either their fatal shield, or SIBYLLS verses, or as
it did concern those other of old to have preserved the image of MINERVA, at
TROY. For at this breach the empires fall first entered. For the election of
emperors being translated thereby after seven successions, from a certain
family, became the meed of most voices in the armies, and they the vendible
ware of popularitie, donatiues, and congiaries. Add, that the very sinews, and
shot-anchor of humane provisions was volently dissolved, when the soldiers
(contrary to honesty and discipline) were taught to despise their allegiance,
and gownmen to concur in like perjury with the soldiers. And what shall
conserve the life of the most innocent, and most meritorious prince, if the
pillar of fealty be removed? Or what must not that state suffer hazardous,
whose principal ties shall sodeinly be dissundred, before new can possibly be
so provided as withal to be timely fastened? Monarckie is like the pole of the
world, where all the meridians meet, and cannot be dislocated in the person
vested therewith, but universal perturbations must follow. CAPITO COSSVTIANVS,
though a very bad man, said very well; That to overthrow souereignty, liberty
was cried up, but if souereignty was thereby overthrown, then would liberty it
self be set upon. MAVRICVS (in PLVTARCKS GALBA) was both a wise man, and a
worthy Senator, who beholding the wild way which NYMPHIDIVS SABINVS
ambitiously gave to the peoples licentious reuenges, and cruelties, immediately
after NEROS end, spoke it openly. That he feared lest they would wish for NERO.
Yea TACITUS himself, howsoever affected with the allowance of change, as in
honest detestation of tyranny, was nevertheless so touched with the mischiefs,
and miseries which forthwith followed thick, that he breaks out upon that
meditation, into words which the best of his friends can hardly excuse from
impotent impiety (borrowed in the probable opinion of IVSTVS LIPSIVS) out of
round and flagrant LVCAN.

CHAP. LV. THE LINE OF THE CAESAR'S ENDED.
IN NERO the maiestical tree of the CAESAR'S withered, in him their channel of
power dried up, the last of their line, and house. For MARCUS AGRIPPA (by IVLIA
the daughter of AUGUSTUS CAESAR, had issue) AGRIPPINA, the wife of GERMANICVS
CAESAR, the parents of AGRIPPINA AUGUSTA, the mother of this unhappy man. All
other the branches, and hopes of the IVLIAN family, were at several times
between, and upon several occasions detrencht, or otherwise decaid, and dead,
their rights combyned in his blood, going all of them out in NERO CAESAR, as a
tedious lamp with an evil odor.

FINIS.

