THE TRVE COPIES OF SUNDRY LETTERS Concerning the Affairs of Bohemia, as they
have been severally written in High Dutch, Latin and French, to Princes, and
other men of account.

Newly translated and printed, M. D. C. XX.

The Contents of that which orderly follows in this Book.
1. A Letter from Prague, April. 1. 1620. concerning the Christening of the
young Prince borne there. 2. A Letter sent into France, concerning the Emperor
Ferdinand his Embassage into France, to desire aid of the French King. 3. A
Letter written by Christian, Duke of Saxony, to the Emperor Matthias, by way of
friendly admonition, not to believe the Jesuits; showing how he ought to
carry himself toward those of Bohemia, and the other incorporate Provinces.
4. A Letter from Gabriel Prince of Transiluania to the Emperor Ferdinand. 5. A
Letter from Gabriel Prince of Transiluania, to Christian Prince of Anhalt. 6.
Another Letter from the said Transiluanian Prince to the Prince of Anhalt. 7. A
Letter from Gabriel Prince of Transiluania, to the Duke of Bauaria.
A Letter written from Prague, the first of April, 1620. concerning the
Christning of the Kings Son, borne at Christmas last.
AFTER the King by way of Embassy had entreated the Prince of Transiluania to
Christen his Child, the young Prince I mean borne, so auspiciously in Prague
about the end of December 1619. to the inexpressible comfort of all the
Kingdom, and confederate Provinces: he made a journey to Proslaw, the
principal town of Silesia, the effect whereof tended to this purpose, that by
his personal appearance amongst them, he not only corroborated their good
opinions of him, but rectified certain disorders, and from that excellent
division of Commutatiue and distributive Justice, opened a larger hand of
bounty to such as stood in need of his favor, and showed a stronger arm of
Majesty to those that neglected his power. But understanding that the
Transiluanians were already on the way toward Prague, he hasted thither; and
by the middle of March was welcomed with many happy relations of several
victories, both in opening the passages, and defeating the Emperors army; as
if Philip of Macedon should have news at an instant, that the Spartanes were
subiugated: Olympia bare him a Son, and his servants carried away the games
of Hercules. So that to make him more way to his joy, about the end of March,
Count Henricus Turzo, with other Noblemen, in the name of Bethlem Gabor, came
to be Godfather to the young Prince; there were diverse Lords of Hungary in
his company, and thirty Hussaros, as they call them, exceedingly well mounted,
six Caroches, each of them drawn with six Horses, and an hundred horses
besides, with good equipage, and well appointed. Notwithstanding such was the
pleasure of the King to keep correspondencie with his own magnificence, that
he sent them twelve Coaches more, with diverse officers of the Crown, among
whom was principal the high great Steward the Baron of Lobcowitz, a man
grateful unto them, as having formerly been in Hungary, and now of
sufficiency to put an equal recompense in the other scale against many
favors by them extended toward him: In this manner they came to the great
City, and the very next day had audience, wherein as an over plus to their
embassy, they assured his Majesty, that about the 1. of May, which was the
Diet of Newsnak, the Crown of Hungary would be determined, and those forces
he had requested, accelerated unto him.

When the day of solemnity approached, wherein I pass over the concourse of
people, and many remarkable accidents tending to the expatiating the Bohemian
glory, his Majesty sent his own Caroch by the Baron of Buslwitz, the better
to accommodate the Earl to the Court; and so the King, with Count Turzo, the
Duke of Wittenbergh, and the Prince of Orange his Ambassador, who were the
other Godfathers, went to the Church with the Lords of the States of the
Country, and the Ambassadors of the incorporated Provinces: Doctor Scultetus
did preach, taking his Text out of the 15. of John, I am the Vine: And when the
Sermon was finished, other religious ceremonies began, the young Prince being
brought into a place of sequestration, yet public enough for the satisfaction
of the people; by the greatest Lady in the Land, called Ouerburgrauen, who
supplied the place of Godmother; and had on her right hand, his Majesty's
brother; and on her left, the Duke of Weymar: The Lords and Officers went
before them, and the Ladies and Gentlewomen followed behind: At every entry
or change of places, the trumpets sounded, and the drums beat, till they
came up to a stately marble table, whereon a bazon of Gold stood, serving in
steed of a Font to dip the Child in. The Count Turzo held him in his arms all
the Christning time, and gave him the name of Robert, as intimating, that the
first Roman Emperor of his Majesty's Family was so called; but questionless
this was the direction of both the Councels, and a policy of the Prince of
Transiluania, to induce the people to conceive or apprehend, that there might
once again be Emperors from their now Bohemian King.

After the Prince was named, he was delivered to the rest of the Ambassadors
there present; and so the deputies of the three States of the Crown, the Lords
of Silesia, Morauia, the higher and lower Lusatia, with many other Ladies of
estimation, had the sight of him by turns, and blessed him extraordinarily
even in his cradle.

But time is the determiner of all things, and so in time, after some
accomplishment of ceremony, they returned in order as they came, except the
King, and some special Lords and Ladies, who followed by themselves, making as
it were another show of State: but it should seem the reason of the Kings
protraction was to entertain a present, which the Count Turzo offered at the
going out of the Church, a very fair and well shaped Turkish Horse, richly
caparisond; the saddle and all things appertaining, were pounced with flowers
of Goldsmiths work, interlaced with many precious Stones, the very covering
was richly embroydered; and the Horse, as if he had known his own glory,
grew want only proud again, to show his bravery to the company.

The royal dinner was solemnised in a great Hall builded on the River for that
purpose, some call it the Mew; some, Moldan; and some, Moldauia, as it makes
several windings through the Cities. The Feast lasted so long, that that night
they could do no more, but retire into a house of pleasure, situated in the
privy Garden, and for this purpose made as it were to show a new countenance
with great variety of refreshing, as guilding, painting, and unusual
pargetting: He Is here. They passed the residue of the time with music,
dances, and another banquet. The next day, the States of Bohemia presented a
gift to the young Prince, of 2000. pounds in valuation, and the other
Ambassadors and Lords offered very largely: so that a man may well cry out of
the wars, as a consumer of Treasure, and impouerisher of Kingdoms. For I am
sure here was so great remonstrance of abundance, that a man would swear they
neither wanted men, nor money.

To morrow is a preparation to celebrate the Baron of Donaws marriage, and the
next day an expectation of a Tilting, and every day an inuitation of iollitie.
For in truth, they that saw the noble customs and princely iollity of King
Frederick, his Queen, his Brother the Duke of Weymar, and the rest of the
Lords and Ladies, (more then solemnity of Prayers and giving thanks unto God)
would little imagine, they had such intanglements of affairs abroad, or at any
time discomforts at home.

A Letter written by a French Gentleman being in the Army of the King of
Bohemia:
To a friend and neighbor of his in Poicton, upon the occasion of the Voyage
of the Ambassador of the Emperor Ferdinand sent into France.
SIR.
I Have received yours, wherein is contained the request of succor, propounded
by the Ambassador of the Emperor to our King: and having communicated it to
those of our Nation, which are here (as I am,) I do here represent unto you
the judgment which we do all make, of what may and ought to be answered, to
those who are of opinion to yield the succor which is required, by an
inueterate enemy to France, and to the House of our Kings, against the King
Frederick of Bohemia, one of our ancient Allies, and one whose House has
deserved so well and so often of the House of our Kings and of France in
general.

We say then, that if these Inducers are not more Spanish then French, at the
least they do heavily offend against the Principles of our State by a gross
folly: by a remarkable baseness, and by a manifest injustice.

By folly, first in setting themselves against those who serve for a
counterpoyse for the State of France, to balance it against a power so great,
as is already become fearful to all the States of Christendom; particularly
in this, that by the Instrumencie of the Jesuits, it pretends to be erected
into a fifth Monarchy, by the ruin of other Kings and Princes.

The second folly were, to go with such facility to the succor of them, who
in the life time of Henry the fourth, did refuse his interposition to
accommodate the differences risen between certain Princes of the Empire,
allied and confederated with France; one of the principal Officers of the
Emperor Rodulph, having dared to say, that the King should trouble himself
with the affairs of his own State, and in the difference now in question,
while it was yet in terms to be acco^modated: my Lord the Duke of Neuers
being then at Vienna, and having charge from our King to offer his
interposition, it was neglected and contemned. And now after the Turk has
refused to give them succor, sued for at his gate four several times, they
come to our King and State, against which they have continually practiced,
during these last fifty years: which they have divided by civil wars, and
thereunto co^tributed their arms and practices, and made use of our miseries
as far forth as they could. This is far from taking hold upon the occasion
which is presented, as it were by the hand and conduct of God to regaine
Cambray, Navarre, and other Demesnes of France, usurped by this House; and to
take from them the means to use the like courses hereafter, and to overcome the
Allies of France.

The third folly, were out of mere iollitie to entangle our selves in a
quarrel, to reestablish that which it seems the will of God is, that it
should not be: whose works do appear in the sudden consent of so many
Nations, and the unanimous co^ciliation of so different inclinations, all
swaying to cast off the yoke of a domination violent and cruel; and tending to
the overthrow of all right, both divine and humane.

The fourth folly were to drayne the reuennues of the King, to weaken him in
Men, by the diminutions which such wars do bring, and to reduce the hearts of
the French to the affection of that Stranger, from whose faction the preceding
Kings have had pain enough to divert them, and into which they had been
thrown by wicked inducements.

The fifth were, in that our King taking a resolution to bear his Arms
against his Allies, in favor of the common enemy, it might cause so great an
hatred against him, that they might grow to accord with this enemy, thrust on
by an indignation, which could not be in this case but very forcible; jointly
to turn their forces against the State of France, which they should find
drained of money, weakened in men, and no way prepared for such an
inconvenience. Whereas the true Counsel of State were, when the Neighbors are
in war, to make a stock of money, to furnish the frontiers with men and
munitions of war, and to keep our selves on our Guard more then ever.

So should it likewise be a great ingratitude and baseness, to persuade a most
Christian King, to render evil for good, to those Princes who have so often,
so readily, and so usefully succored him with Men, Arms, and Money, for which
he is yet indebted in sums of very great importance, employed for the
conservation of the House Royal and State of France, against the attempts and
assaults of those, who are not now ashamed to demand succor against our
Benefactors.

Herein likewise are they answered that would succor the Emperor under hand:
for that which is naught being done openly, is not better by being done in
secret: and to commit a baseness in secret, is as much as to commit a theft
without witness. Besides, that it is unworthy of the dignity of our King, to
counsel him to such actions which have need to be concealed, and yet cannot
be, being subject to disaduow and reuocation when he shall be required
thereto by his Allies.

Finally, there should be a great wickedness in such a proceeding, and a
great injustice in the maine matter: for as to the first, who is it that can
approve that one should run upon his friends, upon the simple report of his
enemies? Must not both the parties be heard, and have leisure to inform the
King of their actions, or if you will not believe them, to send unto the place
to know the truth? And as for the maine cause, it will be found very good on
the side of the Bohemians; For first, the Emperor Ferdinand was never chosen
(neither could be) King of Bohemia; then when it is pretended that he was
chosen, he was not chosen, because the States of Morauia, Silesia, and
Lusatia, were not called unto it, and the principal persons of Bohemia had no
voice in it: but this pretended Election was made by the surprise of certain
Pensioners of Spain; who on the other side could not proceed to a new
Election, during the life of the Emperor, who was also King of Bohemia: for
he that lives has no Heir.

But supposing the Election of Ferdinand, to be good, having after it, against
his solemn Oath, violated the Laws of his Country, endeavored to abolish the
Privileges, and so to make it of an elective Kingdom, hereditary: failed in
his faith and word given to the States of the Country, not to meddle with the
government during the life of the Emperor Matthias: exercised all kinds of
violences and cruelties against the Inhabitants; his domination being
degenerated into Tyranny, those whose had right to elect him King, might reject
him, having rendered himself unworthy.

Now against all these reasons, there are made five Objections, to wit, that
this war being made for the subject of Religion, that the most Christian King
ought to undertake it: that the Emperor Ferdinand is Uncle by the Mother to
the Queen: that succor in distress is a mutual office which Kings do owe
one to another: that the example of revolt against the Prince ought to be
repressed: and lastly, that it is to be doubted that the Turk may make his use
and benefit of these wars among the Christians his neighbors. As for the first
it may be remembered, that when the house of Austria did invade France, they
did stick this calumny upon our Kings, that they were Heretics or favorers
of Heretics; And now to disunite them from their friends and ancient Allies,
they do conjure them by the protection of the Church of Rome, which from all
antiquity they have cherished, and peradventure would not stick to tell the
King, with Saint Gregory the first Pope of that name, that the Kings of France
do alone deserve the name of Catholic, which does not belong to any else.

But this pretext of Religion, is the ordinary Mask of those who would
ouerrunne such as are of a belief differing from them, and beg the assistance
of them which are of their own opinion. This is that old Cloak of two sides,
which shows on the one side the public good of Christendom, and sets forth
on the other side, a feigned zeal of Religion, through which notwithstanding is
nothing to be seen but ambition and hypocrisy.

It is question (say they) of Religion, but may not that be preserved but
under the Empire of Austria? Will you believe the accusers only? shall we
condemn our Allies without hearing them upon this point? And if it were true,
would not the Catholic inhabitants of the Country send to request the Kings
assistance? And yet in this case were it fit to think of the matter. For since
every King and Sovereign in his Territory is not accountable of his
administration to his Neighbors, and that we our selves would not approve
that others should come to control us in this point, we ought to fear the
example of such a proceeding in time to come.

Secondly, if you pronounce a judgment that it is a war of Religion, you
give leave thereby to the greatest part of the Emperors Army to depart home,
who are Protestants of the Countries of Stiria, Carinthia, Austria, etc. And
you do put the Duke of Saxe, and other Protestants out of doubt, who have not
hitherto taken this war for other then a war of State. Besides there do
follow two inconveniences.

First, that you do tax of desertion of the Catholic Religion, those Princes
and States Catholic, who do assist the King of Bohemia.

The second, that you do alarm, divide, and put into evil agreement the
Subjects of this State, the inclinations of whom cannot be too well united, for
the repose of this Kingdom.

But to take away this Mask of Religion, you need but to consider the matter
how it has passed: for at that instant that the Jesuits were driven out of
Bohemia, by the advice of the Catholics themselves, all the other Orders of
Priests and Religious persons, were received into the protection of the States
of the Country. Since that, the King Frederick the first, both at the time of
his Election and Coronation has confirmed it, and has moreover published it
in his Declaration: and lastly has written it to our King by his Letter of the
20 of October last. By which it follows that this fear cannot fall into the
conceit of any, but such, as having no certainly in their faith and word, do
judge of others by their own proceeding.

The second persuasion of the Partisans of the Emperor is to say, that he is
Uncle by the mother to the Queen; but they leave out that the alliance of
State, does extend farther then any personal alliance; as they could well say
when it was contracted, that marriages were but particular contracts, to take
away all shadows from diverse who did enter into ielousies at that time: and
now they would have it clean contrary, that particular pactions should
prejudice the public right of State, so as it may serve for their purpose.

But when this alliance it self was in question, the stipulations,
renunciations, and other clauses which they themselves caused to be inserted,
without any other occasion, then through the jealousy which they bear against
the State of France, and the fear which they had that it might have been
augmented by this alliance, do sufficiently exclude the Queen, particularly
not to interest her self in the quarrels of State between these two houses.

The third objection, is taken from the common interest of Kings, and from the
support which the afflicted do request; which is a clean contrary Style from
that which they did endite, during the war of Piemont, during which they did
pursue as criminals those who did assist the Duke of Sauoy, whose State the
King of Spain did invade, without any more apparent subject, then for the
alliance which he had treated, with the late King Henry the Fourth.

But these men do now preach charity for their own profit, and yet do they
retain Navarre, of which they spoiled one of the Kings Ancestors, who came to
assist our King: nor will they yield up the places which they usurped during
the league which they stirred up, and entertained as long as they could.

But if this argument to succor the afflicted be good, were it not more to
purpose to assist the King of Bohemia, whose Predecessors have contracted
alliance with our Kings, and have assisted them with men and money against the
League, and the house of the Emperor? who have this word by writing, in many
of his Letters; and the Acts and Registers of his own Chamber of Accounts, for
proof of their good deeds, and good offices toward our Kings and their States?

Nor is it to any purpose here for them to allege in the fourth place, the
evil example of the revolt of subjects against their Prince, who have stirred
up and entertained the same amongst us, and who do now receive by the divine
chastisement, and for a lawful subject, the experience in their own
Countries, of the disorders which they have produced in the States of their
neighbors. And, on the other part, the Bohemians, both in regard of what is
said before, and of the reasons laid down in their Declaration, are
sufficiently justified against this accusation.

Finally, To omit nothing which may carry any speciousnesse with it, there is
proposed the fear, lest the Turk may make use of this division. But on which
side has he been already invited, but by the Emperor Ferdinand? who has
not only caused the King of Spain to sue to him for peace, but has caused
his Ambassador to make exceeding great instance four several times to the
great Lord at his gate, to give him succor; which having been refused him, he
comes now to our King out of despair of all other assistance. But if this
apprehension be seriously taken, it is that that should inuit the other
Princes of Christendom, to leave Bohemia in Peace, and to order the grieuances
done unto the Empire: and us not to exasperate against France in all the
allies, kindred, and friends of the King of Bohemia, who are neither so few,
nor so weak, but that they ought to be taken into consideration.

See here Sir, What is our judgment concerning this undue request made of
succor to our King, by his inueterated enemies, against the most certain and
useful allies of his House and Crown. Wherein we esteem that all his good
and faithful subjects will agree with us, and that they will call to mind the
means upon which the State of France our common Country is founded, and has
subsisted for so many years: not to permit that a new Counsel, which among
the Jesuits they call of Conscience, should not only tax all other
Counselors, as if they had no Conscience, but under this pretense does
overthrow all order, both divine and humane. For (I pray) what would have
become of the State of France, during the wars of the League, when these
Inducers of Counsels of Conscience did rage against our Kings, and did pursue
their ruin? Let them remember that by such Counsels and Counselors, there
has hitherto arrived all misfortune to those Princes, which have hearkened to
them, and been served by them. The King of Poland for his part could tell, how
he came to lose Swethland; so could the house of Austria it self speak of
the Low Countries, many years since; and that which is now to be seen in
respect of the realms of Bohemia, and Provinces incorporated, Hungary and
Austria. This is enough to cause other Princes to beware, at the least
henceforward. And I pray God, with all other good Frenchmen, to give our King
the grace both to testify in the view of all Christendom, which has her eyes
upon him, the steadfastness of his word to his good friends and allies against
their common enemy, for their protection, and the repose of his subjects: and
his just indignation against those who do counsel him to the contrary. I am,

SIR, Your servant, Neighbor, and faithful friend, Francois de Saint Foy.
From Prague this 20. of January, 1620.
An Advertisement written in form of a Letter, by the late deceassed Prince,
Christian the Second, Elector of Saxony, to Matthias King of Hungary, Archduke
of Austria, and afterward Roman Emperor.
Translated out of high Dutch into Latin, out of Latin into French; and
lastly, out of French into English.
CHristian, Elector of Saxony, greeteth you happily: We received your Letters
(most illustrious King) dated at Vienna the 27. of September of this year
present. Wherein, according to your accustomed manner of friendly imparting
your self unto us by Letters, you give us to understand, that the happy event
of cheerful homage yielded unto you by the States of Morauia, the twentieth
of August, in the City of Prin; putting you in lively hope of the like
success from the people of the lower Austria: you have notwithstanding found
the quite contrary: that is to say, you find, there is no pressing the States
of this Country to any oath of fidelity, before their just complaints be
heard, and their ancient rites and privileges confirmed: although your
Majesty had many times promised to redress their agrieuances, according to
the equity of their cause, as the custom in this case is. On which bare
promise, the Inhabitants beyond the Ens would not rely, but perseuered
constantly in the former resolution: And therefore you require, that we would
not give credit to those which go about to settle some sinister opinion in our
mind: but rather that we should persuade them to lay aside their obstinacy,
and so to come under the obedience which they owe unto you, with the surplusage
of all that which is further comprehended in the same Letters.

Your Majesty certainly may be assured, that you are no ways deceived in the
good opinion you entertain of our fidelity toward you, in that from our
first entry made upon the Electorship, we may confidently auerre, without any
vain boasting, that all our Counsels aimed at the preservation of the
greatness, reputation, and authority of the house of Austria, in maintaining
the security thereof against all their enemies. And therefore we cannot
without singular coffeehouse apprehend the discommoditie accrewing thereby
to you, which daily augmenteth in every man's sight; and other affairs
proceeding continually with the same contrariety, seem further to threaten you
with worser success.

And though it no ways beseems us to prescribe you, unless of an happy and
fortunate reign: notwithstanding, you manifesting daily the great amity and
confidence you repose in us, we will not fear, to deliver unto you freely our
opinion and advice touching this matter, humbly entreating you to take it in
good part: whereof we assure our selves, from your accustomed humanity and
clemency.

And first of all, who knows not how the house of Austria, has hitherto been
elevated above all other Princely Families under the sacred Empire? with how
many several dignities it has been augmented to every man's satisfaction and
contentment, so that many persons, both of high and mean calling, have
voluntarily come under her tutelage and protection, being very well entreated,
and with all wished clemency?

But there is no man, how faint a lover of truth soever he be, which must not
needs confess, how your Family of long time has met with no more violent
adversaries then the Court of Rome, and Sect of Jesuits, together with those
that adhere unto them, with their turbulent and immoderate Counsels, which the
States of the Empire, neither could nor can any ways support. Your Serenitie
otherwise conceiues, that no other reason moved the so many goodly Provinces
of the Netherlands to shrink from their hereditarie and natural Lord, then
these so intemperate and precipitant courses, which have planted such
irradicable defiance between Subjects and their Princes and Magistrates, that
no Treaties can remove or supplant the same: As in very truth, all those
consulted Treaties could never confirm those Estates in any settled peace.
Furthermore, what has so extenuated and dishonored so many renowned
victories, obtained by the sacred Imperial Majesty against the Turk, as
Belioyeuse, by a secret instinct out of the Jesuits Schools? For the common
enemy being seated in the navel or center as it were of Hungary, with
mighty forces both of horse and foot; at that very instant it was, when fire
was given to the most outrageous persequutions: nay, and in so many several
places, that his said Imperall Majesty, by this means, lost Strigonium,
Transiluania, Hungary, Valachia, and Moldauia: the recovery of which
Provinces, cost our dear German Countries many millions of men, and an
infinite treasure in Gold and Silver. During this cruel war, these
tumultuous people were not satisfied, in partly dishonouring, and making
fruitless the victories of his Imperial Majesty: and partly, opposing and
crossing them; but the Jesuits further, by all manner of wicked stratagems,
wittingly perseuered in their persequutions, in Carinthia, Carmola, and Stiria,
exposing the principal Inhabitants of the said Provinces to cruel
Proscriptions, while the Turk, in the mean while, toooke in Camsa: For, what
other cause was there, why the States of the Sacred Empire, after the last Diet
of Ratisbone, without any laudable effect, or any firm and mutual
reconciliation, separated themselves, but only the Jesuits and their
importunities? who did nothing but exclaim, that the most pious Constitution
of the peace of the Religion, was nothing but a mere delay, a truce, an
Interim, or tolleration, scandalizing in this case, even the Counsel of Trent;
and this they divulged all over, in their writings. From which, and many other
occasions, superfluous here to write, many complots and practices being
undertaken, to the great prejudice of the house of Austria; your Highness may
evidently discern the truth of what we produced; to wit, that your illustrious
Family has met with no more capital and deadly enemies in all the world then
the Court of Rome, the Jesuits and their Society. I speak nothing of so many
pernicious practices, and disastrous assaults, which the Jesuits have
attempted against other Kings and Monarkes in France, England, Poland, Sweden,
Venice, and other places, without all remorse or shame; that if God had not
even by way of miracle, prevented their diabolical dessignes, they had turned
entire Kingdoms topsie turvie, whole Countries with their Inhabitants, and had
reduced them for ever to a final and absolute ruin. For wheresoever this
Sect, or rather insect kind of Creatures plant, they bring with them all manner
of disasters and miseries.

To conclude, if by their Counsels and instigations, which (I must tell you)
are no ways grounded upon any true politic foundation: but rather as Spiders,
wouen out of themselves, their venomous passions, and Scholasticall Dreams,
they have excited Subjects, yea, and the entyre Provinces of some Princes, to
mutiny and revolt; they can create no new Inhabitants or Subjects, themselves
fly away into Italy, or somewhere else, leaving behind them a mortiferous
stink, and the Impressions of an horrible, and vast desolation.

But admit your Majesty, may have been persuaded by some, that you are in no
sort tied to ratify and confirm unto your Subjects their ancient Rights, and
Privileges; above others, those that concern the free exercise and practice
of the Confession of Auspurg, which were granted to the people by the Emperors
of famous memory, Ferdinand, and Maximilian, for no small sums of money: and
therefore upon no beneficial terms, but those very burdensome and
chargeable; we are willing to excuse your Highness innocence herein, and
naked sincerity: believing rather that this was performed by the enemies
formerly mentioned, who seem to affect your Highness overthrow, and to
deprive you of your Provinces: exciting, and drawing either by malice, or
gross stupidity, the general enemy of the Christian name, into the heart of
the Country, who, without any great difficulty, is like to be Master of all
these so renowned Regions, with whole Hungary, the which (except present order
be taken to the contrary) will be enforced to come under the Turkish
protection.

For your Serenity knows, that both the one and other Austria have now
contracted a very firm League with the Kingdom of Hungary, and other
Provinces: so as if you grant not favorable permissions to the one, as well as
to the other, they being equally interessed in the cause of offense, by virtue
of the Confederation, by you approou'd; the other parts will yield them aid
and succor. And though as Subjects, they are ready to expose their lives for
their Sovereign, their blood, yea, even their second drops which is their
goods, and prodigally to cast away whatsoever they have in their power: yet
what can be imagined more deplorable and miserable, then to rack and torment
their souls by such an extraordinary, and servile Tyranny? That same Apothegme
of Stephen King of Poland, was very prayse-worthy; who talking of some
persecutions begun in his Kingdom; said: That he was King over a people, but
not of their consciences. It seems this good King well apprehended, that
Religion was not to be planted by the rigor of Fire and Sword: but leaving his
subjects freely to build upon that belief, by which they hope for eternal
life, and no ways herein disturbing them. And your famous Predecessors,
Princes that were endued with admirable experience and wisdom, plainly
perceived, that those Princes of Germany and Estates of the Empire, which never
gave way to this oppression of conscience, have been wonderfully beloved and
observed of their Subjects, for this only cause, enjoying hereby a most happy
Reign, and tranquillity.

Our devotion therefore, toward your Illustrious Family, being to every one
well known; and from whence this loyal and simple admonition proceeds: your
Serenitie having not the least surmise to think, that we were falsely
aduertized by your Subjects: but on the contrary let all the world duly
observe, what hearts they carry to you, and your thrice Illustrious Family,
that instigate you to these preposterous courses, which common experience, and
the miserable event of present affairs, sufficiently testify. We therefore in
all humble affection beseech your Majesty, that conformable to the trust you
repose in us, having perused these Letters to take them in good part, and
according to the Laws, to the Inhabitants both of the one and other Austria,
ratifying those Privileges which they have dearly bought, you will permit
them the free exercise of the Confession of Ausburge, not putting hereafter
their Consciences to the Rack. And so relying on this Confirmation, as a
member, and Elector of the Sacred Empire, beyond all comparison, we did more
truly labor your own, and the greatness of your Family, then the whole body
of the Jesuits, and their Followers; whereof sufficient testimony, has been
given, during the sixteen years of this Hungarian war, and that your
Illustrious House, has been more sincerely by us affected then ever it either
has, or will be, by this pestiferous Sect. Otherwise if you take this friendly
aduertizement in good part, be sure your Subjects will yield you absolute
obedience, neither sparing their lives, nor goods, in your service; no ways
doubting of their fidelity, or of any effect that can ensue. By this means
you shall purchase immortal glory, and endless exaltations, both amongst
Strangers and the Princes of the Empire, obtaining further from God all
blessings both of body, and soul; and the same God will daily amplify you
with new dignities, and most wished events. Contrariwise, if you suffer the
Jesuits and their Locusts, so to abuse your bounty and clemency, (which will
not sincke into our persuasion:) Let it suffice, that we innocently protest,
that all our reiterated Admonitions aimed at no other end, but to prevent the
House of Austria from those perils and dangers which threaten it: and any
unexpected accidents falling out to the contrary, we are exempted herein from
fault and blame. And thus in sincere equity, we hope to be excused by God and
Men: the which out of our affectionate love and zeal, we did not think good
to conceal from your Highness.

Dated the 6. of October. 1608. at Dresden.
To the Reader.
THe late Elector of Saxony, Christian the second by name, who was elder
Brother to him that now possesses the Electorship, and who in all times, held
good correspondence, and amity, with Archduke Matthias, afterward King of
Hungary, and Bohemia, and not long since, late Emperor Defunct; seeing this
good Prince much grieved, for the ill counsel and advise, which he had
followed in the managing of his affairs, implicitly threatening himself, and
the House of Austria, to lose the said Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary, with
the Provinces thereunto annexed; he resolved to write unto Matthias this
Letter in the Month of October, 1608. which is to say twelve years since:
which being truly prophetical, in that which afterward ensued; it has been
thought of good importance, and sufficiently deserving to be translated into
Latin, French, and lastly into English, for a Caveat and Instruction to all
Princes, and States, that they never fall into the like inconvenience.

To the Emperors most Sacred and Royal Majesty.
Most gracious Lord:
AT what time we sat in Counsel with our Princes and Nobility, moved by the
urgent occasions of the renowned Kingdom of Hungary, I did at once receive
one answer from your Majesty unto both my Letters, sent by the Illustrious
Gentleman Stephen Haller; and as my Letters (occasions so requiring) were two,
so having obtained an answer which agreeable to the weight of the affairs
consisted of two parts, the matter was maturely deliberated by the Counsel:
and perceiving present danger in delay, I would not defer to solicit your
Majesty the more earnestly about the last declaration of your Highness
gracious pleasure.

And whereas I perceive your Majesty does simply and absolutely understand my
declaration of the truce, in this sense; that during the time of League no aid
may be sent by the Hungarians to the Bohemians, and the rest of their
Confederates: the retexing of which question will much illustrate both parts of
the present answer: your Royal Majesty may please to understand the whole
course of the matter in this sense and not otherwise.

In the Polonian Assembly there have been three contracts made with me only:
and in those, many transactions (and that for diverse respects) confirmed.

First, Truce and Conditions of Peace with your Imperial Majesty.

Secondly, with the Bohemians and the other Confederate Provinces.

Thirdly, with the Peers and States of the Illustrions Kingdom of Hungary.

And I confess, that I seemed in the opinion of many so entangled by that
parley (contrary almost and opposite in diverse passages unto it self) that
deserved and promised equity could not possibly be observed toward both
parties, but the one must either be something neglected or iniuried by me;
which so sinister conceit of me that I may speedily remove from the minds of
men (especially if your sacred Majesty or Counselors have entertained it,)
pleases it you to be informed of the certain truth and diverse conclusions.

The Hungarian Nation has confirmed a perpetual league with the Bohemians:
and we have promised mutually by oath to live and dye together in withstanding
all enemies: so as to make peace or war with any, not aduertizing the other,
is unlawful for either part. This agreement and covenant betwixt us took
place, when by notice given them, and their consent, I ratified the peace which
I now have with your Majesty. But since the second Article, I being silent,
does oblige your Majesty expressly to grant the same peace upon demand, to our
Accomplices and Confederates, the Bohemians and the other Provinces, which you
have granted us; and that your Majesty is bound to harken after my motions,
which do but seek that the cessation of Arms upon just and equal
conditions, should be on every side granted; If I shall perceive your Majesty
to satisfy in no part this solemn protestation, but contrarily with renewed
forces to sound the alarm and put your Soldiers in Arms to suppress us: if
I observe your Majesty, as daily complaints inform, contrary to the hope and
expectation of all good men, to swerue already (which be far from you) from
this agreement; who can be ignorant that my self is no longer, neither the
Hungarian Nation obliged to you? Nay, if we aid not without delay our
friends, whose protection we undertake, we shall unworthily be accused, by
them of disloyalty. I do therefore abundantly satisfy the Bohemians and
others, in soliciting your Majesty for their truce like our own: which, if I
obtain of you as due by covenant, or if I discern their suspected and
dangerous estate by vain lingrings and delays; neither your Majesty, nor any
other shall ever accuse me or the Hungarian Nation of promise breaking, if we
find our most bitter enemies, whom obligation tied to league and
peaceablenesse. Wherefore your Majesty is not otherwise to understand my
declaration of the truce placed expressly in the second Article, then the
writing it self witnesses; that this our league with the Bohemians is not,
neither can be made simply common, as if together at the same time and in all
kinds of league we were tied to each other. Neither are they so neglected and
forsaken of us that there is no profit procured unto them by our confederacy.
Moreover I requiring it, and favoring just and equal conditions, your Majesty
is by covenant bound to grant like truce unto them as to us; which if you do
not, we are no further to contend in the matter with words and pen. Let truth
over sway all things. Since I labor and sweat now the third time in
soliciting your Majesty in our Confederates and Friends cause, and that with
obtestation.

Thus much concerning the Entreaties had with your Majesty and the Confederate
Princes.
COncerning the Articles concluded in the Consultations past at Polonia, the
distinction is manifest enough in them both of the truce confirmed with your
Majesty, and the league established and concluded by the Confederates. The
inward administration and government of the Subjects of the Kingdom, until
the truce is expired, or till the next following and proclaimed general
Assembly of State, howsoever prescribed by the Princes and Lords, is (I
suppose) so highly weighed that it should not molest either your Majesty or
others. Assuredly I think it fitter to give place to so many complaints, and
to men's disturbed appetites in this state of things, then having not yet laid
hand upon the tossing bridle, discourage Subjects minds a far off with too
much security; which hitherto, I confess ingeniously, is so performed by your
Majesty, that opposing by all means our studies and endeavor, the industry of
the seditious has more auailed (more is the grief) then theirs whose labor
is employed in composing controversies. But I am ignorant being a stranger in
that administration, where your Majesty's dignity is impeached, or the
liberty of the Kingdom so restrained, since your Majesty in confirming the
league did sauourably consent to my free and absolute Government. Neither for
my part is it urged, in what esteem and regard these present Articles and
public Constitutions are of, in those places which belong to your Dominion But
I see the prescribers of those Laws do endeavor to conform my manner of
Government and Reign to their own pleasure.

From which it is manifest, that neither this administration according to the
Articles, nor any thing else can violate the Peace and League with your
Majesty, and so with sufficient diligence and plainness I have declared the
three conclusions. Neither at this time will I undertake any thing besides an
earnest soliciting, urging and expecting of your Majesty's pleasure and
resolution, concerning this my third and last, and most just demand in behalf
of our Confederates. And whereas your Majesty designeth long time for the
deliberating of this matter, and has sent unto me to entreat of it,
doubtless that cause will move suspicions in men's thoughts, not without some
danger which cannot be removed without certain, real, and desired tidings of
peace established. God preserve your Royal and Imperial Majesty long,
happy, and studious of peace. Given in our free and Regal City Cassouia, 15.
Martij, 1620.

A Letter written about the 18. of March, 1620. to the Illustrious Prince of
Anhalt, by the renowned Prince of Hungary and Transiluania.
Most Illustrious Prince and honored friend:
NOtwithstanding we have more diligently observed in the ternarie request made
to the Roman Emperor, on the behalf of making League with the Confederates,
how he constantly determines: and though we should expect his answer before
our expedition of aid to the Confederate Lords, yet understanding to our great
grief the hostile proceedings of Caesar and his partakers against them, we
thought by these presents with all friendly speed to signify it unto your
Highness, desiring you would withdraw your forces, and not presently, and hand
to hand conflicting with the enemy hazard your Army until this present day,
our succors which with deliberate counsel we have appointed for the
Confederate Princes be joined with you. Yet in the interim, if Caesar's Armies
shall make excursion or spoil in the Territories of Morauia, or Austria, or
removing his Tents shall pitch them in more fortified places, or shall seem to
hinder the means of procuring victuals and relief, we deny because of the
distance of place that you are to depart until the coming of our Forces: in
the speedy furnishing and dispatching of whom we will use on our parts all
diligence, to the end their speedy arriving may abundantly recompense delay.
Which thing we thought fit not to conceal from your Illustrious Person: but
recommending unto you our sincere endeavors, do wish the happy success and
fortune of these attempts.

From Cassouia, 17. March 1620. Your Highness sincere friend in all Offices,
Simon Pectius, Chancellor to the Christian Prince Gabriel.

A Letter written the 19. of March 1620. To the illustrious Christian Prince of
Anhalt, by the renowned Gabriel, Prince of Hungary and Transiluania.
Illustrious Prince and noble friend:
WE understand by both your Letters sent unto us, not only the unfriendly but
also hostile intentions of Caesar toward us: not without great admiration and
grief. Which thing happening contrary to our hope and opinion, he may not
marvel if in deferring our aides longer then necessity and our own desires
require, we provide for our selves. For having made such League with Ferdinand,
as he was to grant the like upon demand to our Friends and Confederates, it
appears by the last Letters sent by Caesar, and also by the enclosed, in what
manner we have solicited and urged the granting thereof in Caesar's Court.
Perceiving therefore Caesar's so manifest hostility, and the truce to be broken
and violated by him, and that he has not satisfied the agrements betwixt us
and him, we will convert by Gods help all our cogitations, studies and forces
to the aid of our Confederates, neither will we make delay in an office so
necessary. Of which things by our Secretary (or Gentleman Usher) we would more
fully signify unto you. And commending your Illustrious Lordship to the divine
protection, do wish all felicity against the common Enemy. Given in the free
and kingly City Cassouia, 16. March, 1620.

Gabriel the Prince.

A Letter written by the Prince of Transiluania, to the Duke of Bauare.
Mighty Prince and Excellent friend:
WE doubt not but your Excellency has sufficiently understood of the present
troubles, and the success of them in the Noble Kingdom of Hungary: but
concerning their causes and proper Reasons, you have not only diversely and
indirectly bin informed, but also our opposers have delated unto you unmeet and
untrue rumors concerning both our purposes and person. These we will in
disdain pass by as the Fictions and Comments of giddie brains, rather then
discover them with tedious ambages. Your Grace shall now receive the true
description of our designements. When as unwittingly he pressed the person of
the most sacred Emperor, and Kingly Majesty of Ferdinand, because of the
ancient persecution of our Orthodox and sound Religion, bearing it well in
mind: So that the Government and Administration of his Majesty was not only
suspected but grudged at by all his Subjects, the covered and lurking fire in
their minds began first in Bohemia to flame forth. Which in the beginning
they might easily and with Clemency (if they had so pleased) according to
wisdom and due office have extinguished, ere it had proceeded to such
combustion. But having now by many companies of people aggregated together from
all the most remote parts of Europe, so ouer-spread and overrun Bohemia and
Morauia, that the Inhabitants were almost constrained to surrender to the
Enemy both life and goods, liberty and their Religion; they threatened with
like tumultuous Arms and Forces, to invade and oppress presently, publicly
and resolutely, Hungary and Transiluania, we and the other Princes being
vanquished and surprised. Wherefore the Morauians and Bohemians with the
Austrians and other Confederates, do all of them protest unto us the peril of
those ensuing wars, and entreat us by the right of our ancient league to
succor their afflicted and decaying State. Being therefore solicited by so
many Kingdoms, and compelled by the authority of ancient league, we did (our
condition so requiring) aid by counsel and approbation our Confederate
friends: yet so as we determined neither to have any forces of the Turk,
neither to suppress the Roman Catholics, or any other Religion, the
Jesuitical Factionly excepted; but would maintain the profession of our
Orthodoxe Faith, and free the liberties and impaired Estates of other Countries
from violence and tyranny. Wherefore our actions witness that our intention
has bin no other hitherto* forasmuch as we have confirmed a league with his
Imperial and Royal Majesty in the Kingdom of Hungary, so that he would
please after sufficient demand to grant the same Articles to the Bohemians and
the other our confederates, which we have not ceased by our Letters and
Ambassages to solicit: to the intent the ruins of the Kingdoms, and the
streams of Christian blood might be diuerted. Moreover, that Arms laid aside,
profitable entreaties and agreements might take place, and such broils might
cease* and peace be obtained by the attending of both parts to most just and
equal conditions. Our selves desire rather to manifest our wishes to deserve
well and highly of all Christian Princes and Kingdoms by practice rather then
by words and Letters. Amongst the which also attributing very much to your
princely equanimitie in these troublesome times of Christian Kingdoms, do
commend with singular confidence our own endeavors, and our Confederates unto
you; the principal scope whereof, being no other then the establishing of
peace and tranquillity, and the restoring unto liberty our Countries, Laws,
and Religion, it is meet your Excellence do promote and further amongst those
with whom you shall converse, this so holy and commendable study; and do
sincerely favor the rights and equity of our Confederates, and conceit us
most respectfull of you in all things. But if (which we suppose not) his
Imperial Majesty shall altogether deny to our Confederates the conditions of
Peace being solemnly demanded, or (not understanding first by way of peaceable
in treaty the just and equal cause of both parts) shall by his own enterprise
or by other convert his power to the utter ruin of those Kingdoms, we cannot
in any case so forsake our friends as not to show our selves incontinently
enemies unto them whosoever shall so invade them and break the Truce. Which
thing being unfit to be done among Christians, so it behooves your Highness
to provide for the concord of Christian Kingdoms rather then favor wars and
hostile enmities. Concerning all which we desire to know your Highness pleasure
and sentence. We do wish unto your Excellence unfeignedly all prosperity.
Given in our Town, Rima Zombath, 29. January 1620.

Your Excellencies assured, Gabriel the Prince.

FINIS.

