W: Sempson fecit
depiction of the goddess Flora seated with a garden in the background,
accompanied by a peacock and a dog, and holding a cornucopia of flowers in her
left hand and a small bouquet in the right

The second book of Flowers Fruicts Beasts Birds and Flies exactly drawn

And are to be sold by George Humble at ye white horse in Popes head Ally

plate depiction of double carnation flowers (Dianthus carophyllus) L.
Garyophyllo maximo G. Gyrosstees grand A. Cornations doble Ge. Gross doppele
Negel

depiction of a leopard A Leopard
depiction of a kingfisher perched on a stalk of harebells (Campanula
rotundifolia) A Kingfisher


plate depiction of wild daffodil flowers (Narcissus pseudonarcissus) L
pseudo-Narcissus G Narcisses A. Daffodill Ge. Hornungs blumen.

depiction of a swan depiction of a stalk of red campion flowers (Silene
dioica) L Lychinis siluestris G Oeillets sauuage A Wild campion Ge Wild frawen
rossli.



plate a depiction of a stalk of tutsan (Hypericum androsaemum) L. Androsemum
G. Toute saine A. Tutsans or park leauis

depiction of an owl A Owl
depiction of a wolf bearing off its prey A Wolf
depiction of a stalk of double campion flowers (Lychinis sylvestris multiplex)
L. Lychin^^ ^s ^^ltiplex G. Oeillets ou Oei^let^ (...) Dieu A. Double campion
G. Frawen roslein



plate depiction of muskmelons (Cucumis melo) L. Melo G. Melons A Musk melon



plate depiction of red lilies (Lilium rubrum) L. Lilium rubrum G Lis roua^s A
Red lilie Ge Rote lilen

depiction of a cuckoo A Cuckoo
depiction of a stalk of roses (Rosaceae family) L. Rosa G. Ro^ses A. a Rose G.
Rosen.



(...) plate depiction of a stalk of butcher's broom (Ruscus aculeatus) L
Ruscus G Bruise A Butchers Broom

depiction of a hawk A Hawk
depiction of a sprig of tamarisk (Tamaricaceae family) L. Tamariscus G.
Tamaris A. Tamariske



(...) plate depiction of a wisp of barley (Hordeum vulgar) L. Hordeum J. Orge
A. Barlye

depiction of a hare A haer
depiction of a sprig of berberis (barberries) (Berberis vulgaris) L.
Oxyacantha J. Eninis Vnoctte A. Barberyes



plate depiction of a sprig of damsons (Pruna domestica) L. pruna Damasena G.
pruneaux de Damas A. Damsons G. psraumen Von Damas

depiction of a sprig of apricots (Prunus armeniaca) L Armenica malus G Abricos
A Aprecocke



plate depiction of a bunch of grapes on the vine (Vitis vinifera) L. Botry's
Vua G. Grappe de raisiu A. Grapes

depiction of a linnet A canthis


(...) plate depiction of stalks of foxglove (Digitalis purpurea) L. Digitalis
G. Gantes nostre dames A. Foxegloue Ge. Fingerhut

depiction of a parrot A Praet
depiction of a fox A Fox
depiction of iris flowers (Iridaceae family) L. Irs G. Flambe ou Glayeul A
Flower de luca G. Blaw Gilgen



plate depiction of a sprig of larkspur (Ranunculaceae family) L. Delphinicum
G. pied d^ Alouette A. Larkes Heel

depiction of a quail A Quail
depiction of a branch of apples (Rosaceae family) L. Pomicon G. Pome A. Apples



plate depiction of a sprig of European ash (Fraxinus excelsior) L. Fraxinus G.
Fresne A. Askh

depiction of a lapwing (tewhit, peewit) A Thuet
depiction of spikes of wheat (Triticum aestivum) L Triticum G Ble fourment A
Wheat



plate depiction of a flower depiction of a goldfinch A Gowld finch
depiction of a halved apple depiction of a branch of peaches (Prunus persica)
L Mala Persica G Pesches A Peches



plate depiction of sweet-brier (or eglantine rose) blossoms (Rosa rubiginosa)
L. Rosa canina odorata G. Esglantine A Sweet Brier

depiction of hollyhock flowers (Malvaceae family) L. Malica hortens G. Rose
d'outer mer A. Halli hoke



plate depiction of heartsease (wild pansy) blossoms (Viola tricolor) L. Viola
tricolor Dod G. Penssees A. Hearts eass Ge. Freissam krant

depiction of an eagle A Eagle
depiction of a baboon A Baboone
depiction of buttercup (crowfoot) flowers (Ranunculaceae family) L Ranunculus
G. Bassinet A Crawfote Ge Hanenfuss




