Aspicis effigiem tantum: par nulla figura Io Pain Fe^ 1032.

BOLTONI Genio, qui super astra manet.
Doctior an melior fuit, haud scio. Dicere* fas est,
Secula vix referent, quem tulit una dies.
E. B.


Mr. BOLTONS LAST AND LEARNED WORK of the Four last Things, DEATH, IVDGEMENT,
HELL, and HEAVEN.

WITH AN ASSISE-SERMON, and Notes on Justice Nicolls his Funeral.

Together with the Life and Death of the Author.

Published by E. B.

LONDON, Printed by GEORGE MILLER dwelling in the Black Friars. MDCXXXII.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, FRANCIS NICOLLS Esquire, one of His Majesty's
Justices of Peace and Quorum, for the County of NORTHAMPTON.
SIR,
IT was the desire of this reverend Author, when that A quarian ague.
furious messenger of Death first seized upon his spirits, giving him no more
intermission, than what would serve for some feeble preparations against a New
Encounter: that I would, in case he died, (which afterward lamentably fell
out) frame an Epistle to this Work which he had then made ready for the
Press; and dedicate it (in his name) to your self, as a pledge of his avowed
thankfulness for those many favors he received from that religious and
renowned Justice Nicolls, as grave and learned a Judge a^ this Kingdom c^joyed
in the age it held him.
Judge, his noble Patron: and from your self, his immediate heir and
successor.

This request from him (that would deny me nothing) I knew not how to
with-stand, though I wronged my self in the acceptance; as to draw a line in
that Work, from which so rare a Workman had taken off his learned and
eloquent pen. But yet a necessity lay upon me; for he desired in his sickness,
that by this Dedication it might appear to the world how much he honored your
self and family, which first preferred him.

It was no small joy to his heart to see that speech of God himself fulfilled
upon your House, Those that honor 1 Samuel 2. 30.
me I will honor. It is fit the world should know (that it may blush and mend)
to what eminency of place the mere merits of Justice Nicolls in that short
race of his life raised him unto. Called he was by the Writ of Queen
ELIZABETH to be Sergeant at Law: He was by King JAMES made Sergeant at Law to
Prince HENRY his eldest Son: Judge of the Common Pleas, and Chancellor to
our (now) gracious Sovereign, when he was Prince of Wales. But that which
truly ennobles his memory, and makes me call to mind what our Fleta reports
was the honor of Judges about King EDWARD the first's days: He had and held
all these places Nec prece, nec Qui pecunia and largitionibus honores
sacerdotia and magistratus ambiunt, his poena deportationis est praestituta.
Lex Iul. de ambitu.
pretio, nec praemio. I am not afraid to english it, for I well know the truth
of it: He neither begged them, nor bought them, nor gave Justice of Peace --
and Quorum, Justice of Oyer Oyer and Terminer, Knight of the Shire, High
Sheriff of the County.
so much as a New-yeares-gift for them.

The like I can truly speak of your self; Those dignities which have been
cast upon you in your own Country (since he was taken to glory) which are
neither few nor mean: they came to you, you sued not for them; Honor fugientem
sequitur, sequentem fugit.
you sought them not: Nay, you degraded your self of one of them (a thing not
usual) by making earnest suit to be out of the Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, after you had a while endured it.

From hence (as I have good ground to conceive) would this worthy Author have
mounted you up on Eagles wings to the Throne of the Highest, who has I^y. 40.
(...).
done these and greater things for you, and have pressed upon you large and
highe^ performances. If ever there were a time for Righteous men that are in
authority to show themselves, the time is now come. Mean Christians, their
very persons and actions are by the abounding of sin become a very Parable of
Reproach; A company of Block-heads, as a melancholy Divine calls them. If those
therefore that are in place should now be silent, it is pity but their breaths
should be stopped for ever. I have observed it long, and not without wonder,
(looking upon former times) that in these days such a spirit of fear and
faintness has possessed the hearts of holy men, that they dare not be
courageous in the cause of God. It is no strange thing for a man to be fearful
in the Dark: but when such a light shines upon us from heaven, as that our
eyes are even dazelled in the beholding Degeneres animos timor arguit.
of it; now to be timorous, now to be faint-hearted in a good cause for fear
of men, or any such ignoble respect; Psalm. 146. 3, 4.
is monstrous Cowardice. What is there in the Nec Christiani ultra durare aut
esse possumus, si ad hoc ventum est ut perditorum minas atque insidias
pertimesca^us. ^ Cypr. Lib. ^. ^pist. 3. ad Corn.
face of man, made of the same mould, tossed to and fro with the same vanity,
resoluble into the same Clay: that we should fear it? What is outward
preferment, to the loss, or certain hazard of a good conscience? For, they
are rarely kept together: what are mockings, ^revilings, reproaches,
imprisonment, etc. to godly men? but deeper impressions of stricter holiness,
and the very marks of the Lord Jesus.

The name of Christian is a name both of Honor and Oportuit in divinis castris
milites CHRISTI: ut non minae terreant nec cruciatus and tormenta devincant.
Cyp. lib. 2. Cap. 6.
Valor, and begets better spirits then either Roman or Grecian; let
Machiauell and other Atheists say what they will: which of their stories ever
made mention of so valiant an army, as that Noble Army of Martyrs, mentioned in
the 11th. Chapter to the Hebrews? How can they want spirit that derive their
courage from no less Author than the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Nay, it were
no hard matter to prove, (might I recede from an Epistle, to pursue a Common
place) That no man can be truly valorous; but he that is truly religious.

As this Courage ought to be in all that fear God: so specially in those that
are Magistrates, and sit in the seats of Justice, the very Tribunals of God
himself: For them to be dastardly and fearful, is to shame their Master.
Give me therefore leave, by some warrant from the Author, in your person (whom
I cannot but commend in this particular) to press this virtue upon all that
bear rule in their Country. It is part of the Essence of a Justice of Peace,
to be a man of Courage. The counsel of I^thro to Moses, was, to make only
such to be Exodus 18.
Magistrates, as were men of Or, able men, in the last ^slation.
courage, fearing God, etc. Wherein the Spirit of God preferres the daughter
before the mother, and Fortitude before the Fear of God, of which it is the
effect, because it is more conspicuous in the eyes of men: For the fear of God
is a thing hidden i^ the heart, but that which draws it forth and makes it
illustrious, is that valor and high resolution of spirit by which it works.
Almighty God makes this good by an example of his own choice. For when he had
appointed Joshua to succeed Moses, and had mightily supported his mind with
arguments of his own assistance and presence with him, he requires nothing
else of him, but to be strong and of a good courage, with many iterations of
the same thing in such phrases as these, Be Josh. 1. 6, 7, 9, 1^.
strong and of a good courage, be very courageous, be not afraid, be not
dismayed: And, as if there were no other virtue desirable in a Magistrate, the
people (in accepting him for their Captain) require of him no other condition
but this, Only be strong, and of a good courage. And the Law of this Land,
which in this, as in most other things, is parallel with the Law of God, (as I
could show) would only have those Justices of Peace, which are the most Stat.
^4. E. 3. Cap. 1. i^ the old Stat. at large.
valiant men of the County.

I speak not this to exclude all those requisites of wisdom that ought to be
in the holiest and most valiant men. I may say in these times as the Apostle
said of another virtue, There is great need of wisdom. The children H^b. 10.
36.
of God ever have been, still are, and ever may be the wisest men upon earth.
Let an unwise world think what it list. I mean not that wisdom (falsely so
called) whereby a generation of men to save their skins, handle a good cause
like a Venice-glasse, loath they are to do any thing that may offend great
persons with whom they would comply: or expose themselves to any danger or
loss. (The very wisdom which caused Francis Spira to despair.) This is
rather cunning or craft: or, to link them together in the language of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 14.
A cunning craftiness, it is not wisdom. True wisdom in the moral Schools
of Philosophy, and in the purer Schools of Divinity, is that Queen of
virtues, which like the soul in the body gives life and Anima est tota in
toto, and tota in qualibet part.
information to all the rest, commands all the affections, regulates all the
actions of man's life, and adds an active quickening power to every virtue, to
every faculty in man, directing them to a blessed issue. So that a wise man is
a valiant man, a just man, a temperate man, an humble man, etc. But he that is
addicted to any vice, a servant to any lust; proud; angry, ambitious,
fearful, covetous, etc. is in all sound Morality and Divinity a very fool,
Solus vir bonus (says that great Aristotle ^o. Ethic.
Philosopher) revera est prudens, Only a good man is a wise man. And King
Solomon makes this Philosophy good Divinity, Pro. Et solus prudens revera est
v^r bonus* contra, stolidi and im^ntes sunt mali.
24. Verse. 4. Wisdom is too high for a fool, by whom throughout the Proverbes
he means a wicked man. There is a connection in the virtues, the way to be
wise, is to be good, and the way to be courageous* is to be wise. K^ck. Syst.
Ethic Lib 1. Cap. 3. p. 148.
A wise man is strong, and a man of knowledge (says Solomon) increases
strength. From all which it is easy to conclude, and hard to be gainsaid,
that a cowardly person, let him swell never so big, let him carry his crest
never so high, is neither wise nor good. The wicked flee Prove. 28. 1.
when no man pursiseth, but the righteous are bold as a Lion.

The kindly venting of those two affections of Anger and Love has made me long
in this argument, and must now be my excuse. That of anger at the present
degeneration of men's minds from that nobleness of spirit that was wont to be
in the servants of GOD: the other of love to you, in encouraging you to as high
resolutions as ever; though he be taken away that was to you as Moses to
Ioshuah, your tutor in your youth, your singular instructor by his powerful
Ministry in your after-yeares: and ever your friend till he went hence, and was
seen^ no more. Amongst those many speeches of his which in his ordinary
conference passed from him by weight, and not by number; I will resume one in
your hearing most fitting my purpose, Innocence and independency (said he) make
the bravest spirits. And it cannot be otherwise: for, that man's heart which is
upright with GOD, and depends upon him alone, is of invincible courage, and
becomes like the spirit of Martin Luther, who, when news was brought to him
that both the Emperor and the Pope threatened his ruin, answered thus in
short, but very stoutly, Contemptus est a me Romanus furor and servor, I scorn
In vita Lutheri.
the worst the Pope can do: like that of David, The LORD is on my side, I will
not fear what man can do Psalm. 118. ^.
unto me.

What you heard him speak, you saw him practice. For, I may say of him as was
said of Gideon, such as the man is, so is his strength: he was one of a
thousand for Judges 8. 21.
piety and courage, which were so excellently mixed with wisdom, that they who
imagined mischief against his Ministry (for, no other occasion could they ever
find against him then touching the law of his GOD) were never able by all their
plotting to Da^. 6. 5.
do him any more hurt, than only to show their Psalm. 37. 12.
teeth.

And although he be now gathered to his Fathers, yet he still speaks to you in
this excellent Treatise, of which he died in travel; encouraging you thereby
still to do worthily in Ephratah, and to hold on in those good Ruth 4. 11.
ways of piety which you have ever loved. The very (...)
Heathens could ^ay that a good man was a public good; but a good Magistrate
is much more, for, he has a price in his hand to do good, and is armed with
power and authority to bring it to pass. These times have need of such: up
therefore and be doing: put on righteousness, and let it cloth you, and let
Justice Job 29. 14, etc.
be to you as a robe and a diadem to break the jaws of the wicked, and to
pluck the prey out of Regium est cum been feceris male audire. Sen.
their teeth. And although these kind of men will for this very thing pursue
you with envy, hatred, reproaches, etc. You need not care; for, their teeth are
broken, and they cannot hurt you. Envy does ever attend goodness; though not
as a companion, yet as a thing which dogs it at the heels. I considered
(says Solomon) every right work, that for this a man is envyed Eccles 4. 4.
of his neighbor. This is your comfort (and it is a great one) Psalm. 91. 14,
15, etc. I will set him on high, because he has known my name, etc. I will
deliver him and honor him, etc.
GOD and the Prove. 22. 11.
King shall honor you for well-doing: He that loves pureness of heart,
(though for this he be scoffed and jeered at in the world) yet (says Solomon)
for the grace of his lips the King shall be his I hold a good Justice of Peace
in his Country to do Me as good service, as he that waits upon Me in My Privy
Chamber, and as ready will I be to reward him: For, I account him a^ capable of
any Honor, Offi^e, or preferment about My Pers^n, as well as any Courtier that
is near about Me. King IAMESS Speech in Star* Chamber, 20. June. 1616.
friend.

I will hinder you no longer from reading this excellent Treatise which
properly belongs to you, being the grand-worke of two Sermons preached before
you; the one at the Funerals of that worthy Judge your uncle, my most dear
father in law (whom I honor in the dust) The other in the time of your
Shireevalty* I will therefore end all in the prayer of this Author, and the
last words that ever he spoke to you in this world, the blessings of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob be upon the heads of you, your wife and children for ever.

Your loving brother, and very friend, EDWARD BAGSHAVVE.

TO THE READER.
BEhold here a Post-humus: a Child brought into the world after the Own-Father
was taken out of the world. A Foster-Father is thereupon required for it: but
certainly, more for custom, than need. Such was the Own Father, as it is
commendation enough for the Child to say, This is the Child of such a Father.
And such is the Child, as for its own sake it will find good entertainment,
though the Father of it were unknown.

Adistinct narration of the life and death of the Author you have truly and
punctually (as becomes such a narration) premised.

All his Works do show that he was full in what he undertook: so full, as he
leaves scarce any thing (if any thing at all) for another Author to add, more
than he has done, to what he has done.

He had a very searching and diving gift: whereby he was able to anatomize and
lay open the several parts and nerves of the points which he handled, and to
set out pertinent signs, rules, means, and motives thereabout.

His expression of his mind by fit words and phrases was answerable to his
invention. Both very copious, full of variety.

Take for instance this ensuing Treatise: the maine scope whereof is to furnish
a Christian against the evil day.

Therein you may observe, how, on the one side he discovers the false means
which most use; and how, on the other side he reveals the true means that
are of singular use to the end intended: yea, and how he enforces the same
with reason upon reason, the better to demonstrate the equity of the point: how
also he infers all sorts of Uses thereupon, as, Reprehension, Exhortation,
Direction, and Consolation: and finally, how he takes occasion from thence of
an exceeding large discourse upon the four last things, which (to use his own
words) have been ever holden very material and of special moment to make us
(by GODS blessing) more humble, un-worldly, provident and prepared for the
evil day. Those four Heads are, DEATH, IVDGEMENT, HELL, HEAVEN.

To add more to what he has set out thereabouts, were to power water into the
sea. First read, then judge: and the LORD add his blessing.

W. G.

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Mr. BOLTON.
THat one age may tell another, that the memorial of the just shall be ever
blessed, when the persons and names of those that are otherwise minded shall
rot and vanish away: It has been the pious custom of ancient and later
times, to commend to posterity the eminent graces of the Saints departed.
Famous are those Panegyricke Orations made at the tombs of the Martyrs in the
Primitive times; when as their persecuting Emperors, priding themselves in
their lamentable deaths, have left no other noise behind them, than the loud
and long continued cries of spilling innocent blood.

Memorable also are the Funeral Orations of the two Gregory's, Nyssen and
Nazianzen on Basil the great: And in later times, to give a few instances,
(for the number in this kind is infinite) Melancthon and Camerarius wrote the
life of Martyn Luther; Iunius the life of Vrsine; Beza the life of Calvin;
Antonius Faius the life of Beza; Josias Simler the life of Peter Martyr; and
Dr. Humphrey the life of our most renowned Jewel.

This manner of honoring the Saints is warranted by GODS own example; who
(for ought is revealed to us) took order for Moses burial, dug his grave,
covered him with molds, and made for him that excellent Funeral Sermon
expressed in the first Chapter of Ioshuah. And that all-wise GOD who sweetly
disposes all things, thinks it needful thus to grace his own people, that
he may hereby uphold their spirits amid those many pressures, scorns,
reproaches, cruel mockings, and innumerable other miseries which they endure
of the world, merely for his service; be they otherwise never so wise, just,
meek, peaceable, and unrebukeable amongst men: Witness those many terrible
persecutions (mentioned Eusebius Hist. Lib. 4. and 5.
in Ecclesiastical Stories) against the Christians, though harmless and
innocent, though they prayed for their Emperors, and GOD did miracles in their
armies by their prayers; yet for this only cause, that they honored CHRIST,
and called themselves Christians, (so odious was that precious name unto their
adversaries) they were put to the extremest tortures that the utmost inventions
of cruelty and rage could devise against them, as Iustine Martyr and Tertullian
in their learned and eloquent Apologies for them do amply demonstrate: this
caused Adrian the Emperor to ordain, Eusebius. Lib. ^* Cap. 9.
that thenceforth none of them should be appeached barely for that name,
unless they transgressed the Laws.

According to these examples, and for the 3
very same causes, I have adventured to publish to the world, the life and
death of this man of GOD the Author of this Work, now a Saint in heaven. I
confess his worth and parts deserved rather an advancement by some such
eloquent Orators as I mentioned before, than a depression by my pen; but yet a
pearl may be showed forth as well by a weak hand, as by the arm of a giant,
I shall do no more. And let his own worth and works praise him in the gates.
I knew him from the beginning of my youth, being my first Tutour in the
University of Oxford, and my self one of his first Scholars, and from that
time to the day of his death, being above seven and twenty years, none knew
him better, or loved him more; our familiarity was such, that (alluding to that
between Paul and Timothy) 2 Timothy 1, 4.
I may say, I knew his doctrine, manner of life, faith, charity, patience; and
now will only relate what I have heard and seen, wherein I will not exceed
the bounds of modesty or truth.

To begin with his birth; I observe that 4
throughout the sacred Bible, and writings on the persons of holy men, their
places of birth are ever remembered; GOD loves the very ground his servants
tread on: The LORD shall count (says David) when he Psalm. 87. 6.
numbreth up the people, that this man was borne there; whereas of other men
there shall be no remembrance of them, they shall have none to lament or bury
them, but shall be cast forth as dung on the face of the earth: so that I may
say of them, as was said of Pope Boniface the eight, famous for nothing but his
wickedness; intravit vulpes, regnavit leo, exivit canis; the Prophet David
renders it thus in plain English. They spend their days in mirth, and
suddenly go down into hell.

He was borne at Blackborne a town of 5
good note in Lancashire on Whitsunday, Camb. Brit. page 752.
Anno Dom. 1572. His parents being not of any great means, yet finding in him
a great towardliness for learning, destinated him to be a scholar, and
strugled with their estate to furnish him with necessaries in that kind,
apprehending the advantage of a singular Schoolmasters that was then in the
Mr. Yates.
town. He plied his book so well, that in short time he became the best
scholar in the school: and no marvel; for, he had those six properties of a
scholar noted by Isocrates and others, which concurring in (...).
one, thrust up learning to a very high elevation.

1. He was ((...)) of excellent parts and abilities of mind, and of a sound
constitution of body. 2. He was ((...)) of a very strong memory; I mean such a
memory as was notably actuated by his ready and quick understanding. For, (as
Philosophers observe) that memory which tends to admiration, being of a quite
differing temperature from the understanding, inclines rather to folly, and
becomes the ground of that Proverb, The greatest Clerks are not always the
wisest men. 3. He was ((...)) a moover of doubts and questions; this was ever
an evident sign of learning; by this our blessed Savior approoved His
learning amongst the Luk 2. 46.
Doctors in hearing them and asking them questions: So did the Queen of
Shebah to King Solomon. A dunce seldom makes doubts; but (as Solomon says of
a fool) always boasts and is confident. 4. He was ((...)) a special lover
of learning; it was always his delight to exercise himself in studies, and
would not endure any aversions from them, as shall be hereafter showed. 5. He
was ((...)) a very laborious painful student, as shall be more largely showed,
for it is worthy imitation. 6. He was ((...)) a great listner after the sayings
and speeches of others, and has been often observed to be only a hearer, and
to sit silent himself, unless he was urged with some importunity, and the
things he heard, he suffered them not to be lost, (if they were of worth) but
always put them down in a book which he particularly kept for that purpose.
He continued long at school, and came 6
not to the University till about the twentieth His studies in Lincoln
College.
year of his age. He was placed at Oxford in Lincoln College under the
tuition of Mr. Randall, a man of no great note then, but afterward became a
learned Divine and godly Preacher at London. In that College he fell close to
the studies of Logic and Philosophy, and by reason of that groundworke of
learning he got at school, and maturity of years, he quickly got the start of
those of his own time, and grew into fame in that House. In the midst of
these his studies his father died, and then his means failed, for all his
fathers lands fell to his elder brother now living: but this cross by GODS
providence prooved a great advantage to him for his growth in learning, though
it put him to monstrous pains of body and mind: for now wanting means to buy
him books, he borrowed of his Tutour and others the best writers on Natural
and Moral Philosophy, and the Politics, and read them all over, and abridged
them all in his note-bookes, which are now to be seen, and then returned the
books to their owners. Nay such a desire he had to attain a perfection in the
things he studied, that though he was very well skilled in the Greek tongue,
yet that he might attain an exactness in it, he did with intolerable pains
write out with his own hand all Homer, (or Hesiod I am sure) for I have seen
it in a fair Greek character; for he wrote that language better than he did
either English or Latin; and asking him the reason of his pains, he told me,
it was only that he might accent perfectly. This brought him to such a
readiness, that he could with as much facility course in the public Schools
(for he was a famous disputant) in the Greek tongue, as in the Latin or
English: and in them all he wrote and spoke Stilo imperatorio, as Lipsius calls
it, viz. a high and lofty style, which was so familiar to him, as that he could
not avoid it in ordinary conference.

From Lincoln College he remooved to 7
Brasen-nose: For, by the Founders of that In Brasen-nose College.
House most of the Fellowships therein were ordained for Lancashire and
Cheshire men, but coming to that College, having but few friends, he stayed
long without a Fellow-ship* about which time (that I may not bury in silence
the charitable acts of such men whom their learning and piety have made
eminent) it pleased Mr. Dr. Bret, knowing A man of sirgular (...) for learning
and (...).
his deserts, and perceiving him to languish for want of means, most
bountifully to contribute for his relief, and by his and others bounty, with
some small stipends he had for his Lectures in that House, he was upheld until
he had got a Fellowship, which fell out about the thirtieth year of his age,
at which time he commenced Master of Arts; and then by the Exercises he
performed in the House and abroad, being Regent-Master he grew into fame, and
was still successively chosen to be Reader of the Lectures of Logic, and
Moral, and Natural Philosophy, (as by the Statutes of the House they were
appointed to be read) which he performed so strictly, and with such exactness,
as that he got credit and applause with the best, but some envy with his
successors, that by his example were now provoked to a more frequent and
painful reading of them, which were seldom and slightly performed before.
And such was his esteem in the University for his public disputations, which
he ever performed with such readiness and acuteness of speech and wit, and
such profoundnesse of learning, that when he was a Master of Arts but of small
standing, he was chosen by the now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Vice Chancellor at King JAMES His first coming to that University, to be one
of the disputants before the King, and to read in Natural Philosophy in the
public Schools. Besides his knowledge in Logic and Philosophy, wherein he
excelled, he was also well studied in the Metaphysics and Mathematics, and in
all Schoole-Divinity, especially in Thomas Aquinas, which he had read over once
or twice, and had exactly noted him throughout, as may appear in his notes.

But all this while though he was I may truly say of him, a^ Tertullian of
Irenaeus, That he was curiosissimus omnium doctrinarum explorator.
very 8
learned, yet he was not good, he was a very mean scholar in the school of
CHRIST, he drew no religious breath from the soil he came, and his master like
an ill seedsman sowed the tares of Popery in most of his scholars: this manner
of education made him more apt to tread in any path than that which was holy;
he loved Stage Plays, cards and dice, he was a horrible swearer and
sabbath-breaker, and boone-companion, and was ever glad (as I have heard him
say) of Christmas-holy days, and mavelous melancholy when they were ended,
he loved not goodness nor good men, and of all sorts of people could not abide
their company that were of a strict and holy conversation, such he would fetch
within the compass of Puritans, thinking that by that lawless name he had
deprived them ipso facto both of learning and good religion. Such a general
scorn has this degenerate age put upon the ways of GOD, that the name of
Puritan which is truly and properly the name of the Eusebius. Hist. l. 6 cap. 42.
and lib. 7 cap. 7.
proud heresy of Novatus, or else of the Preface of K. James to his (...)
vile sect of the Anabaptists, is for want of seeking redress by our
Ecclesiastical Laws* become the honorable nickname of the best and holiest
men This wretched humor Mr. Bolton further discovered at Cambridge, for being
there at a Commencement, and merely carried with the fame of Mr. Perkins, went
to hear him preach, whose plain but very sound and substantial preaching
meeting at once in him with a curious palate and unsanctified heart; quite
turned his stomach against that good man that he thought him (to speak in his
own phrase) a barren empty fellow, and a passing mean scholar. I have heard
many of late (much of Mr. Boltons temper in goodness at that time, but
inferior in learning) speak the like of Mr. Perkins; but the eminent learning
of that man (famous Willlelmus Perkinsus doctissimus theologus. Keck. Syst.
Pol. lib. 1. p. 208.
abroad as well as at home) is so far above their reach; that to traduce his
worth is to question their own. And that late learned Dr. Abbot in his reply
to Bishop.
Bishop of Salisbury in the defense of his book against the cavils of Dr.
Bishop, has in many places amply commended his learning. So that the precious
name of Mr. Perkins shall like an ointment powered forth, fill all the quarters
of this land with a fresh and fragrant sweetness, when nothing shall survive
of his Detractors, but their unsavory and unlearned spite against so holy a
man. And Mr. Bolton himself when GOD changed his heart (which I will next
write of) he changed his opinion of Mr. Perkins, and thought him as learned and
godly a Divine as our Church has for many years enjoyed in so He was but
little above 40 years old when he died
young a man: But I proceed.

When he was of Brasen-nose College, he 9
had familiar acquaintance with one Mr. Anderton his countryman, and sometime
his schoole-fellow, a very good scholar, but a strong Papist, and now a Popish
Priest, and His connersion
one of the He was for his eloquence called Golden mouthed Anderton when he was
but a Scholar.
learnedest amongst them: This man well knowing the good parts that were in Mr.
Bolton, and perceiving that he was in some outward wants, took this advantage,
and used many arguments to persuade him to be reconciled to the Church of Rome,
and to go over with him to the English Seminary, telling him he should be
furnished with all necessaries, and should have gold enough (one of the best
arguments to allure an unstable mind to Popery). Mr. Bolton being at that time
poor in mind and Purse, accepted of the motion, and a day, and place was
appointed in Lancashire, where they should meet, and from thence take shipping
and be gone. Mr. Bolton met at the day and place, but Mr. Anderton came not,
and so he escaped that snare, and soon after returned to Brasen-nose, where
falling into the acquaintance of one Mr. Peacocke Fellow of that House, a
learned and godly man, it pleased GOD by his acquaintance to frame upon his
soul that admirable workmanship of his repentance and conversion to eternal
life, but by such a way of working as the LORD seldom uses but upon such
strong vessels which in his singular wisdom he intends afterward for strong
incounters, and rare employments. The first news he heard of GOD was not by
any soft and still voice, but in terrible tempests and thunder, the LORD
running upon him as a giant, taking him by the Job 16. ver. 1^, 13, 14.
neck and shaking him to pieces, as he did Job; beating him to the very
ground, as he did Paul, by laying before him the ugly visage of his sins which
lay so heavy upon him, as he roared for grief of heart, and so affrighted him,
as I have heard him say, he rose out of his bed in the night for very anguish
of spirit. And to augment his spiritual misery, he was exercised with foul
temptations, horribilia de DEO, terribilia de fide, which Luther called
Colaphum Satanae, for as he was parallel with Luther in many things as I shall
show anon: so was he in these spiritual temptations which were so vehement
upon Luther, that the very venom of them drank up his spirits, and his body
seemed dead, In his Epistle to Melancthon.
Vt nec calor, nec sanguis, nec sensus, nec vox superesset, that neither
speech, sense, blood or heat appeared in him, as Iustas Jonas that was by and
saw it, reports of him: but this sharp fit of Luthers lasted but for one
day, but Mr. Boltons continued for many months, but yet GOD gave him at length
a blessed issue, and these grievous pangs in his spiritual birth produced two
admirable effects in him (as well as in Luther) which many times ensue upon
such hard labor, an invincible courage and resolution for the cause of GOD, in
the which he feared no colors, not the face or force of any; secondly, a
singular dexterity in comforting afflicted and wounded spirits, as shall be
likewise further showed.

Upon this he resolved to enter into the 10
Ministry, and about the thirty fifth year of his age was ordained Minister,
after which he wholly applied him self to the work of the Ministry, and
improoved all his learning and time to that excellent end: A little while after
he was in the Ministry, he was by means made known to Mr. Justice Nicolls, at
that time Sergeant at Law, who observing the comeliness of his person and the
stuff that was in him, had it always in his thoughts to advance him, and
about the thirty seventh year of Mr. Boltons age, the personage of Broughton
in Northampton shire falling void, he did by my hand send for him from the
University to his chamber at Sergeants Inn, and presented him to that living,
at which time Dr. King late Bishop of London being then by accident at the
Judges chamber, thanked him for Mr. Bolton, but told him withal, that he had
deprived the University of a singular Ornament* Then did he put out his first
book, containing A discourse of true happiness, which he dedicated to
Sergeant Nicolls his patron, which for the godliness of the matter, and
cloquence of the style therein contained, was universally bought up, and diverse
have confessed, that at first bought it out of curiosity, for some sweet relish
in the Phrase, took CHRIST to boot and thereby took the first beginning of
their heavenly taste.

About the fortieth year of his age, for 11
the better setting of himself in housekeeping upon his Personage, he
resolved upon marriage, and took to wife Mrs. Anne Boyse a Gentle woman of an
ancient house and worshipful family in Kent, to whose care he committed the
ordering of his outward estate, he himself only minding the studies and
weighty affairs of his heavenly calling, in the which for the space of twenty
years and more, he was so diligent and laborious, that twice every Lords day
he preached, and Catechized in the Afternoon, in which Catechism he
expounded the Creed and ten Commandments in a very exact manner; And upon
every holyday, and on every friday before the Sacrament he expounded some
Chapter, by which means he went over the greater portion of the Historical
part of the Old and New Testament. And in them all, as was well observed by a
learned and grave Mr. Estwick in his Sermon at his funeral.
Divine that preached at his funeral, he prepared nothing for his people but
what might have served a learned Auditory, and in all his preachings he still
aimed next to the glory of God at the Conversion of souls, the very crown and
glory of a good Minister at the appearing of that great day: and herein GOD
wonderfully honored his Ministry in making him an aged father in CHRIST, and
to beget many sons and daughters unto righteousness; for I may truly say,
many hundreds were either absolutely converted, or mightily confirmed, or
singularly comforted in their grievous agonies by his Ministry: for he had
such an art in this kind of relieving afflicted consciences, which he
acquired, partly by great pains and industry in searching into that skill, but
chiefly by that manifold experience he had in himself and others, that he was
sought to far and near, and diverse from beyond the seas desired his
resolution in diverse cases of Conscience, which was the only cause that made
him put forth that last learned and godly Treatise of his, which he styled;
Instructions for a right comforting afflicted consciences.

And though in his manner of preaching 12
he was a Son of thunder, yet unto bruised reeds and those that mourned in
spirit, he was as sweet a son of Consolation as ever I heard, and with a
very tender and pitiful heart powered the oil of mercy into their bleeding
wounds. He (as was said of Luther) was a mighty opposite to the Devils
kingdom, and had a singular skill to discern his sleights and that cunning
craftiness whereby he lies in wait to deceive. He ever thought that there was
no such way to cast down the strong holds of Satan and to batter his
kingdom, then after the steps of John the Baptist, to lay the axe close to the
root of sin, and to set it on with such power, as that the Devil and all
his agents were not able to resist it. By this means he got ground of Satan
and wasted his kingdom, and there were daily added to his Ministry such whose
hearts were softened thereby. And in all his Sermons he ever used to discover
the filthiness of sin, and to press very powerfully upon the conscience the
duties of Sanctification, in expression whereof three things were remarkable
in him.

1. Such courage and resolution of spirit as is scarcely to be found in any. I
am persuaded that in the cause of GOD he could have been contented with Martin
Luther, totius mundi odium and impetum sustinere; to have undergone the rage
and violence of the whole world, whereby he gave such vigor unto the truth he
delivered, that it pierced between the very joints and the marrow. 2.
Impartiality; he would spare none in their sins either great or small, he
knew he was to deliver his Masters will, with whom was no respect of persons.
3. His wisdom; as he was of high courage, so was it excellently tempered with
wisdom, descryed in these four things. 1. In all his denunciations against
sin, he never personated any man whereby to put him to shame, unless his
own inward guiltiness caused him to apply it to himself. 2. He would never
press upon the conscience the guiltiness of sin, but he would for^ifie it
by Scripture, by the ancient Fathers (in which he was ripe and ready) and the
concurrence of the best Orthodoxe Writers, to stop the mouth of all slanderers
that should accuse his doctrine, either of novelty or of too much preciseness.
3. When he had searched the conscience to the very quick (as he would do) he
ever offered CHRIST in all his beauty and sweetness, and powered it forth upon
the conscience with such a torrent of Eloquence as would have melted the hearts
of any, but those which obstinately refused the voice of that powerful
charmer. 4. He would always protest unto his people, that it was a trouble and
grief to him to preach against their sins, he delighted not to vex any of
their consciences, he should be glad the case was so with them, that he might
only preach the riches of the mercies in CHRIST all his days; But he knew no
other way to pull them out of the snare of Satan and state of darkness then
the way he took, without drawing the horrible sin of Bloud-guiltinesse upon
his soul.
But that which made his preaching more illustrious, was that burning and
shining light which appeared in his life and conversation in these five
particulars. Piety.


1. His Piety, wherein I need not say much, for that second book of his
concerning directions for walking with GOD, were framed out of the pious
Meditations of his own heart as a guide for himself for the ordering of his
steps in the ways of righteousness, which he so strictly observed throughout
the course of his life that (allowing to him his frailties and Et certe ea est
semperque suit hominum omnium etiam piorum and Chistianorum vita, vt semper
etiam in optimis and castissimis moribus tamen aliquid possis desiderare.
Jewel. Apol. Aug. p. 64.
infirmities, which the holiest men while their flesh is upon them shall not be
freed from) he could not be justly taxed by any, no not his very enemies (if
he had any such) of any gross and Sanctorum vitam inveniri posse dicimus sine
crimine: sine peccato autem qui se vivere existimat non id agit vt peccatum non
habeat, sed ut veniam non accipiat. Aug. Enchir.
scandalous sins since his first conversion from them. And no marveile if he
attained to such a height of holiness when he was lifted up thither by the
wings of prayer. His constant course was to pray six times a day, twice by
himself in private, twice in public with his family, and twice with his
wife. Besides, many days of private humiliation and prayer ever before the
receiving of the Communion, and many days besides, for the miseries of the
Churches in France and Germany, etc* which he performed with such ardencie of
spirit, that as was said Tria faciunt Theologum; Oration, meditatio, tentatio.
Luther* T^s. Author was exe^cised in them all.
of Martin Luther, He used such humility as in the presence of Almighty GOD,
but such fer vencie and faith, as if he had been talking with his friend. And
GOD heard his prayers, for to the comfort of his soul a little before his
death, he heard of the mighty victories obtained by the King of Sweden against
the Emperor to the astonishment of all the world, that those eyes which now
behold it with joy, do scarce believe themselves in the fruition of it. When
the LORD (says the Psalm. 126. ver. 1.
Psalmist) turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream.
So indefatigable were the pains of this godly man in his private devotions and
public preaching, that being advised by Physicians for his healths sake, to
break off the strong intentions of his studies; he rejected their counsel,
accounting it greater riches to enjoy CHRIST by those fervent intentions of his
mind, then to remit them for the safeguard of his health: Much like the speech
of that famously learned D^. Reynolds to the Doctors of Oxford, coming to
visit him in his last sickness (contracted merely by his exceeding pains in
study, by which he brought his body to a very (...)) who earnestly persuading
him that he would not peraere substantiam propter accidentia, i. e. ^o loose
his life for learning, he with a sweet smile finely Iuuenal.
answered out of the Poet. Nec propter vitam vivendiperdere causas: Nor yet for
love of life loose that dare I,
Which is the cause I live, my industry.
2. For his Gravity, he was of a very Gravity.
comely presence, he had a countenance so finely tempered with gravitie and
austerity, that he in a manner commanded respect from others; insomuch that
many forbear to speak or act unseemely things in his presence, that would not
have been so modest in other company: Such a Majesty does grace imprint upon
the countenances of holy men, that they draw respect from the greatest: this
made those persecuting Emperors to fear the very faces of those poor
Christians that appeared before them: And this caused Constantine the Great so
to honor the countenance of Old Paphnutius S^crates (...). 1. c. 8.
though disfigured by the loss of his eye, that he did often for his delight
kiss the hollow of that eye which was lost for the cause of CHRIST. So true is
that of Solomon, wisdom causes the face to shine, and the rigor of the
countenance to be changed. 3. He was very Zealous for GOD, not Zeal.
only by the power of his Ministry in converting many, wherein GOD had
wonderfully blessed him, but in any public or private good that tended to the
honor of GOD, to whose glory he wholly sacrificed himself and all his
studies, which I can the more safely affirm, in that I know he has diverse
times A true argument that he sought not great things to himself.
refused preferment from some of the Nobility and Prelates of this Kingdom,
and for no other cause in the world, but that he might not be divorced from
that country where his Ministry was so much embraced and wrought so good
effects. 4. But zeal is often of such violent motion, that as the ancient
Philosophers supposed of Wisdom.
the primum mobile, that if the motion thereof were not finely cooled and
allayed by the coelum Christallinum next to it, it would set all the Orbs on
fire; and therefore the zeal of this Reverend man was always tempered with
singular Wisdom and discretion, for though in all his Sermons he pressed
mightily upon the conscience of his hearers, who many times like babes
childishly wrangled at the breasts which should nourish them, yet were they
never able to resist the authority by which he spoke, so that for the space of
22 years being the whole time that his Lamp of light shined in Northampton
Shire, his doctrine was never drawn into question either for error or schism:
so studious was he ever of the unity and peace of the Church of ENGLAND which
he dearly loved that none could justly quarrel with him, but Papists and
other Sectaries, as also others that were corrupted with error or evil life.
5. Lastly for his Charity, he was ever Charity.
universally bountiful, but especially he exceeded in those public distresses
of Germany, France, Bohemia, etc. and to those that stood in true need: for
the enabling of himself hereunto, I have heard him often say (and he made it
evident to me) that ever since he was Minister of Broughton, he spent every
year all the revenewes of his Parsonage (which was of good value) in the
maintenance of his family and acts of hospitality and charity; And that the
estate wherewith GOD has blessed him otherwise, was merely raised by that
temporal estate he had at first. Let them therefore of his own coat from
henceforth cease to traduce him, whom they never did nor dare to imitate. I am
sure the Town of Broughton will ever bless GOD for his charity: for when that
lamentable fire was among them, September 21: Anno Dom. 1626. besides the many
pounds he spent out of his own purse, he was a chief means that by the only
supply of the country without any Letters Patents from above, their houses
which were burnt down unto the ground were all new built, and their outward
estates liberally sustained and upheld. Nay such was his charity, that though
some of his own town had not only slandered his Ministry, but wronged him in
his tithes, yet he put it up, and never called them to question as he might,
nor ever had any suite with them. So that I may for conclusion sum up this in
that witty commendation of Nazianzen on Basil the Great, Oration funebrin
laudem Basilj.
He thundered in his Doctrine, and lightened in his conversation.
This inestimable treasure it pleased GOD 14.
to put in an earthen vessel, and about the His sickness.
beginning of September last, began to break it by visiting him with a Quartan
ague; a disease which brought Calvin to his end, and by the judgment of the
best Physicians, by reason of the long and grievous paroxysmes whereby it
afflicts, is ever deemed mortal unto old men: and so it appeared to him, for
perceiving after two or three sits that it mastered his strength, he patiently
submitted to endure, what by struggling he could not overcome; And called for
his Will which he had made long before, and perfecting some things in it, he
caused it to be laid up, and afterward wholly retired into himself, quitting
the world and solacing his soul with the meditation of the joys of heaven,
which he had provided to preach to his people, for having compiled an elaborate
discourse, de quatuor Novissimis, of the four last things, DEATH, IVDGEMENT,
HELL and HEAVEN, an argument that some Jesuits and Friars have bungled in, and
having finished the three former, told them that the next day he would treat of
Heaven: But the day before being Saturday he was visited with sickness, and
never preached after. GOD then preparing him for the fruition of those
inexplicable joys which he had provided for his people in contemplation.

His sickness though it was long and 15.
sharp, yet he bare it with admirable patience, for he saw Him that was
invisible, and his whole delight was to be with Him, often breathing out such
speeches as these whiles the violence and frequencie of his fits gave him any
intermission, Oh when will this good hou^ (...) shall I be dissolved, when
shall I be with CHRIST? Being told that it was indeed better for him to be
dissolved, but the Church of GOD could not miss him nor the benefit of his
Ministry. To which he thus sweetly replied with David: 2. Sam. 15. 25, 26.
If I shall find favor in the eyes of the LORD he will bring me again and
show me both it and his habitation, but if otherwise, lo here I am, let him
do what seems good in his eyes. Being asked by another, whether he could
not be content to live if GOD would grant him life, he thus answered; I grant
that life is a great blessing of GOD, neither will I neglect any means that
may preserve it, and do heartily desire to submit to GODS will: But of the two
I infinitely desire to be dissolved and to be with CHRIST.

In the time of his sickness there 16.
came many to visit him, but he admitted none but his intimate friends, using
a speech of Ante dies firm december quam exitet e corpore a nobis postulavit
praesentibus, ne quis adeum ingredetetur, nisi ijs tantum horis quibus medici
ad inspiciendum intrarent, velcum ei inferretur refectio, and ita observatum ac
factum est, and omni illo tempore orationi vacabat. Possid. de vit. August.
Saint Augustine, who desired ten days before he died, none might come to him,
that he in that time might the better fit himself for GOD. But to those that
came to him he gave very godly and wise exhortations suting to their callings
and conditions, for although his body was wasted with continual fits toward
the Close of his life, yet his understanding and memory was as active and
quick as in the time of his health. He encouraged the Ministers that came to
him, to be diligent and courageous in the work of the LORD, and not to let
their spirits faint or droope for any affliction that should arise thereupon.
To all that came to him, he bad them make sure of CHRIST, before they came to
die, and to look upon the world as a lump of vanity; He thanked GOD for his
wonderful mercy to him in pulling him out of hell in sealing his Ministry with
the conversion of many souls, which he wholly ascribed to his glory.

About a week before he died, when his 17.
silver cord began to loosen, and his golden boule to break: He called for his
wife, and desired her to bear his dissolution, which was now at hand, with a
Christian fortitude, a thing which he had prepared her for by the space of
twenty years, telling her that his approaching death was decreed upon him from
all eternity, and that the counsel of the LORD must stand, and bad her make no
Isay 46.
doubt but she should meet him again in Heaven: And turning toward his He
had five Children, one son, and four daughters.
children told them, that they should not expect he should now say any thing
to them, neither would his ability of body and breath give him leave, he had
told them enough in the time of his sickness and before, and hoped they would
remember it, and verily believed that none of them durst think to meet him at
that great Tribunal in an unregenerate state. About two days after, diverse of
his Parish coming to watch with him, he was moved by a friend that as he had
discovered to them by his Doctrine, the exceeding comforts that were in CHRIST,
he would now tell them what he felt in his soul. Alas (said he) do they look
for that of me now that want breath and power to speak? I have told them
enough in my Ministry: But yet to give you satisfaction, I am by the wonderful
mercies of GOD as full of comfort as my heart can hold, and feel nothing in my
soul but Christ with whom I heartily desire to be; And then looking upon some
that were weeping, said, Oh what a deal ado there is ere one can die!

The night before he died, when the doors without began to be shut, and the
daughters of Music to be brought low, and he lying very low with his head,
expecting every moment when the wheel should be broken at the Cisterne, yet
being told that some of his dear friends were then about him to take their
last farewell, He caused himself to be lifted up, and then like old Jacob
bowing himself on his beds-head, after a few gaspings for breath, he spoke in
this manner. I am now drawing on apace to my dissolution, and am just in the
Case of A Justice of Peace in Northhampton S^re, whose virtuous memory I can
never th^nke of but in the phrase of the Apostle, The world was not worthy of
him, Heb. 11.
Sir John Pickering, Hold out Faith and patience, your work will speedily be at
an end: And then shaking them all by the hands, prayed heartily, and
particularly for them, and desired them to make sure of heaven, and to bear in
mind what he had formerly told them in his Ministry, protesting to them, that
the doctrine which he had preached to them for the space of twenty years was
the truth of GOD as he should answer it at that great Tribunal of CHRIST,
before whom he should shortly appear. This he spoke when the very pangs of
death were upon him. Whereupon a very dear friend of his taking him by the
hand, and asking him if he felt not much pain, Truly no (said he) the
greatest I feel is your cold hand. And then speaking to be laid down again,
he spoke no more until the next morning when he took his last leave of his
Wife and Children, prayed for them and blessed them all, and that day in the
afternoon about five of the clock, being Saturday the 17. day of December.
Anno Dom. 1631. in the LXth. year of his age yielded up his spirit to GOD that
gave it, and according to his own speech celebrated the ensuing Sabbath in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Thus in the space of fifteen weeks was the first and most
glorious light put out in Broughton, that ere that Town enjoyed or that many
ages will render again.

And thus have you (good reader) the Life and Death of this very learned and
godly man truly set forth: if any man shall contradict any thing that I have
written of him; I shall not be careful to answer him: For if he be good, and
well knew Mr Bolton, he will not have the face to object: If he be Contra Syco
phantae morsum non est remedium* Sen.
bad, I hold him not worth answering: I shall only say to him in the language
of Tacitus, didicit ille maledicere, and ego contemnere, He has taught his
tongue to speak ill, and I have learned to contemn it.

There is only one objection which I 20.
will answer, and noe more, which began to be muttered in his life time and
is now likely to make a louder noise, if it be not put to silence.

This preaching twice a Sabbath is more Ob.
then needs, half of it is but prating. And Ministers under the Gospel may
take more liberty, and are not tied to such precisenes and severity of life as
he used.

I will not grace this objection so much Ans.
as to beelong in answering it: The former part of this objection this learned
Author in his Book of Walking with God, and in his Epistle to his last Book
dedicated to that religious noble Knight, S^. Robert Carre, both by reasons and
the constant practice and precepts of the ancient Fathers, preaching twice a
day, sometimes every day, has a bundantly and unanswerably confuted. I will
only add two examples of later times, the one of renowned Calvin (the glory
Invita Calui. per Theodor. Pez. and Melch. Adam.
of his age) who Preached or Lectured almost every day, and some days twice*
which Preachings were so excellent that they were the matter of those laborious
and learned Commentaries of his upon the Bible, which occasioned D. Reynolds
aptly and truly to call him doctissimus and fidelissimus Scripturae interpres,
the most learned and faithful expounder of Scripture. The other of our most
precious Jewel, who was a very frequent and constant Preacher, and hastened his
own death this way: for, riding to preach at Lacock in Wilt-Shire, a gentleman
that met him perceiving the feebleness of his body, (which he had wasted out
in such spiritual labors) advised him for his healths sake to return home
again. To whom this godly Bishop by way of allusion to that brave speech of
Oportet imperatorem stantem mori. Xiphil. in vita Vespat.
Vespatian the Emperor thus excellently replied, Oportet episcopum concionantem
mori, which in the Dr. Humphrey in the life of ^. Jewel.
story of his life is thus englished, It becomes best a Bishop to die
preaching in the pulpit. And so he did, for presently after the Sermon he was
by the reason of sickness forced to his Bed, from whence he never came off,
till his translation to Glory.

For the latter part of the Objection touching that precisenes of life that was
in him and which ought to be in the Ministers of GOD, Let him that thus
objecteth, but well read and mind those strict precepts of the Apostle Paul to
Timothy and Titus, the examples 1. Tim 3. (...). ^.
of primitive times and those precise injunctions for the Clergy that are
dispersed throughout the whole body of the Canon Law and to come nearer home in
the A ^rapula and ^brietate quae honestatem little deformant omnes omnino
clerici abstineant and vigilanter. Steph. in Council. Oxon.
Provincial Constitutions of Canterbury, But especially in those excellent
reformed Ecclesiastical Laws compiled by the two and thirty Commissioners
(whose names I have under M. S. Sr. Rob. Cotton. Consistit haec deformitas in
vanitate habitus. Item in mala societate. Item deformatur haec honcstas, cum
clericus seimmiscet in negotijs socularibus. Ite^ intendendo mimis and
joculatoribus. Item tabernas ingrediendo, nisi tempore itineris. Item ad aleas
and taxillos ludendo, vel eisdem interessendo. Item quocunque ornatu superstuo
utendo. Lindwood lib. 3. de vi. and honest. Cleric. fol. 87. b.
King EDWARD the sixths own hand appointed by him for the purgation of that
soul body of the Canon Law) and I doubt not but he that so obiecteth will
either be ashamed of his ill tongue or his ill life.

These last Laws were by Royal Authority printed in the Month of April Anno
Domini 1571. and are at this Day (for ought I know) Authenticke rules and
Canons amongst the Clergy: One of these Laws touching Ministers, I will recite
in the proper words of the Law. Non sint compotores, non aleatores, non
aucupes, non venatores, non sycophantae, non otiosi, aut supini, sed sacrarum
literarum studijs, et praedicationi verbi et orationibus pro Ecclesia ad
DOMINVM diligenter incumbant. Refor. legum ECCLES. Tit: de ECCLES. et Minist.
Cap. 4. Fol. 48. Jewel Apol.


Nay that Council or rather Conspiracy of Trent, as Bishop Jewel calls it, of
which I may say as was said of Ithacius, that the hatred of the Priscillian
heresy was all the virtue he had: So all the goodness of this Council chiefly
consisted in the reformation of the badnes of the Clergy. Hear how precisely
it speaks in it own Language Nihil est quod alios magis ad pietatem and Dei
cultum assidue instruat, quam eorum vi^a et exemplum qui se divino ministerio
dedicarunt etc. Quapropter sic decet omnino clericos in sorcem Domini vocatos
vitam moresque suos omnes componere, ut habitu, gestu, incessu, sermon,
alijsque omnibus rebus nil nisi grave, moderatum, etreligione plenum prae se
ferant: le via etiam delicta, qua in ipsis maxima essent, effugiant, ut eorum
actiones cunctis afferant venerationem* etc. Statuit sancta Synodus, ut quae
alias a summis Pontificibus et a sacris Concilijs de Clericorum vita,
honestate, cultu, doctrinaque retinenda, a^ simul de luxu, commessationibus,
choreis, aleis, ac quibuscunque criminibus, nec non Veteres Canones Apo
stolorum illum episcopum, qui simul and civilem ma gistratum and ecclesiasticam
functionem obite velit, ju bent ab officio sununoveri. Can. 8. Jew. pol. page
122.
secularibus negotijs fugiendis copiose ac salubriter sancita fuerunt, eadem
imposterum ijsdem poenis, velmaioribus, arbitrio Ordinarij imponendis
observentur: nec appellatio executionem hanc quae ad morum correctionem
pertinet suspendat. Council. Triden: sess. 22. Cap: 1.

If any man have any more Objections against this Reverend and gracious Author
I will give him no other answer then our Savior did to that Curious question,
Go thou and do likewise. And I make Luke 10. 37.
no doubt but that all these Cauills against him (for they can be no other)
will by a sweet and sacred exchange be resolved into earnest contentions
after that happiness which he now enioyes at his right hand where is, Fulness of
joy and pleasures for evermore.

Mr. BOLTONS FOUR LAST THINGS: DEATH, IVDGEMENT, HELL, HEAVEN.
ISA. XXVI. In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah, etc.
WE have here in this Chapter, First, A Consolation for GODS people in the time
of their Captivity. The Sum whereof is this: Though all things seem to
threaten ruin, and tend toward confusion; yet the issue will be, that GOD will
most mercifully rescue and relieve His own; who afterward, will not only
themselves acknowledge and magnify His miraculous hand in their preservation
and support, but also stir up others to rely wholly upon that mighty LORD,
that never did, or ever will fail or forsake any that put their trust in Him.
In the seven first Verses.

Secondly, An Institution or Instruction, How the godly should carry themselves
in the time of crosses and chastisements; and what difference there is between
them and the graceless in such Cases. From Ver. 7* to the end.

In the first Part we may take notice, and into our consideration these three
Points.

1. Provision of a comfortable Song for the people to carry with them, as it
were into Captivity, and the fiery Trial; that in the midst of their pressures
they might be eased and refresht with a conceit, that the Day would come,
wherein they should joyfully sing the song of enlargement, and salvation, Ver.
1. Though when they sat down by the rivers of Babylon, their hearts would not
serve them to sing any Song of Zion, but fell asunder in their breasts like
drops of water, yet assuredly, all GODS faithful Ones, who believed His
Prophet and Promises, would in the mean time secretly sweeten their sorrows
and sufferings, with a patient expectation of this happy Day, and heavenly
mirth. 2. The Song it self, Ver. 1, 2, 3. Wherein we may consider, 1. The
Time, when the Song shall be sung: In that Day] which we may understand, 1.
Historically, literally, typically, of the Israelites deliverance out of
Babylon, and the miserable slavery thereof. 2. Anti-typically, of the blessed
enlargement of GODS Elect out of the snares and bondage of the Devil. 3. And
mystically also, as some Divines think, of the joyful coming of Christians
out of spiritual Babylon, Rev. 17. 5. and from under the tyranny of
Antichrist. 4. Complementally, of gathering the Saints out of this vale of
tears, and from the eager pursuit of that great red Dragon, and the powers of
darkness, into Jerusalem which is above, where they shall joyfully sing
triumphant Halelujahs in the highest heaven for ever and ever, Galat. 4. 26. 2.
The Matter of the Song; which is, Salvation, Ver. 1. Peace; Ver. 3. Holy
company, Ver. 2. Pure pleasure, comfort, sound contentment, etc. 3. An
Exhortation, or exhortatory apostrophe, to trust in Jehovah. And there is
added, for ever; lest upon Gods delay, and respiting relief, we should
despair, or have recourse unto the arm of flesh. Reasons to enforce this
exhortation are three. 1. In Him is (...) rupes saeculorum, everlasting
strength, Ver. 3. A rock of eternity, upon which we may for ever sweetly and
safely rest and repose our selves, amidst the many furious storms and
boisterous waves of this troublesome world. 2. He is able to tame, take down,
and trample in the mire, the insolency and pride of the most raging
persecutors, Ver. 5. And to raise His, though never so low and languishing, to
set them upon a Rock of safety and salvation for ever, and to give them the
necks of their enemies to tread upon, Verse 6. 3. He weighes and watches over
the ways of the just, Verse 7. See Jeremy 17. 7.
Now whereas the Prophet in the first place does furnish the people of GOD
before hand with a strong counter*comfort and cordial against their faintings
in the furnace of affliction, we may thence be instructed; that,

DOCT. It is an holy wisdom, and happy thing to treasure up comfortable
provision against the Day of calamity. It is good counsel, and a blessed
course, to store up comfort against the evil Day. He that gathers in Summer,
(says Solomon) is a son of understanding: But he that sleeps in Harvest,
is a son of confusion, Prove. 10. 5. If not by an immediate sense, yet by a
warrantable analogy and good consequent this Place will bear this Paraphrase.

That man which now in this fair and seasonable Sunshine of his gracious
visitation is lulled asleep with the Syren-songs of these sensual times upon
the lap of pleasure; swims down the temporizing torrent of these last and
lewdest days with full sail of prosperity and ease, against the secret wastes
and counter-blasts (as it were) of a reclaiming conscience, as thousands do, to
their utter undoing for ever; mis-spends his golden time, and many goodly
opportunities of gathering spiritual Manna, in grasping gold, gathering
wealth, growing great, greatning his posterity, clasping about the arm of
flesh, satisfying the appetite, and serving himself: In a word, he that while
it is called To day, turns not on Gods side, and by forwardness and
fruitfulness in His blessed ways, treasures up comfort and grace against his
ending hour, shall most certainly upon his bed of death, and illumination of
conscience, find nothing but horrible confusion and fear, extremest horror,
and insupportable heaviness of heart: his soul must presently down into the
kingdom of darkness, and bottom of the burning lake, there to lie
everlastingly in tempestuous and fiery torments, the sting and strength whereof
does not only surpass the pens and tongues of Men and Angels, but the very
conceit of those that suffer them, which if a man knew, he would not endure
one hour for all the pleasures of ten thousand worlds: His body (the pleasing
and pampering whereof has plunged him into such a sea of calamity and woe)
must descend into the house of death, an habitation of blackness and cruelty:
lie down in a bed of dust and rottenness covered with worms, guarded and
kept full sure by the Prince and powers of darkness unto the judgment of the
great Day: and then the whole man must become the woeful object, of the
extremity and everlastingnesse of that fiercest and unquenchable wrath, which,
like infinite rivers of brimstone, will feed upon his soul and flesh, without
remedy, ease, or end.

But that happy man, which in the short summers day of his miserable and
mortal life, gathers grace with an holy greediness, plies the noble trade of
Christianity with resolution and vndauntednesse of spirit, against the
boisterous current and corruptions of the times; grows in godliness, GODS
favor, and fruits of good life; purchases and preserves (though with the loss
of all earthly delights) peace of conscience, one of the richest treasures and
rarest jewels that ever illightened and made lightsome the heart of man in this
world: I say that man, though never so contemptible in the eyes of the worldly
wise; though never so scornfully trod upon and overslowne by the tyranny and
swelling pride of those ambitious selfe-flattering Giants, who, like mighty
winds, when they have blustered a while, breathe out into naught, shall most
certainly upon his dying-bed meet with a glorious troop of blessed Angels,
ready and rejoicing to guard and conduct his departing Soul into his Masters
joy. His body shall be preserved in the grave by the all-powerfull providence, as
in a Cabinet of rest and sweetest sleep, perfumed by the burial of our
blessed SAVIOVR, until the glorious appearing of the great GOD. And then,
after their joyfullest reunion, they shall both be filled, and shine through
all eternity, with such glory and bliss, which in sweetness and excellency
does infinitely exceed the possibility of all humane or Angelical Quae lingua,
vel quis intellectus cape^e sufficit illa superna civitatis quanta sint gaudia;
Angelorum choris interesse, cum beatissimis spiritibus gloriae conditoris
assistere, praesentem DE^ vultum cernere, incircumscriptum lumen videre, nullo
mortis metu affi^, incorruptionis perpetuae munere laetari, etc. Gregor. Hom.
^7* in Evang.
conceit.

Thus you see in short, what a deal of confusion that miserable man heaps up
for his precious Soul against the Day of wrath, which spends the span of his
transitory life after the ways of his own heart: and how truly he is a son
of understanding, who in the few and evil days of short abode upon earth,
treasures up grace and spiritual riches against the dreadful winter night of
death.

For I would have you understand, that by comfortable provision] I mean not,

Lands, livings, or large possessions; I mean not wealth or riches: Alas!
These will not profit in the day of wrath, Prove. 11. 4. They certainly make
themselves wings, and in our greatest need, will fly away as an Eagle toward
heaven, Prove. 23. 5.

I mean not silver or gold: they shall not be able to deliver in the Day of
the Lords wrath, Zeph. 1. 18. Will he esteem thy riches? no not gold, nor all
the forces of strength, Job 36. 19.

I mean not top of honor, or height of Place: this (without religion) serves
only to make the downfall more desperate and remarkable. They are raised on
hie, says the very Poet, that their ruin may be more irrecoverable. But what
do I meddle with the Poet? the Prophet is plain and peremptory against the
pride of ambition: Thy terriblenesse has deceived thee, and the pride of thine
heart: O thou that dwell in the clefts of the rock, that hold the height
of the hill: Though thou should make thy nest as high as the Eagle, I will
bring thee down from thence, says the Lord, Ier. 49. 16.

I mean not the arm of flesh, or Princely favors. Assuredly, that man which
gratifies great Ones to the wounding of his conscience by the formal slavery
of baseness and insinuation, or any ill offices of ambitious servitude in
feats of irreligious policy, in justice, cruelty, turning Turk and traitor to
those that trusted him, etc. shall at last receive no other recompense of such
abhorred villainy, when divine vengeance begins to take him in hand, than that
which justly fell upon Judas (in the extremity of his anguish and sorrow) from
the chief Priests and Elders, Matthew. 27. 4. If ever great men, or earthly
Potentates did take their slattering slaves out of the hands of GOD, at that
highest Tribunal, or were able to free a guilty soul from eternal flames; it
were something to grow rich, and rise by vile accommodations, and serving their
turn in the mean time. But such a man s^all certainly (in the day of his last
and greatest need) be cast with horrible confusion of spirit, and (...) grief
of heart, upon Wolsies rufull complaint, and cry out when it is too late: Had I
been as careful (...) serve the GOD of heaven, as my great Master on earth;
he had never left me in my gray hairs. Favors of greatness may follow a man
in fair weather, and shine upon his face with goodly hopes and expectation of
great things, but in shipwracks even of worldly things, where all sinks, but
the sorrow to save them; or especially upon the very first tempest of
spiritual distress, they steer away before the Sea and Wind, leaving him to
sink or swim; without all possibility of help or rescue, even to the rage of a
wounded conscience, and gulf many times of that desperate madness, which the
Prophet describes Isa. 8. 21, 22. He shall fret himself, and curse his King
and his GOD, and look upward. And he shall look unto the earth: and behold
trouble and darkness, dimnesse of anguish, and he shall be driven to darkness.

By comfortable Provision therefore, I mean treasures of a more high, lasting,
and noble nature: The blessings of a better life, comforts of godliness,
graces of salvation, favor and acceptance with the highest Majesty, etc. They
are the riches of heaven only which we should so hoard up, and will ever hold
out in the times of trouble, and Day of the Lords wrath. Amongst which, a sound
faith, and a clear conscience are the most peerlesse and unvaluable jewels;
able by their native puissance, and infused vigor, to pull the very heart (as
it were) out of Hell, and with confidence and conquest to look even Death and
the Devil in the face. There is no darkness so desolate, no cross so
cutting, but the splendour of these is able to illighten, their sweetness to
mollify.

So that the blessed counsel of CHRIST, Mat. 6. 19, 20. does concur with,
and confirm this Point: Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where
moth and rust does corrupt; and where thieves break through and steal. But lay
up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust does
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through, nor steal.

By moth and rust those two greedy and great devourers of gay clothes, and
glistering treasures, two capital vanities upon which worldlings dote, and two
greatest inchanters of mortal men, are insinuated, and signified unto us all
those iron teeth, and devouring instruments of mortality, by which corruption
eats into the heart of all earthly glory, wastes insensibly the bowels of the
greatest bravery, and ever at length consumes into dust the strongest sinews
of the most Imperial Sovereignty under the Sun. Sometimes, A day, an hour,
Dies, hora, momentum, evertendisdominationibus su^icit, quae adamantinis
credebantur radicibus esse fundatae. Casaub. Repent quidem alta seculi co^unt,
pulchra transe^nt. Nam cum stare in his floribus suis mundus cernitur,
repentina fortuna turbat^: aut festina, and omnia deturbante morte co^cluditur.
Vana ergo sunt gaudia seculi, quae quasi manentia blandiuntur: sed amatores
suos, cito transeundo decipiunt. Greg. in 1 Reg. Cap. 11.
a moment, is enough to overturne the things, that seemed to have been founded
and rooted in Adamant. The LORD of Heaven has put a frail and mortal nature,
a weak and dying disposition into all worldly things. They spring and
flourish, and die. Even the greatest and goodliest Politic Bodies that ever
the earth bore, though animated with the searching spirit of profoundest
Policy; strengthened with the resolution and valor of the most conquering
commanders, sighted with eagle eyes of largest depths, fore-sights and
comprehensions of state, crowned with never so many warlike prosperities,
triumphs and victorious achievements, yet like the natural Body of a man,
they had, as it were, their Infancy, youthful strength, man's state, old age,
and at last, their grave. We may see Dan. 2. 35. The glory and power of the
mightiest Monarchies that ever the Sun saw, shadowed by Nebuchadnezzars great
Image, sink into the dust, and become like the chafe of the Summers threshing
floores; upon a windy day. Unto all Dominions GOD has set their periods: who,
though he has given to man the knowledge of those ways, by which kingdoms
rise and fall; yet has le^t him subject unto the affections which draw on
these fatal changes in their times appointed. Sr Walter Rawleigh P. 1. Lib. 5.
Cap. 3. Sect. 13*
Hear a wise and noble writer speaking to this purpose, though for another
purpose: Who has not observed, what labor, what practice, peril, bloodshed,
and cruelty, the Kings and Princes of the world have undergone, exercised,
taken on them, and committed; to make themselves and their issues Masters of
the world? And yet has Babylon, Persia, Egypt, Syria, Macedon, The ruin of
the goodliest Pieces of the world, f^re* shows the dissolution os the whole.
Carthage, Rome, and the rest, no fruit, flower, grass or leaf, springing
upon the face of the earth, of those seeds: No, their very roots and ruins do
hardly remain. All that the hand of man can make, is either over-turned by the
hand of man; or at length by standing and continuing consumed. What trust then
or true comfort in the arm of flesh, humane greatness, or earthly treasures?
What strength or stay in such broken staves of reed? In the time of need, the
Worm of vanity will wast and wither them all, like Ionahs gourd; and leave our
naked souls to the open rage of wind and weather; to the scourges and
Scorpions of guiltiness and fear. It transcends the Sphere of their activity,
as they say, and passes their power to satisfy an immortal soul, to comfort
through the length of eternity; either to corrupt or conquer any spiritual
adversaries. For could thou purchase unto thy self a Monopoly of all the
wealth in the world; were thou able to empty the Western parts of gold; and
the East of all her spices, and precious things; should thou enclose the
whole face of the earth from one end of heaven to another, and fill this wide
worlds circumference with golden heaps and hoards of pearl: did thou in
the mean time sit at the stern, and hold the reins in thine hand of all
earthly kingdoms, nay, exalt thy self as the Eagle, and set thy nest among
the stars; nay, like the sun of the morning advance thy Throne even above the
stars of God; yet all these, and whatsoever else thou can imagine, to make
thy worldly happiness complete and matchless, would not be worth a button
unto thee upon thy bed of death, nor do thee a halfe-penny-worth of good in the
horror of that dreadful time. Where did that man dwell, or of what cloth was
his coat made, that was ever comforted by his goods, greatness, or great men,
in that last and sorest conflict? In his wrastlings with the accusations of
conscience, terrors of death, and oppositions of hell? No, no: It is matter of
a more heavenly metal, treasures of an higher temper, riches of a nobler
nature, that must hold out, and help in the distresses of soul, in the
anguish of conscience, in the hour of death, against the stings of sin,
wrath of GOD, and last Tribunal. Do you think that ever any glorified soul
did gaze with delight upon the wedge of gold, that tramples under foot the Sun,
and looks All-mighty GOD in the face? No, no: It is the society of holy
Angels, and blessed Saints, the sweet Communion with its dearest Spouse, that
unapproachable light which crowns GODS sacred Throne, the beauty and
brightness of that most glorious Place, the shining Body of the SON of GOD,
the beatificall fruition of the Deity it self, the depth of Eternity, and the
like everlasting Fountains of spiritual ravishment and joy, which only can
feed and fill the restless and infinite appetite of that immortal Thing with
fullness of contentment, and fresh pleasures, world without end.

Thrice blessed and sweet then is the advice of our Lord and Master JESUS
CHRIST, who would have us to turn the eye of our delight, and eagerness of
affection from the fading gloss, and painted glory of earthly treasures;
wherein naturally the worm of corruption and vanity ever breeds, and many
times the worm of an evil conscience attends; the one of which eats out their
heart when we expect an harvest; The other seizes upon the Soul in the time of
sorrow, and sinks it into the lowest hell: And as Men of GOD, and Sons of
Wisdom, to mount our thoughts, and raise our spirits, and bend our affections
to things above; which are as far from diminution and decay, as the Soul
from death; and can be no more corrupted or shaken, than the Seat and
Omnipotency of GOD surprised. For, besides that, they infinitely surpass in
eminency of worth and sweetness of pleasure, the comprehension of the largest
heart, and expression of any Angels tongue; they also out-last the days of
heaven, and run parallel with the life of GOD, and line of Eternity. As we see
the Fountain of all material light to power out his beams, and shining
abundantly every day upon the world without weariness, emptiness, or end; so,
and incomparably more does joy and peace, glory and bliss, spring and
plentifully flow every moment with fresh streams from the face of the Father
of Lights upon all His holy ones in heaven, and that everlastingly. O blessed
then shall we be upon our beds of death, if (following the counsel of our
dearest LORD, who shed the most precious and warmest blood in His heart to
bring our souls out of hell) we treasure ap now in the mean time, heavenly
hoards which will ever happily hold out, a stock of grace, which never shrinks
in the wetting, but abides the trial of the spirit, and touchstone of the
Word in all times of danger, and Day of the LORD: even that accurate,
circumspect, and precise walking, pressed upon us by the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 15.
Though pestilently persecuted and plagued by the enemies of GOD in all ages:
And that purity which Saint John makes a property of every true-hearted
Professor, 1 John 3. 3. So much opposed and bitterly oppressed by the world; and
yet, without which none of us shall ever see the face of GOD with comfort. If
while it is called To Day, we make our peace with His heavenly Highness, by an
humble continued exercise of repentance; by standing valiantly on His side; by
holding an holy acquaintance at His merciful Throne with a mighty importunity
of prayer, and godly conversation above; by ever offering up unto Him in the
arms of our Faith (when he is angry) the bleeding Body of His own crucified
SON, never giving Him over, or any rest, until He bepleased to register and
enroll the remission of our sins in the Book of Life, with the bloody lines
of CHRIST'S Soule-saving sufferings, and golden characters of His own eternal
love. If now, before we appear at the dreadful Tribunal of the euer-living
GOD, (and little know we whose turn is next) we make our friends in the Court
of Heaven: the blessed Angels, in procuring their joy and love, by a visible
constancy in the fruits, tears, and truth of a sound conversion. The Spirit of
comfort by a ready and reverent entertainment of His holy Motions and
inspirations of grace: the Son and Heir of the King of glory, the Foundation
and Fountain of all our Bliss, in this world and the world to come: from
whose meritorious blood shed and blessed mediation arise all those floods of
mercy and favor, which refresh our Souls in this vale of tears; and also
those unknown bottomless seas of pleasure, peace and all unspeakable delights,
which will superabound, and overflow with new and fresh sweetness for ever and
ever in the Paradise of GOD. Blessed are they, that ever they were borne, who
have already got Him their Advocate at the right hand of His Father. For,
besides many other glorious privileges thereby, in all their exigents and
extremities, they may be ever welcome to the Seat of mercy, and be sure to
speed. If a man had a suit unto the King, it were a comfortable and happy thing
to find a friend in Court. But if the Kings special and choicest Favorite;
nay, His own only Son were his Intercessour; how confident would he be to
prevail and prosper, to conquer his opposites, and crown his desires? Why
then should any poor Christian be discomforted and cast down: nay, why should
he not be extraordinarily raised and ravished in spirit with much joyful hope,
and sweet assurance, when he throws himself down at the Throne of grace;
since the dearest Son of the eternal GOD, the Heir of heaven and earth, the
Mediator of the great Covenant of endless salvation is his Advocate at the
hand of His All-mighty Father in the most high and glorious Court of Heaven?
Wherefore when an humbled soul, and trembling spirit is sore troubled, and
almost turned back from his purpose of prayer, and prostration at the foot of
heavenly Majesty, by entertaining before hand a feeling apprehension of his
own abhorred vileness, and the holy purity of GODS all-seeing and searching
eye, which cannot look on iniquity; let this consideration comfort and breed
confidence, that JESUS CHRIST the Son of GODS love does solicit and tender
the suit, who out of His own sense and sympathy of such like troubles and
temptations, does deal for us with a true, a natural, and a sensible touch of
compassionatenesse and mercy. Shall that blessed Heb. 4. 1^. Luke 23. 34.
Savior of ours call and cry for a pardon to His Father, for those which put
Him to death; who were so far from seeking unto him, that they sought and
sucked his blood; and shall He shut His ears against the groans of thy grieved
spirit, and heavy sighs of thy bleeding soul, who values one drop of His
blood at an higher price, than the worth of many worlds? It cannot be.

Thus that saying of Solomon, and this counsel of CHRIST makes good the truth
of the Point, which may further appear by these Reasons.

1. Taking this counsel betime, and hoarding up heavenly things in this
harvest time of grace, mightily helps to assuage the smart, mollify the
bitterness, and illighten the darkness of the evil Day. It is sovereign,
and serves to take the venime, sting and teeth, out of any cross, calamity, or
distress: and so preserves the heart from that raging hopeless sorrow, which,
like a devouring Harpie, dries up, dissolves, and destroys the blood, spirits,
and life of all those who are destitute of such a divine Antidote. What vast
difference may we discern between Job and Judas; David and Achitophel, in the
days of evil? The two men of God being formerly enriched with his favor and
familiarity, so behaved themselves, the one in the ship-wracke of his worldly
happiness, the other in the hazard of his Kingdom, as though they had not
been troubled at all: The LORD Job 1.
gave; and the LORD has taken away, says Job, when all was gone, blessed be
the name of the LORD. If I shall find favor in the eyes of the LORD, says 2 Samuel 15. 25. 26. 21
David, He will bring me again, and show me both it, and His habitation. But
if He thus say, I have no delight in thee: behold, here am I, let Him do to me,
as seems good unto Him. But the spirits of the other two false and
rotten-hearted fellows in the time of trouble were so overtaken, nay, over
whelmed with grief, that they both hanged themselves. 2. This holy providence
before hand may happily prevent a great deal of restless impatiency,
reprobate fears, forlorn distractions of spirit, hying to the caves, crying
to the mountains, bootlesse relying upon the arm of flesh; Cursing their King
and their GOD, and looking upward, roaring out with hideous groans; Who among
us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell with the
everlasting burnings? etc. All which desperate terrors and tumultuations of
conscience are wont to surprise and seize upon unholy and unprepared hearts,
especially when GODS hand is finally and implacably upon them. 3. And we shall
hereby excellently honor and advance the glory of Profession; when it shall
appear to the world, and even the contraryminded are enforced to confess;
that there is a secret heavenly vigor, undauntednesse of spirit, and
nobleness of courage which mightily upholds the hearts of holy men in those
times of confusion and fear, when theirs melt away within them like water, and
be as the heart of a woman in her pangs. Worldlings wonder, and gnash the teeth
hereat: When they see, as Chrysostom truly tells us, the Christian to differ
from them in this; that he bears all crosses courageously; and with the wings
(as it were) of faith, out soars the height of all humane miseries. He is like
a Rock, incorporated into JESUS CHRIST, the Rock of eternity, still erect
inexpugnable, unshaken, though most furiously assaulted with the tempestuous
waves of any worldly woe, or concurrent rage of all infernal powers. But all
the imaginary manhood of graceless men does ever in the day of distress
either vanish into nothing, or dissolve into despair. 4. Expression of
spiritual strength in the time of trouble from former heavenly store, is a
notable means to move others to enter into the same good way, and grow greedy
after grace; to draw and allure them, to the entertainment and exercise of
those ordinances, and that One necessary thing, which only can make them bold
and unmooveable like Mount Zion in the day of adversity. I have known some,
the first occasion of whose conversion, was, the observation of their
stoutnesse and patience under oppressions and wrongs, whom they have purposely
persecuted with extremest malice and hate. So blessed many times is the brave,
resolute, and undaunted behavior of GODS people in the time of trial, and
amidst their forest sufferings, that it breeds in the hearts of beholders,
thoughts even of admiration and love, nay a desire of imitation, and turning on
the other side. When they represent to the eye of the world their ability to
pass through the raging flames of fiery tongues untouched, to possess their
souls in peace, amidst scorpions, thorns, and rebels, to pass by basest
indignities from basest men without wound or passion, to hold up their heads
above water in the most boisterous tempests, and deepest seas of danger, to
triumph over all adversary power in the evil day; I say, by GODS blessing,
this may make many come in and glorify GOD, marvelling and enquiring, whence
such invincible fortitude, and bravenesse of spirit should spring; concluding
with Nabuchadnezzar: Surely, The servants of the most high GOD. And so at
length their affections may be so set on edge after the excellency and
amiablenesse of JESUS CHRIST, who being, The mighty GOD, and The Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, does alone inspire all His with such a Lion-like courage; that
they may seriously and savingly seek His face and favor; saying with those,
Cant. 5. 9. What is thy Beloved more than another Beloved, O thou fairest among
women? -- That we may seek Him with thee. When they behold such a deal of
Majesty and mi^th to shine in his face whom they make the mark of all their
spiteful rage and revenge; their teeth with which they could have torn him in
pieces, may water; and they industriously desire to know, what that is, which
makes such a man so merry in all estates.
Uses* 1. This may serve to awaken and reprove all those secure and careless
companions, who, if they may enjoy present contentment, and partake in the
mean time of the prosperity and pleasures of the times, wherein they tumble
themselves with insolency, luxury, and ease; take no thought, make no provision
at all against a day of reckoning, provide no food against a foul day,
treasure up no comfort against the LORDS coming, prepare no armor or aid for
that last and dreadful conflict upon their beds of death. Alas poor souls!
Did they know and feelingly apprehend what a deal of horror, astonishment and
anguish dogs them continually at the heels, ready and eager after a few days
of filthy and fugitive pleasures, to seize upon them like travail upon a woman
with child, suddenly, unavoidably, and in greatest extremity, and that so
intolerable, that they shall never be able either to decline or endure, the
very weakest biting of the never-dying worm, or the least sparkle of those
everlasting flames; they would think all the days of their life few enough to
gather spiritual strength against that fearful hour. Nay, some are such
cruel caitifs and Cannibals to their own souls, and so accursedly blinded by
the Prince of darkness, that instead of comfortable provision, they heap up
wrath against the day of wrath; instead of grace, GODS favor, and a good
conscience, peace, joy, and refreshing from the presence of the LORD, they lay
up scourges, and Scorpions for their naked souls and guilty consciences
against the time and terror of the LORDS visitation. For, let them be most
assured; all their lies, oaths, rotten and railing speeches; all their
covetous, lustful, ambitious and malicious thoughts; all their swaggering and
furious combinations against GODS people, sensual revellings, joviall
meetings, etc. will all, When their fear comes as desolation, and their
destruction comes as a whirlewind, like so many envenimed stings, run into
their sinful souls, and pierce them through with everlasting sorrow. Alas!
What will the sons and daughters of pleasure do then? And all those
spiritual beggars and bankerupts, who have greedily hunted, all their life
long after these mortal things of this life, as if their souls had been
therein immortal; and utterly neglected those things which are immortal, as
if their selves after the world had been but mortal? What do you think will be
their thoughts upon the very first approach of the Port of death, to which in
the mean time all winds drive them? Fullsad, and heavy thoughts (LORD thou
know) then at leisure enough to reflect severely upon their former folly,
though formerly beaten from them by their health and outward happiness, and
will pay them to the uttermost for all the pleasing passages of their life
past. O then they shall lie upon their last beds like Wild Bulls in a net, full
of the fury of the LORD; And in the morning they shall say, would GOD it were
even: and at even they shall say, would GOD it were morning, for the fear of
their heart wherewith they shall fear, and for the sight of their eyes, which
they shall s^e. Then (though too late) will they lamentably cry out and
complain: What has pride profited us? Or what good has riches with our
vaunting brought us? All those things are passed away like a shadow, and as a
Post that hast^th by. And as a ship that passes over the waves of the water,
and when it is gone by, the trace thereof cannot be found: neither the pathway
of the keele in the waves. Or as when a bird has flowne through the air, there
is no token of her way to be found, but the light air being beaten with the
stroke of her wings, and parted with the violent noise, and motion of them, is
passed ^horow, and therein afterward no sign where she went is to be found.
Or like as when an arrow is shot at a mark, it parts the air, which
immediately comes together again; so that a man cannot know where it went
through: Even so we in like manner, as soon as we were borne, began to draw to
our end, and had no sign of virtue to show: but we consumed in our own
wickedness. For the hope of the ungodly is like dust, that is blown away with
the wind, like a thin froth that is driven away with the storm. like as the
smoke which is dispersed here and there with a tempest, and passes away as the
remembrance of a guest that tarieth but a day. If a Minister who labors
industriously all his life long, to work upon such as sit under him every
Sabbath; Of which, some all the while prefer some base lust before the LORD
JESUS: others will not out of their formality to the forwardness of the
Saints, do what he can, or press he them never so punctually and upon purpose;
I say, if it were possible, that he might talk with any of them, some two
hours after they had been in hell: Oh! How should he find the case altered
with them? How would they then roar, because they had dis-regarded his
Ministry? What would they not give to have a grant from GOD, to try them in
hearing but one Sermon more? How would they tear their hair, gnash the teeth,
and bite their nails, that they had not listened more seriously, and taken
more sensibly to heart those many heavenly instructions, spiritual
discoveries, secret (but well understood) intimations, that their state to
Godward was stark naught, by which he sought with much earnestness and
zeal, even to the wasting of his blood and life, to save the blood of their
souls? And yet for all this, you will not be warned in time, charm the
charmers never so wisely: But some of you sit here before us from day to day,
as senseless of those things which most deeply and dearly concern the
eternal ruin, or welfare of your precious souls, as the sea^es upon which
you sit, the pillars you lean unto; nay, the dead bodies you tread upon:
others looking toward heaven afar off, and professing a little, sit before
us as though they were right and truly religious; and they hear our words, but
they will not do them: For with their mouth they show much love, but their
heart goes after their covetousness. And lo, we are unto them, as a very
lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
instrument: For they hear our words, but they do them not. They are friends to
the better side, may go far, and even suffer sometimes in good causes, etc.
But let us once touch them in point of commodity, about their enclosures,
immoderate plungings into worldly affairs, detaining Church-dues, usury, and
other dishonest gain, and base niggardise; If out of grief of heart for their
shaming Religion, exposing the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST to blasphemy, and
^dening others against Profession, we meddle with their fashions, their pride,
their worldlymindednesse, and conforming to the world almost in every thing,
save only some religious forms; If we press them more particularly upon
danger of damnation to more holy strictness, preciseness and zeal, knowing
too well, by long observation and acquaintance, that they never yet passed the
perfections of formal Professors, and foolish Virgins: Alas! We then find by
too much woeful experience; if they politikely bite it not in, that this
faithful dealing does marvellously discontent them; and these precious Balmes
do break their heads with a witness, and make the blood run about their ears;
whereupon they are wont to fall upon us more foul, (such true Pharisees are
they) than would either the drunkard or good fellow, the Publicans and harlots
do in such cases: they presently swelling with much passionate heat, proud
indignation, disdain, and impatiency to be reformed, have recourse to such
weak and carnal cavils, contradictions, exceptions, excuses and raving; that
in nothing more do they discover to every judicious man of GOD, or any who does
not flatter them, or whom they do not blind with their entertainments and
bounty, or delude with painted pretenses, and art of seeming, their formality,
and false-heartednesse. And yet, as they are uncharacterized Isa. 57. 2. They
seek the LORD daily, and delight to know his ways, as a nation that did
righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their GOD: they ask of Him
the ordinances of justice: they take delight in approaching to GOD: They may
have divine Ordinances on foot in their families, entertain GODS people at
their Tables, fast and afflict their souls upon days of humiliation, as
appears in the forecited Chapter, Verse 3. Hear the word gladly, with Hero^;
and with much respect and acceptance observe the messenger, etc. But they will
not stir an inch further from the World, or nearer to GOD, say what he will,
let him preach out his heart, as they say. They will not abate one jot of their
over-eager pursuit after the things of this life, or wagg one foot out of the
un-zealous plodding course of formal Christianity; no, not for the Sermons,
perhaps of twenty years, and that from him who has all the while labored
faithfully so far to illighten them, as that they might not depart this life
with hope of heaven; and then with the foolish Virgins, fall (utterly against
all expectation, both of themselves and others) into the bottomless pit of
hell. O quam multi cum hac spead aeternos labores, and bella descendunt! How
many (says one) go to hell with a vain hope of heaven; whose chiefest cause
of damnation is their false persuasion, and groundless presumption of
salvation! Well, be it either the one, or the other; the besotted sensualist,
or selfe-deluding formalist, could we speak with them upon their beds of death
(their consciences awaked) or the day after they were damned in hell; we should
find them then, though in the mean time they suffer many sour apprehensions
to arise in their hearts against us, in a much altered tune and temper. Then
would they with much amazedness and terrible fear, yell out those now too
late hideous complaints: We fools counted his life madness, etc. we wearied
our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction, etc. What has pride
profited us? etc. Then would they curse all dawbers, and justify all
downright dealers: contempt Se^ Basil. Tom. 1. Page 469.
of whose counsel, would now cut in pieces their very heart strings with
restless anguish and horror, and mightily strengthen the never-dying worm;
whereby the enraged soul will thrust its own hands, as it were, into its own
bowels, and tear open the very fountain of life and sense to feed upon it
self. For, the worm of conscience (say Divines) is only a continual remorse
and furious reflection of the so^le upon its own wilful folly, and thereby the
woeful misery it has brought upon it self.

2. This may serve to stir up all the sons and daughters of wisdom to
hoard up with all holy greediness, instead of earthly pelf, transitory toys
and shining clay, the rich and lasting treasures of divine wealth and immortal
graces. For, these heavenly jewels purchased with CHRIST'S blood, and planted in
the heart by the omnipotent hand of the HOLY GHOST, will shine comfortably upon
our souls with beams of blessedness and peace, amid all the miseries and
confusions, the darkness and most desperate dangers of this present life: nay,
in the very valley of the shadow of death, their splendor and spiritual glory
will not only dissolve, and dispell all mists of horror which can possibly
arise from the apprehension of hell, the grave, those last dreadful pangs, or
any other terrible thing; but also illighten, conduct and carry us triumphantly
through the abhorred confines of the King of fear upon the wings of joy, and in
the arms of Angels, to unapproachable light, unknown pleasures, and endless
bliss. It may be, as yet, thou stand upright without any changes, unstir'd
in thy state by any adverse storm, supposing thy mountain so strong, that
thou shall never be moved. Thus long perhaps the Allmighty has been with
thee: His candle has shined upon thy head, and His patient providence rested
with all favor and success upon thy Tabernacle; so that hitherto thou have
seen no days of sorrow; but even washed thy steps with butter, and the rock
has powered thee out rivers of oil, etc. Yet for all this, the day may come,
before thou die, that thou may be stripped of all, and become as poor as Job,
as they say, by fire, robbery, suretiship, ship-wracke, the destroying sword,
desolations of war, or by the hand of GOD in some other kind; Even, A day, an
hour, a moment (says one) is Dies, (...), momentum, evertendis dominationibus
sufficit, quae adamantinis credebantur radicibus esse funda^ae. Casaub.
enough to over-turne the things that seemed to have been founded and rooted
in adamant: Labor therefore industriously beforehand so to furnish and
fortify thine heart with patience, nobleness of spirit, Christian fortitude,
the mightiness of Jobs faith, Cap. 13. 15. And his manifold integrities, Cap.
31. That if such an evil day should come upon thee (and who can look for
exemption when he looks upon Jobs affliction) thou may with an unrepining
submission to GODS good providence and pleasure, take up his sweetest
resolution and repose: Naked came I out of my mothers womb, Job 1. 11.
and naked shall I return thither: the LORD gave, and the LORD has taken
away, blessed be the name of the LORD. Though, as yet, by a miracle of rarest
mercy, calmnesse and serenity rest upon the firmament of our state; yet who
knows how soon, especially, since many of GODS dearest servants beyond the
seas have lain so long in tears and blood, some dismal cloud and tempestuous
storm may arise out of the hellish ^ogs of our many heinous sins and crying
abominations, and break out upon us, and that with greater terror, and far
more horribly, by reason of the unexpectedness and our present desperate
security: Though the Sun of the Gospel, and glory of a matchless Ministry
shine yet full fair among us in the Meridian of our peace and prosperous
days, yet little know we, how soon and suddenly it may decline and set in a
sea of confusion, calamity and woe: And therefore hoard up greedily in the
mean time, and while the Sun shines, a rich treasury of saving knowledge,
grace and good life; that if need require, thou may then resolutely reply
with blessed Paul against all contradictions and temptations to the contrary: I
am ready not to be Acts 28. 13.
bound only, but also to die for the name of the LORD JESUS: Though at this
present thou do perhaps with much sweet contentment enjoy thy GOD
comfortably, and His pleased face; many heavenly deawes of spiritual joy,
glorious refreshings, and abundance of spiritual delights fall upon thy soul
from the Throne of mercy every time thou come near Him; Thou can say unto
thy Dearest out of thy present feeling, I am Cant. 6. 13.
my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine, and in some good measure keep a part
with the Saints of old, in such victorious and triumphant Songs as these* Oh
that my words were now written, Oh that they were Job 19. 23* 24, 25.
printed in a book! That they were graven with an iron pen and lead, in the
rock for ever. For, I know that my Redeemer lives, etc. We will not fear,
Psalm. 46. 2, 3.
though the earth be remooved: and though the mountains be carried into the
midst of the sea: though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though
the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Selah. I am persuaded that
neither death nor life, nor Angels, Romans ^. 38.
nor principalities, nor powers, etc. Yet for all this, that only wise GOD of
thine may hereafter for some cause seeming good to Himself, and for thy good,
withdraw from thee the light of His countenance, and sense of His love, and
leave thee for a time to the darkness of thine own spirit, and Satan's ^orest
temptations, etc. Ply therefore in this prosperity of thy soul all blessed
means; the Ministry, Sacraments, Prayer, Conference, Meditations,
humiliation-dayes, holiness of life, clearenesse of conscience, watching over
thy heart, walking with GOD, sanctified use of afflictions, experimental
observation of GODS dealings with thee from time to time, works of justice,
mercy, and truth, etc. Thereby so to quicken, fortify and steel thy faith,
that in the bitterest extremity of thy spiritual distress, thou may be able
to say with Job, Though He slay me, yet will I trust in Him, Job 13. 15. A
thousand crosses more, calamities and troubles may over-take thee before thou
take thy leave of this vale of tears: It will be thy wisdom therefore, now
in this calm to provide for a storm; to treasure up out of GODS Book many
mollifying medicines and sovereign antidotes against all slavish and vexing
forethought of them in the mean time, and their bitterness when they shall
come upon thee. Thou may be assured, if thou be a son, thy heavenly Father
will ever correct thee; 1. 1 Pet. 1. 6.
Never before there be need: and always in 2. ^eb. 12. 9, 10. Isa. 2^. ^6, etc.
Wisdom. 3. Isa. 27. 7, 8. And 28. 27, 28. ^em 46. 28. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
Measure. 4. Prove. 3. 1^. Hebr. 12. 5, 6. Rev 3 1^ Isa. 63 9. Psalm 103. 13, 14
Hos. 11. 8, 9. Isa. 40. 11. And ^. 13, 14, 15. And 54. 11. Psalm. 56. 8.
Love and tenderness. 5. For Psalm. 30. 5. and 103. 9 and 125* 3. Isa. 10. 25.
And 54. 7, ^ And 57. 16. Ier. 3. 12. Mic* 7. 18.
a moment only. 6. To Deuteronomy. 8. 2. P^alme 66. 10. Proverb. 17. 3. 1 Pet. 1. 6,
7. ^am. 1. 2.
try thee; what dross of corruption, and what sound metal of grace is in
thee. 7: To Isa 1. 25 And 4. 4. And 27. 9. Prove. 20. 30. Psalm. 119. 67.
purge out sin. 8. To Dan. 11. 3^* and 12. 10, Zech. 13. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7.
refine thee, and make the virtues of CHRIST in thee more shining and
illustrious. 9. To Ioh. 15 2. Romans 5. 3, ^, 5. Isa. 26. 9. Iam. 1. 2, 3.
stir up, quicken and increase all saving graces in thy soul. Of which see
my Exposition upon the 26 Chapter of Isa. Amongst all the rest, Faith ever
becomes most famous by afflictions. Witness that cloud of witnesses, Heb. 11,
10. To Job 5. 17. Iam. 1. 1^. And. 5. 1^. Psalm. 94. 12.
make thee blessed. 11. To 1 Cor. 11. 32. 2 Cor 4. 17.
save thee. 12. And He Isa. 41. 10, 11, 12. And 43 2. Psalm. 91. 1
will be ever with thee in trouble. 13. He Job 5 18, 19. Psalm. 34. 17, 18, 19.
And. ^0* 1^. And 91. 15.
will deliver thee. 14. Nay, and never was Goldsmiths more curious and precise
to watch the very first season, when his gold is thoroughly refined and fitted
for use, that he may take it out of the furnace; than our gracious GOD Isa. 30.
18.
waits in such cases with an holy longing, that He may have mercy upon thee and
deliver thee. But how soever, or whatsoever befall thee in this life, thou must
upon necessity ere it be long, lie gasping for breath upon thy dying bed, and
there graple hand to hand with the utmost and concurrent rage of all the powers
of darkness, and that king of fear attended with his terrors: and therefore
let the whole course of thy life be a conscionable preparative to die
comfortably: Suppose every Day thy last, and thereupon so behave thy self both
in thy general and particular calling, as though thou should be called to
an exact account at night for all things done in the flesh, before that last
and highest Tribunal: In all thy thoughts, words, actions and undertakings in
any kind, say thus unto thy self: would I do thus and thus, if I certainly knew
the next hour to be my last: In a word, so live, that upon good ground thou
may bring David's undaunted boldness to thy bed of death: Though I walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil.

Here, upon this seasonable occasion, give me leave to commend and tender unto
you some special preparatives, rules, motives and means to furnish before
hand, and fortify your spirits against all future evils, and terrible things
that are toward.

1. Treasure up richly and abundantly before hand the precepts, practice and
experimental sweetness of patience, that most useful and precious virtue,
which may serve (when time serves) as a sovereign antidote, to abate, and
abolish the sting and venime of all crosses, afflictions, and mortal miseries;
and as a comfortable cordial to support and hold up thy heart in the
bitterness and extremity of the sorest.

Mighty and miraculous was the work of this glorious grace in blessed Job. By
its heavenly and invincible influence upon his humble soul, it did not only
utterly extinguish (which was a very admirable and extraordinary thing) all
that desperate anguish and slavish grief, which such variety and extremity of
greatest miseries, that ever befell any mortal man, would have naturally bred
in the hopeless hearts of impatient worldlings; least of which is many times
enough to drive them to despair and selfe-destruction; but also Quanta
adversus eum jacula missa* Quanta admota tormenta? jactura rei familiaris
infligitur: numcrosae sobolis orbitas irrogatur: Dives in censu Dominus; and in
liberis Pater di^ior: Nec Dominus repent, nec Pater est. Accedit vulnerum
vastitas, and tabescentes, ac dcfluentes artus vermium quoque edax poena
consumit, etc. Nec tamen Job gravibus and densis conflictationibus frangitur,
quo minus inter illas angustias and pressuras suas DEI benedictio victrice
patientia praedicetur. Cyprian. de'bono Patientiae.

Nihil in Domo remanserat, omnia in uno ictu perierunt, quibus opulentus paulo
ante videbatur. Subito mendicus in stercore sedet, a capite usque ad pedes
vermibus scatens. Quid ista miseria miserius? Quid interiore foelicitate
foelicius? Perdiderat omnia illa quae dederat DEVS, sed habebat Ipsum qui omnia
dederat DEVM. -- Certe pauper est, certe nihil habet. Si nihil remansit, d^ quo
thesauro istae gemmae laudi^ DEI proferuntur? -- O virum putrem, and integrum;
O foedum and pulchrum; O vulneratum and sanum; O in stercore sedentem, and in
coelo regna^tem! August. de Temp. Sermon. 105.


enabled him with the sweetest calmnesse of a well-composed and unshaken
spirit, even to bless the LORD his GOD for taking from him these transitory
things, of which he was the true Proprietary, and which in much undeserved
mercy He had lent unto him so long. The LORD gave, (said he) and the LORD has
taken away, blessed be the name of the LORD.

With what infinite, implacable indignation, and bloody rage would Shemeis
railing have rent in pieces the heart of many a graceless King? And yet David
by the help of this holy virtue, passed on along patiently without wound, or
passion.

That heavy news which was so horrible, that it made both the ears of every
one that heard it, tingle, brought by Samuel to Eli immediately from GODS own
mouth, might have made many an earth-worme to have run mad with the very
forethought of so much misery to come: But good old patient Eli, when he had
heard it all, sweetly ejaculates: It is the LORD: Let Him do what seems him
good.

The taking away of two sons at once by a sudden and violent death, with
visible vengeance from heaven, and in the midst of a most horrible sin, is
naturally matter of sorrow which cannot be expressed, and extremest grief: yet
Aaron in such a case having learned conformity of his own will to the divine
pleasure of the only wise GOD; when Moses told him that the LORD would be
sanctified in them that come nigh Levit. 10. 3*
Him, and before all the people H^ would be glorified; He held his peace: And
Aaron held his peace. So quieting his heart because GOD would have it so. See
further for this purpose, 2 Samuel 3. 15. 26. Isa. 39, 8. etc.

By these few precedents you may easily perceive what singular and sovereign
power patience has to pull the sting, and extract the poison out of the most
grievous calamities and greatest troubles.

But now on the contrary: Impatiency and unpleasednesse with GODS providence in
sending both good and In the equity of an holy and jus^ proportion, we must
expect as well ill as good, at the hands of GOD. What? ( says Job) shall we
receive good at the hand of GOD, and shall we not receive evil? Cap. 2. 10.
ill, yet ever in love, and for our good; For Magis timere debemus* si aut
nullas, aut parvas tribulationes in hoc saeculo patimur: quia si DEVS flagellat
omnem filium quem recipit, sine dubio que^ non flagellat, non recipit: Aus^ de
Temp. Se. m. 105.
what son is he, whom the Father chasteneth not? does more afflict us than
all our afflictions. The storm of GODS wrath breaks out sometimes upon the
outward state of some greedy fretting mammonist, and He justly sinites him for
his wicked covetousness and dishonest gain, perhaps in the height and hot
gleame of his prosperity and thriving, by some sudden visible consumption, or
secret wasting curse: He (as such covetous wretches are wont) takes on
extremely, far beyond the rage of the maddest bedlam. He stamps and stares
(as they say) roares and raves; g^asneth his teeth, tears his hair, bites his
nails, almost like a damned soul, that has new lost heaven; until at length
the Devil lead him to lay violent hands upon himself. Now, are not these
selfe-vexing tortures far more rerrible than the taking away of his
transitories? Is not the cutting of his own throat incomparably worse than the
cross? A bird that is entangled amongst limetwigs, the more she stirs and
struggles, the more she is made sure, and doubles her danger: A Quid indigna^
Querclae and indignatio nil aliud, quam accessio mali sunt; nihil enim tam
exasperat fe^vorem vulneris, quam serendi impatientia. Omnis indignatio in
tormentum suum proficit. Sic laqueos fera dum jactat, astringit; sic aves
viscum, dum trepidantes excutiunt, plumis omnibus illinunt: nullum tam arctum
est jugum, quod non minus laedat ducentem, quam repugnantem Vnum est levamentum
malorum ingentium etiam pati, and necessitatibus suis obsequi. Quid igitur
mor^o corporis, animi morbum addere juvat, teque miseriorem facere murmurando,
etc.
repining reluctation, and angry striving (as it were) to get out of GODS
hands, does ever enveaime and exasperate the wound, and makes us ten times
worse, and more miserable, than if we fairly and patiently submitted to his
omnipotent and most merciful will. Neither does want of patience only
mightily enrage a cross, but it also embitters all our comforts. The bare
omission of a mere complement in Mordecai did not only fill Hamans proud
heart with many raging distempers of hatred, malice, revenge, foolish
indignation and much furious coffeehouse; but also turned all the pleasure,
and kindly relish in his courtly pleasures, riches, honors, offices,
extraordinary advancements and royal favors, into gall and wormwood. And
Haman told them of the glory of his Ester ^. 11, 12, 13.
riches, and the multitude of his children, and all the things wherein the King
had promoted him, and how he had advanced him above the Princes and servants of
the King. Haman said moreover, yea Esther the Queen did let no man come in
with the King unto the Banquet that she had prepared, but my self, and
tomorrow am I invited unto her also with the King. Yet all this avails me
nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings gate. Whereas
now David, a King, as I told you before, by the benefit of this blessed grace,
did not suffer his Princely spirit to be un-calmed at all, no not by the
traitorous and most intolerable reviling of a dead dog, and his baseft vassal.

2. Keep off thy heart from the world, in the greatest affluence of wealth and
worldly prosperity. Earthly-mindednesse ever sharpeneth and keenes the sting in
all distresses. It gives teeth to the cross to eat out the very heart of the
afflicted. Had not Job been able to have professed, that in the height of his
happiness he was thus affected: If I have made gold my hope, or have said to
the ^ine gold, Thou art my confidence: If I rejoiced because my wealth was
great, and because my hand had gotten much: [Here Hic subaudienda imprecatio,
dispeream, etc. Mer^in Loc.
say Divines, something is understood, as dispeream, then let me perish, or the
like] If Quidam hoc ita exposueru^t, quasi Iobus profiteretur, se Solemn and
Lunam non adorasse: quia antiquis ea superstitio valde usitata erat, praesertim
in Orient: -- Is vero sensus verus quidem est, sed tamen loco praesenti non
convenit: Iobus hic voluit alia similitudine uti, and equidem juxta sermonem,
quem jam habu^mus de eo quod professus est se nulla superbia and arrogantia
laborasse, etc. Calv. in loc.
I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness: And my
heart has been secretly entised, or my mouth has kissed my hand: -- Then
should I have denied the GOD that is above. If I grew proud, puffed up, or
pleased my self with the glistering brightness of my earthly abundance, let
it be so and so with me: I say, except Jobs heart had been thus Si laetatus
sum, inquit, multis mihi affluentibus undique divitijs, si recondidi aurum in
pulverem, si spem in pretiosis lapidibus habui. Haecille. Propterea nec quum
erepta quidem omnia subito essent, turbatus est, quippe qui praesentibus non
delectantur, etc. -- Quas omnes ob res mecum ipse plerumque admitari s^leo,
quare in mentem Diabolo venit, exercitationes istius non ignoranti, tot
tantosque adversus ipsum cogitasse labores. Cur igitur illi venit in mentem?
Truculentissima certe bestia nunquam solet despera^e victoriam, quod ad
condemnationem nostram spectat: nam ille nunquam, ut dixi, nostram desperate
perditionem: nos de salute nostra saepius desperamus. Chrysostom. Hom. 34. in M^.
wained from the world, when as yet he wallowed in wealth; he had never been
able to hold out in the evil day, and to have borne so bravely the ruin of so
rich a state without repining. But now churlish Nabal, whose affections were
notoriously nailed to the earth; though perhaps once or twice a year he made a
joviall and frolic feast, as other cunning worldlings are wont to their
good-fellow-companions, upon purpose to procure and preserve a Pharisaicall
reputation of bounty with some flattering dependants, and for a cloak to color
their covetousness and cruelty; yet he was of a ^linty bosom in respect of
doggednesse and extreme niggardise, especially toward GODS people, and his
heart by excessive rooting there, was turned wholly into earth: and therefore
in the evil day, it died within him, and he became as a stone. To keep off
the world in a fit distance, that it do thee no deadly hurt, and undo thee
quite; keep still fresh and strong in thy thoughts a true estimate and right
conceit of the Quid sunt ^os humanae? Cinis* pulvis, sumus, umbra, solia
^dentia, ^los, somnium, fabula, ventus, aer, penna mobilis, ^da decu^ens, and
si quid istis inserius Chrysostom In Epist. ad Heb. Him. 9. Inquiramus, si
placet, quae sunt illa prae sentis vit^ p^ (...) Divitiae, glo^ia, potenti^,
magnum ex^ ab hominibus? Sed videbis nihil illis esse i^certius, -- (...)
vid^ti (...) in (...), aliqua pars ejus, eo quod (...) siunt ima, and ima
summa: ita and nostra^um re^um imp^tus (...) ve^untur summa facit in^ma: ut
videre (...) indivitijs, potenti^, (...). Nunquam enim in e^dem ^atu manent,
sed semper inflabiles, fluminum fluxus imitantur. Idem. Hom. de Nomine Abram.
mutability of all things here below, and thine own mortality. In their best
condition and highest confluence, they are but 1. Vanity: We shall never ^ind
in them any solidity, or that good or comfort which we still with much eager
pursuit and thirst expect and labor in vain to extract from them: but upon
trial and trust in them, they will ever prove empty clouds, broken staves of
reed. Poma Gomorrhaea pulchra quidem sunt, sed cum frangu^ur in vagum pulve^em
fatiscunt.
App^s of Sodom, Wells without water. And when we graspe them most greedily, we
embrace nothing but smoke, which wrings tears from our eyes, and vanishes
into nothing. 2: Vexation of spirit. Besides the emptiness and absence of that
imaginary felicity which we hunt after in them; there is also the presence and
plenty of much (...) and hearts griese, which the slaves of pleasure, and
lovers of the world little look for, when they at first resolve to sell their
souls for such transitory trash. Divitias invenisti? (says one) Requiem
perdidisti. Have thou found riches? Thou have lost thy rest. A man that will be
rich, takes no more rest, than one upon a rack, or bed of thorns* like
Anacreo^ quinque talentis Poly^rate donatus, cum per duas noctes pro ipsis
solicitus fuisset, reddidit ^a, inquiens; no^ tanti esse quata ipsorum nomine
cura laboraret. St^b. Cap. 39.
Anacreon with his five Talents, still distracted with worldly thoughts, and
continually pricked with cares and fears. 3. They cannot satisfy the soul.
Gold can no more fill the spirit of a man, than grace his purse. Between
heaven and earth, spirits and bodies, souls and silver, there is no
proportion. And therefore no earthly excellencies, no carnal pleasures, no
worldly treasures are fit matter, or a full object, for such an immateriall,
immortal and heavenly borne-being to feed upon with any proper delight, true
comfort, or sound contentment. Not all this great material world, or greatest
mass of gold can possibly fill the mighty capacity and immeasurable appetite
of this little spark of heaven breathed into us by the infinite power of an
Almighty hand. A man may as well fill a bag with wisdom, as the soul with
the world; a chest with virtues, as the mind with wealth. 4. They cannot help
in the evil day. Their blood (says the Prophet) shall be powered out as Zeph. 1.
17, 18*
dust, and their flesh as the dung: neither their silver nor their gold shall be
able to deliver them in the day of the LORDS wrath. Put a man into a pang of
any painful malady, and bodily torture; as into a fit of the Stone,
Strangury, No torture of body like unto it, no strappado's, hot-irons* Phalaris
Bulls, all fears, griefs, suspicions, discontents are swallowed up and drowned
in this Euripus, this ^sh Sea, this Ocean of misery, as so many small b^ooks.
This is the Quintessence of humane adversity; all other diseases whatsoever are
but flea-bi^ings to Melancholy in extent. It Is the pith of them all And a
melancholy man is that true Prometheus which is bound to Caucasus the true
Titius, whose bowels are still by a Vul^r d^voured, is Poe^s seigne, and so
does Litius Gi^aldus interpret it, of anxieties, and those gripi^g ^ares. In
all other maladies whatsoever we seek for help^: If a leg or an orme ache
through any d^stemperature ^r wound: or that we have any ordinary disease,
above all things whatsoever, we desire help and health, a present recovery, if
by any means possi^ly it may be procured We will ^ly part with all our other
substance, endure any misery, drink* bitter pot^ons, swallow those (...)
pills, suffer our joints to be seared* to be cut off, any thing for future
health; so sw^et, so dea^, so precious above all other things in the world is
life: but to ^ melancholicke m^n, nothing so ted^ous, nothing so odious; that
which they so carefully secke to p^eserve, ^e a^res; he alone, so intolerable
are his pains. Bur^on of Melanch. page 274.
deep Melancholy, Gout, Cholicke, or the like: let some incurable devouring
Ulcer, Canker, Elephantiasis, the Wolf, the A most lothsom^ and horrible
disease in the hair, unheard of in former times, as Morbus Galli^us, and Sudor
Anglicus; bred by modern luxury and excess. it seizes specially upon women;
and by reason of a viseous v^imous humor, glues together (as it were) the
hair of their head with a proaigious ugly implication and en^anglement:
sometimes taking the for me of a great snaks, sometimes of many little
serpents: full of ^astinesse, v^rmine and noiso^e smell: And that which is most
to be admired, and never eye saw before, pricked with a needle, they yield
bloody drop^; And at the first spreading of this dreadful dis^se in Poland,
all that cut off this ^orrible and snakie hair, lost their eyes, or the humor
fall^g dow^e upon other parts of the body* tortured them extremely. Hear my
Author, that learned and famous Professor of Physics in Padua, Hercules
Saxonia, in his ^wue word: Plica, est agglutinatio, vel invis^atio quaedam
pilorum ex humido viseido, lento ac glutinoso. Nunc primum peruniversam fere
Poloniam grassatur; i^o vero per quasdam Germaniae parts divagatur -- Maximam
partem ^oeminas in* vadit: Eos etiam qui ^orriginem capitis, quam vulgus tineam
vocat, medicamentis ^epercutientibus represserunt: Praeterea f^minas, quae
menstruis temporibus nonsatis purgantur. -- Quis non novum, mirabile, and
horridum putet capillos ex prop^ia natura planos, denussos a^ simplices,
momento temporis sponte sua sub coelo admodum ^gido incrispari, paulo post
e^igi, involvi, atque indissolubili^er conjungi, va^ias recipere sigmas,
quandoque maximi cujusdam anguis, aliquando plurium and minotum se pentum,
undique vermes, (...) ^oetoremque redolere: Quodque omnium maximum est, and a
saeculo inauditum, a^u perpunctos, vel transfixos sanguinem essundere. --
Expertum est, qui tales sas^iculos implicatorum peracte interse c^nium
deraserint, eos oculis cap^. aut detluxibus ad alias parts corporis gravissi^e
to^queri. It begun first not many years ago in Poland. It is now entered into
many Parts of Germany. And me thinks, our monstrous Fashionists, both male and
female; the one for nour^shine their horrid bush^s of vanity; the other for
their most unnatural and cursed cutting their hair should every hour fear
and tremble, lest they should bring it upon their own heads, and awor^ us in
this Kingdom^*
Plica, etc. take hold upon any part of his Body; and let him tell me then,
what account he would make of all the Imperial Crowns upon earth, attended
with the height and utmost of humane felicities? Or what comfort could he take
in the riches, glory and pleasures of the whole world? Or what ease and
refreshing can large possessions, sumptuous buildings, pleasant walks, princely
favors, dainty fare, choicest delights, or any thing under the Sun, afford in
such a case? The very prick of a needle, or pain of a tooth for the time,
will take away the taste of all carnal contentments, and pleasure of the
worlds Monarchy. If the LORD should let loose the cord of thy conscience, and
set His just and deserved wrath a work to enkindle flames of horror in thy
heart, what help could thou have in heaps of gold, or hoards of wealth?
Remember Spira. They would be so ^rre from healing the wound, or allaying the
smart, that they would yet more horribly afflict thy already enraged spirit,
and turn them even into fiery Scorpions for thy further torment. Let thy last
sickness seize upon thee, and then say (for the hour of death, as they say,
is the hour of truth) whether all the gold and goods in the world can any more
deliver thee from the Arrest of that inexorable Sergeant, than can an handful
of dust? Nay, whether then the extremity of thy spiritual affliction, and
anguish of soul, will not be answerable to the former excess of thine
inordinate affection to earthly things, and delights of sense? Or suppose thou
should be surprised by that last and great day, which the LORD in mercy
hasten; how will thou then rescue thy freehold, when the whole frame of the
world is on fire? 5. They cannot possibly lead us beyond this life, or extend
to eternity. If we see a servant follow two gentlemen, we know not whose man he
is; but their parting will discover to whether he belongs; When death shall
sever the owner from the world, then will riches and revenewes, offices and
honors, stately buildings, and all outward bravery cleave to the world, and
leave him to the world to come as poor a worm and wretch, as when he first
came into this world: and therefore they are all the worlds Heireloomes, and
none of his: Even as Absaloms mule went away, when his head was fast in the
great Oak, and so left him hanging between heaven and earth, as a woeful
spectacle of misery and shame to all beholders: So will all their wealth and
worldly felicities deal with their most greedy ingrossers, and dearest minions
upon their dying-beds. They will then most certainly (as Solomon Prove. 23. 5
^aith) make themselves wings, and fly away as an Eagle toward heaven: And
leave their now forlorn former favorites to the fury of a guilty conscience
for their cursed forsaking the Fountain of living I^i. 2. 13.
waters, all their life long, and hewing them out such cisternes, broken
cisternes that could hold no water; nor help in the evil Day. We all stand at
the door of eternity; if death but once open it naturally or violently, or by
any of his thousand thousand ways, we are presently stripped of all, and
immediately enter upon it, either that of everlasting pleasures, or the other
of everlasting pains. And therefore it will be our wisdom in the mean time to
value worldly vanities at no more than their own price; and industriously to
ply all means which may enrich us with heavenly treasures of that divine
stamp and lasting temper, which may attend us through all eternity. And as all
these things here below are thus mutable and fugitive, so thy self art mortal
and frail. A creature as it were but of one days lasting, like that Flos est,
Hemerocallis, cujus vita and pulchritudodiaria est. Sed and volucris ad
Hippanim fluvium est, Hemerovio^ dicta, quae non ultra di^m vivit; sed ^adem
omnino luce, qu^ lucem inchoat, si^it, mo^ientique Soli commoritur: eodemdie,
pueri, ^uvenis, ^enis aetatem experta mane nascitur, miridie and viget, vesperi
consenescit and moritur. Animal^lo huic ^millima est humana vita. Ad fluvium
illa est perpetuo fluen^is temporis, sed and (...) est, magis quam avisulla,
v^l (...), and saepe o^nissuae pompae di^m uni* cum, terminum habet, saepe
horam, saepe pa^io pr^ductius momentum. Quid ergo annos meditamur and saecula,
saepe brevior is aevi quam flor^ aut storum umb^a, aut si quid umb^a^ vanius,
brevius. Ae^ernit. Pro^ho. page 10.
Flower and Bird which as naturalists report, receive their being and birth in
the morning; but wither and die at night. Thy abode upon earth is like a
vanishing Optime Io^us: Et qui cum, inquit, viderant* dicent ubi est? Velut
somnium a^olans non invenietur, (somniare ina^issimum, v^lare celerrimum)
trans^et sicut visio noctu^na. Vita quid est' Flos est, sumus est, umbra est,
and umbrae umbra; Bulla, Pulvis, Spuma, Ros, Stilla, Glacies est* ^idis arcus
deficiens cereus, surculus pertusus, ru^nosa domus, einis dolosus, Dies (...),
April^s constantissimus, unicus testudinis tinnitus est* Hydria frac^a* (...)
rota, aranea^m tela, maris guttula, vilis s^ipula, sols^itialis herba, brevis
fabula, voluc^is, seintilla, tristis nebula, vesica ven^o plena, rut^lans ad
solemn columbula* vita, vit^um tenerrimum, follum levissimum, filum
subtilissimum, p^mum aureum est, sed intus putridum, etc. Si nihil est umbra,
di^ quid umbrae somnium? Sexcenta mill^ talia de vita ^umana recte
pronunciantur. Mihi omnium rectissime videntur dixisse, qui vitam vocant
Somnium umbrae brevissimum* Compendio^em dicamus* vita est Somnus, Bulla,
Vitrum, Glacies, Flos, Fabula, Foenum,
Vmbra, Cinis, Punctum, Vox, Sonus, Au^a, Nihil. Ibid.
Vita praesens figura est and deceptio, and a somnijs nihil dissert^ Ergo men's
ea est pu^rilis, quae ad umbras spectat, de somnijs superbi^, and rebus fhixis
alligatur. Chrysostom* in Genesis Hom. 35*
vision of the night, a flying dream, the very dream of a shadow, etc. This
swift tide of man's life, after it once turns and declineth, ever runs with
a perpetual ebb and falling stream, but never flows again: Our leaf once
fallen, springs no more; neither does the Sun or the Summer beautify us
again with the garments of new leaves and flowers, or ever after revive or
renew us with freshness of youth, and former strength. Not only Solomon (
Eccles. 1.) makes us in this respect more miserable than the Sun and other
soule-lesse creatures; but even the Poet also by the light of natural reason
(whom I urge only to make Christians, mindlesse of their own mortality,
athamed, who have thoughts of heaven and earth, as though eternity were upon
earth, and time only in heaven) tells us that, Soles occidere and redire
possunt: Thus in English;

The Sun may set and rise:
But we contrariwise,
Sleep after one short light,
An everlasting night.
Which we must only understand of returning any more to life and light in this
world. Nay, in a word, lay thy self laden with the utmost of all earthly
excellencies and felicities in the one scale of the balance, and vanity in the
other, and vanity will weigh thee down. Take heed therefore of trusting to the
world in the mean time, lest it torture thee extremely in the time of trouble.

3. Take heed of weakening in the mean time, and unnecessarily over-wearying
thy spirit:

1. By carking forethought of future evils, which forty to one may never fall
out. Many men I am persuaded, (such is the natural vanity of our minds) do
more vex themselves with fear and fore-conceipt of imaginary evils, which
never befall; then they have just cause, to take on and trouble their hearts
for all other true, real, actual troubles, which fall upon them. Thus many
times do men torture themselves vainly with immoderate fear of foreign
invasion, homebred confusion, change of religion, the fiery trial, burning at
a stake, distraction of mind, surprise by the Plague, Small Pox, Purples,
Spotted Fever, distress and going backward in their outward state, loss of
some child they love best, destruction of their goods by fire, robbery,
ship-wracke, the frowns of greatness, hurt and revenge from those that hate
them, hardness of heart, failing of their faith, spiritual desertion,
overthrow by temptation, despair of GODS mercies, sudden death, discomfortable
carriage in their last sickness, the king of fear himself; what shall become
of their children, when they are gone, etc. By these and millions more of such
causeless and carking fore*imaginations, the very flower and vigor of men's
spirits may be much emasculated, and wasted woefully. A godly care to prevent
them by repentance and prayer; and a careful preparation by mortifying
meditations, and Christian magnanimity to bear them patiently, if we be put
unto it, is commendable and comfortable: but in the mean time to unspirit and
macerate our selves with much distrustful misery and needless torture about
them, to our hindrance, distraction and discomfort in any businesses of either
of our callings, or any ways, unchearefull walking; by slavish pre-conceipts
to double and multiply their stings, and to suffer them so often before they
seize upon us, is both un-noble and un-necessary: most unworthy the moral
resolution of a mere natural man, and the generous spirit of an honest
Heathen; much more the invincible fortitude of any of CHRIST'S favorites, and
heirs of heaven.

Or*

2. Selfe-created crosses, that I may so call them. For so it often is, that
many married couples, governors of families (to instance there) having the
world at will (as they say) and wanting nothing that heart can wish from GODS
hand for outward things: and yet (I know not how) by reason of passion,
covetousness, pride, waiwardnesse, frowardness, or something, they mutually
embitter their lives one unto another with much uncomfortablenesse,
coffeehouse and jarring. I would advise all such (and there are many and
many such abroad in the world) punctually and impartially to examine their
consciences; whether such secret sins as these, of which they take no notice,
may not be the causes of it.

1. Matching, as being not moved principally and predominantly with portion,
parentage, personage, beauty, lust, riches, lands, slattery, friendship,
greatness of family, forced persuasions, Parents covetous importunity, or some
base and irrellgious by-respect and graceless ground. This the Apostle calls
marrying in the LORD: that is, for no by respect, but in the fear of GOD, 1
Cor. 7. 39. Without which all matches are miserable, though they should be made
up with hoards of wealth and heaps of gold as high as heaven, crowned with
honors transcendent to the stars. The baseness, folly and iniquity of these
times is not more visible and eminent in any thing, than in making, or rather
marring of marriages. How often may we see by ordinary observation a little
golden glue to join fast in the dearest bonds, pearls and clay? And silken
fools to carry away sufficiencies above their worthless weight in richest
jewels? The world is stark mad in this Point. But they are rightly served;
noble miseries and golden fetters are fit enough for such couples. For from
this bitter root of a covetous, carnal, ambitious, or any ways unconscionable
choice, springs a world of misery and mischief; overthrow and ruin of great
houses, scandalous divorces, unlawful separations, dishonor, disturbance,
jealousies, adulteries, bastardies, brawlings, mutual exprobration of each
others infirmities, deformity, portion, parentage, or some other cutting and
netling matter of discontent; sinful disorders in families, ill education of
children, etc. And, without repentance, after a few and wretched days
tediously worn out with much irksomeness and hearts-breake, lying together
everlastingly in the lake of fire, there banning each other with much desperate
horror, and many bitter despairefull gnashings of teeth, that ever they
entered into that estate.

2. Predominancy of carnal love. Which may be justly punished with many fits
of frowardness and falling out, from such small occasions and light grounds;
that the Parties may well perceive, that the correcting hand of GOD is in it
leading them thereby to the sight and notice, to remorse and reformation of the
brutish sensuality and sinfulness of their matrimonial affection; which
should ever be rectified by reason, and spiritualized with grace. Marriage is
rather a fellowship of dearest amity, then disordered love. And love and amity
are as different as the burning sick heat of a fever from the natural kindly
heat of a healthful body.

3. Immodest or immoderate abuse of the marriage. Which, though it lie without
the walk of humane laws, yet divine justice does many times deservedly
chastise it with variety of visitations upon themselves, families, outward
state, good name: with miscariages, barrenness, bad children, giving them over
to unnecessary distempers and strangeness in their carriage one unto another,
and other such like discomforts and crosses. Which (though they may also befall
GODS children for other ends, yet) let all guilty couples in such cases
conceive, that they fall upon them for such secret sensual exorbitancies and
excess.

4. Want of a comfortable communion in prayer, godly conference, mutual
communication of their spiritual estate, and how they stand to Godward, days
of humiliation, helping one another toward heaven, and that joyful
forethought of most certain meeting together in the ever lasting mansions of
glory, joy and bliss above. Such divine fellowship would incredibly sweeten
that dearest indissoluble knot, and make that state a very earthly Paradise to
those few black Swannes, that love so sweetly and graciously together.

5. Ignorance, or negligence in the right understanding and practicing both of
the common and several duties pertinent and proper to that estate. In all
other Arts, Professions, and Trades of life, the Practitioners desire and
endeavor to be ready in, and ruled by the precepts and directions thereof: but
as concerning this great mystery of managing the mariage-state with wisdom,
conscience and comfort, the most are as ignorant in those Treatises which teach
their Duties (of which there are many excellent ones extant) as they are basely
insolent in clownish frowardness or imperious tyranny, to create a great deal
of needless discontent and misery, both to themselves and their yoke-fellowes.

4. Help also we may have for the Point in hand, even from the wiser Heathen.
Who out of the very light of nature and grounds of reason, did learn and
labor to mollify and assuage the stinging fore-thoughts of ills to come; and
to Videntur omnia repentina graviora. -- Praemeditatio futuro^um malorum lenit
little adventu^. Tusc (...). lib 3. Quoniam mul^um po^est provisio animi, and
praeparatio ad minuendum do sorem, (...) s^mper omnia ^omim (...) meditata.
Haec est illa praestans and divina sapientia: -- Nihil (...) acciderit: Nihil,
antequam (...), non ^* venire posse a. bit^ari (...) Ib^d.

Mani qui (...) aud^ta a docto me^inissem viro,
Futaras (...) comment ^bar miserias:
Aut mo^tem acerbam, aut ex^lij moestam (...),
(...) aliquam molem meduabar mah;
Vt (...) invecta ^as casu sor^,
Ne me imparatam (...) laceraret repens. ^uripid.
Quamobrem omnes, cum secundae sunt maxim, tum maxim
Meditari secum opo^tet, quo pacto adversam aerumnam serant:
Pe^ida, damna, exilia peregie reatens semper cogitet:
Aut silij (...), aut uxo^is mortem, aut mo^bum sili^:
(...) esse hec, fieri posse: ut ne quid animo sit novum:
Q^quid ^aeter spem evenia^ omme id deputare esse in luc^o. Terent.
Drumes a (...) th^s (...) and preparation, but upon better grounds, and by the
rules (...) very powerful to s^able us to pass more patiently through crosses
when they coma.

(...) ita praemedita^ (...); sucrat, ut ad omnia ingenti animo (...) to^ius
substanti^, and tam multarum terum ^acturam, ad filiorum amarissimum obitum, ad
uxoris affectum, ad acerba cornoris ulcera, ad injusta amicorum opprobrla, ad
ancillarum contemptum atque servorum. Chrys^. in Mat. Hom. 34.

Nullus sit casus, quem non meditatio tu^ perveniat: nullus s^t casus, quite
impatatum inven^t: Propone (...) esse quod tubi accidere non possit. Bern. de
interiori Dom Cap 4^.

Men's solicita antequam agere quod libet incipiat, omnes sibi, quas pati potest
(...) propo^at: quatenus Redemptoris sui probra cogitans, ad adversa se (...)
Que nimirum venientia tanto fortius excipit, quanto se cautius ex praesci^
(...) Qui enim improvidu^ ab adversitate deprehenditur, quasi ab host (...)
^nvenitur: e^nique (...) inimiens necat, quia non repugnantem perforat. Nim qu^
mala (...) per solicitudinem pernotat, hostiles incu^sus quasi in in^ vigilans
expectans: and indead victoriam valenter accingitur, unde nesciens deprehendi
putaba^ur. Solerter ergo an^us ante actionis siae primordia, cuncta de^ adversa
meditari ut semper haee cogitans, semper contra haec thorace patientrae
manitus, and (...) acciderit, providus superet: and quicquid non accesserit,
lu^rum (...). (...). lib. 5. Cap 31.


prepare for a more easy and patient passage through them, by entertaining a
resolution beforehand to look for as no uncouth thing, any calamity cross or
casualty, incident to mortality, and the condition of man; and if they escaped
them, to hold it a gain and advantage, and as it were, an exemption from
ordinary frailty, and common misery of mankind. If they fell upon them, the
bitterness would be much abated by their former preparedness and expectation.
But we who profess Christianity, and to whom the Book of GOD belongs, have
far more sovereign antidotes to allay the smart, more sacred and surer
means to mitigate and take off the furyof feared future evils: even the sure
Word of GOD, many exceeding great and precious Promises, confirmed with the
oath of the All mighty, and sealed with the blood of His Son. Every one of them
is far more worth (though the worldling thinks not so) than all the wealth
and sweetness of both the Indies. GOD is faithful, who will not suffer you to
be tempted above that you are able: but will with the temptation also make away
to escape, that ye may be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10. 13. The sufferings of
this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us, Romans 8. 18. All things work together for good to them that
love GOD, Verse. 28. He that spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for
us all: How shall He not with Him also freely give us all things? Verse. 32.
When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the
rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou
shall not be burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, Isa. 43. 2, etc.
If thou truly fear GOD, fear nothing that shall hereafter fall upon thee;
temptation, trial, disgrace, distress in outward things, the face of man,
fiery times, danger from men or Devils, Death it self, or whatsoever can be
imagined most formidable to flesh and blood. For assuredly, He that is
afflicted with thee in all thy afflictions, will ever fortify thee with
sufficient strength beforehand, uphold thee with His all-powerfull presence in
the midst of them, and at length most gloriously deliver thee in despite of
all hell, and the whole world.

5. It is comfortable to consider; that GOD never puts His servants to suffer,
but He furnishes them with spiritual sufficiency to go through. If He mean to
bring thee to the stake, He will undoubtedly give thee a Martyrs strength. It
is His sweetest method and mercy, first to fit His children with divine ability
and answerable endowments, and then sets them on work to do or suffer any thing
for His sake. He suffers some to become extraordinary objects and the special
aim of extremest malice, spiteful railings, and all the keenest arrows of
lewdest tongues; when He has filled him first with so much Christian
magnanimity and nobleness of spirit, that he is able to pass by the most
scurrill gybe of the impurest drunkard, or the disdainefull frown of the
proudest Haman, without wound or passion; and does resolvedly and bravely
contemn all contumelies and contempts for his conscience: taking them as
Crowns and confirmations of his conformity to the LORD CHRIST: others to be
afflicted with variety of worldly crosses, whose heart He has already happily
crowned with contempt of the world* some to be exercised with fiercest
assaults, and Satan's sieriest darts, having been formerly brought up in the
School of temptations: others to be exposed to the fury of Popish flames, when
He has so inflamed their hearts with the love of the LORD JESUS, that they
dare undauntedly look the bloudiest persecutor in the face. The prudent
Commander makes not choice of fresh water or whitelivered soldiers (as they
say) for any hot service or high attempt; but of Veterans, and those of
greatest experience and most approoved valor: A discreet Schoolmasters gives
not the longest lessons and hardest task to dullards and blockeheads, but such
as are of pregnantest wits, and best capacity: the understanding armourer tries
not common Arms with Musket Shot, but that of Proof. The skillful Lapidary
does not try the tender Crystal or softer stones by the stiddy and hammer;
but the Adamant, which is readier to bruise the hardest iron or steel: the
careful Husbandman thresheth not the fitches with a threshing instrument; Isa.
28. ^7.
neither turns a cart-wheele upon the cummin: but beats out the fitches with
a staff, and the cummin with a rod. For his GOD (says the Prophet) does
instruct him to discretion, and does teach him. Now if the LORD of Hosts, who
is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working, give this discretion and
wisdom to frail man; Himself is infinitely more mercifully wise, to
proportion and sit His trials to the state and strength of His Patients;
singling out His valiantest soldiers for the strongest encounters; His best
scholars, for the largest lessons; His choicest Armor, for the highest
Proof; His hardest Adamants, for the most steely Anvill: the most courageous
Christians, for the ^orest conflicts: His ablest Followers, for extraordinary
service and sufferings. Abraham the Father of the faithful, and Friend of GOD;
Job, the justest man upon earth; David, a man after GODS own heart; Paul,
abounding in the riches of grace, and the rarest revelations: I say, these
eminent Champions thus highly favored, and heroically ^itted, were put to it
indeed, as appears in divine Story. The LORD in mercy did first infuse an
invincible mightiness of spirit and much flaming zeal into the breasts of
those three Christian Worthies, Athanasius, Chrysostom, and Luther, before He
employed them in His so glorious service, and exposed them to the rage of so
Athanasius per sex annos va^ie afflictus, in (...) tandem, dum pet totum
Orientis Imperium magna sedulitate exerci^ibus quoque ad investigandum eum
conductis* quae^retur, delituit. Tantae molis erat CHRISTI consodere servum; ut
omnis Imperij vis adversus unum hominem, qui DEVM habebat desensorem*
commoveretur Proditus tandem per ancillam, quae ei ministrabat, ex dominorum
suorum jussu, qui latebras Athanasio praeparaverant, divino admoni^us Spiritu,
ea nocte qua eum comprehendere veniebant ministri, aufugit. Func^ius* Ao.
CHRISTI 343.

Cur verear Chrysostomum appellare Marty^em, qui tot injurijs, tot contumelijs,
tot afflictionibus, nec ad impatientiam perpelli, nec a propaganda Christiana
pietate depelli potuit. Non percussus est securi, sed calu^nijs omni securi
acutioribus non ^emel ictus est. Hoc praemij vir optimus pro tam praeclaris in
Ecclesiam meritis retulit per Episcopos Orthodoxos, and sub Imperatore
Christiano. In vita Chrysostom. per Erasm. Rhoterod.

Quis non putasset Lutherum in tanto cunctorum odio, and invidia, cui totus
pene mundus insidiabatur, etiam ille cujus pedibus Imperatores olim cogebantur
cervices (...) non ^lle mo^tes occubiturum? etc. ^rightm* in Cap. 3. Apo^aly.


many implacable persecutions in their several ages. The first stood at swords
point (I mean the Sword of the Spirit) with the whole world: The whole world
against Athanasius, and Athanasius against it, says Hooker, out of the
Ecclesiastical Story; Half an hundred years spent in doubtful trial, which
of the two in the end would prevail, the side which had all, or else the Part
which had no friend, but GOD and Death: the One, a Defendour of his innocence;
the other, the finisher of all his troubles. After the Church of GOD, (hunted
like a Partridge on the mountains by the Arrian Bishops) woefully wasted and
wearied, had laid down her head in the bosom of this blessed man ready to
breathe out her last, he had never quiet day. Hear my Author: By the space of
six and forty years, from the time of his consecration, to succeed Alexander
Archbishop of Alexandria, till the last hour of his life in this world, they
never suffered him to enjoy the comfort of a peaceable day. The second was a
mighty Thunderer against the corruptions of the times; feared not the face of
the greatest woman in the world, armed as well with might, as enraged with
malice, (I mean Eudoxia the Empress.) but told her undauntedly of her raging,
Ioannes per celebrem illam concionem in Ecclesiam recitavit, cujus exordium
est: Herodias denuo insa^re, denuo commoveri, denuo saltare pergit: denuo caput
Iohannis in disco accipere quarit. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 6. Cap. 16.
dancing, persecuting cruelty etc. Besides a world of wicked oppositions,
insidiations and envy; (for by downright dealing in his Ministry, he had
drawn upon him the hatred of Peccata tanta severitate arguebat, ac si ipse
etiam per injuriam ^aesus esset: and omnium ordinum delicta magna dicendi
liberate taxabat: ita quidem, ut etiam Ducum ( Evtropij and Gain^) imo ipsius
Imperatoris errata reprehenderet. -- Omnes propemodum ordines in se concitavit.
-- Clerici and Aulici occulte suas and ipsi operas adjungebant. Osiand. Hist
Eccl^s. Cent. 5. Lib. 1. Cap. 6.
all sorts, Court and Clergy, etc.) He was diverse times silenced, deprived and
banished. But he was so much honored of GODS people every where, that when he
came into Taurocilicia, as himself reports, there flocked about him abundance
of Christians, weeping and wailing most bitterly for his banishment, and said,
Vbi autem in Cappadoci^ provinciam vcnimu^, multi sanctorum Patrum chori --
juges lachrymarum fontes effundentium, and flentium, eo quod in exilium nos
prosi^isci videbant; dicebantque Tolerabilius fuisse, Si Sol radi os suos
retraxisset obscuratus, qua quod os I^hannis tacuit. Epi^ 2.
That it had been better that the Sun had been deprived of her light, and all
her glory turned into darkness, than that the mouth of Chrysostom should be
stopped from preaching. In the last banishment, by reason of the barbarous usage
and immanities of the soldiers that led him along, Milites praefecti
praetorij, qui illum deducebant, non dissimulabant sibi promissa praemia
magnifica, si (...) in itinere moreretur. Itaque mensibus ^bus per imbres, per
aestus, sine ulla refrigeratione corpusculi durissimum iter pert^ht, Erasm in
vita Chrysostom.
hired for that purpose, he sweetly and blessedly breathed out his last. But
how bravely he bore, and with what invincible divine resolution he passed
through these indignities, oppressions, and cruel wrongs, we may well perceive
by his own words to another banished Bishop: Etenim ego cum a civitate
fugarer, nihil horum cuzabam, sed dicebam intra memet ipsum: Si quidem vult
Regina me exulem, agat in exilium. DOMINI and terra and plenitudo ejus. Et si
vult s^care, secet. Idem passus est and Esaias. Si vult in pelagus mittere; Im^
recordabor: Si vult in caminum in ^cere, idem passi sunt (...) ^lli pueri. Si
(...) feris vult objicere, objiciat: Daniclis in lacum leombus object^ (...).
Si me lapidare vult, lapidet me: Stephanum habeo primum (...) socium Si and
caput tollere vult, tollat: habeo socium Iohannem Baptistam. Si and substantiam
aufe^e, auferat. Nudus exivi de utero matris, nudus etiam abibo. Me adm^net
Apostolus, Etsi adhuc hominibus placerem, servus CHRISTI utique non essem.
Armat me and David, d^cens: Loquebar coram Regibus, and non confundebar. Multa
quidem adversus me consinxerunt, and dixerunt, quod ad communionem non jejunos
receperim. Et si quidem hoc feci, expungatu^ nomen meum ex Albo Episcoporum,
and non scribatur in Lib^o Orthodoxae Fidei: Quoniam ecce si tale quid admisi,
(...) me etiam CHRISTVS e Regno suo. Si autem pergunt hoc mihi objicere and
contendere; Deponant and Paulum, qui postquam coenavit, totam domum baptizavit.
Deponant and CHRISTVM Ipsum, qui postquam coenatum ^st, Apostolis Communionem
dedit. Dicunt quod cum muliere dormiverim: Exuite me, and inveni^tis membrorum
meorum mortificationem. Sed haec omnia per invi^iam excogita^unt. Johannes
exul, Cyriaco Episcopo exuli. Tom. 5* Epist. 3^.
When I was driven from the City, none of these things troubled me, but I said
within my self: If the Queen will, let her banish me: The earth is the LORDS,
and the fullness thereof: If she Psalm. 24. 1.
will, Let her saw me asunder: Isaiah suffered the same. If she will, let her
cast me into the sea, I will remember Jonah. If she will, let her cast me into
a burning fiery furnace; or amongst wild beasts; the three Children and Daniel
were so dealt with. If she will, let her stone me or cut off mine head; I have
then St. Stephen and the Baptist my blessed companions. If she will, let her
take away all my substance: Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked
should I return thither. The Apostle tells me, If I Gal. 1* 10.
yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of CHRIST. And David encourages
me, saying: I will speak of thy testimonies also before Kings, and Psalm. 119.
46.
will not be ashamed. The third is the third Elijah of later times, I mean
blessed Luther: Who by the invincible might of his heroical spirit, and one of
the greatest courages that ever dwelt in humane breast, did sustain and subdue
the hellish rage of that Man of Sin, and all his bloody Emissaries and
Agents; stood upright and unshaken, like an unmooveable Rock, against all the
tempestuous storms and swelling seas of the most furious persecutions that
ever were raised by the powers of hell against mortal man: and did so shake
the kingdom of Antichrist, that since that time, the most glorious light of
the Gospel, and resurrection of Saving Truth has broken out upon, and blessed
the face of Christendom, that did ever shine upon earth, or was seen amongst
the sons of men. Herein was he like unto Athanasius: As he opposed the
Arrian, so Luther the whole Antichristian world; and they both in despite of
all adversary malice, both from Man and Devil, Invitis, Diabolo,
persecutoribus, Papis^s, Athanasius and ^utherus, nobile Heroum par,
placidissima morte ex hac vita excesserunt. Hear the story: Athanasius post
multiplicia certamina* (qualia vix ullum E^clesiae Doctorem sustinuisse
legimus) placidissima morte ex hac vita excessit: cum ab initio usque ad finem
sui Episcopatus Alexandrinae Ecclesiae praefuisset quadraginta sex an^is:
adversus quem ^otus pene orbis conspiravit. Neque tamen (ut D. D. Lutherum) eum
violent^ morte ex hoc mundo exturbare potuit. Osiand. Hi^. Eccles. Cent. 4.
Lib. 2. Cap. 16.
gave up blessedly their happy souls in peace into the bosom of JESUS CHRIST,
whom they had formerly served so faithfully, and for whose sake they had
gloriously suffered so much. Thus you see, when GOD singles out and designs
any of His for some special services, and extraordinary sufferings, He ever
furnishes them beforehand with singularity of gifts, and sufficiency of
spiritual ability to go through, and stand to it to death. But now on the
other side, He will never break a bruised reed, nor quench smoking flax, Isa.
42. 3. but will ever gather the Lambs with His arm, and carry them in His
bosom, and gently lead those that are with young, Isa. 40. 11. I make no
doubt, but that in Queen Mary's days He mercifully hid many a good soul from
the implacable fury of those Popish morning Wolves: who, though they were in a
saving state, and loved the LORD JESUS in sincerity, Ephesians. 6. 24. yet they
wanted strength to stand in the face of the fiery tempests of those times.

6. Beware lest any earthly contentment encroach upon, empaire, and eat up thy
delight in heavenly things. But let thy spiritual joy ever utterly over-weigh
all humane miseries, and overtop incomparably all worldly pleasures. And there
is good reason for it: In respect, Of the 1. Object. The matter, whereupon
earthly joy does feed, is base and vile, filth and fashions, gaming and
good-fellowship, revelling, and in our days, even roaring, lust and luxury,
etc. and other such froth and fooleries, the very garbage of hell; at the best
corn, wine, oil, gold, greatness, offices, honors, high rooms, Princely
favors, etc. as transitory as an hasty headlong torrent, a shadow, a ship, a
bird, an arrow, a Post that hastes by; or if you can name any thing of
swifter wing, and sooner gone. But the object about which spiritual joy is
exercised, are Nehem. Cap. 8. 10. Be not sorry, for the joy of the LORD is your
strength. Psalm 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? And there is none upon
earth, that I desire besides Thee.
IEMOVAH blessed for ever, Hos. 14. 4. I will love them s^eely Ier. 31. 3. I
have loved Thee with an everlasting love.
His free and everlasting love, Psalm. 30. 5. In His favor is life.
the light of His countenance, His Exo 34. 6. The LORD, The LORD GOD mercifu^
and gracious, etc.
sweet name, Luke 10. 10 -- Butrather rejoice because your names are written in
he^ven.
That our names are written in heaven; the Col 1. 13 (...)
Son of His Love, His Person, whose glory, beauty, amiablenesse, sweetness and
excellency is something shadowed (but infinitely short) by outward beauties,
Cant. 5. 10. Zech. 13. 1. In that day there shall be a fountain opened, etc.
The preciousnesse of His meritorious blood, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
exceeding great and precious Promises, Isa. 40. 1, 2. Comfortye, comfortye,
etc. -- Her iniquity is pardoned.
pardon of sins, Ephesians 4. 24. The new man after GOD is created in
righteousness and true hol^nesse.
CHRIST'S glorious Image shining in our souls, Psalm. 16. 11. In thy presence is
fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.
eternity of unconceiveable joys. 2. Of continuance. Earthly joy is like the
crackling of thorns under a pot, a sudden blaze with some noise, but soon
extinct, and comes to nothing. Job 20. 5.
The triumphing of the wicked is short, and joy of the hypocrite but for a
moment. But spiritual joy is like the fire upon the altar; it has ever fuel
to feed upon, though we do not ever feel it. Romans 14. 17.
The Kingdom of GOD is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the HOLY GHOST.
Isa. 35. 10.
The ransomed of the LORD shall return and come to Zion with songs, and
everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing shall sly away. Psalm. 32. 1^
Be glad in the LORD, and rejoice ye righteous: and shout for joy all ye that
are upright in heart. 3. Sincerity. Earthly joy is cruelly embittered with many
slavish, stinging and envenimed mix^ures and marre-mirths: but GOD gives joy to
the upright heart, and no sorrow with it. 4. Effects. Carnal joy utterly
unfits for all holy employments; but spiritual joy is to the faculties of the
soul, as oil to the joints of the body; it makes quick, active, and
excellent for the discharge of any divine duty. 5. Calling to mind, carnal joy
in the evil day torments extremely, and turns it into gall and worme-wood:
but remembrance of those sweetest glimpses, and heavenly deawes of spiritual
joy which were wont to shine into, and refresh our humbled souls when we were
conscionably busied in the ways and work of the LORD, will serve as a
precious cordial, to re-comfort our spirits in sadder times, and surest pledge
of their most certain return in due time. 6. Spiritual joy is many times
much enlarged in times of tribulation: But the heart of the wicked is
sorrowful in laughter, and troubled with melancholy amidst their greatest
mirth. 7. Spiritual joy is ordinarily most free, full, and at the highest in
solitariness, soliloquies, and the most retired exercises of the soul: but
carnal joy and want of company are for the most part incompatible. And it is
kept in that poor little dying life it has, by good-fellowship, and sensual
employments. 8. Carnal joy ever ends in bitterness, spiritual in
blessedness. As the rivers of fresh water run their course with an hasty
current to fall into the salt Sea; so the Posting Sun of all worldly pleasures
after a short gleame, and vain glistering, sets in the Ocean of endless
sorrow.

7. Make thy peace with GOD upon good ground in the mean time, and graciously
walk with Him by a rule and daily direction. Watch over thine heart with
extraordinary industry. Mortify thy members which are upon earth; pride,
choler, covetousness; self-love, hankering after the fashions, etc. Strangle
thy lusts, stand at the Swords Point with thy most beloved sin. Bear the
yoke from thy youth, and Quum nem^ in arena seipsum exerceat, quomodo aliquis
in certamine insignis erit and conspicu^s? Quis unquam athleta non ab incunte
adolescentia in Palaestra corrobora^s, potuit in Olympicis, excelso, ac magno
animo adversarium aggredi* An non oportet quotidie luctari atque currere? Nonne
videtis ^os quos quinque certaminum athletas appellan^, quum nullum forte
reluctatorem repererint, ad saccum arena plenum, vires suas excitare. -- ^os
imitari stude -- sunt enim multa quae ad irae no^ rabi^m incitant, multa quae
concupiscentiae flammam incendunt. Insurge igitur contra passiones, vinca^
animi labores, ut corporis quoque labores possis perferre. Chrysostom. In Mat. Him.
34.
exercise thy spiritual arms every day. Get a habit of heavenly-mindednesse
and holy familiarity with GOD aforehand; and then shall we hold up our heads
and our hearts with boldness and undauntednesse of spirit in the evil day.
The strongest and stoutest creatures (says a godly Divine, pressing this
Point) are afraid of those things which are contrary to their natures, which
other creatures never so weak, fear not, being of the same nature. No more
fearful creature than a ^ish, flying at the shadow of a man; yet it fears
not the Ocean Sea, because of its own nature and acquaintance: which Lions,
and the stoutest creatures fear. -- A sheep ^eares not his shepherd, by
reason of acquaintance, whom yet the bear and the wolf fear: Whatsoever is
strange and unacquainted, is fearful. If we acquaint our selves with GOD, and
walk with Him as His friends, we shall have the more boldness with Him, when we
have most need of Him. In a word, be very temperate, honest, holy. For, the Tit
^ 12.
more conscionable thou have formerly been, the less power will the cross
have when it comes. It was the saying of a reverend man, where sin lies
heavy, the cross lies light: and contrarily, that heart is like to be most
lightsome in a storm, which has been the holiest in a calm.

8. Possess thy mind betime of many mortifying motives and meditations, to
master the immoderate fear of death the king of terror, and then thou will be
able with far more patience and resolution to digest all petty troubles and
miseries in the mean time. For which purpose Ponder upon these Points.

1. There is almost no man, but he has suffered more pain in his life, than
ordinarily he shall pass through in death. The pangs of death (says Mr. Ward)
are often less than of the toothache. 2. The covenant of GOD is offorce with
us, Life of ^aith in death. page (...).
as we lie in the dust of the earth, Mat. 22. 31, 32. 3. Our union with CHRIST
holds still, Col. 1. 18. As the Hypostaticall did, when CHRIST lay in the
grave. 4. Death is but a sleep, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Acts 7. 60. 5. In CHRIST^
morte mors obijt. Gregor. in 1 Reg. Cap. 2.
CHRIST'S death has taken away the sting, and sweetened it to all His, Heb. 2.
15. 6. It is but a sturdy Porter, opening the Door of Eternity, and letting us
into Heaven^ A rougher passage to eternal pleasures. 7. It is but like the
fall of a wheat corn into the ground, and dying, that it may spring up
afterward more gloriously, Ioh. 12. 24. 8. It is but a Departing out of this
world unto the Father, Ioh. 1. 31. 9. It is called in the Old Testament, A
gathering to their Fathers. 10. Jacob made nothing of it. And Israel said unto
Joseph: Behold, I die. Genesis 48. 21. And when Jacob had made an end of
commanding his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the
ghost, and was gathered unto his people.
9. Let us trim our lamps betime, I mean try our spiritual states: for
there are many foolish virgins; and many thousands, who for want of a true
touchstone and sound trial this way, find the pit of destruction to have shut
her mouth upon them irrevocably and for ever, before they will acknowledge
themselves to be wide of the right way to heaven. I have been often upon this
argument, at this time I desire only to discover the d^lusion of the greatest
part by an imaginary faith; and of understanding and worldly-wise men by a
temporary faith, and that in short.

For the first sort; these four Demands may easily discover and destroy the
vanity of their spiritual selfe-cousenage and soule-deceit.

1. Ask them how they came by their faith, when they begun to believe, etc.
and their ordinary answer will be this, or the like: We cannot tell: we are not
such Atheists, or so profane, but we have believed ever since we were borne:
we have ever trusted in CHRIST, and made account of Him as our Savior: We
never doubted, but that He which made us, Nay, but bear the Prophet: It is a
people of no understanding: therefore He that made them, will not have mercy on
them; and He that formed them, will show them no savor. Isa. ^7. 8^.
will have mercy on us, etc. but now these poor deluded ignorants are in the
mean time mere strangers to any work of the spirit of bondage, and pangs of
the new birth, which would have taught them with a witness to have taken
notice what a mighty work and admirable change the glorious Sun of saving
faith is wont to cause wheresoever it comes. They could never yet sensibly and
heartily cry, We are unclean, we are unclean; we are sick, we are lost, we
are heavy-laden, we are undone, we die, we are damned; except we drink of the
water of life, wash in that Fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness,
and have a blessed part in the passion and purity of JESUS CHRIST, etc. Whereas
now the true believer can tell you readily and experimentally, that he was
first enlightened, convinced and terrified with sight, sense, and sorrow for
sin; and so on, as you shall find it Instruct. for comfort* afflict. Consc.
page 324. and seq. But especially fair fall one good token: ever when
justifying faith is infused, there is a thorow-sale of all (...), The Pearl of
great price will never be had, except all be sold: which is a matter so
remarkable, and makes such a miraculous change in a man, that i^ cannot choose
but be strongly remembered, and with greatest astonishment, and the even for
ever, both in this world and the world to come. Sensual pleasures and bosom^
si^es are notoriously na^l'd and glued to a ca^ (...): they are as near and
dear unto it, as (...) dainty and delicious meat to the p^te; (...) (says
Zophar) is sweet in his m^th, he hi^es i^ under his Job. 20. 12.
tongue; he spares it, and for sakes it not; but keeps it still in his mouth:
not only as ordinary garments, but as the most costly jewels, and richest
chain: Pride (says David) compasses them about as Psalm. ^3. 6.
a chain; violence covers them as a garment: as the very limbs of the Body.
Mortify therefore (says Paul) your members which are upon earth: fornication,
Col. 3. 5.
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, covetousness: nay,
and as the most necessary and noble parts, the right eye, and the right hand;
If thy right eye offend thee (says CHRIST) pluck it out, and cast it from
thee: -- And if thy Mat. 5. 29, 30.
right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: yea dearer then
very life it self to flesh and blood: For we may observe and see too often
such sons of pleasure, and slaves of lust to have no joy in this life, after
they have lost the joy of this life. Hence it is, that many times the wretched
worldling being robbed one way or other of the very life of his life, his wedge
of gold and hoards of wealth, makes an end of himself: that the wanton missing
of his lustful aim and much desired choice, finds no pleasure in this life;
but cuts off himself by a violent and untimely death: that Achitophel being
disgraced and over-top'd in a Point of Policy, the crown and pride of his
worldly happiness, put his household in order, and hanged himself. Well then,
if it be thus, that parting from carnal pleasures be as painful and vexing,
as if a man should pull the meat from our mouth, the chain from our neck,
clothes from our back, the limbs from our body, the right arm from our
shoulder, the eyes out of our head, and as the loss of our life, that happy
soul which bids adieu everlastingly to all earthly delights, must needs take
extraordinary notice, and be able for ever to give a ready and most sensible
account of such a mighty change and mavelous work.

2. Ask them, how they keep their faith: and they will tell you, they thank
GOD, they are not troubled about it. They find no such scruples, doubts,
distrusts, fears, jealousies, terrors, temptations, desertions, wants,
weaknesses, etc. as some preciser fellows, who stand so much upon their
profession, strictness, conscience, and other singularities above ordinary, so
much talk of, and take to heart. They see no such necessity of running after
sermons, so much reading, prayer, poring upon precise books, recourse to
Puritan-Ministers, Humiliation-daies, etc. They can believe quietly, follow
their business, and go to Heaven without so much ado. Nay, they are so far
from being troubled in any of these kinds, that if any amongst them be troubled
in mind, and extraordinarily visited with spiritual distress, the portion
many times of GODS dearest children; they presently please and applaud
themselves, that they are free; and conceive and peremptorily conclude that the
afflicted is an hypocrite, has been a more heinous sinner then others, or
meddled too much with Scripture-businesses and divine matters. But now the true
believer holds the precious heavenly Jewel of justifying Faith with much ado,
difficulty and That Sa^ may work our final over throw, it is his usual
custom to tell the true believing Christian that he is destitute of says; and
contrariwise the (...) worldling, that he has a strong says; whereas in
truth, there is nothing in him, but secure pre^ Down* Christ. Warf. Cap. 42.
doubtings. He is as careful and covetous (if it be possible) to preserve and
save this Pearl, as the worldling his gold. For this purpose, he passes
through many fore and bitter conflicts with the fiercest assaults and fieriest
darts of the Devil; (for he knows full well, that that is the arm and power
of GOD unto us, for all sound comfort and spiritual wellbeing, and therefore
he is most furious to weaken us there) with infinite gaine-sayings and
temptations of our inbred insidelity, native ignorance, diffidence, wisdom of
the flesh, our own sense and feeling, and a world of oppositions continually.
He is driven many and many a time to the Throne of Grace with prayers, tears,
and strongest wrastlings for auxiliary forces, and renewed strength. O how
often does he resort with extremest thirst, and dearest longings to all the
blessed Fountains, that feed his faith; the person of CHRIST, His meritorious
blood, the Promises, GODS freest love, His sweetest name; the covenant of
grace, all the Ordinances, those Ones of a thousand, who are able to discover
both the depths of the Devil, and the mysteries of Evangelicall mercy, etc.
and for all this is glad many times to say unto his GOD: Though Thou slay me,
yet will I Job 13 15. Ma^k* 9. 24.
trust in Thee: LORD, I believe, help Thou mine unbelief, etc. The difference
then stands thus: They hold it the easiest thing of a thousand; but he finds it
the hardest matter in the world, To believe.

3. Ask them, what it has wrought upon them: and they cannot give an account
of any alteration to any purpose, or sanctification at all. Imaginary Faith is
but an idle Idea, a naked Notion, a mere fancy, a groundless presumption and
true dream; and therefore it is not active or productive of any real effects,
or true religiousnesse. But now saving ^aith does ever beget a blessed change
in the whole man, body, soul, spirit, calling, company, conver^, and^* ^f any
man be in CHRIST, he is a new creature: Old things ^ Cor. 5. 17.
are passed away, Behold all things are new. It is ever attended with those
three great works of grace: 1. An universal repentance and return from all
sins: from gross ones in practice and action; and from the most unavoidable
infirmities at least in allowance and affection. 2. An universal
sanctification in all the parts and powers of body and soul; though not in
height of degree, yet without exception of parts. 3. An universal obedience to
all GODS commands; though not to perfection, yet in sincerity and truth: and
with an heavenly train of glorious graces* love, hope, virtue, knowledge,
temperance, 2 Pet 1. 5, 6. Gal. 5. ^, 23.
patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, charity, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, etc. And even in the lowest
ebb and greatest weakness, it is ever wont to discover it self at least by
poverty of spirit, hungring and thirsting after righteousness, striving
against doubting, bitter complaints for want of former feelings, industrious
seeking to be settled in believing, earnest and greedy longing after grace,
highly prizing the LORD JESUS, and preferring Him infinitely before all the
pleasures, profits and felicities of this life, resolving rather to die ten
thousand deaths, than to return any more to folly; self-denial, contempt of
the world, care to search out the sin that may possibly hinder comfort, and be
rid of it, continual watchfulness and holy jealousy, lest we should be
deceived, and faithful laboring to subdue corruption.

4. Fourthly, ask them, How they prize the object they apprehend imaginarily;
for it is no better: and it is but thus: If you were able to assure them of
wallowing in all worldly pleasures with constant health, and immortality upon
earth: they would with all their hearts, part with all their hope of heaven
hereafter: For they are yet but carnal, though selfe-confident. But now the
divinenesse and excellency of spiritual delights which justifying Faith does
extract from the Objects about which it is exercised, does so affect and ravish
the heart of the true Believer; that well advised, in cold blood, and out of
temptation, he holds all the corporal felicities of ten thousand worlds, even
world without end, in comparison of them, but as dross, and dung, and dust in
the balance. Our part in the person of CHRIST, with the purchases of His
dearest blood, and possession of the Deity blessed for ever by His means, do
more than infinitely transcend the utmost of all earthly contentments, raised
above the highest possibility, by the most inventive and strongest imagination,
and to be enjoyed through a thousand eternities.

The second sort, which are a generation of more understanding men; stand thus
for their spiritual state, and thus fearfully cousen their own souls, and
come short of salvation: They assay indeed to be religious, give up their names
to Profession, and would go to heaven with all their hearts, so far as the
way holds, with enjoyment of temporal happiness: and therefore, they put on a
form of godliness, and fair outside; furnish themselves with an artificial
habit of talking well; take part in all companies with the better side; follow
and frequent Sermons with good forwardness; set up prayer and other religious
exercises in their families; put themselves upon days of humiliation; leave
many sins, do many things, hold an universal outward conformity to all the
ordinances and divine Duties at the instance of the Ministry. And if they be of
ability, countenance godly Preachers, stand for them, and entertain them into
their houses with much affectionatenesse and bounty, especially such as
(perhaps) by reason of too much charity, unacquaintednesse with their ways,
lothnesse to be accounted too pragmaticall and rough, or something comply with
them in a false conceit of their spiritual well-being, etc. But press them
further, over and besides all this, to the heart and life of religion, to the
power and pith of godliness, crucifying of their corruptions, strangling their
lusts, mastering their passions, parting with all sin, unfashioning them to
the times, abandoning for ever their darling pleasure, denial of themselves,
contempt of the world, daily walking with GOD, delight in the way of holiness,
an holy keeping of the Isa. 35. ^.
LORDS day, fruitfulness in all good works, living by faith, an uncowardly
opposition to the iniquities of the present, etc. which (they well know) will be
necessarily accompanied with Drunkards songs, railings of the basest,
discountenance from ungodly greatness, the worlds deadliest enmity, speaking
against every where, etc. O then, Acts 28. 22.
you strike them stark dead on the nest, as they say. These are hard speeches,
very harsh, grating and ungrateful to their ears, and go to their very
hearts: and therefore in such Points as these pressing more preciseness, you
may as well remoove a mountain of brass with your little finger, as stir
them an inch. Say what you will, and preach out your heart, (as they say) they
will no further. Thus far as they go already, shall either serve their turn
for salvation, or they will venture their souls with thousands that are worse
than themselves. They pitch upon a safe, wise, moderate and discreet temper of
religion, as they conceive and call it, and neither desire, or endeavor to go
any further, or grow any better. A fair day mends them not (as they say) and a
soul day paires them not. As they are peremptorily consident, the Pearl will be
had at their price; so they are constantly peremptory never to become more
precise. And if it fall out sometimes, that they meet with some faithful man
of GOD, who hi^s right upon their humor; discovering the insufficiency of
their present spiritual state, for future happiness; and persuading them upon
a necessity of salvation, to an universal resignation of themselves with
unreservednesse and zeal to all the world, and will and ways of GOD; they are
wont to put it off thus, or in the like manner: The man is a good man, and of
good parts, one whom I love well; but a little too hot, too boisterous and
rough, and pinches too much upon preciseness and particularizing men's
spiritual states; that is all his ^ault: I must confess, I am of such a
nature and disposition, that I shall be more moved with milder sermons, and
calmer carriage in the Pulpit: I do not see how this Ministerial severity and
roughness, And yet the Apostle says, (...) ^. 1. 13. Reprove them sharply,
severely, cu^gly; of (...) Quemadmodu^ m^us, qui b^li vult mede^i, amaris
utitur pharmacis, ita obdurati, prae^racti, atque contumaces homines duris and
severis verbis arguendi sunt: malo enim nodo malus quaerendus est ^unens.
Mega^der in (...).

Vt caro quae callo obdu^uit non sacile accipit vib^ces plaga^um, nisi improbis
and crebris ictibus* ita animus assuetus peccatis, non commovetu^ correctione
nisi seve^a^ and ac^i. Idem Ibid.

Haec ^hementia and severitas, quam hic Paulus in Pastore requirit, non vacat
omni i^a: quam and CHRISTVM invasisse Evangelista testis est. Man. 3. 5.

Haec autem justa est, and pia^ra, quam Scripturae vocant Zelum DEI, cum sit
iracundia amore DEI and pietatis excitata: qualis CHRISTVM invasit cum
negotiatores expulite Domo Patris sui. Ioh. 2. 15.

Hoc loco non alienos dicit, sed domesticos esse coarguendos. Theophylactin L^c

Neque alienos solum hic taxat Paulus, sed cos nominat^m qui CHRISTO nomen
dederant. Calvin. in Cap 1. ad Tit.

For of all others, those which give their names to religion, and are unsound
at the heartroot: who money times also most fearfully and scandalous^y shame
their P^osession, and cause the good way to be evil spoken of, by their
worldliness, pride, fashions, (...) tonguednesse, passions ^y, detaining
Church dues, cowardlinesse in good causes, impatiency of Ministerial reproof,
i^ it cross them in their commodit^, strangeness of apparel, intimate
correspondence with the prophan^, etc irreligiousnesse of their servants and
f^llowers, etc. are to be scarched thoroughly, and most severely censured, that
they may be saved at the length, truly humbled, Christians indeed, and not
only in their own conceit, and such as GOD would have them.


sharpness of reproof, and such searching into, and peremptory censuring men's
state to GOD- ward, does so much good, etc.

My whole Discourse of true Happiness is a touchstone and looking glass for a
trial and discovery of the unsoundnesse and spiritual selfe-deceit: and
therefore thither I remit them.

10. A serious and fruitful meditation upon the four last things, has been
ever holden very material, and of special moment, to make us (by GODS
blessing) more humble, un-worldly, provident and prepared for the evil Day.
Give me leave therefore, to select and propose some profitable Considerations
thereabouts, and Conclusions thence, which may serve to mortify our affections
to the world, take off the edge and eagerness in pursuit after earthly things;
mollify, and make fit our hearts for a more easy entrance, and effectual
entertainment of all saving impressions, and motions of the Word and Spirit,
for our spiritual good; that in times of terror, we may stand like Mount
Zion, unmooveable and magnanimous.

About DEATH, Consider:
1. That all the pleasures, treasures, and comforts of this life, wife,
children, goods, gold, great friends, lands, livings, possessions, offices,
honors, high rooms, brave situations, fair prospects, sumptuous buildings,
pleasant walks, and even the world it self, upon which thou have lost so much
labor, time, care, thought-fulnesse, and doted so long, holding a divorce, as
death it self, must all, upon the stroke of death, Orbis medicos ad te
convoca; Podaly^ios, Machao^as* Aesculapios, Hippocrates and Galenos omnes
reviviscere ^ube, non hi omnes vel horulam annis tuis apponent, ultra quam
velit DEVS. Pharmacopolia exhau^as, aurum and uniones glutias ut vitam
extendas, tamen terminos, qui praeteriri non poterunt, non promovebis. Cautus
sis, quantum velis, vitae pericula omnia declines, morborum principijs obstes,
numerum mensium non augebis. Op^es, vovea^, roges, nihil agis; vitae tuae
termini jam constituti sunt, nec unquam, (quicquid resistas) praeteriri
poterunt. -- Ciborum tibi praestantissimorum copia sit and selectus; vini
slorem bibas; nunquam labores nisi ad sanitatem; ^artum somni capias, quantum
and I ex Archiatrorum, and ratio valetudinis poscit; Ad numerum caleas and
algeas, nihilo-minus mortalis eris, and ubi vitae tuae metam contigeris, age,
valedie rebus humanis, and ad rationem reddendam te para: Tribunal te vocat.
which not heaven and earth, or any created power, can any ways possibly
prevent, divert, or adjourne, be suddenly, utterly, and for ever left, never
more to be minded, medl'd with, or enjoyed in this world or the world to come.
When our breath goes forth, and we return to our earth, all our thoughts
perish: Even the thoughts of the greatest Princes, and mightiest Monarchs upon
earth, who happily may have in their heads whole commonwealths, and the
affairs of many kingdoms. Put not your Psalm. 146. 3, 4.
trust in Princes (says King David) nor in the son of man, in whom there is
no help. His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth, in that very day
his thoughts perish. And therefore let it be thy wisdom, to rent and weane
thine affections from the world with an holy resolute violence in the mean
time: Contemn vivens, quae post mortem habere non potes* Dissicile est, imo
impossible ut praesentibus quis ^rnatur bonis, and futuris; ut hic ventrem,
and illic mentem impleat, ut de delicijs tra^seat ad delicias, ut in terra and
in coelo gloriosus appareat. Bern De interiori Domo. Cap. 45.
Disdain and scorn to set thine heart upon those things here, which thou
can not, thou must not have in the second life. And there is good reason for
it. For they are all (as I said before) at the best, and in the height: 1. But
vanity. And 2. Vexation of spirit. 3. They cannot satisfy the soul. 4. They
will not profit in the day of revenge. 5. They reach not to eternity. 6. There
is no man so assured of his honor, wealth or any worldly thing, but he may be
deprived of them, the very next moment. 7. Thou needs to fear no want: There
is no man (says CHRIST) that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or Mar.
10. 29, 30.
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my sake and the Gospels;
but he shall receive an hundred fold now in this time, houses and brethren, and
sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the
world to come eternal life. Of eternal life, the point is clear: But how
shall they be so manifoldly remunerated in this life? 1. In the same kind,
sometimes, and (...), as they say. Abraham, at GODS command, left his country,
kindred, and fathers house: and he was afterward (as you know) crowned with
riches and honor abundantly, and became a great and mighty Prince: Job for the
glorifying of GOD, and confounding of Satan, bore patiently, and blessed GOD
for the loss of all: and how richly was he after repayed with a large and
singular addition, and excellency of goods and children. ^ertur Idianum cum
summam (...) Romani administ^et, istum Valentinianum, qui praefectus (...)
erat, ex Albo militum qui in exercitu Ioviniani vocabantur, ex emisse, and
(...) addixisse exssio: simulatione quidem quod milites sibi subjectos, cum
contra hosts pugnandum esset, parum commode instruxerat, sed revera hinc
inductus est. Cum Iulianus ad^ue in Gallia, que ad occidentem solemn vergit,
aetatem ageret, ad quoddam delubrum ivit sacrificatum: simulque cum eo fuit
Valentinianus. Nam Romany vetu erat mos, ut praefecti militum, qui Ioviani and
Herculiani vocabantur Imperatorem proxime a tergo praesidij causa sequerentur.
Valentinianus autem ^um esset lime delub^i transgressurus, and sacerdos ritu
Gentilitio virides olivae ramusculo madefactos manu tenens, introtuntes illos
aspergeret gutta in suam vestem dela^a, aegre admodum and graviter tulit.
Christianus enim erat, and propterea sacerdotem, qui ipsum aqua asperserat, and
convicijs adoritur. Aiunt preterea cum etiam Imperatore Iuliano inspectante
tantum vestis suae cum ipsa gutta excidisse, abjecisseq, quantum gutta
madefecerat. Vnde Iulianus ei admodum incensus, iratusque non multo post
condemnavit exilio, ut nimirum Melitinam, utbem Armeniae perpetuo incoleret,
causa quidem simulata, quod milites sibi subjectos negligenter admodum
gubernasset. Noluit enim videri propter religionem ullo cum afficere incommodo,
ne inde aut martyris, aut consessoris honos illi tribueretur: siquidem hac de
causa alij^ etiam Christianis pepercerat, quia videret eos ex periculotum
susceptione (uti supra demonstratum est) tum gloriam sibi consequi, tum
religionem ac fidem CHRISTI vehementer confirmare. Ac simul ut imperium Romanum
Ioviano delatum est, iste Valentinianus ab exilio Nicaeam revocatus, mortuo jam
forte Iuliano, and consilio ab exercitu and his qui tum primos magistratus
ge^ebant, inito, omnium sussragijs Imperator deligitur. Sozom. Histor.
Ecclesiast. Lib. 6. Cap. 6.
Valentinian the Emperor was put from his place of command in the army, by
Julian, and banished for the profession of CHRIST: but afterward was called
back from banishment, and with much honor and applause advanced to the height
of the Imperial dignity. The Apostles forsaking all for CHRIST'S sake, had
afterward for one Apostolis, postquam domi reliquissent omnia, omnium fidelium
domus erant apertae, ut loco unius aediculae centum haberent dominos: omnesque
fidelium agri Apostolis quoque suum fructu^ etc necessaria ferebant, ut recte
Paulus scripserit, 2 Cor 6 10. Apostolos esse tanquam nihil habentes, and tamen
omnia possidentes. Sic ubi unum patrem, unam matrem, pauculos fratres, and
sorores reliquerunt, alibi centum fideles invenerunt, qui paterno, materno and
fraterno animo eos prosecuti sunt. Harmon. Evang. Cap. 132.
poor cottage, the houses of all the faithful Christians in the world, to
which they were far more welcome, than ever any Haman was to his proudest
palace: and so all godly Ministers in all ages ever find heartier
entertainment, amongst the Household of Faith, (truly so called) than ever any
natural father, mother, sister or brother could possibly afford; because, as
yet they can see no beauty in the image of CHRIST in others, or in their feet
who bring glad tidings, nor love spiritually. 2. Or in equivalence, by
Centuplaigitur ista, hoc est multo plura animus recipit, non centuplo modosed
infinito, majore tum volup^ate utens mod^eis illis, quaecunque ad vitam
praesen, tem in persecutione DOMINVS dederit, quantilibet tribulationibus
circundatus. quam ante cognitum Evangelium, usus suerat ijs, quae reliquit
Bucer. in Cap. 29. Matthew. Interim suos exh^rat DEVS, ut illis pluris sit,
longeque suat vius tantillum boni quo fruentur, (...) si extra CHRISTVM illis
asslueres immensa honorum copia. (...). (...) (...). i. e. Quae centie tanti
sint, nempe quod ad verum usum, and commoda hujus etiam vitae attinet: si modo
^lla non ex copijs and cu^tate nostra, sed ex DEI nostri voluntate, (quae una
est certissima bonorum Regula) metiamur: adeo ot fideles in media etiam
egestate hujus promissionis eventum sentiant: Itaque perridiculus erat Iulianus
ille Apostata, quum hunc locum exagitans, quaerere nicentum etiam uxores
habituri essent Christiani. Beza in Cap. 10. Marti.
contentment, which does incomparably both in sweetness and worth surpass and
over-weigh all worldly wealth. Witness that worthy reply of the most famous
Italian Marquess, Galeacius Caracciolus (having left the rich and pleasant
Marquesdome of Vico, all Imperial, Popish, Princely, Courtly favors, and
other proportionable felicities attending upon such humane greatness for the
Gospels sake) to a wicked Jesuit tempting him with a great sum of gold, to
return out of Zion to Sodom; from Geneva into Italy; The life of Galeacius
Caracciolus, the noble Marquess of V^o in the kingdom of Naples. Cap. 23. ^
Fore dicit, ut in medijs etiam persecutionibus centuplo sint foelicrores, quam
unquam artea, qui CHRISTVM omnibus hujus vitae ^ommedis antepesuerint. I.
Let their money perish with them, who esteem all the gold in the world, worth
one days society with JESUS CHRIST, and His HOLY SPIRIT. I make no doubt but
to any of our learned and holy men, exiles for CHRIST in Queen Mary's time, of
whom many after returned, and received an hundred fold according to the letter
of the Text, brown bread and the Gospel in Germany, during that bloody five
years, were infinitely more sweet and dear, than all the Bishoprics of
ENGLAND with Subscription to the six Articles. 3. Even in in I^d. E^e qui
reliquerit pauem, and elegerit sibi Patrem Div^, uno ei plus, (...) centuplum
constat recepisse, etc -- Qui reliquerit fratrem, ut habeat CHRISTVM fratrem,
nonne meli^n erit ei quam centum fratres? -- Si dimittit substantiam, ab
omnibus diligitur, ab omnibus honoratur, a quibusdam autem and timetur. Nam
ipse DEVS cui se tradidit, dat ei gratiam coram omnibus: Nonne melius est ei
hoc, quam universa terra? Incertus Author in Mat. Hom. 33.

Ne quis suspicetur quod dictum est solis congruere Discipulis: dilatat
promissionem ad omnes qui similia faciunt: Habebunt enim pro carnalibus
cognatis, familiaritatem and fraternitatem cum DEO; pro agris Paradisum; and
pro lapideis aedibus supernam Jerusalem, etc. Theophylact. in Cap. 19. Mat.

Quamvis pios semper in hoc mundo persecutiones maneant, and quasi eorum tergo
crux adhaereat, tam dulce tamen est condimentum gratiae DEI, quae ipsos
exhilarat, ut illorum conditio regum delicijs optabilior sit. Calv. Ibid.


an overflowing and transcendent manner, in a pressed and heaped, and even
over-inlarged measure by spiritual joy, peace of conscience, contentment of
soul, more familiarity with GOD, nearer communion with JESUS CHRIST, fuller
assurance of His love, and our portion in Him, more sensible experience of His
all sufficiency, extraordinary exercise of faith, sweeter taste in the
Promises, closer cleaving to the Word, clearer sight of divine excellencies,
heartier longing for heavenly joys, etc. One drop of which spiritual
refreshing deawes distilling upon the soul even in greatest outward distress;
one glimpse of such glorious inward joys shining from the face of the Sun of
salvation into the saddest heart in the darkest dungeon, does incredibly
surpass all the comfort which wife, children, wealth, or (in a word) any
worldly good, or mortal greatness can possibly yield. 4. Or in posterity; by
a very remarkable, if not miraculous providence and care for them. Consider for
this purpose, that GOD-fearing Prophet, 2 Kings 4. who upon the matter, and in
the true meaning, denied himself, and forsook all for GODS sake. ( Relinquere
aliquid propter nomen CHRISTI, sive propter CHRISTVM, est CHRISTVM praeronere
omnibus, and super omnia amare: ita eum esse cha^um pectori nostro, ut illius
gratia parati s^nus omnia relinquere quantum is chara, quae nos alliciunt, aut
inducunt, aut etiam cogunt, ut aliquid faciamus, quod fit contra ejus gloriam.
Musc.
For he does so also, who preferres the glory of GOD, the Gospel, the cause of
CHRIST, and keeping of a good conscience, before any, or all earthly things;
holding fast unfainedly a resolution, if he be put to it, and times require
really and actually to leave all for CHRIST.) This good man might have
Colligemus ex hac paupertate virum illum fuisse constantem in vera and sana
religione: quia si deficere voluisset, ad cultum Iezabelis, and impij regis,
victus and justae facultates ei non defuissent. Pet. Mart. in loc.
applied himself to the present, served the times, sought the Court, and sat
at Iezabels Table with her other temporizing trencher-chaplaines. But it is
said in the Text, that he feared the LORD, and so disdained, and abhorred to
gain by humouring greatness, to grow rich and rise by baseness and flattery.
And therefore did choose rather to die a beggar, to leave his wife in debt, and
expose his children to the bondage of cruel creditours, than any ways to make
ship-wracke of a good conscience, or consent and concur to the adulterating
of GODS sincere and purer worship. But mark what follows: rather than the wife
and children of such a man, who preferred GODS glory before his own
preferment, shall suffer want; they must be relieved by a miraculous supply, as
appears in the story. 5. Or in good I will give them an ever lasting name that
shall not be sut off. Isa. 56. 5 Prove. 22. 1.
name; which is rather to be chosen than great riches, says Solomon. For
instance, compare together Bradford and Bonner. The name of that blessed man
shall be of most dear and glorious memory to all that love our LORD JESUS
CHRIST in sincerity, until His second coming: and it is like we shall look
upon him, and the rest of that royal Army of Martyrs in Queen Mary's time,
with thoughts of extraordinary sweetness and love in the next world through all
eternity. But now the remembrance of that other fellow, who (like a
bloodthirsty Tiger) made such horrible havocke of the Lambs of CHRIST, shall be
had in a most abhorred, execrable, and everlasting detestation. The name of the
forenamed noble Marquess, Hear Calvin in his Epistle to him, before his
Commentary upon the first to the Corinth. Etsi neque tu plausum Theatri
app^tis, uno test DEO contentus neque mihi propositum est lauds tuas ena^are:
Quod tamen cognitu ^le est a^ fructuosum, non prorsus celandi sunt Lectores:
Hominem primaria familia natum, honor and opibus florentem; nobilis^ima and
castissima ^xore, numerosa sobole, domesti^ quiet and concordia, totoque vitae
statu beatum, ultro, u^ in CHRISTI castra mig^aret, pat^ia cessisse: Ditionem
fertilem and amoenar^, lautum Patrimonium, commodam non minus, quam voluptuosam
habitationem neglexisse: Exuiss^ splendo^em domesticum; Patie, conjuge,
liberis, cognatis, a^sinibus sese pri^asse, etc.
who left and and lost all with a witness for the Gospels sake, shall be
infinitely more honored of all honest men, so long as any one heavenly beam
of GODS eternal truth shall shine upon earth, than his uncles Paul the fourth,
or all that Rope of Popes from the first rising to the final ruin of that Man
of sin. Nay, theirs shall rot everlastingly; but his shall re-flourish with
sweetness, and fresh admiration to the worlds end.

2. That, to die, is but to be once done; and if we err in that one action, we
are undone everlastingly. And therefore have thine end ever in thine eye. In
cunctis quidem rebus necessari^ est providentia; in ijs tamen maxim, quae
amplius quam semel fieri n^queunt: ubicunq* pes lapsus fuerit, actum est: unu^
error multa trahit errorum millia. Haec ratio mortis est; unicus in ea error,
infinitos trahet errores: Hic semel errasse, aeternum est peri^sse. Lamachus
Centurio, admissi erroris increpabat militem, qui ut culpam dilueret, de^nceps
nil tale admissurum se promisit. Cui Centurio: In bello, inquit, Bone vir non
licet bis peccare Plutarch. in Lacon. In morte, eheu, nec vel semel quidem
peccare licet. Nam hoc tale peccatum est i^evocabile. Semel mortuuses, semper
mortuus es: semel male mortuus es, semper damnatus es. Hanc mortem corrigere,
han^ damnationem excutere, per omnem aeternitatem non poteris.
Let all our abilities, businesses, and whole being in this life; let all our
thoughts, words, actions, refer to this one thing, which (as it shall be well
or ill ended) is attended either with endless plagues, or pleasures; with
eternity of flames or felicity.

3. That thou may look upon thy last bed, tobe full sorely terribly
assaulted by the king of fear, accompanied with all his abhorred horrors, and
stinging dread; by the fearful sight of all thy former sins, arrayed and
armed in their grisliest forms, and with their fieriest stings; with the
utmost craft and cruelty of all the powers of darkness, and the very
powder plot of the prince of hell, that roaring Lion, who has industriously
labored to devour thy soul all thy life long; with the terror of that just
and last Tribunal (...) which thou (...) ready to pass to reckon precisely
with Almighty GOD for all things done in the flesh. What manner of man ought
thou to be (...) i^ the mean time; in all holy care, forecast and cas^g about
to give up thine account (...) comfort at that dreadful hour? Be so far
from Caveamus (...) op^lum (...). Quot hominum nu^lia v^l han^ ^nam ob cau^am
male (...), quia distulerant minime disserenda. Q^d crastinum, quid perendinum
saluti tuae destinas? Crast^us dies t^s non est: Hodiernus est. Hodie queso,
ha^ ho^, jam age quod agendum est. Cras, (...) ub^ tu (...)?
deserring repentance in this Day of visitation, and patting off till that
time; (For how can thou possibly attend so great a business, when thou art
beset with such a world of woeful work, and hellish rage?)* That ^hou should
est in this thy day, like a son of wisdom, constantly ply and improove all
opportunities, occasions, offers, every moment, Ministry, mercy, motions of the
Spirit, checks of conscience, corrections, temptations, etc. To store thy self
richly with spiritual strength against that last encounter, and of highest
consequence, either for eternal happiness, or unconceiveable horror.

4. That thy body, when the soul is gone, will be an horror to all that behold
it; a most loathsome and abhorred spectacle. Those that loved it most, cannot
now find in their hearts to look on^, by reason of the griesly d^formednesse
which death will put upon it. Down it must into a pit of carions and
confusion, covered with worms, not able to wagg so much as a little finger, to
remoove the vermin that feed and gnaw upon its flesh; and so moulder away into
rottenness and dust. And therefore let us never for the temporary, transitory
ease, pleasure, and pampering of a r^inous, and rotten carcass, bring
everlasting misery upon our immortal souls. Let us never, for a little
sensual, short and vanishing delight flowing from the three filthy puddles of
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, drown both
our bodies and souls in a dungeon, shall I say, nay in a boiling Modo jam
discamus pericula vicina nosse, quae facile cavet, qui praevidet. Non parum
interest ^ terra spectes naufragium passi sunt, and irreparabile, quot quot ad
orcum praecipitati sunt; nec in portum unquam pervenient. Aeternitatis igneum
mare, carcer aeternus hos naufragos jam sepelivit.
sea of fire and brimstone, where we can see no banks, nor feel no bottom.

5. That when the soul departs this life, it carries nothing away with it, but
grace, GODS favor, and a good conscience. The Sun of all worldly greatness,
prosperity, and joy then sets for ever: Even Crowns, Kingdoms, Lands,
Livings, and all earthly Possessions are everlastingly left. And Si conscientia
sit inquinata, nihil ^spiam nec in r^bus conditis, ne^ in conditore solatij est
reperire: Omnia a cerba, Fellea omnia: Et quo profugias? Ad DEVM? Hostis est.
Ad conscientia^? (...) est. Ad coelites? Offensi sunt. A^ socios? Augebunt
cruciatus. Ad delitias and voluptates? Conscientiam magis inquinabunt. etc.
what will an immortal soul, destitute of divine grace, do then? Then will
that now newly-separated soul, finding no spiritual store or provision laid
up in this life against the evil day, with an irksome and furious reflection,
look back upon all its time spent in the flesh; and beholding there, nothing
but abominations, guiltiness and sin: Presently awakes the never dying worm
which having formerly had its mouth stopped with carnal delights, and mus^'d up
with outward mirth, will now feed upon it with horror, anguish, and desperare
rage, world without end. O then, let these precious, dear, everlasting things
breathed into our Bodies for a short abode in this Vale of tears, by the
All-powerfull GOD, scorn with infinite disdain, to feed upon Earth, or any
earthly things; which are no proportionable object, either for divinenesse, or
duration, for so noble a nature to nestle upon. But let them ply and fat
themselves all the days of their appointed time, with their proper, native,
and celestial food: At that great Supper made by a King at the marriage of a
Kings son, Luke 14. 16. Mat. 22. 2. And therefore must needs be most
magnificent and admirable: At that Feast of fat things, that Feast of wines on
the lees; of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined, Isa.
25. 6. The founder and furnisher whereof is the LORD of Hosts. He that made
Heaven and Earth, makes it; and therefore it must needs be matchless and
incomparable: At the Wellhead of Wisdoms richest Bounty; who has killed her
beasts, mingled her wine, and furnished her table, Prove. 9. 2. In and by these
and the royallest ^east that can be imagined, are shadowed, but infinitely
short, and represented unto us, but nothing to the life, all those inexplicable
divine dainties, delicates, sweetnesses; those gracious quicknings, rejoycings
and ravishments of spirit; which GOD in mercy is wont to communicate and convey
through all the ordinances and means of grace to truly humbled souls, for a
mighty increase of spiritual strength and invincible comfort. O how
deliciously may a heavenly hungry heart feed and fill it self; 1. In the
powerful Ministry unfolding all the sacred sense and rich mines of GODS own
meaning in His blessed book. 2. In the precious promises of life, by the
applications and exercise of Faith. 3. In the LORDS Supper, by making the LORD
JESUS surer to our souls every time; and every time by feasting afresh upon
His body and blood spiritually, with exultations of dearest joy, and sweetest
glimpses (as it were) of eternal glory. 4. In fruitful conferences and
mutual communications of gifts, graces, prayers, duties with GODS people,
which the LORD does usually and graciously water with the deawes of many sweet
and glorious refreshings and quickening, much increase of Christian courage, and
an holy contentation in the good way. 5. In meditations upon the mystery of
CHRIST, the miracles of mercy upon us for our good all our life long, and the
eternity of joys and bliss above. 6. Upon the LORDS Day, when showers of
spiritual blessings are accustomed to fall from the Throne of grace all the
day long, upon those who sincerely endeavor to consecrate it as glorious unto
Him. 7. Upon those soule-fatting days of humiliation; which, who ever tried
For secret and private, many thousands of Christians can speak very admirable,
glorious, and extraordinary things: Of public thus speaks a learned Doctor.
To GOD^ glory, and to the ^opping of our adversaries mouths, the Papists, (who
kn^w not what the true exercise of fasting means) it is to be acknowledged,
that howsoever we have not been so frequent in this exercise, as were to be
wished* yet notwithstanding, upon diverse public occasions* there have been
public Fasts observed and sol^nized among us with good and happy success: As
for example; In the time of the great Plague* Anno 1563. After the great
Earthquake, Anno 1579. After intelligence had of the Spanish Invasion, Anno
1588. In the time of the great Famine, Anno 1596 and 1597. And ^ow of late in
this time of the Pestilence, Anno 1603. Besides the private and secret fasting
of the ^aithfull, as it has pleased GOD ^o moove them, either by private, or
public occasions. D^. Downam, now Bishop in Ireland. The Christians Sanctuary.
Sect. 54 page 54.

Nay, Hear King CHARLES Himself* graciously acknowledging GODS extraordinary
goodness in hea^ing our prayers in public Fasts blessedly appointed by His
own royal Command: And whereas the greatest confidence men have in GOD*
arises, not only from His Promi^s, but from their experience likewise of His
Goodness, you must not ^aile often to re-call to the memory of the people with
thankefulnes, the late great experience we have had of His goodness toward us:
For, the three great and usual judgments which He darts dow^e upon disobedient
and unthankefull people, are Pestilence, Famine and the Sword. The Pestilence
did never rage more in this Kingdom than of late; And GOD was graciously
pleased in mercy to hear the prayers, which were made unto Him; and the
ceasing of the judgment was little l^sse than a miracle. The Famine threatened
us this present year, and it must have followed, had GOD rained down His
anger a little longer upon the fruits of the earth. But upon our prayers he
stoyed that judgment, and sent us a blessed season, and a most plentiful
Harvest, etc. Instructions directed from the Kings most excellent Majesty,
etc. page penul^.


either secretly, privately, or publicly; either by himself alone, with his
yokefellow, in his family or congregation, and found not GOD extraordinary,
according to the extraordinarinesse of the exercise?

About the last IVDGEMENT, Consider,
1. How Nota quo demum tempore conspiciant improbi ac obstinati CHRISTI
gloriam, nempe non prius quam ipsum persequ^i suerint, ac tum quidem cogentur
^um videre cum admiratione maxima^ and stup^e; and cum dolor conscientiae
ineffabili, cum videbunt judicem sibi constitui cum, que^ tam indignis modis
tractarunt in vita ista. Nemo est* qui non id serat aeg^, si quem interfecit,
^um habeat sibi judicem. Ro^oc. In Johan. Cap. 8. mihi page 518.
cuttingly, and how cold the very first sight of the Son of Man coming in the
clouds of heaven with power and great glory, will strike unto thine heart, who
have refused to turn on His side, and take His part all the time of thy
gracious visitation. Then will thou begin with extremest grief and bitterness
of spirit to sigh and say within thy self: Oh! He that I now see sitting down
upon yonder flaming white and glorious Throne, is that JESUS CHRIST, the mighty
GOD, the Prince of Peace, that sweetest Lamb, whose precious blood was powered
out as water upon the earth, to save His people from their sins. And He it
was, who so fairly invited and wooed me (as it were) by His faithfullest
Messengers, and entreated me with terms of dearest love, all my life long; but
even to leave my lusts, and bi^ the Devil adieu; and He, even He, would become
my all-sufficient and everlasting Husband; and now as at this time have set an
immortal crown of bliss and glory upon my head with His own all-mighty
hand. But I alas! like a wilful desperate wretch, did not only neglect so
great salvation, forsake mine own mercy, and so judge my self unworthy of
everlasting life: but I also (a bloody butcher to mine own soul) all my few
and evil days, basely and bitterly opposed His blessed kingdom; the purity,
power and holy preciseness thereof, as quite contrary to my carnal heart, and
that current of pleasures and worldly contentments into which I had desperately
cast my self: I indeed wretchedly and cruelly against mine own soul
persecuted all the means which should have sanctified me, and all the men
which should have saved me. Happy therefore were I now, if I could entreat the
greatest Rock to fall upon me, or be beholding to some mighty mountain to
cover me; there to lie hid everlastingly from the face of Him that s^teth on
the Th^one, and from the wrath of the Lamb. O that I now might be turned into
a beast, or bird, or stone, or tree, or air, or any other thing! Blessed were
I, that ever I was borne, if I could now be unborne: That I might become
nothing, and in the state I was, before I had any being! Ah that my immortal
soul were now mortal, that I might Flammas infernales sustinebit, ubi est
fletus and st^idor dentium, ubi ^lutarus, lamentatio and poeniten^a sine ull^
reme dio, ubi est vermis ille, qui non moritur, and ignis qui nunquam
extinguitur; ubi mors quaeritur, and non invenitur. Quare in inferno mors
quaeritur and non invenitur? Qua quibus in hoc saeculo rita offertur, and
nolunt accipere* in inferno quae^uat mortem, and non poterunt invenite Vbi e^it
nox sine di^* amaritudo sine (...), obscuritas sine lumine, etc. Aug. de ^emp.
Sermon. 152.
die in hell, and not lie eternally in those fiery torments, which I shall
never be able either to avoid, or abide! Let us then betime in the name and
fear of GOD, kiss the Son, lest he be angry at that Day; and so we perish
everlastingly. Let us now, while the day of our visitation lasts, before the
Sun be s^t upon the Prophets, address our selves unto Him* 1. With hearts
burdened and broken with sight of si^ne, and sense of divine wrath, Mat. 11.
28. 2. Prize Him infinitely and above all the world, Matthew. 13* 46. 3. Sell
all, part with all sin, Ibid. Out of Egypt quite, leave not an hoof behind,
Exodus 10. 26. 4. Take Him as our Husband and LORD, whereby we become the sons
of GOD, John 1. 12. 5. Take his yoke upon us, and learn to be meek and lowly,
Matthew. 11. 28. 6. Enter into the way, which is called the way of holiness,
Isa. 35. 8. 7. And there continue Professors of the Truth, and of the power of
the Truth, and of the power of the Truth in truth: (For otherwise, thou may
be a Professor, and perish eternally:) That CHRIST may own thee, at that Day.
Many profess the Truth, and not the power of the Truth: some profess both the
Truth and the power of it, but are false-hearted. Where then shall the
non-Professour appear? Nay, the Persecuter of the Sect, which is spoken
against every where, Acts 28. 22.

2. That thou must presently pass to an impartial strict, the highest and
last Tribunal, which can never be appealed from, or repealed: there to give an
exact account of all things done in the flesh: Thy conscience shall then be
suddenly, clearly, and universally irradiated and enlarged with extraordinary
light, to looked upon all thy life at once, as it were: Causae cognitio sita est
in revelatione omnium, quae quisque per vitam universam fecerit, dixerit,
cogitarit. Voss de Iud. Extr. p. 2. These. 1. Atq^id est quo^ (...) de
aperiendis libris de Apoc. 20. 12. Nempe per apertionem librorum ^gnificatur,
ut uni^uique conscientia sua (nec enim opus erit testibus externis) sugge^ura
si^ omnem suam vitam Idem. Ibid. Iuditium sedit, and (...) etc] Conscientiae
and opera singulorum in utramque partem, vel bona vel mala omnibus ^cvelantur*
Hieron. In ^an. 7. Quaedam igitur vis est intelligenda divina; qua fiet, ut
cuique opera sua, vel bona, vel mala cuncta in memoriam revocentur, and mentis
intuitu m^a celeritate cernantur: ut accuset, vel excuset scientia
conscientiam* atque it a simul and omnes and singuli judicentur. Aug. de Civit
DEI Lib. 20. Cap. 14. Necesse igitur non e^it, ut manifestatio fiat voce
sensibili ac humana; sed satis erit, si menti representetur, and ma^festetur.
Hugo Victorin. Lib. 1 de anima. cap 11. In hoc judicio fiet ape^tio Librorum,
sc. conscientiarum, quibus merita and demerita universorum sibi ipsis and
cae^eris innotescent, faciente hoc virtute illius Libri* vitae; verbise.
incarnati. Bon. Brevilo Cap. 1.


For, every thought of thine heart, every word of thy mouth, every glance of
thine eye, every moment of thy time, every omission of any holy duty, or good
deed, every action thou have undertaken, with all the circumstances thereof,
every office thou have borne, and the discharge of it in every point and
particular, every company thou have come into, and all thy behavior there,
every Sermon thou have heard, every Sabbath thou have spent, every motion of
the Spirit which has been made unto thy soul, etc. Let us then, while it is
called To Day, call our selves to account, examine, search and try thoroughly
our hearts, lives, and callings, our thoughts, words, and deeds: let us
arraigne, accuse, judge, cast and condemn our selves: and prostrated before
GODS Mercy-Seat, with broken and bleeding affections, lowliness of spirit, and
humblest adoration of His free grace, upon the same ground with the Aramites, 1
Kings 20. 31. ( We have heard that the Kings of the House of Israel are
merciful Kings: let us I pray thee, put sack cloth on our loins, and ropes on
our heads, and go out to the King of Israel, peradventure he will save thy
life.) Let us there give our merciful GOD no rest, until we have sued out our
pardon by the intercession of the LORD JESUS, etc. And then we shall find the
reckoning made up to our hand, and Hine sidelium peccata non prodibunt in
judicium: quum enim in is it hac vita per sententiam justificationis (...)* te^ta
sunt and ablata; and ultimum illud judicium confirmatio erit, and manifestatio
ejusdem sententiae; non esset consentaneum, ut in lucem denuo tum temporis
proferantur. Ames Medul Theol Lib. 1 Cap 4^* ^ect. 22.
all matters fully answered beforehand. And (which is a Point of
unconceiveable comfort) He that was our Qui modo est Advocatus noster, ipse
tune erit Iudex noster. -- Si haberes causam apud aliquem judicem agendan, and
instrue^es Advocatum esse, susceptusab Advocato, ageret causam tuam sicut
posset* and si non illam ^inisset, and audires illum in judicio venturum,
quantum gaude^es, quia Ipse potuit esse Iudex tuus, qui fuit paulo ante
Advocatus tuus? -- Quia Advocatum praemisimus, securi Iudicem venturum
speremus. August, de Tem. Sermon. 119.
Advocate upon earth, and purchased the Pardon with His own hearts blood,
shall then be our Judge.

3. That all the beastly and impure abominatitions of thine heart; all thy
secret sins and closet-villanies, that no eye ever looked upon, Sed tu quem
times major est omnibus. Ipse timendus est in publico, Ipse in secreto.
Procedis, videris: intras, videris. Lucerna a^det, videt te: Lucerna e^tincta
est, videt te. In cubile intras, videt te. In cord versaris, videt te. Ipsum
time, illum cui cura est, ut videat te, and vel timendo castus esto Aut si
peccare vis, quaere ubi te non videat, and fac quod vis. Idem de Verb. Dom.
Sermon 46.
but that which is ten thousand times brighter than the Sun; shall all then be
In^quitates tuae omnibus populis nudabuntur, and cunctis agminibus patebunt
universa scelera tua, non solum actuum, verum cogitationum, and locutionum*
Multa vero tune venient ex improviso, quasi ex insidijs, quae modo non vides,
and forsitan plura and terribiliora his quae vides. Vndique erunt tibi
argustiae, hinc erunt accusantia peccata, tremenda justitia, subtus patens
horridum chaos, desuper iratus Iudex, intus ve^mis conscientiae, foris ardens
mundus. Bern. de corsc. Ad Fin. Scio quod anima tamamaram, non aeque sert
memoriam, sed cogamus came, and constringamus. Melius est nanc eam ipsa morderi
memoria, quam per illud tempus, supplicio* Si nunc peccatorum sis memor, and ea
continuo proferas, and pro ipsis depreceris, ea cito delebis: si nunc vero
fueris oblitus, tunc and invitus^oram omni mundo ^orum commonefies: ipsis in
medium seferentibus, and coramostentantibus, and amicis and inimicis and
Angelis. Chrysostom Ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 41. Cum hosrelinquat, and captos Angeli
quidam invitostrahant, and lachrymis perfusos, and deorsum tacentes in gehennae
flammas, prius coram toto terrarum orb ad dedecus productos* quantum dolorem
esse putas? Idem. Hom. 48. detremenda Iudicij die. Pensant sancti viri quanta
sit illa verecundia in conspectu tunc humani generis, Angelorum omnium
Archangelorumque confundi.
disclosed and laid open before Angels, Men, and Devils, and thou shall then
and there be horribly, universally, and everlastingly ashamed. Thou now acts
perhaps securely some harefull and abhorred work of darkness, and wickedness
not to be named, in thine own heart, or one way or other in secret, which thou
would not for the whole world, were known to the world, or to any but thy
self, or one or two of thy cursed companions curbed by their obnoxiousnesse:
but be well assured in that Day, at that great assize, thou shall in the face
of heaven and earth, be laid out in thy colors to thine eternal confusion.
Never therefore go about, or encourage thy self to commit any sin, because
it is midnight, or that the doors are locked upon thee; because thou art
alone, and no mortal eye sees thee, neither is it possible to be revealed:
(And yet I must tell thee by the way, secret villainies have and may be
discovered, 1. In sleep. 2. Out of horror of conscience, or in time of
distraction.) For, suppose it be concealed, and lie hid in as great darkness,
as it was committed, until that last and great Day: yet then shall it out with
a witness, and be as legible in thy forehead, as if it were writ with the
brightest stars, or the most glittering Sun*beame upon a wall of Crystal.

4. In what a woeful case thy heavy heart will be, and with what strange
terror, trembling, and desperate rage, it must needs be possessed, and rent in
pieces, when thou shall hear that dreadful sentence of damnation to eternal
torments and horror, pronounced over thine head: Depart Mat. 25. 41.
from me Though the sentence be pronounced generally, yet every reprobate wi^
take it to himself with infinite anguish of spirit by particular application.
Quaeritis a scholasticis, utrum una general^ sententia^, and electi recipiendi
sint in coelum, and reprobi con^iciendi in gehennam. Sane sic videtur, quia non
nisi generalis a Mattheo sententia adfertur. Tamen dixerit aliquis, opus esse,
ut sua singulis sententia dicatur, quia and praemiorum and poena^um ce^i erunt
gradus. Ad hoc plerique respondent, sensibili quidem voce pronunciatum i^i
sententiam generalem* (...) eam, quia particulatim omnes sciant, quantum
praemium, quant^e poena maneat ipsos, id cujusque menti esse representandum,
ita ut ejus^e manifestationis non minus aperta alijs futura sunt judicia, quam
si singulis sua diceretur sententia. Vossius de Iud. extr. The. 3^.
thou cursed wretch into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
angels: Every word breathes out nothing but fire and brimstone, vengeance and
woe, bites deeper, and terrifies more than ten thousand Scorpion stings. To
depart from that glorious presence were hell enough: but thou must also go with
a curse: nor only so, but into fire: and that must be everlasting, fed
continually with infinite rivers of brimstone, and kept still in flame and
fierceness, by the unquenchable wrath of the most just GOD, through all
eternity. And in that horrible dungeon and fiery lake, thou shall never have
other company or comforters but wicked devils, and they insulting over thee
everlastingly with much hellish spite, and stinging exprobrations, for
neglecting so great salvation all thy life long; and losing heaven, for some
base lust, and believing their lies. If the drowning of the old world,
swallowing up of Korah and his accomplices, burning up of Sodom with brimstone,
were attended with such terrors, and hideous out*cries: How infinitely
transcendent to all possibility of conceit, expression, or belief, will the
confusions and tremblings of that Day be; when so many millions of men shall be
dragged down with all the Devils of hell, to torments without end, and past
imagination. There was horrible scryking, when those five filthy cities first
felt fire and brimstone drop down upon their heads; when those rebels saw the
ground cleave asunder; and themselves and all theirs go down quick into the
pit; when all the sons and daughters of Adam found the flood rising and ready
to overflow them all at once* But the most horrid cry that ever was heard, or
ever shall be in heaven or earth, in this world, or the world to come, will be
then, when all the forlorn condemned reprobates, upon sentence given, shall be
violently and unresistably haled down to hell, and pulled presently from the
presence not only of the most glorious GOD, the LORD JESUS, Angels, and all
the blessed Ones, but also of their Fathers, Mothers, Wives, Husbands,
Children, Sisters, Brothers, Lovers, Friends, Acquaintance; Beati coelites non
tantum non cognatorum, sed nec pare^tum sempiternis suppliei^s ad ullam
miserationem ^entur. Imo vero ^tabuntur ^usti cum viderint vindictam; Manus
s^as (...) in sanguine pecc^to rum. Malum autem quem^* (...) DEVS om nes^* bo^i
habebunt odio, ut (...) ^ilius quidem pietatem habe^ de (...) in poenis
conspecto. (...). de similitud. Cat. 62.
who shall then justly and deservedly abandon them with all detestation and
derision: and forgetting all nearenesse and dearest obligations of nature,
neighborhood, alliance, any thing, rejoice in the execution of divine justice
in their everlasting condemnation. So that no eye of GOD o^ man shall pity
them; neither shall any tears, prayers, promises, suits, cries, yellings,
calling upon rocks and mountains, wishes never to have been, or now to be made
nothing, etc. be then heard or preva^e i^ their behalf; or any one in heaven
or earth be found to mediate or speak for them; to reverse or stay that
fearful doom of eternal woe: but without mercy, without stay, without any
farewell, they shall be immediately and irrecoverably cast down into the
bottomless pit, of easelesse, endless, and remediless torments, which then
shall finally shut her mouth upon them. Oh! What then will be the guawings of
the never*dying worm; what rage of guilty consciences; what furious despair;
what horror of mind; what distractions and fears; what bitter looking back
upon their misspent time in this world; what Damnati DEVM, Sanctos, seips^s,
(...) ash^uis execrationibus dev^vebunt: pa^entem ^ilius, ^ilium parens, matrem
(...), (...) ma^er execrab^ omnes vi^ dies, annosque, and ipsam qua quisque
^tus est ho^am maledictis onerabit.
banning of their brethren in iniquity; what cursing the day of their birth;
and even blaspheming of GOD Himself blessed for ever; what tearing their hair
and gnashing of teeth; what wailing and wringing of hands; what desperate
roaring; what hideous yellings, filling heaven, and earth, and hell, etc. No
tongue can tell, no heart can think! Be forewarned then, in a word, To
thirst, long and labor infinitely more to have JESUS CHRIST in the meanetime,
say in the Ministry to thy truly humbled soul; I am thy salvation; than to be
Possessour (i^ it were possible) of all the riches, glory and pleasures of more
worlds, than there are stars in Heaven.

About HELL, Consider,
1. The Pain of loss. Privation of GODS glorious presence, and eternal
separation from those everlasting joys, felicities and bliss above, is the
more Poena damni, (...) divinae visionis privatio, omnium omnino supp^orum
summum est, quo DEVS hominem punire potest. Nam (...) videre DEVM, ipsissima
beatitudo est: Ita, DEVM videre non posse, maxima damnatorum poena est, equa
inexplicabilis in eorum voluntate na^itur tristitia. Inter supplicia omnia hoc
futurum est summum, maximumque, a Conditoris aspect^ vel brevi morula detineri.
Si jam ab eodem exclusus sis aeternum, Hoc tibi tormentum ^rit infandum prorsus
and inexplicabile.
horrible part of hell, as Divines affirm. There are two parts (say they) of
hellish torments; 1. Pain of loss; and 2. Pain of sense: but a sensible and
serious contemplation of that inestimable and unrecoverable loss, does
incomparably more afflict an understanding soul indeed, than all those
punishments, tortures, and extremest sufferings of sense. It is the constant
and concurrent judgment of the ancient A DEO ^balienari ac separati, poenis
etiam gehennae gravius est: sicut oculo, luce, etiamsi dolor absit, and
animanti vita privari molestum est. Basil. Ascet. Cap. 2. mihi page 255.
Intolerabilis est gehenna and illa poena: tamen licet quis innumeras ponat
gehennas, tale nil dicet, quale illa foelici excidere glo* ria, a CHRISTO odio
habeti: Audire, Nesciovoi. Chrysostom. Ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 47. mihi Col. 329.
Omnia vero gehennae supplicia superabit* DEVM non videre, and bonis carere,
quae in potestate habuisti obtinere. Bern. de inter. Domo. Cap. 38. Videtur una
tantum modo poena esse, comburi. Sivero aliquis diligenter expendat, duplex hoc
invenit esse supplicium. Qui enim in gehenna uritur, and coelorum regnum
prorsus amittit: quae cette poena major est, quam cruciatus ille flammarum. ^
Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 24. Intolerabilis quidem res est etiam gehenna: Quis
nesciat, and supplicium illud horribile? Tamen si mill aliquis ponat gehennas,
nihil tale dicturus est, quale est a beatae illius gloriae honor repelli,
exosumque esse CHRISTO, and audire ab allo: non novivos. Ibid.
Fathers, that the torments and miseries of many hels, come far short, are
nothing, to the shutting out everlastingly from the kingdom heaven, and
unhappy banishment from the beatificall vision of the most sovereign, only,
and chiefest Good, the thrice-glorious Jehovah, blessed for ever. For, by how
much the degrees of infinite good and happiness in GOD, exceed the finite
wickedness and misery of men: by so much greater is the sorrow and grief,
(being rightly conceived) for the loss of that, than for the sense of this.
Assure then thy self beforehand, though thou little think so in the mean
time, the loss but of the least raye of that Sun-like resplendent Body, we
should have in heaven; but of a taste of those overflowing rivers of pleasure,
and un-utterable bliss of that happy soul which should dwell in such a Body;
but of one foot-breadth of the pavement of the Empyrean Heaven, to which the
Starry Firmament is but a Porch, or out-house; but one hours company with all
the crowned Saints, and glorious inhabitants of that happy Place; but of one
glaunce upon the glorified Body of JESUS CHRIST; but of one glimpse of that
unapproachable Light, and Iehovahs face in glory; I say, the loss but of any
one of these would be a far dearer and more unvaluable loss, than that of ten
thousand worlds, were they all composed of purest gold, and brim-full with
richest jewels. What will it be then (think you) to loose all these, nay, the
full and absolute fruition of all heavenly excellencies, beauties, glories,
pleasures and perfections, and that eternally: I know full well that carnal
conceits and worldly-wise men will wonder at this; For having no sight but by
sensual eyes, they cannot possibly apprehend, or will by any means
acknowledge any such thing. Eagle-ey'd they are, and sharpe-sighted enough into
things of earth; yet blinder than a mole (as they say) in beholding any
spiritual or celestial beauty. But had we but the eyes of Austin, Basil,
Chrysostom, and some other holy Fathers, (and why should not ours be clearer
and brighter, considering the greater splendor and illustriousnesse of divine
knowledge in these times?) we should easily confess that the far greatest,
and (indeed) most unconceiveable grief would be, to be severed for ever from
the highest and supreme Good: And that a thousand thousand rentings of the
soul from the body, were infinitely less than one of the soul from GOD.
Nicostratus in Aelian, himself being a cunning artisan, finding a curious
piece of work, and being wondered at by one, and asked, what pleasure he could
take, to stand as he did, still gazing on the picture, answered: Had thou
mine eyes, my friend, thou would not wonder, but rather be ravished, as I
am, at the inimitable art of this rare and admired piece. ^*
It is proportionably so in the present Point. Or were we vouchsafed but one
moment of Paul's heavenly rapture, that we might s^e but a glimpse of that
insini^e glory, and drink but one drop of those ever-springing Fountains of
joy; then should we freely acknowledge and feel the truth of what I say; and
that all I say comes far short of what we shall find. If it be so then, that
the loss of the presence of GOD, and endless pleasures be so painful,
irrecoverable and inestimable; and that it has been many times made manifest
unto you by Scriptures, Fathers, Reasons, convincing, familiar, easy
resemblances; and the same also appears, and may be clearly concluded by the
third exhortation before the Sacrament in the Common Prayer Book; to wit, that
living and lying wittingly and willingly in any one sin against conscience,
robs us of all these infinite, ever-during, unutterable joys, and beatificall
vision, and fruition of GOD Himself for ever: I say, since it is both thus and
thus: Let every one of us in the name and fear of GOD, as we would not for a
few (...) pleasures, nay, sometimes one vile lust in this vale of tears for an
inch of time, lose (...) known delights through all eternity in another world,
with an unshaken invincible resolution oppose all sorts and assaults of sin,
with all motions, enticements, and temptations thereunto: Let us hold with holy
Chrysostom: Etsi multi gehennamomnium malorum supremum atque ultimum putant^
Ego tamen s^ censeo, sic assid^e p^dicobo, mul^o acerbius esse CHRISTVM
ossendere, qu^ gehennae malis vexari. Idem in Mat Hem 37. ad sin.
That it is worse and a more woeful thing to offend CHRIST, than to be vexed
with the miseries of hell. Let us profess with Anselme: Si hin^, inquit
A^peccatt pudorem, and illine cernerem inferni horrorem, and necessatio uni
illorum haberem immergi, prius me in insernum me^gerem, quam peccatum in me
immitterem. Mallem enim purus a peccato and innocens gehennam intrare, quam
peccati sorde pollutus coelorum regna tenere. Anselm. de similitud. cap. 190.
That if we should see the hatefulness of sin on the one side, and the
horror of hell on the other, and must necessarily fall into the one, we would
rather choose hell t^an si^. Potius, aiebat, in ardentem rogum insiluero, quam
ullum peccatum in DEVM commisero. In marg.
It is reported also of Edmund his successor; that he was wont to say: I will
rather leap into the siery lake, than knowingly commit any sin against GOD.
Let us resolve with another of the Ancients: Rather to be torn in pieces with
wild horses, than wittingly and willingly commit any sin. See for this purpose
twenty curbing Considerations to keep from sin. Instr. for comf. afflict.
Consc. page 108.

2. The Pain of sense. The extremity, exquisiteness and eternity whereof, no
tongue can possibly express, or heart conceive. Consider before*hand, what an
unspeakable misery it would be (and yet it would not be so much as a
slea*biting to this) to lie everlastingly in a red hot scorching fire, deprived
of all possibility of dying* or being ever consumed! I have some where read of
the horrid execution of a Traitor in this manner: being naked, he was chained
fast to a chair of brass or some other such metal, that would burn most
furiously, being filled with fiery heat; about which was made a mighty fire,
that by little and little caused the chair to be red and raging hot, so that
the miserable man Tyrannis prisca vix acerbio. es cruciatus ullos reperit, quam
vivu^ slammis tradere, lent exu^ere, ass^re. ^gnia suppliciorum ultimum,
gravissimum. Sed o mitem gehen^am, o temperatas ^lammas, v^l millies vivum
comburi! Feralis haec sententia: mill h^ras tole^are stammas, c^ptiv
sinferor^m long (...), quam si reo (...) plecte^do vi^u fiat gratia
roared hideously many hours for extremest anguish, and so expired. Tormentum
horribile prorsus, ^e* verb (...), homm in i^ne emi^us ac lent^ admoto tribus
h^is torreri vivum. Quodnam igitu^ (...) o DEVS, quam ^fandum, quam
incomprehe^sum* non duas, (...), non unum al. (...), non annum, a^sque mill,
^d aere nitate to^ (qu^ (...) ^n ^unquam tota (...)) and corpus and animam u^i,
necunquam comburi! Hi^ (...) and (...).
But what an horrible thing had it been to havelien in that dreadful torment
eternally: And yet all this is nothing. For, if the black fire of hell be
truly corporal and taken properly, as some of the Fathers suppose; yet it is
such (say they) that as far passes our ordinary hottest fire, as ours
exceeds the Ignis (...) and nost^ nimium quantum diss ru^t, and primo quidem
urendi (...). Noster ig^is Augu^tino pict^s* (...), sed ille alter, verus
Discrimen ingens, imo v^ ulla simili^do verae, ae pictae flam^ae Quicquid hic
(...), fabula est, (...) est: quicquid hic pateris, me^issimus ludus (...)
ig^ium umbia sunt ignes nostri ad illa inserorum incendia; poenae quas hic
dependimus delic^ae suut, ad illa nunquam desitt^ra tormenta.
fire painted upon the wall. And it must be so, I mean, as far surpass our
most furious ordinary sire, immeasurably, unconceiveably in degrees of heat,
and fierceness of burning. For, the one was created for comfort; the other
purposely to torment: the one is made by the hand of man; the other tempered by
the angry arm of almighty GOD, with all terrible and torturing ingredients, to
make it most fierce and raging, and a sit instrument for so great and mighty a
GOD to torment everlastingly such impenitent reprobate rebels. It is said to be
prepared, Matthew. 2^. 41. Isa. 30. 33. as if the allpowerfull wisdom did
deliberate, and (as it were) sit down and devise most tormenting temper for
that most formidable fire: the one is blown by an aerie breath; the other by
the angry breath of the great GOD, which burns far hotter than ten thousand
rivers of brimstone: The pile thereof (says the Prophet) is fire and much
wood, the breath of the LORD, like a stream of brimstone, does kindle it. What
soul does not quake and melt with thought of this fire, at which the very
Devils tremble? There is no proportion between the heat of our breath, and the
fire that it blows. What a fearful fire then is that which is blown by a
breath dissolved into brimstone? which a great torrent of burning brimstone
does ever mightily blow? If it be Dicerem quidem sic arsuros sine ullo corpore
spiritus, etc. Nisi coavenienter ^sponderi cernerem, talem fuisse illam
slammam, quales oculi quos ^evavit, and Laz^n vidit, qualis lingua cui humorem
exiguum desideravit infundi, qualis digitus Lazari, de quo id sibi fieri
postulavit, ubi tamen erant sine corporibus animae. Aug. de Civit. DEI. Lib.
21. 10. Metaphorice loquitur de exitio reproborum, quod satis alioqui complecti
non possumus, quemadmodum nec beatam, and immortalem vitam percipimus, nisi sub
siguris quibusdam ingenio nostro accommodatis adumbretur: unde apparet quam
inepti and ridiculi sint Sophistae, quide illius ignis natura and qualita^e
subtilius disscrunt* atque in eo explicando vary se torquent. Explodendae sunt
crassae hujusmodi imaginatione^, cum figurate Prophetam loqui intelligamus*
etc. Call. in Isa. c 30 v. ^lt Quod igni cruciandos dicit, nuper met aphoricam
esse locutionem admonui: idque ex membro adjuncto aperte liquet. Neque enim
fingendi sunt e terra vermes, qui infidelium corda arrodant. Idem in Cap. 66.
v. ^lt. Qui aeternum illum ignem, materialem and elementarem fingunt; nature
inferioris, and superioris; temporis and aeternitatis modum consundunt. Cum
enim nihil materiatum and physicum capax sit proprietatum hyperphy sicarum,
fieri non potest, ut corporeus ignis, quem Pontificij Scholasticorum
auctoritate fre^, (nam Patres hic dubitanter loquuntur) in tartaro statuunt,
aeternitatis sit capax. -- Ad haec* cum idom ignis sit paratus Diabolo and
hominibus impijs, Mat. 25. 41. Ignis autem corporeus non possit agere in
spiritum; planum fit, ignis imagine spirituale supplicium adumbrari. -- Porro
nulla omnino causa est, cur ibi statuatur ignis corporeus, cum vermis morsus,
quo mentis aestum figurari docent Scholastici, ignis ustionem long exuperet,
exipsorum sententia. Til. adhuc Orthodox. Syntog. P. 2. Cap. 68.
metaphorical, as Austin seems some where to intimate, and some modern
Divines are of mind: and as the gold, pearls and precious stones of the wall
streets and gates of the heavenly Jerusalem ( Rev. 21.) were metaphorical; so
likewise it should seem that the fire of hell should also be figurative: And
if it be so; it is yet something else, that is much more terrible and
intolerable. Scie^dum Scripturam ^es futuri saec^li rerum (...) symbolis and
imagin^bus adumb^ so litam; quemadmodum ^ l^a p^dia, rerum (...) and (...)
typ^s; ^a d^a o^um cruciatus ^erum (...) and acerbissima^um (...)* ^me, (...),
(...) dentium, ca^e (...), ^agno sulphu^eo, etc. nobis depinge^e. Idem. Ibidem.
Thesi. 40.
For as the Spirit of GOD, to shadow unto us the glory of heaven, does name the
most precious, excellent and glorious things in this life, which
notwithstanding come infinitely short; so does He intimate unto us the
inexplicable pai^es of hell, by things most terrible and tormenting in this
world, fire, brimstone, etc. which yet are nothing to h^llish tortures. Whether
therefore it be material or metaphorical, I purpose not here Curio^orum imo
suri^ (...) ignem hunc contentionis gladio, ul^ra quam ^as est, f^dere. N^s,
aculeati (...) quaest^onum ^icis, apinisque tanquam Aegyp^s (...) ^n Sophista^m
(...) ^elictis, in hanc potius curam, toto pectore incumbere dece^, ^t igne^
i^ium s^ei (...) extingua^as; ne qualis sit, tandem experiamur. Idem Ibid*
Thesi 51.
to dispute, or go about to determine: neither is it much material for my
purpose. For, be it whether it will, it is infinitely horrible and ins^fferable
beyond all compass of conceit, and above the reach either of humane or
Angelical thoughts. It does not only exceed with an incomparable
disproportion ^ll possibility of patience and resistance; but also even ability
to bear it; and yet notwithstanding, it must upon necessity be borne so long
as GOD is GOD. Take in a word, all that I intend to tell you in the point at
this time. Potest quis sibi representare, quicquid unquam illaetabile,
luctuosum, crudele, miserandum, horribile vidit and audijt, quicquid ab orb
condito ^aeva tyrannorum crudelitas excogitavit, quicquid ad usque mundi
occasum saevissimorum hominum immanitas invenire poterit, hoc autem omne si
velut in fasce colligatum cum aeternitate damnatorum componere -- cum
Chrysostom^ proclamabit* Haec omnia quae hic patimur, merus ludus acrisus sunt,
si cum illis supplicijs in contentionem veniant. ^one, si libet, ignem, ferrum,
and bestias, and si quid his difficilius: atramen, nec umbra quidem sunt haec
ad illa tormenta -- Nonne videmus terrenos milites principibus serv^entes,
quomodo ligant, quomodo ^gellant, quomodo per^odiunt costas, quomodo faces
tormentis adhibent: sed haec omnia (...), and risus ad supplicia. Chrysostom. ad
Pop. (...) Hom. ^9.
If the several pains of all the diseases and maladies incident to our
nature, as of the stone, gout, colicke, strangury, or what other you can name,
most afflicting the body: nay, and add besides all the most exquisite and
unheard of tortures, (and if you will, even those of the Spanish Inquisition)
which ever were or shall be inflicted upon miserable men, by the Consider here
all the horrible tortures in^cted upon Christians in the Primitive times: That
man in the brazen chair: Ravillacs torments; French Story, page 129^ All the
monstrous cruelties through the Turkish Story: the ^iery and bloody miseries
executed upon our blessed Martyrs in Qucene Mary's time: the barbarous and
prodigious butcher^es of the Spanish Inquisition, which the Poet brings in as
the fourth Fury.
bloudiest executioners of the greatest tyrants, as that of him in the brazen
chair mentioned before, etc. and collect them all into one extremest anguish;
and yet it were nothing to the torment which shall for ever possess and plague
the Because all the members of the body and powers of the soul have been
weapons of unrighteousness, man shall be plagued in all the parts of the body,
and faculties of the soul by that horrid instrument of hellish torment; called
by CHRIST, Fire prepared for the Devil and his angels, Mat. 25.
least part of a damned body! And as for the soul: let all the griefs,
horrors and despaires that ever rent in pieces any heavy heart, and vexed
conscience; as of Judas, Spira, etc. And let them all be heaped together into
one extremest horror; and yet it would come infinitely short of that desperate
rage and restless anguish, which shall eternally torture the least and lowest
faculty of the soul! What then do you think will be the torment of the whole
body? What will be the terror of the whole soul? Here both invention of words
would fail the ablest Orator upon earth, or the highest Angel in heaven. Ah
then, is it not a madness above admiration, and which may justly amaze both
heaven and earth, and be a prodigious astonishment to all creatures, that being
reasonable creatures, having understanding like the Angels of GOD, eyes in your
heads to foresee the approaching wrath, hearts in your bodies that can tremble
for trouble of mind, as the leaves of the forest that are shaken with the
wind, consciences capable of unspeakable horror, bodies and souls that can
burn for ever in hell; and may (by taking less pains in the right way, than
a drunkard, worldling, or other wicked men in the ways of death and going to
hell) escape everlasting pains: yet will sit here still in the face of the
Ministry with dead countenances, dull ears, and hard hearts, as senseless and
unmooved, as the seats you sit on, the pillars you lean to, and the dead
bodies you tread on, and never be said, (as they say) never warned, until the
fire of that infernal lake flame about your ears! O monstrous madness and
merciless cruelty to your own souls! Let the Angels blush, heaven and earth
be amazed, and all the creatures stand astonished at it.

3. When sentence is once irrevocably past by that high and everlasting Judge,
and the mouth of the bottomless pit has shut it self upon thee with that
infinite anguish and enraged indignation, thou will take on, tear thy hair,
bite thy nails, gnash the teeth, dig furiously into the very fountain of
life, and (if it were possible) spit out thy bowels: because having by a
miracle of mercy been blessed all thy Occasio tibi nunquam defuit, tu semper
occasioni. Potuisti, and noluisti: Lue, jam lue nequitias. En tua tot tamque
gravia flagitia; cum tamen long suavius virtu^i licuisset operari quam vitijs.
En perditissime, inter jocos and ^udos perdidisti regnum: Potuisses esse f^lix
aeternum* modo voluisses: brevi ^c leni labor beatam immortalitatem tibi
parasses, modo voluisses. En (...), pro carnis voluptatul^, pro spurca, and
momentanea oblectatiuncula immensas vendidisti voluptates. Nimi^m tua tibicaro,
quam coelum carior erat. Sentis jam, quas delicias sectatus fueris? Praedixi,
monui, vellicavi. Sed actum egi, nihil profeei, oleum and operam perdidi. Nunc
vindico, nunc ^pes and res abs te segregant, sed ^ua solius culp^. En
impurissime ut delectatiunculas pauxillo tempo^is retineres, perdidisti omnia.
Procul nunc a te honores, thefauri, voluptates beatorum; ad quas om^is tibi via
intercepta est. Haec tibi tormenta ^ibidines tu^ para^unt, in ho^ ignes tua te
ptaecipitavit incontinentia: tuam illam hilarem, sed brevem insaniam, nunc lui^
ae^erno luctu. Desperate ploras Paradisi gaudijs privatum? Tu ipse te privasti.
Ac acerbissime doles perenne coeleste epulum neglectum? Tu neglexisti. --
Differendo and neglige^do huc sponte irruisti coecus and a^ens, hic nunquam
exiturus amplius. Nulla hic libertas, nulla salus. Despera centies, sexcenties,
despera millies, aeternum desperaturus, aeternum moriturus, and ad mortem
nullis saeculis proventurus.
life long in this gloriously illightened Goshen with the fairest noone-tide of
the Gospel that ever the Sun saw, and either did, or might have heard
many and many a powerful and searching Sermon; any one passage whereof (if thou
had not wickedly and wilfully forsaken thine own mercy, and suffered Satan
in a base and beastly manner to blindfold and ba^le thee) might have been unto
thee the beginning of the new birth, and everlasting bliss: yet thou, in that
respect a most accursed wretch, did pass over all that long day of thy
gracious visitation, like a son or daughter of confusion, without any
piercing or profit at all; and passed by all those goodly Hoc laccrabit
cordamnatorum, quod gratiam millies oblatam recusarunt millies Inde in sei^sos
fur enter exardescent miseri, and assiduo sibiipsis lugubrem hanc cantilenam
occinent: o tempus rerum omnium pretiosissimum! ^ di^ o horae plusquam aureae,
quo evanuistis aeternum nonrediturae! Nos coeci and excord^s, obstructis oculis
and auribus libidine furebamus, and mutuis nosmet exempli^ trah^* bamus ad
interitum.
offers and opportunities, with an inexpiable neglect and horrible ingratitude;
and so now lie drowned and damned in that dreadful lake of brimstone and
fire, which thou might have so easily and often escaped. Non min^s tuncquam
(...) ^os exag^abit, qui^ (...) spatio (...) non (...), (...), (...)
inessabil^us bonis (...) n^s in^ (...) in Mat. (...) ^st qui de^ (...) assequi
(...) adeund^ hereditate, sed ille ^gnavissimus causae suae indo^, itaque
haeredita^em tam opulen tam neglexit; ^amque ^alibus serae ^oenitentiae ^ijs
a^tatur, u^ ipse sibi immineat, ve^t ipsum discerp^urus. Et nonnunquam mo^s
inde violenta sequitur. Haud aliter damnatorum quilibet scipsum sic allatrat:
Potuissem; auxilia non deerant, vocabar: Potuissem, Eheu! Potuissem; sed nolui.
A summo b^no exclusissimus sum in omne aevum; and usque in aeternum non videb^
lumen, quia nolui videre. Sentire tanto se bono privatum esse, and quidem su^
culpa inexplicabilis, in^andus erit dolor (...).
This irksome and furious reflection of thy soul upon its own wilful folly,
whereby it has so unnecessarily and sottishly lost everlasting joy, and must
now live in endless woe, will vex and torture more than thou can possibly
imagine, continually gnaw upon thy heart with remediless and unconceivable
grief; and in a word, even make an hell it self. O then, having yet a price
in thine hand, to get wisdom to go to heaven, lay it out with all holy
greediness, while it is called To day, for the spiritual and eternal good of
thy soul! Improve to the utmost, for that purpose, the most powerful
Ministry, holiest company, best books, all motions of GODS Spirit, all saving
means, etc. Spend every day, pass every Sabbath, make every prayer, hear
every S^imon, think every thought, speak every word, do every action, etc. As
though when that were done, thou were presently after to pass to judgment,
and to give up an exact account for it, and whatsoever else done in the flesh.

4. That the conceit of the everlastingnesse of the torments, when they are
now already seized upon the soul, and hopelesnesse of ever coming out of hell,
will be yet another hell. If thou once come there, Ite furiosi, ^e and d^litiis
af^luere supremam foelicitatem credit; hodie vino and plumis vos mergite, cras
forsitan me^gendi flammis.
and there most certainly must thou be this night, if thou die this day in
thy natural state, and not newborn; I say then (so terribly would the
consideration of eternity torture thee) that thou would hold thy self a
right Si nobis faltem (...) ut arenosus quispiam mo^s extolle^etur amplitudine
terras coaequans, fastigiocoelum attingens, ex quo, post centum millia annorum
advolans avicula rostro non plus au^erret, quam est decima unius a^enulae pars,
and ^sus post alterum centum ann^rum ^lle, aliam arenul^ unius* decimam partem,
and pari modo aliam atque aliam, ita ut ^atio decies cen^um millium annorum,
tantum unicum arenulae unius (...) de monte illo a^enoso minue^etur: quam
laeti, quam alacres essemus, quod post ultimam sal^em montis to^ius ablat^onem,
damnationis nostrae fi^em aliquem haberemus
happy man, if thou might endure those horrible pains, and extremest
horrors no more millions of years, than there be sands on the seashore,
hairs upon thine head, stars in the firmament, grass piles upon the ground,
and creatures both in heaven and earth. For, thou would still comfort thy
self incredibly with this thought: My misery will once have an end. But alas!
This word Ah, vel mus^ae, vel culicis ^unctiuncula, si tamen sit ^terna, quam
inexplicabil^s cruciatus pronunciabitur? Quis igitur horror exercebit damnatos,
vel ob unam hanc, sed assiduam cogitationem? Hi^ ignis aeternum serendus, hic
ululatus aeternum audiendus; hic (...) sempiternus.
Never will ever rent thine heart in pieces with much rage and hideous roaring;
and give still new life to those insufferable sorrows, which infinitely exceed
all expression or imagination. Let us suppose this great body of the earth upon
which we tread to be turned into sand, and mountains of sand to be added
still, until they reach unto the Empyrean Heaven, so that this whole mighty
creation were nothing but a sandy mountain: let us then further imagine a
little wren to come but every hundred thousandth year, and carry away but the
tenth part of one grain of that immeasurable heap of sand; what an
innumerable number of years would be spent, before that world of sand were all
so fetched away? And yet, woe and alas that ever thou wast borne! When thou have
lien so many years in that fiery lake, as all they would amount to, Damnati
sic calculum ponunt: Elapsis december millibus anno rum, adjicientur centum
millia, post haec centum millia, tot jungentur myriades, and milliones quot in
firmamento sunt stellae, and in littore maris arenae. Post quae longissima
annorum spatia, quasi nihil de poenis nostris accisum esset, sic iterum ab
initio pati tormenta incipiemus: atque ita sine interruptione, sine fine, sine
modo, volvetur assidue nostrorum tormentorum rota.

Ex quo poli sunt perfecti, A^de numero complecti Stellas coeli, stillas roris,
Vnd as aquei fluoris, Guttas imbris pluvialis, Floccos velleris nivalis Quot
sunt vere novo flores, Quot odores, quot colores, Quot vinaceos Autumnus, Poma
legit and vertumnus: Quot jam grana tulit aestus, Frondes hiemis tempestas.
Totus orbis animantes Aer atomos volantes, Pilos ferae, pecus villos, Vertex
hominum capillos: Add littoris arenas, Add graminis verbe^as, Tot myriades
annorum Quot momenta saeculorum: Heus adhuc Aeternitatis Portus fugit a
damnatis.


Metire semel, ite^um saepius: post december annorum milliones, post centum mill
myriadum annotum, post decies centies millena millia milliorum annorum; necdum
finem, necdum medium, imo nondum Aeternitatis principium designasti: junge ad
illa omnes hominum and Angelorum cogitationes, omnes motus and mutationes
quarumvis rerum creatarum: add his a^enulas, quot non possent millenarum
terrarum vastissimo sin^ contineri: collige denique in unum omnes numeros
Arithmetic^ quadratos, cubicos quosvis: nunc imple his numeris volumina
chartarum hinc ad supremos coelos usqu^, nondum Aeternitatis durationem
mensuses, tantum abest, ut ^isemensus. Quamdiu igitur durabit Aeternitas?
Semper. Quando finietur? Nunquam. Quamdiu coelum erit coel^m; Quamdiu inferi
erunt inferi; Quamdiu DEVS erit DEVS, tamdiu durabit Aeternitas: tamdiu coelum
beabit Sanctos; tamdiu improbos torquebunt inferi. Ne quaeso, molestior sis
quaerendo: Apprehende saltem, si comprehendere non potes.


thou art no nearer coming out, than the very first hour thou enteredst in.
Now, suppose thou should lie but one night grievously afflicted with a
raging fit of the stone, collicke, strangury, toothache, pangs of travail,
etc. Though thou had to help and ease thee a soft bed to lie on, friends
about thee to comfort thee, Physicians to cure thee, all cordial and
comfortable things to assuage the pain; yet how tedious and painful, how
terrible and intolerable would that one night seem unto thee? How would
thou toss, and tumble and turn from one side to another, counting the clock,
telling the hours, esteeming every minute a Sumamus noctem unicam quam a
curis, alijsve sodicantibus cogitationibus insomnem aut quam infestante
calculo, urente podagra, torminibus aut dentium doloribus in nos saevientibus,
turbata exigimus. Quam haec talis nox longa, and instar hebdomadis, aut mensis
est! Quid si anno toto sic inter dolores jacendum, quid si annis centum, quid
si mill annis, si sex aut december millibus annorum? Quid si aeternum and sine
fine?
moves, and thy present misery matchless and unsupportable? It w^ld prove an
extreme misery, as it seem^s, to lie eternally upri^, and never stir, even
upon a bed of roses; what would it be then, to sit for ever in that fiery
chair mentioned before? But then above all degrees of comparison, what will it
be roar everlastingly in bellish slames! Hear my A^our. Memini melegere, nec
^ne admiratione, ^uisse hominem, qui Aeterni^atem animo sic perspexerit: Quis ^
ortalium est, aicbat ipse secum, qui quidem san^ mentis sit and ratione (...),
qui regnum Galliae, Hispaniae, Poloniae, reg^a sane (...) sibi vendicet ea
p^ctione, ut quadraginta continuos annos in l^ctulo (...) strato, eoque
mollissimo ^supinus jaceat? E^ licet forsan non def^us sit, qui ad hanc
condi^ionem descendat; is tamen non totum triennium (res certa) sic decumbet,
quin abrumpat and dicat: sin^e, (...); malo carere regnis, non (...) bus, sed
omnibus quam sic continue, (...) m^lissime jacere, vel december tantum annis;
ne^dum vigia^i, aut^iginta, veluti pactio fiebat, annis quadraginta. Ite res se
habent, ut nemo sanus reperiatur, qui ut t^iplici regno donetur, triginta vel
quad aginta annis (...) lege decumbere velit? Quam ergo coeca, quam suriosa est
insan^, (...) lacerum (...), ^btres aviculas, ob crepundia vilissima, illud
petulanter (...) periculum, and tale designate facinus. ob quod in candente
crate, in fereti^ stammeo, non solis quadragi^ta, non quad^gentis, nec quatuor
millibus, sed nec quater centenis millibus, sed aeternum torquearis furijs; ^
mortales, intemperantissimis agimur, nisi jam mature, and in rem nostram
sapimus. In mollissimo jacere sed semper jacere and aeternum jacere supplicium
soret inexplicabile Quid jam omnium apud inferos suppliciorum erit cumulus ac
conge^ies sormidabilissima?
What will it be then (think thou) to lie in fire and brimstone, kept in
highest flame, by the unquenchable wrath of GOD, world without end? Where thou
shall have nothing about thee but darkness and horror, wailing and wringing
of hands, Apud inseros singula^ssimum erit tormentum (...) c^ntenorum millium
horribilissim^s mugitus, planctus, (...); perinde (...) meri boves assent^r
vivi, aut si rapidi ca^es cate^as (...), (...) ^ssint. (...); aur^m (...),
(...) hominum, (...) ^num, l^porum ululatus, mug^tus (...), (...) l^onum,
aliarum (...) ^emitus, fragores nubium, dejectus aquarum, and quicquid (...)
singi potest: ah qu^m id omne nihil est ad Orcinia^ae (...) desperatiss^m
sletum, cujus auctarium est stridor dentium.
desperate yellings and gnashing of teeth: thine old companions in vanity and
sin to ban and curse thee with much bitterness and rage; wicked Devils to
insult over thee with hellish cruelty and scorn; the never-dying worm to feed
upon thy soul and flesh for ever and for ever. O coe^itas ^umane gentis nullis
sa^ lachtymis deploran la! Ex omnibus templorum (...) clamatur, Aeternitas,
Eternitas, Aeternitas. Nos nihilominus praesenti ducim^ volup^ate. Adeo perire
s^ve est. Quis exprimat quid sit aeternitas? Quis concipiat quid sit
Aeternitas? Est unum perpetuum Sum, quod praeteri^ (...) and (...). Est
circulus, cujus centrum femper, circumferentia nunquam. Cogito mill annos,
cogito tot annorum millia quot sunt momenta, (...) puncta in toto (...) a
condito mundo usque ad ejus consuminationem, and de (...) ate nihil habeo. O
Aeternitas! Quis poterit par esse Aeternitati in tormentis? Et ^mus tormenti
ipsorum ascendet in saecula saeculerum, Apoc. (...). Quid est in sae^ula
saeculor^m? Volo dicere, and nescio dicere. Illud tantum scio id ipsum esse,
quod DEVS solus sua infinitate a^ b^ and complectitur*
O Eternity! Eternity! Eternity! Since it is thus then, that upon the little
ynch of time in this life, depends the length and breadth, the height and depth
of immortality in the world to come: even two eternities; the one infinitely
accursed, the other infinitely comfortable; loss of everlasting joys, and
lying in eternal flames; since never ending pleasures or pains do unavoidably
follow the well or mis-spending of this short moment upon earth; with what
unwearied care and watchfulness ought we to attend that One nec^ssary Thing
all the days of our appointed time, till our change shall come? How ought we
as strangers and pilgrims to abstain from fleshly lusts? What manner of
persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness? How thriftily
and industriously to husband the poor remainder of our few and evil days for
the making our Calling and Election sure: In a word, with what resolution and
zeal to do or suffer any thing for JESUS CHRIST? Quid agis miser, perire vis?
Facillimo istud impe^dio fiet: ho^ula u^a, imo vel unica part ^rulae; imo
momento vel unico per iram vel libidinem patras, quod aeternum doleas. Hic
serio cogitandum: Itane homines etuditi, and humano sensu sancti accusantur,
judicantur, damnantur? Quid mihi fi^t misero? Ergo animum quantis possum
industrijs cu^abo. Alij se, suamque cuticulam cu^ent aeternitatis obliti;
vigeant, floreant, cras fo^sancinis and favilla Hos ego mo^es nihil mo^or, hanc
ego viam non ingredior, nam and alium viae terminum quaero.
With what industry and dearness to ply this moment, and prize that eternity!

Concerning the joys of HEAVEN,
Let me tell you before hand, that the excellency, glory, and sweetness
thereof, no mortal heart, finite brain, created understanding can possibly
conceive and comprehend to the life. For,

1. Paul t^ls us, 1 Cor. 2. 9. That neither eye has seen, nor ear heard,
neither heart of man conceived the incomprehensible sublimity and glorious
mysteries of that heavenly wisdom, and inexplicable divine sweetness revealed
in the Gospel: (For I take that to be his natural immediate meaning:) How
transcendently (then) unutterable and unconceiveable is the complement,
perfection, the real, actual and full fruition of all those Evangelicall
mysterious revelations, accomplished to the height in the highest heavens
through all eternity? Where we shall enjoy the face and beatificall presence of
the most glorious and all susticient GOD, as an object wherein all the powers
of our souls will be satisfied with everlasting delight.

The eye of man has seen admirable things: Coasts of Pearl, Crystal
mountains, rocks of Diamond, Golden mines, Spicy Islands, etc. (so Travailers
talk, and Geographers write.) Ma^soleum. Mauso^ regis Cariae sepulchrum, ab
Ar^emisia uxore extructum, tanta operis magnificentia, ut inter septem orbis
miracula suerit numeratum.
Mausolus Tomb, Dianaes Temple, the Egyptian Maximae hujus genetis in Aegypto
fuisse memorantur circa Memphim, structurae ex quadratis lapidibus admirand^,
fastigiatae ultra omnem excelsitatem, quae manu fieri posset. etc.
Paramides, and all the wonders of the world.

The ear has heard the most delicious, exquisite, and ravishing melody. Such
as made even Alexander the Great transported with an irresistible pang of a
pleasing rage as it were, and delightful Spiritus qui in cord agitant,
tremulum, and subsulfantem recipient aerem in pectus and inde excitantur: A
spiritu musculi moventur, etc. Scalig. Exercit. 202.
dancing of his spirits, that I may so speak, Carda^. Subtle. lib. 13.
Exilire e convivio, etc.

Man's heart can imagine miraculous admirabilities, rarest pieces, worlds of
comforts and strange felicities. In conceit it can convert all the stones upon
earth into pearls, every grass pile into an unvaluable jewel, the dust into
silver, the sea into liquid gold, the air into crystal. It can clothe the
earth with far more beauty and sweetness, than ever the Sun saw it. It can
make every Star a Sun, and all those Suns ten thousand times bigger and
brighter than it is, etc.

And yet the height and happiness of Evangelicall wisdom does far surpass
the utmost which the ear, eye, or heart of man has heard, seen, or can
possibly apprehend. And this so excellent light upon earth discovering the
inestimable treasures of hidden wisdom in CHRIST, is but as a grain, to the
richest golden mine, a drop to the Ocean, a little glimpse to the glory of the
Sun; in respect of that fullness of joy hereafter, and everlasting pleasures
above: with what a vast disproportion then does the inimaginable excellency of
heavenly bliss surpass and transcend the most enlarged created capacity?
Infinitely, infinitely.

2. Our gracious GOD in his holy unsearchable wisdom does reserve and detain
from the eye of our understandings a full comprehension of that most glorious
state above; to exercise in the mean time our faith, love, obedience,
patience, etc. As a father shows sometimes, and represents to the eye of his
child, a glimpse and sparkle (as it were) of some rich orient jewel, to make
him love, long, pray and cry for a full sight of it, and grasping of it in his
own hand: So our heavenly Father in this case. If celestial excellencies, and
those surpassing joys, arising principally from the visible apprehension of
the purity, glory and beauty of GOD, were clearly seen and fully known, even
by speculation, it would be no strange thing, or thanksworthy for the most
horrible Beliall, Tan^a est autem pulchtitudo justitie, tanta jucunditas lucis
aeter nae, hoc est, incommutabilis veritatis, atque sapientiae, ut etiamsi non
lice^et amplius in ea manner, quam unius diei mo^a propter ho^ solum
innumerabiles anni hujus vitae pleni deliciss and circumslu^ntia temporalium
bono^um recto, meritoque conte^neretur. August. de Lib. Arb. Lib. 3. Cap. ul^.
to become presently the holiest Saint, the worlds greatest minion, the most
mortified man. But in this vale of tears we must live by Faith.

3. It is a fruit of our fall with Adam, and the condition of this unglorified
mortal state here upon earth, to know but in part: From which our knowledge
above shall differ, as the knowledge of a child from that of a perfect man: as
knowledge by a glass, from apprehension of the real object: 1 Cor 1^.
as knowledge of a plain speech, from that which is a riddle. It is not for us
(says Induci in nubes* penetrare in plenitudi nem lumin^, ^umpere ^la ritatis
al ys^s, and lucem hab^tare maccessibilem, nec temporis est ^us ne^ (...) ribi
in novissimis^ eservatur, cum ^ mihi exhibuero gloriosum non habentem maculam
aut rugam, aut aliquid (...) Be^n. Sup^r Ca^l. Sermon. 38.
one) in these earthly bodies, to mount into the clouds, to pierce this
fullness of light, to break into this bottomless depth of glory, or to dwell
in that unapproachable brightness: This is reserved to the last Day; when
CHRIST JESUS shall present us glorious and pure to His Father without spot or
wrinkle.

4. Our understandings upon necessity must be supernaturally irradiated and
illightened with extraordinary enlargement and divinenesse, before we can
possibly comprehend the glorious brightness of heavenly joys and full
sweetness of eternal bliss. It is as impossible in this life for any mortal
brain to conceive them to the life, as to compass the heaven with a span, or
contain the mighty Ocean in a nut-shell. The Philosopher could say; that as
the eyes of an Owl are to the light of the Sun, so is the sharpest eye of the
most pregnant wit to the mysteries of nature. How strangely then would it be
dazeled and struck stark blind with the excessive incomprehensible glory and
greatness of celestial secrets, and immortal light?

But although we cannot comprehend the whole, yet we may consider part. Though
we cannot take a full draught of that overflowing fountain of endless bliss
above, yet we may taste; though we cannot yet enjoy the whole harvest, yet we
take a survey of the first fruits. For, the Scriptures to this end shadow unto
us a glimpse, by the most excellent, precious and desirable things of this
life.

Thus much premised; let us (for my present purpose) about the joys of Heaven,
consider;

1. The Place, where GOD and all His blessed ones inhabit eternally.

But how can an infinite GOD be said to dwell in a created heaven?

GOD from all eternity when there was nothing, to which He might manifest and
make known Himself, is not said to dwell

As for the place of GOD before the world created, the sinite wisdom of
mortal men has no percep^i ^n of it: neither can it limit the s^at of
infinite power; no more than infinite power it self can be limited; for, His
Place is in Himself, whom no magnitude else ca^ contain. Sr. W. Rawleigh.
Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Non est quod quaeras ultia, ubi ^rat ante quam mundus tieret?
P^eter ipsum nihil erat, ergo in seipso (...). Be^. de consid. Lib. 5. Cap. 6.
Antequam faceret DEVS coelum and terram, ubi habitabat? In Se habitabat apud Se
habitabat, and apud Se est DEVS. Aug^in Psalm. 122. Ante omnia DEVS erat solus,
Ipse Sibi and mundus, and locus, and omnia. Solus autem: quia nihil extrinsecus
praeter Illum. T^rtull. adversu^ Praxean. non procul ab initio
any where, either to have been out of Himself, or in any thing, but only in
Himself. He was therefore an heaven to Himself. But when He pleased He
created the world; that in so large and goodly a Theater He might declare and
conveigh His power, goodness and bounty, some way or other, to all creatures.
Especially, He prepared this glorious heaven we speak of, not that it might
enclose or enlarge His happiness: But that He might unspeakably beautify and
irradiate it with unconceiveable splendor of His Majesty and Glory; and so
communicate Himself beatifically to all the Elect, Saints and Angels, even for
ever and ever. I said, not that it might enclose, conclude and confine Him:
For, He is as truly without the heavens, as He is in them: And He is where
nothing is with Him. He was when nothing was, and then He was, where nothing
was beside Himself. Before the Creation there was properly, neither when nor
where, but only an incomprehensible perfection of indivisible immensity and
eternity; which would still be the same, though neither heaven nor earth, nor
any thing in them should any more be. F^st DEVS it a ubique, ut non tantum
omnes hujus universi parts permeet, sed etiam immensa illa spatia quae sunt
supra coelos, (qua est naturae infinitate) penetret* non tamen existimes DEVM
ibi ess^, tanquam in loco posi^ivo repletive, sed tantum per immensitatem
essentiae. Eustachius De DEO. ^. ^.
But we may not so place Him without the Heavens, as to cloth Him with any
imaginary space, or give the check to His immensity by any parallel distance
local. He is said to be without the heavens, in as much as His infinite
Essence cannot be Behold, the heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain
Thee. 1 King. 8. 27.
contained in them, but necessarily contains them. He is so without them, or
(if you will) beyond them, that albeit a thousand more worlds were heaped up by
His all-powerfull hand each above other, and all above this; He should by
virtue of His infinite Essence, not by free choice of will or mutation of
place, be as intimately coexistent to every part of them, as He now is to any
part of this heaven and earth we enjoy. In a sober sense, Vbi est? Quid
diximiser? Sed ubi non est* Altior est coelo, inferno profundior, latio^ terra,
mari diffusior. Nusquam est, and ubique est: Quia nec abest ulli, nec ullo
capitur loco. Bern. mihi Col. 363.
Bernard says true; Nusquam est and ubique est: He is no where; because no
place, whether real or imaginary can comprehend or contain Him: He is every
where; because no body, no space or spiritual substance can exclude His
presence, or avoid the penetration (if I may so speak) of His Essence.

This glorious Empyrean Heaven (where nothing but light and blessed
immortality, no shadow of matter for tears, discontentments, griefs, and
uncomfortable passions to work upon, but all joy, tranquillity and peace, even
for ever and ever does dwell) is seated There is a place beyond that slaming
Hill,
From whence the stars their thin appearance shed,
A place beyond all place, where never ill
Nor impure thought was ever harbored:
But Saintly Her^es are for ever said
To keep an everlasting Sabbath^rest,
Still wishing that, of what they are still possessed,
Enjoying but one joy, but one of all joys best.
Fletcher, CHRIST'S Victory, page 2. St. 6.
above all the visible Orbs, and Starry Firmament. See Deuteronomy. 4. 39. and 10. 14.
Josh. 2. 11. Pro. 25. 3. 1 King. 8. 27. 30. 39. 43. 49. Luke 24. 51. Acts 1. 9.
and 7. 69. Ephesians. 4. 10. 2 Cor. 12. 2. where it is called the third heaven.

1. The first is that whole space from the Earth to the Sphere of the Moon;
where the birds fly; whence rain, snow, hail, and other Meteors descend. See
Genesis 7. 11. Psalm. 8. 8. Mat. 8. 20. Deuteronomy. 28. 12. Mat. 6. 26. where they are
called (...). 2. The second consists of all the visible Orbs. See Genesis 1. 14,
15. where he calls the whole (...), Expansion, Firmament, Heaven. And in this He
places the Sun, Moon, and other Stars, Deuteronomy. 17. 3. Within this second
Extension we comprehend three other Orbs, represented to our knowledge by their
motion. Of which see Communis quidem opinio est december tantum esse coelos
mobiles: nempe 7 coelos Planetarum, Coelum Stellatum, Coelum Cristallinum, and
primum mobile. Verum mihi valde probabilis visa est recentiorum Mathematicorum
sententia, undecim esse coelos mobiles: ita ut inter firmamentum, and primum
mobile, pro unico Coelo Cristallino, duplex coelum constituatur. Namque pro
unico motu trepidationis, qui Coelo Cristallino tribuebatur, quem admitti non
posse demoastrant, ponunt duplicem motum librationis: alterum ab Ortu ad
Occasum, and e contra, quem tribuunt nonae spherae. Alterum a Septentrione ad
Austrum, and e contra, quem decimae Spherae assignant. His additur undecima
Sphaeraseu primum Mobile Denique Theologi praeter Coelos mobiles, admittunt
supremum Coelum immobile, quod Empy^um appellant, quod sit seeds Beatorum. D^
Coelo. 2. 6.
Eustachius Table, at page 94. 3. The third is that where GOD is said specially
to dwell; whither CHRIST ascended, and where all the blessed Ones shall be for
ever.
No Neque ex sensu, neque ex motu, neque ex effectu, aut adjuncto aliquo, sed
ex sola DE^ per Scripturas revelatione nobis innotuit. Tilen.
natural knowledge can possibly be had of this heaven: neither any help by
humane arts, Geometry, Arithmetike, Optics, Hypotheses, Philosophy. etc. To
illighten us thereunto. For, it is neither aspectable nor moveable. Hence it is
that Aristotle, the most eagle-eyed into the mysteries of nature of all
Philosophers, and whom they call Natures Secretary; yet said, that beyond the
moveable Heavens, there was neither body, nor (...). De Coelo. Text. 99.
time, nor place, nor vacuum. But GODS Book assures us of this Heaven of
happiness, and House of GOD, above all the aspectable mooving Orbs. 2 Cor. 3.
2. Ephesians. 4. 10. 1 Kin. 8. 27. 30. 39. 43. 49.

And, it is the biggest and most beautiful Body of the whole creation,
incorruptible, unmooveable, unalterable: wholly shining with the most exquisite
glory and brightness of purest light: wherein, as in a confluence of all
possible felicities, Jehovah, GOD blessed for ever, does familiarly and freely
communicate Himself to be beatifically seen, and fully enjoyed face to face
of all the elect, humane and Angelical spirits for ever. Where the glorified
Body of JESUS CHRIST shines with unconceiveable splendor above the brightness
of the Sun, etc.

This place most excellent replenished with those unknown pleasures which
attend everlasting happiness, where GOD, blessed for ever, is seen face to
face, is made admirable and illustrious by its bigness and beauty.

Guess the immeasurable magnitude and beautiful signs of it,

1. By its Statum Ecclesiae conti^uum a suo tempore in omnem usque aeter
^itatem de^cripsit Johannes, sicut Prophetae Iesaias and Ezechiei^ quae causa
est, cur non omnia ista vaticinia, vel de sola Ecclesia, vel de solo Coelo, sed
de utroque simul intelligi possint, out debeant; verum servata moderatione.
Neque enim omnia quae de Ecclesia sunt, ^a etiam de coelo intelligi possunt.
Neque vicissim omnia, quaede Coelo, ea ad Ecclesiam accommodari queunt.

But ye are to observe, that it is not the purpose of the HOLY GHOST to set
forth the just and full composse of the Hea^ enly Jerusalem: (For it is
immeasurable to our capacity) but by this great measure. He gives us, as it
were, some t^ste of the largeness thereof. Gyffard upon Rev. Cap. 21.


description, Rev. 21. It is called Ver. 10. by an excellency, That great City,
etc. Which if it be immediately meant (as many learned and holy Divines would
have it) of the glory of the Church here on earth, when both Jews and Gentiles
shall be happily united into one Christian Body and Brotherhood, before CHRIST'S
second coming, it is no less pregnant to prove, that the Heaven of Heavens
is a place most glorious above all comparison and conceit. For, if there be
such goodlinesse, amplitude, beauty and majesty in this Militant Church; how
infinitely will this beauty be yet more beautified, and all this glory
glorified with incredible additions in the Church Triumphant. If there be such
excellency upon earth, what may we expect in the Heaven of Heavens.

2. By those many Habitationes sunt in coelis, quae sufficiant infinitis mundis
capiendis: imo virtus est in as^e^sione CHRISTI, ad praeparandum locum
infinitis etlam mundis, nedum omnibus hominibus qui in hoc uno mundo sunt. Sed
causa est in hominibus ipsis qui desunt sibi, neque ^edunt in illum sanguinem
quo praeparantur nobis illa in coelis loca. Rolloc. in Io^n. Cap. 14.
Mansions prepared for many thousand thousands of glorified Bodies after the
last Day, Ioh. 14. 2. Besides the numberless numbers of blessed Angels; the
present inhabitants of those heavenly Palaces.

3. By the incredible distance from the earth to the Starry Firmament. If I
should here tell you the several Mathematici alij distantiam Coeli Stelliferi,
seu firmamenti metientes, numerant 16538562. milliaria Germanica: alij, ut
Bernardinus and Rosetus numera^t 65257500. Age igitur ^ Quantam dicis Astrologe
a centroterrae, ad coelum octavum seu firmamentum vulgo appellatum dista^iam.

Vulgo intervallum dicitur continere Diametros terrae 10040 11/24.

Terrae vero Diametro tribuuntur parts 120. Vni^uique parti milliaria 6a. Quae
ducta in totum Diametrum conficiunt summam milliariorum 7440. Qui numerus
multiplicatus per 10040 11/24. ostendit distantiam terrae ab orb octavo, nempe
74703180. milliariorum See Casman. Ouranogra.

Be it so, that the adventure of Mathematicians in this Point be too audacious
and peremptory: and that the sublimily, and how many miles it is distant,
cannot be certainly known: yet you must n^eds be of ^y Authors mind: Dubitari
non potest magnam esse Expanss coelestis intercapedinem and altitudinem:
siquidem, id testatur cum visus ipse, tum passim sacra Scriptura: Ioh 11. 8.
Dicuntur coeli altissimi; ideoque quantitas little est impervestigabilis, and
al^itudo homini inscrutabilis. Idem. Ibid.


computations of Astronomers in this kind, the sums would seem to exceed all
possibility of belief. And yet besides, the late learned of them place above
the eight Sphere, wherein all those glorious lamps shine so bright, Maginus was
the man, who by his admirable ar^ of latter times added a tenth mooveable
Heaven* so that now there are three mooveable Heavens above the Firmament, as
our Masters in that Profession teach us. S^c Maginus his Theoriques. Eustachius
followe^ him. De Mundo and Coelo. page 64. 65.
three mooving Orbs more. Now the Empyrean Heaven comprehends all these; how
incomprehensible then must its compass and greatness necessarily be?

4. By considering, what a large Expansion and immensity the mighty LORD of
heaven and earth is like to choose for revealing His glory in the highest and
most transcendent manner to all His noblest creatures; infinitely endeared unto
Him by the bloody death of His dearest Son, even the Son of His love, through
all eternity. Who does all things like Himself: if He love, it is with a fr^e,
infinite, and eternal love: if He work, He makes a world: If He go out with
our Hosts, the Sun shall stand still if need be, and the Stars must fight: if
He come against a people, He will make His sword devour flesh, and His arrows
drink blood: if He be angry with the world, He brings a sloud over the whole
face of the earth. If He set His affection upon a mortal worm, that trembles
at His Word, and is weary of sin; He will make him a King, give him a
Paradise, crown him with eternity: if He builds a house for all His holy Ones;
it must needs be a Nonesuch; most magnificent, stately and glorious, far
above the reach of the thoughts of men.

5. What a spacious and specious inheritance; what a rich, super-eminent and
sumptuous Purchase and Palace do you think was the precious blood of the Son
of GOD by its inestimable price and merit, able to procure at the hands of His
Father, for His Redeemed?

Let us here also lay hold upon some considerations, whereby we may behold (at
least) some little glimpses of the admirable glory of its light.

1. To say nothing of that glorious projection and transfusion of Aethereall
light, both of the Sun and of the Stars, of the six magnitudes, which by
Astrologicall computation, constitute See Casman. Astrol. p. 1. cap. ^*

Vt in nullum numerum ponamus, aut Veneris, aut Mercurij sydera, nec computemus
stellas novem, quas obscuras, aut quinque, quas rubeas appellant, vel
nebulosas: nullo etiam numero habeamus infinitas alias, quae sexto ordine sunt
minores.


three hundred Suns at the least, (whence arises a mass of shining beauty)
upward into the Empyrean Heaven; which Patricius endeavors industriously to
prove; I say, to pass it by as a groundless Nihil temere hic vel asseverare,
vel inficiari debeo. Novi interim, Beatorum domicilium illud, supremum coelu^
d^pingi lucidissimum sub imagine novae Hierosolymae. Apoc. 21. 23. Dicitur: Non
eget Sole and Luna, ut luc^ant in ea. Nam gloria DEI illustrateam: and Lucerna
ejus est Agnus. Quid hinc mi Patrici? Desententia Iohannis: Aliam esse lucem
coelestis gloriae; aliam Solis and Luna: Non opus esse Sole (ait) and Luna:
Negatio est sydereae lucis. Opponitur ci affirmatio divinae lucis and
gloriosae, quae proficiscitur a DEI gloria and Agno Filio DEI. Ibid.

Neque vrbi ista eget Sole, etc.) Non negat, quin Sol and Luna in firmamento
suum retentura sunt lumen: sed ait supremum illud coelum, long praestantio^i
luce splendere, nec opus habere tali Sole and Luna. Gloria inquit DEI (...).
Discrimen facit inter (...) gloriam DEI, and inter (...) quo ipsa urbs
illustratur. Gloria DEI majestas est DEI, luxque illa, Deitasipsius, quam
inhabitare DEVS dicitur. Ea omnibus est inaccessa, and corporeis oculis
invisibilis. Ab hac majesta te vero pro been placito voluntatis DEI, lumen
creatum proficiscitur, quo tota urbs splendet: and quo electis etiam
communicato, efficit DEVS, ut ipsum plene, and quas facie ad faciem cognoscant.
Zanch. De Coelo beato. Cap 4.


conceit; let us take a scantling, as it were, and estimate of the
incomparable brightness and splendor of the highest heaven; by that which
Orthodoxe Divines soberly tell from Rev. 21. and other places; to wit, that it
is verus (...), wholly light, not like the Starry Firmament, bespangl'd here
and there with glittering spots: but all as it were, one Coelum Beatorum est
imprimis lucidis^imum, eoque verus (...): Hoc est totum and omni ex part
luminosum ac splendidum. Non enim est sicut firmamentum varijs ornatum ^ellis,
eoque alibi lucidum: alibi vero non it a lucidum, sed totum est pellucidum. Est
enim perinde atque si totum sit quidem Sol maximus, and omnia suo ambitu
complectens. Neque lux illa est similis luci stellarum, neque etiam ejusdem
generis. Sed est lux vere divina, licet creata: idcirco quia lux est alterius
generis, and lux est gloriae, non penetrat huc ad nos usque: oculis tamen
corporeis futuro saeculo a nobis videbitur. Ide^ Ibid.
great Sun. From every Point pouring out abundantly whole rivers, as it were,
of purest heavenly light, etc. Hence with allusion to brightest things below;
it is said to have a wall of Jasper, building of gold, a foundation of precious
stones, and gates of pearls. Being clear as Cristall; shining like unto
glass; transparent in brightness as a molten looking glass. It may be, those
places may also in latitude of sense intimate and include this glorious visible
light I speak of. Coloss. 1. 12. Psalm. 36. 9. 1 Timothy 6. 16.

Ancient Divines also apprehended this glorious beauty and brightness in the
blessed heaven.

The eternal City (says Incomparabiliter clara est civitas eterna: ubi
victoria, ubi veritas, ubi dignitas, ubi sanctitas, ubi vita, ubi aeternitas.
De vita aeternd.

Oh how brave, how beautiful, how glorious, how glittering, how gorgeous, how
admirable a City is this! For, if the gates be of pearl, and the streets of
g^ld; then what are the inner rooms? What are the dining chambers? And what
are the lodging rooms? O how unspeakable is the glory of this city; that Kings
shall throw down their Crowns and Scepters before it, counting all their
pomp and glory but as dust in respect of it? And the magnificence and pomp of
all the Potentates of the earth shall here be laid down. And albeit none of
the Kings and Nobles of the Gentiles might be admitted into the old Jerusalem,
yet all the Gentiles that believe shall be admitted into this new Jerusalem, and
made free Denisons thereof for ever. Dent upon the Rev.

I might tell you here of many other probable singularities about this
celestial palace, and that from the hand of some godly and learned Divines: To
wit, [That this third Heaven is not penetrable by any creature; whereas the
other two are passable by the grossest Bodies; so that it is said to open to
the very Angels. Ioh. 1. 51. Who, though they be able to penetrate all things
under it, yet are they no more able to enter that Body* than they are to pass
into one another natures* Hence it comes to pass, that the third Heaven gives
way to Angels, souls and bodies of men to enter in by miracle: GOD making way
by His power, where nature yields no passage. For, it is without pores, and
cannot possibly extend or contract it self into a large or straiter compass.
That, Tertium hoc and summum coelum, in medio non est corpus solidum: sed inest
aura aliquis coelestis quae supplet defectum aeris corporibus glorificatis: In
qua etsi pori non sunt, in nobis tamen porierunt, in quibus erit haec natura
coelestior; qu^ etiam aeris vicem supplebit ad sermonem. In coelo enim usuri
sumus Hebr^a lingua: 1. Nam natura ibi redibit, quae primitus hanc linguam
tenuit. 2. Confusio linguarum maledictior fuit. And this aura coelestis ( say
they) shall maintain life eternally; and be answerable to our constitution,
even as this atre is, etc.] But as I would my self by no means confidently
entertain, so will I never ebtrude upon others any thing in this or any other
divine point; but that only which i^ grounded ( either directly and
immediately, or by good and sound consequence) upon GODs sure Word.


Austin) is incomparably bright and beautiful; where there is victory, verity,
dignity, sanctity, life, eternity.

If those which be condemned (says Basil) be cast into utter darkness; it is
evident that those which walked worthy of GOD, have their rest in
supercelestiall light.

2. Besides the superexcellency of its native luster, that I may so speak, this
blessed heaven will yet be made infinitely more illustrious and resplendent by
all the most admirable and amiable shining glory of that dearest ravishing
object, to a glorified eye, the glorified Body of JESUS CHRIST. In respect of
the beauty and brightness whereof, all sydereall light is but a darksome mote,
and blackest midnight. See Mat. 17. 2.

3. Add hereunto the incredible and unspeakble splendor of many millions of
glorified Saints, whose bodies also will outshine the Sun. See Mat. 13. 43.
Phil. 3. 21. Dan. 12. 3. Who are said to shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, as the Stars, Dan. 12. 3. As the Sun, Mat. 13. 43. To be like CHRIST
Himself, John 3. 2. And to appear with Him in glory, Col. 3. 4.

Now, what a mighty and immeasurable mass of most glorious light will result
and arise from that most admirable illustrious concurrence, and mutual shining
reflections of the Empyrean Heaven more bright and beautiful than the Sun in
his strength, the Sun of that sacred Palace, and all the blessed Inhabitants?
All which every glorified eye shall be supernaturally enlarged, enabled, and
ennobl'd to behold and enjoy in a kindly and comfortable manner with ineffable
delight and everlastingnesse!

4. If the porch and first entry be so stately and glorious, garnished and
bespangl'd with so many bright shining Lights and beautiful Stars: What
workmanship and rare pieces, what majesty and incomprehensible excellencies may
we expect in the Palace of the great King, and the heavenly habitations of the
Saints and Angels? * How full of beauty and glory are the chief rooms and
Presence Chamber of the great and royal Monarch of Heaven and Earth?

O with what infinite sweetest delight may every truly gracious soul, bathe it
self beforehand, even in this vale of tears, in the delicious and ravishing
contemplation of this most glorious Place, wherein he has an eternal blisfull
mansion most certainly purchased and prepared for him already, by the blood of
JESUS CHRIST! Let us therefore (as an holy Divine would have us) spend many
thoughts upon it; Let us enter into deep meditations of the inestimable glory
of it: Let us long until we come to the fingering and possession of it: even
as the heir longs for his inheritance. -- Let us strive and strain to get
into this golden City; where streets, walls and gates, and all is gold, all is
pearl: nay, where pearl is but as mire and dirt, and nothing worth. O what
fools are they, who deprive themselves willingly of this endless glory for a
few stinking lusts! O what mad men are they, who bereave themselves of a room
in this City of Pearl, for a few carnal pleasures! O what bedlams and humane
beasts are they; who shut themselves out of these everlasting habitations, for
a little transitory pelf! O what intolerable sots and senseless wretches are
all such, who wilfully bar themselves out of this Palace of infinite
pleasure, for the short fruition of worldly trash and trifles?

2. In a second place, let us take notice of some names, titles and epithetes
attributed to heavenly joys, eternal glory, which may yet further represent
to our relish their incomparable sweetness and excellency. They are called,

1. A Kingdom, Mat. 25. 34. Luke 12. 32. Now a Kingly Throne is holden the top
and crown of all earthly happinesses: the highest aim of the most eager and
restless aspirations and ambitions of men. A confluence it is of riches,
pleasures, glory, all royal bravery, or what man's heart can wish for outward
welfare and felicity. Who has not observed what labor* practice, peril,
blood shed, cruelty, the Kings and Princes of the world have undergone,
exercised, taken on them and committed; to make themselves and their issues
Masters of the world. S. W Rawleigh.
What stirs and stratagems, what murders and mischiefs, what mining and
counter-mining, what mysterious plots and machivillian depths, what strange
adventures and effusions sometimes even of bloody seas, to catch a Crown?
Witness Lancaster and York, nay all habitable parts of the earth, which from
time to time have become bloody cock-pits in this kind. 2. An Heavenly
Kingdom, Mat. 7. 21. And 18. 3. to intimate, that it surpasses in glory and
excellency all earthly kingdoms, as far as heaven transcendeth earth, and
unconceiveably more. 3. The Kingdom of GOD, Acts 14. 23. A Kingdom of GODS
own making, beautifying and blessing; who does all things like Himself, as I
said before: replenished and shining with Majesty, pleasures and ineffable
felicities, beseeming the glorious Residence of the King of Kings. 4. An
Inheritance, Acts 20. 32. Not a tenement at will, to be possessed or left at
the landlords pleasure: but an inheritance settled upon us, and sealed unto us
by the dearest and highest price that ever was paid, which will be as orient,
precious and acceptable, after as many millions of years, as you can think, as
it was the very first day it was powered out and paid. 5. A rich and glorious
inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 18. Fit for the Majesty and mercy of Almighty GOD to
bestow; the un-valuable blood of His Son to purchase, and the dearly Beloved
of His Soul to enjoy. 6. An Inheritance of the Saints in light, Coloss. 1. 12.
Every word sounds a world of sweetness. 7. An Inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled, and that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1. 4. There can never possibly be
the least diminution, much less any abolishment of the least glimpse of
heavenly glory. But all bliss above will be as fresh and full innumerable years
hence, as at our first entrance, and so through all eternity. 8. A Crown of
righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Fairly come by, and full dearly bought. A crown
of life, Ia^. 1. 12. A Crown of glory, 1 Pet. 5. 4. Glory it self, Romans 9.
23. Nay, an exceeding exceeding eternal weight of glory, 2 Corinthians. 4. 17.
Which Crowns, Kingdoms, Pearls, Jewels, Feasts, etc. do but weakly shadow
out unto us. A superlative transcendent Phrase (says one) such as is not to be
found in all the Rhetoric of the Heathens, because they never wrote of such a
theme, nor with such a spirit. 9. Fullness of joy, everlasting pleasures, Psalm.
16. 11. A swift flowing river and torrent of pleasures, Psalm. 36. 8. The very
joy of our LORD and Master, Mat. 25. 21.
3. In a third place, let us consider the beauty and blessedness of glorified
Bodies.

I do not here curiously enquire with the Schoolmen; whether the glory of the
body does spring originally out of the blessedness and beautiful excellency
of the soul, and so redounds upon the body, by a continued constant influence,
as Aquinas thinks. Or, (which I rather follow) that those excellent endowments
and heavenly splendours are originally and dispositively implanted by GODS hand
in the reformed body, only perfected and actuated (as it were) by the glorious
soul, as Bonaventure supposes. Sure I am in general, they shall be made like
the glorious Body of CHRIST, Philip. 3. 21. And that is happiness and honor
enough, inexplicable, supereminent.

Besides their freedom from all defects and imperfections, diseases and
distempers, infirmities and deformities, Restat ergo, ut suam recipiat quisque
mensuram, quam vel habuit in juventute, ^msi senex est mortuus^ vel fuerat
habiturus, si ante est defunctus. Aug. de Civit. DEI. Lib. 22 Cap 15. Circa
triginta annos desinierunt esse, etiam saeculi hujus doctissimi homines,
juventutem. Idem Ibid. Resurgent omnes tam magni corpore, quam vel erant, vel
futuri erant in juvenili aetate. Idem. Ibid. Cap. 16. Quibus omnibus pro nostro
modulo consideratis and tractatis, haec summa conficitur, ut in resurrectione
carnis in aeternum eas mensuras habeat corporum magnitudo, quas habebat,
perficiendae sive perfectae, cujuscunque indita corpori ratio juventutis, in
membrorum quoque omnium modulis congruo decore servatur. Ibid Cap 20. All the
bodie^ of the Elect shall arise in that perfection of nature, whereunto they
should have attained by their natural temper and constitution, if no
impediment had hindered: and in that vigor of age, that a perfect man is at
about three and thirty years old, each in their proper sex. So says some
worthy Divine, whose name I forgot to note when I took his Saying.
maimednesse and monstrous shapes, infancy, or decrepitnesse of stature, etc.
From want of meat, drink, marriage: for we shall be like the Angels of GOD in
heaven, Matthew. 22. 30. We shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, Rev.
7. 16. of sleep; for, there shall be no wearying of the body, or tyring the
spirits; for, we shall live by the all-sufficient Spirit of GOD, which never
needs refreshing: of physic; for, we shall enjoy A ssruere licet, sanitatem
vitae futurae ita vigere, and immutabilem, ac inviolabilem fore* ut inessabili
quadam dulcedine suavitatis totum hominem repleat, and omne quod alicujus in se
vicissitudinis, mutabilitatis, aut laesionis suspicionem praetendere queat,
procul ar^at, atque repellat. Anselm. de simililitud. Cap. 54.
perpetual impregnable health: a glorified body cannot possibly be
distempered; either by inward contrariety of elementary qualities; or any
outward contagion, or hurtful impression: of air; to cool our heat, or keep
us from stifling: of clothes; for, we shall be clothed with long white robes of
immortality, Rev. 7. 9. which can never be worn out; but shall be so
beautiful and glorious; that like the Sun, we shall be best adorned, when we
have no other covering, but our own resplendent Majesticall brightness: of
Sun; for the glory of GOD shall illighten that heavenly city; and the Lamb
shall be the light thereof, Rev. 21. 23. Of any thing; for, GOD shall be unto us
All in All, 1 Cor. 15. 28.

I say, besides an everlasting exemption, and privilege from all ils, pains,
miseries; our bodies shall be gloriously crowned with many positive prerogatives,
mavelous excellencies, high and heavenly endowments.

1. Immortality, 1 Cor. 15. 54. Glorified bodies can never possibly die. They
shall last as long as GOD Himself, and run parallel with the longest line of
eternity. In which respect also, our condition is a thousand times more happy
and glorious, than if we had stood still with Adam in his innocence and
felicity. If so, he could but have conveyed unto us bodies immortal
Immortalitas sumitur quadrifariam: Pro 1. Impotentia moriendi absoluta, and
natura. Sic solus DEVS immortalitatem habet, 1 Timothy 6. 16. 2. Impotentia
moriendi ex gratia creationis: sic Angeli and animae humanae sunt immortales.
3. Impotentia moriendi ex gratia doni: sic coelum novum, terra nova, corpora
beatorum immortalitatem habebunt. 4. Potentia non moriendi ex aliqua Hypothesi,
licet in se sit mortale. Sic homo ante peccatum erat immortalis corpore, ex
Hypothesi unionis cum anima originaliter perfecta, immortali.



potentia non moriendi ex Hypothesi, as they say; that is, endowed only with
power of not dying, if so and so: but now they shall be immortal impotentia
moriendi, that is, shine for ever in the highest heavens with impossibility of
ever perishing.

2. Incorruptiblenesse, 1 Corinthians. 15. 42. 54. For, every glorified body shall
for ever be utterly impassible, and un-impressionable with any corruptive
quality, action, or alteration. Whether, 1. By the power of some peculiar
glorifying endowment implanted in the body, or redounding from the soul upon
the body for that purpose: Or, 2. From an exquisite temper and harmony of the
Elementary qualities freed everlastingly from all possibility of any angry
contrariety and combat: Or, 3. Which seems most probable and approoved by
the learned Schoolmen, from an exact subjection of the body to the soul,
as of the soul to GOD: I say, whether so or so, I do not here enquire or
contend; but leave all alterations in this kind to the curious disquisitions
of such idle and ill-exercis'd Divines. The testimony of GODS never-erring
Spirit (in the cited place) is more than infinitely sufficient to assure every
Christian heart, that our raised bodies, reformed by the All-mighty glorious
hand of GOD, shall never more be exposed to violence or hurt from any external
agent: or obnoxious to the least disposition toward any inward decay,
putrefaction or dissolution.

3. Potency, 1 Corinthians. 15. 43. Our souls are in nature, substance, and
immateriality like the Angels of GOD: One of which killed in one night an
hundred fourscore and five thousand, 2 Kings 19. 35. And therefore little know
we, though the edges, excellency and executions may be dul'd and drowned in our
heavy, frail, sinful bodies, of what might and power they may be originally.
But then, when to the souls native strength, there is an addition of
glorifying vigor, and GODS mighty Spirits more plentiful inhabitation; and it
shall also put on a body, which brings with it, besides its own peculiar
inherent power, an exact serviceablenesse and sufficiency apted and apportion'd
to the souls highest abilities and executions; In futuro igitur, ut jam
praelibavimus, and sie justus ortus erit, ut etiam si velit, terram commovere
possit. Anselm. de similitud. Cap. 52. Verum praestabunt viribus, quicunque
supernis viribus associantur civibus, in tantum, ut nullatenus illis quisquam
obs^stere valeat, vel si movendo quid, aut evertendo voluerit, a suo statu quin
illico cedat. Nec in eo quod dicimus majori laborabunt conatu, quam nos modo in
oculorum nostrorum motu. Ne quaeso similitudo illa Angelorum nostro excidat ab
animo quam adepturi sumus in futuro; quatenus si in hac forticudine, aut in his
quae dictu^i sumus ad exemplum non occurrit, vel ipsa per quam Angelis
adaequabimur, ad ea comprobanda prosit. Si igitur in quibus Angelos valere
constat, nostra nihilominus fortitudo valeat: neminem autem qui dubitet puto
existere, Angelos ea quae volunt fungi fortitudine. Cum igitur similes eis
fuerimus, nunquam imbecilliores illis crimus. Sed fortassis quaereret aliquis,
quid nobis tune illa fortitudo praestabit, ^um singulis tam convenienter, ut
convenientins nequeant ubique dispositis nihil immutandum, nihil evertendum,
nihil statuendum sit, in quo vires suas exercere possit? Qui hoc dicit, paucis
nobiscum quid in hujusmodi habeat usus humanus attendat, and videbit quia non
semper omnibus quae habemus, and quae nos habere non parum gaudemus actu
utimur. Sicut verbi gratia, ipso visu potestate aliqua nonnulla^um scientia
rerum, and multis in hunc modum: sic and tune de qua agitur fortitudine erit.
Sola namque possessio nobis grata erit, and exultatio grandis: licet in actu
nequaquam sit necessaria nobis cunctis, ut dictum est, in suo statu
convenienter locatis. Haec eadem quaestio, si aut de velocitate, aut de aliqua
beatitudinis partium movetur, hac solutione, si non aptiorem lector invenerit,
solvatur. Ibid.
how incredibly powerful and mighty may we suppose a Saint in heaven shall be?

4. Spiritualnesse, 1 Cor. 15. 44. Not that our bodies shall be turned into
spirits, but employed spiritually. Or more fully thus:

1. Because they shall be fully possessed with the Corpus gloriosum perfect
movebitur Spiritu DEI: sicut movetur ab anima: non quod anima tune sit
cessatura movere aut a gere: sed quod ipsa quoque plena spirituali luce, and
perfectione corpus spiritualiter tune movebit, ut cibo, potu, vestitu. Aere,
calore nullo in ligeat amplius. Par. Excitatur corpus spirituale] Hoc est vitam
and Esse suum non tam habens ab anima ista ejusque facultatibus naturalibus:
(Quanquam etiam tum eadem haec anima nostra conjungetur cum eodem ipso corpore
nostro, and peream etiam tum vivemus) tamen corpus quod excitabitur, non tam
habebit vitam and Esse suum ab ea quam a Spiritu illo CHRISTI, quia ita ut sic
loquar, animabit and animam istam and corpus istud, ut totus homo gloriosus
instar ipsius CHRISTI conspiciendus sit. Rollocin Johan. Cap. 5.
Spirit, which dwelling primarily and above measure in CHRIST our head, is
communicated from Him to us His members; so that then we shall no more live by
our animal faculty, nor need for preservation of life meat, drink, sleep,
clothing, physic, or the former natural helps. In which respect they cease
to be natural bodies, being freed from those animal faculties of nourishing,
increasing, and multiplying by generation. They shall no more live by virtue of
food and nourishment thrice concocted: first, in the stomach, etc. but shall be
spiritual and heavenly, living without all these helps, as the Angels in
heaven do.

2. Because they shall in all things become subject to the Spirit of GOD; and
be wholly, perfectly, and willingly guided by Him, with a spiritual,
Angelical, most absolute, and free obedience. As the spirit serving the flesh
may not unfitly be called carnal; so the body obedient to the soul (says
Sicut spiritus carn^ serviens non incongrue carnalis, ita caro spiritui
serviens recte appellatur spiritualis: non quia in spiritum convertetur, sicut
nonnulli putant; eo quod scriptum est: Seminatur corpus animale, rejurgit
corpus spirituale: Sed quia spiritui summa and mirabili obtemperandi facilitate
subdetur, usque ad implendam immortalitatis indissolubilis securissimam
voluntatem omni molestiae sensu, omni corruptibilitate and tarditate detracta.
Non solum enim non erit tale, quale nunc est in optima valetudine, sed nec tale
quidem quale suit in primis hominibus ante peccatum. Qui licet morituri non
essent, nisi peccassent, alimentis tamen ut homines utebantur, non spiritualia,
sed adhue animalia corpora gestantes. De Civit* DEI Lib 13. Cap 20. Non
potestas, sed egestas edendi ac bibendi talibus corporibus auferetur. Vnde and
spiritalia erunt, non quia corpora esse desistent, sed quia spiritu vivisicante
subsistent. Idem. Ibid. Cap. 22.
Austin) is rightly termed spiritual.

3. By reason of their Corpus Sanctorum resurget spiritale, quia velocitate,
levitate, perspicuitate spiritibus erit aequale. Idem. Tom. 9. p. 2. Mihi page
1084.
activenesse, nimblenesse, agility: whereby they shall be able to moove from
place to place with Erunt illa corpora, ut animus agilia, ut Sol, perspicua.
Quam cito enim nunc animus ab Orient in Occidentem cogitatione pervenit; tam
cito, tune illud corpus illuc pervenire poterit. Ibid. Sed velocitas quae
pulchritudine non minus amatur tanta nos comitabitur, ut ipsis Angelis DEY
aeque celeres simus, qui a coelo ad terias and e converso dicto citius
dilabuntur. -- Hujus quoque velocitatis exemplum in radio Solis licet intueri,
qui statim orto Sole in plaga Orientali pertingit usque ad ultima plagae
Occidentalis, ut in eo perpendamus non esse impossible, quod de nostra dicimus
futura velocitate: praesertim cum rebus animatis soleat inesse major velocitas,
quam inanimatis. Huic etiam Radio Solis simile exemplum velocitatis habemus in
nobis. Radius quippe oculorum nostrorum in sublevatione palpebrarum usque ad
coelum pertingit, and ictus earum totus in semet ac integer redit. Anselm de
similitud. Cap. 51.
incredible swiftness and speed; not being at all hindered by their weight. An
heavy lump of lead, that sinkes now to the bottom, being wire-drawne as it
were by the workman into the form of a boat, will swim, (says Austin:) And
shall not GOD give that ability to our bodies, which the Artificer does to the
lead? etc.

Here some of the Schoolmen moove an idle unnecessary question: to wit;
Whether glorified Bodies moove from place to place in an instant?

For they may well know out of the Principles in Philosophy, and Rules of sound
reason, that it is utterly impossible, and implies contradiction:

That a body should in an instant be in many places at once.

But if a glorified body moove from place to place in an instant: it will
necessarily follow that the same body is in an instant, In termino a quo, locis
intermedijs and termino ad quem simul; in the beginning, middle, and end of the
space, through which it passes at once; which is more than utterly impossible,
and quite destroys the nature of a true Body.

I would rather interpret those words of Austin; [ Certe ubi volet spiritus,
ibi protinus ^rit corpus; the body will presently be there where the soul
would have it] of extraordinary speed, and incredibly short time; Aquinas calls
it Corpus gloriosum movetur in tempore, sed imperceptibili propter brevitatem
Supplem. 3. page 84. Ar^. 3.
imperceptible. So that I doubt not, but that a glorified Saint desiring to be
in such or such a place a thousand miles off, after the very first bent of his
will that way, would be there in an But not in an^ ^stant, as A quinas his
argument demonstrates unanswerably thus: In motu locali spatium and motus and
tempus simul dividuntur, ut demonstrative probatur in 6 Physic. Sed spatium
quod transit corpus gloriosum pe^ suum motum, est divisibile: Ergo and motus
divisibilis est, and tempus divisibile, instans autem non dividitur. Ergo and
motus ille non crit in instanti. Ibid. Sed contra] Bellarmine then errs in his
Art of We^-dying translated into English by O. E. page 215. saying: The Saints
having the gift of agility ca^ in a moment pass from place to place -- from
East to West, etc. ( ^f he speak prop^rly.)
incredibly less time, than thou would imagine.

5. Glory, 1 Corinthians. 15. 43. The bodies of the Saints in heaven shall be
passingly beautiful, shining, and amiable.

Two things (according to Omnis corporis pulchritudo est partium congruen^, cum
quadam coloris suavitate. -- Proinde nulla erit deformitas, quam facit
incongruentia partium: ubi and quae parva sunt corrigentur: and quod minus est
quam decet, unde Creator novit, inde supplebitur: and quod plus est quam decet,
materiae servata integritate, detrahetur. Coloris po^o suavitas quanta ^rit,
ubi justi ^ulge bunt sicut Sol in regno Patris sui? De Civit. DEI. Cap. 19.
Austin) concur to the constitution of beauty:

1. A due and comely proportion; an apt and congruent symmetry and mutual
correspondency of all the parts of the body: or in a word, wellfavourednesse.
2. Amiablenesse of color; a pleasing mixture of those two lively colors, of
white and red. I add a third: 3. A cheerful, lively, light some aspect. When
the two former materials (as it were) are pleasantly enliv'd and actuated by a
lively quickness and modest merrinesse of countenance. Whereupon, (says the
Moralist) it is not the red and white, which gives the life and perfection of
beauty: but certain sparkling notes, and touches of amiable cheerfulness
accompanying the same. In beauty (says another) that of favor is more than
that of color; and that of decent and pleasing motion, more than that of
favor. That is the best part of beauty, which a picture cannot express, etc.
All these concur in eminency and excellency in glorified bodies.

1. An exquisite feature and stature, beautified by GODS own blessed
all-mighty hand, with the utmost of created comeliness, and matchless
proportion. 2. Not only sweetest mixture of liveliest colors; but also a
bright shining splendor of celestial glory. 3. And both these actuated to the
life, preserved in perpetual freshness and oriency, and quickened still with
new supply of heavenly activenesse and amiablenesse by a more glorious soul;
(for, if the brightness of the body shall match the light of the Sun; what, do
you think, will be the glory of the soul?) and by an infinitely more glorious
spirit, which shall plentifully Vt anima ista dum exercet functiones suas in
corpore impertit eicolorem and totam hanc externam corporis gloriam: ita tum
cum DEVS erit omnia in omnibus, Spiritus CHRISTI in nobis habitans, indu^t
corpora nostra gloriosissima, quibusque qualitatibus. Rolloc. in Johan. Cap. 5.
dwell in them both for ever.
Amplify the glory of our bodies in heaven from such places as these: Dan. 12.
2. Mat. 13. 45. Phil. 3. 20, 21. Col. 3. 4.

From which the ancient Fathers also thus collect and affirm:

If we should compare (says Si vel cum micantibus Solis radijs futura nobis
corpora contul^imus, nihil tamen pro illius splendoris dignitate explicabimus.
Sermon de misericordi^.
Chrysostom) our future bodies even with the most glistering beams of the
Sun; we shall yet say nothing, to the expression of the excellency of their
shining glory.

The beauty of the just in the other life (says In illa siquidem vita
pulchritudo justorum Solis pulchritudini, qui septempliciter, quam modo sit,
splendidior erit, *adaequabitur. Vnde scriptum ^st, Fulgebunt justi, sicut Sol
incouspectu DEI. De similitud. Cap. 50.
Anselme) shall be equal to the glory of the Sun, though sevenfold brighter than
now it is.

The Hujus quoque corporis claritas tantum Solemn excellit, quantum Sol in
claritate nostrum corpus praecellit. Apud August. Tom. 9. p. 2. Mihi page 1085.
brightness of a glorified body does as far excel the Sun, as the Sun our
mortal body.

Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their
Father] Not (says Tunc fulgebunt just^, sicut Sol in regno Patris corum] Non
quia Solis etiam splendorem non superabunt; sed quando nihil fulgentius Sole
videmus, propterea re apertissima nobis ad exprimendum usus est. In Mat. Hom.
12.
Chrysostom) because they shall not surpass the brightness of the Sun; but,
because that being the most glittering thing in the world, he takes a
resemblance thence toward the expressing of their incomparable glory.

But how can there be so much beauty and delightful amiable aspect in such
intensive and extraordinary brightness? Or what pleasure can we take in
beholding such extremely bright and shining bodies! Since we find by experience,
that there is far more content and delight in looking upon a
well-proportioned object, beautified with a pleasant mixture of colors, than
in seeing the Sun, though it should not so dazzle, and offend the eyes.

For satisfaction herein, we must know, that the Neque in eo loco claudendi
erunt oculi, ne forte a nimio splendore laedantur: nam and ipsi oculi beati
erunt, ac per hoc impassibiles and immortales; qui enim lumine gloriae
confortabit oculos mentis, ne videntes DEVM facie ad faciem, opprimantur a
gloria; idem etiam dote impassibilitatis confortabit oculos corporis, ut sine
^aesione cernant non Solemn unum, sed innumerabiles.
glorified eye shall become impassible, elevated far above all mortal
possibility, and fortified by an heavenly vigor, to apprehend and enjoy all
celestial light and glory with much ravishing contentment and inexplicable
delight.

Secondly: that omnipotent merciful hand of GOD, which will raise our bodies
out of the dust, and reform them anew, can cause light and color to concur
and consist in excellency, in glorified bodies.

Those things which according to nature can consist together; the one or both
being in gradu remisso, (as they say) abated of their height, can by divine
power consist together in gradu intensissimo suae speciei, in their excellency:
but it is so with light and color according to nature: ergo, etc. as Lib. 4.
Did. 44. Q. 8.
Durandus one of the acutest Schoolmen makes good by arguments. Whether shall
color or light be seen? Corporis gloria naturam non tollet, sed persiciet:
unde color qui debetur corporiex natura suarum partium, remanebit in eo, sed
superaddetur claritas ex gloria animae. Sicut etiam videmus corpora colorata ex
natura sui, Solis splendore relucere, vel ex aliqua alia causa, extrinseca, seu
intrinseca. Aquin. Supplem. 3. p. Q. 85. Art. 2. ad 3^. In noctilucis simul
stant color and lux, ut apparet ad sensum, and sic videtur quod virtute divina
corpora gloriosa possunt simul esse colorata and lucentia. Dur. Lib. 4. Did.
44. q. 8.
Why not both in a most delicious admirable mixture?

Here the Schoolmen according to their wont do curiously inquire, discuss and
determine the manner of the acts, exercise and objects of all the senses. They
say not only; 1. That the eye shall delightfully contemplate CHRIST'S glorious
body, the shining bodies of the Saints, the beauty of the Empyrean Heaven, etc.
2. The ear drink up with infinite delight, the vocal harmony of
Hailelu-jahs, etc. But also audaciously undertake to define without any good
ground or found warrant, many particulars about the other senses, not without
much absurdity, and unspiritualnesse. But let it be sufficient for us, without
searching beyond the bonds of sobriety, to know for a certain that every sense
shall be filled with its several singularity and excellency of all possible In
illa futura vita delectatio quaedam ineffabilis bonos inebriabit, and
inestimabili dulcedine sui totos eos inenarrabili abundantia satiabit. Quid
dixi totos? Oculi, aures, nares, os, manus, guttur, cor, jecur, pulmo, ossa,
medullae, exta etiam ipsa, and cuncta sigillatim singulaque membra eorum, in
communi ram mirabili delectationis and dulcedinis sensu replebuntur, ut vere
totus homo torrente voluptatis DEI potetur, and ab ubertate domus ejus
inebrietut. Anselmede similitud. Cap. 57.
pleasure, and perfection.

4. In a fourth place; let us take a glance of the unutterable happiness of
the Soul.

I should be infinite and endless, if I did undertake to pursue the several
glories, felicities, and excellencies of every faculty of the soul: and when I
had done, ended with the utmost of all both Angelical and humane understanding
and eloquence, come infinitely short of expressing them to the life; I will at
this time but give you a taste only, in the understanding Part:

And that shall be extraordinarily and supernaturally enlarged and irradiated
with the highest illuminations, largest comprehensions, and utmost extent of
all possible comfortable knowledge, of which such a creature is capable.

1. Humane knowledge of Arts, Nature, created things, is delicious and much
desired: Witness,

1. The wisest Heathens, and best Philosophers, who were so ravished but even
with a dim glimpse of this knowledge, that in comparison thereof they have
contemned all the riches, pleasures, and preferments of the world. 2. That wise
saying: A learned man does as far excel an illiterate, as a reasonable
creature a brute. 3. The extraordinarily exulting and triumphant cry of the
famous Mathematician, hitting after long and laborious disquisition upon some
abstruse excellency of his Art: (...).
I have found it, I have found it. 4. That passage in an Epistle of Aeneas
Silvius to Sigism. D. of Austria: Cujus facies, si videri possit, pulchrior est
quam Luciser, and Vesperus.
If the face of humane learning could be seen, it is fairer and more
beautiful than the Morning and Evening Star. 5. For the pleasure and delight
of knowledge and learning (says Advancement of Learn. Lib. 1. page 44.
another) it far surpasses all other in nature: for shall the pleasures of
the affections so exceed the senses, as much as the obtaining of desire and
victory exceeds a song or dinner? And must not (of consequence) the pleasures
of the intellect or understanding exceed the pleasures of the affections? We
see in all other pleasures, there is a saetiety; and after they be used, their
verdour departs; which shows well, they be but deceipts of pleasure, and
not pleasures; and that it was the novelty which pleased, and not the quality.
And therefore we see, that voluptuous men turn Friars; and ambitious Princes
turn melancholy. But of knowledge there is no satiety: But satisfaction and
appetite are perpetually interchangeable; and therefore appears to be good in
it self simply, without fallacy or accident.
Now this learning shall then be fully perfected, and raised to the highest
pitch: so that the least and lowest of the Saints in heaven shall far
surpass: in clear contemplation of the causes of all natural things, and
conclusions of Art, the deepest Philosophers, greatest Artists, and learned
Linguists that ever lived upon earth.

There are many difficulties and doubts in all kinds of humane learning, which
have from time to time exercised the bravest wits: but by reason of the native
dimnesse of our understanding, never received clear resolution and infallible
assent. As,

Whether the Elementary forms be in mixed Bodies; 1. Corrupted. 2. Remitted
only. 3. Or, Entire? Whether the celestial Orbs be moved by Angels, or
internal forms? Whether there be three distinct souls in a man; 1.
Vegetative. 2. Sensitive. 3. Rational: Or one only in substance, containing
vertually the other two? How all the Peculiariter apud Astrologos (...)
dicuntur, quae apparent in coelo. Arat.
(...), Appearances in the Aethereall Heaven, may be truliest, and with least
exception maintained: whether by Excentricks and Epicycles: or only by
Concentricks: or the Earths motion: or the motion of the Stars in the
heavens; as fish move in the sea, and birds in the air? etc. So the best wits
are inextricably pusl'd also, about the Sympathy and Antipathy of things,
Alchymie, cause. of Critical days.

The mysts about these and many things more, shall be dispel'd out of our minds,
by a clear sun of a new and excellent knowledge: so that we shall be exactly
acquainted with the causes, natures, beginnings, of-springs, and ends of all
creatures, and created things.

2. We shall clearly see and comprehend the vanity and rottenness of all
Heretical cavils, Antichristian depths, Popish imposture, the very bottom of
that most wicked and abhorred Mystery: the true, full, and sweet meaning of
all GODS blessed Book; whether Jobs wife bid her husband bless or curse GOD:
whether Iphtah sacrificed his daughter, or only consecrated her to virginity:
whether Naaman was a true, or unfound convert: what is the meaning of that
place, 1 Corinthians. 11. 10. And that, 1 Cor. 15. 29, etc.

3. We shall with wonderful ravishment of spirit, and spiritual joy, be
admitted to the sight of those sacred secrets and glorious mysteries: 1. Of the
holy Trinity; into which some Divines may audaciously dive, but shall never be
able to explicate: 2. Of the Union of CHRIST'S humanity to the divine nature;
and of the faithful to CHRIST: 3. Of the causes of GODS eternal counsel in
Election and Reprobation: 4. Of the Angels fall: 5. Of the manner of the
creation of the world, etc.

4. We shall know one another: For,

1. All comfortable knowledge shall be so far from being abolished, that it
will be enlarged, increased, and perfected:

But, etc.

Therefore

Our knowledge shall be perfected: For, We shall know as we are known, 1 Cor.
13. 12. Which is set out by comparison of the less: That our knowledge then,
shall differ from that now, as the knowledge of a child from that of a perfect
man: by a glass, from seeing the thing it self: that of a plain speech, from
a riddle: Why then should we doubt of knowing one another? especially, since our
Savior CHRIST sets forth the state of the blessed by the knowledge one of
another, Mat. 17. And as the knowledge is perfect, so the memory. In nothing
must our knowledge be empair'd but bettered.

2. We shall then enjoy every good thing, and comfortable gift, which may any
way increase and enlarge our joy and felicity:

But meeting there, knowing then, and conversing for ever with our old dear
Christian friends, and all the glorious Inhabitants of those sacred Palaces,
will mightily please and refresh us with sweetest delight.

Therefore, etc.

Society is not comfortable, without familiar acquaintance: Be assured then, it
shall not be wanting in the height and perfection of all glory, bliss, and
joy. Nay, our minds being abundantly and beatifically illuminated with all
wisdom and knowledge, we shall be enabled to know, not only those of former
holy acquaintance; but also strangers, and such as we never knew before; even
all the faithful, which ever were, are, or shall be. We shall be able to say:
this was Father Abraham, this King David, this Saint Paul: this was Luther,
Calvin, Bradford, etc. this my Father, this my Son, this my Wife, this my
Pastor, this the occasioner of my conversion, etc. as may be gathered by
proportion out of GODS Book.

1. If Rectehinc colligitur nos in vita a ^erna, deposi^s omnibus (...) antia*
and ^tis* ch^lis ^iam no^ invic^m, and (...) Sanctos, quos nunquam vidimus
agnituros. Si enim Adamus virtute (...) divinae concreate ^van. de corpore suo
sump^am, cum e somno evigilasset, illi^o agnovit. Quomodo no ^tiam, secundum
ea^dem imaginem t^ansmutati de gloria (...) gloriam, a DOMINI Spiritu, Sanctos
and beatos ejusdem corporis memb^ agnosceremus? Kem^it Harm. Evang. Cap. 87.
(...) invita (...) se mut^o agnituri? Vtique qui plem su^mi sunt SPIRITV SANCTO
and sapientia, sicut Adam ante l^psum ad huc ^tmeri integritatem imaginis DEI,
Evam, quam nunquam viderat, and undenam esset, nemine dicente, agnovit. Genesis 2.
23. Bucan. Loc. 39.
Adam before the fall had that measure of illumination, that he knew Eve, and
from whence she came, at the first sight: much more shall our knowledge in
heaven, and highest happiness be enlarged in this kind.

2. If the Apostles accompanying CHRIST in His transfiguration, and vouchsafed
but a taste and glimpse (as it were) of glorification, were Petrus and qu^ cum
ipso e rant, videntes Mosen and Eli am in gloria, cos noverunt, licet prius
illos nunquam viderint. Vnde vero hoc? Non certe ex imagimbus and statuis,
quibus uti Iudaeis non fuit concessum: nec ex notitijs naturalibus, quae in
rebus c^lestibus penitus sunt coe^ae: sed ex sola gratia DEI, quae incredibilem
hanc sapientiae and cognitionis lucem animis Apostolorum infudit. Vt ergo
Samuel ex DEI inspiratione Saulem agnovit, nunquam antea visum, 1 Samuel 9 17. Et
quemad modum Ioha^nes in utero intra alvum B. Virginis, CHRISTVN DONINVM suum
agnovit: ita SPIRITVS SANCTI ^adijs horum etiam mentes fuerunt illustratae.
Kem^it. loc supra cit. Petrus in monte in mortali corpore Mosem, and E^iam,
quos nunquam viderat, revelatione interna cogno^it, Mat. 11. 34. Bucan. loc.
supra cit.
able thereby to know Moses and Elias, whom they had never seen: how much more
shall we, being fully illuminated, and perfectly glorified in heaven, know
exactly all the blessed ones, though never acquainted with them upon earth?

3. CHRIST tells the Jews, Luke 13* 28. That they shall see Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the kingdom of GOD, and therefore know
them: Boni bonos in Regno, and mali malos in supplicio agnoscunt. Si enim
Abraham Lazirum minime recognovisset, nequaquam ad Divitem in tormentis positum
de transacta ejus contritione loqueretur, diccus, quod mala receperit in vita
sua. Et si mali malos non ecognoscerent, nequaquam Dives in torrnentis positus,
fratrum suorum etiam absentium meminisset. Quomodo enim praesentes non posset
agnoscere, qui etiam pro absentium memoria curavit exorare? Qua in re illud
quoque ostenditur quod nequaqua^ ipse requisisti: Quia and boni malos, and mali
cognoscunt bonos. Nam Dives ab Abraham cognoscitur, est diviti cognitus, quem
mitti precatur ex nominedicens: Mitte Lazirum, ^t intingat extremum digiti sui
in aquam, and refrigeret linguam meam. In qua videlicet cognitione utriusque
partis cumulus retributionis excrescit: ut and boni amplius gaudeant, qui secum
cos laetari conspiciunt quos amaverunt; and mali dum cum eis torquentur, quos
in hoc mundo, despecto DEO, dilexerunt, eos non solum sua, sed etiam eorum
poena consumat. Greg. Dial. Lib. ^. Cap. 33.
And Dives is said to know Abraham and Lazarus in so great a distance, Luke 16.
Whence I argue thus: if the damned know those who are saved, though they have
never seen them; much more shall the glorified Saints, now plentifully endued
with all knowledge, and supernaturally illightened by the HOLY GHOST.

Many of the ancient Fathers are of the same mind: (Whose authority I never
urge for necessity of proof; GODS blessed Word is ever more than infinitely
all-sufficient and super-abundant for any such purpose: but only; either, 1.
Sometimes in some singular Points to show consent: or 2. In our controversies
against the Antichristians, Antinomists, Neopelagians, etc. Or, 3. When
somehonest passage of sanctification, or seasonable opposition to the
corruption of the times, is falsely charged with novelty, singularity, and too
much preciseness.)

1. There was a Widow in Austins time, who craved very importunately both by
word and writing, some consolations from him, to support her under that
incomparable cross of her husbands loss, and widow-hood; and as it may seem,
she desired to know whether she should know him in the second life. For the
first, he hits upon the sweetest, mightiest, and most sovereign comfort which
could possibly be imagined. Non te desolatam putare debes, cum in inte^ore
homine habeas praesentem CHRISTVM pe^ fidem in cord tuo. E pist. 6. ad
Italicam.
You can by no means (says he) think your self desolate; who enjoyes the
presence and possession of JESUS CHRIST, in the inmost closet of your heart by
faith. About the other, he answers peremptorily: Hic autem and conjuxtuus,
cujus abscessu vidua diceris, tibi ^otissimus erit. -- Cum vene it DOMINVS, and
illuminaverit a^ ondita tenebrarum, and manifestaverit cogitationes cordis,
tunc nihil latebit prox^mum in proximo; nec e^it, quod suis quisque aperiat,
abscondat alienis, ubi nullus erit alic^us. Ibid.
This thy husband, by whose decease thou art called a widow, shall be most known
unto thee. And tells her further, that there shall be no stranger in heaven, etc.

2. In Fit autem in electisquiddam mirabilius, quia ^n solum ^os agnos^unt,
quos in hac vita novera^t; ^d velut v^os viso^ ac cognitos, recognoscunt bonos
quos nunquam viderunt. Greg. loc. supra cit.
the Elect (says another) there is something more admirable; because they do
not only acknowledge those whom they knew in this world; but also, as men
seen and known, they know the good, whom they never saw.

3. There (says Ibi a singulis omnes, ibi ab omnibus singuli cognoscentur: Nec
quemquam omnino latebit, qua patria, qua gente, qua stirpe quis ed^us fuerit,
vel quid etiam in vita sua fecerit. Anselm. de Similitud. Cap. 59.
Anselm) All men shall be known of every several man, and every several man
shall be known of all.

Again, Perpende, si vales, quam grata ^it sapientia ista, qua tu sicut ab
omnibus, sic omnes a te cognoscentur in vita illa. Ibid. Cap. 61.
Conceive if thou can, how comfortable that knowledge will be, by which, as
thou of all others, so all others shall be known of thee in that life.

Yet let me tell you before I pass out of the Point; that this for the most
part is the curious Quaere of carnal people; who feeding falsely their
presumptuous conceits with golden dreams, and vain hopes of many future
imaginary felicities in the world to come, whereas in the mean time they have
no care at all, use no means, take no pains, to enter into the holy path,
which leads unto that blessed place. It is even, as if one should busy
himself much, and boast what he will do in New England when he comes thither;
and yet (poor man) he has neither ship, nor money, nor means, nor knowledge
of the way, nor provision before hand for his comfortable planting there.

To cool and confront such lazy, idle, and vain curiosities; take notice:
that we shall not know our old acquaintance by former stature, feature, favor:
so vast a distance and difference will there be between a mortal and
glorified body: neither in a worldly manner. In which respect says Paul, 2
Cor. 5. 16. Henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea though we have
known CHRIST after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him no more. Our
mutual knowledge one of another in heaven shall not be in outward and worldly
respects, but divine and spiritual, as we know them in CHRIST, by the
illumination of the Spirit.

5. We shall know the spiritual substances, offices, orders, excellencies of
the Angels: the nature, immortality, operations and original of our own
souls, etc. In a word, all things Sapientia quam omnes in hac vita^ non
utiliter amant, tanta in futura vita^ bonis erit, ut eorum quae s^ire
voluerint, nihil sit quod ignorent. Bonus enim perfecta quae DEVS est sapienti^
replebitur, ^amq, facie ad faciem intuebitur, quam dum it a perspexerit,
creaturae totius naturam videbit, quae in DEO melius quam in seipsa constitit.
Tunc ^enim just^ cuncta scient quae DEVS fecit scien la, tam ea quae
praeterita, quam ea quae postmodum sunt futura. Ans^lm de similitud Cip 54. Cum
electi antiquos patres in illa aeterna haereditate viderint, eis incogniti per
visionem non erunt, quos in opere semper noverunt. Quia enim illic omnes commu^
claritate DEVM conspiciunt; quid est, quod ibi nesciant, ubi scientem omnia
sciunt? Greg. Dialog. ^ib. 4 Cap. 33. Neque sola visio DEI sanctis hominibus in
coelo promi^itur, sed etiam omnium rerum, quas secit DEVS. Hic quidem in terris
cernimu^ per sensum videndi, solemn, and lunam, and stellas, and terras, and
maria, and slumina, and animantia, and arbores, and metalla. Sed men's nostra
nihil omnino cernit; i. e. nullam substantiam creatam perfect nos it, non
differentias essentiales, non proprietates, non vires* ac ne animam q^i* sem
suam homo videt, sed mo^e coecorum palpando effecta, and discurrendo per
rationem aliquid cognitionis acquirit. Quale ergo gaudium erit, cum
intelligen^a nostra revelata fa ie manifest videbit naturas omnium rerum
differentias, proprietates, vires? Et cum quanta exultatione obstupescet, cum
videbit exerci^um Angelorum innumerabilem, quorum nullus cum al^o in specie
convenit, and differentias omnium and singulorum perspicu^ intuebitur? De
ae^ern. Foelicit. Lib. ^. Cap. 2. When we shall know GOD in heaven, we shall in
Him know the manner of the work of creation, the mysteries of the work of our
Redemption: yea, so much knowledge as a creature can possibly conceive and
comprehend of the Creator and H^ works. P. P.
knowable.

6. We shall be beatifically illightened with a clear and glorious sight of
GOD Himself: which Divines call Beatificall Vision.

About which the Schoolmen audaciously discoursing, fall upon differing
conceits.

1. Some say, GOD shall then be known by a Species representing the divine
Essence: and by a Light of glory elevating the understanding by a supernatural
strength.

2. Others, That the divine Essence shall be represented to the glorified
understanding, not by any Species, but immediately by It Self: yet they also
require light of glory to elevate and fortify the understanding by reason of
its weakness, and infinite disproportion and distance from the
incomprehensible Deity.

3. Others hold, that to the clear vision of See Durand. Lib. 4. Did. 49. q.
2.
GOD, there is not required a Species representing the divine Essence, as the
first sort suppose; nor any created light elevating the understanding, as the
second sort think: but only a change of the natural order of knowing. It is
sufficient (say they) that the divine Essence be immediately represented to a
created understanding. Which, though it cannot be done according to the order
of nature, as experience tells us: (For, we so conceive things; first having
passed the sense and imagination.) Yet it may be done according to the order of
divine grace, etc.

But it is sufficient for a sober man to know, that in heaven we shall see Him
face to face.

Upon my Patron.
And here by your good leaves, I will be bold to make benefit of the instant
occasion, because it is very seasonably coincident with the Point. And press
from that the practice of this last mortifying motive. These artificial Forms
of sadness, and complementall representations of sorrow in blacks and mourning
weeds, are nothing for my purpose: neither do I desire to stir up or renew in
any man thoughts of heaviness, or grief of heart, which he might conceive and
nourish by reason of some particular interest in the bounty, love, person, and
worthy parts of the departed: many times men are too forward and overflowing in
those tender offices, and last demonstrations of natural affection. And
therefore my counsel in such cases is; that we would show our selves Christians:
and by the sacred rules of Religion ever prevent that unseasonablenesse and
excess, which many times with a fruitless torture does tyrannise over the
hopeless hearts of mere natural men.

The Point that I would principally press, and persuade unto, is a Christian,
and compassionate taking to heart, the public loss, that every one of us may
upon that occasion be truly humbled in himself, and bettered in his own
soul. And I tell you true, especially in these times, this loss is great.

He was a revexend and learned Judge, a Prince, and a great Man in Israel: nay
a God upon earth, All I say, is cuber from my own certain knowledge; or
concurrent testimony above exception. I would not speak a word, which I think
not in my conscience to be true, to be heir of his possessions. It may be
affection may make me deliver things something passionately, and more unto the
life.
for so are Judges styled by the Spirit of GOD, Psalm. 82. 6. Though he be
departed this life like a man, and fallen as one of the Princes.

But these are nothing; they are but bare titles, in respect of any true worth.

He was really remarkable, and renowned for very special judiciary endowments,
and sufficiencies; and those aided and attended with many worthy additions of
morality, and subordinate abilities. As first,

1. Such calmnesse in his affections, and moderation of his passions (as I
never saw) even in his ordinary carriage. He might have been a mirror (me
thinks) in this point even amongst the exactest Moralists. And they say, that
appeared most eminently in his public passages and executions of justice. And
how needful a virtue this is to a Judicial Place, those may best conceive,
who either feel, or but consider what a cruel and intolerable thing it is for
an ingenuous man to stand before a Judge, who is prejudicately and passionately
transported with anger, malice, or hatred against the party to be sentenced.

2. Patience to hear the basest, both parties, all they could say. And
unwillingnesse to lend his ear to the one, without the others presence.

3. A great and happy memory.

4. Singular sagacity in searching and diving into the secretest and utmost
circumstances (so far as was possible) of the causes that came before him,
that he might give the more righteous judgment.

5. A mavelous tenderness, and pitiful exacttnesse in his inquisitions
after blood. Holding, on the one side, the life of a man very precious: and
yet, on the other side, persuaded of the truth and terror of that place, Numb.
35. 33. For blood, that defiles the land, and the land cannot be cleansed of
the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it. But yet
all these, whatsoever you apprehend, in my conceit had not been much worth,
though good in their own nature; neither (to tell you true) should I have so
much as named them, had they not been aided, (as it were) and managed with
three other most noble and necessary virtues, especially in these times, which
actuated them (as it were) and gave them their life and luster.

1. A love to integrity, the right and truth in all his judicial courses,
which (for any thing I know, or could ever hear) no man living upon just
ground can or will contradict.

2. With a constant and resolute heart-rising against bribery and corruption;
the cursed bane of all goodness, honesty, and good conscience, wheresoe'er it
comes. And to this, that high place he worthily held about the Prince, can give
royal attestation: where he qualified fees to his own loss; and protested
his resolution, and all possible opposition to all offers for offices, with
this reason: he would have them come in clearehanded, that they might deal
honestly in their places. And his own followers, to whom he gave a charge at
his first entrance to a judicial place, that they should not meddle, nor make
any motions to him, that he might be secured from all appearance of corruption.
And, as I am credibly informed, his ordinary reading of great letters, and
rejection of gratuities after judgment given.

3. With a noble and unshaken resolution, and mighty opposition of Popery: and
that without respect or fear of any greatness, as we have evident
demonstration. Now of this we need no further testimony (though there be very
pregnant and plentiful besides) than the present triumph of the Papists; and
barbarous insultations of that bloody and murdrous generation. And especially
in yonder Country of Lancashire, and those Northern Parts; where he shook the
pillars of Popery more valiantly and succesfully, than any these many years.
Officers in those Parts observed, that in his two or three years, he
convicted, confined, and conformed more Papists than were in twenty years
before. And that last charge he gave at Lancaster in his last Circuit but one,
for I meddle not with the last of all, for lawlearning, earnestness and
excellency against Popery, profaneness, non-residency, and other corruptions
of the times, and for the extraordinary heartning and encouraging all good men
and godly Ministers was such, that I am persuaded, it will be remembered with
dearness and love, while any honest man that heard it or heard of it, is
alive in those Parts. To go no further then: and this I now say, I speak of
him as he was grown in his latter time; and out of hope he would have
continued: and I speak it also in compassion of mine own country; which I
know by too good experience how pitifully it lies bleeding under the insolency
of Papists, and multitude of Priests: and then I say, the redemption of the
life of such a Judge, in such times as we live, for the good of such a country,
if we go no further, if that had consisted with GODS pleasure, had been worth
a Kings ransom.

I lay these things thus together upon purpose to aggravate the loss, that a
compassionate consideration of the greatness thereof in those respects I have
told you, may be as powerful in begetting a godly and profitable sorrow and
taking it to heart in all truly religious and loyal hearts: as I know
rejoicing in his fall will create in the insolent spirits of the enemies to GOD
and the King, (I mean the Papists) barbarous insultations and triumph. I am
persuaded, if we get as much humiliation out of the sense of a true loss, as
the Papists hardening and obduration by apprehension of their imaginary gain,
we shall make a good use of his death. I am a little more earnest, because I
perceive the Papists begin already to calumniate and slander.

Here is yet another Point of profitable consideration from the present
occasion. When any worthy man in a State, especially who takes a faithful
discharge of his place, and the public good to heart, is cut off by the hand
of GOD; it is in a Christian jealousy, and out of spiritual wisdom to be
holden as a presage of some more fearful general judgment to succeed. I
have my ground, Isa. 3. 1, 2, 3, etc. And therefore my counsel is, and in the
present case for one: when any good Patriote which in some high place like a
strong Pillar opposes the corruptions and Popery of the times: or any faithful
Pastor, which by his prayers (like a Moses) stands in the gap against the
indignation of GOD, is taken away; that we take it to heart, as a M^mento, to
make our selves ready against an evil day. And to tell you my mind, I am much
afraid some heavy thing is preparing for us, our sins are grown unto such a
height. I am no Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet; yet out of a comparative
contemplation of GODS proceeding with His own people in all former ages, I
cannot but concur with the judgment of a great Doctor delivered in an high
place: The White, page 80. at Spittle.
sins of this Land are come to that elevation, that there is scarce left any
room for the mercy of GOD to help us. They are even full ripe for His
revenging Hand. To his four reasons I add two more: his are taken, 1. From the
greatness and crying of the sins, which are very horrible; Atheism,
whoredom, Sodomy, bloodshed, oppression, says he; I add pride, drunkenness,
usury, etc. 2. From the generality of them. All sorts are wrapped in them. 3.
From their impudency: with brazen brows, and whorish foreheads they outface
the Sun. 4. From their impatiency of admonition and reformation: they grow so
upon us, that all the Pulpits in ENGLAND cannot beat them down. Adda 5t. from
2 Chronicles. 36. 16. And a 6t. from Isa. 3. 1, 2, 3. and seq. I mean the dropping
away of many worthy men; and few take it to heart, or consider that they are
taken away from the evil to come. We have lost many a godly man within this
few years. The Princes Court was not many years since disrobed and bereft of
one of the noblest men that ever trod upon English mould, besides other noble
ornaments, his eminency of grace made him so. For, Christian Nobility is best
and truest, where GOD Himself is top of the kin, and Religion the root; in
regard whereof all the rest (I mean that of riches, birth, learning or
morality) are but shadows and shapes of nobleness. And the other year, a
very worthy Doctor, and triumphant Champion against the Giants of Rome. Against
whom they have since sent out an illiterate libell, called, White died Black;
fit for the foul and black mouths of such railing Rabshekaes. And now of
late, to say no more, of a Chancellor of rare and remarkable integrity in his
Place. I have not yet done, and yet the time is done: only a word or two
therefore, and so I Will make an end.

And yet let no man think, that I am come hither;

1. Either to smooth and mollify any faults or frailties; any falls or
infirmities; any personal sins or imperfections that might be in this great
Man. I dare not go about to cover them; that is not my office; I leave that to
the precious blood of the Son of GOD, and tenderhearted mercies of our
gracious Father. I would rather in this point advise great men to walk warily.
For, their greatness makes their sins greater, and their mightiness will
make them mightily tormented, except they stand constantly on GODS side. Height
of Place ever adds two wings unto sin: Example and Scandal; whereby it
soars higher, and flies much further. If the Sun be eclipsed and obscured; a
thousand eyes gaze upon it: a lesser Star may be darkened, and no man take
notice. 2. Or to fasten upon him any false praises in a flattering funeral
Panegyric. I dare not dawbe for a world of gold. Himself abhorred that. And
not long before his last sickness complained much against slattery, as a
grievous iniquity of the times. 3. Or to make a solemn and formal narration
of all his noble commendable parts. When I undertook this business first, I
studied only, and bethought my self, how I might speak most profitably, and
make the best use of the present occasion to my living Auditors. And had I not
found pregnant matter for that purpose, I had not been here this day. And
therefore for conclusion, and as the last and best service I can now do unto
him, to whom I owed as much as any man alive: I will labor from the occasion
to work some heavenly good (if GOD so please) upon the hearts, presented here
this day as a selected and choice number of his worthiest and dearest friends.
And to this end give me leave to single out, and propose for imitation, some
worthy and noble parts of his, and only those which I conceive may be most
seasonable and suitable to the exigency of my Auditory. And I must also crave
the aid of your loves unto him, and those softened thoughts of mortality which
are wont to attend these times; that I may conveigh and commend them to your
liking, and practice with more success and stronger impression.
And the first I shall commend unto you, is,

1. His singular integrity and honorable purpose in disposing those
Ecclesiastical Livings he had in his power. And in this Point I my self can
say more than any, who tasted deepliest of his worthy dealing this way. When I
never sought after, as it is famously known, nor thought upon any such thing,
he sent for me, and bestowed that which I presently enjoy most freely. Which,
though every Patron ought proportionably to do, yet the horrible corruptions
abroad in the world in such cases do (as it were) by a kind of Antiperistasis
make a duty a transcendent virtue. And this was not all. Though incrochments
upon the Church be like the breaches of the sea; a thousand to one never
return: yet did he restore to a farthing all that which had a long time been
detained from the Church; and parted with it most freely; though he had as much
wit and power as any other to have continued it so, if he had pleased. And I
said Ecclesiastical Livings, though I instance but in one; because I partly
knew his purpose for the rest. For, he gave me himself this message to as
worthy and reverend a man, as I know unprefer'd in this Land; that if he would
come unto him, he would give him the first that fell; and for no other reason
in the world, but because he heard he was a reverend and worthy man. Now lay
these things to the practice of the times, wherein there is such sinful and
Simoniacall packing together, compacting, secret covenanting with the party or
friends for present money, or after-gratifications: some part of the tithes, or
his own must be reserved to the Patron; or he must be the Farmer at his own
price; or pin a wife upon the sleeve of the parson, as they contemptuously
speak, (a base also and unworthy respect) or the like such wretched
combinations to help one another toward hell: my disacquaintance must excuse
my ignorance in the terms: and then tell me if this was not a noble part in
him worthy the imitation of the best. I am persuaded in this Point, he might be
a pattern not only to all here present whom it might concern, (though I look
upon the faces of some who have dealt also very nobly this way) but to all the
Patrons in ENGLAND. Be pleased then, you that loved him to tread in his steps
herein; and the rather because your unconscionablenesse in so high and
important a point for the glory of GOD, and the good of the Church, may not
only bring upon your own heads, your houses and posterity, the curse of GOD in
the mean time: but also a company of poor souls cast away by reason of your
corruption, against you at that last and great day: who will then cry out upon
you before the face of GOD, Angels, and men; that you were the men who for a
little bloody gain put upon them an ignorant, idle, dissolute, non* resident,
or some way unfaithful Minister; (For, it is too common, that those who enter
corruptly, deal unconscionably in their places) whereby they must now perish
everlastingly; whereas if you had been honest and incorrupt, there had been
hope they might have lived in the endless joys of heaven. And what a vexing
cry in the ears of all sacrilegious Church-robbers will that be of a damned
wretch in hell; when he shall complain everlastingly, that his soul had been
saved, if such a man had not been Symoniacall. 2. His forbearing travel upon
the Sabbath in his Circuit. Whereby he wan a great deal of honor to his name
over all this Kingdom; prevailed in the same with others of his own reverend
rank; and by his example (as has been observed) wan much encouragement,
increase and regard to religion in those Countries through which he past. I
would I might so much prevail with you, as that upon this occasion you would
be content to take nearer to heart a more holy and heavenly spending of the
LORDS Day. Not only in forbearing sin, the works of your calling, idleness,
vain sports; this is but only flying evil, and privative good: but also to
ply with conscience and reverence all GODS holy Ordinances; prayer, reading,
singing of Psalms publicly and privately; the Word preached specially,
conference, meditation, and the like: and to feed and satisfy your prepared
and hungry souls with all that sweetness, comfort, and spiritual strength;
which they are wont to conveigh into humble hearts upon GODS holy Day; this
also is doing of good and positive piety. For, a thousand to one, a constant
keeper of the Sabbath is soundhearted toward GOD: and as great odds, a common
Sabbath breaker (howsoever he may deceive his own heart) is in truth and
trial a stranger to the power of grace, and life of godliness. 3. His patient
yielding, and submission to private admonition. A virtue, ordinarily as far
out with great men, as flattery is familiar. Yet in him so as I tell you.
Something there was, to which his private affection was very much endeared; and
his reputation thereabout in the respect of the world was also entangled in
some more public engagement. And yet when I in zeal and love to his soul and
salvation, pressed upon him in private as a Minister of GOD, and in the humblest
manner I could, tendering my reasons against his resolution; after he had well
thought upon it, it never went further, all was dashed for ever. Yet let me tell
you, he had formerly given me encouragement hereunto; entreating me once in
private, to deal plainly with him. And now I am grieved at heart, I did not
more in this kind. Now I would to GOD, you would imitate him in this also;
especially you that are great ones. Alas! You Will give the Physician leave to
tell you the diseases of your body: the Lawyer to show you any flaw that is in
your state: your Horse-keeper to tell you the surfets of your horse: nay, your
Huntsman the surrances of your dogs: and shall only the Minister of GOD not
tell you your souls are bleeding to everlasting death? Now GOD forbid. 4. His
taking his high place to heart. I mean his extraordinary industry and
indefatigablenesse in his judiciary employments. His painfulness this way was
wonderful even after his last sickness had seaz'd upon him. If I should
report unto you the particulars from eyewitnesses, you would marvel. And I
rather name and commend this unto you, because the contrary is cause of great
misery in a Commonwealth. Oh it is lamentable, when men mount into high rooms
only in a bravery, and vanity, and desire to be adored above others; or follow
the execution of their places, and administration of justice, only as a Trade,
with an unquenchable and unconscionable thirst of gain; which justifies the
common resemblance of the Courts of Justice to the Bush; whereunto, while the
sheep flies for defense in weather, he is sure to lose part of his fleece:
when cunning heads hunt after greatness and promotion, purposely to execute
the lusts of their own hearts, and attain their own ends. Oh! this is the
curse and cutthroat of worthy States; the bane and breake-necke of all honest
government. Formalities of justice without a real care and conscience to
search the truth, and deal uprightly, do but serve to smother innocence and
right: and that which was necessarily ordained for the common good, is through
shameful abuse made the cause of common misery. I would all the Magistrates in
the Country were my hearers in this Point; I would hence entreat them with all
earnestness and contention of Spirit, as they love either GOD or their
Country; that they would with all nobleness of a free spirit, and clearenesse
of a good conscience, take their Places of Justice to heart; be active,
conscionable, resolute; not only formal and ciphers; hunters after praise and
plausiblenesse; that they would abominate even all appearance of bribery and
partiality to the pit of hell: that they would not be angry with us when we
press and persuade them to round courses against the Papists, and dejection of
Alehouses; upon which point His royal Majesty, and the worthy Judges so much
beat; and when all is said, are the sinkes and sources of all villainy, etc.
otherwise, howsoever they may please themselves with the common applause: it
were better the Commonwealth had never known them. 5. His resolutenesse
against rising by corruption and bribery. Whereupon (as I have heard) when he
was first presented to that place of honor about the Prince, it pleased our
gracious Sovereign to style him the Judge which would give no money. A blessed
thing it were, were this heart in all. Then should we not have vines, olive
trees, and fig trees wither away in obscurity, and brambles brave it abroad
in the world. We should not have servants by insinuation and bribery clime on
Horseback, when Princes like servants walk upon the ground. And this worthy
Part in Him, was a very convenient Companion, and necessary Consequent as that
was of the former. For I^e never believe, that a Man which purposes from his
Heart to be faithful in a public Charge, will ever be very forward in an
ambitious pursuit of it. The illumination of Nature taught the Heathens so, and
therefore they condemn it by a law de ambitu. Hunting after one hie room even
morally is most unworthy a Man of honor and worth, and He cannot better
express His insufficiency, and weakness of Spirit, who is transported with
an impotent and impatient Humor this way. But now if to this ambitious
baseness there be an addition of bribery, it makes the matter a great deal
more vile, and dishonorable. Of this hateful Merchandising, besides other
infamies and iniquities, which mingle with it, it is commonly said, That He
which lives in gross, sells by retaile. And therefore if a Man would
continue truly Noble, and Worthy, comfortable in His conscience, and faithful
in His Place, if He be advanced, let him either rise fairly, or else thank
GOD, and be content with His present station. 6. An easiness of access,
affablenesse of carriage: A fair, loving, kind deportment toward all. I never
saw a Man of such worth and greatness look more mildly upon a mean Man in my
life. And yet with so grave a presence, that neither the authority of his
Person, nor due attributions to His Place received any disparagement or
diminution. I omit not even this, because even in this also He might have been
a notable Precedent to take down the haughty imperious carriage of many abroad
in the world of far more inferior Worth and Ignoble birth. For amongst all
the Sea ^asill 406. ad fincm*
degenerations of our gentility; (I speak not of all, we have many truly so
called and worthy Gentlemen) from that true nobleness and ancient Worth which
dwelt formerly in the Gentle breasts of English Nobles, this is not the least:
That they think to bear down all before them with an artificial affected
impetuousnesse, as it were, of Countenance; a disdainful neglect and
contemptuousnesse in their Carriage, with a kind of outbraving and brow-beating
of their Brethren. As though brave Apparel and a big look were demonstrations
of a Noble Spirit, whereas very often they only guild over a worthless, weak
and graceless Inside. As amongst Professors of Religion, He Is the best
Christian, which is most humble: so in the School of Morality he has been
holden the truest Gentleman, which is most Courteous. 7. His happiness in
having religious Followers. Follow Him also in this. He tasted the fruit of it
in his last extremities. For being cast by Gods Providence upon that Place in
the Country where He had not such means, and Opportunities for those last
comfortable Spiritual Assistances, which a dying Man would desire; They were
both able, and did pray with Him to the Occasion, and present necessities,
where with He seemed to be much affected, and spoke seasonably unto Him out of
the Book of GOD. Whereupon I must tell you; (Let as many profane scornful
Spirits iy be or gnash the Teeth at it, as will) Those Followers of His
whosoever they were, call them Puritanes, or what you will; Howsoever they
might miss in some complementall circumstances, by reason of those amazments
and grief which sat fresh upon their Hearts for the loss of their so Noble a
Lord, yet they did Him in those last Agonies more true service and Honor then
all the swaggering Good Fellow Serving men will do their Masters unto the
worlds end: Let them follow you, as long as you will. 8. A right conceit and
commendation of profitable and conscionable Sermons. He has been often heard
of late times reply thus or in this sense to contradictions: I cannot tell,
says He, what you call Puritanicall Sermons; they come nearest to my
Conscience, and do Me the most good. This of all the rest, I had purposed to
have pressed most upon you. If you were but thus affected, to say the least; you
would begin to look toward Heaven. But I have already trespast too much upon
your Patitience. And therefore I conclude this Point with that of Paul, Philip.
4. 8. Finally, Brethren, etc.
A SERMON PREACHED AT LENT ASSIZES, Anno Domini, MDCXXX. At Northhampton before
SIR RICHARD HVTTON AND SIR GEORGE CROOK, His Majesty's Justices of Assise, etc.
TEXT. 1. COR. CHAP. 1. VER. 26. For brethren, ye see your calling, how that
not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called.
THE blessed Apostle Saint Paul perceiving, that his preaching, and plantation
of the Gospel of CHRIST received strong and mighty opposition in the City of
Corinth, a famous Mart Town, seated between two Seas, the Aegaan and Ionian,
and so fit for commerce with other Nations, full of wealth, knowledge, glory,
and the rest of earthly excellencies, labors in this Chapter to abase, and
dishonor the pride, and vanity of all humane greatness, and to advance the
neglected Mystery of his heavenly Doctrine, and the glorious power of
downright preaching, which the great men amongst them esteemed foolishness,
yet indeed such as by which the LORD of Heaven and Earth saves those that
believe. And he so far acquaints them with the counsel of GOD in the point:
that he gives them to understand that upon the matter, whereas the noble, the
mighty, and wise after the flesh, with all the bravery and selfe-confidence
vanish and perish: Meaner men of lower rank, and more contemptible are
converted. In the words I read unto you he appeals to their own experience in
the point, and bids them look about, and view well, the work of the Ministry
amongst them, survey, and search thoroughly that goodly flourishing body of the
Church, which he had there created, and collected by his eighteen months
presence, and pains: And they shall find, that not many wise after the flesh,
nor mighty, nor noble, gave their names unto CHRIST, or became Professors of
the Gospel. But the foolish, and weak things of the world carry all away in
matter of salvation, and entertainment of CHRIST. He renders two Reasons in
the Verses following: 1. That the wise men of the world may be confounded: 2.
And that GOD himself blessed for ever may have all the glory. The words then
being plain: Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble are called, I build directly, and naturally this point upon them: Few
great men go to Heaven: Or Doctrine.
thus, Great men are seldom good. I here understand greatness according to
the world: In respect 1. Of excellent learning. 2. Worldly wealth and height of
place. Both make mighty, nay many times gold is the more powerful commander.
3. Worldly honor and nobility. 4. Worldly wisdom.

Greatness in any of these kinds is rarely accompanied with goodness, few
such great men as these are called, converted or ever come to heaven. I say
Few: for I find Divines, both Ancient, and Modern upon this Text, to make Not
Many, and Few equipollent: In Loc. Sicut non omnes sapientes damnantur: ita nec
omnes, qui e vulgo sunt, salvantur. Sed qui agnitione suae indignitatis
humiliantur, reverenter se subi^ciunt verbo, and Christum in Evangelio
amplectuntur: Hi salvantur, sive sint ex primoribus, sive ex vulgi fece. Sed
illud fieri in pluribus ex vulgo, in paucioribus vero ex sapientibus, Christus
affirmat.
Primasius, and Anselme, Calvin, and Piscator.

For proof of the point:

First by Scripture: Look upon such places as 1.
these.

1. Matthew. 11. 25, 26. At that time JESUS answered, and said, I thank thee, O
Father, LORD of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes. Even so, Father, for so it
seemed good in thy sight. CHRIST who knew full well the bosom of his Father
casting his eye seriously upon the condition of his followers, and fruit of his
Ministry: and seeing the Scribes, Pharisees, and great ones of the world, not
only not entertain and countenance, but out of their proud and profane
malice disdain, and contemn the glorious Gospel, and divine Messages he
brought from Heaven; and a company of poor fishermen, and some few other
neglected underlings with an holy violence lay hold upon his Kingdom: He brake
out into this thankful acknowledgement and admiration. I thank thee, O
Father, LORD of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and revealed them to Babes: And then ascends to the
wellhead, and first moover of all his Dealings with, and differences amongst
the Sons of men; the sacred and unsearchable depth of this (...), Beneplacitum,
the good pleasure of his will: Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy
sight. In an humble adoration of the inscrutable, and immutable courses whereof
we must finally and fully rest with infinite satisfaction, silenced from any
further search, and carnal curiosities, by that awefull check, and
countermaund of Paul: Nay but O Man, who art thou that reply against Romans 9.
20.
GOD? Flesh and blood has it old ages grumbled and repined, kicked and cavil'd
about this point; but ever at length by measuring this deepest Mystery by the
line of humane reason, and laboring to fathom this bottomless sea by the
pride of their own wits, they have become wretched opposers of the grace of
GOD. We behold the Sun, and enjoy the light, as long as we look toward it,
but tenderly, and circumspectly: We warm our selves safely, while we stand
near the fire. But if we seek to outface the one, or enter into the other, we
forthwith become blind, or burnt. It is proportionably in the present point.

Here by the way from our Saviors words we may extract a sovereign Antidote
against those temptations, and discontented reasonings which are wont to arise
in our hearts sometimes, when we see those great ones of the world, who look
so big, and carry their heads so high, not only to carry all before them, to
wallow, and tumble themselves with all bravery and applause in the glory,
wealth, and pleasure of the world, to swim down the current of the times
with full sail, and prosperous wind, though many times against the secret
murmr, and counterblasts even of their own Consciences. In a word, in these
worst times to have what they list, and do what they will: but also lay about
them with the fist of wickedness, and scourge of tongues, to trample if it
were possible the lambs of CHRIST even into the dust, with the feet of malice
and pride, by a plausible tyranny, and aid of the times iniquity to keep them
down still, and still in disgrace: hunting them continually with cruelty and
hate like a Partridge in the mountains, as the Pharisees did CHRIST: I say
when we see this, let us never be troubled and take offense: let us never be
grieved or grow discontent or out of heart. But pity them, pray for them, and
possess our own souls in patience, and peace. And after the precedencie of
our blessed Savior, go in private, and say: I thank thee, O Father, LORD of
heaven and earth, because thou have revealed the Mysteries of CHRIST, and
secrets of the saving way to me a poor wretch, and worm, trodden under foot as
an object of scorn, and a contemptible outcast, and have hid them from the
wise, and the noble, and the mighty: from the boisterous Nimrods, and proud
Giants of the world, Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. And
there staying a while, ever magnify, admire, and adore with lowliest,
humblest, and most thankful thoughts that dearest and dreadful Depth of GODS
free and incomprehensible love which made thee to differ. Which is as it were
the first ring of that golden chain, Romans 8. 29. 30. which reaches from
everlasting to everlasting, and gives being, life, and motion to all the means
that make us eternally blessed. Out of the rich, and boundless treasury
whereof, came that inestimable Jewel, JESUS CHRIST blessed for ever, and by
consequent, all those heavenly happinesses which crown the glorified Saints
through alleternity. For so GOD loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have
everlasting life, John 3. 16.

2. John 7. 47, 48. Are ye also deceived? have any of the Rulers, or Pharisees
believed on him? Here the chief Priests and Pharisees boiling with much envy
and indignation against CHRIST'S preaching, (for he preached with Matthew. 7. 29.
power, and not as the Scribes) And because the people Luke 4. 32.
so flocked after him, (for there followed him Matthew 4. 25.
great multitudes of people) had sent officers to apprehend him, and bring him
before them. Who when they came to him, and heard him preach, they were so
struck and astonished with the most piercing Majesty of his Ministry, that
they had no power to lay hands or hold upon him at all. Upon their return,
these great men gathered together in counsel against him; like so many morning
Wolves thirsting eagerly for his blood, calls hastily, and impatiently unto
them, before their officers could say any thing: Why have ye not brought him?
They do not examine them about his doctrine, or inquire whether he be guilty
or no: but like unjust, and tyrannical wretches they labor to lay hold upon
him, though most innocent, to stop his mouth, and make him sure. But the
Officers answered: Never man spoke like this man. Whereupon the spirit of
profane malice being yet further enraged in them, they reply: Are ye also
deceived? What? Are you turned Gospellers too? Will ye also gad with the
giddie multitude after this new Master, etc. And then being frighted least they
should fall from them, goes about to take them off with a very foolish
argument, says Theophylact, (though Argument^ stul^o. Theoph.
the Minor would be true, and is the sinew of my proof) Have any of the Rulers
or of the Pharisees believed on him? Alas! No. They are so blinded with an
opinion of their devout, and deeper learning: so puffed up with the pride of
their high places, so swollen with selfe-conceitednesse of their own forms and
false glosses, and so possessed with prejudice against the spiritual and
heavenly Doctrine of CHRIST: that the very Publicans and Matthew. 21. 31.
Harlots go into the Kingdom of GOD before them: That is, when they go not.

And thus it is in all ages of the Church: There is a Lecture I will suppose;
To which many of the meaner sort especially, resort for spiritual food, as to
the Market for corporal. Some of which happily wrought upon by the saving
influence of that Ministry, begins to bless GOD for the benefit, and magnify
his mercy for such means: but some Bystanders, like pestilent opposites
interpose: yea but which of the great men of the Country come to it, when do
you see any of the Nobles, Knights, or Gentlemen there? No, alas! They are
afraid of hearing of their sins, being made Melancholicke, and to be tormented
before their time: and therefore they most wretchedly neglect so great
salvation, forsake their own mercies, and judge themselves unworthy of
everlasting life* Bowling-greenes, gaming-houses, horse-races, hunting-matches:
Their curs, and their Kites: their cock-pits, and their covetousness, or
something do too often eat up and devour that blessed fat, and marrow of
time, those golden, and goodly opportunities, which GOD in great mercy affords
them in the Ministry, to make their peace with him before they go into the
pit, and be seen no more. For one hour whereof, to hear but one Sermon
after the irrecoverable day of visitation is past and expired, they would be
content to live as precisely and mortifiedly as ever man did upon earth so long
as the world lasts, but it shall not be granted. A thousand worlds will not
purchase it again. And besides, when your souls shall then furiously reflect
upon their own wilful folly in this respect, and the woeful misery they have
brought upon themselves thereby: it will sharpen infinitely the bitings of the
never-dying worm, and torment moreterribly than ten thousand Scorpions stings.
Remember this (I pray you) all ye that forget GOD: before that wrath be kindled
in His bosom against you, which will burn unto the very bottom of hell, and
set on fire the foundations of the mountains: before He gird about Him those
arrows which will drink blood, and that sword which will eat flesh; and come
against you (as the Prophet speaks) like a bear robbed of her whelps, and
rent the very caul of your hearts, and tear you in pieces, when there is none
to help.

3. Nehem. 3. 5. But their Nobles put not their necks to the work of the LORD.
Others (as you may see in that place) were industriously busy in building up
the walls, and repairing the holy City, for the wonted worship and service of
their GOD, but the Nobles would do just nothing. And thus it has been in all
times, and is just so in our days. Mean men many times contribute very
liberally, and far above their ability to the procurement and maintenance of
a profitable and powerful Ministry: but the rich, worldly-wise, and gentlemen
thereabouts, will not part with a penny for any such holy purpose. Such great
men as these will by no means put their necks, their power, and their purses
to any such blessed work of the LORD: though it be for the erecting of the
Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST amongst them: for the illumination and refreshing of a
dark and barren place with the light of the Gospel, and waters of life, where
both their own souls, and many more about them are starving and bleeding to
eternal death for want of heavenly food and ministerial help. Nay, too many
of them detaining the Churches Patrimony, will neither restore it to the proper
native use and end: nor (which is very lamentable) part with a little portion
of a large revenew in that kind toward a competency. Before you receive
encouragement to go on in this course with comfort, I pray you procure us (from
your partakers, if there be any such) Answers to those many learned Treatises
extant upon this argument, and (for any thing I know) utterly unanswered:
especially, Mr. Bernards, Dr. Sclaters, and Dr. Fields. I know well some
excellent spirits of late merely out of the gracious freeness of their truly
noble dispositions, to their great honor, and adorning profession, have given
back to the Church for ever (I mean nothing about buying in Impropriations,
one of the most glorious works in that kind (for any thing I know) that ever
was undertaken in this Kingdom) diverse Church Livings, some an hundred pound
per annum, some six or seven score, some threescore, some one; so many as
amount to the value of above seven hundred pounds yearly. But I must tell you
also, they are only such as you mis-call Puritan-gentlemen (for I neither
hear nor know of any other that stirs this way) and how few such are to be
found in a Country, every eye spiritually illightened may clearly see, and
heartily bewail. For, I mean none but such as are (in true search and
censure) GODS best servants, and the Kings best subjects.

I come in a second place to make the point appear yet further by reasons. And
first, such as are peculiar to the several sorts of greatness* all which (once
for all) I understand such secundum mundum, secundum bominem, secundum carnem,
according to the world, according to man, according to the flesh.

And first for excellency of learning understood still after the flesh, employed
also by the Apostle in this place: as appears by the former words: Where is
the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this world? Where are the learned Rabbis
of the Jews? Where are the profound Philosophers of the Gentiles? Let us take
notice that learning of it self is a very lovely and illustrious thing, which
made Aeneas Silvius in his Epistle to Sigismund Duke of Austria, say, If the
face even of humane learning could be seen, it is fairer and more beautiful
than the morning or the evening-starre. But notwithstanding bent the wrong way,
and spent upon private and pernicious ends, it becomes the fowlest fiend the
Devil has upon earth, and his Degeneratio optimi pessima.
mightiest agent to do a world of mischief. No corruption is worse than of
that which is best mis-imployed: it is of woeful consequence, proportionable to
its native worth. And the longer and more prosperously it is employed as an
instrument of all, and in the service of Satan ever the more pestilently, which
is for my purpose, does it harden and enrage the heart against all means of
grace, the power of godliness, and possibility of conversion.

Secondly, men of this world for the most part in the attainement and exercise
of learning and knowledge propose to themselves, and finally rest upon many
bastard, base, and degenerate ends: as, pleasure of curiosity, quiet of
resolution, refining and raising the spirit, ability of discourse, victory of
wit, gain of profession, ornament, and reputation, inablement for employment
and business. Thus whereas variety and depth of knowledge should properly and
principally serve to prepare, fit, and furnish the soul wherein it is seated:
First, for a higher degree, and agreater measure of sanctification in it self:
secondly, to do GOD more excellent and glorious service: Thirdly, to do more
nobly in Ephratha, and be more famous in Bethlehem: I mean, by an edifying and
charitable influence to illuminate and better all about them: The most learned
men have these worthy ends, and comply exactly with the world: hunting only
after by their knowledge, and aspiring toward (as their utmost aims) certain
second prizes: as though they labored only by their learning to find (as one
says well:) a cowch whereupon to rest, a searching and a restless spirit: or
a tarrasse for a wandering and variable mind, to walk up and down with a fair
prospect: or a tower of state, for a proud mind to raise it self upon: or a
fort or commanding ground for strife and contention: or a shop for profit or
sale: and not a rich storehouse for the glory of the Creator, and the relief
of man's estate. And so by the abuse and misapplying of it, they put their great
engine, very powerful either for excellency of good, or excess of ill, as it
takes, into the Devils hands for the enlarging and advancement of his kingdom:
and turn the edge of it to the dangerous hurt of others: and so by consequent
and by accident, it prooves a mighty bar to keep CHRIST and His kingdom out
of their hearts.

Let me in a word by an instance intimate unto you the trains and temptations
to which they expose themselves, the snares and curses which they incur, who
bend their abilities of learning, closing with the corruptions of the time, to
raise and enrich themselves; the two maine ends of the most in these covetous
and ambitious days.

First, there is a plant in the nurceries of literature of great expectation
and hope: which being watered, and warmed at the well-heads of Academicall
learning, and with the fruitful heat of Polemicall exercises and agitations in
the Schools, wherein the true worth and excellency of a Scholar consists,
grows ripe and becomes remarkable; so that he hears after him in the streets
a secret murmuring: This is the man: Dignum est monstrarier and dicier Hic est:
Now by this time he begins to reflect with the eye of self-love, and many
vainglorious glaunces upon his personal worth and public applause: and then
casts about what course to take. GODS principle and path is: It is better to be
good, than great; religious, than rich: And therefore He would have him employ
and improove all his natural and acquired endowments, all the powers and
possibilities of body and soul upon His glory and service that gave them, and
where they are more than infinitely due. And that when the good hand of divine
providence shall bring him to any place for the exercise of his gifts and
ministerial employment, he would there spend himself (like a shining and
burning lamp) in the illumination and salvation of GODS people: and so
hereafter shine as the brightness of the firmament in the highest heavens, and
as the stars forever and ever. Nay, (says the Devil) that is a sour,
strict, precise way: It is not meet, that such admired eminency of learned
parts should be confined to such obscurity, that such rare gifts and depth of
knowledge should be lost upon high shoes, and amongst a number of rude,
ignorant, and incapable clownes: and therefore he labors to raise his spirit
to higher hopes: and would have him plunge presently into the current of the
times, and become somebody in the world. Hereupon (his heart already ravished
with the pleasing apprehension of worldly glory and humane greatness,
represented by Satan in the most alluring forms to his ambitious imagination)
he resolves fearfully against his own soul, to follow the stream, to ply the
present, and plot all means and ways of preferment: after which ordinarily
every step toward an high room, or to be hastily rich, is a snare and curse
unto him: and therefore at the height, he must needs be holden fast in the
clutches of Satan. He now begins upon all occasions to disclaim all things
that tend to preciseness, and in his deportment draws nearer to good
fellowship: he remits and interrupts his care and constancy in study, and
studies how to understand the world, negotiate for advancement, and humor the
times: He merrily derides Doctrine and Use, as they scoffingly call it: all
edifying plainness and foolishness of preaching: and now he digs with much
ado perhaps a whole quarter of a year into the rotten dunghils of Popish
Postillers, and fantastical Friars, and from thence patches together many
gayish and gaudy shreds of painted bables, and frothy conceits and tricks of
wit; and at length comes out with a selfe-seeking Sermon: just like that
discourse which King JAMES compares to a corne-field in harvest, pestered with
red and blew flowers; which choke and eat up all the good grain. For, he well
knows this is the way to ingratiate himself into the times, and gratify
those great ones who desire far more to have their ears tickled, than their
consciences touched; and would rather have pillowes sowed under their arme-holes
by such deceiving dawbers, that they may lie more softly upon the bed of
security; than the keen arrows of righteousness and truth fastened in their
sides by GODS faithful messengers to drive them to si^cerity: and yet after
this, he must serve his time in serving the times: and through many miseries of
secular martyrdom, as Peter Blesensis calls it, and many shipwracks of a good
conscience, by baseness, flattering, attending, depending, and undoing his
soul. At last (if he die not in the pursuit, as many have done) besides all
these precedent miserable means, by present simony, or some other vile
services: he comes into some high place, or at least becomes a negligent,
non-resident, or insatiable pluralist. Which wicked entrance being accompanied
with GODS curse, his heart already so hardened, his ministerial strength and
vein of learning so wasted and dried up by discontinuance, desuetude, and
worldly dealings: having now attained his ends, he drownes himself over head
and ears either in secular businesses, or sensual pleasures to muffle up the
mouth of his horribly guilty conscience: cries down preaching, opposes the
power of godliness: and so becomes rather a wolf than a shepherd.

In a second place. The rich worldling also is in a woeful case this way, as
appears by CHRIST'S own words, Matthew. 19. 23, 24. which is further confirmed
by casting our eyes upon Luke 16. 14. and 1 Timothy 6. 9. Luke 16. 19. And the
Pharisees which were covetous heard all these things, and derided him. And what
heard they from CHRIST? That it was impossible to serve GOD and Mammon. So that
there are some passages ever in a faithful and searching ministry, which
covetous worldlings deride, and will not down with by any means, but
resolutely reject in their carnal wisdom as very foolish, unnecessary,
precise, and no ways to be given way unto. Especially such as these. 1. That
they must restore whatsoever they have any ways gotten, or detain wrongfully
and wickedly. 2. That they must rather themselves starve, and leave their
children in beggary, than put their hands to any unlawful ways or means of
getting: so much as to tell a lie, etc. 3. That godliness is great gain, and
that it is incomparably better to be religious than rich, good than great. 4.
That there is a life of faith which will keep a man in sweet contentment in
any estate, should he be never so poor. 5. That Job was truly richer with
CHRIST alone, than when before he was laden with abundance of thick clay. 6.
That riches are nothing, Proverbes 23. 5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that
which is not? 7. That they must leave all for CHRIST. 8. That if they part with
all for Him, they shall be recompensed an hundred fold in this life. 9. That if
they had no recompense at all in this world, yet the reward that they shall
have in the world to come, will be a super-abundant recompense.

Notwithstanding these satisfactory and uncontrollable principles, they will be
rich in the Apostles sense; after they have gotten a golden heap, will be more
rich still: and therefore are easily tempted unto, and taken in the snare of
that execrable and most abhorred trade of usury. In the exercise whereof they
still negotiate with the Devil, and receive all their increase at the Devils
hands: and therefore how is it possible they should turn on GODS side? And
that usurers trade with the Devil, and have their usurious money from him.
Hear the judgment of the Hom. Vol. 2.
Church of ENGLAND, to which ordinarily all Hom. 17. page ^.
Ministers subscribe; Verily so many as increase themselves by usury, etc. They
have their goods of the Devils gift. Hear also the judgment of the State even
of the King, the Nobility, and the whole Body of the Kingdom in Parliament;
and in that Statute whence usurers take very falsely some encouragement, as
though it were allowed; which is most untrue. These are the words in the
beginning of the Statute: Forasmuch as all usury being forbidden by the Law of
GOD, is a sin, and detestable, 13. Eliz. cap. 8.
etc.

Thirdly, though an high place be holden in the false opinion of vain men, the
only heaven upon earth: yet in truth, and upon trial, by accident it prooves
Satan's surest hold to hamper them in his strongest and most inextricable
snares, until he tumble them hence with a more desperate and headlong
downfall into the pit of hell. For, as those of truest worth are ever
timorous, and most retiring in such cases; so the worst men ordinarily are most
ambitious and aspiring. Consider for the purpose the unambitious modesty and
magnanimity of the olive tree, fig tree, and the vine: but the base and
worthless bramble, a dry, empty, Judge. 9.
saplesse kex and weed, apt and able only to scratch, tear, and vex, must
needs be up and be hoised into an high room, and domineere over others* Men of
most prostituted consciences are for the most part the most pragmatical
prowlers after undeserved preferments: and the only men to serve themselves
vijs and modis, (as they say) into offices, honors, and places of advancement.
For, they want honest wit to conceive and foresee the weight of the charge,
and conscience to discharge it faithfully. Now then, where there is a
concurrence of corrupt times, a wicked wit, a wide conscience, and a vast
gluttonous desire to domineere. What will not be done to attain their ends?
They will not stick to lie, dissemble, break their words, forswear,
machiavellize, practice any policy or counterpolicy to honesty, reason,
religion, to flatter, raise a faction, humor the times, supplant competitours,
gratify the Devil, do any thing. We may proportionably conceive the malignity
of inferior ambitions by the monstrousness of higher aspirations. Now who
has not observed (says that learned Knight in his Preface to the History of
the World) what labor, practice, peril, bloodshed, and cruelty the Kings and
Princes of the world have undergone, exercised, and taken on them to make
themselves and their issues masters of the world? Oh by what plots, by what
forswearings, betrayings, oppressions, imprisonments, tortures, poysonings, and
under what reasons of State, and politic subtilty have these forenamed
Kings, etc. By this time these men by these means are mounted (I will suppose)
on horseback, and have left many Princes walking as servants upon the earth:
And folly is set in great dignity. And what then? Then do they begin so to
swell with pride, until they are ready to burst again with overweening of
their own worth, selfe-opinion and selfe-estimation: and to toil extremely
with revengefull inward indignation against all good men: whose hearts (as they
conceive) and their consciences tell them (there was just cause) did rise
against their growing great and rising. Being thus empoysoned at the first
entrance with pride, selfe-conceiptednesse, prejudice, revengefull jealousies,
and other exorbitant and base distempers they begin to consider and resolve how
to behave themselves in their new purchased place. And we must know there is
too much truth in that principle of policy in Tacitus: Never any came to an
high room wrongfully, and unworthily: Nemo unquam imperium flagitio quaesitum
bonis artibus exercuit. Hist. lib. 1. page 417.
but he exercised his power and authority wickedly and unjustly. They therefore
pitch presently upon such conclusions as these: We will pleasure our friends,
though we prey upon the public, or pinch some peevish precise fellows, which
can well bear it: we will plague our enemies; we must above all, manage
matters with a fit correspondency to accomplish our own ends; especially to
enrich our selves, raise our kindred, make way to rise higher, and greaten our
posterity; we must look big, and sometimes amaze the multitude with some acts
of awfulnesse and terror, to procure and preserve respect, fear, and all
attributions proper to our place: and let me tell you by the way; He that
suspecteth his own worth, or other men's opinions, thinking that less regard
is had of his person, than he believes is due to his place, holds it good
policy to spend all the force of his authority in purchasing the name of a
severe man. For, the affected sowrenesse of a vain fellow does many times
resemble the gravity of one that is wise: and the fear wherein they live which
are subject to oppression, caries a show of reverence to him that does the
wrong, at least it serves to dazzle the eyes of underlings, keeping them from
prying into the weakness of such as have jurisdiction over them, etc. Beside
all this, men in great place are liable, and exposed daily to more and stronger
temptations, than men of lower ranks. Honor, wealth, worldly reputation,
earthly favors, etc. are Satan's snares to entangle and tie them faster to
their fools paradise and admired folly; and as golden fetters, to chain them
unmooveably to their noble slavery.

Secondly, great men are for the most part (and it is one of their greatest
miseries) so enclosed and beleager'd with flatterers, the basest of slaves,
with sycophants, false-hearted followers, selfeseekers, etc. that very hardly
(if at all) can any honest man or faithful Micaiah have access, come near
them, or at any time be heard with patience, especially either to tell them the
truth, or wisely and humbly reprove them for their faults.

Thirdly, those that are verst in story, shall find many and many a time this
property put upon Mallent cadere quam loco cedere.
men in high place; to be thrown into the grave, or from their greatness, is
both one to them. For first, they so delight in domineering, and dote upon
their high room as their dearest Idol: And withal they know full well, that
as in natural privation there is no return to habit, so it is very rarely
seen in the privation politic, and point of preferment; that they would even
rather die, than be dejected.

Lay now these two points together: and count all the snares from which poorer
and private men by reason of their meaner condition are happily exempted: And
no marvel though not many mighty, either in heaps of wealth, or height of
places, be converted, or go to heaven.

In the fourth place: what a strong hold for the powers of hell, and mighty
bar to keep out grace, worldly wisdom is; may appear by taking notice of
the nature of it, and so of its notoriously pestilent properties. This wisdom
of the flesh springing from the principles of carnal reason, and precepts of
humane policy, and receiving continual influence and instigation from that
old wily serpent to go on still in his and the worlds ways, does with a proud
disdainfulnesse and imperious contempt scorn the great mysteries of
godliness, foolishness of preaching, simplicity of the Saints, and society of
the brotherhood: crosses directly, and contradicts the counsel and commands
of GODS Spirit, in all motions to good, and matters of salvation: accounts in
good earnest holiness hypocrisy, sanctification singularity, profession and
practice of sincerity preciseness, the great things of GODS Law as a strange
thing: In all its consultations concludes ever things pleasing to flesh and
blood; and ends at last with extremest folly and utter confusion. Witness
Achitophel, who was wise enough to set his house in order, and yet wanted wit
to rescue his own life out of his own hands: he was curious to provide for
his family after his death, and had no care at all to preserve himself from
eternal death: was not this a madness even to miracle, Amentia usque ad
prodigium.
as Divines speak? He got him home to his house, put his household in order,
and hanged 2 Samuel 17. 23.
himself; and is hanged up in chains as a dreadful spectacle to all
posterity, for all worldly-wise men to take warning by to the worlds end.

The Spirit of GOD intimates unto us the pestilency of its properties, James 3.
15. It is, First, Earthly. Secondly, Sensual. Thirdly, Devilish.

Devilish: for, it imitateth the Devil in plotting and contriving mischief
and ruin against the glory of GODS Majesty, and Ministry of His Word. It tastes
of his hellish wiliness in close conveyances and secret infidiations, for the
undermining, supplanting, and confounding of the passage of the Gospel, and
plantation of grace in the hearts of men. Satan (you know) is ever fierce and
furious, when he spies but the least glimpse of GODS truth, or spark of grace
to peep our and break forth at any time, or in any place. When the glorious
sunshine of the Gospel did in these latter times of the world (according to
the Prophecy in the Revelations) arise out of the darksome* night, and
dangerou fogs of Popery, and begun graciously to inlighten many thousand souls
which lay in darkness, and under the shadow of death, with what strange and
prodigious rage did the great Dragon presently ascend out of his bottomless
pit.

Since that time what furious martyring of the Saints, what horrible murdering
of Kings, what bloody massacres, what invincible Armadoes, what hellish
powder-plots, what devouring of Martyrs, by that bloodthirsty monster the
Spanish Inquisition, what hateful imprisonings, what desperate conspiracies,
what a deal of hell has vexed and rent the face of Europe, and shaken the
pillars of this part of the world: as though all the fiends in hell, and whole
armies of those damned spirits were broke loose, to cast the Christian world
into a new Chaos of darkness, combustion and confusion. And all this has
been the Devils doings of pure spite and malice against the light of the
Gospel, and power of the Word. The Pope, Jesuits, and their wicked adherents
have been indeed the instruments and executioners of all these bloody
miseries, but Satan himself was the principal agent. The cursed influence of
all this wrath and rage was inspired from him, and every particular and
circumstance of all these mischiefs was first plotted in hell, before they
were acted upon earth.

2. In our own kingdom also his spite and malice against the light of the
Gospel has been notorious and transcendent since the Word of truth has
grown powerful amongst us. With what strange fury and malice has Satan
bestirred himself? What a deal of dear and innocent blood did that red
Dragon drink up in Queen Mary's time? For five years space the fire of
persecution did flame in this land, and the sacred bodies of our glorious
blessed Martyrs were sacrificed amids the merciless fury thereof: Afterward
what a black and bloody catalogue of most hateful and prodigious conspiracies
did run parallel with that golden time of Queen ELIZABETH'S life, that (now)
glorious Saint of dearest memory? But in all this hellish rage the Devil never
played the Devil indeed, until he came to the gun-powder-plot; that was such
a piece of service against the light of ye Gospel, as the Sun never saw
before; the sons of men never heard of, hell it self never hatched. Since Satan
fell from heaven, and a Church was first planted upon y^ earth, there was never
any thing in that kind which made the Devils Malice more famous, GODS mercies
more glorious, that Priest of Rome and his bloody superstition more odious; or
that cast such a shame and obloquy upon the innocence of Christian Religion.
And all this was the Devils doing of pure spite and malice against the glory of
the Gospel, the power of the Word, and the Saints of GOD. I say he was the
archplotter and first moover of all these mischiefs. The Pope, and Jesuits,
and their cursed confederates were indeed his instruments, executioners and
agents, as we well know, and some of the Priests themselves confess. See
Quodl. 7. Act. 8. page 199.

Scarce was that blessed Queen and incomparable Lady warm in her Princely
Throne; but Satan sets on the Pope Pius Quintus, he sends from Rome two Popish
Priests, Morton and Web with a Bull of excommunication; whereby the subjects
and people of the Kingdom were in a Popish sense discharged and assoil'd from
their allegiance, loyalty and obedience to her Majesty. They solicit the two
traitorous Earls of the North, Northumberland and Westmerland, to be the
executioners of this bloody Bull, which indeed was the fountain and foundation
of all the succeeding horrible plots and barbarous treacheries. See Bells
Anatomy of Popish tyranny, in his Epist. Dedic. a little book called The
executioner of justice in England, etc. I pray GOD now at length turn these
Popish murderous hearts from whetting any more swords to shed the blood of the
LORDS anointed: or return the sharp swords from the point with a cutting
edge on both sides, even up to the very hilts into their own hearts blood. O
LORD, let the King flourish with a crown of glory upon his head, and a Scepter
of triumph in his hand, and still wash his Princely feet in the blood of his
enemies.

3. This spiteful rage and furious oposition of Satan against the power of the
word, appears also by daily experience in those towns and parishes; where by
the mercies of GOD, a conscionable Ministry is planted; before, while Satan
ruled and reigned amongst them, by his wicked deputies, ignorance, prophanenes,
Popish superstitions, sinful vanities, lewd sports, profanation of the Saboth,
filthiness, drunkenness, and such other accursed Pursevants for Hell: Why then
all was well, all was in quiet and in peace. O then that was a merry world, and
as good a Town for good-fellowship, as was in all the Country. And no
marvel: when a strong armed man keeps his Palace, the things that he
possesses are in peace. Luke 11. 21. While Satan sits in their hearts, and
rules in their Consciences; he suffers them to have their swings in their
furious vanities and wicked pleasures, without any great disturbance or
contradiction. And commonly he never sets profane people together by the ears
and at odds, but when his own kingdom may be more strengthened, and their
souls more endangered by dissension, than by their partaking in profaneness,
and brotherhood in iniquity. Let it not seem strange then, when towns and
parishes where conscionable means are wanting, live merrily and pleasantly;
for, they walk together in the knot of good-fellowship, through the broad way,
they follow the course of their own corruptions, and swing of their corrupt
affection, and swim down the current of the times, and are at Satan's beck to
do him any desperate and notorious service at all assaies, in all passages of
profaneness, and offices of impiety and rebellion: but bring amongst such a
powerful Ministry, which takes a right course for the plantation of grace,
and salvation of their souls: and then mark how spitefully and furiously
Satan begins to bestirre himself; besides his own malice and machinations, he
presently sets on foot and on fire too all that belong unto him in his
instigation. They band and combine themselves with great rage and indignation
against the power of the Word, and the faithful messengers of GOD. They fret,
and fume, pick unnecessary quarrels, rail, slander, and indeed foame out
filthily their own shame, in disgracing the truth of GOD without all truth or
conscience: and il Satan spies any poor soul amongst them to be pulled out of
his clutches and kingdom of darkness by the preaching of the Word, he
presently sets all the rest upon him as so many dogged curres, or rather
furious wolves (for so our blessed Savior makes the comparison) upon a
harmless lamb; he whets (like sharp razors) all the lying and lewd tongues
in the town, and tips them with the very fire of hell; so that they plead for
profaneness, profaning the Sabbath, and many sinful fooleries and vanities
in all places where they come. He makes those who have a little more wit, his
close factors and under-hand-dealers: for that stands not with Satan's policy,
and the reputation of the worldly-wise, that themselves should be open actors
in childish vanities, and profes'd enemies to the Law of GOD: they do him
sufficient service by being secret patrons and protectors of impiety,
counselors and countenancers of the works of darkness: he fills the mouths of
the ignorant with slanderous complaints and cries, that there was never good
world since there was so much knowledge: that there was never more preaching,
but never less working: whereas (poor souls) they never yet knew what grace
or good work meant, or scarce good word: but their naughty tongues, and hatred
to be reformed, are true causes why both the world and places where they live,
are far worse. Those that are desperately and notoriously naught, he inforces
and inrages like mad dogs; so that they impudently and openly bark at, and
with their impoysoned fangs furiously snatch at that hurtlesse hand which would
heal and bind up their bleeding souls: they are like dogs barking at the
moon; for, GODS Ministers are stars in the right hand of CHRIST, Revel. 1.
16. If they would do them any deadly harm, they must pluck them thence; but
let them take heed how they be bold and busy that way, lest at last they take
a bear by the tooth, and awake a sleeping lion.

Thus you see what a stir the Devil keeps when he is like to be driven from
his hold by the power of the Word: and how he plays the Devil indeed, when
the light of the Gospel begins to shine in a place which himself has long
kept in darkness and error by those twofold fiends, ignorance and
profaneness. Perhaps at the very first rising of that glorious sun of the
Word of life unto a people that has sit in darkness and under the shadow of
death, it breeds only astonishment and amazement, they are for a while only
dazelled with the glory and beauty of so rare and extraordinary a light, but
when after some little space they be thoroughly heated, and it begin to burn up
their noy some lusts, to gall their guilty consciences, to sting their carnal
hearts, to vex and disquiet their covetous affections, then begins all the
stir, and Satan to play his part: the sudden infliction of a wound is not so
very painful, and while it is green it is not so grievous, but after, when
it comes to be searched in cold blood, to have tents put into it, and
corrasives applied, then it goes to the heart: When the sword of the Spirit
first strikes the carnal heart, it may perhaps bear away the blow reasonable
well; but if the Surgeon of the soul, I mean the Minister of the Word
follow his cure faithfully, and open the wound wider, as he sees need, apply
spiritual cor^osives to eat away the rankness of the flesh, and the poison of
sin, then begins the profane man (if the LORD give him not grace to suffer
his soul to be saved) to rage and rave with the smart of it, and perhaps with
malice and fury to fly into the face of his souls Physician.

See the humor of profane men against the power of a conscionable Ministry,
Ier. 44. 15, etc. Acts 13. 8. and Cap. 14. 2, etc. and Ver. 19. and Cap. 16.
19. and Cap. 17. 5. and Ver. 32. and Cap. 19. 2^. and 24. 5.

This spite and malice of Satan against sincerity and grace is to be seen also
in private families: if the governors of the house, the children and servants
be all profane (as it is very true of very many in most places) then they are
passing well met for matter of Religion, and were there nothing amongst them to
breed difference and dissension, but GODS service, they would never fall out:
for they are all content to hear no more, or more often of the affairs of
heaven, judgments for sin, the ways of GOD, and reformation of their life,
than they must needs: they are all willing and forward to profane the Sabbath,
in one kind or other; some by absenting themselves from the house of GOD, some
by worldly talk all the day long, some by idleness, some by sinful sports,
etc. They are well content to lie down at night, like wild beasts in their
dens, without lifting up their hearts together unto that merciful GOD which
has preserved and prospered them all the day: to rise up also in the morning,
prayerlesse, or only with formal prayers. They all join in malice against
the Ministry of the Word, in slanderous lies against the messengers of GOD, in
base and reviling speeches against the professors of Christianity. The reason
is, they are all possessed with the same spirit of profaneness, love of
pleasures, hatred to be reformed, and carnality of heart. But if it once please
the LORD to plant grace in the heart of the Master of the family; so that he
begin to plant in his house reformation, household instruction, prayer,
sanctification of the Sabbath, and other holy orders, and godly exercises; then
presently begins the Devil to stir in the hearts and tongues of their profane
servants: they begin to be furiously impatient of such preciseness,
strictness, and restraints (for so they wickedly and wrongfully call the
pleasures of grace and way to heaven) they can by no means digest such new
fashions: they will not be troubled with giving account of Sermons they hear:
they will have their recreation on the Sabbath, that they will: they will not be
mewed up at home, when other men's servants are at their sports abroad, etc. Nay
perhaps even their own children (except the LORD season them with the same
grace) may grow stubborn and refractory, and very rebellious and disobedient
to the best things: so that in a holy sense, CHRIST'S words may be there truly
verified, Matthew. 10. 34, 35. Thus was zealous David troubled with the vanity of
a scornful, proud, and profane wife, 2 Samuel 5. 20. Abel with a bloody
brother, Genesis 4. 8. Jacob with a profane Esau, Genesis 27. 41. Isaac with a
mocking Ishmael: And many a gracious heart in families where grace bears not
sway, with the lewdness, malice, and ungodly oppositions of those among whom
they live.

Or if it so fall out that the power of grace seize on the heart of a servant
or son, so that he begin to be sensible of the ignorance, disorders,
profaneness, and sinful confusions of the house where he dwells: desires to
spend the Sabbath as Christians use to do: then presently begins Satan to put
rage into the heart, and frownings into the face of the father or master of the
family: he then takes on, tells him, that such preciseness is not for his
profit, he will have no such inferior fellow to be a reformer of his family:
he will not be controlled and contradicted in his own house, he will govern his
people in the old fashion as his father did before him, etc. so that there is
no longer biding for that new convert under such a crabbed master, without a
very great deal of patience. All this, and a thousand more mischiefs are the
black broods and bloody effects of Satan's malice against the power of the
Word, and the plantation of grace.

GOD Himself is the GOD of peace, CHRIST JESUS the Prince of peace, and the
blessed Spirit is the fountain of peace, that passes all understanding, the
holy Word is the Gospel of peace, the faithful Ministers are the Messengers
of reconciliation and peace, the Saints of GOD are the children of peace: The
Devil and the rebellious corruptions of profane men are indeed and truth the
true causes of all these stirs and strong oppositions, which are raised any
where, at any time, any ways in the case and cause of Religion. The fault I
confess, and imputation of troublesomenesse is laid upon GODS children by the
lewd tongues of graceless men. See Ier. 15. 10. utterly without cause. 1.
Kings 18. 17. Act. 24. 3 etc. but these and the like are lies hatched in Hell,
and managed by the malice of carnal men. And that was most true, which the
blessed Prophet of GOD Elijah, and the holy Apostle Saint Paul answered in such
cases, 1. Kings 18. 18. Act. 24. 13, 14. and so proportionably may all
Christians answer all profane wretches amongst whom they live: It is you and
your profane families, your proud ignorance, hatred to be reformed, malice
against the Ministry, etc. which trouble Israel, are the true causes of all
Dissentions and disquietnesse, and bring upon us all these plagues and
judgments which any way afflict us. A godly Minister stands at staves end with
all the world, and has the most enemies of any man. He must war not only
with desperate swaggerers and notorious sinners, but also with civil honest
men, formal Professors, counterfeit Christians, unsound converts, relapsed
creatures, etc.

5. Lastly, That particular person, whom it pleases the LORD to sanctify and
set apart for his service, has good experience of Satan's fury and rage against
sincerity and grace: there is not a man that passes out of the powers of
darkness and Satan's bondage, by the power of the word, but he presently
pursues him far more furiously, then ever Pharaoh did the Israelites, to
recover and regaine him into his kingdom. See my discourse of Happiness, page
60.

Thus I have given you a taste of the Devils malice and machinations against
the light of the Gospel, the power of GODS truth, and the Ministry of the
Word: now you must understand that worldly wisdom is his very righthand,
nearest counselor and chiefest champion in all these mischievous plots and
furious outrages against GOD and goodness. This has been more then manifest
in all ages of the Church: In those great Politicians, the Scribes and
Pharisees; in the Statesmen of Rome; in our times, and amongst us daily:
worldly-wise men, that are only guided by carnal reason, they employ their
wit, their power, their malice, their friends, their underhand dealings, their
policy and their purses too, unless they be too covetous; to hinder, stop,
disgrace, and slander the passage of a conscionable Ministry and the
Messengers of Almighty GOD, of whom the LORD has said, Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105. 15. They ever imitate and
follow to a hairs breadth their Father the Devil in malice and practice
against grace and good men; except sometimes they forbear for a time for
advantage, for reputation; or such other by-respects and private ends: except
naturally they be extraordinarily ingenuous, and of very loving and kind
natural dispositions; or be restrained by fear of some remarkable judgment,
from persecution of the Ministers.

2. As worldly wisdom is divelish, as Saint James calls it, and ever mixed
with a spice of Hellish malice and virulency against the Kingdom of CHRIST: so
it is also earthly, for it minds only earthly things, and though that casts
beyond the Moon for matters of the world, yet it has not an inch of forecast
for the world to come: But though a man be to pass, perhaps the next day, nay
the next hour, nay the next moment, to that dreadful Tribunal of GOD, and to
an unavoideable everlasting estate in another world, either in the joys of
heaven, or in the pains of hell, yet it so glues and nails his hopes,
desires, projects, and resolutions to transitory pelf, and things of this
life, as though both body and soul at their dissolution, should be wholly and
everlastingly resolved, and turned into earth, dust, or nothing.

To give you a taste of this earthlinesse of worldly wisdom, give me a
worldly-wise man, and,

1. Put him into discourse of the affairs of the world, and the business of
his calling, and you shall find him profound and deep in this argument, able
to speak well and to the purpose, if it were a whole day, and that with
dexterity and cheerfulness: But divert his discourse a little, and turn him
into talk of matters of heaven, of the great mystery of godliness, the
secrets of sanctification, cases of conscience, and such like holy conference;
and you shall find him to be a very infant, an idiot: it may be, he may say
something of the general points of Religion, of matters in controversy, of
the meaning of some places in Scripture: but come to confer of practical
dignity, experimental knowledge, passages of Christianity, and practices of
grace, and you shall find him, and he shall show himself to be able to say
just nothing with feeling and comfort: many a poor neglected Christian, which
in the spirit of disdainfulnesse, and out of the pride of his carnal wisdom,
he tramples upon with contempt, and would scorn to be matched with in other
matters: yet would infinitely surpass him in this case; quite put him down,
that he would have nothing to say.

2. Let him come to some great personage with a suit, to entreat his favor and
countenance, or to give him thanks for some former good turn: and he will be
able to speak well, plausibly, pleasingly, persuasively, and seasonably: but
put him to pray in his family unto Almighty GOD for the pardon of his sins, and
a crown of life, for the remoovall of damnation and an everlasting curse; to
power out his soul in thankfulness for every good thing he enjoys (for he
holds all from Him) and such a wise man (which is strange and fearful) in a
business of so great weight, will not be able to speak scarce one wise word
without a book.

3. Come into his family, examine the estate of his house, you shall find all
things in good order, every affair marshalled and disposed for the best
advantage, a provident forecast, and present provision of things necessary for
their bodies: Every one busy in their several employments, and careful in
the works of their calling: but search also into the estate of their souls,
what heavenly food is ministered for their spiritual life, how the Sabbath is
sanctified among them, how it stands with them for houshold-instructions and
familyexercises, etc. And (GOD knows) in that regard, that way there is no
providence at all, no care, no conscience about any such matters.

Walk also amongst his husbandry: you shall find his arable carefully dunged,
tilled and sown: his pastures well mounded, bankt and trencht; his trees
pruned, his gardens weeded, his cattle watchfully tended: but inquire into the
spiritual husbandry at home in his own conscience, and you shall find his
heart over-growne with sin, as the wildest wast with thistles and briars: no
fence to keep the Devil out of his soul, many noisome lusts growing thick
and rank, like so many nettles and brambles to be cut down and cast into the
fire; so that his silliest lamb and poorest pig is in a thousand times more
happy ease, then himself the owner, and well were he if his last end might be
like theirs, that is, that his immortal soul might dye with his body: but
that cannot be; except in the mean time he repent, and renounce his carnal
reason, he must be destroyed with an everlasting perdition, from the presence
of GOD, and from the glory of His power.

4. Consider His care and affection toward His children; you shall find that
to be all earth: for whereas perhaps with farrelesse toil and travail, by the
mercies of GOD, by teaching them the fear of GOD, instructing them in the
ways of godliness, restraining them from profaneness, and profaning the
Sabbath, by his own example of piety and godly conversation, he might plant
grace in their hearts, and provide a crown of glory for their heads hereafter:
yet (wretched man) he does not only wickedly neglect these means of
everlasting comfort: but with too much worldliness, variety of vexations (and
perhaps for his very wickedness that way, if there were nothing else) with the
great danger of his own soul; he heaps up for them those hoards, that will
hereafter heap coals of vengeance on their heads; and purchases and provides
for them those green pastures of a prosperous state in this world wherein they
are fatted for the same slaughter, and through which they profanely pass into
the pit of the same endless destruction with himself.

5. Ask his judgment about the Sabbath, and ordinarily you shall find his
resolution to be this; that he sees no reason but men's servants and children
may enjoy some hours of recreation and sport even upon the Sabbath, especially
with exception of times of Divine Service: what would they have us to do, (will
he say) or what would they make of us? I hope they do not look we should be
Angels upon earth: they know, we are but flesh and blood. It is too true
indeed, this cavilling against the keeping of the Sabbath savours full rankly
of flesh and blood.

GOD out of the abundance of His own goodness, and compassionate
consideration of our weakness has allotted and allowed unto us six days for
our own business, and reserved but one to be consecrated in special manner,
as glorious unto Him; and yet wretched men, they must needs clip the LORDS
coin, encroach upon His sanctified time, and unthankfully and accursedly spend
those holy hours in which they should treasure up knowledge and comfort
against that fearful day, in idleness, worldinesse, and profane pastimes,
whereby besides the particular curse upon their own souls, they many times
draw many miseries and plagues upon the place where they live. This reason is
carnal indeed, this wisdom is earthly with a witness.

6. Add another out of Luke 12. 39, 40.

Thus you see worldly wisdom in all that consultation and cariages inclines
unto the earth, provides ever with greatest care for the world, and savours
rankly of flesh and blood.

3. It is also sensual: for, it does senslesly prefer the pleasures of sense
and pleasing the appetite, before the peace of conscience and sense of GODS
favor. It provides a thousand times better for a body of earth, which must
shortly upon an unavoidable necessity, feed the worms, and turn to dust; than
for a precious immortal foul, the immediate issue of GODS almightinesse, and
which can never possibly die: It does with greater sweetness and hold-fast,
relish, apprehend and enjoy the furious delights of some bosome-sinne, which it
has in present pursuit, taste and possession, than spiritual graces, GODS
favor, joy in that blessed Spirit, and a crown of life hereafter; for which
it has GODS Word and Promise, if it would be wise to salvation. In a word: it
does so highly prefer a few bitter-sweet pleasures for an inch of time in
this vale of tears, before unmixed and immeasurable joys through all eternity
in the glorious mansions of heaven: Is not this wisdom strangely nailed and
glued unto sense, and stupidly senseless in spiritual things, that though many
times foretold and forewarned by the Ministry of the Word, yet will needs for
the temporary satisfaction of its carnal, covetous, or ambitious humor, with
filthy vexing, transitory pelf, with vanity, dung, nothing, run wilfully and
headlong upon easelesse, endless, and remediless torments in the world to
come? And that which is the just curse and plague of worldly wisdom, (this
spiritual madness commonly called) it is confident that it does wisely, and
takes the best way, and thereupon becomes incorrigible and obstinate: For there
is more hope of a fool, than of him that is wise in his own conceit, Prove.
26. 22. And, Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar, yet will not his
foolishness depart from him, Prove. 27. 22. How fearful then is his case,
that to his worldly wisdom joins confidence in his ways? But the day will
come that he will see and bewail the vanity of his wisdom, and the truth of his
folly, and that with bitter grief and horrible anguish even in hell fire, as
it is notably set down in the book of Wisdom, Cap. 5.

But the word which here in James is rendered sensual, is the same which is
used, 1 Corinthians. 2. 14. The natural man receives not the things, etc. (...).

So that worldly wisdom is in that sense natural: that it can neither relish
nor receive the things of the spirit: it cannot possibly conceive and
comprehend the immediate means and mysteries of salvation: let a man otherwise
be never so fair and comely in body, never so proportionable, personable, or
goodly to look upon, and in the eye of others, yet if himself want eyes (the
instruments of light, he cannot possibly behold and gaze upon with delight the
goodlinesse and glory of this great frame of the world about him: he cannot see
the brightness of the Sun, the beauty of the earth, and the delightsome
variety of the creatures: so a worldly-wise man, though he be never so
graceful for his other parts, never so admirable to carnal eyes, or mightily
magnifi dby his flatterers or favorites: yet wanting the saving sight of GODs
sanctifying Spirit, and the eye of spiritual understanding, is stark blind in
spiritual matters, and cannot possibly behold the rich paradise of the
kingdom of grace, the secrets of sanctification, and the incomparable glory
and excellency of Christianity. This wisdom of the flesh serves the worldling
(like the Ostrich wings) to make him to out* run others upon the earth and in
earthly things; but can help him never a whit toward heaven: nay, is rather
like a heavy millstone about his neck, to make him sink deeper into the
bottomless pit of hell.

The reason why these great politicians and jolly wise men of the world (as
they are called) for all their depths and devices, with all their wit and
windings, cannot understand one tittle of the things of GOD, is, because this
spiritual knowledge is hid from them, for so says our Savior CHRIST, Mat.
11. 25. I give thee thanks O Father, LORD of heaven and earth, because thou
have hid these things from the wise and men of understanding, and have revealed
them unto babes. And this reason our Savior renders why he spoke to
worldlings in parables, and to his Disciples plainly, because to these it was
given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it was not
given. And indeed it is just with GOD, that,

1. Since they (when the glorious sun of the Word of life shines surely upon
their faces, do wilfully shut their eyes against it, that He should strike them
stark blind, so that for matters of salvation they should grope even at
noonday, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and stumbleth in the darkest
night.

2. Since they depend on their own policy, depths, and turning devices, GOD
justly turns them loose to follow the swing of their carnal reason; and
suffers them to lie and delight themselves in the sensualmists, and
self-conceipted fooleries and vanities of their own natural wisdom: while the
Moon looks directly upon the Sun, from whom she borrowes her light, she is
bright and beautiful, but if she once turn aside, and be left to her self,
she loses all her glory, and enjoyes but only a shadow of light which is her
own: so while men with humility and teachablenesse turn their faces toward
the Sun of righteousness, CHRIST JESUS, and those Stars which he holds in
his right hand, the faithful Ministers, to receive from them illumination in
heavenly things, and instruction in the ways of GOD, GOD does graciously
vouchsafe unto them the glorious light of saving knowledge: but when they turn
their backs upon Him, betake themselves to their own plots and projects,
devices and policies, and seek deep to hide their counsel from the LORD:
then they are justly left to the darksome giddiness of their carnal reason,
and walk toward fearfulness and horror, thorough the windings and turnings
of their worldly wisdom.

3. Because they are proud of their earthly policy, the LORD will not give them
prudence in heavenly matters: because they are wise in their own conceits,
they are justly given over to follow the deceitfulness of their own hearts:
with an imperious disdainfulnesse, they scorn the simplicity of the Saints,
and therefore they are justly blinded, to think the ways of their salvation
foolishness.

4. Worldly men make an Idol of their wisdom: both in respect that they
wholly repose themselves upon it, for their provision and protection, and
because they secretly desire to be admired and adored for it, as men of
extraordinary endowments, and oracles of discretion and policy: and it may be,
that they are so by their favorites and flatterers: but they must give GOD His
Word, and good men leave to censure them truly and justly to be the
notoriousest fools upon earth, because they are infants and idiots in the
matters and mysteries of salvation. Now I say, because they make an idol of
their wisdom, GOD and this earthly Dagon cannot possibly dwell together in one
soul, but in his just judgment suffers them with such doting devotion,
selfconceipt to sacrifice unto it, that they want both understanding and hearts
to do him any acceptable service.

This natural and sensual wisdom being thus hoodwinked from al heavenly
light by GODs just judgment, and by the pride, prejudice, wilfulness,
selfenesse of the owner does proportion and measure all its conceits and
considerations of Religion and religious men by the unsound and sensual
principles of our corrupt nature, and by the false scantling of carnal reason.

We may see this carnality of worldly wisdom in censuring spiritual things in
Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. See also a carnal conceit of worldly wisdom in my
Discourse of true happiness, page 58, 59.

Hence it is also that we find it to be a constant property of a worldly-wise
man to conceive or censure a zealous profession of GODs truth, and sound
practice of sincerity, to be nothing but hypocrisy and humor: an affectation
of singularity, preciseness, and a kind of odnesse from other men. The reason
is, when he looks upon himself in the flattering glass of selfe-conceipt, he
judges himself to be a very jolly fellow: thinks he within his own heart; I
go for a sufficient man in the world: the best make good account of me: Quisque
in alio supersluum esse censet, ipse quod non h^bet, nec cu^at: That which he
has not himself, or does not esteem, he accounts superfluity, an idle
quality, a mere foppery or hypocrisy in another.
I am well beloved of my neighbors: my sufficiency for wisdom, moderation in
Religion, civility for carriage, justness in dealings with men, are both
known, and well spoke of by the most: and what would you have more in a man?
Hereupon, out of this practical survey of his own counterfeit worth, and
because he is stark blind in spiritual matters, and the affairs of heaven,
he presently concludes, whatsoever zeal, singularities of grace and spiritual
excellencies are supposed by some kind of men to be in others, especially, if
they be of lower rank and less account for worldly wisdom than himself, to
be nothing but only outward shows, pretenses and hypocrisies: he is furnished
in his own conceit with a competency, if not an extraordinary sufficiency of
natural and moral endowments* and he never felt either the power of grace,
neither can possibly see or acknowledge those holy operations in others: and
therefore he cannot be persuaded, but he is fully as good as the precisest of
them (for that is the language of profaneness against grace) and that there is
no worth worth naming, or any true real goodness in those they now call
Christians, over and besides that which he finds in himself.

5. Concerning greatness of nobility, understand that by nobles I mean both
the greater and less nobility, according to Dr. Smiths distinction Cap. 17, 1^.
in his Commonweal of England: And this double nobility is of diverse sorts.
1. Personal. 2. By descent.

6. There is yet another nobility, which is divine and super-naturall; in
regard whereof all other kinds whatsoever are but shadows and shapes of
nobleness. Here GOD is top of the kin, and religion is the root. These are
truly and the only noble indeed, and so accounted by King David, though of no
account in the world at all. How rarely is the glorious image of the LORD JESUS
(which only creates this excellency) seen shine in their souls, or show
forth it self in their holy conversation, who glister in outward glory, and
are lifted up above others by eminency of noble birth, or indulgence of highest
favors. Such noblemen and gentlemen are black swans, and thinly scattered in
the firmament of a State, even like stars of the first magnitude. For, says
my Text, Not many noble, etc.

And that no marvel, for many reasons. And yet I will not here trouble you, in
telling how miserably and extremely ill those who be better borne are
ordinarily educated. Alas, they are too often brought up in ignorance,
idleness, excessive pursuit of sports and vain things: in drinking, carnal
looseness, riotous excess, in sensuality, pride, profanation of the LORDS
Day: In strange fashions, healthing, gaming, good-fellowship: in frequenting
Plays, those grand impoysoners of many hopeful plants, with universal,
profane, unnatural dissoluteness, melting unhappily the vigor of their
spirits into effeminatenesse, lightness and lust. And almost ever in a
constant opposition to the good way, the power of godliness, and strictness
of the Saints, who are the ordinary objects of their greatest distaste, jesting
and scorn: and whereas they (of all others) have best means, largest
maintenance, most time, capacity, and pregnancy of wit, and other encouraging
advantages whereby they might become excellent scholars, of eminent abilities,
proportionable to their precedence in birth: yet for want of a conscionable
care in their education, of choice for godly and worthy Schoolmasters,
Tutors, Teachers, Consorts, Ministers, and restraint from the corruptions of
the times: and by reason of their perverting and empoysoning by the forenamed
youthful aberrations, or rather exorbitancies. They pass through those famous
nurceries of learning and law, without any material impressions of Academicall
worth, or wisdom of State. At length returning many times unto rich
inheritances, and fair estates, and then reflecting upon their lost time with
late repentance, and finding in themselves neither any competent sufficiencies
to serve their Country, or to little purpose, and very poorly; norany solid
stock of sound learning for their working spirits to be exercised in, and feed
upon with contentment: they resolvedly languish and dissolve into idleness and
pleasures, as though they were put into the world, as Leviathan into the sea,
to take their pastime therein. And so at last in respect either of personal
worth, or the public good, they become but unprofitable burdens of the earth:
and by their exemplary ill expense of time, if not far baser tricks; the
very bane of the Countries that bred them, and great dishonor to the families
that own them. For assure your selves, to be well borne, and live like an
humane beast, is a notorious blemish to a noble House: and let never any be so
vain, as to brag of their birth, except they be newborn: this honor of
birth (says Charron) may light upon a vicious Page 2^1.
man, etc.

Neither will I here take up a complaint of the much lamented degeneration of
our modern Nobility and Gentry (I ever except the truly worthy and noble) from
even the civil worthiness, military valor, and noble deportment of former
times. Now adays, if a man look big, be first in the fashions, shake his
shag-haire in aboisterous and ruffian-like manner, carry himself with a
disdainful neglect and proud bravery, and with an affected, and artificial
haughtiness of countenance, outbrave others, and brow-beat his brethren,
better than himself, he is the man. But alas! How far distant is this, and
degenerating from true generousnes, and that sweet amiable courtesy and
affability which is wont to dwell in the gentle breasts of the ancient English
Nobles? I am afraid if we go on, our posterity will find in the next age the
basest generation of English that ever breathed in this famous Kingdom. Sir
Walter Rawleigh, I confess in his excellent Work having discoursed and
discussed of this Question, Lib. 5. page ^61. and seq.
whether the Romans could have rectified the Great Alexander, makes good in a
second place to the matchless honor of this Nation, that neither the
Macedonian nor the Roman soldier was of equal valor to the English. But when
were those times? When his Father sent to the Black Prince, fighting (as it
were) in blood to the knees, and in great distress this message: Let him
Histor. of Frame page 196.
either vanquish or die. When Warwick, Bedsord, and that famous Talbot, and
such other victorious English Commanders with their valiant armies walked up
and down France, like so many invincible Lions. But oh the mighty, and
unconquerable manhood and magnanimity of the ancient English! Whether art thou
gone, and where art thou buried, that we might visit thy Tomb? But I say, to
let these pass, I only lay hold upon that which is most pregnant and
punctual to my purpose. These Nobles in my text, and ordinarily in all times
swallow down so many bai^s from the Devils hands, are so surrounded with
variety and strength of temptations: so ill brought up, and so vainly puffed up
with insolency and selfe-estimation because they are lifted up above others:
They are so lined with inextricable ensnarements, by pleasures, riches,
honors, ease, liberty, earthly splendor, bravery, applause of the world, and
pride of life; that commonly, by such time as they come to the strength of body
and mind, corrupt affection obtaines its full strength and height, and
hardness in their hearts: And then, and by that time, in what danger they are
for salvation, you may perceive by well weighing the condition of this
Devilish engine, and its cursed companion, which I am wont to describe thus:

It is the ripened and actuated strength and rage Corrupt affection defined.
of original corruption that furiously executes the rebellious dictates of the
Devil, and desperate projects of men's sensual hearts: stands at defiance,
professes open hostility against grace, goodness, good men, good causes, and
all courses of sanctification: seeds upon so long, and fills it self so full
with worldly vanities and pleasures, that growing by little and little
incorrigible, and hating to be reformed, it breeds, and brings forth (as its
natural issue) despair, horror, and the worm which never dies.

And this corrupt affection is of it self, and naturally, First, untameable;
Secondly, insatiable; Thirdly, desperate.

1. Untameable. The heart of man is naturally No works, signs or miracles are
able to change the hardness of man's heart, but grace from GOD only.
of the hardest flint, hewed immediately out of the sturdy and stubborn rock of
the race of Adam. It own corruption, the just curse of GOD upon it, and the
accursed influence of hellish malice, fill it so full of iron sinews, and of
such adamant and prodigious hardness, that no cross or created Ioh. 12. 37,
38.
power, not the softest eloquence or severest course; nay, not the weight of
the whole world, or the heaviness of hell, if they were all pressed upon it,
could possibly bend and break it, make it yield or relent one jot from it
obstinate and outrageous fury in it own ways: this is only the work of the
holy Ghost, with the hammer of the Word. The stubborn Israelites were heavily
laden, with an extraordinary variety of most grievous crosses and afflictions:
there was nothing wanting to make them outwardly miserable; and no misery
inflicted upon them, but upon purpose to humble and take down their rebellious
hearts. See Isa. 1. 5, 6, 7. How the Prophet paints out to the life the rufull
and distresfull state of their fresh-bleeding desolations: The whole head
(says he) is sick, and the whole heart is heavy, etc. for the place is meant,
not (as some take it) of their sins, but of their sorrows. But all the blows
and pressures were so far from softning their hearts, that they hardened and
emmarbled more and more. Wherefore (says the Prophet) should ye be smitten any
more, for ye fall away more and more? What created power can possibly have more
power upon the souls of men, than the sacred Sermons of the Son of GOD, who
spoke as never man spoke? And yet these dear entreaties and melting
invitations which sweetly and tenderly flowed from that heart, which was
resolved to spill that warmest and inmost blood for their sakes moved those
stiff-necked Jews never a jot: Jerusalem, Jerusalem, says he, which killest
the Prophets, etc. Mat. 23. 37. Isaiah that noble Prophet, whose matchelesse
eloquence surpasses the capacity of the largest created understanding; and to
which the powerful elegancies of profane writers is purebarbarisme, shed many
and many a gracious and golden shower of softest and sweetest eloquence upon a
sinful nation and rebellious people, which was fruitlesly and vainly spilt as
water upon the ground, or lost upon the hardest slint: many a piercing and
powerful Sermon had he spent amongst them, to the wasting of his strength and
spirits; which yet was to them as an idle and empty breath, vanishing into
nothing, and scattered in the air. The LORD (as He says Himself) made His
mouth as a sharp sword, Cap. 49. 4.
and Himself as a chosen shaft; and yet that twoedged sword was full often
blunted upon their hardest hearts; and his keen arrows discharged by a
skillful hand, rebounded from their flinty bosoms, as shafts shot against a
stone wall. And that made that Seraphicall Orator, the unmatched Paragon of
sacred eloquence, thus to complain, Isa. 47. 4. I have labored in vain, I
have spent my strength in vain, and for nothing: A course of extraordinary
severity and terror was taken with Pharaoh; he was not only chastised with
rods, but even scourged with Scorpions: and yet all the plagues of Egypt were
so far from piercing and softening his hard heart, as that every particular
plague added a several iron sinew, and more slintinesse to his already stony
heart. And as the heart is naturally thus hardened toward godliness, so also
hollow toward the godly: See Saul's carriage toward David. No material weight
can more crush the heart of man, than braying in a mortar; and yet says
Solomon, Prove. 27. 22. Though thou should bray a fool, a desperate sinner,
a rebellious wretch in a mortar amongst wheat brayed with a pestill; yet will
not his foolishness, his sinfulness, which is the greatest, depart from him,
no more than the skin from the Blacke-moore, or the spots from the Leopard by
washing him. Shame an old obstinate beaten sinner with his horrible
ingratitude; show him the ugly face of his heinous sins, tell him of the
loss of the happiness of heaven; affright him with the fear of hell and
damnation: in all this he is like a Smiths anvill, that grows harder and
harder for all his hammering. Lastly, a damned spirit, though he lie in the
lowest dungeon of utter darkness, laden with that burden of sin, which pressed
down a glorious Angel of light and all his followers from the top of heaven
into that lowest pit, with the full weight of the unquenchable and everlasting
wrath of GOD; with all the heavy chains of that infernal lake; and with that
which (me thinks) is far worse and more cutting than many hels, than ten
thousand damnations, even with despair of ever having ease, end, or remedy of
those most bitter, everlasting, intolerable hellish torments: I say, though a
damned soul be thus laden, and thus heavily pressed down with all this cursed
weight, and heinousness of hell; yet he is still as hard as a stone. So
certain it is, that no curse, or created power, not the softest eloquence or
severest course, not the weight of the whole world or the heavines of hell; if
all were pressed and laid upon the heart of a man; could possibly break that
stubbornness, or tame that rebellion. This is only the work of the blessed
Spirit with the hammer of the Word.

This hardness of heart had attained a strange height even in the worlds
infancy: into what a prodigious rock is that grown now then by length of
time, in so many ages, since every generation since, by invention of new sins,
and addition of heinousness unto the old, have every one added thereunto a
several iron sinew, and a further degree of flintinesse. What a heart was got
into Cains breast, who was first cut out of the stony rock of corrupt
mankind; remorse of shedding the guiltless blood of his murdered brother,
which was able to have melted an adarnant into bloody tears, moved him never a
whit. Nay, the presence of Almighty GOD, at which the Psalm. 114. 7.
earth trembles, the hills melt like wax, which turns Psalm 47. 5.
the rock into water-pooles, and the stint into a fountain Psalm. 114. 8.
of water, (as David speaks) yet made his stony heart relent never a whit.
Nay, yet further, GODS mighty voice immediately from His own mouth, which
breaks the cedars, and shakes the wilderness, which was able with one word
even in a moment to turn the whole world into nothing, and the sons of men
as though they had never been; yet (I say) this powerful and mighty voice did
not at all amaze or mollify the un-relenting stubbornenesse of this bloody
wretch: but in a strange dogged fashion he answers GOD Almighty even to His
face. For, when GOD mildly and fairly asked him what was become of his brother
Abel, he answered, I cannot tell: Nay, further, as though he had bid GOD go
look, he faith, Am I my brothers keeper? Where take this Genesis 4. 9.
note by the way; Let not Christians think much to receive dogged answers and
disdainful speeches from profane men: you see how doggedly this fellow
answers even GOD Almighty: The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the
servant above his Lord: It is enough for the Disciple to be as the Master, and
the servant as his Lord: if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub,
how much more them of his household? Mat. 10. 24, 25.

What a strange stony heart lodged in the breast of the tyrant Pharaoh? When
the Prophet (1 Kin. 13.) cried to the altar of Jeroboam, O altar, altar, the
altar clave presently asunder at the Word of GOD in the mouth of the Prophet;
but this mighty hammer of the Word, ( Ier. 23. 29.) with ten miracles gave ten
mighty strokes at Pharaohs heart; and yet could find no entrance, could not
pierce it; but rebounded back as an arrow shot against a stone wall. Let no
man then think it strange to see many stubborn and rebellious wretches run on
in their courses, and rage against the ways of GOD, though they have both the
Ministry of the Word of GOD to reclaim them, and be many times singled out
particularly by the hand of GOD with some special judgment, for the abatement
of their fury. For, the rebelliousnesse of man's nature can never possibly be
tamed, corrupt affection can never be conquered, until the heart wherein it
sits enthroned, be crushed and broke in pieces: and this hardness of heart can
never be mortified, no created power can possibly pierce it, until the
Almighty Spirit take the hammer of the Word into His own hand; that by His
special, unresistable power He may first break and bruise it, and after by
sprinkling it with the blood of CHRIST, dissolve it into tears of true
repentance, that so it may be softened, sanctified, and saved. And let no man
marvel, that the powerfullest Ministry does produce by accident the most
pestilent scorners, cruellest persecutors, and men of most raging carriage
against the means of their salvation; for these reasons.

1. From the nature of the glorious Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, the sunn of
righteousness, which shining upon one that has spiritual life, will more
revive and quicken him: but in one dead in sins and trespasses, causes him to
stink more hatefully before the face of GOD and man.

2. From the cruelty of Satan: who lays more burdens and heavier chains upon
him; that the Ministers labor to pull out of h^s snares.

2. Insatiable. Corrupt affection is unsatiable in all it sensual pursuits for
the empoysoned,

1. Fountain of original pollution is bottomless, restless, and ever
working; it sends out uncessantly fresh desires, new longings, and more
greediness, for the grasping, engrossing, and devouring of earthly delights
and carnal pleasures.

2. When the heart of man forsakes the blessed and boundless Fountain of
living waters; of which if it should drink heartily and sincerely, and every
drop should be in it a well of water springing up to everlasting life; and digs
unto it earthly pits; wherout to suck the muddy* and troubled streams of vanity
and sensual delights; then GOD in his just Judgment makes those pits
bottomless, that they will hold no water; so that it shall seek and never be
satisfied: it shall toil and tire out it self in ways of wickedness and
destruction, and shall never find end and rest; but in endless woe and
restless torments.

3. Never was jailer so jealous over his prisoners, as Satan is watchful over
every wicked man. And therefore least he should wax weary of his way to hell,
he fails not by a secret accursed influence to fill his sinful heart, with an
unquenchable thirst after pleasures of the earth. And he does not only put
this insatiable thirst into the soul of a carnal man; but also by his juggling
and art of imposture, he gilds over sensual objects, with lying glory, and a
deceitful luster, and puts a violent, strong enticing power into wordly
vanities, that they may continually feed his greedy appetite with fresh
succession, and an endless variety of sensual sweetnesses. Satan himself is
infinite in malice against the majesty of GOD. He drinks up sin, and
devoures iniquity with as insatiable greediness, as Behemoth the river Jordan.
Of all those huge mountains, the numberless number, and purple seas of sins
and transgressions, which have at any time, any where, by any creature been
committed since himself first fell from heaven unto this hou^e, or shall be
from thence until the day of doom, or from thence everlastingly in hell, by
bannings, cursings and despaires amongst those damned fiends: I say, of all
these sins Satan is guilty one way or other: and if he might have his will,
he has malice enough to make an infinite addition both in number and
heinousness. Where one sin is committed, he wishes there were ten thousand.
He would have every sinful thought be a sin of Sodomy: every idle word a
desperate blasphemy: every angry look, a bloody murder: every frailty, a
crying sin: every default, a damnable rebellion. Now as Satan himself is
thus infinite and insatiable in the ways of darkness; so does he inspire
every limb of his with a spice of this sinful greediness, and restless
pursuit of their own wicked ways. To give an instance of trembling and
terror in this kind, and of Satan's merciless malice that way. I knew a man
which in his life time was given to that fearful blasphemous sin of
swearing, who coming to his deathbed, Satan so filled his heart with a madded
and enraged greediness after that, most gainelesse and pleasurelesse sin)
that though himself swore as fast and furiously as he could; yet (as though
he had been already amongst the bannings and blasphemies of hell) he
desperately desired the standersby to help him with oaths, and to swear for
him. Incredible rage, prodigious fury! Now if Satan be able to beget such
insatiablenesse after sin wherein there is no profit or delight at all; how
fiercely and fearfully will he enrage carnal men in the pursuit of gainful,
pleasure full and advancing sins?

You see then how the insatiablenesse of corrupt affection springs out of the
fountain of original naughtiness, from the just curse of GOD and malice of
Satan.

It is clear and evident by ordinary experience, and observation in the world,
with what insatisfiable desire and greediness, corrupt affection does feed
upon that sensual object, and earthly pleasure, upon which with special
apprehension, and delightful taste, it seazes and sets it self.

1. If it fall in love with honor and high rooms; it begets ambition, which
is an unsatiable thirst after glory, and a gluttonous excessive desire after
greatness. Of all other vicious passions which do possess the heart of man,
it is the most powerful and unconquerable. As it is superlative and
transcendent in it object and aspirations; and seated in the highest, and
haughtiest spirits; so is it resolute and desperate in it undertakings furious
and headstrong in it pursuits and persecutions. It is ventrous to remove any
let, and hardened for all means; many times without remorse or tears, it takes
out of the way by some cruel contriuance, their dearest friends, and tramples
the nearest blood, as we see ordinarily in the Turkish Emperors, to get up
into an high place, and grasp an Imperial Crown. It is victorious over all
other affections, and masters even the sensuality of lustful pleasures, as we
may see in many great men of the Heathens, Alexander, Scipio, Pompey, and many
others; who being tempted with the exquisitenes and varieties of choicest
beauties, yet forbear that villainy, not for conscience sake, or for fear of
GOD, whom they knew not; but least thereby they should stop the current of
their uictorious atchieuements, and obscure the glory of their remarkable
valor. It preferres a high room in the world before a temporal life; yea,
and eternal life too. How many great men's hearts have burst, at the displeased
and frouning countenance of a King? how many either by desperate practices or
their own violent hands have brought themselves to untimely ends, because they
were impatient of the lower places they had formerly enjoyed. Achitophel, when
he was like to loose the reputation and rank of a Privy Counselor, sadled
his Ass, went home, put his house in order, and hanged himself. How many
daily run great hazards, to domineere for a while in their undeserved
dignities? And prepare against the day of wrath, by an unconscionable
purchasing of highest rooms amongst the sons of men?

Lastly, it is incapable of society, and sharpened by the enjoyment of that it
desires. Give room to Caesar, and heel ambitiously pursue the Sovereignty of
the whole world: Let Alexander conquer the whole world, heel ask for more; let
those be subdued; he would climb toward the stars, if he could aspire
thither, he would peep beyond ye heavens. For the proud and ambitious man
enlarges his desire like hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, etc.
Hab. 2. 5. Who can fill the bottomless gulf of hell, or stop the insatiable
jaws of death? neither can the greedy humor of a haughty spirit be satisfied.
Let a consideration of that crown of endless joy and glory, which the
Christian has in pursuit; be unto him a counterpoyson to uphold his heart in
comfort and contentment against the vanity and venom of such endless
ambitions; and if men be so infinitely ventrous for an earthly crown, which (as
one says) if we well weighed with what fears, jealousies, cares,
insidiations, etc. it is thick set, if we found it before us in the way, we
would not take it up. I say then, how eager should we be after the glory of
Heaven?

2. If corrupt affection fall in love with riches, and the wedge of gold, it
begets covetousness, the vilest and basest of all the infection of the soul:
as ambition haunteth the haughtiest spirits, so covetousness lodges in the
most dunghill disposition, it turns the soul of man, that noble and immortal
spirit into earth and mud: whereas it might live in heaven upon earth, and by
holy meditation, by a sweet familiarity and acquaintance (as it were) with GOD,
and conversing above, and in that everlasting heaven of endless happiness
hereafter: It lies in hell upon earth, and by restless torture of unsatiable
greediness, makes way by it rooting to descend into the hell of wicked devils
in the world to come. This devouring gangrene of greediness to get riches,
does not only by a most incompatible antipathy, keep out grace and GODS
fear; but also by it venomous heat wast and consume all honest and natural
affection, both to man, and beasts, to parents, kindred, friends and
acquaintance. Nay, it makes a man contemn himself body and soul, wilfully to
abandon both the comfortable enjoyment of this short time of this present
mortality, and all hope of the length of that blessed eternity to come, for a
little transitory pelf, which he does neither enjoy or use; except it be for
use which enlarges his covetous thirst as mightily, as it brings forth money
monstrously.

Besides, covetousness pierces through the soul with a thousand torments, and
the riches of iniquity engender in the heart of man many tortures, envies and
molestations, as their proper thunderbolt and blasting. And of all other vile
affections it is most sottishly and senslesly unsatiable, Eccles. 4. 8. For,
how is it possible that earth should feed or fill the immateriall and
heavenborne spirit of a man? It cannot be: and the Spirit of GOD has said it
shall not be; Eccles. 5. 9. He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with
silver, etc. Hence it is, that the deeplier the drowsy heart of this covetous
man does drink of this golden stream, the more furiously it is inflamed with
spiritual thirst. Nay, it is most certain, that if the covetous man could
purchase a monopoly of all the wealth in the world; were he able to empty the
Western parts of gold and silver; and the East of pearls and jewels; should
he enclose the whole face of the earth from one end of heaven to the other; and
heap his hoards unto the stars: yet his heart would be as hungry after more
riches, as if he had never a penny, and much more: Such is GODS curse upon that
man which makes his gold his god. And this insatiablenesse in the covetous man
begets cruelty and oppression of others, and perpetual want of contentment and
comfort in that he has already. Sweetness of gain makes him many times drink
the blood and eat the flesh of the oppressed. He begins first (if he be of
power and place) to grind the faces of the poor; then to pluck of their skins,
then to tear their flesh, then to break their bones, and chop them in pieces as
flesh for the pot, and at last even to eat the flesh of GODS people. That is;
first to weary them out with petty wrongs and extraordinary occasions, to vex
them with new conditions, and unconscionable encroachments: and at last to
wring their pensive souls from their wasted and hunger-starved bodies, with
extremity of oppression, and cruelty of covetousness. And that which is a just
curse upon the covetous man; he is ever infinitely more tormented with the want
of that which he does immoderately and unnecessarily desire, than contented and
comforted with the enjoyment of those things he does presently possess. The
ambitious man, if he be disgraced and over-top'd by any grand opposite and
counterfactionist, or derided and reviled with baser and inferior contempt, or
neglected by omission of some due observance and ceremony of state: he (I say)
is more grieved, if he want grace, for some such little default in the
attributions of his place, and want of complementall respect in that measure,
and of such men as he desires; than he has glory and pomp in his highest
place. This is clear in Haman; though he was compassed and crowned with such
undeserved and extraordinary precedence and pomp; yet this one little thing,
because Mordecai would not bow the knee and do reverence to him at the Kings
gate, did utterly mar and dissweeten all the other excellencies of his new
advancement, and extraordinarinesse of the Kings favor: See Hester 5. 10, 11,
12, 13. And Haman told his wife and friends of all his glory, etc. But all this
(says he) does nothing avail me as long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at
the Kings gate. As it is thus in ambition, and in great men that are
graceless; they many times take more to heart (out of the pride of their
hearts) the want of some one circumstantiall observance, and of reverence from
some one man; than they heartily enjoy all the other glory of their place: so
it is also with the covetous man; though already he has more than enough; yet
some greedy wish of a new addition does more torture his heart, than the rowing
amongst al his other wealth can rejoice it. Ahab, though he had already 1 King.
21. 4.
in his hand the riches, glory, pleasures, and sovereignty of a kingdom, yet
after he had cast his covetous eye upon poor Naboths vinyard which was near his
palace, his heart did more afflict and vex it self with greedy longing for that
bit of earth; than the vast and spacious compass of a kingdom could
counter-comfort. He could take no joy in the beauty of a crown, and largeness
of his royal command, because his poor neighbor would not deprive himself
and all his posterity of the inheritance of his fathers, which his ancestors
had enjoyed time out of mind.

For a counterpoyson against the greedy gangrene of hoarding up riches;
consider in what stead thy riches will stand thee upon thy bed of death;
consider that speech of a poor distressed woman afflicted in conscience, whom
I heard thus say in the agony of her grieved spirit, I have husband, goods, and
children, and other comforts; I would give them all the treasures of the earth
if I had them, and all the good I shall have in this world or in the world to
come, to feel but the least taste of the favor of GOD in the pardon of my
sin: she would in this case with all her heart have given the warmest and
dearest blood of her heart for one drop of CHRIST'S blood to do away her sins.

If corrupt affections fall in love with worldly pleasure, such as are
surfeiting and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, lust and uncleanness,
unlawful sports and recreations, it begets a strange furious thirst and heat
in the carnal appetite, which cannot be satisfied, but like the two daughters
of the horsleech, which cry still, give, give; which is set on fire by hell:
and therefore it is as unsatiable as that bottomless infernal pit; every
taste of sensuality serves as fuel to increase the flame and fury of
concupiscence: We see it in drunkards, who by drinking do not quench their
thirst, and satisfy their appetite, but by their immoderate swilling both
increase the burning thirst of their bodies and enraged intemperance of their
minds. We hear it of wantons, Wisd. 2. Come let us enjoy the pleasures that
are present, etc. Let us crown our selves with roses before they wither, let
there be no pleasant meadow which our luxuriousness does not pass over; let
us leave some token of our pleasure in every place, for that is our portion,
and this is our lot. Every Carnalist feels it in himself after once he has
given the reins to his concupiscence: he is like a strong man running headlong
down a steep hill, though he would never so feign, he cannot stay himself,
but run still faster and faster, till he break his neck at the bottom: If
once he suffers the fountain of original pollution which naturally flows out
of his rocky heart, to have that free and full course: it will shortly gather
in its passage many strong and heady streams of stub bornenesse and rebellion,
until by growing by little and little in strength and swiftness, it swell
into a mighty and furious torrent, so at last fall with fearful noise and
horror into the gulf of irrecoverable misery. In a word, after the heart of a
man be set upon any sensual delight, it feeds upon it as greedily as the
horsleech upon corrupt blood, it will burst before it give over. It will by no
means part with its hold until it either be broken with the hammer of the
Word, or burst with the horror of despair. It drinks so deep and long of
the empoysoned cup of carnal pleasures, until the LORD fill it unto its brim,
full of the cup of wine of his indignation, and bid it drink, be drunken, and
spue, and fall, and rise no more, Ier. 25. 27.

A counterpoyson against this greedy wolf of devouring earthly delights;
consider that at our conversion Mutantur gaudia, non tolluntur, Heavenly
succeed carnal joys: See Iackson of Just. Faith, page 340, 341.

4. If it fall in love with revenge, it begets a base, a cruel and wolvish
disposition, and an unnatural thirst of blood: of all the sinful passions of
the soul, desire of revenge is the most base and cowardly: it ever breeds in
the most hateful and weakest minds. And of all kind of revenge, that is most
execrable and deadly, which (like a serpent in the green grass) lies lurking
in the flatteries and fawnings of a s^iring face; which kisses with Judas, and
kills with Ioab; entertaines a man with outward forms, and complement, and
courtesy, but would (if it durst or might) strike about the third rib, that he
should never rise again: When a man's words are to his neighbor as soft as
oil and butter, but his thoughts toward him composed all of blood and
bitterness, of gall and gunpowder: for we commonly see, that the basest and
most worthless men are most malicious and revengefull: seldom does it find
harbor in a well-bred and generous spirit: but as thunder, and tempests, and
other fearful motions in the air do trouble only and disquiet those weaker
frail bodies below, but never disturb or dismay those glorious heavenly ones
above: so wrongs, disgraces, and wrongful usages do vex and distemper men of
baser temper and conditions: but the causeless spite and profane
indiscretions and childish brawles of fools, wound not great and high minds.
Above all others, the true Christian which is only of a true noble spirit,
contemnes, scorns, and disdaines to be revenged upon any, though his
undeservedly basest and greatest enemy: For,

1. He is completely fortified with the armor of proof of his own innocence
against the malice and mischief of wicked men, and comforted continually with
that inward spiritual feast of a good conscience, against all the lies and
slanders of lewd and spiteful tongues.

2. He leaves them to be scourged of their own consciences for their causlesse
ill-wils against him, and wrongful dealings: then which, (except they repent
and be reconciled) there is no more certain and severe revenger and
executioner: no scourges, no scorpions can so lash and torture a man, as his
own foul and guilty conscience.

3. He is kept in awe by an holy fear from presuming to take vengeance out of
GODS hands: It is one of GODS royal prerogatives, we must not meddle with
that, or incroach upon it, Vengeance is mine, I will repay it, says the LORD,
Romans 12. 19.

4. He will not pollute so far, and defile the glory and nobleness of his
Christian resolution, as to be moved and disquieted with the rage of any dogged
Doeg or railing Shimei, by procuring temporal punishments to the spiritual
afflictions: and outward vexations to the inward woeful misery of the soul of
his profane malicious opposite: except he see it probable, that by suffering
justice to have its course, the party may be humbled, and others terrified.

5. He knows out of his Christian policy, that a courageous and undaunted
insensibility in suffering injuries, is the way to tame and stop the rage and
fury of the wrongers, and to make them to return and rebound wholly like heavy
blows upon their own pates. For, a profane malicious man cannot be possibly
more vexed, than to see himself direct particularly his hate and contempt
against his supposed adversary a good Christian, and yet he is able to bear it
away without wound or passion; nay with reputation and comfort.

As revenge is base, so it is bloody and unquenchable, and prodigiously thirsty
that way: I will give instance in the most revengefull wretch (I am persuaded)
that ever lived: It is reported of a man, or rather a Bodin. de Rep. lib. 5.
cap. 6.
monster of Millaine in Italy; when he had surprised upon the sudden one whom
he deadlily hated, he presently overthrew him, and setting his dagger on his
breast, told him, he would presently have his blood, except he would renounce,
abjure, forswear, and blaspheme the GOD of heaven; which, when that fearful
man (too sinfully greedy of a miserable life) had done; in a most horrible
manner he immediately dispatched him, as soon as those prodigious blasphemies
were out of his mouth: and with a bloody triumph insulting over his murdered
adversary, as though his heart had been possessed of all the malice of hell, he
added this horrible speech: Oh (says he) this is a right noble and heroical
revenge, which does not only deprive the body of temporal life, but bring
also the immortal soul to endless flames everlastingly.

3. Desperate: corrupt affection is strangely desperate to run headlong upon
the damnation of hell, for a little earthly delight: if we should see a naked
man in some furious mood, as prodigal of his temporal life, run upon his
own sword, or throw himself from some steep rock, or cast himself into some
deep river, and tear out his own bowels, we should censure it presently to be
a very desperate part and ruefull spectacle: what shall we say of him then, who
thorough the fury of his rebellious nature, to the endless destruction of the
life of his immortal soul, does desperately throw himself upon the devouring
edge of GODS fiercest indignation: upon the sharpest points of all the plagues
and curses in his Book, and into the very flames of everlasting fire: It is a
very fearful thing, to see a man bath and embrue his hands in the blood and
butchery of his own body, and with his murderous blade to take away the life
thereof: but of how much more horror and woefulness is that spectacle, when a
desperate wretch with the empoysoned edge of his own enraged corruption, does
cut the throat of his own dear immortal soul, so that a man may teach him
all his life long, by the blood thereof in the sinful passages of his life,
until at length it be stark dead in sins and trespasses, for how can a
soul all purple red with wilful sheading its own blood, look for any part
in that precious blood of that spotles lamb? Nay, assuredly such bloody
stubbornnes and selfe-murthering cruelty will be paid home at last, by the
severe revenger of such cursed desperatnesse. He will judge such a man after
the manner of them that shed their own blood, and give him the blood of wrath
and of jealousy.

Lord it is prodigiously strange and lamentably fearful, that so noble and
excellent a creature as man, prince of all other earthly creatures, by the
privilege of reason and enlightened with the glorious beam of understanding,
nature should be so furiously madded with its own malice, and bewitchedly
blindfolded by the Prince which rules in the Air; as, for the momentany
enjoyment of some fewglorious miseries, bitter-sweet pleasures, heart-vexing
riches, or some other worldly vanity at the best, desperately and wilfully to
abandon and cast himself from the unconceivable pleasures of its joyful place
where GOD dwells, into an infinite world of everlasting woefulnesse. For let a
carnal man consider in a word his prodigious madness in this point. He might
not only in this vale of tears be possessed with a peaceful heart, which is
an incomparable pretiousnesse surpassing all created understandings: For I dare
say this, I know it to be true: One little glimpse of Heaven shed sometimes
into the heart of a sanctified man, by the saving illumination of the
comforting spirit, whereby he sees and feels, that in despite of the rage of
devils, and malice of men; let sin and death, the grave and hell do their
worst, his soul is most certainly bound by the hand of GOD in the bundle of
the living, and that he shall hereafter everlastingly inhabit the joys of
eternity: I say this one conceit being the immediate certificate of the spirit
of truth does infinitely more refresh his affections, and affect his heart with
more true sweetness and tastfull pleasure, then all carnal delights, and
sensual delicacies can possibly produce, though they were as exquisite and
numberless, as nature, art, and pleasure it self could devise, and to be
enjoyed securely as long as the world lasts. Besides this heaven upon earth,
and glorious happiness even in this world, he might hereafter go in arm with
Angels, sit down by the side of the blessed Trinity amongst Saints and Angels,
and all the truly worthy men that ever lived, with the highest perfection of
bliss, endless peace, and blessed immortality: all the joys, all the glory,
all the bliss, which lies within the compass of heaven, should be powered upon
him everlastingly: and yet for all this he does not only in a spiritual
frenzy desperately deprive himself, and trample under foot this heaven upon
earth, and that joyful rest in heaven, world without end: but also throws
himself into a hell of ill conscience here, and hereafter into that hell of
Devils, which is a place of flames, and perpetual darkness, where there is
torment without end, and past imagination.

The day will come, and the LORD knows how soon, when he will clearly see
and acknowledge with horrible anguish of heart, his strange and desperate
madness. See Wisd. 5. 2, etc. For, after the moment of a few miserable
pleasures in this life be ended, he is presently plunged into the fiery lake;
and ere he be aware, the pit of destruction shuts upon him everlastingly:
and if once he find himself in hell, he knows there is no redemption out of
that infernal pit: then would he think* himself happy, if he were to suffer
those bitter and intolerable torments no mo thousands of years, than there are
sands on the sea shore, hairs on his head, stars in heaven, grass piles on
the ground, and creatures both in heaven and earth: for, he would still comfort
himself at least with this thought, that once his misery would have an end:
but alas, this word, never, does ever burst his heart with unexpressible
sorrow, when he thinks upon it: for, after an hundred thousand of millions of
years there suffered, he has as far to suffer, as he had at the first day
of his entrance into those endless torments: now let a man consider, if he
should lie in an extreme fit of the stone; or a woman, if she should be
afflicted with the grievous torture of childbed but one night; though they lie
upon the softest beds, have their friends about them to comfort them,
Physicians to cure them, all needful things ministered unto them to assuage
their pain; yet how tedious, painful, and wearisome would even one night
seem unto them? how would they turn and toss themselves from side to side,
telling the clock, counting every hour as it passes, which would seem unto
them a whole day? What is it then (think you) to lie in fire and brimstone,
inflamed with the unquenchable wrath of GOD world without end? Where they shall
have nothing about them but darkness and discomforts, yellings and gnashings
of teeth: their companions in profaneness and vanity to ban and curse them:
the damned fiends of hell to scourge them and torment them: despair and the
worm that never dies, to feed upon them with everlasting horror.

If carnal wretches be so desperate, as wilfully to spill the blood of their
own souls: let us set light by the life of our bodies, if the cruelty of the
times call for it, for the honor of the Savior of our souls.

Let me give one instance of dangerous snares, wherein such as these are
ordinarily entangled and holden fast, from which inferiors are for the most
part free. Let us come into a town or countrey*village, and we shall find all
the rest not so exorbitant but enter into the Noblemans, Gentleman's, or Knights
house, (if there be any there) there shall we find a nest of new-fangl'd
fashionists; naked breasts, and naked arms, like bedlams, says that excellent
and learned Gentleman, in his Oil of Scorpions. Bushes of vanity in the one
Page 109.
sex, which they will not part with (said Marbury) until the Devil put a
candle into the bush: and cut hair in the other, stirs against the Ordinance
of GOD, and nature in both: and many other such deformed loathsome, and
prodigious fashions, censured by that stinging and flaming place against
fashion-mongers, Zeph. 1. 8. And these are the more pernicious, because it were
many times more easy for us of the Ministry. I speak out of some
experience: to undertake by GODS blessing ( caeteris paribus, as they say) the
driving of an impure wretched drunkard, from his beastly and swinish sin, which
would be a very hard task, than to draw such as delight in, and dote upon
these miserable fooleries, from the abhorred vanity of strange fashions: nay,
and though sometimes they would be thought to look toward religion.

And thus I have done with the reasons peculiar to every several sort of
greatness: I now come to those which are common to them all.

1. All the great ones according to the flesh in any of these kinds: I say, ye
are all as yet deadly Psalm 24. 4.
enemies from the very heart-root to the profession Mat. 5. 8.
and practice of the holy men, without which Heb. 1^. 14*
holiness we cannot see GOD: you cannot endure to be called puritans; much
less to become such: and yet without purity, none shall ever see the face of
GOD with comfort.

Mistake me not. I mean CHRIST'S (...), CHRIST'S puritans, and no other, (...)
Matthew. 5. 8. (...).
Ioh. 13. 11. and (...).
15. 3.

Secondly, I mean only such as Bellarmine intimates, when he calls King JAMES
puritan: for, he so calls him, says D. Harkwit against Carrier, Cap. ^. page
258.
because in the first book of his Basilicon Doron, he affirms, that the
religion professed in Scotland was grounded upon the plain words of the
Scripture: And again in his second Book, that the reformation of religion in
Scotland was extraordinarily wrought by GOD. Gracious and holy speeches (as you
see) with men of the world are puritanicall. And if a man speak but holily,
and name but reformation, Scripture, conscience, and such other words which
sting their carnal hearts, it is enough to make a man a puritan.

Thirdly, I mean the very same, of whom Bishop Downam one of the greatest
scholars of either Kingdom, speaks thus in his Sermon at Spittle, called
Abraham's Trial: And even in Page 7^*
these times (says he) the godly live amongst such a generation of men, as
that if a man do but labor to keep a good conscience in any measure, although
he meddle not with matters of State, or Discipline, or Ceremonies, (as for
example, if a Minister diligently preach, or in his preaching seek to profit
rather than to please, remembering the saying of the Apostle* If I seek to
please men, I am not the servant of CHRIST, Gal. 1. 10. Or if a private
Christian make conscience of swearing, sanctifying the Sabbath, frequenting
Sermons, or absteining from the common corruptions of the time) he shall
straightway be condemned for a Puritan, and consequently be less favored than
either a carnal Gospeller, or a close Papist, etc.

Fourthly, I mean none but those whom the Communion-Booke intends in that
passage of the prayer after confession: That the rest of our life hereafter may
be pure and holy.

Now these come by their purity by preaching the Word. Now says CHRIST, ye are
(...), clean by the Word which I have spoken unto you, Ioh. 15. 3. The Word
must first illighten, convince, and cast them down: so that out of sight of
sin, and sense of divine wrath, being weary, sick, lost, wounded, bruised,
brokenhearted, (these are Scripture-phrases) and thereupon casting their eyes
upon the amiablenesse, excellency, and sweetness of the LORD JESUS, and the
Allsufficiency of His blood to cure them, resolve to sell all, to confess and
forsake all their sins, not to leave an hoof behind: and then taking him
offered by the hand of GODS free grace, as well for an Husband, Lord, and King,
to love, serve, and obey Him, as for a Savior to free them from hell. They put
on with the hand of faith the perfect purity of His imputed righteousness,
attended ever with some measure of inherent purity, infused by the sanctifying
Spirit, and after entering the good way, their lives are ever after pure and
holy. These are CHRIST'S (...), and the Puritans I mean. And these men of
purity some never mean to be: nay, they heartily hate the very image of JESUS
CHRIST in them, they speak spitefully against them, David was not only the
drunkards song, but those also that sat in the gate spoke against him: they
are your music, and matter of your mirth; I am your music, says the Church
in the person of Jeremy, Lam. 3. They will many times call upon a roguish
vagabond at your feasts to sing a song against them, whom they should rather
set in the stocks; they are transported, and inwardly boil with far more
indignation and heart-rising against their holiness, purity, precise walking,
and all means that lead thereunto, though enjoined upon pain of never seeing
the face of GOD in glory: than more Heb 12. 14.
simple, poorer, and meaner men; and that is a reason Psalm. 24. 4.
Mat 5. 8.
they stick faster in the Devils clutches than Ioh. 3. 3.
they, and that few of them are called, converted, Ephesians. 5. 15.
and saved, according to my Text.

Secondly, ye that are thus the worlds favorites, are very loath to become
fools; and therefore in the mean time he locked full fast in the Devils bands,
and cannot escape except ye be such. I speak a very displeasing thing to
worldly-wise men, but they are the very words and wisdom of the Spirit of GOD,
1 Cor. 3. 18. Let no man deceive himself: if any man among you seems to be
wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

Let no man deceive himself; such caveats as this are wont to be premised when
men out of their carnal conceits are peremptory to the contrary, and would
venture their salvation (as they say) that it is not so. See Ephesians. 5. 6. 1
Cor. 6. 9. Mat. 5. 2. And did not most of your hearts rise against these words
of mine (you must become fools, or never be saved) until I brought Scripture?
Give me here leave (I pray you) to intimate in a few instances the meaning of
the place, and the truth of your false and selfe-couzening hearts in
obnoxiousnesse to the point. Suppose a messenger of GOD should deal faithfully
with you, and tell you, that upon the LORDS Day you must not serve yourselves,
and your own turns, in idleness, travailing, sports, gaming: in any earthly
business, or mis-imployment whatsoever: but spend that whole blessed Day
wholly and only in spiritual refreshing, heavenly businesses, divine worship,
and holy duties: in meditation upon the creatures spiritually, upon the great
work of redemption and resurrection of CHRIST: and upon that everlasting rest
above: of all which the Christian Sabbath is a remembrancer unto us, in both
public and private prayer, reading, singing of Psalms, hearing Sermons,
conference, etc. and in ruminating, and (as it were) chewing the cud upon
Scripture points. I say, ruminate (as it were) and chew the cud: for, it is the
very phrase of the Church of England in the Homily for reading Scriptures. And
those reverend and godly men which composed them, express the benefit thereof
emphatically: Thus run the words; Let us ruminate of the Scriptures sc.) that
we may have the sweet juice, spiritual effect, marrow, honey, kernel, taste,
comfort, and consolation of them. I say, suppose ye were thus pressed, would ye
not presently out of your worldly wisdom and impatiency to be so snaff^d at,
to be tied all the day to spiritual exercises, and restrained from ordinary
recreations, conceive of it, and cry out against it as a puritanicall novelty,
and foolish preciseness? Because you mention preciseness and novelty; I could
(as I am wont, and to make you without excuse) appeal unto, and implore the
aid of antiquity, which will utterly take off such aspersions. And here (were
it incident and seasonable) I were able to procure Councels, and Fathers, and
other authorities concurrently to testify and take my part, that upon the
LORDS Day, we are to recreate our selves only with spiritual delights: only
then to ply divine businesses, and to do those things alone which belong to our
souls salvation. Hear their own words.

We ought upon that Day, Solummodo spiritualibus gaudijs repleri. Concilium
Parisiense. Anno 829.

Tantum divinis cultibus serviamus. August. de Temp. Sermon. 251. Soli divino
cultui vacemus. Idem Ibid.

Eaque tantum faciat quae ad animae salutem pertinent. Hierom. in Cap. 56. Isa.

Nay the whole Church of England has this threescore years and above complied
exactly with antiquity in this point in the Hom. of the place and time of
prayer: These are the words, GODS people should use the Sunday holily, and rest
from their common and daily business: and also give themselves wholly to
heavenly exercises of GODS true religion and service. And yet for all this, you
are so wise in your own conceits; ye will none of this saving folly, you are
no such fools, as after so long liberty to fall ^o any such strictness.

Secondly, suppose a Minister should counsel you when you come home from the
house of GOD, to take your Bibles, and call both your wives and children to the
comparing together, and conferring upon those things which were taught: That
the husband should exact of the wife, and the wife ask of the husband those
things that were there spoken and read, or at least some of them: That you
should set this law to your selves to be kept inviolably, and not only to your
selves, but also to your wives and children: that you would spend that one
whole Day of the whole week, whereon you meet to hear the Word, in meditation
of those things which are delivered: I say now in this case your carnal
wisdom would resolutely condemn such counsels, as contrary to the counsel
of great houses, as a way to become a Byword to the whole Country, and as
savoring too rankly of a foolish strictness, and needless singularity. And
yet this was totidem verbis, wise, holy advise above twelve hundred years
ago: For it giving the counsel, I have but rendered Chrysostom word for word
in diverse places. Hom. 5. in Matthew. In Ephesians. Sermon. 20. Hom. 2. in Joan. Hom. 5.
ad Popul. Antioch.

Thirdly, If Preachers should press you to plant, and preserve Family Duties
in your house, Prayer, and reading Scriptures, evening, and morning, Singing of
Psalms, etc. and you of greatest means may best spare time for such blessed
businesses. Would not your wisdoms think this more then need: And that it
would be a foolish thing, and much against your profit, to rob your selves,
and servants of so much time from your worldly affairs? And yet here I could
produce four or five Fathers above a thousand years ago, pressing this point,
and punctual for my purpose. Besides Ambrose quoted in my Book of Walking with
Quid beatius esse poterit, quam in tetra tripudium Angelorum i^ mitari, mox
orto die ad precationes properantem, hymnis and odis venerari Creatorem. etc
Basil. Epist. 1. Docens and admonens, atque formam ostendens, and tunc filijs
suis; and tunc omnibus nobis in perpetuum; ut confestim diluculo ex noctis
requie exsurgentes; ante omne opus* vel verbum, ante omne colloquium, vel
conventionem, primitias resurrectionis nostrae Deo exhibeamus in sinceris
orationibus, atque precibus* in matutinis deprecationibus, atque gratiarum
actionibus. Origin lib. 1. In Job sol. 7. A mensa non ad lectum, sed ad
deprecationem vertamur, ne brutis animantibus simus magis bruti* Novi fore
multos, qui damnent ea, quae nunc dicuntur, veluti qui novam quandam and miram
consuetudinem inveham concionandi; At ego magis damnabo pravam consuetudinem,
quae nunc obtinuit. E^enim quod post cibum, and mensam non ad somnum oporteat
ire, nec ad cubile* sed oporteat cibo preces, ac divinarum Scripturarum
lectionem succedere, manifestius declaravit ipse Christus, qui quum immensam
multitudinem accepisset convivio in deserto, non remisit illos ad lectum, aut
somnum, sed ad audiendos sermones divinos invitavit. Chrysostom. conc. 1. De
Lazaro. Nec solum vobis sufficiat quod in Ecclesia divinas lectiones auditis;
sed etiam in domibus vestris, aut ipsi legite, aut alios legentes requirite,
and libenter audite. August. de Tem. Sermon. 55. Page ^77.
God, page 67. Here other Fathers, Basil, Origin, Chrysostom, August.

Fourthly, If you were moved by the Ministry, to restore every half penny
that you have any ways, at any time got wrongfully, or by any wicked means,
or that you detain unjustly from any man: And then casting your eye back, and
considering, How you are grown hastily rich, and by what ways you are come to
a great deal of wealth, should find very foul works: would you not force
your selves by a strong counter-plea of carnal reason, not to believe the
point, and think it extreme madness at the instance, and prating of a
precise companion, which understands not the world (for so or in the like
manner would you speak) to part perhaps with a good part of your estate? And
yet Austins Rule of above twelve hundredth years standing, and confirmed
concurrently by all Divines to this day, is, That Non tollitur peccatum
nisirestituatur ablatum; No restitution, no remission. And our own Church tells
us in the second exhortation before the Communion: That without readiness to
make restitution, and satisfaction for wrongs done, the Sacrament as often as
you come, does nothing else but increase your damnation.

Thus might I pass through all the points of Sanctification, and passages of
holy life: And all the great men of the world, either in Learning, Wealth,
Nobility, or Wisdom according to the flesh, would pass these censures upon
them, and entertain conceits of them proportionable to that of Nicodemus about
the New Birth. They will not become fools in the Apostles sense: And therefore
they are soakt, and fast fettered in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity; and that above ordinary.

Thirdly, All ye great ones of the world in the sense I have said, As ye are
very wise in your own conceits, and it may be truly so according to the flesh,
so you are selfe-conceited, and soule-couseners about your spiritual state.
For you think all better then you, too precise, and all worse then you too
profane; and your selves only to have happily hit upon the golden mean; and
pitch upon that well-tempered moderation in Religion, whereby you may enjoy
temporal happiness here, and eternal hereafter. Sleep in a whole skin (as
they say) and with a good conscience: Live the life of pleasures, and die the
death of the righteous. Whereas to be so conceited, is the very complement and
perfection of folly: And the very same attempt as to make two parallel lines to
meet. You think ye have a reach beyond the Moon: To lie in some sweet
sin, and yet to nourish in your selves some hope of salvation. To have two
heavens, one in this world, and another in the world to come, which was never
heard of: to wear two crowns of joys: whereas JESUS CHRIST himself had the
first of thorns. But alas! Beloved, if you be saved in this condition, you
must have a new Scripture, and there must be found out another way to heaven,
then any of the Saints ever went since the Creation or shall do to the end of
the world. And therefore we may say of you as Quintilian some where, of some
deluded with an overweening conceit of themselves. That they might have prooved
excellent Scholars if they had not been so persuaded already: So if you did
not think falsely, your selves safe already, you might be saved. But while you
thus hug the golden dream of your mistaken states to Godward like the
Pharisees, the very Publicans and Harlots shall go into the Kingdom of heaven
before you, Matthew. 21. 31.

Fourthly, you that are great in the world in the four forenamed respects, and
meant in the Text; cannot possibly down with, and digest downeright dealing
and the foolishness of preaching as it is called, verse. 21. And that utterly
undoes you. You like well enough, nay and much approve, and applaud such
Sermons as King JAMES censures, in the reasons of his directions for preaching,
etc. which he there calls a light, affected, and unprofitable kind of preaching,
which has been of late years (says he) taken up in Court, University, City,
and Country, -- whereby the people are filled only with ayrie nourishment,
etc. and I warrant you, not especially hating to be reformed or disquieted, for
these are not wont to discover your consciences, nor disturb you in your
present courses, they never terrify you with any forethought of the evil day,
neither torment you before the time: but now let a man come with the
foolishness of preaching, by which it pleases GOD (says the Apostle) to save
them that believe, with demonstration of the Spirit, and of power, and come
home to the conscience: if he suffer not Satan to revell in the blood of your
souls without resistance, nor see you post furiously toward eternal fire,
but will tell you that the pit of hell is a little before you: In a word, if he
take the right course to convert you, and show you therefore only your
spiritual misery, that you may be fitted for mercy, etc. O such a fellow is a
dangerous man, a terrible and intolerable Teacher, able to drive men to
distraction, despair, selfe-destruction; he breaths out nothing but damnation,
and his searching Sermons are as scorching as the very flames of hell! Fit
phrases for the Devil himself, railing in a drunkard, or scoffing Ishmael
against faithfulness in preaching; and if you know where or when such men
preach, (and it may be you entertain some intelligence for that purpose to
prevent the torture) you will not, you dare not hear them for your hearts,
except you cannot decline it for stark shame; or for a time or two to satisfy
your curiosities, but as S. Paul says, you become their enemies, because they
tell you the truth: to which truth not to have listened in this day of your
visitation, will herafter (when it is too late) torment you more than ten
thousand fiery Scorpions stings, and gnaw upon your consciences with unknown
and everlasting horror. Alas! Beloved, what mean you? You will give your
Physician leave to tell you the distempers of your body: the Lawyer to discover
unto you any flaw in your deeds: your horse-keeper to tell you the surfets of
your horses: nay, your hun^sman the surrances of your dogs: and shall only the
Minister of GOD not tell you that your souls are bleeding to eternal death?
Preposterous and prodigious incongruity!

If it be thus then, that of all the several sorts of Vsex.
great men mentioned before (by reason that they are beset with such variety of
snares, entangled in so many temptations, so much taken up by the world, and
for other reasons rendered already) very few are called, converted and saved, my
counsel in a word unto all such, is CHRIST'S own word, Luke 13. 24. Strive to
enter in at the strait gate, lay violent hands upon flesh and blond, strangle
your lusts, contend and (...).
wrestle as for the Garland in the Olympian Games, to which the word seems to
allude, become fools in the worlds censure, that you may be wise in the
mystery of CHRIST; be little and vile in your own esteem, that you may be
great and gracious in the eyes of GOD. In a word, submit your souls to the
sword of the Spirit, and foolishness of preaching, (as the Apostle calls it)
that you may be wrought upon savingly, and brought into the good way, and that
by such works, and ways as these.

Upon which before I enter, give me leave to give you an account, why at this
time I labor rather to work upon your consciences for your personal
conversion, than as heretofore to tender unto you counsels and considerations,
for a more conscionable deportment in your several public places. When I well
weighed with my self, the truth of that principle and position in Hooker, That
it is no peculiar conceit, but a matter of sound consequence, that all duties
are by so much the better performed, by how much the men are more religious,
from whose abilities the same proceed. And finding by experience of all ages,
and most of all in these worst and woeful times, that men of public employment
and in high places, until there be infused into their souls by the Spirit of
grace an internal supernatural principle and divine habit to work by, until
aliquid CHRISTI (as they say) be planted in them by the power of the Ministry,
they cannot possibly be universally through, and unshaken. Some strong
affection, fear, favor, or some thing, will make them fly out and fail in
some particular very fowly. Upon extraordinary temptation they will serve the
times, and their own turns: for* alas! as yet their spirits are not steeled
with that heavenly edge, and mighty vigor, as to set to their shoulders
against the torrent of the times, and not to be overflowen with it. I say, upon
this ground I have advisedly chosen to assay and follow this way at this time:
for, if once you turn on the LORDS side in truth, you are won for ever to an
invincible constancy, and conscionablenesse in an uniforme, regular and
religious discharge of your public duties: and will ever hold fast without
partiality, cowardlinesse, or fear of man's face, that brave and noble
resolution, Vt fiat justitia, ruat coelum, let heaven and earth be blundred
together with horrible confusision, before I make shipwreck of a good
conscience, or be any ways drawn to do basely. Being incorporated into the
rock of eternity JESUS CHRIST blessed for ever, you will stand (like
unmooveable rocks) against the corruptions of the times, and all ungodly
oppositions; and never before. For, in the mean time (say Ministers what they
will) you will not be moved; but you hear our discourses of a faithful
discharge of your places, as ye would hear a very lovely song of one that has
a pleasant voice; they leave no more impression upon your consciences, than a
sweet lesson upon the Lute in the ear, when it is ended; for, then both the
vocal and isntrumental sweetness dissolve into the air, and vanish into
nothing: It is too truly so with our Sermons upon your souls. Hear your
character in GODS own words unto the Prophet; They come unto thee, as the
people comes, and they sit before me as my people, and they hear thy words,
but they will not do them: for with their mouth they show much love, but their
heart goes after their covetousness: and lo, thou art unto them, as a very
lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
instrument: for, they hear thy words, but they do them not. Let us lift up our
voices never so high, or cry never so loud: and ^ll Judges, That they ought not
to be afraid Deuteronomy 1. 17
of the face of man, for the judgment is GODS: that in judgment, they must
neither respect the person of the (...) it. 19. 15.
poor, nor honor the person of the mighty: that they should not only hold
their hands from gross bribes with Epaminondas, who (as the story tells us)
refused (...). chron. sol. ^7.
great presents sent unto him, although he was poor, saying, If the thing were
good, he would do it without any bribe, because good: if not honest, he would
not do it for all the goods in the world. But they must also be of Austins
judgment, that not only money, gold and silver, or Psalm. 25.
presents (as they call them) are bribes; but the guilt Page 144.
of bribery also may be justly imputed, even to any exorbitant affection, which
sways a man aside from an impartial execution of justice: as love, fear,
hatred, anger, pusillanimity, worldliness, desire of praise and applause,
which is Austins instance, etc. That they beware of bringing more blood upon
the Law by sparing the spiller of blood. For ble^d (says GOD) it desileth the
land: and the land cannot be clea^sed of the blood that is shed therein, but by
the blood of him that shed it: that they must not look upon the ca^ses which
come before them only through the spectacles of a favorite, etc, and tell
Justices of Peace, that they must be truehearted patriots, and not servers of
themselves, and their own turns: that they must be serious, real, and grave;
not only formal, not ciphers, not unnobly light in their behavior on the
Bench: that they must ever aim at the public good, and never at their own
particular and private ends: that they should disdain and scorn at any time
to combine factiously, or for a petty bribe to uphold a rotten cause,
apestilent alehouse, or lewd companion; and ever join with an unanimous
magnanimity to honor GOD, and do their Country good. And tell the Lawyers,
that they should not make have to be rich, for so says Solomon, they shall not
be innocent, nor swallow down gold too greedily, least it turn to gravel,
and the gall of asps within them; and they be enforced to vomit up the riches
(as Job speaks) they have heaped together so hastily, either by remorse and
restitution in the mean time, or with despair, and impenitent horror here
after: that to oppose and wrangle against a good cause, or undertake the
defense of a bad; are both equally most unworthy the very moral virtue of an
honest Heathen; that they must not learn to spin out the causes of their
clients from Term to Term, and wire-draw their suits until they be utterly
undone; that they should not now be taking instructions from their clients,
when they should themselves here in the House of GOD be instructed to the
kingdom of heaven: had they this morning received a message from the Almighty,
that at night they should appear before that high and everlasting Judge to
give an account for all things done in the flesh; if they be not Atheists, or
Papists, O with what eagerness and violence would they have attended, addressed,
and applied themselves to the present opportunity! and little do we know what
the evening may bring forth. For, assure your selves, there is no man so
assured of his riches, or life, but that he may be deprived of one or both the
very next day or hour to come. And tell the jurors and sworn-men, that they
should rather die than draw the blood of any man's life, livelihood, or good
name upon their own consciences, either by acqui^ting the guilty, or betraying
the innocent. Here (had I time) I would intimate unto you a mystical, but
mischievous packing sometimes in choice of j^ry-men. I have seen (I speak of
that which was long since, and at a Sessions) some of the choicest drunkards in
a Country chosen for that service. Now is it not a pitiful thing, that Country
businesses should be put into the hands of such as labor industriously, and
with equal cunning, to plague an honest man, and deliver a drunkard? I say
now, all this while, we thus discourse unto you, earnestly endeavoring, and
with a thirsty desire to do you good, and direct you aright, and by a divine
rule in the several duties proper to your places: we do but plow in the sea,
and sow in the air (as they say) except the immortal seed of the Word has
first molded you anew, and ye be brought by the foolishness of preaching out
of the warm sun into GODS blessing, and from the fools paradise of worldly
wisdom, into the holy path of sincere professors; and thereupon prize and
prefer the peace of a good conscience before all the gold in the West, and
preferments in the world; which blessed change from nature to grace, is wrought
by such stirrings of the soul, and footsteps of the spirit as these: lend me,
I beseech you, (while I pass along them) something more than ordinary
attention: for, I know they will seem strange things to all such great ones as
are intended in my Text, and those who live at rest in their possessions, and
have nothing to vex them. The natural stoutnesse of their spirits will
disdain and scorn to stoop to such uncouth humiliations, and this mighty
change. And the more they are men of the world, and wise according to the
flesh, the greater repugnancy and reluctation shall they find in their
affections against these spiritual workings, which makes the point good which
was proved before. But yet without them in truth and effect (I define not the
measure and degree, GOD is a most free agent) they can never become either
gracious men, or good Magistrates. They must upon necessity become such fools,
or they can never be wise unto salvation.

1. If any of you then would come out of Satan's clutches into the arms of
CHRIST, he must be illightened, convinced, and cast down with sight, sense,
and trouble for sin, as in my art of comforting afflicted consciences I have
showed.

2. Secondly, the point may teach us not to be greedy of greatness, nor hunt
ambitiously after high rooms.

3. The point may serve as a sovereign antidote against all discontent or
fretting, when we see men of the world carry all before them, etc. We may
entertain an holy indignation to see folly set in great excellency, so many
servants on horseback, and Princes walking as servants upon the ground. But I
am prevented by the time from prosecuting these two latter Uses. Let me briefly
say two things more, and I have done.

1. The first concerning what I have said: I have spoken much (as you have
heard, my Text naturally and directly leading me thereunto) of the true misery,
and spiritual madness of all great men in learning, wealth, nobility, wisdom
according to the flesh. Least any be unjustly angry, and mistake, or caussesly
grumble and gainsay, let me take up the words of that ancient holy Father
Salvianus about a thousand years ago in the like case. He having impartially
discovered the horrible impieties of the noble and rich men in those corrupt
times, tells them by the way, and it is my just apology at this time. I do not
(says he) speak thus of any, but only such as know these things to be in
themselves. If their consciences be free, nothing that I say tends to their
disparagement and disgrace: but if they know themselves to be guilty, let them
know also, that they are not my words, but their own consciences which vex
them. And in another place thus. Since I speak not these things of all, but
those who are such, none of you ought to be angry at all, which finds not
himself to be obnoxious; least thereby he make himself seem, and be
suspected to be of the number of those that are naught. Rather let so many as
being guiltless and truly noble, abhor such unworthy courses, be angry with
them who disgrace the name of Nobility by their base and wicked behavior:
because although others be much worse, and scandalized by them, yet especially
they bring a great deal of shame and dishonor upon those who are of the same
noble rank. Take notice by the way, that by the Fathers words, those men are
much too blame, who go about to dawbe over the disorders, and smother up the
scandalous exorbitancies of delinquents in their own profession, or to be
concurrents for their deliverance from deserved shame and punishment. To give
instance in the highest calling: A Minister which falls to drunkenness, and
ale-house-haunting, should rather be publicly shamed and censured, than a
fellow of an inferior calling. We do not honor the Ministry by having our
hands in helping out such, but by disclaiming, and not owning them; well may we
by so meddling incur suspicion of obnoxiousnesse: but never bring credit to
our so holy a calling. I knew a Knight did penance at Pauls-Crosse, but at the
same time I heard that many of his rank in the City labored to have him
dis-knighted first, before he so publicly disgraced their order. Me thinks all
wellminded should be so minded. 2. The other is to my Lords the Judges. My
reverend and noble Lords, give me leave to cloth the thoughts of the Country
in a word or two. We much rejoice in you, and bless GOD for you, as men of
singular and known integrity, special friends to the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST,
and a great honor, and happiness to these parts, and heartily pray that we
may hold you still: and therefore my entreaty unto your Lordships is, that you
would courageously advance forward, and do like your selves, and nobly still.
Draw our your dreadful swords against the torrents of Belial, as David calls
them, which even threaten a deluge; and be your selves as mighty torrents,
armed both with j^st and holy laws, and the godly resolutions of your own
noble spirits, to bear back, and beat down the common crying, and reigning
sins of our Country. In a word, be unto the oppressed and innocent as a refuge
from the storm, but as a terrible tempest upon the face of every humane beast,
and son of Belial. And O that you could help us, that GODS people might not
perish for want of bread: Is it not a pitiful thing, that in such a dear
year specially, it should be almost as hard a work to get down a wicked
alehouse, as to win Dunkerke? That Maultsters should snatch (as it were) the
grain from the mouths of the poor in the market place, to uphold these
hell-houses, these nurceries of the Devil: that Magistrates should be so
unmercifull, as neither for GODS sake, nor the Kings sake, nor the poores sake,
nor their own souls sake to take the utmost penalties for blasphemies, ale
house-hauntings, drunkenness, and prophanations of the LORDS Day? And were it
not an honorable course, and worthy to have an universal contribution over
the Country to pull down something the excessive prizes in market-townes for
the poor thereabouts, during this extremity? But I leave it to your Lordships
charitable wisdom to do the best you can possibly; that the blood of the poor
this year be not added to the already crying sins of the Kingdom, to hasten
GODS judgments upon us, and our long since deserved ruin. And in the mean
time you need not fear the face of the proudest Devil, whether incarnate, or
in his own shape. For, while you thus advance GODS glory, and truly honor the
King, assure your selves, the hearts, and tears, and prayers of all good men
shall be for you, and yours shall be the crown and comfort; when all profaneness
and profane opposites to the good way, all the enemies of GOD, and pestilent
packings and complotments of the Devils agents against GODS people, shall be
buried in hell.
FINIS.

