A treatise of ye right honourynge and wourshyppyng of our savior Jesus
Christ in the sacrament of bread and wine, when it is ministered with thanks
giving at the holy supper: set forth by Richard Bonner priest, in ye year
of our lord god. M. ccccc xlviii. and the.xii. of November.

John.iiii. The hour comes and is now when trwe worshippers, shall worship
the father in spirit and veryte, for the father seeks such, yt may worship
him.

printer's device of N. Hill, a compartment with the blazon or coat of arms of
Queen Mary I at the base, the winged female personification of Victory seated
with a palm branch and laurel wreath at the top, the female personification of
Justice standing with a sword on the left, and the female personification of
Prudence standing holding a snake by the neck to the right (not in McKerrow)
DIEV ET MON DROYT
VICTORIA

IVSTITIA

PRVDENTIA



To the right reverend father in God / Thomas, archebysshop of Canterbury, and
of all England Metropolitan, Richard Bo^ner wyssheth grace and peace in our
savior Jesus Christ, with the increase of all godly knowledge.
IN as much, right virtuous father, as god has not only called you for long
(as many men have well perceived) to such a knowledge of his most holy word,
as did stir up in you both a great reverence toward the same, and cause you
right earnestly to desire to have it trewly taught and set forth to the glory
of god in all places, but specially amongst us his people, of this your native
country: but has also, after it has now pleased him to offer the same freely
unto us, called you to have the oversight thereof, I have thought it not only
mete, but therwythal my bound dew tie to present this my poor work unto your
faithful dyscretion. And not because I did either judge any thing to be in it
which I would declare unto you, as if you were ignorant of the same, or else
that I feared you would not provide (as much as in you lay) the truth in all
things to be known and set forth without the vtteryng of my rude and simple
mind in it: but only because I, knowing the slenderness of my lernyng, and
being yet constrained to write of this so weyghty a matter, feared that there
might be sumwhat written of me in it, that should not fully agree with the
veryte of gods word, which is now so greatly desired almost of al me^ to be
sincerely declared, that it seems they would even devour the same, if they
might but ones spy it out. I have therefore humbly give this poor work unto
you inspecially, that it might rather be corrected by your godly judgment and
dyscrete ouersyght, the^ thought worthy to be thankefully received. And less
the rudeness thereof might yet let you from the reading of it for the same, I
have here also, in a brefe sum, set forth the special matters of it, which
are these.

First, in declaryng how our Lord Jesus Christ might be honored a right in
this sacrament, when it is mynistred at an holy souper, I have showed what God
gives us by his holy word and sacraments, and specially what he gives us by
this most holy sacrament of his body and blood, by the which I have said,
that our lord Christ, (though through his heavenly spirit also) offers and
presents unto us his very body and blood, as it was both in sufferynge death
for us here and as it is also at the right hand of God for us now, that is
to say, as his very bodily Passion and true Resurrection and Ascensyon, was
and is continually the only means that purchases us the grace and good will
of God for the remyssion of all our sins, and presents the same freely unto
us by his most mighty spirit and by this his holy sacrament, for to help
us both to a sure faith and trust in the same free remyssyon, and for to
work in us also all the hole strength and virtue of his very body and blood:
as the very same meekness, love and charity with all the holiness,
ryghtuousnesse and purite that has always been and is in it. These.ii.
things chiefly does our lord Jesus Christ offer and freely present unto us
by his mighty and most heavenly spirit and by this holy sacrament, to
thentente that we might so receive by the virtue of his bodily passion,
which he suffered yet but once for all, the free remission of our sins at
all times, and by his true ressurection and ascensyon our full iustificatyon:
like as he has dyed for the one as well as for the other. By means whereof I
have said also, that this sacrament is called the body and blood of Christ,
and the very testament or promise of them being present with it thus, at al
such times as it is ministered according to his institution. Whereupon I have in
likewise further declared, that forasmuch as there is present thus the body
and blood of Christ, so must this needs be the honor and worship specially
dew unto it when it is ministered. That we do first and before we will receive
it, being the treasure of all heavenly virtues, co^ceyue such a faith and
trust in his bodyly passion and true ressurection, through this his free and
undeserved calling of us to the better remembrance of it by this sacrament of
his own instituting for the same purpose, as may cause us both to lay away
all the vices within our corrupt bodies with such a repentance as feleth us
sumwhat to have need of the great virtues offered in it, and to believe also
that we shall the more assuredly receive then the full remyssyon of all our
sins through the worthiness of the same passion and ressurection.

And secondly yt we do forth with up on this calling of us unto faith by this
sacrament, receive it externally also according to his ordinance, for the
strengthenyng and confyrmyng of the same faith the more assuredly in us, and
for our better encreasyng in his most godly virtues. And thirdly that we from
thence forth do give over our selves holly to the rest of his laws, but
specially to the charitable and loving expressing of his meekness and patience
to our neighbors again, like as he has most gentely dealte with us in
geuyng them unto us freely before. These.iii. things, repentance, faith, and
amendment toward our neighbor, are the special honors dwe unto this
sacrament at all such times as it is ministered according to his ordinance,
wherewith we must honor it in spirit and verite. And yet do not these kinds
of honoring it, let yt we should not at al such times as we will receive it,
humbly honor it with all the powers and members of our bodies also (if some
necessity do not debar the same) as with the vncoueryng of our headdes, with
the knelyng and bowyng down of our bodies, and with the praysyng of his
goodness therein with our tounges: but the honoring of it in spirit and
veryte does seclude all other tokens to be done unto it, but when we can so
wourshyppe it before. As to wete: we can never honor this sacrament a right
with hands and knees, but when we can first conceive such a faith and trust in
the bodylye passion and true ressurection of Christ for the remyssyon of our
sins, by his free calling of us unto it through ye presentyng of this his
sacrament to be externally received in the remembrance of the same, as causes
us both to repent of our former sins, and to be redye and glad to receive it
also according to his ordinance for the better assurance of the same faith in
us. The which faith as we can never conceive it by this sacrament, but only
when it is presented to be externally received according to Christ's
ordinance (for his ordinance in it and in all other things is the only thing
that causes us to gather a sure faith in him) so is it then only to be
wourshypped externally also, and at none other time.

And thyrdely I have showed by a plain declaratyon taken both out of the holy
scripture and of the use of the prymatiue church, that there should no mess
be done wherein the souper of the Lord is handled, without communicantes, that
is to say, without such as may have the sacrament communicated unto them.
And that this is true, sayncte Cyprian speaking of the right vsyng of the
lords supper said also, in writing of it thus: utique ille sacerdos uice
Christi fungitur, Lib. ii. Epist. iii
qui id quod Christus fecit, imitatur. That is to say, that priest doubtless
does execute the office and doing of Christ in this sacrament, that does
follow even the same thing, which he did in it. Now if that priest do execute
the office and doing of Christ a right, that follows it only ye Christ him
self did in it, then do not those priests use this sacrament a right that will
not entende, when they will hold the souper of ye Lord, to stir up a true
faith in Christ for the freremyttyng of all sins and for the conferring of
all other virtues, by the offering of it to be received externally, and that
with the gyuyng of such thanks, through the recyting up of ye great goodness
of god showed forth in our savior Jesus Christ, as may quicke^ in the people
both a sure faith in Christ and also a reverence toward his ordinances, or
ever they shall receive it: but will make them believe either that they shall
receive as much profit if they do but look upon the sacrament as God has
ordained to put into their minds by the corporal eating and drynking thereof,
or else that they shall take as much profyt if they do receive it but in one
kind only, as they should if they did take it in both.

And fourthly I have declared that it ought to be much reproved in a true
christen man, to be present at the holy souper of the Lord, and not to receive
ye sacrament. Because the doing thereof must needs proceed of the imperfection
of faith: as either because men do not believe these words a right when they
are spoken unto them: take, eat, take, drink, or yt they do not esteem dear
enough ye healthful meat and drink of his body and blood, or else they have
some superstitious fear of the sacraments, in thynkyng them to require a full
perfection of life to be in us before we should receive them, when they
require none other perfection to be in us then that we will but ones desire
unfeignedly to have our imperfection and weakness strengthened by such
things as they freely offer us to do ye same with all. Now which of all these
three do hold a man from receyuyng of the sacrament, it is doutlesse worthy
great reprofe.

These four things specially, dear father, have I declared in this little
work, and for the better proof of them to be as they are here declared (as it
seems to my poor judgment) I have also confuted some of the principal
arguments, which the Pope, through his adherentes, was wont to make for the
contrary. Most humbly desyryng your good lordshippe now, that if there be any
thing in it which do not agree with the verity of gods word, to admonyshe
me of ye same, that it might so through your godly correction, at the least way
do not hurt, though it be like to do but little good. Which thing if it might
please you of your goodness to do, I would not only retracte and with all
dylygence revoke again all such faults as your discretion shall find in it,
but also think my self bound to pray for your good estate so long as my
life should endure. The which I beseech the living God, through his dearly
beloved son Jesus Christ long to continue, to the glory of his most holy
name, and to the profit of your soul.

And thus most heartily fare ye well. Written the second year of the reygne of
our sovereign lord king Edward the syxte, and the xiiii. of Nouembre. by Your
obedyent Diocesen and daily orator Richard Bonner.

Of the right honoring and worshyppyng of our savior Jesus Christ, in the
sacrament of bread and wine, when it is ministered at the holy souper.
THat the good and simple people might have a grounded and sure enstructio^ of
this, it shall be expedient for them to know first what honoring and
worshippyng in the scripture, is called, and is, and wherein the true honoring
of our lord Jesus Christ does specially consyst and stand. Out of the which
then it shall be easy to perceive how we should honor Christ a right in
this holy sacrament.

To honor outwardeli, what it is.
Now to honor or worship, (as it is taken outwardly) is to show unto one,
whom we will honor, tokens of a good will and mind, and of having him in
estimation and reverence in our hearts. As to praise him with words, to knele
or fall down before him, in showing him obedyence therewith, or else to give him
such gifts as we judge him to have most pleasure in. All these be outward
tokens of a good will and mind within, and of having one in estymatyon and
reverence in our hearts. Therefore to whom so ever we do show these tokens,
there does every man say, that we do honor and wourshippe him therewith.

But as they are oftentimes of diverse condytyons or sundry degrees amongst
us, unto whom we do thus show honor and wourshyppe, so do we use diverse and
sundry tokens also in honourynge them. For they that be our superiors, are
otherwise honored of us, than they that are either our inferyours or like unto
us. And likewise do we honor them also that are our high governors,
otherwise than them that are not in so high authoryte. For some do we honor
only with the puttyng of of our cappes, other some with cappe and knee, and
other some again with knelyng hole down, with kissing of their hands, and
such like. And if we will honor any manne with gifts, so are the same
diverse with us also. For most commenly we will give unto every man such
kind of gifts as we know to be mete for him, and as we think he will
thankefully take. As to great men do we give great gifts, and though not
great in cost and value, yet costly in being according to their pleasures. And
to honor men thus does even natural reason learn us: which teaches, that
for as much as honoring must be a showing of a synguler good will and mind,
and of having one in reverence in our hertes, so must we have a great respect
both to the dignite, and to the will and pleasure of the person also, whom we
will honor either with our bodies or gifts. Whereupon it comes, that if we
perceive them, whom we will honor with gifts, to have pleasure in hunting,
we do rather give them sweft greye hundes, than good drawyng oxen. Have they
pleasure in halkyng, so do we sooner give the^ a sparre halke, than the best
syngyng bird that can be gotten. And thus doubtless do we in all our gifts,
we have always our chief respect to the delight and pleasure of him, unto
whom we will show our selves beniuolent and thankful.

Now seeing than that every nature learneth us thus to honor every manne,
according to it that we hold of his dygnite, and to have a special respect
always to the delight and pleasure of him whom we will honor with gifts or
other thankfulnesses: and that Christ our savior, is the highest in all
degrees, and therwythall of so great dygnyte that we neither have nor can get
of our selves it wherewyth we might honor him according to his degree, and
as we of duty are bound: so must we, specyallye in the honourynge of him,
have a great respect unto it, wherein he will be honored of us, and what
may be to him pleasant and acceptable.

If we will then look upon the holy scripture aryghte, out of the which
only, we may be in certain of this, so do we find that our Lord and God
requires this honor of us specyallye: What ye true honoring of God is and
ye special tokens thereof.
first that with all our hertes and minds we give faith unto al his words and
works: and secondly that we freli and to the praysynge of his name and
enlarging of his kingdom, confess and acknowledge the same faith outwardly,
with the geuynge of our holelynes to the exercysynge of all his laws and
commandments: as to the hearing of his word desirousely, to the receyuynge
of his sacraments thankefully, and to the applyenge of our selves humbly to
fasting, prayer, and to all the deeds of charytie: that our bodies therewith,
might be kept under, and gentelye serve both him and our neighbor in all
holiness and ryghteousnes. This is the true honoring of our lord God, and
the special tokens thereof. Under the which these tokens are also
comprehended, both that we with our bodies do show all humylytye and mekenes
when with our souls we perceive the grace of God to be specially present unto
the^, Other tokens of the true honourynge of god.
as it is in the ministracion of his word and sacraments, and also yt we
provide his word to have a place and time appointed convenient for the
honorable ministracion thereof, and his sacraments to have instruments both
honest and seming. And yt these latter tokens are also a kind of ye honourynge
of God, may well be seen by them of the old time, unto whom he gave
commandment for the decent mynistratyon of his holy word and sacraments,
both that there should be builded, first a costly tabernacle, and after yt a
gorgyouse temple with an alter, and al so yt there should be provided many
instruments of gold, silver, precyouse stone, of sylke, cypres and such
other, for orname^tes of religion, and let it be an acceptable thing unto him
that they should honor him with the falling down before the Arc of
promise, i. Re. ii.
and toward the same, as also toward heaven, to lift up their hands and
eyes, for the showing of their obedience toward him therewyth: because men
should the more surely know, his grace to be right present, at the
mynistracion of all such things as he had ordained himself, to give forth
the same by, and that the ministration of them was therefore right preciouse and
honorable.

Gal. iiii
But seeing these things are now out of use, (as towchynge to the express
commandment of God whereby they had a sacramental signification) to wete,
both temple, ceremonies, and also the instruments used for the same: and that
the lord in the new testament has appoyncted neither temple nor instrument,
like as there was in the old, but did both he him self, and his Apostles
also after him, use every commen houses at their assemblynges together and
when they would yet preach the word of life, and admytte even commen
instruments for the mynistration of right holy sacraments: we may well
gather thereby, both that he will be as well present with us now, being gathered
together in his name, either to hear his most lively word, or to use his
most holy sacraments, or to do any other Godly exercise else, as he was
before, in what place so ever it be, and with what kind of instrument so ever
his holy religion be used or set forth: and also that the grace given us by
his holy word and sacraments now, does chiefly call us to the dispisinge of
al pleasant worldly things, and will us to remember only things heavenly
and permanent. Out of ye which it does also follow, yt seeing he has nether
given commandment nor showed example him self, nor none of his apostles
after him, that we should show us to worship him or his relygyon with the
buyldyng of gorgious temples, or with the preparyng of golden instruments for
the ministratyon of his holy sacraments, so can there no man say, that the
building of gorgyouse temples, or the preparinge of goodly instruments
should be any of the special tokens of the true honoring of God or of his
holy relygyon, more than even very simple and plain. And in likewise, seeing
that he has nether given commandment nor showed any ensample that we should
now either lift up hands or eyes, or knele down to his holy sacraments, like
as they did in the old testamente, but did hold the most deyntye feast of his
holy supper with his disciples as they were sytting at ye table, according to
their accustomed manner, so can there no man appoynte these things to
apperteyne specially to the honoring of god in his most holy sacraments.

Yet seeing God is even of the same spirit and mind toward mankind now
that he was then in the old time, Hebrew. xiii.
and that he does give us even the same thing now by his holy word and
sacraments, i. cor. x.
that he then gave forth unto the^, yea and that so much the larger does he
give them unto us now as Christ has opened al things more plainly by his
coming into our nature corporally: it must needs therefore be a toke^ also of
having him in honor and reverence now as well as it was the^, both to prepare an
honest place and instruments, convenient for ye better using of his word and
sacraments, and also with hands and knees applied to ye humble mekenes of the
spirit, to receive the same with all reverence, when so ever they shall be
mynistred unto us. But because the humble meekness of the spirit only, must
appoint in every man, when, and how far forth these things shall be tokens
of the true honourynge of God in his holy word and sacraments, (and not
because they belong unto it specially of them selves) so will I first declare
what things God gives us now by his holy word and sacraments, that the
special honor due unto ye same might the better be known, as the only means
which may cause these other kinds to have place with them also.

What time as our savior Christ should offer up his blessed body upon the
cross for the redemption of mankind, i. Io. ii. Ephe. v
he did it with so much meekness, love, and charity, that the heavenly
father was fullye therewith content and pacified: right thankefully accepting
the same into his divine nature, as a mean most sufficient and fullye able
for the workyng in all men not only of a sure faith and trust in the remyssyon
of all their sins, i. Ti. ii. Heb. ix.
but for ye workyng also of all holiness and righteousness in the^. For first, in
yt it was the blessed body of his derely beloved son which was so offered
up upon the cross, he saw it to be able enough for the workynge of a sure
faith in all men, and to cause them to trust unto the worthynes of it for the
full remyssyon of their sins, how sore so ever they had offended, or how long
so ever they had lain therein. And again, in that it was done with so much
meekness, love, and charity as did excede all other in plentifulnes, he saw
it able enough to make all men partakers of those his heavenly virtues: both
for the stablysshing of the^ in the same faith against al such sin as death
and ye deuel might lay against them afterward, and for to be as a sure
earnest unto the^ also, whiles they were yet in this world, of yt godli life,
which they might hope to receive more fully in another world.

Most thankefully therefore did the infynite goodness of God accept and
take the meke passion and loving death of our savior Jesus Christ, Ephesians. i.
Hebre. ix
that man thereby might not only be iustyfied, but also be holly reconsylled
and brought again unto his first state of innocence, that is to say, that he
might not only be loosed and quit from his sins committed through faith
conceived in the worthy acceptyng of his passion, but receive through the same
faith also such a part of his full and abundant meekness, love, and charity,
as might both reconsyle and bring him again to the right expressyng of this
his Godly image unto other, and also put him in a sure hope whiles he were yet
in this life, of the full receyuynge of these heavenly virtues in another life.

And although our most merciful savior, of his omnipotente wisdom, knew
well enough, his meke passion and loving death should right thankefully
thus be accepted and taken into the dyuine nature of his heavenly father, as a
thing most sufficient and fullye able to be the only means of man's
salvation, and that man therefore should finally be saved: Because of our
weakness, were the sacraments ordained.
yet forbycause he saw the weakness of man to be such that he would be
very slack in geuynge faith to this glad tidings of the worthy
accepting of his passion, either for the contynuall remyssyon of his sins,
or for the receyuyng of his aboundau^t grace to amend them always again, if
the effect of the same his passion and only means should always be brought
and presented unto him, only through the secret inspiration of God: so did he
most mercyfullye therefore institute and ordeyne, before he should suffer,
certain signs and tokens, to cause al them, unto whom he should peculyarly,
and more than to all other nations, send or give the same, to trust so much
the better unto his passion contynually, both for the remyssyon of their
sins, and for the receyuyng of his heavenly grace and goodness also, to amend
them again. Yea and that these signs might the better for our capacytie, do
this thing, he ordained them of such of his good creatures as might, by their
natural proprytyes which he had given unto them to do service unto our
bodies, partly declare what goodness he would now show by them also, unto
our souls. As first, Romans v.
forbycause the nature of man was by deriuation holy defiled, and brought with
it such a vycyous and corrupt infection as could not lie still, but
continually ^^^uoke us to all kind of syn^ (...) ^^^^mall instinction, or
(...) ^^^^shement thereof. (...) before his good crea^^ (...) (^or that it had
this natural ^^^rytte with it to wash away the fylth of the body when it
was powered on) to certifye us that our souls were inwardly washed from the
fylth of sin, and we admitted into his flock, through the merytes of his
passion, when this water was powered upon us after his commandment in token of
the same.

And further lest man should think the strength and virtue of this wasshyng
away of the fylth of our souls, given us at our baptime, might yet decay and
not be sufficient for us at all times, if by fraylty we fell unto sin again
afterward, and so fell also from the faith and trust in the favor of God
which we had ones conceived by our baptyme, he ordained the common preaching
and famyliar declaryng of his comfortable passion and loving death, (because
the familiar talking which one of us has with an other does often times
comfort such greatly as are in any adversity or heuines) to certifye us, that
he would renew us unto the same favor of God again which we had ones
conceived at the first, and take away our sins by the means of his passion,
when so ever his passion and death was preached and declared unto us after his
commandment, in token of the same.

And thyrdly, to the intent we should doubt nothing of this our renewyng unto the
grace and favor of God again, and unto the clean taking away of our sins
after our fall, when we were called to the trustyng unto it by the preaching
and famyliar declaryng of his meke passion and loving death, for that the
mynistration thereof was a thing done in commune and to a great nu^bre at ones,
whereof some of them might paraduenture fear whether the words of it did
specially belong unto them or no: he did ordeyne his good creatures bread and
wine (because they had this natural property with them of norysshyng the
body) to certifye us by the gyuynge of a sign of the same unto every manne,
as it were into his own hand, that his body breaking and blood shedynge
should at all times nourysshe and feade our souls from al sin, death, and
the deuell, when so ever this bread and wine was mynistred unto us after his
commandment in token of the same.

These.iii. signs and tokens specially, did our most loving savior institute
and ordeyne for our weak necessity, to cause us at all such times as he
should present or send the same unto us, to trust so much the more
assuredly to his passion and death, both for the remissyon of our sins, and
for the receyuynge of his plentyfull grace and goodness also, to amend them
again.

And now that these signs and tokens may certyfye and cause us the more
assuredlye to believe in the remyssyon of all our sins first, when so ever
any of them is ministered unto us, shall easily be perceived. For inasmuche as
they be of Christ's own institutyng, and that to put us continuallye in
remembrance of the worthy acceptyng of his passion, so are they plain
promysses which do show and most certeynly witness his passion to pacify
so the wrath of God for our sins that it does continuallye both purchase us
the remyssyon of al our sins, and also offer and present unto us freely the
grace and good will of God by these signs and tokens to help us to believe
surely in the same, when so ever any of the^ is ministered unto us after his
commandment. For to what purpose else, should he have ordained such signs
and tokens to put us contynually in remembrance of the worthy acceptyng of his
passion, seeing we are so far unable to give faith to the same for the
remission of our sins (how plainly so ever it be declared unto us) that we
can not think one good thought of our selves, yea so far unlike are we to
have that godly gift faith of our selves, ii. co. iii.
that all the powers of our body are enemies to the whole laws of God, if
the grace and good will of God, To. vii.
were not of promise through the merits of Christ's passion, freely presented
with these signs, to help us unto faith, when they be offered un us? but
surely as these signs and tokens are of Christ's own institutyng, and that to
put us continually in remembrance of his passion and death suffered for our
sins, so are they plain promyses which do show and witness his passion
and death to offer and present unto us freely by the^, God opens the door of
faith. Act. xiiii
the grace and good will of God for to open our hertes, to give faith unto
them, when so ever they are ministered unto us after his commandment. And
therefore as the grace and good will of God which is freely presented and applied
by these signs for ye merits of Christ's passion, can easily at al times open
our hertes to give credence unto al such things as they do show and witness:
so may it well be said therefore that they do certifye and cause us the more
assuredly to believe in Christ's death for the remission of our sins first,
when so ever any of the^ is mynistred unto us according to his institution. And
so forbycause they do thus, freely offer and present unto al me^ indifferently
the grace and good will of God through the merits of Christ's passion, at al
such times as they be ministered according to their institution, therefore does
ye scripture plainly say: Titu^. iii Act. ii. and.xxii Mathe. xviii. i. Cor.
xi.
baptism is the bath of regeneration, and wassheth away our si^nes: ye
ministre of ye gospel does forgive me^ their sin: and the bread and wine in
the holy souper co^municateth unto us the holy and blood of Christ: though in
deed they do no more in it at the first, but healpe us the more suerly to
believe that our sins are freely washed away and forgeuen us by the body and
blood of Christ in sufferyng death for us here: by showing us that the
effect of the same passion and death, does, at al such times as they are
mynistred unto us, offer and present unto us the grace and good will of God
freely to help us to believe surely in the same.

Well thus ye see that these signs and tokens do of promise (as far forth
yet as they be moved of their promyser) offer and present unto us freely the
grace and good will of God, for the merits of Christ's passion, that they
might cause us the better to believe in the remyssyon of our sins first,
when so ever any of the^ is ministered unto us, according to their institution,
and that because they be of Christ's own instytutyng, for the same purpose.

And further that they may well certyfye and cause us the better to believe that
we shall receive by them also, the very same meekness, love, and charity,
which Christ offered up for us upon the cross, may in likewise be easily
perceived. For in that Christ did not give his blessed body to be broken and
his precious blod to be shed, that ye hole effect, virtue, and substance
thereof, might be no more but to obtain us freely the grace and good will of
God for to healpe us unto faith in the remissyon of our sins, and so to let
us fall by and by unto sin again, but that it might be all our holiness and
righteousness also: so may we well believe that seeing the grace and good will
of god is through the merytes of Christ's passion, freely presented with these
signs for to help us unto a sure faith and confidence in the remission of all
our sins first, that it is there present to apply and give us by them also,
all the holiness and righteousness of his death and body, that is to say,
both the very same meekness, love, and charity, that was in his natural
body when he suffered death for us here, and as ye same is also of effect,
strength and virtue in him syttyng at the right hand of God for us now: for
to make us like unto his own image in expressyng of these his heavenly virtues
or spiritual substance unto other. For how might he else be called our
hole righteousness and holiness in this world also, if he should not set
our faith in such possession of these his virtues, being the substance of
his very body and heavenly life, as might both keep us from the falling
unto sin again (so long as we will apply our lives unto them) and also
cause us to hope surely to have the full use of them in another world? But
surely seeing the effect strength, and virtue of Christ's body is not only
the means whereby we come unto a sure faith and trust in the remission of al
our sins, first by his sufferyng death for us here, but is also the very
effectuouse means whereby we come unto all other holiness and righteousness,
by his syttyng at the right hand of God for us now, we may well think that
as he freely presents and gives us first by these signs the grace and good
will of God for to help us the better unto a sure faith in the remission of
all our sins, that the same grace and good will of God shall help us by them
also, unto all the other strength and virtue of his body and heavenly life.

And so forbycause they do freely thus present unto us the grace and good will
of God for to help us to both these things, through the effect of Christ's
body, as it was both in sufferyng death for us here and as it is in sitting at
the right hand of God for us now also, when so ever they be ministered
according to their instytucyon, therefore did sayncte Paul speaking of holy
baptysme, To. vi.
say also: we are buried with him by baptysme, for to dye: that likewise as
Christ was raised up from death by the glory of his heavenly father, so we
also should walk in a new life. By the which words doubtless he meaned
not that baptism was a sign that caused us the better to believe our sins
paste only to be buried in the death of Christ, in that it did witness the
grace of God to be freely presented unto us for to help us to do the same: but
that we were endued by it also, with the same life that Christ did rise again
in, that is to say, with the same meekness, love, and charity that was in his
body when he did rise again: for to burye in us (if we would apply our
lives thereafter) those remanentes of sin also, which did yet abide in us
after faith, and which might else cause us to fall unto sin again
afterward.

And he speaking also of the souper of the lord, i. cor. xi.
called it the communion or partakyng of the body and blood of Christ. By the
which sayng he meaned not that this bread and wine which was used in the
holy souper, was a sign that might cause us the better to believe in the body
and blood of Christ for the remyssyon of our sins paste only, in that it
did present unto us freely, the grace of God to help us to do the same, but
that they did communicate unto us also the very substance of his nature, as
his natural meekness, love, and charity, for to nouryshe our bodies to an
heavenly life, if we would apply our selves unto them.

Yea and this was his meaning also when he called the preaching of the gospel:
the power of god to all them beleuynge in it. Romans i.
For it gives forth such a strength and power of gods grace, through the
merits of Christ's passion, as does not only deliver us from sins past, in
presentyng of our faith unto us to help us to believe in ye same surely: but
also it delyuereth us from those sins that might come upon us again
afterward, if we will dylygently give over our selfs to it and to the rest of
his laws.

Well by these things now a foresaid, it is sumwhat manifest, what the word
and sacraments are, and what things god gives us by the^: to wete, these.ii.
things specialli First he gives us our faith the better by the^, yt is to
say, he causes us ye better to believe his passion and death to be ours at
all times, in that he shows and witnesses by the^, as by tokens of his own
instituting for the same purpose, that his passion is co^tynuallye of so much
strength and virtue for us, that it does freely offer and present ye grace and
good will of God unto us by the^: for to help us to believe suerly in ye same
for the remyssio^ of al our sins first, when so ever any of the^ is ministered
unto us after his commandment. And secondly, seeing that Christ dyed not to
help us unto faith only in this world, but to give us a part of his heavenly
life also for to cause us the better to hope after a more full use of it here
afterward, as he did now give us an earnest thereof, so does he give us by
these signs also ye very substance of his body and heavenly life, for to
help us to reform our lives according to the same.

Wherefore I may well conclude upon this sacrament of bread and wine (as I may
now from hence forth let the other.ii. pass) that it is a sign, and toke^
whereby our savior Christ does minister and give both these things in speaking
this sygnifycation unto us thus by it: as this bread and wine is at my
commandment given unto you to be eaten and dronken into your bodies as your
own fode, so is my death and resurreccion your own fode in presentinge unto
you, at al such times as this sign shall be offered unto you, the grace and
good will of god freely, for to make you believe suerly in my death and
resurrection both for the remyssion of your sins, and for the receyuyng of
all the strength and virtue of my heavenly life also, for to help you from
falling unto sin again hereafterward, so far forth as you will apply your
dylygence thereunto, and suffer my spirit to rule you in it. And therefore seeing
that through this signification there is of promise present spiritually both ye
virtue and substance of Christ's body in sufferyng death for us here, and also
the effect and spiritual substance of his body being now in heaven, so might
Christ well say of the bread which he used at his holy souper:

This is my body which shall be given for you: And of the cup in likewise
might he well say:

This cup is the new testament in my blod which shall be shed for you and
for many unto the remyssion of sins. And finally, forasmuch as these signs
and tokens do thus prevent us with the grace and good will of god, only for the
merits of Christ's passion to help us to a sure faith in the remission of
our sins, and to all the strength and virtue of Christ's body and heavenly
life also, that we might amend our lives afterward and serve him in all
holiness and righteousness, therefore are these signs and tokens (for the
better declaracion of their office) called sacraments, that is to say godly
ceremonies, or exercises ordained of god, for to sacrat and make us holy even
with Christ's own holiness and goodness.

These things now being had in remembrance, do of them selves, in a manner,
declare what honor (...) dynaunce, this is to be judged of all Christen men.
That as we can not be sure that it is the sacrament of Christ, or of his
body and blood, but when it does the office that he has appointed unto it,
in minystring forth of his mind and sygnification, so ought we not to say
that we can conceive as much comfort and faith by the using of it any
otherwise, than even after his own institution and ordynance. And again,
seeing that Christ has ordained this sacrament to be oftentimes presented
unto us, as well as he would have us oftentimes called upon for the dylygente
hearing of his holy gospel, and for the vsyng of his holy commandments, as
fast, prayer and almose deeds, so ought this to be judged also of all christen
men: that as he would never have done this, if ye weakness of our faith had
not so required it, so ought we to obey his commandment in making of our
faith sure that we be led and possessed still of his holy spirit within, by
the receiuyng of this sacrament when so ever we can conveniently come unto the
same. Wherefore this is the second honor dew unto this sacrament, that we, by
the receyuynge of it after the same manner and order that he has appointed it
to be a sacrament unto us, do strengthen our faith by it both for the
remission of our sins, and for the receyuyng of his heavenly body and life
also, to amend them again.

The third honor is, that seeing god does of his mere goodness give unto us
such gifts in this his holy sacra. as the very effect and spiritual
substance of his own precious body and blood, as it was both in sufferyng
death for us here, and as it is now making intercession for us at the right
hand of God, so is it our bound dewtie again to apply our hole lives to the
vtterynge and bestowynge of these same his gifts so after we have received
them that his most holy will thereby, might the better both in our selves and
other be fulfilled, and his kingdom enlarged. And specially seeing he does so
louyngly, yea most charitably join us together into his own body, as flesh
of his flesh and bone of his bones, by making us partakers of the effect and
substance of him self, through the faithful receiuyng together of this his
mystical bread, that is to say, through the receiving of his godly spirit,
mind, and will in it, so ought we again to be charitable and loving one to an
other, and one to feed and noryshe another with all our words and deeds, that
we might grow up and walk forth together in the strength of the same meat
unto ye mou^te of Oreb, the felicite of heaven. Well, these.iii. kinds of
honor then are specially due unto this sacrament or rather to the grace of
god present in it, at all such times as it shall be presented unto us after
Christ's ordinance.

And now that these.iii. kinds of honoring this sacrament, are so specially
due unto it when it is ministered according to Christ's ordydinaunce, that
without the effect of them all.iii. together, it can be had in no reverence
nor honor of us, may well be perceived by the honor that they of the old
time, should have given to their sacrifices, which were unto them sacraments.
Whom the lord did greatly reprove as manifest abusers and despisers of his
holy ordinau^es, because they did leave undone the honor and reverence which
he had specially appointed the^ to do unto him in the^, by saying thus unto
the^ through his holy prophet Jeremy. Iere. vii
Thus says the lord of hosts, ye God of Israel: put your burned offerynges,
and other offerynges together, and eat up the flesh. For I have not, ye day
yt I brought your fathers out of Egipte, spoken unto them, nor given them
commandment of burned offrynges and other offrynges. But this I commanded
them, saying: harken and obey my voice: and I shall be your God, and you shall be
my people. Walk therefore in all the ways that I have commanded you that ye
may prosper. But they would not hear me, nor enclyne their ears unto me.
Behold, whiles the Jews did offer up their sacrifices, which were such holy
ceremonies as God had commanded him self to be offered unto him, without
repe^tau^ce had before for their former sins, and without the strengthening
again of their faith in christ for ye same, not geui^g ear to this his mind
and meaning in them, for the which they were chiefly ordained, he said unto
them: they should but put their offeringes together, and eat up the flesh of
them them selves, for he had given them no commandment of them. As to wete,
that they should offer them so unto him, in puttyng their hole trust of
honoring him or of doing him service, in the outward doing of them, without
the receiving of repe^tau^ce, faith, and purpose of amendeme^t, by ye fre
presenting of his grace and good will in the^ before And in like wise, when the
Jews would live out of charity with their neighbors, or requyt euel for
euel, without compassion taking in all things, and think yet to please ye
lord with the outward doing of such ceremonies and sacrifices as he had
commanded, the lord said thus unto the^ by the prophet Amos: Amos. v
I will have mercymeat and no sacrifice. By the which saying he did not yet
forbid them to do that thing with all reue^ence, which he had ones commanded:
^ut he wylled them not to do it in ^ruste to honor or please him any ^hynge
thereby, without they had co^^eyued before, such a faith and trust ^n the fre
remission of their sins ^horow Christ, by the institutyng of ^hese
sacrifices, as had made them of ^ynde to follow and obey all his
^ommaundementes, but specially in ^hewing of mercy unto al me^, like as ^e had
showed it freely unto them.

Through Esaye the prophet the ^orde said also that such offerynges and
sacrifices as he had yet hyghly ^o^maunded him self to be offered, Esaias. i.
^ere abomination unto him, and that he could not ones abide them. ^ote here,
good reader. this wyt^esseth God of the service, which ^^e people would yet
seem to do unto him self and not to any strange Gods, and that in such
things as were not commanded to be done by man, but, as touching to the
doing of them in form and manner outwardly as they were commanded, by God him
self. Only because they would needs do him service in them, without the
conceyuynge before of such a faith and trust in the free remyssyon of their
sins by the merits of Christ, as had brought them in mind both to repent
them of their sins, and also to amend their lives. Now if the vsyng of the
sacraments were thus abominable to him ones, that he could not abide the
sight of the^ when they had not their true honor given unto them, how dwely
so ever they were observed and honored outwardely: what will he say then i^ we
do now use his holy sacraments which be of no less strength and virtue than
were theyrs in old tym but rather of more, without these iii. things be
surely grounded in our minds before? wherefore it is manifest that neither
our gold nor other goods, neither our bowyng down nor knelynge before them,
neither yet our often using of the^ outwardely, can be any thing to the
honoring of the holy sacraments, or to the grace of God present in them,
except we do first with hearty repentance call to mind the great need that we
have of the fre grace presented in them through Christ, for our daily sins,
and except we do then strengthen our faith ye better by ye using of the^
according to his ordynance, and so give over our selves holly to all other his
laws. And although these.iii. things now a fore said, be ye special kinds
of honoring this sacrament of ye body and blod of Christ when it is ministered
unto us, and yt so due unto it that with out the effect of them all iii.
together it can not be honored or had in any reverence of us (like as I have
said:) yet seeing the humble meekness of our penytent and faithful hertes,
does always require that both all our goods and members should serve to the
better expressyng of the same, when soever we will show it forth either in the
receyuyng of this sacrament, or in the doing of any other godly exercise: so
does it require these tokens or kinds of honoring this sacrament to be
present also when we will receive it. First, yt we provide a place both
honest, comely, and several from all other busynes, for the commune ministracion
of this holy sacrament, with instruments right semyng for same. And secondely,
that we apply all the me^bres of our bodies to serve to the humble meekness of
our penytent and faithful hertes, at the reverent receiving of this sacrament:
as to wete, that we receive it with ye humble vncoueryng of our heads, with
the bowyng of our bodies or knelyng down, and with the lawdyng and praysynge
of his goodness in it with our tounges also. These be tokens of ye true
honoring of this sacrament also, as far forth as they do assure both our
selves and other of our vnfeynednesse and true receyuyng of it. For as that
mind is trewly penytente, which causes all the body to show meekness, as
the heart to sighe for sorrow, the hands to be lyfted up or the knees to be
bowed down for fear, and the tongue to break forth in cryeng for mercy: so
are these sure tokens of the true honoring of god also, when the heart does
show them forth, whether they be done at the receyuyng of this sacrament or at
any other godly exercise. And forbycause they do most certeynly thus, assure
both our selves and other of our unfeigned heart and pure mind, therefore are
these tokens taken in the scripture for the honoring of God it self. Mathe.
iiii.


But as no man can express these outward tokens a right, which has not
partly received before, through the sygnification or meaning of Christ in this
his holy sacrament, the other.iii. special tokens, that is to say, which
has not partelye with an humble and penytent heart before, considered so
far forth the goodness of Christ in the ordeynynge and presentynge of this
sacrament for to show his death to apperteyne unto us at all such times as
it is ministered, that he both trusts so much the more assuredly in it, for
the remyssyon of his sins, and fully purposes also to amend his life through
the assysta^ce of the same grace and goodness which he shall then presently
receive by it: so are these outward tokens not to be taken as signs of the
true honoryng of Christ in this sacrament, but when the other.iii. are from
with in joined with them.

The which.iii. inward tokens can not be joined with ye other outward signs
a right, but in and at the receyuyng of this sacrament only (for then only
does this sacrament give us a sure faith in the death of Christ, out of the
which the inward repentance of the mind and the purpose to amend with all
other tokens of humilite does spring) therefore are these outward tokens plain
ydolatry, if they be at any other time expressed or done to this sacra. but
when it is ministered according to Christ's ordinance. Wherefore thus I will
conclude upon these latter kind of tokens wherwt we do honor this sacra. If we
can first conceive by the presentyng of it unto us, a hearty repentance for our
sins past, and then a sure faith in ye death of Christ for the remission of
the same again, with a good purpose to amend, we do honor the grace of god
and the presence of Christ in this sacrament (for the bread and wine have no
power of themselves to give us such things) though we do kneel or bow
down our bodies to it also, when we do receive it. But if we can not first
honor it thus, then do we honor the creatures of bread and wine for them
selves, if we do either bow down or lift up our hands unto them, co^myttyng
therewith plain ydolatrye. And therefore as thine own heart must be thy guide in
this matter, so is it needful that thou say thus with David, in going to
receive this holy souper: direct my fotesteppes, o lord, and teach me to do
thy will. For thou only must give us before the gift of grace and knowledge, of
thy mere goodness and for ye merits of thy son Jesus Christ, or else we can not
take it unto us nether in this sacrament nor in any thing else. We humbly
beseech the therefore so to illuminate our hertes with the presnce of thy holy
spirit, that we, in receyuyng of this holy sacrament, may receive also thy
blessed will therein: Amen.

Well, thus much is said, for this time, concerning the right honoring of
our Lord Jesus Christ in this sacrament, when it is ministered at the holy
souper. Whereby may be perceived that both these kinds of honoring it are
requysyte, though not of like, nor in like place. For the inward worshipping
of it must needs have the first place, and is so special, that with out the
tokens thereof, this sacrament can be had in no kind of reverence: where the
outward tokens are not only but in the second place, but are also subject to
all kinds of necessity. As to wete, if our own necessity or our neighbors,
or else that the time and place will not conveniently permyt us to lift up our
hands, or to kneel down when we shall receive it, they are not so greatly to
be passed on, nor to be tarried for, necessity holds us excused. But the
inward worshippyng of it with sure faith in the death of Christ, wherout
repentance and amendment of living does ensue, is so dew unto it, that no
necessity can excuse it. And yet the Pope had brought this sacrament to such
an use, that it was continually reserved and daily set forth before the
people in the mass, without any mention making of the inward worshippyng of
it, but only that it might be outwardlye worshypped with the lyftyng up of
hands and bowyng of knees, with candels, torches and such like: the styrryng
up of repentance, faith, and amendeme^t of living being left to the blind
conscience of man, which is yet dull enough when it is most sharply pricked
forward unto the^. Yea and to prove this abusyng of it to be yet the cause of
much good devotion amongst the people, he brought forth not only goodly
arguments and reasons, (as they appeared outwardly) but also certain places
and ensamples of the scripture for the same. And so thus he said for to prove
that we should continuallye honor this sacrament with hands and knees,
whether we did inwardly worship it or no.

In this sacrament there is present the body and blood of Christ: and
therefore ought we to wourshyppe it with hands and knees whether we do
strengthen our faith by the corporal receyuynge of it, or no.

The answer. Christ says that he and the father will be so present with them
that keep his commandments, John.xiiii.
that they will both come and dwell with the^. And Saint Paul says also that
ye lord Christ dwells through faith in the hertes of the elected. Ephesians. iii.
And yet it does not follow of this, yt we should fall down upon our knees
before godly and devout people, as though we could receive Christ presently, by
the honouringe of him so, in them. The lord in deed gives effectually his
very body and blood in this sacrament when it is ministered according to his
ordinance, and yet we can not receive it with the worshyppynge of it with
hands and knees only. But specially we must first wourshyppe it with the
hands and knees of our faith, like as we do only receive and feel him
present there with the mouth of our faith. The presence of Christ's body
and blood in this sacrament, is an heavenly work, that is to say, it is
wrought into us by the spryte of God only and through the declarynge of the
goodness and merytes of Christ's passion, and is no work of this world, that he
is present to be given us there. And therefore when we will either receive or
worship it there, By the sacrament we must sing sursum corda.
we must first sing thus with the church: Sursum corda, et non huc corda.
That is to say, we must first lift up our hertes above al yt ca^ be felt or
seen in it, and through faith lay hand upon ye goodness of Christ, in considering
this sacra. to be a plain promise which does most certeynly witness and show
his passion to have pacified so yt wrath of God for our sins yt it does
co^tinualli purchase us both the remission of them al, and freely offer and
present unto us also the grace and good will of god no less for to help us to
believe surely in it than to amend the^ again, when so ever it is mynistred
unto us. The which faith as no man can have that entendeth not to receive it
when so ever it is ministered unto him, even so can there no man worship this
sacrament a right with hands and knees that does not receive it also.

Wherefore although true faith brings well to pass, What outward worship
true faith brings forth.
yt we, by this most holy ministracion, do oftentimes fall down upon out knees
and lift up our hands, either when we hear these most wholesome words of the
lord: take, eat, this is my body which shall be given for you: take, drink
ye all out of this: this cup is the new testamente in my blood and cetera:
or when we do receive the most comfortable meat and drink at the ministration
of the sacrament in the holy souper: yet that we should therefore take it for an
acceptable honourynge or worshippyng of our Lord Christ, to fall down upon
our knees before this sacrament either when it is showed, hanged up, or borne
about, or to do it any kind of reverence when it is lyfted up, and yet not to
receive it according to Christ's ordinance, that doutlesse can not only be
gathered out of no word of God, but is also plain against the same, where it
says: take eat. etc. take and drink. For what we must forthwyth as it is
mynistred unto us, eat and drink corporally to the strengthenyng of our
faith, and to the styrryng up of all godliness in us, that may we not think
to receive by the seeing of it when it is lyfted up or carried about. wherefore
it can not be the true honoring of Christ in this sacrament, but rather a
despysyng of his goodness, to go about to amend and change his ordinance in
it after our blind reason, in saying we will honor him in it, when we will
not receive it.

And therefore to knele down before the sacrament lyftyng up hands and eyes
toward it either when it is in ministrynge or otherwise showed, of the which
kind of honoringe it either Christ nor his apostles has any thing taught, and
yet not to receive it according to his ordinance, a thing which the lord
commanded to be done with all diligence, can be nothing else than a vain
worshipping of him in it with ye doctrine of man, as I shall plainly prove by
this argument.

It is all a vain worshyppinge of Christ in this his holy sacrament, when we
will not humbly and with all faithful obedyence receive the gift and benefyte
which he offers us by the mynistracion of these words in it: take eat,
take, and drink. But they do not worship Christ a right with the humble
receyuinge of the benefyte which he presents unto them by the mynistracion
of these words that will not take, eat, and drink this sacrament after his
ordinance, when he commands them to do it. And therefore all the
worshypping of Christ in the sacrament, without the humble and faithful
receiving of it also after his ordinance, is but a vain worshypping of him in
it, and the doctrine of man.

Besides this, to worship Christ in the sacrament with hands and knees, and
yet not to receive it after his ordinance, what other thing may it show
else, than yt we will enclose Christ our lord in the bread comprehensyblye,
byndynge him so unto it, and bring him therewith into an earthely living and
being again? To worship Christ a right in this sacrament what it is.
where we should yet lift up our selves by and by as it is presented, from the
vysyble sign to the inuysyblye grace which it does sygnifye, and from the
earthely ministracion of it, to the heavenly goodness of him that ordained it to
be ministered, and so worship in it Christ our lord in spirit and truth,
that is to say, most inwardely and heartily remembryng then ye goodness of our
savior Jesus Christ, which would show us by it that his passion had so
pacyfyed the wrath of god, for our sins, that it did continually purchase
us the remyssion of them all, and freely offer and present unto us therefore by
this sacrament the grace and good will of god, for to help us both to believe
surely in it, and also to amend our lives again. The which faith (as I have
said) as no can have truly, which is not by and by ready to receive after
Christ's ordinance, his holy sacrament and that with al humble reverence both
of body and mind, as soon as it is presented unto him, so is this only the
worshyppynge of God in spirit and truth in or by this holy sacrament: first
to conceive such a faith in the goodness of Christ by it, as may cause us
surely to trust both to the remission of our sins and to the receiuynge of
so much grace and goodness also by the corporal eating and drinking of it,
as may help us to amend our lives. And then to give over our selves holly
to the lawdynge and praysynge of his name, and to the following of his
commandments, both in the humble receyuyng of this sacrament, and in
following of his other laws.

The second argument wherewith the pope would prove that this sacrament
should be reserved, kept, and showed to be honored of ye people with hands
and knees, though they did not receive it, is this. The Arc of promise, and
the Mercy seat was continually worshypped of the^ in the old time, which was
a sacrament. And therefore (says he) we ought to do ye like unto this sacrament
at all times, though we do not receive it.

The answer. God did ordeyne this Arc and Mercy seat for the^ of the old
time to put them continuallye in remembrance that he would suerly be present
amongst them, to fulfill all the promesses yt he had made unto the^. The which
Arc and Mercy seat because it should continuallye put them in remembrance
of the sure fulfyllynge of his promysses, therefore was it both reserved
contynually, and also had in all reverence amongst the people when they would
receive this remembrance at it. But the bread and wine has not the lord
ordained to be reserved contynuallye, or to be lyfted up for a show, but given
it to be eaten and dronken at an holy souper with this sygnifycatyon: as I do
give you this bread and wine to be eaten and dronken into your bodies as your
own food, so shall my body and blood noryshe and feed your souls with the
grace and good will of God, for to help you both to believe surely in it for the
remission of your sins, and also to amend the same again. And therefore as
this sacrament does not ministre this signification, nether by the reseruyng of
it, nor by the showing of it after any such means, as the Arc did, but only
when it is given us to be eaten and dronken with this remembrance, so is it
then only to be honored, when it is so received in the holy souper. But
before I speak any further of ye true worshypping of this sacrament I will
first show how the primative church used to worship it.

What the faith and use of the primative church has been of worshyppyng this
sacrament.

That they of ye primative church have with al reverence and honor mynistred,
handled, and received this holy sacrament, of it we find witness enough. But
that they have worshypped it, kneled down before it, with the lyftyng up of
hands and eyes toward it, and set it forth in gold and silver to be
worshypped, or borne it about in processions, honoring it with candles,
torches, ryngyng and syngyng, and al other melodye, of that we find not only
no witness, but rather it whereout we may gather clean the contrary. For we
find how that certain bishops of Rome did use to send the sacrament to the
gates, Eusebius, libro v. capi. xxiiii.
for to be received there of other strange bishops when they came to vysite
them. Eusebius. libro vi. capi. xxxiiii.
And we find how yt a priest did give the sacrament unto a boy for to bear
home to his father and to give it him there. Also we may se in the books of
saint Cipriane, Cipri. in sermo de Lapsis. Hiero. in Apolo. pro libris aduersus
Iouianum.
Tertuliane, and Hierome, how that men were wont in the time of those holy
fathers, to give the sacrament unto ye lay people for to bear home with them:
and how that the people were wont, after they had so received it, to lay it up
in their chistes, or other special custodyes, Ambrosius de suo fratre satiro.
yea some would hang it about their necks, and receive it when they list
them selves. Out of the which we may well gather, that men in those days,
knew nothing of worshyppyng the sacrament, at the least ways as it was now
worshypped.

Honorius tertius, a Pope that lived and writ in the year of our Lord.
M.CC.xvi. did ordeyne that men should reserve and keep the sacrament in a place
appointed, and that the priests should oftentimes learn the people, reuere^tly
to knele down when the sacrament was lyfted up in the mass, or when it was
borne unto the sick folk. Behold, this Pope which lived but.iii. hundred
and.xxxii. years a goo, ordained first that men should reserve the sacrament
in a place appointed, and that the priests should learn the people to knele
down when they saw the sacrament lyfted up, or borne about. Where was than,
before those days, the goodly pyxes, canapies, and lamps, with all ye
crouchinges and knelynges which we have used? but after the right use of the
sacrament which god him self had commanded to be kept, was one fallen, it
was easy enough for the deuell to bring in all such supersticious abuses,
and to cause men believe that they were to the true honouringe of god and his
holy sacraments.

Now is it true also that in the prymatiue church there were some that did
reserve the bread which they had remaining over the communion in a secret
place till the next time, and that they had an use also to show the bread in
the holy souper. For as Dionisius in ye.iii. chapter De eucharistia makes
mention, it was the use in his time, that the priests should first set forth
upon the alter ye bread and chalice covered, and after they had consecrated, to
uncover them, and bring them so forth into the sight of the people, and the^ to
deal ye bread by and by in peaces, and to give forth the cup in lykemaner.
And in the Greek Liturgia we read that ye priest, a little before the
ministringe and receiving of the sacrament, The showing of ye sacrament has been (...) ^^ip ^^^ge of (...), when it was to lifted up, was never used, till
of late.
did lift up a little the bread, modicum sustolteus, like as we used to do in
our mess by and by, after the pater noster. But that either the chalyce was at
any time lyfted up in those days, or else that the people fell down upon
their knees and worshipped ye bread being so lyfted up, of it we read nothing,
before this Pope Honorius did ordeyne it.

Whereby we may perceive, that al though yt showing of ye bread in ye holy
souper, be well old, yet to fall down and worship it when it was so showed, or
to lift up hands and eyes to it, and not to receive it, as ye lord
commanded, is an abuse crepte in of late, which was utterly unknown to them
of the old time. The which kind of honouringe can as little stand with ye
pleasure of god in this sacrament, which commands us to take, eat, and
drink it, as could the honoring of ye brazen Serpent with hands and knees,
after they had left out and forgotten the remembrance of it that god had
ordained it to present and give unto them.

But thou say: when I se the sacrament either lyfted up in the mass or set
forth by any other means, I can the better call to remembrance by it, the
merciful help of God which is universally present. And therefore it is good to
se the sacrament at all times, and to worship it, though we do not receive it.

The answer. First, for as much as Christ has not ordained this sacrament to
put us in any godly remembrance, but by the eating and drynkyng of it, at an
holy souper, so ought we not to say, that we can the better call to remembrance
the goodness of God by the seeing of it then by the corporal receyuyng of it.
Nether is it to be taken for the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
but for one of his good creatures, except it do put us in remembrance of his
body and blood, after his own ordinance. And secondly, to worship a creature
with hands and knees, is not enough to say, thou wylt, when thou see it, call
to remembrance the universal help of God, but we must be sure also, that the
creature be ordained of god him self, for to put us in such a remembrance.
For a man, and specially a godly man, is the excellent creature to put us in
remembrance of the goodness of God, that may be either in heaven or in earth.
The Sun, the Moon, and all manner of beasts upon earth are the precious
works of God, and the very images of his godly power, which do manifestlye
show forth also, his wonderful wisdom and goodness at al times: like as he
witnesses him self in his word. And yet so far is it of that we should
therefore worship any of these his creatures, that it is plainly forboden by his
holy word.

Thou say further paraduenture: why do we then worship our parents,
princes and magistrates with cappe and knee, seeing they are but creatures.

The answer. These persons are appointed of God to teach us to follow the
laws of Christ, yea and to put us in remembrance of the same with corporal
punyshmentes, if we do not follow their instructions. And therefore we are
bound to be both obedient to all their good ordinances, and also to show the
same obedience toward their persons, with the humble vncoueryng of our
heads, with the knelyng down unto them, or such like, according to the use
and manner of every country. But God has not appointed the sacrament of his
body and blood to be worshypped, for any thing that we can call to remembrance
by it, but when we do receive the same remembrance by it which he has
appointed to give unto us by the corporal eating and drynking of it. And
therefore seeing God has not appointed it to put us in any remembrance of his
power or goodness by the seeing of it, but has given us a plain commandment
to receive it, affirming it to be his body and blood when he speaks unto us
by it, these words: take, eat, this is my body: take, drink this is my
blood: by the which saying of Christ, as this use can not stand that we should
receive his body and blood, either by the lokyng upon it or by the knelyng
before it, for any other remembrance besides this: so ought we to follow and
fulfill this commandment of the Lord, and to let the setting of it up for to
be kneled unto, without the receiving thereof, fall, as the plain invention of
man.

And yet seeing the lord does in the holy souper, through his word and
sacrament, offer him self unto us after a synguler grace, and shows
himself to be more mercyfullye present in this sacrament when it is ministered
at his holy souper, than in other of his creatures, so shall we wourshyp him
there also accordyngly, that is to say, first, How (...) worshi^^ Christ in
the ^^crame^t
conceive an earnest repentance for our sins paste with a sure faith by it
in his death and body both for the remissyon of our sins and for the
receyuyng of his own grace and strength to amend them again: and then with
the same faith receive it humbly and with the falling down up on our knees,
and with the showing of all other corporal reverence: like as we may read,
Genes. xxiiii. Exo. iiii and.xii.
that they of the old time did worship God with the falling down upon their
knees, and with other tokens of honor and reverence, so often as he did
present himself unto them, after any special or syngular manner, as by the
ministracyo^ of his word and sacraments.

Wherefore this does well agree with the scripture: that seeing we have in the
holy souper the lord him self present amongst us, as he was present with
them of the old time in their sacraments, that we should worship him there
also both with heart and mind, and with all the powers and me^bres of our
bodies, as well as they did worship him so in times past and yet committed
therewith no ydolatrye. But that we should therefore reserve the bread which
has been once at the souper, and cause the people to lift up hands and eyes
unto it, as though god were bound thereunto, whether it did minister his word
and sygnyfycation unto us after such sort as he had appointed it or no, that
can not stand with ye word of God which requires but this honor and
obedyence only of us in this sacrament, yt we stre^gthen our faith by it. The
which strengthening of our faith as be it, it can not be wrought into us by
any other means, than by the receyuynge of it only, after Christ's
ordinance, so is it then only to be worshipped and taken for the sacrament,
and none otherwise.

Furthermore, there can no man say, that the bread and wine should be Christ
him self comprehensyblye, or naturally bind him unto them, because they have
been ones presented at his holy souper. But we must needs grant this
sacrament to be then only a sign and token that God does present unto us his
very body and blood, when it does present and speak these words unto us:
take, eat, this is my body: take, drink, this is my blood etc. And therefore
as we can not say that we receive these words by the sacrament but when we
receive it corporally in and at the holy souper, so can we not say that we do
reserve Christ amongst us after the souper, but by the applyenge of our hole
lives to his holy will, How to reserve Christ amongst us.
as by the often receyuyng of this sacrament, and by the following of his other
commandments.

But to prove the external wourshyppyng of the sacrament when it was not
received, all that ever the Pope could bring in out of the holy doctors, was
this saying only of saint Austyne. No man eats the flesh of Christ, that
does not worship it before. Which saying we judge to be right godly spoken.
But that in these words saint Austyne meaned of the worshyppinge of the
sacrament with hands and knees without the receiving of it (a thing which was
utterly unknown in saint Austines days) and not rather of the spiritual
worshyppyng of it, is not to be thought. For to worship the flesh of Christ
can be nothing else than with an humble and penitent mind to show us to
believe this surely of our savior Christ's flesh: first, that he has
offered it up upon the cross, and instituted this sacrament to assure us yt ye
same one offeri^g has purchased us ye remissyo^ of our sins for ever, To
wo^ship the flesh o^ Christ.
and did therefore present and offer unto us freely the grace and good will of
God by it, for to help us to believe surely in it both for the remission of our
sins, and for the receiving of his grace and strength to amend them again:
and then, humblye to receive this sacrament in the same faith, and with a good
purpose to use the grace given us by ye same to the utter mortifying of our
own flesh. This is the true wourshyppynge of the flesh of Christ, either at
the receyuyng of this sacrament or at the exercysyng of any other of Christ's
commandments. And thus may we wourshyppe the flesh of Christ and receive
it also through faith and by the applyeng of our selves to his hole laws, as to
the hearing or redyng of his holy word, or to the exercysynge of fast,
prayer, and almose deeds, even as well as by the receyuyng of this holy
sacrament. And therefore to wourshyppe the flesh of Christ before we do eat
it, can be nothing else, than to believe surely in the death and resurrection
of it. First, and than to obey and follow his commandments with all
dilygence. And that we can not wourshyppe the flesh of Christ any otherwise
than thus as is aforesaid, neither yet reserve or comprehend it in the
sacraments for to be worshipped, though the elements or creatures of that
bread and wine which has been ones used at the holy souper, may be
reserved, but only when they do ministre unto us these words: take eat,
take, drink, like as God has appointed them, may easily be perceived by the
holy sacrament of baptysme. Unto the which we judge no honor to be due but
only when the water does certyfie us that our souls are washed within,
through the body and blood of Christ, by having it powered upon our bodies
outwardely, in token or remembrance of the same.

But to this the Pope has said: the water of baptism ought not to have so
much honor done unto it, as the sacrament of the body and blod of Christ,
both because Christ is not naturally and substancially in that water, and also
because there is no such change of that water into the body and blod of
Christ as there is in the bread which has been at the holy souper.

The answer. After what sort his change was, or how he thought Christ to
be present in the holy sacrament of Baptism, I cannot tell. But this I am
sure of, that if the holy sacrament of baptime be ministered a right, and
according to the ordynance of Christ, there baptyseth by it: God the father,
God the son, and God the holy ghost. These.iii. doubtless are given in the
name of Baptyme. And how it should be then, that Christ is not as naturallye
and substancially present there, as in ye other sacrament, is to be wondered
at. But doubtless as both these sacraments are the ordynaunces of Christ,
and instytuted both for one purpose, (as towchynge to their effect) so is he
as naturally present with the one as with the other: and his presence is to be
honored in the one, like as it is in the other

The Pope himself does grant the substance and effect of Baptysme to
consyste chieflye in the ministracion of these words: I Baptyse thee in the
name of the father and cetera. And yet he will not grant the substance and
effect of this other sacrament to consyst chiefly in the ministracio^ of
these words likewise: take, eat, this is my body etc. take, drink, this is
my blod. etc. but says that the bread is always the body of Christ, if it
has been once consecrated, whether it be mynystred or hanged up for a show.

The answer. First, that the substance of holy baptyme does not chefly
alone but also holly consyst in the mynistracyon of the words appointed unto
it, is good to be known. For except there be a person baptized with the
water, The virtue of baptime consysteth in the ministration of the words only.
in the name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost, the water of it
self is of none effect. For as Saint Austen says: when the word comes
together with the water, then is there a sacrament. By the which saying he
meaned as if he would have said thus: when these words. I baptize the in the
name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost, are ministered by the water of
baptime, and received with believe of him, unto whom they are ministered, then
is there a sacrament presented and given unto him. Whereupon this doctor said
further thus also: in the water does the word purifye. Take away the word,
and what is it the^ other than water. Behold, without these words be
ministered by the water: I baptyse the in the name of the father, etc. the water
of it self is of none effect. And where is then I pray you ye virtue of so
many blessings and brethinges as were wont to be made over the font, when there
did none yet receive ye effect of these words together with the water? but as
these words of baptising, which only make the water of it of effect, can not
be received, but when the water is ministered to one that is baptized in deed,
so does the hole effect and substance of this holy sacrament of baptyme,
consyst chiefly and only in the mynistryng of the words.

And eue^ so does the hole substance and effect of both these.ii.
sacraments, baptyme and the souper of Lord, consyst and stand in the
ministering of the words that Christ has appointed unto them. For if they be
not so used, that the word may go together with ye ministering of them, after
ye same form and manner that their lord and master did ministre them him
self, and appointed or ordained us to do it after him, but are altered of us,
then are they not his sacraments, but our own inventions. Wherefore as in the
sacrament of baptism there must be present first the ministre, whose faith
is so far forth required that he do ente^de to mynistre it both according to
Christ's ordinance, and for the same purpose also that he did institute it, to
wete, for ye styrryng up of faith in him for the fre remission of their sins:
and then there must be present also ye person which may have it mynistred
unto him: and thyrdlye there must be with both these in likewise, the
sacrament of baptyme, which is not the water of it self, but ye dyppyng in, or
the powryng on of the water upon the person together with these words: I
baptize the in the name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost: even so
is it with the souper of the Lord. For there must be present first, the
mynistre, whose faith is thus far forth required, that he do entende to
stir up a true faith in Christ, and that by the mynistrynge of it
according to his ordinance, and there must be present also them that will
receive the holy souper, and then the sacrament, The substance of the holy
souper does consyst in the ministryng of the words.
which is not the bread and wine of themselves, but the ministrynge of the
bread and wine together with these words: take, eat, this is my body etc.
take drink, this is my blod etc. do this in the remembrance of me. Therefore
seeing our Lord Jesus Christ has joined all these words and the ministrynge
of them to gether thus, and commanded us to do even the same thing that he
did him self, in the remembrance both of his passion and of instytutynge
this sacrament, with all other things that he has done or does for us, so
shall it not be lawful for us either to deuyde or part in sundre these holy
words and the ministringe of them together with the sacrament making the
holy sacramental words to be only these: this is my body. Or to take the
bread and wine for the sacrament of his body and blod, though they had been
once prepared for the^, when these other words: take, eat, take, drink, do
this in the remembrance of me, are excluded from them. For these words:
take, eat, take, drink, and do this in the remembrance of me, do make the
sacrament to be of effect unto us, in showing this, that he would never have
put us in remembrance thus, These words: take, eat, and drink do consecrate
the sacrament as well as these: this is my body
of his body breakyng and blod shedyng for our sins, if he would not have us
to gather first a sure faith in ye remissyo^ of al our sins, by the same, at
al such times as they were ministered and spoken unto us according to his
commandment, as well as he would by these other words: this is my body,
declare what it is that we shall receive afterward. Wherefore as we do first
gather a sure faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, We do first gather faith in
the remyssyon of al our sins by hearing of ye priest speak the words holly
together, when he will present the sacra. And we dostreng then the same faith
by the receyuyng of it afterward
by the hearing of this his commandment: take, eat, take, drink, and do
this in the remembrance of me, as well as we do by the other words which
declare the sacrament to be his body that we shall then receive, so should
these words be always spoken together unto the people, when the sacrament
may be ministered with them also. Lest the words which do declare ye sacra. to
be his body, might else be spoken to our damnation, if the other words which
do declare his goodness in presentyng of it unto us, did not first give us this
faith before, that he would never so have said and done if he would not have
showed by the same yt his body and blood was always the remission of our
sins. And yet the schole doctors, being deceived through the abuse which
was crepte in by the reserving of that bread which had been ones prepared at
the souper, made the sacramental words only these: this is my body.

Now out of all this, may every good christian man perceive, that the hole
virtue, substance, and effect of this holy sacrament of the lords souper,
does no less consist and stand only in the ministering of the words and
sacrament together, like as he did use them him self, than does the holy
sacrament of baptime, and that these.ii. sacraments are in this point both of
one nature, and not unlike, that is to say, the water of baptime is a
sacrament when these words are ministered by it: I baptize the in the name and
cetera. and the bread and wine is a sacrament when these words are ministered
by it of Christ him self (though yet by the mouth of a ministre appointed):
take, eat, this is my body and cetera. take, drink, this is my blood etc. and
do this in the remembrance of me. Wherefore they are nether of them
sacraments but when they are in ministrynge of the words which Christ
appointed to them, although the Pope would have that bread which has been
ones at the holy souper to be hanged up, and borne about in processions as a
sacrament, for to maintain therewith all this abuse: that it might be
corporally worshypped, as though that should be more to ye honoring of the
sacrament then to have it offered to be received spiritually. Let every good
christen man judge this by the word of God.

But thou say: if the hangyng up of the sacrament, and the bearing of it
about, for to be corporally worshypped should be laid a side as an abuse, so
should we condemn therewith, as manifest ydolatrers, both all them that have so
worshypped it without ye receyuyng, and the^ also that do so worship it yet
in other countres.

The answer. Though the worshypping of it, as it has been used, should be
laid a side as an abuse, yet is there not therwithall condemned all the
people, that have done, or do yet wourshyppe it so in other countres. But
therwithall is condemned this abuse, that men should not hold, take and
receive this holy sacrament as Christ has ordained it to be taken, to the
strengthening of their faith in him, both for their sins past, and for the
receyuynge of his grace to amend them again, but to show it, to ha^ge it up,
and to bear it about, to have it corporally worshypped only. Which kind of
honoring it, with out the receyuyng thereof, as ye lord has made no mention of
it, neither by word nor deed in all his holy scriptures, and does therefore
serve to the vain trustyng in the inuencyon of man, so has he forboden it as
a thing most abominable in his sight. This abuse is to be condemned, although
we do not therewith condemn the hole church of Christ, that either has or does
yet abide in the same vnwittinglye. For as many of the children of god as has
or does yet follow this abuse, not knowing any better but being seduced by
their pastors, that do they not as the members of Jesus Christ, and of his
church, The me^bres of the church may well ^^re but not as ye me^bres of
Christ.
but as they are imperfect and ignorant persons, which ignorance god our
heavenly father, for his sons sake Jesus Christ, shall forgive them withal
their other offenses like as he does forgive us our daily sins also, when so
ever they or we do repent.

But for an excuse of this cloked holiness, the Pope says further: it can be
none abuse, nor any evil thing, what so ever is, of good devotion, done to
the honor of God and to the having of his sacraments in higher reverence.

The answer. This were very well spoken if all men knew truly what good
devotion were. Which doutlesse can be in nothing, where Gods word and
commandment is not. King Vzia did of a good devotion (as he thought) save
certain of ye best catle which he took from his enemies, ii. para. xxviii.
to do sacrifice unto ye lord with all, for the great victory he had given him.
And yet because it was not according to gods commandment yt he so did, he was
puinished for it. And therefore we may not look what we think to be good
devotion and use it, but we must count yt the best devotion which does most
agree with gods commandments. Wherefore let us count this to be the^ chief
honoring of this sacrament to receive it with such a pure faith as causes
both repentance for our former sins, and a good purpose to amend them
again, to spring forth in us. Well, thus have we proved that this sacrament,
ought not to be reserved for to be corporally wourshypped also, as the Arc
was.

And as this was a great abuse to set up the sacrament or to carye it about
in processyons for to have it corporally wourshypped without the presentyng of
it to be corporally received, saying ones in the year only, so was this no
less abuse, to receive it than neither but in one kind only. And that this
was also an abuse, consydre first, that it must needs be granted to be an
abuse, to alter any of Gods ordinances otherwise than he used them
himself, To use any thing otherwise than the lord has commanded, is an
abuse.
and commanded them to be used of other. Now is it plain and of al men
confessed, that ye lord in his first souper did communicate the sacrament in
both kinds unto his disciples, commaundyng them also to do the same that he
himself had done before them. The which commandment was observed, and the
sacrament in both kinds communicated for long time in the church after
Christ, yea and it has been always used to this day in Ethiopia and Gretia.
And how it came to pass that men of late days did use to receive it thus in
one kind only, we find no good testimony. Where by we judge it to have crept
in by ye negligence of priests and pastors.

But seeing the Lord has ordained the bread to be the sacrament of his body
for it self, and the wine to be the sacrament of his blood, we ought to speak
of them as he has ordained them, and none otherwise. The lord has appointed
these words to be mynistred by the bread: take, eat, this is my body which
shall be given for you. And these to be ministered by the cup: take, drink,
this cup is the new testament in my blood, which shall be shed for you and
for many, to the remission of sins. And wherefore will we then be wyser then
Christ has taught us, in saying: the bread alone is the body and blood of
Christ, and the cup ye blood and body? in deed in him self the lord has
his body and blood inseparable, and gives them to us holly together and
undivided. Yet as he has ordained the bread for the distributyng of his
body, and the cup for the giving forth of his blood, so ought we to use
them, and to speak of them, with out any further reasonyng.

But for the ministering of the sacrament in one kind only, and for the
mayntenaunce of all other abuses contrary to gods commandments, the Pope
is wont to bring in this reason: The church has in all outward things power
to dyspose and order, as they shall think best: and therefore they may keep
this ordinance of receyuyng the sacrament in one kind only, if they shall
think it good.

The answer. The holy church of Christ, being grounded with his spirit,
Who be ye church of christ, and what is their authority.
has doutlesse power to order and dyspose all outward things in time, place,
measure and manner, so far forth as the same may make to ye increase of
godliness amongst the people, that is to say, deuote people both of the
clergy and layte, may order and dyspose the time and place that gods wourde
and the holy sacraments shall be mynistred in, and they may order the manner,
measure, and time of praying together in the church, and appoint the day and
time when the common fast shall be observed of all the people together. In all
these things has the hole church of Christ full authority and power to
dispose, that ye things might so much the better for such appointing of
time, place, measure, and manner, be observed and holden as Christ has
commanded them, that is to say, that men might the more conveniently by the
appointing of such a place and time, hear the word of God and receive the
sacraments, and the more quyetly come to ye end that fasting and prayer was
ordained for. Out of the which ground ye church has even from the beginning
made ordinances, both for the word and sacraments, and also for other godly
exercises. As for this sacrament, that men should receive it fasting in the
morning (if necessity did not otherwise require) because that time seemed, and
is, (as every man well knows) more mete for the styrrynge up of deuotyon and
earnest godliness, than is the time after we have eaten our full. And
further, seeing that the coming together to the Lords souper is the godlyest
and most wholesome work that one of us may exercise and use with another, so
has the church thought it good, and to the furtheraunce of much devotion,
that it should be holden in a place both several from all other, and also
with out the using of any worldly business with it, as not only saint Paul,
i. Cor. x.
but all the hole congregation of Christ also, ordained that me^ should keep
none other feast in the church, when they would go unto the table of ye Lord,
but it alone. Also, seeing that Christ has not showed by express commandment
what prayers of thanks geuyng, or what other godly instructions he would
have used at his holy souper, and did yet use it him self with great plenty
of the^ both, therefore ought the church of Christ to descrybe some godly form
and manner of geuynge instructions unto the people before they come unto the
receyuynge of so high a mysterye, The church, that is to say, the devout
people both of the Magistrates and clergy in every country shall provide for
them selves, that all things be done after a decent order.
and of rendryng thanks unto god for it, after they have received it.
Wherefore this is the hole authority and power that ye church has in the
word and sacraments, and other of gods ordynaunces, that they may thus,
and shall with all their diligence, both as well the Princes and Magistrates
the^ selves, as the ministers of the word, order and dyspose them so in time,
place, measure, and manner, that the people thereby might not only have the more
devotion to use them with all fear and reverence, but also come the better to
the same end and purpose of them that they were ordained for of god. The
church has no authority to take away any of the sacraments, no more tha^ it
can forbid us to fast or pray.
But to change them unto any other fashyon, (as this sacrament was changed
from ye corporal receiving of it into a lokinge glass) or to leave them
utterly undone (like as men had left the receiuyng of the cup in the holy
souper) that authorite has no man, till Christ, which is the end that they
lead us unto, come him self. For it can be called no right ordering or
dysposynge of the sacraments to ye increasing of any godliness amongst ye
people, for to take the^ clean away: no more than it can be called a right
ordering of our prayers, to say we will pray trewly with our hertes, though we
do wylfully leave out the prayer of the mouth also. Wherefore it must needs be
an abuse to receive the sacrament in one kind only, other wise than god has
ordained it.

Moreover that we ought to receive this sacrament, in both kinds may well be
perceived, in that the lord him self, after he had taken the cup into his
hands, given thanks, and reached it unto his disciples, did and that with
great feruentnesse, and with more plain and comfortable words, express our
redemtio^ and communion in him by the cup, then he did by the bread or by
any other sacrament. For at baptyme, he commanded no more to be said then: I
baptize the in the name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost. And at
the ministryng of the bread of thanks geuyng, no more then: take, eat, this
is my body, which shall be given for you. But at the ministering of the cup he
said, and commanded other in his name to say: take, drink, this cup is the
new testament in my blood, which shall be shed for you and for many unto ye
remission of sins. Behold, good reader, how comfortable a gospel our
savior Christ has ordained this sacrament of wine to express. Wherefore it
may well be called the most holy and comfortablest sacrament of all other.
The cup is the most comfortable sacrament.
For seeing it is the word, when it is mynistred by the creature, that makes
the creature to be a sacrament, so does it doutlesse follow, that so much the
more comfortable as ye words are when they are ministered, so much the greater
is the sacrament that ministers them And therefore no christian man, yea no
angel from heaven, ought to have taken away from the weak and sinful
flock of Christ, this most comfortable sacrament specially seeing the lord
himself commanded it to be used also, with so great feruentnesse. Wherefore he
that would with hold this sacrament of wine from the people in the holy
souper, should (as much as in him lies) keep from them the ministration of
this holy gospel, that Christ has shed his most precious blood for
them. For although we do in deed receive even the same thing before by the
bread when it does ministre unto us the body of Christ, that we do
afterward when we receive the cup which ministers unto us his blod: yet as
he that loses the profit of them both again, which will not for all this
give himself, with all dylygence, unto fast, prayer, almosse deeds and all
other Godly exercyses, but wylfully follows the works of the flesh: so
does he lose the profit that he had received before by the bread which
ministered unto him the body of Christ, that wylfullye will refuse to receive
the wine, which should also mynister unto him his blood.

Wherefore if it be an abuse to neglecte gods commandments, when oportunite
serves us to obey the same, than must it needs be a great abuse to refuse the
receyuyng of the holy cup of thanks geuyng, when it is ministered in the holy
souper. But because me^ should not so greatly pass upon the true receiving of
this holy sacrament of the body and blod of Christ, either in one kind or in
both, the pope was wont to bring in this argument chiefly.

This sacrament of the body and blood of Christ (says he) may as well be
received spiritually by calling to remembrance that Christ has dyed for us
when we do but look upon it, as it may be outwardely: though we should
receive it ones in the year outwardely also.

The answer. To say that the sacrament may as well be received spiritually,
as it may be corporallye or outwardlye, must needs be a wonderful saying. For
turn it what way ye will, and it shall be yet holly against Christ and his
manifest commandment. For if ye understand by the spiritual receyuynge of
this sacrament that it must be received in true faith, The sacrament was
instituted to be received both corporally and spiritually.
but yet corporally also, then is that the only receyuyng of it according to
gods spiritual ordinance, and none other. But if you understand your
saying of such a spiritual receyuyng of this sacra. as is with out ye
corporal receyuyng of it also, so can not that be the receyuyng of it
according to gods spiritual ordinance. For he gave the bread unto his
disciples and commanded them to take, and eat it, and that corporally also,
and in like manner gave he them the cup to drink. And therefore as it is
manyfestly against the commandment of Christ, to make a gasynge stock of the
sacrament and not to receive it, in saying thou can call as much to mind
when thou do but se it, as the Lord has ordained to put into thy mind by
the corporal receyuyng of it after his most loving and spiritual
institution, so is there no spiritual receyuyng of this sacrament but to take
it corporally with such a spirit and faith, as styrreth us both to repentance
for our sins past, To receive ye spirit of god in ye sacrament when we
receive it corporally, what it is.
and also to amend them again by the humble following of his laws.

And yet for the mayntenaunce of a spiritual receyuyng of this sacrament, many
have brought forth this saying also of saint Austyne: Creed et manducasti, that
is to say, believe and thou have received. The which saying has yet been
dyuersely understand, like as the appetites of men are diverse. For many of
the^ which will seem to favor ye word of god, have understand it thus: if a
man believe trewly in Christ it forces little for the receiving of the
sacrament, a man may be saved well enough without it, say they: and so they
are become as negligent in receyuyng of this holy sacrament as ever they were
before. But of such I would feign know, what the corporal receyuyng of this
sacrament is, and where to it serves, if to believe in Christ be the only
receyuyng of it. Other some again, (as the Pope enspecially) has said, that
if a man believe trwly upon the sacrament he has fulfilled these words of
saint Austyne: Creed et manducasti, that is to say, believe and thou haste
received. But to all such I answer, that we may not believe upon the
sacrament as if it were able to work or give us our salvation of it self, but
we must believe upon Christ and upon the merits of his passion, the virtue and
strength whereof he gives us in this sacrament. Wherefore when saint Austyne
spoke these words: Creed et manducasti, that is to say, believe and thou have
received, it must needs be that he meaned the^ of their believe that could not
come unto the use of the sacrament. Unto whom he might well say, Quid paras
uentrem et dentes, creed et manducasti, that is to say, what do thou prepare
either belie or teeth, believe in Christ, and thou have eaten even ye same thing
that he would give the by the sacrament if thou myghtest come unto it. We must
use all these things, spiritually, and yet corporally also.
For if we ca^ not come unto this sacra. for lack of opportunity, nether fast
by means of weakness, nor pray for lack of tongue, nether give almose for lack
of substance, yet if we believe surely in Jesus Christ, this same faith shall be
rekened unto us for all righteousness. But again, if we may use either any of
these things, or can come unto this sacra. we ought to use it, and that as
often as it is presented, (except our delytyng in sin fear us to the
contrary) and nether make a gasing stock of it, as if we could receive ye
strength thereof by what means we would, nor yet think us to have no need of it
because we do sumwhat believe in Christ already. We have the holy gospel,
through the which we may continually eat and receive Christ spiritually: and
yet when the sacra. is presented, we shall to the furtheryng of our faith and
to the encreasyng of our obedience toward gods laws, use it also, and
that after the same manner that the lord used it him self, and not turn or
pervert the sacra. into any other use, but abide by these plain words of the
lord: take, eat etc. take and drink etc.

But thou say: our savior Christ has not bound him self or the works
of our salvation unto any outward work or ceremonye, and therefore it is not
necessary to our salvation to receive this sacrament but at our lybertye.

The answer. Undoubted it is that our savior Christ has not bound his
grace and the works of our salvation upon any outward work or ceremonye,
but we may receive and eat to everlasting life, Christ our lord, that true
heavenly fode, through his word, not only with out this sacrament, but with out
all other his ordinances also. For if we can nether have the use of them, or
not have them according to the institucion of Christ, yet if we do believe these
words truly of the holy gospel: Christ has dyed for our sins, so shall we
then eat the flesh of Jesus Christ and drink his blood to everlasting life,
even as well as we had had the use of all his ordinances. But therwithall, when
Christ sends us opportunity of time and place, and that we may conveniently
come together in his name, and hold his holy souper, if we do not then hold
the same, and that even after his own fasshion and commandment, so can or
may this spring of none other occasion then that we do not aryght know Jesus
Christ our savior in this his holy ordinance and commandment of the holy
souper, To believe in Christ a right requyrethe our obedyence toward all his
laws and ordinances.
as our only God and savior. For we do not believe aryght that he has
ordained and commanded us, like as in all other, so in this sacrament also,
that, which shall serve us certeynly (if we will use it only so, as and whereunto
he has ordained and set it forth) to our salvation, in furtheryng more
assuredly our healthful receyuyng or eating of his flesh and blood by it:
but we hold the corrupt judgment of man to be wyser and more careful for our
salvation then our savior Jesus Christ, the everlasting wisdom of the
father, and the which was yet so desirous of our health, that he did not
only bestow his body and blood for us upon the cross, but has provided
this sacrament for to give us the same effectuallye by it also.

But two causes specially there are wherwyth the Pope has let the simple
people from receyuynge the sacrament according to Christ's commandment. The
first was, because he taught (by making of ordinances for the same) that the
priests might use the holy souper of the Lord priuatelye for them selves,
and that they might therefore use also as many Masses in their churches upon
one day, or together, as they list. The second, because the priests were not
commanded to teach the people, that it was go, and negligence, and worthy
to be much reproved in a true christen man, to be present at the souper of the
lord, and yet not to receive the sacrament. The which.ii. causes doubtless
are not only contrary to the dewtie and service that god does in his word
require both of the priests and people, but also to the use that has been in
the old and prymatiue church before times. And yet to stablyshe ye first cause
and error, the Pope has brought in this reason.

The lord has instituted this sacrament, that there might and should
receive it, who so does of a pure heart desire it. The which desire shall
neither by the multitude nor fewenesse of the people, be hyndred. And therefore
(says he) may any priest pryuately and for him self alone, use this sacra.
when so ever he does with a pure heart desire it, though there be no man to
be comunycated with him.

The answer. That the sacrament was of the lord instituted, The souper of the
lord is not bownde to any time, place, or people: and yet the faithful ought
not to hold it otherwise than the lord commanded.
that there might and should receive it, whosoever of a pure heart and good
devotion did desire it, must needs be granted. But to desire it with a pure
heart and good devotion can doutlesse be none other thing, than to desire it
according to the ordinance and institucion of the lord. Now is it verily
the institution of the lord that the faithful shall in commune and being
gathered together, receive it one with an other, as the lord did hold it him
self at the first, and commanded it of other to be holden: like as saint
Paul well witnesses, and concludes upon this, that it is not the holding of
ye lords souper, when it is not kept in commune, but every company for it
self. Whereupon he learned and exhorted the Corinthians doing the contrary,
to tarry one for another, i. Cor. xi.
and so to hold it in commen together.

Thou say: if this ordinance of Paul should be observed of all men, than
were the sick folk like to be evil seen unto, which can not come unto the
church to receive the sacrament there in commune.

The answer. Because the sick folk can not come unto the church, therefore
ought the Church, through certain of their ministers and members, to come
unto them, and so to hold a communion with them at home in their own houses,
rather tha^ so godly an ordinance should be broken. But if it should so
chance that this ordinance of receyuynge the sacra. one with another in
commune, could not so be kept for lack of time, and persons conueniente,
Christ him self showed an ensample of this in healyng a sike man upon the
sabbothe day. Mar. ii.
than may the ministre dyspence with this ordinance in time of necessity, and
prefer the succouringe of the sick man's conscience, before the observing
of any outward ceremonye. But where the people may come together, there ought
this godly ordinance to be observed, with all dilygence. For thus have the good
holy fathers used it in ye primative church always. The which did yet, hold
the souper of the lord pryuately for them selfs in their oratories, (which
were little chapelles in their houses) when they could not have the people to
gether to the sacrament and had yet a good devotion to hold the holy souper,
though not alone but with their devout brethren: like as we may read of saint
Vlrichus and other holy fathers and godly bishops, which had their private
masses in their own houses, but not without communicantes.

Wherefore seeing it is the ordinance of the lord that we should hold the holy
souper one with another in common, as Paul well witnesses, and that it has been always used to be holden so of the most holy martyrs, co^fessours and
other godly fathers, till now of late, it can be no good devotion to desire to
receive the sacrament after another order tha^ god did both use it him self,
and gave commandment to have it used of other, seeing there can no man amend
his order and fashion in it. If a man do desire to have his devotion exercised
and strenghthened through the using of godly things, he may use such
things as god has ordained for every man's sodein necessity: as the
hearing or redyng of the holy scripture, or he may deuouteli give him self to
fast, prayer, and almosse deeds. In the which godly exercises, a true and
devout faithful man, may as well receive and eat that heavenly bread,
Christ our lord, as in the holy souper. But if he have devotion to eat the
souper of the lord, so let him tarry for the congregation yt with the eating
thereof together with them in commune, he may profess and show, that as the
bread is made of many graynes which ministers unto him ye very body of
Christ, and the wine of many grapes which ministers forth his blod, so will
he be of one mind, will, and power with all them specially, that receives it
together with him.

Now is it true also, that there is mention made in the old doctors, both of
the Greeks and Latins, that the people used in their days to receive the
sacrament some at Easter only, some twyse or thryse in the year, and some
oftener, but very few daily, where the mass was yet daily observed. But yet
can not this prove tha t men have kept the souper of the lord with out
communicantes, and that in every corner of the church, like as we have done.
For there was always some good devout people, besides the clerks and
scholars which were the^ many in eueri church, that tended upon the ministracio^
of the sacraments, that would receive it together with the priest. And less
any should dout of this, I shall manyfestly prove it to have been so.

A plain declaration out of the holy scripture, and of the use of the
primative church, yt there should no mass be holde^ wherein the souper of the
lord is used, with out communicantes.

The word of god shows this plain enough where it says: do this in the
remembrance of me. By the which words we may well perceive that we ought to
do even the same thing in the holy souper of the lord, that he did him self in
it. Now do the euangelystes manyfestly witness that he took the bread and the
cup in his hand, gave thanks, and communicated them both unto his
disciples, commaundyng them therewith to take them both and receive them. The
which commandment, being so manifest that nothing can be more plainli spoken,
ought to be so highly esteemed of us, that we should think it utterly unlawful
to handle or use this sacrament otherwise than ye lord has done with it him
self. Wherefore this plain and earnest ordinance of Christ shall be sufficient
for to declare unto al Christian me^ that to hold ye souper of ye lord with out
co^municantes, that is to say, without the mynistryng or co^municatyng of it
unto some body, is not lawful. And that ye holy fathers of old time have
also thought it unlawful may easily be perceived by this: The holy fathers make
always mention of the dystrybutynge and receyuynge of the sacrament
in that they do at all times, when they make mention of the souper of the
Lord, and speak of it at any time fully, make mention of the halowyng and
dystributyng of the sacrament together, as the chief part and substance
thereof. As is to be seen first by saint Cypriane, who writing of the mass
brought forth this ensample for to fear such as were unworthy from coming to
the sacrament. Sermon de lapsis.
When the common prayers and ceremonies were fully done, and that the deacon
had begone offer, Note how the old fathers used this word, offer.
that is to say, to offer and present the chalice unto them that were present,
a certain maid, through fear of the godly majesty, because she had given
unto her aunte in the time of persecution part of it that had been offered unto
Idolles, turned her face, holdyng her mouth together, and would not receive
the chalice.

Saint Ambrose also, Sermon.viii. in psalm. cxviii.
writing of the holy souper of the Lord, exhorts the people to the receyuyng
of the sacrament with these words: when the holy souper is prepared, se thou
stand ready, that thou may receive a preservation, and that thou may
receive ye body of Jesus Christ And thus is ye holy souper set forth by the same
Ambrose also, libr. v. ca. i. ii. iii. Where he shows plainly that the folk,
when they did hold the holy souper, did come up unto ye alter, to receive the
body and blood. Lib. ii. retract. xi.


And saint Austyne, speaking of the songs that me^ used by the alter, and
making mention of the holy souper of the lord, as it was holden in those
days, writes, that men have song psalms before the offering, or as that was
dystributed which was offered.

Epis. lix.
He writing also ad Paulinam, and speaking of the prayer of the mass, sets
together the halowing and breakyng of the bread that was for to be dystributed,
and says, that all these things were concluded with prayer.

Lib. ii. cap. xviii
The same saint Austen writing contra Faustum says thus: We christian men do
keep the remembrance of the offering of Christ with the offering et
participationae, that is to say, with the common partakyng of the body and
blood of Christ.

By these sayings now, every man sees well, that with them of the old time,
the dystributyng and receyuyng of the sacrament was taken forth effect and
substance of the holy souper. And without ye which they did not use the
halowyng or offering of the h. sacra, but did only bliss and halowe it with
thanks geuyng, that it might be dystributed and offered unto other that were
present. So that the lay people did always use it in common together with the
priests. Whereupon that holy father Chrysostom did say: Homel. xviii. upon
the epistle to the Corinthians
that in the h. souper there shall be set forth unto al the^ that are present,
one body and one cup. And the priests shall have it (says he) in common
with the folk.

And further said he: the priests do stand in vain at the alter,
sermon.iii. ad Ephesians.
and daily offering is done in vain, where no man does communicate with them.

And he writing upon the epistle to the Hebrews said thus also: Lione^^ xvii.
to the Heb.
I do not say that it is enough to prepare thy self.xl. days to the
communion at Easter, as if I did forbid the thereby the communion at any time of
the year, but I will thou go always unto it with true godliness.

Now seeing this holy doctor Chrysostom affirms both that the priests do
stand at ye alter in vain, where no man does communicate with them, and also
that he would have men at al times of the year to go unto the sacrament in
true godliness, it is to be thought, that if this holy bishop had had none of
the clerks nor of the lay people to communicate with him, that he would not
have kept the souper of the Lord. By blissynge of the folk was understand
the recytyng of the goodness of god showed forth in our savior Christ, whereby
the people were so stirred to faith, that they were blyssed thereby.


In actis concilii Toletani have we, as certain priests had begone to
communicate by and by for themselves, so soon as they had said the prayer of
the Lord, before they did bliss the folk how that in the same counsel it
was ordained, that when the prayer of the Lord (called in latyne the pater
noster) was said, the blessyng of the folk should follow, and that then first
the holy sacrament should be received, and that after this order: the priests
should receive it before the alter, the clerks in ye quere, and the people
without the quere. In the which counsel there was also set forth a
reformacyon, and an order descrybed for the saying of mess. Whereby we may
plainly see, how that the holy fathers in those days, All the Canons yt ever
have been made for the sayyng of Mass, do witness the communicating of ye
sacra. to be a substa^cy all part thereof. And therefore the old fathers never
knew any mass said with the communicating thereof
did take the communicatyng of the folk with the sacrament, to be the
chiefest, part, effect, and substance of the mess. Yea and not only is this
found by all the old holy fathers of the prymatiue church, but it is
stablyshed also with all the ordinances of holy counselles, where the contrary
can never be found in any good author, but special in no counsel. And that
does all the orders and canons made for ye saying of mess, not only amongst
the Greeks, but the Latinistes also, most plainly witness: like as we may
well see by the form and canon which has been daily used amongst us for the
same. As where it is ordained in the canon of ye mass, that ye priest, should
after the consecration, speak always these words: we meke men do desyer the,
O almyghtye god, command these things, through the hands of thy holy
aungelles, to be carried up to thy high alter, in the sight of thy divine
majesty, that we all, which of the communion of this alter, shall receive the
holy body and blood of thy son, may be replenysshed with all grace and
thankfulness. Seeing now that this prayer was made for a part of the canon
and rule which was set forth for the right order of saying mass, and was
therefore to be continually said, when so ever there was any mass holden, it
is doutlesse good to perceive, that when this prayer was made first, and a
right, it was not made to be said in mockage to the dyuyne majesty, like as
it has now for long been used, but because the people in those days
should use to receive the body and blood of Christ with the priest, when so
ever there was any mass said.

Mark these.iiii. words specially in this prayer which was thus in Latyne: Vt
quotquot ex hac altaris participatione corpus et sanguinem filii tui
sumpserimus, that is to say, we beseech the that as many of us, first as have
received, second, of this communion of the alter, third, the body and blood
of thy son, fourth, may be replenysshed with all grace and thankfulness.
Which prayer can not be said of any man a right, where the body and blood of
Christ is not so received as the Lord appointed it to be done, by taking and
eating of the bread, and by drinking of the cup at an holy souper. And upon
the receyuynge of the sacrament thus, goes many of the prayers also, which
were made to be said after the communion, and were therefore called in latyne
Post communionem, whereof some of them did begyne thus: Sacramenta que sumpsimus
that is to say, that sacraments which we have received. Item misteria que
sumpsimus, that is to say, the mysteries which we have taken, and such like.
Also in the canon and order which Dionisius set forth for the saying of
Mass, and in other old forms and canons made both amongst the Gekes and
Latinistes, there is plainly declared that the ministrynge of the sacrament to
the people, was always a special part of holding the holy souper. For in
all these forms and canons there is an order set forth how the priests
should exhort the people to the receyuynge of the sacrament and how they
should ministre the same unto them.

Therefore is it true, and shall remain true for ever, that as the ordinance
of our savior Jesus Christ is manifest and plain that men should always
when his souper is in hand, take and eat the bread and drink of the cup,
even so has the holy fathers used it in the prymatiue church also, following
the Lords commandment herin, and holden no Mass without there were some
that would receive the sacrament together with the priest. Wherefore it must
needs be an error unlawful to do the contrary.

Well thus have ye heard a plain declaratyon both by the ordinance of
Christ, and by the use of the prymatyue church also, that there ought no
Mess to be said wherein the souper of the lord is handled, without
co^munica^tes, tha^ is to say, some such as will receive the sacrament
together with ye priest And now to declare also that there ought to be no mo
masses then one in a church at ones, ye shall first consydre the word of
god, given us through the holy apostle Paul, wh^^ he says thus: when ye come
togethe^ me^ do not eat the souper of ye lord for every man takes of the
meat^ his own souper for him self. When we hold more tha^ one souper to
gether, we do not hold the souper of the lord.
Behold, he called it here not the eatin^ of the lords souper, when every m^
eats a souper for him self. Whereupon, after he had set forth the example and
commandment of the lord as how he had holde^ his holy soup^ him self, and
commanded it of other to be holden: and after he had mad^ mention also of the
great punysshementes which god had sent upon the Corinthians for their
holding (...) the holy souper without godly order, he concluded with these
words: therefore my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another. Now if this be the right order of holding the lords souper, for one
to tarry ge^tely for another, and that the holy souper is not kept after a dew
order, when there is kept in one congregation more than one souper at ones,
than may every man well know that it is a thing unlawful so to do. And therefore
was it a thing vnherd of by them of the old time also, than in one church
there should be more tha^ one alter, or that there should be more than one
souper kept together. How often does sayncte Cypryane, when he speaks of the
unity of the church, bring in the one alter, like as it is of the other old
fathers also?

Yet is it true also, that at such time as the churches were yet but small,
and could not conuenientlye receive the people that were for to come together
in the^, They have holden in one church more tha^ one mess upon a day, but
not for all one and the same people, but for another sort of them.
that the good holy fathers, have at hie feasts, holden in one church mo
messes than one, but always one of the^ after another, and every one of them
for a part of the people which could not well come to the holy souper before.
Like as we have a plain instruction of this by pope Leo, writing ad Dioscorum
Alexandrinum and thereof there is sumwhat spoken also, de consecrat. distinc. i.
cap. necesse. And therefore the contrary is not to be thought, but that al they
that came to any of these messes, and did abide by the handlyng of the holy
souper in them, did receive also the sacrament all together, that they might
show thereby they would be all of one mind, will, and power, like as they had
al together taken part of one sacramental bread. And unto this receyuyng of
the sacrament together did saint Ambrose exhort the people coming together to
the mass, saying: The people used in those days to bring their offeringes of
bread and wine unto the church and to lay the^ upon the alter, yt the
ministre might give god thanks for them and so distrybute the^ unto the
poor: of the which there was one portion reserved for the sacra. also. And
because of this use, the Mass was caled a sacryfyce.
the offered gifts, laid upon the alter for the poor folk, shall be of the
hole folk: for through one bread they are all signified, because that we being
one, do eat all of one bread. And even unto this uniform manner did saint
Paul exhort the people also when he said: We many are one bread and one
body. For we all, (although every man yet in his own place, or in the same
congregation that he comes into) do always take part of one bread in ye holy
souper.

And further, seeing the priest in the mynistration or handlyng of the holy
souper, shall represent and show Christ our Lord, and that all the prayers
made in one congregation shall go together as out of one mouth and heart, and
finally seeing that Christ ordained this his holy souper to be keep together of
ye people, which use the holy apostles delivered unto the church, and the old
church of holy Martiers and Confessors have kept it none otherwise, what
godly occasyon than can there be ymagyned, wherefore men should in one church,
and in one congregation of the faithful, specially where all they that are
present may hear well one priest, and at one alter receive the sacra. to
gether, hold mo Masses than one at ones? But all this notwithstanding, after
the Pope had brought in that Dn^s nobiscum should be songen in Latin to the
people ye understood it not, then began the priests to pass little whether the
people took any head to the answeryng to it or no, so they might have a living
thereby: and after the priests had persuaded the people yt if they saw ye
sacra. lifted up in the Mass, it was even as good as if they had examyned
their conscience and come to the receyuyng of it, tha^ came it to pass by and
by yt the multitude of Messes were brought up, to the great destruction not
only of the holy souper of the Lord, but of the christian people also. For the
poor simple people began then to put their trust in the seeing and hearing of
Mass, without any faith in Christ, and without repentance for their
sins, gathered by the same. And that they so did may easily be peceyued. For
how should they either have gathered a sure faith in Christ by seeing the
sacrament (as it was thought to be) to be lyfted up, when they knew no thing
whether it was Christ's will and mind to have it so showed unto them, or no?
without the sure knoweledge of the which, there can no man, gather a sure
faith. Or how should they have gathered any true repentance by the hearing
of a priest say mass before them, when they heard him speak never a word
against them that brake the laws of God, wherout the true knowledge of syn and
repentance for the same does always spring: seeing he spoke in such a
language as they understood nothing at all. And therefore it did rather comfort
them in their sins, then move them from them, so long as it did not bring
them trewly unto these.ii. things.

Well, we have declared thus both these.ii. things, to wete, first, that there
ought no mass to be said, wherein the souper of the Lord is handled, without
co^municantes. And secondly that there ought no mo masses to be said in a
church then one at ones, if the people may al together conveniently hear one
priest. And so there rests to declare now, whether it be worthy reprofe and
punishment for a true christen man to be present at the souper of the lord,
and not to receive the sacrament.

The word of god is doutlesse manifest enough in this, which to all them
indifferently yt are present at ye souper is spoken thus in the name of the
lord Christ: take, eat, this is my body: take, drink, this is my blood.
Now to be present at the speaking of these words and to give no credence yt
Christ does offer and present unto us in them, together with the sacra. the
very meat and drink of everlasting life, It is a plain token of
unfaithfulness and dysobedyence, to be present at the souper and not to
receive the sacra.
is surely worthy to be reproved in a christian man. But it is not possible that
we should believe this trewly and yet not be obedient unto the lord in
receyuyng at his hands, with all thankfulness and devotion such meat and
drink as may give him everlasting life, when it is freely offered him. And
therefore if not to believe that Christ does offer us here his body and blood
as the meat of everlasting life be worthy reproffe, so must it also be worthy
reproffe not to take it when it is freely offered. And if thou say you art not
at all times worthy to receive it when thou art at it, so do I answer yt
again, that thou art not worthy the^ to be present at it neither. For it is
also worthy reprofe for a man to give him self unto any godly exercise, To the
souper perteyne they only yt will receive.
to ye which he finds himself not mete or worthy, but specially to be
present at ye exercysing of ye godly souper. For it is manifest, yt Christ
hylde this his holy souper with such disciples only as were worthy (as it appeared
outwardly, according to ye which we must judge) and as unto all the which he
gave his body and blood, and commanded al yt same to take and eat it.
Therefore can no man be present, or is mete to be at this godly exercise, which
knows not yt he may receive the h. sacra. to his salvation and so be a
disciple Christ. For he yt has not given him self so far in to the doctrine
of Christ, that he will abide in the lord and desire the lord to abide in him,
he is not mete to hear these words spoken unto him: take, eat, this is my
body. etc. The holy fathers would suffer no man to be present at the holy
souper whom they thought not mete to receive
Wherefore the h. fathers of old time have kept this use very strongely and
earnestly, yt they, after ye common prayer and sermon was made, and before
they began to hold the h. souper, would put out of ye christian congregation
being assembled together in the church, not only such as were yet learners
of their faith and not christened, whom they called Cathecumeni, and such as
were possessed with euel sprites and were not well by the^ selves or by ye sprit
of christ, who^ they called Euergumeni, with them also yt did continue in any
open crimes or manifest ungodliness, but the^ also which stood yet in doi^g of
ye penance which had been laid upon them for their great offenses, wherewith
they had offended ye christen congregation openly, and were not yet reconsyled
unto Christ, by satysfyenge of his faithful people whom they had offended,
that they would amend, nor absolved of the^, for the same. All these they
would put out of the church when they would hold the holy souper of the
lord, as men unworthy to be present at it. Which thing they did not without a
good cause. For seyinge Christ (as I have said,) did hold this his holy
feast, with those dysciples, only to all the which he gave his body and blood,
and all the which did rceiue and eat the same: and seeing he has commanded us
to do even the same thing in his holy souper that he did him self, so is it
doutlesse right semyng that we should hold this holy feast but in the
presence of such dysciples only (so far forth as we can judge them by their
works) as are both mete, worthy, and desirous to receive the holy sacrament.
For as it is very unmeet and worthy great reprofe, as holy Chrysostom says,
to be called of a right gracious lord for to come unto a costly and precious
feast, and yet when thou come unto it not to prove of the meat and drink
that is set before the, so must it needs be worthy great reprofe to be called
of thy lord and savior, and that to ye feastfull eating of his most precious
body and blood, and yet not to prove ones of it. And because of this the holy
fathers have acknowledged all them to be unworthy also to be present at the
holy souper and to behold the godly ministracion thereof, that are not worthy
and mete to receive the holy sacrament also.

Which vnmetenesse, unfaithfulness, and despysyng of the heavenly meat and
drink, holy Chrysostom does sore speak against in writing thus of it. Who
so abides and stands present at the holy souper, and does not with other
receive ye sacrament, he stands there stubburnly and without all shame. For
(says he) as by the table of a lord which is but a man, the servants shall
not be present that have made angrye or offended their master, even so shall
there be done also by the holy souper, where there is brought forth the killed
offering, the Lord Christ, the lamb of God. Therefore men do bydde them go
their way that are in sin: Now when this is done, and they that know them
selves in sin, do not go their way, they show therewith an unshamefast
stubburnesse, and shall hear of ye lord these words: Friend, how art thou
common herin. And have not the marriage cloth on? etc. And this h. doctor
Chrysostom notes these words specially here, that the lord said not:
Wherefore art thou sytte^ down, but wherefore art you common herin. Whereby he
would show yt there should no man come in or tarry at this feast, which is not
clothed with the marriage cloth Christ, that is to say, which is not mete to
receive holsomely the holy sacra. to his salvation. But if it be so, that a man
do not know him self to be in wylful sin, that is to say, that he will
wylfully abide in it, when he is present at ye souper, so were it then a great
shame to despise and contemn the king our lord Christ, and his heavenly meat
and drink, in not receyuyng it when it is so gentely offered. And such a one
does Chrysostom compare to him that is desired of a friend to a good souper,
and comes, wassheth his hands, and lytteth down at the table, and yet
touches nothing, nor ones proves of the meat: whom doutlesse (says he) he
that desired such a one, can do none other then take him up again to his great
shame.

This holy father gives this answer also unto al them that will say they are
unmeet or unworthy to receive the sacrament, He that is not mete to the
communyon of the sacrament is not mete to pray together with the church.
and will yet be present at the holy souper. He that is not mete to receive the
sacrament, is neither mete with the church to pray nor ones to behold the
sacrament. But he shall do penance first, and then come unto the table of the
lord, when he fyndeth him self mete to receive the holy sacrament also.

And this ordinance did Pope Calixtius acknowledge to have been received of the
Apostles and to be observed in his time in the church of Rome, e. peracta. de
co^sec. distinc. xi.
as he witnessed saying. When the halowyng and preparyng of the people to the
sacrament by thanks geuynge unto the Lord for it, Thapostles ordained that
such should be shette out of ye church, as would not receive the sacrament in
commune.
is done, then shall they all be communycated, that will not be shett out of
the church. For thus (says he) have the Apostles ordained it, and thus does
the church of Rome keep it. What would this Pope say (think you) if he might
now come into the church of Rome and see the sacrament (as it is thought to
be) handled in every corner of ye church, and yet neither the priests to offer
it unto any man, nor any of the people ones to desire it? would he say that
this Pope were either his successor or the successore of thapostles? no truly.
For if he thought it to be a godly ordinance and worthy to be kept of all
men ones, and that so much the more as it had been used of thapostles them
selves, that all they should be shet out of the church, that would not receive
the sacrament when the souper of the lord was kept, he would doutlesse the
say both yt this were not ye keeping of ye right souper of the lord which is
now used in ye church, and also yt he which was now Pope, were no true
Christen man.

Be co^set. ^istinc. i.
The.ix. cannon also which Gracianus witnesses to have been the ordinance of
thapostles, commands all faithful that come into the church and hear the
scripture, if they will not also continue in praieng and receyuyng of the
sacrament, to be shet out of ye church, as them that set up a mysordre
amongst the people. Which thing was ordained also in the.ii. canon concilii
Antiochini.

And the.viii. canon of thapostles does require, that if a bishop, priest,
deacon, or other clerk will not be communicated when ye souper of the lord is
holden, he should show the cause thereof. And if the cause be leaful, he
should be pardoned, yt he did not communicate. But if he do not show the cause
of it, so shall he be she^ out of the congregation, as one that offends the
people, and styrreth up a suspection of him that offered the sacrament to be
received.

Now these.iii. canons or holy ordynaunces do acknowledge it to be so great a
fault, to come into the congregation where the holy souper of the lord is
holden, and yet not to be communicated, that they commau^de such to be excluded
and shet out of ye church. Shewinge this to be the cause of their appoyntinge
so hard a punishment to the offenders. Because they that did so absteyne or
with hold themselves, from the communion, did bring in a mysordre into the
church. As if it were don of a bishop, priest, deaco^ or other clerk, it caused
ye people to suspect his living or learning, which did ministre ye sacra. to
besuch, as with who^ me^ should not be communicated. For who so did not hold him
self in the true doctrine received and agreed upon in the church (as there
were many such in those days) with him did no devout bysshope, pryest or
clerk, communicate. He shall therefore (says the canon) show the cause, why
he is not communicated, and not bring in, or styre up a vain suspectio^ of any
man, through the which ye holy ministracion might be despised, or a deuysyon set
up amongst the people.

Who sees not now by these words, that to appear by ye holy souper, and not
to be communicated with the congregracion, has been condemned both in lay men
and also in the clergy. And that therefore, because it brought in a misordre
amongst the people which were in use to be communicated together.

But specially we may see by this latter canon, that al ye people in those
days when this order was taken, did use to be communicated together, and that
such should be expulsed as would not come to the sacrament. For else how
should that ministre have been brought in an euel suspeccion with the people,
that ministered the holy souper, when a bishop, priest, deacon or other clerk
had come^ in and not ben communicated with him at his ministracion, if it had
not ben the commen use that all they which were present at ye holy souper
should be communicated? and in like manner, how should they of ye layte which
did not receive it together, have been accused thereof, as men that set up a
misordre in the church, if it had not ben the commen use, that when the holy
souper was holden, al they that were present should receive the sacrament
together? but doutlesse it was the commen order in those days, that men
should shet out of the church and commen congregation both them of the
clergy and laite, that were present at the holy souper, and were not
communicated together. And that for this purpose, because the doing thereof,
when it was done of a lay man, did bring in a misordre in the church where
the people were wont to receive the sacrament all together: and when it was
done of any of the clergy it stirred up an evil suspection toward him that
ministered the holy souper.

Out of al these now it is manifest and plain to every christen man, that both
after the word of god, and use of the old or prymatyue church, it was worthy
reprofe, to be present at the holy souper, and not to receive the sacrament
together. For the lord has ordained his holy souper, for all them his disciples
only, that will and may receive it together. And he that will not be such a
dysciple, to him is not this souper prepared. For ye lord has not instituted
it to be a lokyng glass, or a gasyng stock, but said: take, eat: take and
drink. And likewise Paul: the bread yt we break, etc. we, says he, and not
I, Cor. xi.
or ye priest alone. And further says he: one bread one body, for we all take
part of one bread: we al, says he. And thus has the old church used it
also, till the true governing of ye same did fall, and till men began to hold
ye h. souper of ye lord, not thereto yt we might ye more perfiteli live in
christ, and he in us, but yt the priests might get the^ a living by it, without
any true teaching or preching of Christ, and without any moving of ye people to
repe^tau^ce and ame^deme^t of living by their ha^dlyng of the h. sacra. Which
thing to do ye better, the priests said ye mass was a sacrifice for sin. And
the^ ye people were content to look at ye sacra. a far of, because the
priests had persuaded them, that if they were present at the hearing and
seeing of the Mass, or gave any thing thereunto, so should it obtain them al
good fortune, and save them from all peril and danger. whether they
understood it, or not, whether they were communicated or not, they having
repentance for their sins and purpose to amend there lives, or not. But as
god and our savior Jesus Christ, has ordained this holy sacrament for to move
us first unto a sure faith and trust in the free remyssion of our sins, that
he might the better so, cause us both to repent of our synful lives, and to be
bold also to follow his most loving commandments, and that by ye
ministering of his blesed body and blood to be received of us by the corporal
receiving of it: he grant us also so to behave our selves at all such times
as it shall be presented unto us, that we may co^tynually be thankful both to
him and to our neighbor for the same.

Grant this, good Lord, for thy sweet sons sake Jesus Christ. Amen.
Imprinted at London for Gawlter Lynne dwelling on Summers kaye by Byllynges
gate.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.




