The book of hauking huntyng and fysshyng, with all the properties and
medecynes that are necessary to be kept.


The true form of keeping of hawks as has been used in times past. And first
to speak of hawks from an egg till they been able to be taken.
FOr to speak of hawks. First they ben eggs. And after they been disclosed
hawks and commonly goshaukes ben disclosed as soon as ye choughes, in some
place more timely after the country is of here and timely breedyng. And we
shall say yt hawks done eyere and not breed in the woddes. And we shall say
that hawks done draw when they bear tymbryng to their nestes, and not they
build, ne make their nestes. And in the time of their love they call, and not
cauke. And we shall say yt they tred^ And when they ben unclosed and begin for
to fether any thing of length: anon by kind they will draw somewhat out of the
nest, and draw to bows and com again to their nest. And then they ben called
bowesses. And after saint Margarettes day they flee from tree to tree. And then
they ben called brau^chers. And then it is time for to take the^. And seven
nyghtes before saint Margaretes day and seven nights after is the best taking
of spatehaukes.

How ye shall demean you in taking of hawks and with what instruments, and
how you shall call them.
WHo will take hawks: he must have nets which been called vrynes, and those
must be made of good small threde, and it had need be dyed either grene or blewe
for espyeng of the hawk. And he must take with him nedle and threde to ensyle
the hawks that been taken. And in this manner they must be ensiled. Take the
nedle and threde: and put it through the over eye lyd and so of that other, and
make them fast under the beck that she see not. Then she is ensyled as she
ought to be. Some use to ensyle them with the nether eye ^yd above the beck on
the head almost, but that is ye worst way. For of ^eason the ouerlyd closes
more iustlye then the neither, because of the largeness, when she is ensyled:
bear her home on thy fyst and cast her on a perch, and let her stand there a
night and a day. And on that other day toward night take and cut easily the
thredes and take them away softely for breakyng of the eye lyddes. Then lofte
and fair begin to feed her, and deal easily with her ti^ she will sit upon
thy fyst. For it is dred for hurtyng of her wings. And then the same night
after the feding: wa^^ her all night, and on the morrow all day, then she will
b^ preuy enough to be reclaimed. And the first meat tha^ she shall eat: let
it be hot, and give her enough thereof.

How your hawk may be drawn to reclaim and the manner of her diet.
ANd if your hawk be hard penned, she may be drawn to be reclaimed. For all
the while that she is tender penned: she is not able to be reclaymed. And if
she be a goshauke or tercell yt shall be reclaimed: ever feed her with washed
meat at the drawyng, and at the reclaiming. But look it be hot, and in this
manner wash it. Take ye meat and go to the water, and strike it up and down in
the water, and wring the water out, and feed her therwyth and she be a
brau^cher. And if it be an eyes: ye must wash the meat cleaner then ye do to a
brau^cher, and with a lynnen clothe wype it and feed her. And ever more the
third day give her casting when she is fleeing, if she be a goshauke or tercel
in this manner. Take new blanket clothe and cut five pellettes thereof an ynche
long, and take flesh and cut five morcelles. And with a knyues point make an
hole in every morcell, and put therein the pellettes of clothe. And take a
fair dyshe with water and put them therein. Then take the hawk and give her a
morsel of hot meat the quantity of half her supper. Then take that that lies
in the water and feed her for all night.

How you shall feed your hawk and know her infirmy^ies and there be many
diverse of them.
IF your hawk be a sparehauke, ever feed her with unwashed meat, and look
that her castyng be plumage. Then look it be clean under the perch. And on
the next day ye shall find the casting under the perch, and thereby ye shall
know whether ye hawk be clean or not. For some piece will be yelow, and some
green, and some glaymous, and some clear, and if it be yelow: she enge^dreth
the frou^ce, which is an evil that will rise in the mouth or in the cheke, and
if it be green: she engenders the rye, the condition of this evil is this. It
will arise in ye head and make ye head to swel and in the eyes glemous and
dark, and but it have help it will down into the legs and make the legs
to rancle, and if it go fro the legs into ye head again: thy hawk is but
lost, and if it be glaimous and roping: she engenders an evil called the
cray, that is when an hawk may not muteise.

Mark well your medicines hear following.

A medecin for the frounce in the mouth.
Take a silver spoone and put the small end in the fire till it be hot. The^
let hold the hawk, and open her beak and bren the sore, and anoint it with
ye mary of a goose yt has lain long, and she shall be whole. And if ye frounce
be wexed as great as a nutte: then is therein a grubbe, which ye shall cut with
a raser in this manner. Let hold the hawk and slyt the place where the sore
is, and ye shall find therein as it were the mawe of a pygeon, take it out al
whole, and take a pair of sheres and nit the hole of the sore and make it as
fair as ye may with a linen clothe, and wype clean the blood away, and
anoint the sore with bawme four days suyngly, and afterward with pampilion
till it be whole.

How the frounce comes.
The frounce comes when a man fedeth his hawk with porke or cattes flesh
four days together.

How the rye comes.
For defaut of hot meat this sickness the rye comes.

How the cray comes.
The cray comes of washed meat which is washed with hot water in the
defaute of hot meat. Also it comes of thredes which ben in the flesh that
the hawk is fed with. For though ye pick the flesh never so clean yet ye
shall find thredes therein.

When your hawk shall bathe her.
And evermore each third day let your hawk bathe her during the summer, if it
be fair wether. And once in a weke in winter if it be fair wether and not
else. And when ye bathe your hawk: ever give her a morsel of hot meat
unwashed, though she be a goshauke.

How ye may cause your hawk to flee with a courage in the morning.
If ye will yt your hawk flee in ye morning tide: feed her the night before with
hot meat, and wash the same meat in vryne, and wring out ye water clean, and
that shall make her to have lust and courage to flee in ye morning in ye best
manner.

How you shall guide you if your hawk be full gorged and ye would soon have
a flight.
If your hawk be full gorged and that ye would soon upon have a flight: take
four corns of whete and put them in a morcell of flesh, and give the same
morcelles to the hawk, and she will cast anon all that she has with in her.
And anon after that she has cast: look that ye have a morcell of hot meat
to give her. And if your hawk be ouergorged: give her the same medicine.

A medicine for the rye
Take dasye leaves and stamp them in a mortar and wring out the juice, and with
a pen put it in the hawks nates once or twice when the hawk is small gorged.
And anon after let her tire, and she shall be whole as a fyshe. Or else take
percelye roots and serve her with them in the same manner, and when she tyreth:
hold rewe in your hand with the tyryng, and that shall make her void. But it
is peryllous to use it often that the juice fall ne spryng in to her eyes.

Also and you give your hawk fresh butter or mary of hogs that is in the
bone of the but of porke, it shall make her to cast water well at the nares,
and it will keep the nares open. But it will make her hawtaine and proud.

A medecin for the cray, and more f^lowe.

Take and chaufe with your hands the foundament of your hawk with warm water
a long time. And after that take the poudre of saxyfrage, or else the poudre
of rewe, and a quantity of may butter, and tempre it well together till they
ben even meddled. Then put it in a little box and stop it fast. And as often as
ye feed your hawk an whole mele: annoint her meat a little therewith, and that
shall make her to love meat the better for love of the ointment. And it shall
save her from the cray and from many other sickenesses that gendre often in a
hawk.

Also take the hot heart of an hog or a pygge and feed her two days
therewith, and she shall be whole.

Also take porke and we^e it in hot milk of a cow, and feed the hawk
therewith, and that shall make her muteyse at the best wise. And porke with the
mary of the bone of the butte of porke shall make her muteyse, and feed her
with both together. Also use her to fresh butter, and it will do the same.
Also one mele or two at the most of the hot liver of a pygge shall make her
muteyse well. Beware give her not to great a gorge thereof, for it is a peryllous
meat. Also take the white of an egg, and labor the same in a sponge as well
as ye would make glayre for red ynke till it be like water. Put the same in a
vessel and let the meat that shall be for her supper lie and stepe therein all
the day before, and that night feed her therewith. And that which shall be for
her dinner in the morning let it lie all the night, but in any wise look that
ye have always fresh glayre, and if her fedyng be porke it is the better, that
is proved*

The kyndely terms that belong to hawks.
IN the beginning of kyndlye speech of the terms that belong unto hawks:
here may ye find them, The first is hold fast at all times, and specially
when she bateth. It is called batyng for she bateth with her self most often
causeless. The second is rebate your hawk to your fyst, and that is when your
hawk bateth, the least meuing yt ye can make with your fyst she will rebate
again on your fyst. The third is, feed your hawk, and not give her meat.
The.iiii. an hawk suyteth or sueth hrr beak and not wypeth her beck. The.v.
your hawk souketh and not slepeth. The.vi. your hawk proyneth, and not
pycketh, and she proineth not but when she begins at her legs, and
fetches moisture like oil at her tail, and bawmeth her feet, and shakes
the feathers of her wings through her beak. And it is called the note, when
that she fetches such oil. And ye shall know that an hawk would not be let
of her proyning. For at such time as she proyneth: she is lykyng and lusty,
and when she has done: she will rouse her mightily. And sometime your hawk
countenaunceth as she pycketh her, and yet she proyneth not. And than ye must
say, she refourmeth her feathers, and not pycketh her feathers. The.vii. your
hawk colyeth, and not becketh. The.viii. she rouseth, and not shakes
herself. The.ix. she streyneth, and not claweth ne scratcheth. The.x. she
ma^telleth, and not stretches when she puts her legs from her one after
an other, and her wings follow her legs, than she does mantell her. And
when she has manteled her and brings both her wings together over her back,
you shall say your hawk warbelleth her wings. And that is one term due
therefore. The.xi. ye shall sai your hawk mutesseth or muteth, and not shyteth.
The.xii. ye shall say cast your hawk upon the perch, and not set up your
hawk upon the perch.

Here ye shall understand furthermore other manner of terms that belong unto
hawks for to commend them for diverse of their properties.
First ye shall say, this is a fair hawk, an huge hawk, a long hawk, a
short chicke hawk, and say not this is a great hawk. Also ye shall say,
this hawk has a large beak or a short beak, and not call it bil. An huge
head, or a small head fair seasoned, ye shall say your hawk is full gorged,
and not cropped, and your hawk puts over and endueth, and yet she does both
diversely.

How your hawk puts over.
An hawk puts over when she remoueth the meat from her gorge into her
bowels, and thus ye shall know it when she puts over: she trauerseth with her
body, and specially with her neck as a crave does or an other bird.

When ye shall say endueth and enbowelled.
An hawk endueth never as long as her bowels ben full at her fedyng. But as
soon as she is fed and rests she endueth little and little, and if her gorge
be wide and the bowell in any thing styffeth, ye shall say she is embowelled,
and have not fully endued, and as long as ye may find any thing in her
bowels: it is right peryllous to give her any meat.

Mark well these terms following.
Say an hawk has a long wyng, a fair long tail with.vi. bars out, and
stands upon the seventh. This hawk is enter^enned, that is to say when the
feathers of the wings ben between the body and the thighs This hawk has an
huge leg, or a flat leg, or a round leg, or a fair e^seted leg.

To know the mayle of an hawk.
Hawks have white maile, ca^uasmaile, or red mayle* And some call read mayle
yren mayle, white mayle is soon known. Ca^uasmaile is between white maile and
yren mayle, and yren mayle is very red.

Plumage and cast your hawk.
A Goshauke nor Tercell in their sore age have not their mailes named, but is
called their plumage, and after the cote: it is called their maile, and if your
hawk reward to any foul by countenance for to flee thereto: ye shall say cast
your hawk thereto, and not flee thereto.

Nomme or seized.
And if your hawk nomme a foul, and the foul break away fro her, she has
disconfyte many feathers of the foul and is broken away, for in kyndely speech
ye shall say your hawk has no^med or seized a foul, and not taken it.

Wherefore an hawk is called a ryfeler.
And oftentimes it happeth many a hawk for egrenesse when she should nomme a
foul he seaseth but the feathers. And as often as he does so he rifleth, therefore
such hawks ben called ryfelers, if they do often so.

How ye shall name the members of your hawks in conuenable terms.
NOowe ye shall understand the names of the members of hawks, to begin at
their feet, and go upward, as knights ben harneysed and a^med so we shall
enaime her.

Talons.
First the great cleis behind that stryneth the back of the hand, ye shall
call them talons.

Pounces.
The cleis wtin the foot ye shall call a right her pou^ces.

Long sengles.
But cectainly the cleis that are upon the middle stretchers ye shall call the
long sengles.

Petye sengles.
And the vttermoste cleis ye shall call ^he pety sengles.

The key or closer.
Understande ye also yt the long sengles ben called the key of the foot, or
the closer. For what thing soever it be that your hawk streineth: is upon ye
sengle, and al ye foot is thereupon, for ye strength thereof fortifyeth all the
foot.

Setes of watery or waxy color.
Also understand ye that the skyn about your hawks legs and her feet is
called ye setes of her legs and her feet whether they ben watery hewed or waxy
color yelowe.

The beme feathers, full su^med, full fermed and reclaymed.
AN hawk has twelve feathers upon her tail, and one pryncypall fether of the
same in the mids, and in manner all the other are covered under the same
fether, and that is called the beme fether of the tail. And there goes black
bars ouerwhart the tail. And those same bars shall tell you when she is
full summed or full fermed. For when she is full barred: she stands upon
seven and then she is perfyte ready to be reclaymed.

Ye shall understand that as long as an hawk stands under the nu^bre of
seven bars, and she be in her sore age: it must be said that she is not full
su^med. For so long she is but tender pe^ned, whether she be brau^cher or eyes.
And if she be a mewed hawk and stand within seven bars: ye shall say she is
not full fermed. For she is not able to be reclaymed because she is drawn to
soon out of the mewe for she is hard penned no more then a sor^ hawk.

Brayles or braylfethers degouted.
To know furthermore of hawks. An hawk has long small white feathers hangyng
under the tail from her bowell downwarde. And the same feathers ye shall call the
brayles, or the brailfethers. And comu^ly every goshauke and every tercelles
brayles ben disprenged with black speckes like armyns. And for all that they
ben accounted never the better. But and a sparehauke be so armyned upon the
brayles, or musket: ye shall say, she is degouted to the uttermost brayle, and
much it betokens hardynes.

Breast feathers, plumage, barbe feathers, pendaunt feathers.
The feathers aboutt the former parties of an hawk ben called breast feathers,
and the feathers under the wings are plumage. The feathers under the beak ben
called the barbe feathers. And the feathers that been at the ioynte at the hawks
knee: they stand hangyng and sharp at the ends, those ben called the
pendaunt feathers.

Flagge or flagges feathers.
The feathers at the wings next to the body be called the flagge or flagges
feathers.

Beme feathers of the wyng sercell.
And the long feathers of the wings of an hawk ben called beme fether of ye
wyng. And the feathers that some call the pynion fether of an other foul: of an
hawk it is called the sercell. And ye shall understand if an hawk be in mew,
the same sercell shall be the last fether that she will cast, and till that be
cast: she is never mewed, yet it has been seen yt hawks have cast ye same
first as I have heard say, but the other rule is general. And when she has
cast her sercelles in mewe: then and no sooner it is time for to feed her with
washed meat, and to begin to ensayme her.

Ensayme.
Ensayme of an hawk is the greece. And but if that be take away with feding of
washed meat and otherwise: as it shall be declared hereafter, she will gendre a
panell which may be her vttermoste confusion, and she fl^e therewith and take
blood and cold thereupon.

Couertes or covert feathers.
There ben also feathers that close upon the sercelles, and those same ben
called the couertes or ye covert feathers and so all the feathers ben called that been next over the long beme feathers are the sagge feathers upon ye wings.

Back feathers.
The feathers upon the back half ben called the back feathers.

Beak, Clap, Nares, Sete.
The beak of ye hawk is the upper part yt is crooked.

The nether part of the beak is called the clap of the hawk.

The holes in the hawks beak ben called the Nares.

The yelowe between the beak and the eyes is called the sere.

Crynettes.
There ben on an hawk long small black feathers like here is about the sere, and
those same be called crynettes of the hawk.

Sore age.
Ye shall understand that the first year of an hawk, whether she be a
brauncher or eyesse, that first is called her sore age. And all that year she
is called a sore hawk, for and she escape that ye^e with good fedyng she is
likelye to endure long.

To reclayme an hawk.
IF ye will reclaim your hawk, ye must depart one mele into three meles unto
the time that she will come to reclayme. And when she will come to rec^aime,
increase her meles every day better and better. And or she come to the
reclayme, make her that she sore not, for though she be well reclaimed it may
hap that she will sore so high into the air that ye shall neither see nor find
her And if your hawk shall flee to the partryche, look that ye ensayme her or
she flee, whether she be brau^cher or eyesse or mewed hawk.

When an hawk is called an eyesse.
An hawk is called an eyesse fro her eye^. For an hawk that is brought up
under a bussarde or pu^tock as many ben have watery eyes. For when they ben
dysclosed and kept in ferme till they be full summed: ye shall know that by
their wratry eyes. And also her look will not be so quycke as a braunchers is.
And so because the best knowledge is by the eye, they be called eyesses. Ye
may also know an eyesse by the palenesse of the seres of her legs or the
sere over the beak, and also by the taintes that been upon her tail and her
wings, which tayntes come for lack of fedyng when they ben eyesses.

What a taint is.
A taint is a thing that goes overthwart the feathers of the wings and of the
tail like as it were eaten with worms. And it begins first to breed at the
body in the pen. And that same pen shall frete a sondre and fall away
through the same taynt, and than is the hawk disparaged for all that year.

Medecines to ensayme your hawk.
Take the root of ras^e and put it in clean water and lay your flesh therein to
tempre a great while, and give it to your hawk to eat, and if she eat thereof:
dred not but it shall abate her greece. But within three days she shall not
greatly abate.

Also take Pulyall and garlyke and stamp it well together, and wring out the
juice in a dysshe, and than wet the flesh therein, and feed your hawk therewith
and but it tempre your hawk, that is to say, ensayme your hawk within four
days: I marvel. But look every day that ye make new juice, and when ye
feed her wet your meat therein. Also take juice of Mercely mores, otherwise
called percely roots, and the same of Ysope, and wasshe your flesh therein,
and your hawk shall be ensaymed kyndly, and no great abate to the hawk.

Some use to lay their flesh in water almost a day and give the same to the
hawk at supper. And that lies all night to give to her in the morning, and
thus to feed them in mewe or they ben drawn about a month or.vi wekes, and to
ensayme them or they come on fyst, and as soon as they cast their sercell:
then is the time to fee^ them so.

How your hawk ensaymeth.
Understande ye for cer^ayne that as long as your hawks feet ben blackyshe
and rough: she is full of greece and ever as she ensaymeth, her feet will wax
yelowe and smothe.

How you shall gyde you when your hawk is redye to flee, and ye shall say put
up the partryche.
WHen ye have ensaymed your hawk and reclaymed her, and that she is ready to
flee to the partryche: ye must take a partryche in your bag and go into the
feeld, and let your spanyelles find a couy of partryches. And when they ben up
and begin to scatter: ye must have markers to some of them and then couple up
your spaniels, for when ye have so done: let some fellow of yours pryuely,
take the partryche out of your bag, and tie it by the leg with a cryaunce,
and cast it up as high as ye can. And as soon as the hawk sees her: she will
flee thereto, and if your hawk sease the partryche above, give her a reward
thereupon, and go after that by l^yser to the partryche that been marked, and
do as I shall tell you here following. If ye have a chastysed spanyell that
will be rebuked and is a retryuer: uncouple him and no mo of your spaniels, and
go to a single partryche of ye couy so sparcled, and be as nigh as ye can to
the rising thereof, and if your hawk desire: cast her to, and if she take it
the^ is your hawk made for that year, and of the same partriche that she
sleyth thus ye must reward her as it shows here following.

How ye shall reward your hawk.
Take a knife and cut the head and the neck from the body of the partryche, and
stryppe the skin away from the neck, and give the same to the hawk, and
cover the body of the foul with a bonet or with an heart, and lay the said head
and the neck thereupon, ^ if she will forsake the foul that she plumeth on and
come to the reward: than pryuelye take away the partryche, and reward your
hawk with the brain and the neck. Beware that she eat no bones, for that is
evil to endewe, and it will make her unlusty for to flee, and thus must ye
serve her of as many as she sleyth, but let her reward be the less, for else
she may be soon full gorged, and then she may flee no more a great while.

How your hawk shall rejoice.
And when your hawk has slain a foul, and is rewarded as I have said: let
her flee in no wise till she has rejoiced her, that is to say, till she has
sewed or suyted her beck, or else row^^ her. And when she has done any of
these, or all: go and retryue more, and she will nomme plenty.

When your hawk has nomme a foul, how ye shall ^oo that ye rebuke not the
hawk.
Learn well one thing, and beware thereof, when your hawk has nomme a
partryche, stand a good way of, and come not to nygh her, and drive a way
your spaniels for rebuking of her. For many hawks love no spaniels, and also
many spaniels will ^enym them their game from their foot, and that is right
perillo^. And while your hawk plumeth: come softely toward her always nere
and nere. And if she leave pluming and look upon you: stand still and cherke
her, and whystell her until she plume again* And thus serve her till ye be
right nigh her. Than soft and leyserly fall upon your knees, and pryuely while
she plumeth: set your hand and be sure of the guess, and than ye may gyde all
things as ye will. And if ye do the contrary: she will for fear carry her game,
or let it go quick and that is but loss to you and to your hawk also.

A medecin to make an hawk to cast that is accombred with castyng within her
body.
Take the juice of Salendine, and wet a morcell of flesh therein to the
quantity of a nutte. And give that morcell to the hawk, and that shall make
her for to cast her old castyng, and the hawk shall be safe.

A medecin for an hawk that will sore.
Wash the flesh that your hawk shall be fed with, in juice of fenell, and
that shall take away the pride fro her, and make her leave her soring whether
she be lene or fat, and many times an hawk will sore when she lacks bathing.

A medecin for an hawk that is lousye.
Take quick silver and put it in a basen of brass, and put thereto salendyne,
and ashes, and meddle it well together till the quick silver be dead. And meddle
thereto farte of bones, and anoint the hawk therewyth. And hang it about her
neck till it fall away, and it shall slay the lyce. Also poudre of orpement,
blown upon an hawk with a pen, will slay the lyce.

Also take a dagon or a piece of rugh bla^ket vnshore and hold it to the fire
unto the time it be throughout warm, and wrappe the hawk therein. And then
hold her softely and stylly for hurtyng of your hands* and the vermyn will
crepe into the clothe. Also hold her in the son on a fair day and ye shall
see the vermyn crepe out upon the feathers. Then take a knyfe and wet the one
side of ye blade thereof with your mouth. And always as they appear lay the wet
side of the knyfe to them, and they will cleave thereto* and then ye may slay
them.

The opynion of Ostregyeres.
After the opinion of many ostregyers* and ye feed your hawk continually with
porke, with iayes, with pyes, or in especially bear her much in rayny wether, she
shall be lousy.

Ostregers, Speruiteres, Faukeners.
Now because I speak of ostregiers, ye shall understand yt they ben called
ostregiers yt keep goshaukes or tercels and those yt keep sparehaukes and
muskettes, ben called speruiters, and kepers of al other hawks are called
faukeners

The length of the guess, sewes, tyrettes, and how they be fastened, and
bewettes.
Hawks have about their legs gesses made of lether most como^ly, some of
silk which should no longer but that the knottes of them should appear in ye
mids of the left hand between the long finger and the leche finger because
the lewnes should be fastened to the^ with a pair of tyrettes, which tyrettes
should rest upon the lewnes and not upon gesses, for hangyng and fasting upon
trees when she fleyth, and those same lewnes ye shall fasten them upon your
little finger slacklye, in compassyng the same in four or five fold as a bow
stryng unoccupied. And the tyrettes serve to keep her from wyndyng when she
bateth. Also the same lethers that been put in her belles to be fastened about
her legs, ye shall call bewettes.

Creaunce.
Also ye shall call the long line, that ye do call your hawk to reclaim
with, your creaunce, whatsoever it be.

A medecin for an hawk that will cast flesh.
Put the flesh that your hawk shall eat in fair water, and feed her therewith
three days, and she shall hold her flesh in the best wise.

A medecin for an hawk yt has lost her courage.
An hawk yt has lost her courage a man may know if he will take good heed.
For such is her manner, when she is cast to a foul she fleyth awayward as
though she knew not the foul. Or else she will flee a little way after and anon
she gives it up, and for such an hawk this is a good medecin. Take oil of
spain and tempre it with clear wine and with the yolke of an egg, and put
therein beef, and thereof give to your hawk five morcelles, and then set her
in the son, and at even feed her with an old hot cuiuer, and if ye feed her
thus three times: that hawk was never so lusty nor so iolye before as she will
be after, and come to her own courage. Other make poudre of melees that
stink, and put the poudre on the flesh of a Pecocke, and meddle the blood of
a Pecocke among the poudre, and make her to eat the flesh.

A medecin that an hawk shall not lie in mew for vnlustynesse.
Take fern roots that grows in an oak and oak apples, and make juice of
them and wet her flesh therein and feed the hawk three times or four, and
that shall make her to leave that.

A medecin for an hawk that has the tayne.
An hawk that has the tayne a man may soon know if he take heed, for this
is her manner, she will pant more for one batynge then other for four, and if
she should flee a little while: she should almost lose her brethe, whether she
be fat or lean, and always she makes heavy che^e and for that, this is the
medecin. Take a quantytye of the rednes of hasyll, with the poudre of rasene
of peper and somewhat of gynger, and make thereof in fresh greece three pellettes
and hold the hawk to the fire, and when she feleth the heat: make her swalow
the three pellettes by strength, and knyt fast her beak that she cast it not
out, and do so thryes, and she shall be safe.

Also take rasne and rubarbe and grind it to gither and make juice thereof, and
wet the flesh therein, and give it her to eat and she shall be whole.

Also take Alisander and the root of prymeroses, and the root of grognauiles,
and sethe them all in butter of a cow, and give her three morcelles every day
unto the time that she be whole, and look that she be void when ye give her
the medecin.

How a man shall take a hawk from the air.
WHo so takes an hawk from the eyrer, him behooves for to do wisely, in
bringing him easelye and to keep him well from cold, and from hurting of his
bones, for they ben full tender and they must have great rest. And they may not
have stynking and fylthy air, but as clean as can and may be thought and
evermore give him clean meat and hot, and a little and often and change often
their meat, but look it be whole, and cut her meat in to small morcels, for
they should not tire on bones till they might flee, then after when she
begins to pen and plumeth and palketh and pycketh her self, put her in to a
close warm place that no fulmers nor fecheus nor other vermyn come not in to
her, and let the place be sure for wind and rain. and then she will preue her
self, and ever more give her good hot meats. For it is better to a man to
feed his hawk while she is tender with meat to make her good with some cost:
then to feed her with evil meats to make her unthrifty with little cost. And
look when she begins to ferme, then give her bayting.

A medecin for worms in an hawk, which sickness is called the fylaunders.
Mark well this sickness, and beware thereof. This is the medecyne therefore. Ye
shall take an herb that is called neppe, and put in a small gutte of a capon
or of an hen, and knytte it with a threde, and let her receive it whole, and
she shall be whole and safe. Thus ye shall know when your hawk has worms in
her belly. Look when she has castyng, then ye shall find one or two about her
castyng place, if she has been with any.

A medecyne for an hawk yt casts worms at the foundament and what worms
that they be.
Take the lymayl of yren and meddle it with flesh of porke and give it two days
to the hawk to eat, and she shall be whole.

A medecin for an hawk that has a sycknesse which is called the
aggresteyne.
When ye see your hawk hurt her feet with her beak and pulls her tail,
then she has the aggrestyne. For this sickness, take the donge of a dove and of
a sheep, and of an allow, and strong vynegre and do al softely in a basyn of
brass, and meddle them well together to serve three days after and give her
flesh of a culuer with honey, and with poudre of peper, and set her in a dark
place and so do nine days. And when ye see new feathers in the tail wash her
with verose, and she shall be whole and safe.

A medecyne for an hawk that has the crampe in her wings, and how it comes.
For this crampe take a white lofe of bread somewhat colder then it comes out
of the oven, and let hold the hawk softely for hurtyng, and cut the lofe
almost through out, and duplay the wynge easily and hold it between the two
parts of the lofe and let it behold so the space of half a quarter of an
hour, and she shall be whole.

The crampe comes to an hawk by taking cold in her youth. Therefore it is
good for an hawk to keep her warm young and old, and this medecin is good
at all times for her, whether she be young or old.

Let not an hawk be put in mewe to late, but in this manner as follows if ye
love your hawk.
If ye love well your hawk keep her well, and put her not late in mewe, for
who so for covetousness of fleing leseth the time of his hawks mewing, and
withholdeth her to long therfro, he may after put her to mewe at adventure, for
than a part of her mewyng time is past.

Who so puts his hawk in mewe in the beginning of Lent, if she be kept as
she ought to be, she shall be mewed in the beginning of August.

How ye shall dispose and ordeyne your mewe.
Set and dispose your mewe in this manner, so that no wesel nor polcat nor non
other vermyn enter thereto, nor no wind nor great cold, nor that it be
ouerhote. Let that one part of the mewe be turned toward the son so that
in the most part of the day the son may com in.

Also ye must see yt she be not auexed nor grieved with much noise nor with
song of men, and that no manner folks come to her, but only he that fedeth her.
It behooves that your hawk have a feding stock in her mewe, and a long
string tied thereto to fasten her meat with. For else she will carry it about the
house and soil it with dust and peradventure she will hyde it till it stynke,
and than feed upon it, and that might be her death. And therefore when it is
bound to the said fedyng stock, she will neither at fedyng nor at the tyring,
ne at the lyghtyng, ne a^ the rysyng hurt her self, and when she has fed take
away the remnaunte if any leave, and in any wise that she have clean meat, and
at every meal fresh. For of stale meats and evil meats she shall engendre
many sycknesses, and look ye go never to your mew but wha^ ye shall give your
hawk meat, or else to bring water to bathe her. And suffer no rain to wete
her at any time if ye may, and as for her bathing that shall nothing hyndre her
mewyng.

The manner how a man shall put an hawk into mewe and that is well noted.
Of one thing ye must beware well if she have any sickness that ye make her whole
or ye put her in mewe, for as I understand a sick hawk shall never mewe well.
For though she mewe she shall not endure but while she is great and fat, for
at the abatyng of her estate she may no longer endure. Sometime without any
medecin many men devise how they might mewe their hawks, for some put hawks
in mewe at high estate, and some when they ben right low, and some when they
ben full, and some when they ben empty and lean, and some when they ben
miserable lene, but thereof is no force if she be hole, nevertheless I shall
say mine advise as I have seen and learned.

Whosoever puts a goshauke or a tercel or a sparehauke into mewe so high that
she may be no higher: she will hold her long in that point or that she lose
or lent any feathers, and who so puts her in mewe lean it will be long or she
remount, and who so puts her in mewe to hungry and to lean, if she have
meat at her will: she will eat to much, because of hungre, and peradventure she
may be dead thereby, as often has been seen. But who so will that an hawk endure
and mewe kyndely, my counsel is that she be not high neither to low, neither
in great dystresse of hungre but like as she should flee best, then take heed
the first day of to much eating, unto the time that she be stanched. And
after that: a man may take her such meat as I shall tell you more plainly
hereafter.

In what manner and how a man shall feed his hawk in mewe.
Look with what meat she has been most used to be fed: and feed her therewith
eight days contynually, and those eight days give her birds enough both
morrow and even, and let her plume upon them well, and take castyng of the
plumage, and that shall talaunte her well, and cause her to have good appetyte,
and it shall cleanse well her bowels, and when she is well cleansed: ye may give
her what meat that ye will, so it be clean and fresh.

But the best meat to make an hawk to mewe most soonest without any medecyne:
is the flesh of a kyd or of a young swan, and of a cheken, and specially
ratons flesh. So they ben not assaute, none like to it: and of a young goose.
For such meat is hot of it self.

And take pieces of great fresh eles, and specially the colpen next the navel
and wet it in hot blood of mutto^ it is good to make her to mew, but specially
it shall make her wight after the sore age. These said flesshes been good to
mewe an hawk, and to keep her in state, but look she have good plentye every
day, so that she rather leave part than lack any. And every third day let
her bathe if she list. And when she is wexed nigh ferme: give her hens and
fat porke, and of an hounde is passing good.

An hawk is never full fermed nor ready to draw out of mewes to the time her
sercel be fully grown yet have I seen some folks take them out of mew when
the sercell were but half sprung, and that is peryllous, for they are not then
hard penned. Some folks use when an hawk has cast her sercell: to begin and
wash her meat and feed her in mewe with washed meat a month or.vi. wekes or
ever they draw them. But of all flesh after she is mewed: a reasonable gorge
of a hot hare is best, and also of a crow hot. But it must be washed in water
and then it is the better. For that will not benym them hastily their greece,
nor put them in a great feebleness. For it dureth somewhat with her.

To make an hawk to mewe tymely, without any hurtyng of her.
Now I shall tell you very true medecines for to mew an hawk hastily that ye
shall believe for truth and ye will assay them. There ben in woods or in hedges
worms cal^ed adders yt ben red of nature, and he is called viper^ And also
there be snakes of ye same kind, and they ben very bitter. Take two or three of
them and smite of their heads and thendes of their tails, the^ take a new
erthen pot that was never used, and cut them into small pieces and put those
same therein and let the^ seche strongly a grea^e while at good leyser, and let
the pot be covered yt no air com out of it nor no brethe, and let it sethe so
long that ye same pieces sethe to greece. Then cast it out and do away the bone
and gather the greece, and put it in a clean vessel, and as often as ye feed your
hawk anointe her meat therewith, and let her eat as much as she will, and that
meat shall mew her at your own will.

An other medecin.
Take wheat and put it in the brothe that the adders were soden in, and when
ye see ye wheat begin to cleue, take it out and feed hens and chekyns
therewith, and feed your hawk with the same polaine.

Who so will that an hawk mew not nor fall none of her feathers: therefore here
is a med^cine
Take poudre of canel and the juice of frank costs and the juice of paraine,
and take morcelles of flesh three or four if ye list and wet them therein, and
make the hawk to swalowe them, and serve her so many times.

Also take the skyn of a snake and of an adder and cut it into small pieces, and
te^pre it with hot blood, and cause your hawk oftentimes to feed thereof, and
she shall not mew.

For the gout in the throat.
when ye see your hawk blow oftentimes, and that it comes of no bating, ye
may be sure she has the gout in her throat and for that take the blood of a
pecock and encense myrabolana and clowes of gelofte and canell and gynger, and
take of all these euenly and meddle them with pecockes blood, and sethe it til
it be thick, and thereof make morcels, and give the hawk every day at midmorne
and at none.

For the gout in the head and in the reins.
When ye see your hawk may not end where meat nor remount her estate, she
has the gout in the head and in the reins, take momia^ otherwise called
momin* among polyca^ies ye may have it, and the skyn of an hare, and give it to
your hawk to eat.ix. times with the flesh of a catte, and if she may hold
the meat she shall be safe.

A medecin for sickness called the fallera.
When ye see your hawks cleis wax white then she has the fallera. For this
sickness take a black snake cut away the head and the tail and take the myddle
and try it in an erthen pot, and take the greece and save it, anoynte the flesh
of a pecocke therewith and give it to the hawk for to eat.viii. days, and if
ye have no pecocke give her flesh of a dove, and after the eight days give
her a chekyn and wash it a little, and give it her to eat and take the tendrest
of the breast with the frosshel bone and let her eat it, and if she amend any
thing she shall be whole.

A medecin for the crampe in the thigh, in the leg, and in the foot of an
hawk.
When ye see your hawk lay one foot upon an other foot, she is taken with
the crampe. The^ draw her blood upon the foot yt lies upon that other foot,
and upon the leg also, and he shall be whole.

For the cough or the pose.
Take poudre of bays and put it upon the flesh of a dove and give it often to
your hawk, and without doubt she shall be whole.

A medecin for the podagre.
When your hawks feet ben swollen: she has the podagre, then take fresshe
may butter, and as much of oil olive, and of alum, and chaufe it well to gether
at ye fire and make thereof an ointment and anoint the fe^te four days and set
her in the son and give her flesh of a catte, and if that avail not: seethe
the knyttyng of a vine and wrap it about the swellyng and let her sit upon a
cold stone and anoint her with butter or fresh greece, and she shall be whole.

A medecin for sickness wtin the body of an hawk and if it show not outward
how she shall be helped and in what manner.
A man may know by the cheer and vngladnes of an hawk this infirmity. But
yet it is strange to know things yt a man may not see in his sickness and what
manner they ben grieved, and specially when a man woteth not whereof it comes.
Feed your hawk well upon an hen and then make her to fast two days after to
avoid well her bowels. The third day take honey soden and fill her body full,
and bind her beak that she cast it not out of her body and then set her out
of the son, and when it draws to the night: feed her with a hot foul, for
as I heard my master say and she be not whole with that: look never other
medecin.

For the passion that goshaukes have fasting.
Take the root of small ^usshes and make juice of them and wet your flesh
therein, and make her eat it.

For hawks that be wounded.
Take away the feathers about the wound, and take the white of an egg and oil
of olyue, and meddle it together and anoint the wound and keep it with white
wine unto the time ye see dead flesh, and then put in the wound escompe unto
the time the dead flesh be wasted. After take ensence and cleue as much of the
one as of the other, and meddle it together, and when ye will anoint the sore:
hete your ointment, and anoint it with a pen till the time the skin grow
again, and if see dead flesh thereon and would have it away: take vinegre and
then anoynte it with this ointment before said, and she shall be whole.

A medecin for an hawk that has the artetyke.
When ye see your hawk fat about the heart: trust it for truth she has
the artetyke. Therefore let her blood in the oryginall vain, and after that
give her a frogge for to eat, and she shall be whole.

A medecin for an hawk combred in the bowels.
When your hawk is encombred in the bowels: ye shall know it by her eyes, for
her eyes will be dark and she will look vngladly, and her mutysing will defoile
her foundement. Then take the hawks meat, and anoint it with ye poudre of
canel and give it her to eat, and she shall be whole.

A medecin for an hawk that has the gout.
Feed your hawk with an Irchin once or twice and it shall help her.

A medecin for an hawk that has mytes.
Take the juice of wormwood and put it there as they ben, and they shall dye.

That an hawk use her craft al ye season to slay or leave
When ye go to the feeld in the lateer end of hauking and desire that your
hawk shall use her craft to do her in this manner. Let her slay a foul and
let her plume upon it as much as she will, and when she has plumed enough: go
to her softely for fraying, and reward her on the foul and after that ye may
cast her on a perch, and as well she may use her craft so as that she slew all
the year.

A medecyne for an hawk that has the stone.
Annoint her foundament with oil, and put ye poudre of alum with a holowe
straw. Also take an herb called Christ's ladder, and anoint her mouth within,
and she shall be whole. Also take small fla^be roots and polipodye and the corns
of spurge and grynde it well, and sethe it in butter, and draw it through a
clothe, and make thereof three pellets of the greatness of a nut, and put it in
his mouth in the morrow tide, and look that he be void, and then let him fast
till euensonge, and feed him little and little, and he shall be whole.

A medecin for vermyn.
Take the juice of the root of fenell, and do it where the vermyn be and they
shall dye.

A medecyne for the rewme that hawks have.
When ye see your hawk close her eyes and shakes her head, then has she the
rewme in her head. Therefore give her larde of a got the first day, and the
second give her epatike with the flesh of a chekyn, and she shall be whole.

A medecin for hawks that been dry, and desire to drink to keep them moist in
kind.
Take the juice of horehound and wete thine hawks mete therein, and feed her
therwyth once or twyse, and she shall be whole.

For sickness that hawks have in their entrayles
AN hawk that is sick within the entrails, is of an other array the^ in other
sickness, for if she hold not her meat, but cast it: that is a token of the
foul glet for surfeit of feathers that been given to hawks in their youth. And
afterward when they come unto travail and ben avoided of the river then they
wexe slow to flee and desire for to rest. And when the hawk is upon her
perch, then she will sleep for to put over at the entryng. And if she hold
flesh any while in her gorge: it will look as it were sodde^, and when she is
waking she assaieth to put over at the entryng, and it is aglu^ted and keled
with the glette that she has engendered and if she should escape she must put
over, or else she must die, or cast it. And she cast it: she may be help with
the medecyne.

A medecyne for the entrayles.
Take yolks of eggs ^awe, when they ben well beten together, put thereto
spanishe salt and as much honey thereto, and wet therein thy flesh and feed thy
hawk three days therewith. And if she make danger to eat it: let hold thy
hawk and make her to swalow three or four morcels in a day, and sikerly she
shall be whole, yet I shall tell you an other thing. Take honey at the changing of
the moon and a sharp nettel, and thereof make small poudre, and when it is
well ground: take the breast bone of an hen and an other of a culuer and hacke
it small with a knyfe and do away the skyn and do thereon the poudre, and all
hot with the poudre feed her, and so do thryse and she shall be whole.

For syckenes of swellyng.
If a wicked felon be swollen in such manner yt a man may hele it yt the hawk
shall not die, thus a man may help her strongly and length her life but the
hawk will be very egre and grievous of the sickness, and therefore ye must take the
root of comfort and sugre like much, and sethe it in fresh greece with the
third part of honye, and the^ draw it through a fair clothe, and often give it
to ye hawk, and she shall be whole

A medecin for blaynes in hawks mouths called frounces.
On the frou^ce it is dread for hawks, for it is a noyous sickness and draws
her to death, and withholdeth her strength. For me^ say that it comes of cold,
for cold does hawks much harm, and makes fleme fall out of the brain, and
the eyes wi^ swell and empayre in her head, and but she have hastly help, yt
will stop her nose thrylles, and therefore take fenell, maryal and serses, a like
much, and sees them and draw them through a cloth and otherwhile wash her
head therwt and put some in ye rofe of her mouth, and she shall be safe.

A medicine for an hawk that casts her flesh.
Wete her flesh in a satsyol, or else sees rasine in water and put her flesh
therein when it boyleth.

A medicine for the rume called agrum.
When thou see thy hawk upon her mouth, and her chekes blobbed, then she
has this sickness called agru^ Therefore take a nedle of silver and hete it
in the fire and bren the narelles throughout, then anoint it with oil olive.

A medicine for an hawk great and fat.
Take a quantity of porke and honey and butter a like much and purged grease,
and do away the skin, and seth them together, and anoint the flesh therein,
and feed your hawk there with and she shall increase mightily. Else take the wings
of an Eued, and feed her, and keep her from travail, and do so often though ye
eued be never so fat, and if your hawk be not passing fat within.xiiii. days
wondre I think.

For botches that grow in an hawks Iawe.
Cut these botches with a knyfe and let out the matter of them and after cleanse
them clean with a silver spoo^e or else fyl the hole with a powder of arnemelyt
brent and upon the powder do a little larde that is reside, and so it will away

Here is a good medicine for an hawk that will not come to reclayme.
Take fresh butter and put thereto sugre and put it in a clean cloth and
reclaim her to ye and keep it in a box in your bag

A medicine for hawks that been refrayned
When ye se your hawk nesyng. and castyng water through her nosethrylles on
her nares: the^ doutlesse she is refrayned. For yt sickness take the greynes of
chafelegre and of peper, and grynde it well, and tempre it with strong vynegre,
and put it in her nares and in the rofe of her mouth, and give her flesh to
eat, and she shall be safe.

A medecin for hawks yt have pain in their crops.
Ye shall take fair Morfum and poudre of gylouer and meddle it together and
give it to your hawk to eat, and if she hold it past the second day after,
she shall be whole^

A medecin for the stone in the foundament.
When your hawk may not muteyse, then she has that syckenes, called the
stone. And for this sickness ye shall take the heart of a swyne and the greece of
a swyne, and cut it with the flesh of the heart, and she shall be whole.

A medecin for the dry frounce.
For this sickness take ye root of polipody yt grows upon oaks and sees it a
great while, the^ take it from the fire and let it stand and wexe lewe warm,
then wash your flesh therein feed your hawk three times and she shall be hole

A medecin for worms called anguelles.
Take pressure made of a lamb that was ened in vntime and make thereof three
morcelles and put in a gut of a culuer and feed her therewith, and look the
hawk be void when ye give her the medecyne. Also take juice of dragons and
put full the gutte of a pygeon, and then cut it and depart it as ye hawk may
over swolow it and put it in his body, and knit his beak for castyng. Also
give her the ballockes of a bucke as hot as they be kut out, and make poudre
of the pyntell and cast upon the flesh of a Cat, and feed her therewith, and
she shall be whole.

Poroper terms used in keeping of hawks.
An hawk tyreth, Fedeth, Gorgeth, Beketh, Rouseth Endueth, Muteth, Percheth,
Iouketh, Puts over, Proineth, Plummeth, She warbulleth, and ma^telleth, She
tyreth upon tumpes, she fedeth on al manner of flesh she gorgeth when she
fylleth her gorge full of meat, she beaketh when she sueth, that is to say,
when she wypeth her beak. She rouseth when she shakes her feathers and her
body together. She endueth when her meat* in her bowels fall to digestion. S^e
muteth when she auoydeth her ordure. She perche^h when she stands on any
manner bow or perch. She iouketh when she slepeth. She puts over when she
auoydeth her meat out of her gorge into her bowels. She proyneth, when she
fetches oil with her beak over the tail and anointeth her feet and her
feathers she plumeth when she pulls feathers of any foul or of any thing and
casts the^ fro her. She warbelleth when she draws her wings over the
mids of her back and there they mete both, and softely shakes the^ and let
them fall again. And mantelleth when she stretches her one wing alone after her
leg, and afterward the other wing and most commonly she does yt before she
warbelleth her.

The hames of sparehaukes as Ostregyers and speruiters have determined.
THere is a question asked whether a man shall call a spear, or a sparehauke, or
an aspere* hawk. And ostrygers, and also speruiters say she may be called all
three names, for these reasons she may be called a sparehauke for of all hawks
that there be she is most spear, yt is to say most tender to keep. For the
least mysdieting and mise^te^ding slea^th her. And she may be called an aspere
hawk of sharpnes of her courage and of her loking quickly and also of her
flying, for she is most asper and sharpin all thing that belong unto her of
any other hawks. She may also be called a sparehauke for two resons. one is,
she spares goshaukes and tercels both such as ben in their sore age unto ye
time they may be reclaimed and made ready to flee. As goshaukes and tercels that
be not fullye mewed unto the time they may be clean ensaymed and ready to flee.
For all the while they ben unable, the sparehauke occupies the season and
sleith portryche well, that is to say, from saint margaretes day unto it be
la^mas and so forth in the year, and she will slay well young fesandes, young
heth cocks in the beginning of the year, and after Michelmas when partryches
pass their danger* I have seen the^ made some to slay the pie, some to slay the
te^e upon the river at the Iutte, some to slay the woodcocke, and some for the
black bird and the thrush. The woodcock is cumbrous to slay but if there be
craft, therefore when ye come into a wood or querke of bushes, cast your
sparehauke into a tree and beat the bushes, then and if any woodcocke arise she
will be sure thereof, ye must first make her to a foul cast up out of the bushes
and your hawk must sit on loft as ye make her to a partrich. Also as I said ye
may call her a sparehauke for an other cause, for and there were a ship fraught
full of hawks and nothing else, and there were a sparehauke among them, there
should no custom be paid because of her. And so for the most common name they
ben called sparehaukes for the reason before said.

An hawk fleeith to the vewe, to the beck or to the Tol, Nota, Crene, Querre,
Fer, Iutty.
AN hawk fleeith to the river diverse ways, and sleaith ye foul diversely,
that is to say, she fleeith to the vewe, or to the beck, or the toll, and all
is but one as ye shall know hereafter. She fleeith also to the querre, to the
Creep, and no more ways but those three. And she nymmeth the foul at the fer
Iutty, or at the Iutty far.

Now shall ye know what these terms betoken and more following. As huff, Iutty,
Ferry, mount Raundon, Creep, Emewed.
A Goshauke or a tercel that shall flee to the vewe to the Toll, or to the
Beck, in this manner she is caught Ye must find a foul in the river or in a
pyt pryuely and then set your hawk a great space upon a mol hill or on the
ground and creep softly toward the foul from your hawk straight way, and
when ye come almost there as the foul lies: look back ward toward the hawk
and with your hand or with your tabur stick beek your hawk to come to you, and
when she is on wyng and comes low by the ground and is almost at you: then
smite your tabre and cry, huff, huff, huff, and make y^ foul spring, and with
the noise the foul will rise, and the hawk will nymme it.

And now take heed if your hawk nymme the foul at the far side of the river
or at the pyt from you, that she sleith the foul at the far Iutty. And if
she slay it upon the side that ye be on, as it may hap diverse times, then ye
shall say she has slain the foul at the Iutty ferrye.

If your hawk nymme the foul a loft^ ye will say she took it at the mount
or at the souce. And if the foul spryng not but flee a long after the river
and the hawk nymme it: then ye shall say she slew it at the raundon.

Creep.
And your hawk fleyth at or to the creep when ye have your hawk on your fyst
and creep softely to the river or to the pyt and steals softly to the brinke
thereof, and then cry, huff, and by that mean nymme a foul, then it is slain
at the creep either at the far Iutty, or at the Iutye ferry, as is before
said. And if it hap as it does oftentimes the foul for fear of your hawk
will spryng and fall again into the river or the hawk sees her, and so lie
still and dare not arise: ye shall say then your hawk has annewed the foul
into the river. And so ye shall say and there ben more fowls in the river than
your hawk nymmeth if they dare not arise, for fear of your hawk.

A thief.
Understande ye that a goshauke should not flee to any foul of the river with
belles in no wise, and therefore a goshauke is called a thief.

Querre.
And your hawk fleyth to the querre, when there ben in a stubyll time Sordes
of malardes in the feeld. And when she espyeth them and comes covert her self
and flee pryuely under hedges or low by the ground and nym one of them or they
rise, then shall ye say that the foul was slain at the querre.

Mark this term draw.
Some folk mysuse this term draw, and say yt their hawk will draw to the
river, and that term draw, is properly assigned to that hawk that will slay a
rooke, or a crow, or a raven upon a land sytting, and then it must be said
that such an hawk will draw well to a rooke.

Now ye shall understand if a man will make an hawk to the querre in this
manner he must do.

Take a tame mallarde and set him in a fair plain and let him go where he
will. Then take your hawk upon your fyst and go to that plain, and hold up
your hand a pretty way of from the malarde, and look if the hawk can espy it
by her own courage, and if she have found the foul and desire to flee
thereto: let her slay it, and plumme well upon her and serve her so two or three
times: and then she is made to the querre.

I have known ge^tlemen yt when so ever, and where ever they see any tame
duckes, and if their hawks would desire to them, the^ they would let flee to
them encouraging their hawks to well fleing unto ye querre an other time.

A pretty craft to take an hawk yt is broken out of mew and al manner of fowls
yt sit in trees if a man will.
Look where an hawk perchethe for a night in any manner place, and soft and
leyserly clym to her with a skonce or a lantern that has but one light in
your hand, and let the light be toward the hawk, so that she see not your
face, and ye may take her by the legs or otherwise as ye list, and in
likewise all other manner of fowls.

Of hawks belles.
THe belles that your hawk shall were look in any wise that they be not to
heuye, over her power to were. Also that none be heuyer then an other but like
of weight. Look also that they be sonowre and well sounding and shil, and not
both of one sound, but that one be a semytune under an other, and that they be
whole and not broken, and specially in the soundyng place. For and they be
broken, they will sound fully.

Of sparehaukes belles there is great choice and little charge of them, for
there ben plentye, but for goshaukes sometime belles of Melayne were called the
best and they ben full good, for they commonly are sounde^ with silver and sold
thereafter. But there ben now used of duche land belles of a town called
Dordreght, and they be passing good belles. For they ben well sorted, well
sounded, sonour of ryngyng in shylnes and passing well lasting.

Here ends the process of hauking, and now follows the names of all manner
of hawks and to whom they belong.
These hawks belong to an Emperor,
THese ben the names of all manner of hawks: First an egle, a bautere, a
meloun, ye simplest of those three will slay an hynde, a Calfe, a Faune, a Roe,
a Kyd an Elke, a crane, a bustarde, a storke, a swanne, a fox, on the plain
ground, and these be not in^ured ne reclaimed because that they ben so
ponderous to the perch portatife. And these three by their nature belong to an
Emperor

These hawks belong unto a king.
A ger fauco^, a tercel of a gerfauco^ are due unto a king

For a Prince.
There is a faucon gentle, and a tercell gentell, and these ben for a prince.

For a Duke.
There is a faucon of the rock, and that is for a duke.

For an Earl.
There is a fauco^ peregrine, and that is for an Earl.

For a Baron.
There is a bastard. and that hawk is for a Baron.

Hawks for a knight.
There is a sacre, and a sacret, and those before a knight.

Hawks for a squire.
There is a lanere and laneret and these belong unto a squire.

For a lady.
There is a marlyon, and that hawk is for a lady.

An hawk for a young man.
There is a Hobbye, and that hawk is for a young man

And th^se ben hawks of the tower and ben both illured to be called and
reclaymed.

And yet there be mo kinds of hawks.
There is a goshauke, and that hawk is for a yoman.

There is a ^ercell, and that is for a poor man.

There is a sparehauke, and she is for a priest.

There is a musket, and she is for an holy water clerck.

And these ben of an other manner of kind. For they flee to querre and to
far, Iutty and to Iutty ferry.

Thus ends the book of haukyng.
Imprynted at London in Paul's church yerde by Robert Toye.

Here begins the book of Hunting where unto is added the measures of
blowyng.



Likewise as in the book of Haukynge a foresaid are written and noted the
terms of pleasure belongyng to gentilme^, having a delyght therein. In the same
manner this book following shows to such gentle persons the manner of Huntyng
for all manner of beasts whether they be beasts of Uenery or chase of rascal,
and also it shows al terms conuenyent, as well of the hou^des as of ye beasts
aforesaid, and there be many diverse of them, as is declared in the book
following.

Beasts of Uenery are.iii. kinds.
WHere so ever ye fare by frith or by fell
Mi dear child take heed how Trista^ does you tell
How many manner beasts of Ueneri there were
Lysten to your dame, and she shall you lere
Four manner of beasts, of Uenery there are
The first of them is the heart, the second is the Hare
The Bore is of one of tho, the wolf and not one more.
Beasts of the chase are.v. Kinds
ANd where ye come in plain or place
I shall you tell which ben beasts of enchase
One of them is the Bucke, an other is the do
The Fox and the Martyron, and the wild Roe
And ye shall my dear child other beasts all
Where so ye them find, rascal ye shall them call
In fryth or in fell, or in the forest I you tell.
Note here the age of an Heart.
ANd for to speak of the Heart, if ye will it lere
Ye shall him a calfe call at the first year
The second year a broket so shall ye him call
The third year a spayd learned thus all
The fourth year a stagge call to him by any way
The fyft year a great stagge your dame bid you say,
The syxt year call him an Heart
Do so my child while ye be in quarte
To know the head of a Heart and that is diverse
ANd of the horn that he then bears about
The first head shall be judged without
Therein finden we such diversity
Nevertheless the sixte year evermore at the least
Thou shall well judge the perse of the same beast
When he has auntlere without any let
Ryall and suryall also there I set
And that in the top so when we may them ken
Then ye shall call him forces an heart of ten
And when he has in the top three of the selue
Than ye shall call him troched an heart of twelve
And afterward in the top thereof when there four been
Than shall ye call him summed an heart of syxtene
And from four forward, what so befall
Be he never of so many ye shall him summed call
Right of the nombre, even that he is
Calls him from four summed ywys
Also have ye sele, and heart heded well.
An Herd, a Beuy a Sounder, a route
MY child calls herdes of Heart and of Hynde
And of Bucke, and of Do, where ye them find
And a beuy of Roes what place they ben
And a soundre ye shall of the wild swine
And a route of wolves where they pass in
So shall ye them call, as many as they ben.
A little herd, a middle herd, a great herd.
TWenty is a little herd, though it be of hyndes
And three score is a middle herd to call them by ki^des
And four score is a great herd, call ye them so
Be it heart, be it hind, bucke, or else do.
How ye shall say a great heart* and not a fair, and other.
A Great heart when ye him see, so shall ye him call
But never a fair heart, for nothing yt may befall
A great hind, a great bucke, and a great do
My sons where ye walk, call ye them so
So ye should name such dear, and do as I you lere.
What is a beuy of Roes great or small.
ANd six is a beuy of Roes in a row
And ten is a middle beuy so well I it know
A great beuy is twelve, when they together be
And so call them sons, where that ye them see
The more nombre then ywys, the greater the beuy is.
What is a soundre of swyne great or small.
Twelve make a soundre of the wild swyne
Fyftene a middle soundre, what place they be in
A great soundre of swyne, twenty ye shall call
Forget not this lesson, for nothing that may befall
Think what I say my son, night and day.
Of the Roo huntyng, brekyng, and dressyng.
WHen ye hunte at the Roo, then ye shall say thore
He crosses and trasoneth your hounds before
A great Roe bucke, ye call him not so
But a fair roe bucke, and a fair do
With the bowelles and with the blood
Reward ye your hounds, my son so good.
And each foot ye shall cut in four I you ken
Take the bowelles and the blood, and do al together the^
Give it then to your hounds so
And must the gladder then they will go
That to your hounds no reward is named
For it is eaten on the ground and on the skyn dealed
The Roe shall be herdeled, by very I wene
The two forther legs the head laid between
And take the one hyndre leg up I you pray
And that other farther leg right as I you say
Upon that other ferther leg, both ye them pyt
And with that other ferther leg up ye them knit
On this manner thus when ye have wrought
All whole into the kechyn it shall be brought
Save that your hounds eat the bowels and the feet.
Now of the age and undoing of the Bore.
NOw to speak of the Bore the first year he is
A pygge of the sounder called as I have blys
The second year a hog, and so shall he be
And an hog stere when he is of years three
And when he is of four years abore shall he be
From the sounder of the swyne then departs he
A synguler is he so for alone he will go
When ye have slain the Bore and will do him right
Ye shall undo him vnflayne, when he shall be dight
Thyrty bredes and two of him ye shall make
By the law of Uenery, I dare undertake
Through your hounds by strength if he be dead
They shall have the bowels boiled with bread
Cast upon the ground where the Bore was slain
And that is called a reward so hunters it said
Upon the earth so have I bliss, for that so eaten is.
Now of the Hare.
NOw to speak of the Hare my sons sykerly
That beast king shall be called of all Uenery
For all the fair speaking and blowing that their
Comes of seching and finding of the Hare
For my loving children I take it on hand
He is the meruaylous beast that is in any land
For he femayeth croketh and roungeth evermore
And hears talow and greece, and above teeth has before
And other while he is male, and so ye shall him find
And other while female, and kyndely by kind
And when he is female and kyndleth him within
In three degrees he them bears or he with them twyn
Two rough and two smoth who will them see
And two knottes also that kyndeles will be
When he is female so tell I my tale.
The rewards for hounds.
When your hou^des by strength have don her to dead
The hunter shall reward them with the head
With the shoulders and the sides and with the bowels all
And al thing within the womb save only the gall
The paunch also, give them none of tho
Which reward when on the earth it is dealed
With all good hunters the halow it is named
Then the loins of the Hare look ye not forget
But bring them to the Kitchen, for thy lords meat
And of this beast to ^rete, here shall it be let.
Which beasts shall be slain, and which stripte.
NOw to speak of beasts, when they ben slain
How many be^ stripped, and how many ben slain
All that Bear skyn and talow, and roung leave me
Shall be slain save the Hare, for he shall strypt be
And all that bears greece and piles thereupon
Ever shall be stripped, when they ben undone
On this manner play, thus ye shall say.
Which beasts shall be rered with the limere.
MY dear sons echone now will I you lere
How many manner of beasts as with the limere
Shall Be up rered in fryth or in feelde
Both the heart and the Bucke, and the Bore so wild
And all other beasts that hunted shall be
Shall be sought and found with ratches so free
Say thus I you told, my children so bold.
The discryuyng of a bucke.
ANd ye speak of a Bucke the first year he is
A faune souking on his dam, say as I you wys
The second year a pryket, the third year a sorell
A soar at the fourth year the truth I you tell
The fifth year call him a Bucke of the first head
The sixth year call him a bucke and do as I you read.
Of the horns of a Bucke.
THe horns of a great Bucke or he so be
Must be sommoned as I say, harkeneth to me
Two braunces first pawmed he must have
And four auauncers the sothe if ye will save
And.xiiii. espelers and then ye may him call
Where so he be a great bucke I tell you all
Of the Roe Bucke.
ANd if ye of the Roe bucke will know the same
The first year he is a kyd souking on his dame
The second year he is a gyrle, and ben such all
The third year an hemuse look ye him call
Roe Bucke of the first head he is at the fourth year
The fyft year a Roe bucke him call I you lere
At saint andrews day, his horns he will cast
In more or in moss he hides them fast
So that no man may them soon find
Eles in certain he does not his kind
At Saint James day, where so he go
Then shall the Roe bucke gendre with the Roe
And so boldly there as ye soiourne
Then he is called a Roe bucke going in his turn
And if ye may a Roebucke slay withouten any fail
And ye find the beuy greece, at his tail
As some Roe buckes have, when ye it find
Than shall ye rere it as ye do of Heart and of Hynde
Also the Robucke, as it is well his kind
At holy rood day he goth to ride
And uses the byt, when he may get it.
Now of the Heart and the Hynde.
Sons of the Heart and the hind learn yet ye may
There they draw to the herd, at holy Rood day
To the stepe then they gone, each hot day at none
Which stepe they use my children I you say
Till it be midsomer at the least way
The cause of the stepe is to keep them fro the fly
Who so comes to that place may it well spy
An other thing use they my child also
The same season of the year to soil to go.
Of the crienge of these beasts.
AN Heart beloweth, and a Bucke groyneth I find
And each To Bucke, certainly belleth by kind
The noise of the beasts thus ye shall call
For pride of their make they use it all
Say child where ye go, your dame tought you so.
Mark well these season following.
Time of greece begins at mydsommer day
And till holy Roode day, lasts as I you say
The season of the Fox, fro Nativity
Till the Annunciation of our Lady free.
Season of the To bucke at Easter shall begin
And till Michelmas lasts nigh or she blyn.
The season of the To begins at Michelmas
And it shall endure till it be Candelmas.
At Michelmas begins the hunting of the Hare
And lasts till midsomer there will no man it spare.
The season of the wolf, is made in each country
At the season of the Fox, and evermore shall be.
The season of the bore is from the nativity
Till the puryfycacion of our Lady so free
For at the Nativity of our Lady sweet
He may find where he goth under his feet
Both in woods and feeldes, corn and other fruit
When he after food makes any suit
Crabbes and oak corns and nuttes, there they grow
Hawes, and hepes and other things mow
That till the purificacion lasts as ye may see
And makes the bore in season to be
For while that fruit may last, his time is never past.
NOw to speak of ye Hare, how al shall be wrought
When she shall with hounds be fou^den and sought
The first word to the hou^des yt the hunter shall out pit
Is at the kenel door, when he opens it
That all may him here he shall say (arere)
For his hounds will come to hastily
This is the first word my son of Uenery
And when he has coupled his hounds echone
And is forth with them to feelde gone
And when he has of ^ast his couples at will
Then shall he speak and say his hounds till
Horse de couple auaunt se auaunt (twyse fo)
And then (so ho so ho) thryse and no mo
And then say, sacy auaunt so ho, I the pray
And if ye see your hounds have good will to ren
And draw awaywarde fro you, say as I you ken.
Here how a my, again them call so
Then, swef mon amy swef, to make them soft tho
And if any find of the hare there has go
And he hight Rychard or Bemound to him cry so
Oyes a Bemounde le vyllant, and I shall you auow
Que quida, troula ^owarde oula court cow,
That Bel^ounde the worthy without any fail
That weneth to find the toward with the short tail
And if ye see where the hare at pasture has been
If it be in the time of the corn green
And if your hounds chase well at your will
Then three notes ye shall blow both loud and shyll
There one and there another there he pastured has
Then say (Illoquens) in the same path
So say to them in kind, unto time ye her find
And then cast a sign all the feeld about
To see her pasture where she has be in or out
Other at her form for gladly to be she is not lefe*
There she has pastured in time of relefe
And any hounde find or musyng of her mace
There as she has been and is gone out of that place
Ha cy touz cy est ill, so shall ye say
Uenz arere so how sa, as loud as ye may
Sa cy ad est so how, after that
Sa sa cy auaunt, and thereof be not lat
And when ye see unto the plain her at the last
In feelde or in arable land or in the wood past
And your hounde will find of her there then
Say la douce amy last est a, and do as I you ken
That is to say, sweet friend there is he come low
For to dry here, and therewith ye shall say, so how
Iloquens ey douce ey vaylaunt so how so how, the^ twice
Thus may ye now dear sons learn of veneryce
And when ye come there as ye trow he will dwell
Aad so seems to you well then say as I you tell
La douce la est a venuz, for to dwell thor^
And therewith thryes, so how, say ye no more
And if it seems well you to find all in fear
And wene so to do then say, douce how here how here
How here douce, how here, how here he sytteth
So shall ye say my children and for nothing lets
All manner of beasts that ever chased be
Have one manner of word, so how, I tell thee
To fulfill or vnfyll al manner of chase
The hunter evermore in his mouth that word he hase
And if your hounds at a chase run there ye hunt
And the beasts begin to run, as hearts ben wunt
Or for to hanylon as does the fox with his gyle
Or for to cross as the do otherwhyle
Either to dwell so that your hounds cannot out go
Then shall ye say (ho sa amy sa sa)
A couples faarere, so how, such is the play
And so how is as much as sa how to say
^But for so how it is short in speech when it is brought
^herfore say we so how, but sa how say we naught
and if your hounds chase at heart or at hare
and they run at defaute thus ye shall there fare
I Ico so how assayne assayne stou ho ho
F Sa assayne arere so how, these words and no mo
and if your hounds run well at the fox or at ye do
(...) so fail at defaute say thus ferther or ye go
Ho ho or swefe aluy douce aluy, that they here
Ho hoy assayne astayne sa arere
So how so how venes a coupler, and do as I ken
The more worship may ye have among all men
Your crafts let not be hid, and do as I you bid
Al my sons in same, and thus may ye know of game
The boste yt the master hunters makes to his man, now here following ye may
hear
THe master to the man makes his boste
That he knows bykinde what the heart cost
At huntyng evermore when he gothe
Quod the man to his master that were good lore
For to know what he does the hounds before
What does he quod the master to the man?
He does quod he even as thou may see
Break and so does no beast but he
When breke^h he qoud the man, what is that to say?
With his fete he opens the earth there he goth away
What is the cause quod the man, master I thee pray
That the heart before the hounds when they him hu^t ay?
That then to the river he wylleth for to go?
Quod the master to the man there are causes two
For two causes the heart desires to ye river, and note
well these terms following. Dis^e^de and other.
One cause for the river descend he is aye
And so he is to the water when he takes the way
Why call thou him descend master I the pray?
For he pays of his might the sooth for to say
An other is to the water why he goth otherwhyle
The hounds that him suen to purpose to begile
Yet of this heart quod his man master I will ken
Into the water when he lepeth what he makes then?
He profereth quod the master and so ye shall say
For he wot not him self yet how he will away
Whether over the water he will forth pass
Or turn again the same way there he first was
Therefore it is profer as these hunters said
And reprofer if the same way he turn again
At the other side of the water if he vpstarte
Then shall ye call it the soil of the heart
And that is for the water of his legs weet
Down into the steps there fallen of his feet
Again the water his way even if he hent
Than breketh he water thereto take you tent
And if with thee go algate you it shall
Defoulant the water and heart so him call
Now of the numbles mark well the terms
The man to his master speaks blythe
Of the numbles of the heart that he would them kythe
How many ends there shall be them within?
Quod the master but one, thick nor thynne
And that is but the gargylyon to speak of al by deene
And al these other crookes and roundelles been.
The auauncers, the forcers
Yet would I wit and thou would me le^e
The crookes and the rou^dels of the numbl^s of the dear
One crook of the numbles lies ever more
Under the throat ^oll of the beast before
That called is (auauncers) who so can them ken
And the (...) part of the numbles then
That i^ to (...) ^the (...)) that lain even between
The two thighs of the beast that other crookes even
In (...) midret that called is the roundell also
For ^he sides round about (...) it is fro
(...) sons bold say of (...) thus I you told
Yet would I wit master why these hounds all
Bayen and cryen when they him sethe shall?
For they should have help that is their skyll
For to slay the beast that they run till
Tell me master quod the man what is the skyll
Why the Hare would so ^ayne run against the hill*
Quod the master for her legs be shorter before
Then behind that is the skyll thore.
What is the cause quod the man yt men say of the beast
That the Hare sytteth aye when she takes her rest
And other beasts lie as commonly men said
For two causes quod the master I tell the plain
One is for the hurcles upon the houghes aye
And all other beasts can the side to the ground say
An other cause there is and that is no less
For she bears both sewet and pure greece.
Yet would I master quod the man feign wit more
Where lies the sewet of the hare behind or before?
Over the loyne quod the master of each hare thou take
Between the tail and the chine even on the back
Yet would I master quod the man these at the lere
When thou walk in the feeld with thy lymere
Thereas an hare pastured has or thou him see
To know fat or lene whether he be?
I can quod the master well tell the this case
Wait well where he lay, and where he fum^^d has
Yelow and englamed if that it be
Then he is fat I tell thee learn this of (...)
And if it he both black and hard and clean
Then he is megre larbre and lene
And of this same thing if thou leave not me
Take heed in the winter and th^^ thou may it see
yet mays^^^ of the har^ fay^^ would I wit more
What he does when he goth the hounds before?
He sorth and resorth there he goth away
Prycketh and repriketh the soth for to say
But what is that quod the man when they so done?
That shall I quod the master tell the full soon
In the feeldes where he goes no ways ben
There he sorth when he steppeth and it may not be seen
And after when he doubleth and turns not again
Then he resorteth as good hunters said
And when he renneth in the way dry or weete
Then may find foostalx of clees or of feet
Then pricketh the Hare aye when he does so
And repricketh than he again go.
A vauntelay, alay, and relay.
Master yet quod the man, what is that to say?
That shall I tell thee quod he, for a little bysethe
When the hounds are set an heart for to mete
And other him chasen and folowen to take
Than all the relays, thou upon them make
Even at his coming if thou let thy hounds go
While the other that be behind far are him fro
That is, auauntelay, and so thou shall it call
For they are than far before those other hounds all
And an hyndring great all other until
For they may not that day no more sew at will
And hold thy hounds still if that thou so do
Till all the hounds that be behind become thereto
Than let thy hounds altogyther go
That called is an, alay, and look thou say so
And that hyndryng is yet to them that been behind
For the rested will ever over go the weary by kind
A relay is after when the hounds are past
Far before with the heart that hyeth them fast
To let thy hounds far after them gone
And that is than a fortheryng to them echone
For and thy hounds have overtake these other by distres
Than shall they all follow him of one swyftenes.
What is a forloyne.
Master yet would I feign this at you lere
What is a forloyne for that is good to here?
That shall I say thee quod he the sooth at the least
When thy hounds in the wood seche any beast
And the beast is stole away out of the fryth
Or the hounds that thou have meten therewith
And any other hounds before than may with the^ mete
These other hounds are then forloyned I thee ^ete
For the beast and the hounds are so far before
And the hounds behind ben weary and sore
So that they may not at the beast come at their will
The hounds before forloyne them and that is the skyl
They ben ay so far before to me if thou will trust
And this is the forloyne lere it if thou lust.
Which three things causes ye hounds to endure
Yet would I wit master if it were thy will
When thy hounds run an heart until
And aye the ferther that they go the gladder they ben?
For three causes quod he as oftentimes is seen
One is when the heart renneth fast on a res^
He sweteth that it renneth do (...) throughout his cle^^
The hounds when they find of that his sweet
Then they are leue^ to run and l^ther to let
An other cause when the heart nigh no more may
Then will he white f^oth cast there he goes away
When the hounds find of that than are they glad
In hope they shall him have and run so rad
The third cause is of the heart when he is nighe dead
Then he casts out of his mouth froth and blood red
The hounds know that he shall be taken soon then
And ever the ferther they go the glader they run
These are the causes three, that causes them glad to be
Which beast a slow hound takes as soon as a swift
What beast yet maystre I ask it for none ill
That most who^e al hounds run until
And also soon the slowest shall him overtake
As the swyftest shall do what way so ever he take
That beast a Bauson hight, a brocke or a gray
These three names he has the sothe for to say
And this is cause thereof, for he will by kind
Go through thorns always the thickest he may find
There as the swyft hounde may no ferther go
Then the slowest of foot be he never so through.
Why the hare fumayse and croteyes.
YEt master would I wit why that men said
That the hare fumayse and croteyse both plain
And al other manner of beasts that hunted be
Femyon^ or fenon^ as we well it see?
That shall I well tell that quod the master then
For why that he fumayes and croteyse well I ken
He fumayth for he bears talow that is no lece
And he croteys men said for he bears no greece
And soukes on his hoghes when he lets it go
And beasts of such kind find we no mo
How many beasts femae^ master feign would I lere
And how many fenon^ that were good to here?
All this to tell quod the master I hold it but light
All beasts that bear talow and stand vpryght
Femayen when they do say as I thee ken
And al other fenon^ that rouken down then
How many manner of beasts of Uenery releue
How many manner of beasts master me tell
Of venery releuen by frith or by fell?
To this quod the master I shall the answer
Of all beasts but two the heart and the hare
From the annunciacion of our lady
The heart then releueth the sothe for to say
Till saint Peter's day and poule and the hare right
From the purification of our lady bright
Till translacyon releueth leave ye me
Of saint Benet the.xi. of July.
To undo the wild bore.
Yet my child of the wild bore to speak more
When he shall be undone I tell you before
Two and ^hyrty bredes ye shall of him make
Now will ye wit my sons where ye shall them take
The first of them is the head what ever befall
Another is the collar, and so ye shall it call
The sheeldes on the shoulders thereof shall two be
Then every side of the swyne depart in three
The pestels and the gamons depart them in two
And two fille^tes he has forget not tho
Then take the legs and his feet and show your sleyght
For they shall of his bredes be counted for eight
Depart the chine in four pieces and no mo
And take there your bredes thirty and two
And fair put the gre^e when it is take away
In the bladder of the bore my child I you pray
For it is medicine, for many manner pyne.
How ye shall break an heart
ANd for to speak of the heart while we think on
My child first ye shall him serve when he shall be undone
And yt is for to say or ever ye him dyght
Within his horns to lay him vpryght
At the assay kitte him that lords may see
Anon fat or lene whether that he be
Then cut of the coddes the belly even fro
Or ye begin him to fley, and then shall ye go
At the chaules to begin as soon as ye may
And slit him down to thassay
And fro thassay even down to the belly shall ye slyt
To the pyssill there the codde was away kit
Then slit the left legs even first before
And then the lift legs behind or ye do more
And these other legs upon the ^ight side
Upon the same manner slyt ye that tide
To go to the chekes look that ye be pressed
And so flay him down even to the breast
And so flay him forth right unto thassay
Even to the place where the codde was cut away
Then flaye the same wise all that other side
But let the tail of the beast still thereon a bide
Then shall ye him undo my child I you read
Right upon his own skin and lay it on bread
Take heed of the cutting of the same dear
And begin first to make the erbere
Then take out the shoulders and slitteth anon
The belly to the side from the corbyn bone
That is corbins fee, at the death he will be
Then take out the sewet, that it be not lafte
For that my child is good for leche craft
Then put thine hand softely under the brestbone
And there shall ye take out the exber anon
Then put out the paunche and from the paunche thase
Away lightly the rate such as he hase
Hold it with a finger do as I you ken
And with the blood and the greece fill it then
Look threde that ye have and nedle thereto
For to sewe it withal or ye more do
The small guts then ye shall out pyt
From them take the mawe, forget not it
Then take out the liver and lay it on the skin
And after that the bladder without more din
Then dress the numbles first that ye recke
Down the auauncers, kerue that cleueth to the neck
And down with the bolthrote put them anon
And ke^ue up the flesh there up to the back bone
And so forth to the fillettes that ye up arere
That falls to the numbles, and shall be there
With the neres also and sewet that there is
Even to the midryfe than upon him is
Than take down the midryfe from the sides hot
And heave up the numbles whole by the boll throat
In thine hand than them hold, and look and see
That all that longs them to, together that it be
Than take them to thy brother, to hold for try^t
Whiles that thou them doublest and dress at thee list
Than away the lyghtes and on the skin them lay
To abide the querre my child I you pray
Than shall ye slyt the slough there as the heart lies
And take a way the hears from it and flies
For such hears has his heart aye it upon
As men see in the beast when he is undone
And the mids of the heart a bone shall ye find
Look ye give it to a lord, and child be kind
For it is kind for many maladyes
And in the mids of the heart evermore it lies
Than shall ye cut the shyrtes the teeth even fro
And after the rydge bone kytteth even also
The forches and the sides even between
And look that your knives aye whetted been
Than turn up the forthes and frote them with blood
For to save greece, so do men of good
Than shall ye cut the neck the sides even fro
And the head from the neck cutteth also
The tongue the brain, the paunche, and the neck
When they washed ben well with the water of the beck
The small guts to the lyghtes in the deres
Above the heart of the beast, when thou them reres
With all the blood that ye may get and win
Al together shall be take and laid on the skin
To give your hounds, that called is ywys
The querre, above the skin for it eaten is
And who dresseth so by my counsel
Shall have the left shoulder for his travail
And the right shoulder where so ever he be
Give it to the Foster for that is his fee
And the liver also of the same beast
To the fosters knave give it at the least
The numbles trusse in the skin, and hardell the^ fast
The sides and the forchesse together that they last
With the hindre legs, be done so it shall
Then bring it home and the skyn withal
The numbles and the horns at the lords gate
Then boldly blow the price thereat
Your play for to nymme, or that ye come in.
Explicit dame Iulyan Bernes doctrine in her book of huntyng.
Beasts of the chase of the sweet fewte and stynkyng.
THere ben beasts of the chase the sweet fewte And tho ben the bucke, the do,
the bear, the raynder, the elke, the spickarde, the ottre, and the martron

There ben beasts of the chase of the stynkyng fewte And they ben the roe
bucke and the roe, the fulmard, the ^yches, the baude, the gray, the fox, the
squyrel, ye white rat, the sotte, and the polcat.

The names of diverse manner of hounds
THese ben the names of hou^des. First there is a grehou^d, a bastard, a
mo^grel, a mastif, a lemor, a spaniel raches kenets, terrors, bouchers hou^ds
du^ghil dogs, trindel tails and pryckeered curres and small ladi popies that
bear away the fleas and diverse small fautes

The properties of a good grehounde.
A grehou^d should be hedded like a snake, and necked like a drake, foted like a
catte, tailed like a ratte, syded like a breme, and chi^ed like a beme. The
first year he must learn to feed, ye second year to feeld him led, the third
he is fellow like, the.iiii. year he is none like, ye.v. year he is good enough,
the.vi, year he shall hold the plough, ye vii. year he will avail great
bytches for to assail, the viii. year lyckladell, the.ix. year cartsadel, and
when he is comen to that year, have him to the tannere. For ye best hounde
that ever bytche had, at the.ix. year he is full bad.

The properties of a good horse.
A Good horse should have.xv. properties and co^dicions. That is to wete, three
of a man, three of a woman three of a fox, three of an hare, and.iii. of a^
ass.

Of a man bold, proud, and hardy. Of a woman fair brested fair of hear,
and easy to lepe upon. Of a fox, a fair tail, short ears, with a good trot,
Of an hare, a great eye, a dry head, and well rennyng. Of an ass, a bygge
chyn, a flat leg, and a good hoof. Well trauayled women nor well trauayled
horse were never good. Arise erly* serve god devoutly, and the world beselye,
do thy work wisely, give thine alms secretly; go by the way sadly, answer
the people demurely, go to thy meat appetytely sit thereat discretly, of thy
tongue be not to lyberall, arise therfro temperatly, go to thy supper soberly,
and to thy bed merely, be in thine inn iocundlye, please thy love duly, and
sleep surely

Mark well these four things.
THere ben four principal things pri^cipalli to be dred of every wise man.
The first is the curse of our heavenly father god. The second is the
indignacio^ of a price (quia indignacio Regis vel Pricipis mors est The third
is the favor or will of a judge. The fourth is sclaunder, and the mutacion of a
cominaltie.

Who that makes in Christmas a dog to his larder. And in March a sow to his
gardyner, And in May a fool of a wise man's counsel, he shall never have good
larder, fair gardyne, nor yet well kept counsel.

Far from thy kynsmen ^ast thee, wrath not thy neighbors next thee. In a
good corn country threste the and sit down Robyn and rest thee.

Who that buyldeth his house all of salowes
And pricketh a blind horse over the falowes
And suffers his wife to seek many halowes
God send him the bless of everlasting galowes
If these be not directed, then go they at adventure
There ben four things full hard to know which way that they will draw. The
first is the ways of a young man. The second is the course of a vessel in
the sea. The third of an adder or of a serpent sprente. The fourth of a foul
sittyng on any thing.

Two wives in one house. two rattes and one mouse

Two dogs and one bone, shall never accord in one Who that m^nneth him with
his kyn
And closes his crofte with chery trees
Shall have many hedges broken
And also little good service.


The Companyes of beasts and fowls.
AN herd of hearts an herd of al manner dear an herd of swans an herd of
cra^es an herd of curlewes an herd of wrennes an herd of harlottes a nigh of
fesauntes a beuy of Ladies a cite o^ grayes a ^ery of ^o^yes a richesse of
martrons a besynes of fe^ettes a brace of gr^houndes ^r.ii. a les^ of
^rehoundes or.iii. a couple of spanyels a couple of re^ning hounds* a lytter
of wolpes a kyndell of young cattes a beuy of r^^s a beuy of quayles a sege of
Herons a sege of byttoures a sord or a suit of mallards a mustre of pecockes a
walk of suites a congregation of people an exaltyng of larkes a watch of
nyghtyngales an host of men a feloshyppyng of yemen a cherme of goldfinches a
cast of bread a couple or a pair of botels a flight of doves an unkindness of
ravens a clateryng of choughes a dissimulacion of birds a route of knights a
pride of lions a sleuthe of bears a draught of butler^ a prou^e shewi^g o^
taylers a temperaunce of ^o^kes a stalk of fosters a boste of souldyours a
laughter of ostlers a glosyng of tauerners a malepe^^^es of pedl^rs a thraue of
thresshers a squat of daubers a fyghtyng of beggars a synguler of bores a dryft
of tame swyne an harrasse of horse a ragge of coltes or a rake a baren of mules
a tryppe of gotes a tryppe of hares a gaggyll of geese a brood of hens a
badelynge of duckes a nonpaciens of wives a state of princes a though of barons
a prudence of vycaryes a superfluity of nuns a scoole of clerks a doctrine
of doctors a conuertyng of prechours a sentence of Judges a dampnyng of
Iuryours an obeisaunce of servants a sete of ushers a tygendes of pyes an
host of sparowes a swarm of bees a cast of Hawks of the toure, two a lose
of ye same hawks.iii. a flight of goskaukes a flight of swalowes a byldynge of
rookes a murmuracyon of stares a route of wulues an untruth of sompners a
melody of harpers a poverty of pypers a subtlety of sergeauntes a tabernacle
of bakers a dryft of fysshers a dysgysynge of ^aylers a bleche of souters a
smere of coryours a cluster of grapes a cluster of churles a rag of maidens a
rafull of knaves a blusshe of boys an vncredibilite of kocoldes a couy of pat
riches a spryng of teles a dessarte of lapwynges a fall of wodcockes a
congregation of plouers a couerte of cootes a dule of tur^ylles a scull of
freres a bominable sight of monks a sclul of fyshe an example of masters an
obseruaunce of heremites an eloquence of lawers an execucyon of officers a
faith of merchants a provision of steward of house a ker^e of panters a
credence of fewers a lepe of ^ydarde^ a shrewednes of (...) a sculke of thieves
a sculke of foxes a nest of rabbettes a labor of moles a mu^e of hounds a
kenell of caches a suit of a lyam a cowardnes of curres a sourde of wild swyne
a stod of mares a pace of asses a drove of nete a flock of sheep a gagle of
women a pepe of chekyns a multeplyeng of husbands a po^^y fycalytye of
prelates a dygnytye of chanons a charge of curates a discrecion of priests a
disworship of scortes
Explicit.
Here follow ye dewtermes to speak of brekyng or dressyng of diverse beasts and
fowls. etc. And the same is showed of certain fysshes.
A Dear broken A goose rered an embr^w^ng of ^a^uers a (...) do s^porters a
blast of hunters* a thretenyng of courtyers a promise o^ ^^^sters a lyeng of
pardo^ers a mysbeleue of paynters a lasshe of carters a skolding of kewsters a
wondering of tynkers a wa^wa^d^es of ha^wards a worship of writers a
neuerchryuyng of iuglers a fraunche of myllers a feast of bruers a goryng of
buchers a trynket of coruysers a pluck of shooturners a dronkenshyp of cobblers
a cluster of nuttes a rage of the teeth a rascal of boys an egg tired a fire
tymbred*
Now of the fyshes.
A salmon chyned a pyke spla^^ed a haddocke syded a cheuyn fynned a sole ^oyned
a gutnarde chyned a tenche sauced an ele tro^choned a breme splayed a barbel
^us^ed a trout gobe^ted a pygge headed and syded a capon sawced a chekyn
frusshed a cony unlaced a cra^e dy^playde a curlewe unjointed a fefant alet a
quayle wynged a plouer wynced a pygeon thyghed a brawne leched a swan lift a
lamb shouldred a kyd shouldred an hen spoiled a malarde unbraced an heron
dismembered a pecocke disfygured a bitter vntached a partryche ale^ a rail
brested a woodcocke thyghed.
Ye shall say thus.
An heart harbors a bucke lodges a squyre lodges a roe beddeth a ty^man
beddeth an hare in his form shoulderyng or lenyng a cony syttyng a woodcocke
breakyng
Here now folowying shall be showed all shyre^ and the byshopryches of the
realm of England / and ye shall understand that the shyres ben written before
/ and the byshopriches of the same are written following nere after / and than
afterward are showed the prouynces of this land^.
KEnt, Canterbury, Rochester, Sussex, Chichester, Hamshyre, Suxrey, Winchester,
Wyltshyre, Barkshyre, Salisbury, Somersetshyre, Dorse^shyre, Bathe, Deuenshyre,
Cornewayle, Excester, Essex, Myddlesex, London, Northfolke, Suffolk, Norwiche,
Ca^brydgeshyre, Ely.

Leyceter, Worceter, Wigorne, Hertforthshire, Herforde, Chesshyre, Shropshyre
part of Lancasshyre, Chester, Yorkeshyre, Staffordshyre, Darbyshyre,
Notyngamshyre, and other as part of Lancastershyre, York,

Prouynces of England.
Canterbury, York, Stafford, Derby, Notingham, Northu^berla^d, Durha^,
Westmerla^d, Tyndale. ^a^lile.

To have a faithful friend.
A Faithful friend would I feign find
To find him there he might be found
But now is the world wext so unkind
That frendshyp is fall to the ground
Now a friend have I found
That I will neither ban ne curse
But of all friends in feeld or town
Ever gramercy mine own purse.
My purse it is my preuy wife
This song I dare both sing and say
It parts men of much strife
When every man for himself shall pay
As I ride in rich array
For gold and silver men will me floryshe
By this matter I dare well say
Ever gramercy mine own purse
As I ryd with gold s^red
And have to do with lands law
Men for my money will make me speed
And for my goods they will me know
More and less to me will draw
Both the better and the worse
By this matter I say in saw
Ever gramercy mine own purse.
It befell me upon a time
As it has done by many a one mo
My horse, my nete, my sheep, my swyne,
And all my goods were gone me fro
I went to my friends and told them so
And home again they bad me trusse
I said again when I was woe
Ever gramercy mine own purse.
Therefore I read you syrs all
To assay your ^^eendes or ye have need
For and ye come down and have a fall
Full few of them for you will grede
Therefore assay them every ^hone
Both the better and the worse
Our lord that shope both son and moon
Send us spendyng in our purse. Amen.
Thus ends the book of huntyn^.
The measures of blowyng of a horn. First to give knowledge to go to the
feeld.
Blow with one wind, one short one long and a longer.

2 To blow to the couplyng of the hounds at the kepell door.
Blow with one wind, one long and.iii. short.

The second wind one long, one short and a shorter.

3 To blow to the feeld.
Blow with two wyndes, with the first one short, one long, and two short.

With the second wind one short, one long, and a longer.

4 To blow in the feeld*
With two wyndes, the first two short one long and two short.

The second, one short, one long and a longer.

5 To uncouple thy hounds in the feeld*
Three long notes, one with three wyndes.

6 To blow to s^ke.
To wyndes, the first a long and a short. the second a long.

7 When the hounds a game unknown hunteth then the hunt blows this.
Blow the velyne, one long, and.vi. short.

8 If it be the same ye hunt for^
Blow the whole rechate with three wyndes, the first wind one long and.vi.
short.

The second wind two short and one long.

The third wind one long and.vi. short.

9 Struck to draw from covert to covert.
Three wyndes.ii. short, one long and.ii. short

The second one long and a short.

The third one long.

10 To blow the earthyng of the fox when he is couerable.
Four notes with four wyndes.

The relyefe one long.vi. short.

11 To blow if the fox be not couerable.
Two wyndes, one long, and three short

The second wind long.

12 To blow the death of the fox in the feeld or covert.
Three notes with three wyndes.

The rechate upon the same with three wyndes

The first wind, one long, and.vi. short

The second one short and one long.

The third one long and.v. short.

13 The death of the fox at the lords gate.
Tho notes. And then the relyefe three times.

14 The death of the bucke* either with bow / hounds, or greyhoundes.
One long note.

15 The knowledge upon the same.
Two short, and one long.

16 The death of the bucke with hounds.
Two long notes, and the rechate.

17 the price of an hartryall.
Nine notes with three testes.

18 The rechate with three wyndes.
The first one long, and.vi. short

The second one short, and one long.

The third one long, and.vi. short.

19 To blow the call of the keepers of any park or forest.
One short, one long* and one longer.

20 If the keeper answer you^ blow.
Two short with one wind, and draw toward hynt, and after that blow one
short.

21 When the game breaks couerd.
Four with three winds, and the rechate upon the same

^^ The stent when the hounds can hunt no further.
Three wyndes, the first one long and.vi. short.

The second, one long, and one short

The third, one long.

23 Where the fox is ^rthed blow after this manner for the taryers.
One long, two short.

The second wind, one short, and one long.

Note this is the chefest and principallest point to be learned.

Every long conteyneth in blowyng.vii. quauers, one mynyme, and one quauer.

One mynyme conteyneth four quauers.

One short conteyneth three quauers.

The end of the whole measures of blowyng.

Imprynted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of of the Rose Garland by
Wyllyam Copland for Robert Toye.

Here begins a tretyse of Fysshynge with an Angle.



Solomon in his parables says that a good spyrite makes a flouring age, that
is a fair age and a long. And since it is so I ask this question, which be ye
means and the causes that enduce a man into a merry spirit? Truly to my best
discrecion it seems good disportes and honest games in whom a man ioyeth without
any repentance after. Then follows it that good dysportes and honest games:
because of man's fair age and long life. And therefore now will I choose of
four good dysportes and honest games, that is to wete of Haukyng, Huntyng, and
fysshyng, and for Fouling. The best to my discrecion which is fysshing called
anglyng with a rod, and a line, and an hook, and thereof to treat as my simple
wit may suffyse, both for the said reason of Salamon and also for the reason
that reason make^h in this wise.

Si tibi deficiant medici, medici tibi fiant. Hec tria, men's leta, labor, et
moderata dicta. Ye shall understand yt this is for to say, if a ma^lacke leche
or medicine, he shall make three things his medicine and he shall never need
mo^. The first of them is a merry thought. The second is a labor not
outrageous. The third is diet mesurable. The first if a man will ever more be
in merry thought and have a glad spirit, he must eschew al contrarious compani
and al places of debate where he might have any occasions of mela^coly, and if
he will have a labor not outrageous: he must the^ ordeyne him to his hearts
ease, and pleasance without study, pe^sifnes of travail, a merry occupacio^
which may rejoice his heart, and in which his spirits may have a merry delight.
And if he will be dieted measurably he must eschew all places of riot, which is
cause of surfeit and of syckenesse, and he must draw him to places of sweet air
and hungry, and eat nourishable meats and diffiable also.

AS ^owe than will I descryue the said dysportes and games to find the best
of them as verily as I can, all be it that the right noble and full worthy
prince Duke of york late called master of ye game, has discriued the myrthes
of hunting like as I think to discryue of it and of all other. For huntyng as
to mine intent is to laborous. For the hunter must always run and follow his
hounds traueling and swetyng full sore. He blows till his lyppes biyster.
And when he weneth it be a Hare: full often it is an hedgehog. Thus he chaseth and
woteth not what. He comes home at even rain beten, picked, and his clothes
torn, weteshod and al myrie Some hounds lost, some furbate. Such greues and
many other happeth unto the hunter, which for displesau^ce of the^ that love
it, I dare not report, Thus truly me seems that this is not the best disport
and game of ye said four. The disport and game of Hauking is laborous and
noyus also (as me seems. For as often the faukener leseth his hawks as the
hunter his hounds, than is his game and disporte gone, full often cries and
whisteleth till he be right evil a thrust. His hawk takes abow and list not
ones on him to regard. Wha^ he would have her to flee: tha^ will she bath.
With misfeding she shall have ye frou^ce ye rye, the cray, and many other
sicknesses yt brings them to souse. Thus by proof this is not the best
disport and game of the said four. The disporte and game of foulyng me seems
most simplest. For in the winter season the fouler spedeth not but in the
hardest and coldest wether which is grievous* for wha^ he would go to his ginnes
he may not for cold, Mani a gin and many a snare he makes yet sorili does he
fare. at morn tide in ye dew he is wete shod unto his tail. Many other such I
could tell: but dred of maugee makes me to leave. Thus me seems that hunting,
and hauking, and also fouling be^ so laborous and grievous, that none of the^
may perform nor be very mean to enduce a man to a merry spirit which is
cause of this long life according unto the said parable of Solomon. Doubtless
then follows it yt it must needs be ye disport of fishi^g with an angle. For
all other manner of fisshyng is also labourous and grievous, often making of
folks full wete and cold, which many times has be seen cause of great
infirmities, but ye angler may have no cold nor no disease nor anger, but if
he be causer him self, for he may not lose at the most but a line or an hook:
of which he may have store plenty of his own making, as this simple treatise
shall teach him. So then his loss is not grievous, and other grefes may he not
have saving but if any fish break a way after yt he is taken on the hook,
or else yt he catch naught which is not grievous, for if he fail of one he may
not fail of an other, if he does as this treatise teaches, but if there be
naught in the water, and yet at the least he has his wholesome walk and merry at
his ease, sweet air of ye sweet savor of the meadow flowers that makes him
hungry. He hears ye melodious armony of fowls. He sees the yo^ge swa^s,
hero^s, duckes, cootes, and mani other fowls with their broodes, which me
seems better the^ all the noise of hounds, ye blastes of horns, and the scry
of fowls, yt hu^ters, faukeners, and foulers ca^ make. And if ye angler take
fyshe: surely then is there no man merier the^ he is in his spirit. And who so
will use this game of angling: he must rise erly, which is profitable to man in
this wise. That is to wete, most to the health of his soul. For it shall cause
him to be holy, and to ye health of his bodi, for it shall cause him to be whole.
Also to ye increase of his goods, for it shall make him rich, as the old
English proverb says in this wise. Whosoever will rise erly, shall be holy, helthy,
and happy. Thus have I proved in mine intent that the disport and game of
angling: is the very mean and cause that enduceth a man into a merry spirit,
which after the said parable of Solomon and the said doctrine and the Phisike
makes a flourynge age and a long, and therefore to all you that been virtuous,
gentyl, and free borne, I write and make this simple treatise following, by ye
which ye may have the full craft of angling to disporte you at your lust, to
thentent yt your age may the more flower, and the more longer endure.

IF ye will be crafty in angling, ye must first learn to make your harneys,
that is to wete your rod, your lines of diverse colors, after that ye must
know how ye shall angle, in what place of the water, how deep and what time of
the day, for what manner fyshe, in what wether, how many impedimentes ther^ ben
of fyshing that is called angling, and in specially with what baytes to every
diverse fysshe, in every month of the year. How ye shall make your baytes
breed, where ye shall fi^de the^, and how ye shall find them, and how ye shall
keep them and for the most crafty thing, how you shall make your hooks of
steel and of osmonde. Some for ye dub and some for the flote and the ground.

And how you shall make your rod craftily, here I shall teach you, ye shall
cut between Michelmas and Ca^dellmas a fair staff of a fadome and a half
long and arm great of hasyll, willow, or ^spe, and breath him in a hot oven,
and set him even. Then let him cool and dry a month* take then and frete him
fast with a cokshote cord, and bind it to a form of an even square great
tree. Then take a plu^mer wyre that is even and straight, and sharp at the one
end, and heat the sharp end in a charcole fire till it be hot, and bren the
staff therewith through, ever straight in the pith at both ends till they
meet, and after that bren him in the nether end with a bird broche, and with
other broches each greater then other, and ever the greatest the last, so that
ye make your hole aye tapre wise. Then let him ly still and kele two days,
vnfrete him then and let him dry in a house roof, in the smoke till he be
through dry in ye same season take a fair yerde of green hasel, and bethe it
even and straight and let it dry with the staff and when they ben dry make
the yerde meet unto the hole in the staff unto half the length of the staff,
and to perform ye other half of ye crop, take a fair shote of black thorn,
crab tree, medler or else of Ienepre cut in the same season, and well bethed,
and straight, and set them together fetely, so that the crop may iustlye enter
all into the said hole. Then shave your staff and make him tapre way, then
vyrell the staff at both ends with long hoopes of iron, or laton in ye
clennest wise, a pike in ye nether end fastened with a renning vice, to take in
and out your crop. Than set your crop an handful within the over end of your
staff, in such wise, yt it be as bygge there, as in any other place above,
then arm your crop at ye over end down to the fret with a line of syx hears,
and double the line and frete it fast in the top with a bow to fasten on
your line. And thus shall ye make you a rod so pryuy that ye may walk
therewith, and there will never any man wete what thing ye go about. It will be
very light and nymble to fish with at your pleasure, and for the more redines,
lo here a figure thereof in example.



AFter ye have thus made your rod: ye must learn for to color your lines of
hear in this wise. first ye must take of a white horse tail ye lo^gest hear
and fairest yt ye can find, and ever the rounder that it be: the better it is.
Depart it in six parts, and every part ye shall color by him self in
diverse colors, as yelowe, green, brown, tawny, russet, and duske color.
And for to make good green colors on your hear, ye shall do take small
ale a quarte, and put it into a little pan, and put thereto half a pound of
Alum, and put thereto your hear and let it boil softlye half an hour. Than
take out your hear and let it dry, than take a pottel of fair water and put
it in a pan and put therein two hands full of Wyxene, and press it with a tyle
stone, and let it boil softly ye space of an hour. And when it is yelowe on
the scumme: put therein your hear, with half a pound of coperose beaten in
powder, and let it boil half a mile way. And than set it down and let it
kele five or six hours. Than take out the hear and dry it, and it is than
the finest green that is possible to be had for the water. And ever the more
that ye put thereto of coperose the better it will be, or else in the stead of
it vertgrese.

And another way may ye make a brighter green, as thus. Let wod your hear
in a woden fat of light plunket color, and than set him in old or wyxen like
as I have showed you before, saving ye shall not put therein neither coperose
or vertgrees.

For to make your hear seem yelow, dight it with Alum as I have said before,
and after that with oldes or wixen, without coperose or vertgrece.

An other yelowe ye shall make thus, Take small ale a pottell, and stamp three
handful of walnut leaves and put it together, and put in your hear till that it
be as deep as ye will have it.

For to make russet hear.
Take a pynte of strong lie and a half pound of soote, and a little iuce of
walnut leaves and a quart of Alum, and put them all together in a pan, and boil
them well, and when it is cold: put in your hear till it be as dark as ye
will have it.

For to make a brown color,
Take a pound of soote and a quarte of ale, and sees with as many walnut
leaves as ye may, and when they be black set it from the fire, and put their in
hear and let it lie still til it be as brown as ye will have it.

For to make an other brown.
Take strong ale, and soote and tempre the^ together and put there to your
hear two days and two nights, and it shall be a right good color*

For to make a tawny color.
Take lyme and water and put them together, and also put your hear therein
four or five hours. Tha^ take it out, and put it into a tanners ose one day,
and it shall be as fine a tawny color as any needs to our purpose.

The syxte part of your hear, ye shall keep still white for lines, for the
double hook to fisshe for the troute and grasynge, and for small lines for to
lie for the roche and the Dase.

When your hear is thus colored: ye must know for which waters, and for
which seasons they shall serve. The green color in all clear waters from
April unto Septe^bre. The yelow color in every clear water, from Septembre to
Nouembre, for it is like to the wedes and other manner of grass which grows
in the waters and ryuers when they be broken.

The russet color serves all the winter unto the end of Apryll, as well in
riuets as in pooles, or lakes.

The brown color, serves for that water yt is black dedish in rivers or
other waters. The tawni color, for these waters that been hethy or morysh.

NOw must ye make your lines in this wise. First look ye have an instrument
like unto this figure portrayed following. Than take your hear and cut of the
end an handful large or more. For it is neither strong nor sure. Than turn
the top to the tail, every one like much, and depart it into three parts.
Than knyt every part at one end by him self, and at the other end knit all
three together. And than put the same end in that other end of your
instrument that has but one clifte. And than set that other end fast with the
wedge four fyngers in all shorter than your hear. Tha^ twyne every warpe one
way, and like much, and fasten them in three cleftes alyke straight. Take that
out at that other end, and than twine it that way that it will desire enough
Than strain it a little and knyt it for undoing, and that is good. And for to
know how to make your instrument: lo here is a figure. And it shall be made of
tree, saving the bolte underneath, which shall be of iron.



SO when ye have as many of ^ ^y^^es as ye suppose will suffyse for ye length
of a line: than must ye knyt them together with a water knot, or else a duches
knot, and when your knot is knit: cut of ye void short ends a straw bred fro
the knot. Thus shall your lives be fair and fine, and also right sure for any
manner of fysshe.

YE shall understand, that the most subtyl and hardest craft in making your
harneis, is for to make your hooks. For whose making ye must have fete toles
thyn and sharp and small beaten, a semy clam of Iron, a bender, a pair of
long and small tongues, and an hard knyfe somedele thycke and an anuy^de, and a
little hammer.

And for small fysshe, ye shall make your hooks of the smallest quarrel ned^les
that ye can find of steel, and in this wise ye shall put the quarrel in a red
charcole fire, till it be of the same color that the fire is. Than take him
out and let him kele, and ye shall find him well alayed for to fyl^. Than raise
the berde with your knyfe and make ye point sharp. Than alaye him again or
else he will break in the bendyng. Than bend him like to ^ bend according to
the purpose. And greater hooks ye shall make in ye same wise of great nedles,
as broderers nedelles, or tailers, or shoomakers nedles, spear points of
shomakers nalles i^ especial ye best for great fish, and look yt they be^d at
the point wha^ they ben assaied, for else they be not good. When the hook is
be^ded, beat the hinder end abroad, and fyle it smothe for fretting of ye
line. Than put it into the fire again, and give it an easy red here. Than
suddenly quench it in water, and it will be hard and strong. And for to have
knowledge in your instruments: ^oe they be here in figure portrayed. Hammer,
Knife / Pinsons, Clame / Wedge / File, (...) / ^ ^nnelde.


When ye have made your hooks: the^ must ye set them on your lines according
in greatness and strength in this wise, ye shall take small red sylke, and if it
be for a great hook the^ double it not twined. And else for small hooks let it
be single, and therewith frete thick the line there as the one end of your
hook shall sit a straw bread. Then set there your hook and frete him with the
same threde the two parts of ye length that shall be fret in all. And when ye
come to the third part: the^ turn the end of your line again upon the
frete double, and frete it so double at the other third part, then put your
threde in at the hole twies or thryse, and let it go each time round about
the yerde of your hook, then wete the hole and draw it till it be fast, and
look that your line lie evermore within your hooks, and not without, then cut
of the lines end and the threde as nigh as ye may saving the frete.

So ye know with how great hooks ye shall angle to every fish, now I will tell
you with how many hears ye shall Angle to every fish. First for the Menow
with a line of one hear. For the waryng roche, ye bleke, the Gogyn and the Ruf
with a line of two hears, for the Darse and the great roche with a line of
three hears, For the Perch with Flounder and bremet with four hears For the
Cheuyn chubbe, the Breme. the Te^che, and the Eele with six hears. For the
troute, graysyng barbyl, and the great cheuyn: with nine hears. For the great
with twelve hears. For the Samon with.xv. hears, and for the pike with a
chalk line made brown with your brown color aforesaid armed with a line as
ye shall hear hereafter when I speak of the pyke. ^our lines must be plummed
with lead. And ye shall wete that the next plumbe to the hook, shall be therfro a
large foot and more, and every plu^be a quantity unto the greatness of the
line. There be three manner of plu^bes for a ground line rennyng. And for the
flote set upon the ground line lyeng.x. plu^bes ioynyng al together on the
ground line renning nine or ten small. The flote plu^be shall be heavy yt the first
pluck of any fysshe may pull it down into ye water, and make your plumbes
round and smothe, yt they stick not on stones or on weeds, and for the more
understanding, lo they be here in fygures.

The ground line, renning and lieng.


The Flote line, and the line for Perch or Tench


The line for a pyke, plu^be, cork and armed with wire


THen shall ye make your flotes in this wise. Take a fair cork that is clean
without any holes and bore it through with a small hot iron, and put therein a
pen just and straight, ever more note the greater pen, and the greater hole.
Than shape it great in the mids, and small at both ends, and specially
sharp in the nether end, and like unto the figures following and make them
smothe on a grindinge stone or on a tyle stone, and look that flote for one
hear be no more the^ a pese, for two hears as a bean, for.xii. hears as a
walnut, and so eueri line must have according to his portion. Al manner lines
that be not for the ground: must have flotes, and the renninge ground line
must have a flote, the lieng ground line must have a flote.



NOw I have learned you to make al your har^eys Here I will tell you how ye shall
angle.

Ye shall understand that there is six manner of anglyng. That one is at ye
ground for the troute and other fisshe. An other is at the ground at an arche
or a stange, where it ebbeth and flows: for bl^ke, roche, and Darse. ye
third is with a flote for all manner of fysshe. The fourth with a menow for the
Troute, without plumbe or flote. The fifth is renning in the same for the Roche
and darse, with one or two hears and a fly. The sixth is a dubbed hook, for
the Troute or graylyng. And for the first and principal point in angling: keep
the ever from the water for the sight of the fisshe, either far upon ye
land, or else behind a bushe that the fish se you not. For if they do: they
will not bite. And look that ye shadow not the water as much as ye may. For
it is that thing that will soon fraye the fish. And if a fyshe be a frayde: he
will not byte long after. For all manner of fyshe that feed by the ground ye
shall angle for them to the botome, so that your hook shall run, or lie on
the ground. And for all other fyshe y^ fedeth above: ye shall angle for them
in the mids of the water, or so^dele beneth, or somdele above, for ever the
greater fisshe: the nerer he lies to the botome of ye water. And ever the
smaler fyshe the more he swimmeth above, The third good point is when the
fish biteth that ye be not to hasty to smite, nor to late.

For ye must abide till ye suppose that the bayte be fer in the mouth of the
fish, and then abide no longer, and this is for the ground. And for the flote,
when ye se it pulled softly under the water, or else carried softly upon ye
water, then smite. And look that ye never ouersmite the strenght of your line
for breking. And if it fortune you to smite a great fyshe with a small harneis,
then ye must led him in ye water, and labor him there till he be drowned and
overcome* Then take him as well as ye ca^ or may and ever beware that ye hold
not over the strength of your line. And as much as ye may let him not com out
of your lines end straight from you, but keep him ever under the rod, and
evermore hold him straight so yt your line may sustain, and bear his
leapes, and his plu^ges with the help of your croppe and of your hand.

Here I will declare unto you, in what place of the water ye shall angle, ye
shall angle in a poole or in a standing water in every place where it is any
thing deep.

There is no great choice of any place where it is any thing deep in a poole.
For it is but a prison unto all fyshes and therefore it is the less maystry to
take the^. But in a river, ye shall angle in every place where it is deep and
clear by the ground, as gravel or clay without mud or wedes, and in especial
if that there be a manner whyrling of water or a covert. As an holowe bank or
great roots of trees, or long weeds fletyng above the waters where as the
fysshe may cover and hyde them self at certain times when they list. Also it
is good for to angle in deep styffe streams, and also in valles of water and
wears, and in flode gates or myll pyttes.

And at the bank, and where the streme renneth nighe thereby, and is deep and
clear by the ground and in any other places where ye may se any fysshe have any
fedi^g.

AS now shall ye wit, what time of the day ye shall angle. From the beginnynge
of May until it be September: the biting time is erlye in the ^or^we from four
of the clock unto eight of the clock, at after none from four to eight also,
but not to good (...) the morning, and if it be a cold wind and a lowryng
day, it is much better than a clear day. Also many po^^e fysshes will byte
best in the morn tide.

And if ye se in any time of the day the Troute or gralyng lepe, angle to him
with a dub according to the same month. And where the water ebbeth and
flows: the fisshe will byte in some place at the ebb, and in some place at
the flood after they have restyng behind stanges, and arches of brydges, and
other such manner places.

Here shall ye wit in what manner of wether ye shall angle in, as I said before
in a dark lo^ryng day when the wind blows softly. And in summer season when
it is brenning hot, than it is naught. From Septembre unto Apryll in a fair
sunny day it is right good to Angle: and if the wind (...) have any part of
the Dryer^ wa^he^: (...) it is naught, and when it is great wind and when it
shows, raynech, or hayleth, or is a great tempest, as thunder or lyghtninge
or a swoly hot wether: than it is naught for to angle.

YE shall now wit that there be twelve manner of impedimentes which cause a man
to take no fysshe, without other comin that may casually hap. The first is if
your harneys be not mete, nor fetely made. The second is, if your baytes be not
good nor fine. The third is if that ye angle not in bytyng time. The.iiii. is
if the fisshe be frayde with the sight of a man. The.v. if that the water be
very thick, white or red of any flood late falen. The.vi. if the fisshe stere
not for cold. The.vii. if that the wether be hot. The.viii. if it rain.
The.ix if it hayle or snow. The.x. if it be tempest. The xi. if it be great
wind. The.xii. if the wind be in ye east and that is worste. For commonly
neither winter nor somer the fysshe will not byte than. The west and the north
wind ben good, but the southe is best.

ANd now I have told you how to make your harneys, and how ye shall fysshe
therewith in all points: reason will that ye know with what baytes ye shall
angle to every manner of fysshe in every month of the year, which is all the
effect of the craft. And without which ^aytes: know well by you, all your
other craft here to borne au^ileth you not to purpose. For ye cannot bring a
hook into a fysshe mouth without a bayte, which baytes for every manner of
fysshe, and for every month here follows in this wise.

AS now because that the Samon is most statelye fysshe that any man may angle
to in fresshe water: Therefore I purpose to begin at him.

The Samon is a gentle fisshe, but he is comberous for to take. For co^me^ly
he is but in deep places of great ryuers, and for the most part beholds him
in ye mids of it, that a man may not come at him. And he is in season from
March unto michelmas. In which season ye shall angle to him with these baits
when ye may get them. First with a red worm in the beginning and ending of
the season, and also with a grub that breeds in a du^ghill, and especially
with a sovereign bayte that bredeth in a water docke. And he bideth not at ye
ground but at the flote, also ye may take him, but it is seldom seen with a
grub at such times as when he lepeth, in like form and manner as ye do take a
troute or a gralyng, and these ben well proved baytes for the Samon.

THe Troute for because he is a right deynteous fish and also fervent biter, we
shall speak next of him. He is in season fro March unto Myhelmas. He is on
clean gravel ground, and in a streme, ye may angle to him at all times with
a ground line, lieng or renning, saving only in leaping time, and than with a
dubbe. And erly with a renning ground line, and forth on the day with a flote
line.

Ye shall angle to him in March with a menow hanged on your hook by the
nethernes without flote or plu^be drawing up and down in the streme till ye
feel hi^ fast

In the same time angle to him with ground lines, and with a red worm for ye
most sure. In April take ye same baytes, and also Iuneba. otherwise named.vii.
eyes. and also the ca^ker yt breeds in a great tree and the red snayle.

In may take the stone fly, and the ^obbe under the cow tord and the sylk worm
and the bait yt bredeth on a fern lefe

In June take a red worm and nip of the head and a codworme before upon the
hook. In July take ye great red worm and the codworme together. In august
take a flesh fly, and the great red worm, and the fat of the bakon, and bind
them together about the hook. In Septembre take the red worm and ye menow,
In October take the same, for they ben special for the troute at al times of
the year. From Apryll till September the troute lepeth, than angle to him with a
dubbed hook according to the month which dubbed hooks ye shall find at ye
end of this treatise, and the months with them.

THe Grayling by an other name called Umbre is a right delycyous fish to
man's mouth, and ye may take him like as ye do the Troute, and these ben his
baytes, In March and in April the red worm In May the green worm, a little
braysed worm, the docke Canker and the hawthorne worm. In June the bayte that
breeds between the tree and the bark of an Oak. In Iuill a bayte that
breeds on a fern lefe and the great red worm, and nyp of the head and put
it on your hook and a Codworme before in August the red worm and a Docke
worm, and all the year after a red worm.

THe Barbell is a sweet fish but it is aquaysy meat and perylous for a man's
body. For commonly he gives an introduccion to the febres. And if that he be
eaten raw, he may because of man's death, which has often times ben seen.
These be his baytes. In March and in Apryll take a fair fresshe cheese, and
lay it on a board, and cut it in small square pieces of the length of your
hook. Than take a candel and brenne it at the end at the point of the hook
unto the time that it be yelow, and than bind it on your hook with fletchers
silk, and make it rough like a welbede, this bayte is good all the summer
season. In May and June take ye hauthorne worm, and the great red worm, and
nip of the head and put upon your hook a codworme before, and that is a good
bayte. In July take the red worm for cheef, and the hauthorne together, also
the water docke lefe worm together in august, and for all the year, take the
talaw of a sheep. and soft cheese of each like much, and a litel honye, and
grind or sta^pe the^ together long and te^per it till it be tough and put
thereto a little flower, and make it in small pelletes and that is a good bait
to angle with at ye ground, and look yt it sink in ye water, or else it is not
good to this purpose.

THe Carpe is a deynteous fish, but there be but few in England, and therefore
I write least of hi^ he is an evil fish to take. For he his so strong en armed
in the mouth that there may no weke harneyes hold hi^ And as touching his
baytes I have but little knowledge of it, and I were loathe to write more then I
know, and ^aue proved. But well I know that the red worm and the menow ben
good baytes for him, at all times, as I have heard say of persons credible,
and also found written in books of credence.

THe cheuin is a stately fish, and his head is a deynti morsel. There is no
fish so strongly enarmed with scales on the body, and because he is a strong
biter: he has the more baytes which ben these. In March the red worm at the
ground, for commonly then he will bite there at all time of the year, if he be
any thing hungry. In April the diche Canker that breeds in the tree, a worm
that breeds between the rynde and the tree of an oak. The red worm, and the
young frosh is when the feet be cut of. Also the stoneslie, the bob under the
cowetorde, the red snayle, In May, the bayte that breeds in the osy^r lefe,
and the docke canker together upon your hook, and a bayte that breeds on a
fern lefe, the red worm, and a bayte that breeds on a hauthorne, and a
bayte that breeds on an oken lefe, and a silk worm, and a codworme
together. In June take the creker and the dorre, and also a red worm, the head
cut of and a codworme before, and put them on the hook. Also a bayte in the
osyer lefe, young frosshes, the three fete cut of by the body, and the fourth
by the knee. The bayte on the hauthorne, and ye codworme together and also a
grub that breeds on a dungehil, a great greshop and ye humble be in the
meadow. Also young bees, and young hornettes, also a great bre^deth fly that
breeds in paths meadows, and the fly that is among pismer hills. In
August take worte worms, and magottes to Mychelmas, In September the red
worm, and also take the baytes when ye may get them, that is to wit, cheries,
and young myce, not hered, and the house comb.

THe Breme is a noble fyshe, and a deynteous, and ye shall angle for him from
March unto august with a red worm, and then with a butter fly. and a green
fly, and with a bayte that breeds among green reed and a bait that
breeds in the bark of a dead tree, and for bremettes take magottes. And from
that time forth all the year after take the red worm, and in the river brown
bread. More baytes there be, not easy, and therefore I let them pass^.

THe Tenche is a good fish, and heals al manner of other fish ye ben hurt if
they may come to him He is most part of the year in the mud, and styreth
most in June and July, and in other season but little. He is an evil byter,
and his baytes ben these for all the year, brown bread tosted with honey in
lykenes of a but tred lofe, and the great red worm. And take the black
blood in the heart of a sheep, and flower and honey, and tempre them
altogether, somedele softer then past, and anoint the red worm therewith, both
for his fisshe and for other. And they will byte much the better thereat, at al
times.

The perch is a deynteous fyshe, and passing holsom, and after bytyng. These
ben his baytes. In march the red worm. In Apryll the bobbe under the
cowetord. In may ye slothorne worm, and the codworme. In June ye bait that
breeds in an old fallen oak, and the great ca^ker In July the bait ye
breeds on the oyser lefe, and the bob that bredeth on a dunghill, and the
hathorne worm and the codworme. In August the red worm and magottes, and all the year after take the red worm for the best.

The roche is an easy fysshe to take, and if he be fat and pe^ned the^ is he
good meat, and these be^ his baytes. In march the red worm. In Apryl the
bobbe under the cowtord. In May the bayte that breeds on the oken lefe, and
the bob on the dunghyl. In June the bayte that breeds on osyer, and the
codworm. In July house spies and the bait that breeds on an oak, and the
nutworme, and mathewes, and maggots unto michelmas, and the^ after yt the fat
of bako^.

The Dace is a gentyl fish to take and if it be well refert the^ it is good
meat. In March his bayt is a red worm. And in April the bob under the cowtorde.
In May the docke canker, and the bayte on the flothorne, and on the oken lefe.
In June the codworme and the bayt on the osyer, and the white grub in the
dunghill. In July take house spies and flies ye breed in pismer hills, ye
codworme and magots unto michelmas, and if ye water be clear, ye shall take
fish when other take none, and from ye time forth do as ye do for ye roche,
for commonly it is seen yt their biti^g and baytes be like

The bleke is but a feeble fish, yet he is holso^, his baits from march to
Mighelmas be the same yt I have write before for ye roche and the darse, saving
al ye somer season yt ye may angle for him with a house fly, and in winter
season with bako^ and other bait made as ye hereafter may know.

The Ruf is right and wholesome fisshe, and ye shall angle to him with the same
baits in all seasons of the year and in the same wise as I have told you of
the perch, for they be like in fyshe and feedyng, saving the ruf is less and
therefore ye must have the smaller bayte.

The Flounder is a wholesome fysshe and a fre, and a subtyl byter in his manner.
For commonly wha^ he souketh his meat he fedeth at the ground, and therefore ye
must angle to him with a ground line lieng, and he has but one manner of bayte,
and that is a red worm, and that is most chief for all manner of fysshe. The
Gogyn is a good fysshe of the mochenes, and he biteth well at the ground, and
his baytes for all the year ben these, the red worm, codworme and magottes and
ye must angle to him with a flote, and let your bayte be nere the botome, or else
upon the ground.

The menow when he shines in ye water, the^ he is bitter, and though is body
be but little yet he is a ravenous byter, and egre, and ye shall angle for him
with the same baytes yt ye do for ye gogin saving they must be small.

The Eele is a quaysi fish, a rauenour and deuourer of the brood of fish, and
the pyke also is a deuourer of fish. I put the^ both behind al other for to
a^gle, for this eele ye shall fi^d an whole in ye ground of water, and it is
blew and blackish, there put in your hook til yt it be a foot wtin ye hole
and your bait shall be a great a^gle^wich or a menow. The pike is a good fish
but for he deuoureth so many as well of his own kind as of other, I love him
ye less and for to take him ye shall do thus. Take a roche or a fresh hering,
and a wyre with a hook in ye end and put it in at ye mouth, and out at ye
tail down by ye ridge of the fresh h^^ring and tha^ put the line of your hook
in after, and dra^ the hook into ye cheke of the fresh hering, tha^ put a
(...) be of lead upon your line a yerde long from your (...), and a flote in
midway between, and cast it in a pyt where the pikes use, and this is the best
and most surest craft t^ take the pike. And three manner of taking him there is
take a frosshe and put it on your hook at ye neck betwen^ skin and ye body, on
ye back half, and put on a flote a yerd the to, and cast it where the pike
haunteth and ye shall have him

An other manner, take the same bait and put it in assafe ^ida, and cast it into
the water with a cord and a cork an^ ye shall not fail of him. And if ye list
to have a good sport, tha^ tie the cord to a goose foot, and ye shall se good
haling whether the gose or the pike shall have the better

NOw ye wot with what baytes and how ye shall angle unto every manner of fyshe,
Now I will tel^ you how ye shall keep and feed your quick baytes, y^ shall
feed and keep them all in general, but every manner by him self with such
things in and on whych^ they breed. And as long as they be quick and new
they be fine. But when they be in a sl^ugh or else dead tha^ ben they naught.
Out of these ben excepted three broo^des, that is to wit of hornetes,
humblebees, and was^pes, whom ye shall bake in bread, and after dyp their
heads in blood and let them dry. Also except mago^^tes, which when they be
bred great with their natural feedyng, ye shall feed the^ forthermore with
sheeps talow And take good head yt in going about your disportes y^ open no
ma^s gates but yt ye shit the^ again. Also ye shall not use this foresaid crafti
disport for no covetousness, t^ the increasing and sparing of your money only,
but princ^^pally for your solace, and to cause the health of your body, (...)
specyallly of your soul. For when ye purpose to go on your disportes in
fisshynge, ye will not desire greatly many persons with you which might let
you of your game. And than ye may serve god devoutly in saying effectually
your customable prayers. And thus doing: ye shall eschew and also avoid many
vices, as ydelnes which is principal cause to enduce man to many other vices
as it is right well known, Also ye shall not be to ravenous in taking of your
said game, as to much at one time which ye may lightly do if ye do in every
point as this present treatise shows you, which should lightly be the
occasion to destroy your own disportes and other men's also. And when ye have a
sufficient mess ye should coueyte no more at that time. Also ye shall besye
your self to nourish the game in all that ye may and also to distroy all such
things as been deuourers of it.

Finis. And all those that does after this rule shall have the blessyng of God
and saint Peter, which he them grant that with his precious blood us bought.
Amen.
Here ends the book of Haukyng, Hunting, and Fysshing, with other diverse
matters.
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the Rose Garland by Wyllyam
Copland.


