IS thy wit quick?
Than do not stick
To read these Riddles dark:
Which if thou do,
And rightly too,
Thou art a witty Spark.
decorative border

THE BOOK O MERRY Riddles.

Together with proper Questions, and witty Proverbs, to make pleasant pastime.

No less useful then behoouefull, for any young man or child, to know
whether he be quick witted or no.

LONDON Printed for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop near
Fleet Street Conduit. 1617.

Here begins the first Riddle.
TWo legs sat upon (...) legs, and had one leg (...) her hand, then in
came four legs and bare away one leg, then up start two legs, and threw
three legs at four legs, and brought one leg again.

Solution.
That is a woman with two legs, that sat on a stool with three legs, and
had a leg of mutton in her hand, then came a dog which has four legs,
and bare away the leg of mutton, then up start the woman and threw the stool
with three legs, at the dog with four legs, and brought the leg of
mutton again.

The 2. Riddle.
He went to the wood and caught it,
He sat him down and sought it,
Because he could not find it,
He brought it home with him.
Solution.
(...) thorn, for a man went to the (...) caught a thorn in his foot, and
(...) him down, and sought to have (...) out, and because he could not find
(...) must needs bring it home.

The 3. Riddle.
(...) work is that, the faster ye work, (...) it is ere ye have done, and
the (...) ye work, the sooner ye make an end.

Solution.
That is turning of a spit: for if ye turn fast, it will be long ere the meat
be enough, if ye turn slowly, it will be the sooner enough.

The 4. Riddle.
What is that that shines bright al day, and at night is raked up in his own
dirt.

Solution.
That is the fire, that burns clear all the day, and at night is raked up in
his ashes.

The 5. Riddle.
I have a tree of great honor,
Which tree bears both fruit and flower,
Twelve branches this tree has nake,
Fifty nests therein be make,
And every nest has birds seven,
Thanked be the King of heaven:
And every bird has a diverse name,
How may all this together frame?
Solution.
That tree is the year, the twelve branches, the twelve noneths, the fifty
two nests, be the fifty two weeks, the seven birds, be the seven days in
the week, whereof every one has a diverse name.

The 6. Riddle.
What is that, that is rough within, and red without, and bristled like a
bears snowt: there is never a Lady in this land, but will be content to take
it in her hand.

Solution.
That is an Eglantine berrie, for that is rough within, and red without, and
has bristles on the tep.

The 7. Riddle.
What Kings, Queens, and their servants be they, that be burnt once a year,
and be cut and torn as small as flesh to the pot.

Solution.
Those be the Kings and Queens and varlets among the cards, that be some
burned, and some torn, and some cut.

The 8. Riddle.
What is that, that has his belly full of man's meat, and his mouth full of dirt.

Solution.
It is an Oven when it is full of bread, or pies, for that is man's meat, and
the Ouens mouth is then closed with dirt.

The 9. Riddle.
What is that that has a beard of flesh, a mouth of horn, and feet like a
Griffon.

Solution.
That is a Cock, for his beard is flesh, his bill horn, and his feet like a
Griffon.

The 10. Riddle.
What is that, the more yelay on, the faster it wastes.

Solution.
That is a Whetstone, for the more ye whet the less is the whetstone.

The 11. Riddle.
Of what faculty be they, that every night turn the skins of dead beasts.

Solution.
Those be the religious persons, for every night at Mattens, they turn the
leaves of their Parchment books, that be made of sheep skins, or calnes
skins.

The 12. Riddle.
Two black,
Leapt over the lake,
With their mouths full of man's bones.
Solution.
That is a pair of shoes on a man's feet, when a man leapeth over a lake, for
they be black, and they are within full of man's flesh and bones.

The 13. Riddle.
Three prisoners such as it was,
Were shut up in a prison of glass,
The prison door was made of bread,
And yet they were for hunger dead.
Solution.
Those were three flies that were shut up in a Glass, and the mouth of it
stopped with a piece of bread.

The 14. Riddle.
Little boy bunting,
Sat on the house easing,
With a bow and a bolt,
Slaieth the king and all his folk.
Solution.
That is death, which slaieth Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Gentlemen, and
every living creature.

The 15. Riddle.
Yonder side sea is there a boat,
The kings daughter of England, there she sat:
And if ye tell me her name, no man it wot,
What was the maids name that sat in the boat?
Solution.
Her name is Anne, for in the fourth line it says, An if ye tell be her name:
but this riddle is not to be seen on the book, but it is to be put without
the book, or else it shall soon be understood.

The 16. Riddle.
M. and I. made great moan,
When C. upon C. was left alone.
Solution.
That is Marie and John made great moan, When Christ on a Cross was left
alone. For Marie begins with M. John begins with I, Christ begins with
C, and Cross begins with C. Also this riddle may be put another way, and
that is this. A thousand and one made great moan, when a hundred on a hundred
was left alone. For M, is for a thousand, and I, is for one, and C, for a
hundred, and then is M. for Mary, I. for John, C. for Christ, and then is the
riddle very defuse.

The 17. Riddle.
Who bare the best burden that ever was borne, at any time since, or any time
beforne.

Solution.
It was the Ass that bare both our Lady and her son out of Egypt.

The 18. Riddle.
What is the most profitable beast, and that men eat least on.

Solution.
It is a Be, for it makes both honey and wax, and costeth his master nothing
the keeping.

The 19 Riddle.
I am without it, and yet I have it,
Tell me what it is, I pray God save it.
Solution.
It is my heart, for I am without it, insomuch that it is within me, for ye
may not understand by the riddle that I lack it.

The 20. Riddle.
What is that is like a mede,
And is not past a handful bread,
And has a voice like a man,
You will tell me this, but I wot not when.
Solution.
It is a little Popingay, for it is green like a mede, and is not past a
handful bread, and it speaks like a man.

The 21. Riddle.
L. and V. and C. and I.
So height my Lady at the font stone.
Solution.
Her name is Lucy, for in the first line is L. V. C. I. which is Lucy: but this
riddle must be put and read thus, fifty and five, a hundred and one: then is
the riddle very proper, for L. stands for fifty, and V. for five, C. for a
hundred, and I. for one.

The 22. Riddle.
What is that one seeks for, and would not find?

Solution.
That is, a hole in his shoe, or a piece of pilgrims salve on a seege board,
when he comes darklong in the night.

The 23. Riddle.
What is that I wish for, and would not have?

Solution.
That is heaven, for many a man wishes that he were in heaven: and though
they knew sure that they should go thither straitwaies, yet would they be
loath to die and go thither: And this riddle may be soyled another way, as when
a man or woman does say, a vengeance and a pestilence on her child, or on her
servants, or wishes them dead, yet would she be loath it were so. Mary percase
if some woman wish such a wish to her husband, then peradventure this riddle
could not thereby be assoyled.

The 24. Riddle.
What is that as high as hall, as bitter as gall, as soft as silk, as white as
milk?

Solution.
That is a walnut, for it grows as hie as a hall, and the shell is as bitter
as gall, and the rind that covers the kernel, is as soft as silk, and the
kernel is as white as milk.

The 25. Riddle.
What was he that slew the fourth part of the world.

Solution.
That was Cain, when he slew his brother Abel, for then there were no more
persons in the world but four, that is to say, Adam, Eve, Cain and Abel.

The 26. Riddle.
What three heads be they that uphold the world?

Solution.
Those be, the hammer head, the plough bead, and the head that multiplieth the
world.

The 27. Riddle.
what man is he that gets his living backward?

Solution.
That is a Ropemaker, for as he makes his Ropes, he goes always backward.

The 28. Riddle.
Five brethren were bred at once,
Without any flesh, blood, or bones,
Two have beards, and two have none,
The fifth has but half a one.
Solution.
The five brethren, be 5. green barbes under the rose leaves, which spring all
at once, and two of them have bristles like beardes on the edges and the other
two have none, but they be plain on the edges, and the fist is bristled or
bearded on the one side, and plain on the other.

The 29. Riddle.
What is he that goes to the water, and leauesh his guts at home.

Solution.
That is a pillow beer, for when it goes to washing, the pillow and the
feathers be left at home.

The 30. Riddle.
What is he that goes to the water on his head.

Solution.
That is a horseshooe nail, for the head is downward.

The 31. Riddle.
What is that that goes to the water, and the first that touches the water is
his arse.

Solution.
That is a bucket in a well, or a payle.

The 32. Riddle.
What be they that be all day full, and empty at night.

Solution.
It is a pair of shoes, for all day they be full with man's feet, and at night
when he goes to bed, they be empty: and it may be asso yled by any other part
of man's raiment.

The 33. Riddle.
Who is he that eats his mother in his grandams belly?

Solution.
It is a worm in a nut, for of the kernel of the nut comes the worm,
therefore the kernel is here taken for the mother of the worm: and of the
shel the kernel comes: and therefore the shell is here taken for the mother
of the kernel, and the grandame of the worm.

The 34. Riddle.
Who is he that runs through the hedge, and his house on his back?

Solution.
That is a snaile, which wheresoever he goes, he carries his house on his
back.

The 35. Riddle.
To what poor man is a man's alms worst bestowed.

Solution.
That is a blind man, for he would with a good will see him hanged that gives
him the alms.

The 36. Riddle.
What folk be they that love not to be prayed for.

Solution.
Those be beggars and poor folk, when men say, I pray God help you.

The 37. Riddle.
Ten men's strength, and ten men's length, and ten men cannot set it on end,
what is that?

Solution.
That is a great roape or cable, of ten fadome in length or more, which ten men
cannot set on end, nor ten score, nor ten thousand.

The 38. Riddle.
I gathered apples in a garden, and ere I could get out, I paid tolc for them
at three gates. At the first gate I paid half the apples that I had gathered,
and one more, and at the next gate I paid half the apples that I had left, and
one more, and at the third gate I paid half the apples that I had left, and
one more, and when I came out I had but one apple left: tell me now how many
apples I gathered in all.

Solution.
He gathered in all xxii. apples, for at the first gate he paid a xi. that was
half, and one more, that was xii. so he had left ten, then at the second gate
he paid five, that was half, and one more, that was sipe, so had he left
four, and at the last gate he paid two, that was half, and one more, that
was iii. and so he had one left.

The 39. Riddle.
Garden ways, comfort of flowers, to hight my Lady, what hight yours?

Solution.
Her name wis Alison, for the ways in the gardens be called Allis, and the
sun is the comfort to all flowers, and so put them two together, and that
makes Alison.

The 40 Riddle.
The Dear complains and mones,
The Heron feeding in her place,
This is the name of my Ladies grace.
Solution.
Her name is Braybrook, for when the Dear complains, hunters say he brayeth,
and the place of a Heron is a brook, and then put them two together, and that
makes Braybrooke. But this riddle was made by same Gentleman for his Ladies
pleasure, and is neither proper for every man, nor easy to be assoiled

The 41. Riddle.
What is that stan death on this side the wood, and looks over the wood.

Solution.
That is a Sow, that has a yoke about her neck, for her feet be on this
side the wood, and her head is over the wood.

The 42. Riddle.
What is that goes to the wood, and his head homeward.

Solution.
It is an are hanging upon a man's back, when he goes to the wood.

The 43. Riddle.
What is that goes to the wood, and carries his way on his neck.

Solution.
It is a man that goes to the wood to fell boughs, and carries a ladder on
his neck to get up.

The 44. Riddle.
I came to a tree where were apples, I eat no apples, I gave away no apples,
nor I left no apples behind me. And yet I eat, gave away, and left behind me.

Solution.
There were three apples on the tree, for I eat one apple, and gave away one
apple, and left one. And then I eat no apples, for I eat but one apple, which
is no apples, and thus I gave away no apples, for I gave but one, and thus I
left no apples, for I left but one.

The 45. Riddle.
What is that as small as a nit, and serves the king at every bit.

Solution.
It is salt.

The 46. Riddle.
There is a water that I must pass,
The broadest water that ever was,
And yet of all waters that ever I see,
To pass it over is least ieopardy.
Solution.
It is the dew, for that lies over all the world.

The 47. Riddle.
What is that, the more it is, the less men fear it, and the less it is, the
more men dread it.

Solution.
It is a bridge, for if it be little, we are afraid to go over it for falling,
and if it be big, we fear no more to go over it, then on the ground.

The 48 Riddle.
I bought a brace of hounds for my Lords grace, and when I departed from his
place, I neither left them there, nor took them with me, this marvelous
thing how may it be.

Solution.
I left one of the greyhounds there, and took the other with me, so then I
neither left them there, nor took them with me.

The 49. Riddle.
Here I have it, and yonder I see it.

Solution.
It is my breath in a mystie morning, for here I have it at my mouth, and
yonder I see it a yard from me.

The 50. Riddle.
What is that is higher then a hall, or a house and it seems much lesser then
a mouse.

Solution.
It is a star in the sky.

The 51. Riddle.
My Lovers will,
I am content for to fulfill,
Within this rhyme his name is framed,
Tell me then how he is named.
Solution.
His name is William, for in the first line is will, and in the beginning of
the second line is, I am, and then put them both together, and that makes
William.

The 52. Riddle.
What is that, that is as white as snow,
And yet as black as any crow,
And more pliant then a wand,
And is tied in a silken band,
And every day a Princes peer,
Looks upon it with a sad cheer.
Solution.
It is a book tied within a silken lace, for the paper of it is as white as
snow, and the ink is as black as a crow, and the leaves be more pliant then
a wand.

The 53. Riddle.
What space is it from the highest of the sea to the bottom.

Solution.
It is but a stones cast, for be the sea never so deep, a stone if it be cast
in, will reach to the bottom.

The 54. Riddle.
How many calves tails will reach to the sky.

Solution.
One if it be long enough.

The 55. Riddle.
Mary an Christ loved very well,
My Ladies name here I do tell,
Yet is her name neither Christ nor mary,
Tell me her name then, and do not tarry.
Solution.
Her name is Maryan, for in the beginning it is said, Mary an Christ, but this
riddle is to be put without the book, and not be read, or else it will soon
be perreiued.

The 56. Riddle.
What is that as white as milk,
As soft as silk,
As black as a coal,
And hoppeth in the street like a steed fool.
Solution.
That is a Pie, that hoppeth in the street, for part of his feathers be white,
and part be black.

The 57. Riddle.
What is that goes about the wood, and cannot get in.

(...) will not lie in a great chest.

Solution.
It is a long Spear.

The 65. Riddle.
What is that as round as a ball,
Longer then Paul's steeple, weather-cocke and all.
Solution.
It is a round bottom of thread, which when it is undone, it is much longer
then Paul's steeple.

The 66. Riddle.
Down in the meadow have I two swine, the more meat I give them, the louder
they cry, the less meat I give them the stiller they be.

Solution.
These be two milstones, which the more they grind, the more noise they make,
and they be called swins here, because swine be fed with corn, and so be
they.

The 67. Riddle.
What is that, that goes through the wood, and touches never a twig.

Solution.
It is the blast of a horn, or the cry of a beast, or such other.

The 68. Riddle.
What is that, that has flue legs on one side, and three on the other.
Three heads and six ears, and two things like my mother.
And yet such another thing as has my brother.
Solution.
That is a man and a woman upon a mares back.

The 69. Riddle.
Beyond the sea there is an oak,
And in that oak there is a nest,
And in that nest there is an egg,
And in that egg there is a yolke,
That calls together Christian folk.
Solution.
It is a clapper in a bell, within a steeple, for the Church is taken for the
oak, the steeple is taken for the nest, the bell is taken for the egg, and
the clapper is taken for the yolke.

The 70. Riddle.
Down in a dale there sits and stands,
Eight legs and two hands,
Livers and Lights, and lives three,
I count him wise that tells this to me.
Solution.
It is a man riding on horseback, and having a hawk sitting on his hand.

The 71. Riddle.
Walking abroad to take the air,
I met two Ladies bright and fair,
Two pretty boys by the hands they led,
And thus unto them both I said:
O ye fair Ladies I pray you tell me,
By nature and kind whose children these be.
Their answer.
Gentleman, if ye will the truth know plain,
The sons of our sons they be certain:
Brothers to our husbands they be ywis,
And truly each of them to the other uncle is.
Begotten and borne in wedlock they be,
And we are their mothers we tell you truly.
Solution.
These two Gentlewomen had two sons, the one Thomas, and the other William:
Thomas married Williams mother, and William married Thomas his mother, and
either of them had a son by their wives, which sons must needs be the
sons of their sons, brothers to their husbands, the one uncle to the other,
and they their lawful mothers.

The 72. Riddle.
Over a water I must pass, and I must carry over a lamb, a woolfe, and a
bottle of hay, if I carry any more then one at once, my boat will sink: if I
carry over the bottle of hay first, and leave the lamb and the woolfe
together, the wolf will carry my lamb away, if I carry over the woolfe first,
the lamb will eat my bottle of hay. Now would I know how I should carry them
over, so that I leave not the lamb with the woolfe, nor the bottle of hay with
the lamb on neither side.

Solution.
First carry over the lamb, and then come again and fetch the woolfe, and
bring the lamb back again on the other side, and then take the bottle of hay
and carry it, and then fetch over the lamb, and so the question is assoyled.

The 73. Riddle.
There were two fathers a hunting went,
And their two sonues for the same intent.
They caught conies in all but three:
And every one had one, how may that be?
Solution.
One of the sons, had a son, thus he is father, and stands both for the
father and the son.

The 74. Riddle.
I consume my mother that bare me, I eat my nurse that fed me, then I die
leaving them all blind that saw me.

Solution.
Meant of the flame of a candle, which when it has consumed both wax and week
goes out, leaving them in the dark which saw by it.

The 75. Riddle.
As long as I live, I eat, but when I drink I die.

Solution.
That is the fire, which continues so long as it has matter to burn upon,
except it be quenched with water, which may be termed the death of that nature.

The 76. Riddle.
Ten thousand children beautiful of this my body bred:
Both sons and daughters finely decked, I live and they are dead:
My sons were put to extreme death. by such as loved them well:
My daughters died in extreme age, but where I cannot tell.
Solution.
That is a tree, which signifies the mother, the fruit the sons, and the
leaves the daughters. (...)

John Goose.
LOng time since, when men eat butterd peason with a spoone,
I had a man unto my father, borne under the moon.
His name was Tom Goose, this is true indeed,
When he could live no longer he fell sick and dyed.
And within four days after, when he was laid in grave,
My mother would needs another husband have.
The more husbands the better luck, some wives do say the same,
And then married she one, Dick Duck was by his name.
A widdoer he was, and had a daughter called Ione,
She was a merry one, and a minion minser alone:
She was my sister and I was her brother,
By law it was so, it could be none other.
And my mother did love him as the turtle Dove.
Yet at length my father died for love.
Then said my mother, though I have two husbands wed,
I must live die the quick (quoth she) and not by the dead.
Yet was she tough and toothlesse, short tale to make,
And married the third husband, called John Drake.
He loved her right well, and had his own wishing,
For within ten days he killed her with kissing.
Then would he have a young woman to lengthen his life,
And fell in with my sister Ione, and took her to wife.
After that I could not choose, though before I was her brother,
But justly as became me, I called her mother.
At length he was sealous, and she perceiud his blindness,
Where upon within a few days she killed him with kindness
After he was dead, then did my mother Duck,
Take me to her husband, me thought I had strange luck.
Because first she was my sister Ione, and I, John her brother,
And after John her son, and she Ione my mother;
Now am I John her husband, and she Ione my wife,
We John Goose and Ione Duck, together must lead our life,
Now if you have well marked,
Unto you I have told;
How this demand is true,
Therefore you may be bold.
Proper Questions.
The first Question.
I Bought three pennyworth of Eggs lately,
and for every penny had like many:
And after gave them in alms a none
unto three Beggars every each one,
Some to the Beggar that asked my first,
the second had twice so many just:
The third Beggar that there I found,
had twice as many as the second.
Now answer me to this question shortly,
how many Eggs had I for a penny?
And how many Eggs after the rate,
that every Beggar had for his part?
Solution.
I bought seven Eggs for every penny, and the first Beggar had three Eggs,
the second six Eggs, and the third beggar had twelve Eggs.

The second Question.
Two men that had in their purses money,
the one to the other thus can say:
Put one of thy pence of thy purse in mine,
then is in my purse as much as in thine,
Nay said the other, I pray thee do thus, put one of thy pence into my purse,
Then have I double as much as thou:
What was in both their purses say ye?
Solution.
The one of them had five pence in his purse and the other had seven pence in
his purse, and so the question is assoyled. But if ye make the question, take
always two pence, then the numbers must be ten, and xiiii. of iii d. xv. and
one and twenty, and so always proceed forth.

The third Question.
A Fisher an hundred of herrings did buy,
after the rate of two for a penny:
And bought an hundred in another place,
three for a penny neither more nor less:
He put them together, and sold anon,
still five for two pence till all were gone:
Now in that bargain I think that he,
Either won or lost, How say you:
Solution.
Account ever sixescore to the hundred, and reckon then, and ye shall find
that he has lost thereby, even four pence.

The fourth Question.
ANother question I would feign define,
I wedded thy mother, and thou weddedst mine:
By my wife I had a son soon after,
and thou upon thy wife begattest a daughter.
This question now tame would I know of thee
What kin together these Children be.
Solution.
The Son was Uncle to the Daughter, because that her brother was his Father:
also, the Daughter was Aunt to the Son, because her brother was his Father.

The fifth Question.
I Knew a maid that once did pray,
a man to lend her some money,
Which swore by God, and by Saint John,
that to that maid he would lend none:
Yet for all that, ere that he went thence,
he saved his oath, and lent her twelve pence.
Solution.
This man lay with the maid first, and so she lost her maidenhead: and
afterward he lent her twelve pence.

The sixth Question.
A Batcheler came a man's wife until,
praying her his carnal lust to fulfill:
She swear a great oath as touching that sin.
She would never offend with him therein.
She kept her oath so vndefilde,
that soon after he got her with child.
Solution.
The wives husband dyed first, and after that, the Batcheler married her
lawfully, and with her then he had carnal copulation.

The seventh Question:
I Knew a man which in his life,
begat a child upon his own wife,
And when it was born, his heart was done,
he looked upon it, it was not his Son:
Of this now tell me the true solution.
Solution.
The child that he begot upon his wife was a daughter.

The eight Question.
A Man would have slain his son hastily,
But one counseled him the contrary:
To slay thy son it is well done,
to dread and fear nothing:
For such a deed thou shall have meede
of Christ our heavenly King.
The ninth Question.
A Pair of Gloves a man once bought,
and them to three sisters brought,
And said, Cast lots, for some of you three,
shall wear these Gloves for love of me.
How might his saying be verified there,
Yet none of them all did them wear?
Solution.
The one of the Sisters ware the one glove, and one of the other Sisters ware
the other.

The tenth Question.
A Soldier that to black heath field went,
prayed an Astronomer of his judgment:
Which wrote these word to him plainly,
thou shall go thither well and safely:
And from thence come whom alive again,
never at that field shall thou be slain.
The soldier was slain there at that field,
And yet the Astronomer his promise held.
Solution.
The poynting of the words, is the solution, as thus: Thou shall go thither well
and safely, and from thence come home again a-liue never: at that field shall
thou be slain.

The eleventh Question
IN Essex I know a place right well,
where men buy Oysters by the Bushel:
For every Bushel four pence they pay,
and yet for all that, the buyers may
For two pence a Bushel sell them again,
all by one measure, and yet have good gain.
Solution.
They buy these Oysters when they be very small, and keep them in creekes of
the salt water a year or two, till they be great, and then one Bushel will
make sire Bushels.

The twelfth Question.
I Know a child borne by my mother,
Naturally borne as other children be:
That is neither my sister, nor my brother:
answer me shortly what is he?
Solution.
It is the person that speaks the word: for he is neither brother nor sister
to himself.

The thirteenth Question.
A Vessel of wine here stands me by,
of eight gallons just full by the eye:
An other of five gallons, an other of three:
but those twain both empty be,
Mete by three gallons of this wine truly,
and thereto none other vessel to occupy.
Solution.
First fill the five gallon vessel full, and then with that fill the three
gallon vessel full then, and there remains in the fifth gallon vessel two
gallons: then put the three gallons that be in the three gallon vessel, into
the eight gallon vessel, into the five gallon vessel, and then fill up the 3.
gallon vessel, with the five gallon vessel, and it will receive but one
gallon thereof, because there was in the three gallon vessel before, but two
gallons, and so there will remain in the five gallon vessel, just four
gallons, and then you have your purpose: that is to say, four gallons mete
truly by those three measures only.

The fourteenth Question.
A Fish was late taken others among,
which had a head of three foot long:
And the tail was as long truly,
as the head and half the body:
And yet was the body without fail,
as long as the head and the tail.
This question here I pray thee tell,
How long was the Fish here every deal.
Solution.
The tail of the Fish was nine foot long, and the body, was twelve foot long:
and because the head was three foot long, therefore the length of the whole
Fish was fourteen foot long, and so the question is assoyled.

The fifteenth Question.
A Widow with her horse and maid at Dover,
Prayed a Shipman into France to bring them over:
He swore yt neither widow, horse, nor maid,
Should into Francr for him be conuaide.
How might his oath there saved be,
Yet he brought them into France in his
Ship all three.
Solution.
The widow was married, the maid lost her mayden-head, and the horse was
gelded: and then the Syip man carried them all over together in his Ship, and
so saved his oath which he had taken before.

The sixteenth Question.
ONe said, God speed dame with the
Geese twenty,
Nay six, said she, I have not so many:
But if that I had as many mo
as I have, and half as many thereto,
And over that half, half as many,
and two Geese and a half, then had I twenty.
How many Geese had she now truly?
Choice and witty Proverbs.
1 SO great is the ill that does not hurt me, as is the good that does not
help me. 2 He that for the new, leaves the old way, oftentimes is found to
go astray. 3 Given is dead: and restored is naught. 4 Conceal not the truth
from the Physician and Laywer. 5 A young Barber and an old Physician. 6 To
look for and not to come: To be in bed, and not asleep: To serve and not to
be accepted, are three tedious things. 7 He that will not endure labor in this
world, let him not be borne. 8 There is no virtue that poverty destroys not.
9 The abundance of things ingendreth disdainfulness. 10 He that sits well,
thinks ill. 11 The mirth of the world dureth but a while. 12 He that uses
me better then he is wont, has betrayed me, or will betray me. 13 He that
does not that whith he ought, that haps to him which he never thought. 14 He
that has time, has life. 15 Al weapons of war cannot arm fear. 16 He helps
little, that helps not himself. 17 So much is mine, as I possess; and, give
or lose for for Gods sake. 18 Choose not a woman, nor linen cloth by the
candle. 19 Kinsman helps kinsman: but woe be to him that has nothing. 20
Honors alter Manners. 21 He knows enough that knows naught, if he
knows how to hold his peace. 22 A man assaulted is half taken. 23 He that
is wise in his own eyes, there is more hope of a fool than such a one. 24 Old
sin, new repentance. 25 Sin that is hidden, is half forgiven. 26 An ounce of
state, requires a pound of gold. 27 He that lives well, dies well. 28 He that
iudures her; overcomes her. 29 Fly that present pleasure, which pains thee
after wards. 30 Every extreamitie is a fault. 31 Every question requires not
answer. 32 Patience is sorrows remedy. 33 Conscience serves for a thousand
witnesses. 34 Nature is the true law. 35 All fear is bondage. 36 Things
present are judged by things past. 37 That is well done, which is done soon
enough. 38 There is a remedy for all dolors, saving for death. 39 The Law
grows of sin, and chastises it. 40 The like I say, sits with the Iay. 41
Birds of a feather flee together. 42 One man is worth a hundred, and a hundred
are not worth one. 43 A wise man ought not to be ashamed to change his purpose.
44 Marvel is the daughter of Ignorance. 45 The deeds are manly, and the words
womanly. 46 The more that riches is honored, she more is virtue despised. 47
Time is the father of Truth, and experience is the mother of Science. 48 He
that sows virtue, reapeth same. 49 Betimes in the Fishambles, and late in the
Butchery. 50 To a good understander, half a word is enough. 51 Flies go to
lean horses. 52 He that has the world at will seems wife. 53 Provide a
Fig for thy friend; and a Peach for thy enemy. 54 The hearts mirth, makes the
face fair. 55 At marriages and burials, friends and kinsfolks be known. 56 A
dradly disease neither Physician nor physic can ease. 57 The love of a
harlot, and wine of a flagon, is good in the morning, and naught in the
evening. 58 An Ass pricked must needs trot. 59 He daunceth well enough, to
whom fortune pipeth. 60 He gains enough, whom fortune loses. 61 A dead Be
makes no honey. 62 By one, and one, the spindles are made up. 63 Fair words,
and wicked deeds, de^ine wise men and fools. 64 Ill goes the Boat without
Oars. 65 An old band, is a Captains honor. 66 A Barking dog sildome bites.
67 An old dog barks not in vain. 68 A running horse; an open grave. 69 A
fair shop and little gain. 70 He that buyeth dear, and takes upon credit,
shall ever sell to his loss. 71 A fire of straw yeeldes naught but smoke. 72
He that hunts two Hares, loses both. 73 He that is in poverty, is in
suspicion. 74 He that has a good Spear, let him try him. 75 He that does
nothing, does ever amiss. 76 He that does amiss, may do well. 77 He that
does ill hates the light. 78 He that has no heart, has legs. 79 He that
has no wise beats her often 80 He that has no children, does bring them up
well. 81 He that has not served, knows not how to command. 82 He that
cannot beat the horse, beate^^ the saddle. 83 He that does not rob, makes
(...) roabe or a gown. 84 He that hurts another, hurts himself. 85 A common
servant, is no man's servant. 86 He that serves harlots, a is slave to sin.
87 He that will have all, losethall. 88 He that goes to bed with dogs, arise
with fleas. 89 He that goes to bed without his supper, is out of quiet all
night. 90 He that goes and comes makes a good voyage. 91 He that lives in
Court, dies upon straw. 92 Speak no ill of another, till thou think of thy
self. 93 One crow never pulls out another eyes. 94 From word to deed is a
great spce. 95 Folly is wise in her own eyes. 96 Hard with hard never made
good wall. 97 Fair speech subdueth anger. 98 It is a goodly thing to take two
Pigeons with one Bean. 99 Fair gayning, makes fair spen^^^g. 100 Mischief
comes by pounds, and goes away by ounces. 101 Mariners craft is the grossest,
yet of handy crafts the subtillest. 102 He whose belly is full, bel^eues not
him that is fasting. 103 The Peach will have wine, the Fig water. 104 Fish
marreth the water, and flesh amends it. 105 He promises mountains, and
performs mole-hils. 106 Promising is the vigil of giving. 107 More then enough
breaks the Cover. 108 Sparing is the first gaining. 109 Wine by the savor,
bread by the color. 110 Experience is sometimes dangerous. 111 Make me a
diuinour, and I will make thee rich. 112 Friars obseruants spare their one, ^^d
eat other men's. 113 A gloued cat can catch no mice. 114 A broken bag can
hold no meal^ 115 It thou will come with me, br^ with thee. 116 Offices may
well be given, br^^^ discretion. 117 Suffer the ill, and look for the go^^ 118
In the world their be men that w^ have the egg, and the hen. 119 Above God
there is no Lord. 120 Above black there is no color, and above salt their is
no favor. 121 If it were not for hope the heart would break. 122 Cut off a
dogs tail, he will be a dog still. 123 Naught is that Muse that finds no
excuse. 124 Naught are those houses where the Hen crows, and the Cock holds
his peace. 125 He is in ill case that gives example to another. 126 Too much
hope deceives. 127 All draw water to their own mill. (...)

