A TREATISE, CONCERNING the causes of the Magnificencie and greatness of Cities,
Divided into three books by Sig: Giouanni Botero, in the Italian tongue; now
done into English By Robert Peterson, (...) ^^. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

To The right honorable, my very good Lord, Sir Thomas Egerton knight, Baron
of Ellesmere, Lord high Chauncelor of England, and one of his Majesty's most
honorable Privy Council.
MY very good Lord, when I had enterteyned some of my free hours of vacation
from other businesses, with the reading of this Author in his own language;
and that my liking led me into this further travail with him, to translate him
into our own tongue: I thought I had yet done little for him, except I did
also set him before the common eye of my country, that the pleasure and
proffit, which I reaped in this work, might by this communication thereof,
redownd to many. And, that I might do so worthy a writer all right, the matter
consisting of Policy and State; I could not address my self and my
translation of him, to one whose wisdom, and grave, both experience and
Judgment, might be more parallel to the substance of this work, or whose
honorable favor to my self, might require of me more love and duty, then
your good Lordship. To express this, I have been bold to commend these my
labors to your honorable favor, beseeching you to make them happy in your
protection of them, and with them, to receive my humble duty and service;
which rests ever

Your Lordships to be commanded, Robert Peterson.

A Table of all the Chapters contained in these three books, of the Causes of
the greatness of Cities.
In the first Book.
What a City is, and what the greatness of a City is said to be. Fol. 1. Of
Authority. 2. Of Force. 4. How the Romans increased the City of Rome, by
wasting their neighbor Towns. 7. That some have gotten the Inhabitants of
other Towns in to their own Cities. 8. Of Pleasure. 9. Of Proffit. 11. Of the
commodity of the Site. 13. Of the fruitfulnes of the Soil. 15. Of the
commodity of Conduct. 17.
In the second Book.
The proper means the Romans used to appopulate their Cities. 30. Of
Colonies. 33. Of Religion. 36. Of Schools and studies. 41. Of the place of
Justice. 45. Of Industry. 47. Of privileges. 53. Of having in her possession
some Merchandise of moment. 55. Of Dominion and power. 60. Of the Residency of
the Nobility. 62. Of the Residency of the Prince. 65.
In the third Book.
Whether it be expedient for a City, to have few or many Citizens. 87. What
the reason is, that Cities once grown to a greatness, increase not onward
according to that proportion. 89. Of the causes that do concern the
magnificency and greatness of a City. 97.
THE FIRST BOOK of Johannes Boterus of the causes of the magnificencie and
greatness of Cities.
CAP. I. What a City is, and what the greatness of a City is said to be.
A City* is said to be an assembly of people, acongregation drawn together,
to the end they may thereby the better live at their ease in wealth and plenty.
And the greatness of a City, is said to be, not the largnes o^ the ^ite or the
circuit of the walls; but the multitude and number of Inhabitants and their
power, Now, men are drawn together, upon s^ndry causes, and occasions
thereunto them moving* ^ome by authority* some by force, some by pleasure, and
some by profit, that proceeds of it.

CAP. II. Of Authority.
_^ Ain was the first Author of Cittyes; but, the Poets (whom Cicero therein
followed) fable that in the old world, men scattered here and there, on the
mountains, and the plains; led a life little different from brute beasts,
without laws, without conformity of customs, and manner of civil
conversation. And that afterward there rose up some, who, having with their
wisdom and their eloquence, won a special Reputation and Authority above
the rest, declared to the rude and barbarous multitude, how much and how great
profit they were like to enjoy: if drawyng themselves to one place, they would
unite themselves into one body, by an interchangeable co^municatio^* and
co^merce of all things that would proceed thereof. And by this means they
first founded Hamlets and Villages, and after Towns and Cittyes, and thereupon
these Poets further seyned, that (...) and Amphi^n, drew after them, the beasts
of the fields, the woods and stones: meaning under these fictions, to signify
and show the grossenes of the wits, and the roughnes of the manners of the
same people. But* besides these fables, we read of T^eseus, that after he had
taken upon him the government of the Athenians, it came into his mind, to unite
into one City, all the people that dwelt in the contry there about,
dispersedly in many Villages abroad: Which he easily effected, by manifesting
unto them, the great commodity and good that would ensue of it.

The like thing is daily at this time put in practice in Brasill. Those people
dwell dispersed here and there Brasill.
in caves and Cottages, (not to call them houses) made of boughs and leaves of
the Palm. And for as much as this manner of life, to live so dispersedly,
causes these people to remain in that same savage mind of theirs, and
roughnes of manner and behavior; and brings therewith much difficulty and
hindera^ce to the preaching of the Gospel, to the conversion of the Infidells,
and the instruction of those that travail painfully, to convert them, and to
bring them to knowledge and ciuility: The Portugalls and Jesuits have used
extreme diligence and care, to reduce and draw them into some certain place
together, more convenie^t for their purpose; where living in a civil
conversation, they might more easily be instructed in the christian faith, and
governed by the Magistrate and ministers of the King. So that to this purpose I
might here remember those cities that have been built by the power, and
inhabited by the authority of great Princes, or some famous commonweals. For
the Grecians and Phaenicians, were the authors of an infinite sight of Cities.
And Alexander the great and other Kings, erected a number more besides, whereof
bear witness the Alexandriae, Tholomai^s, Antiochiae, Lysimachiae,
Philippopoles, Demetriade^, Caesareae, Augustae, Sebastiae, Agrippinae,
Manfredoniae, and in our time, Cosmopolis and the City of the Son.

But none deserves more praise in this kind, (after Alexan er the great, who
built more than three scoare and ten Cittyes,) then the King Seleucus, who
besides many other* built three Cittyes called Apa^iae, to the honor of his
wife, and five called Laodiceae, in memory of his mother; and to the honor of
himself five called Seleu^tae: and in all more than thirty magnificent and
goodly Cities.

CAP. III. Of Force.
THrough force and inevitable necessity people are gathered other while
together into one place, when as some imminent pe^ill, especially of wars or
ruin and vnreconerable wast and deuastacion, enforces them to fly unto it,
to put in safty their lives or their goods: and such safety is most found in
mountains and craggy places, or small and little Islands, or such other like,
that are not easily to be approached or come unto.

After the general deluge of the world in the time Noe.
of Noe, while men feared their might a fresh happen such another ruin again
upon the^, th y sought to secure themselves, some by building their habitations
upon the tops of high hills, and some by advancing huge Towers of incredible
height and greatness, even up to the heavens* And without doubt, for this
respect, the Cittyes seated upon the mountains, are for antiquity the most
noble: And the Towers are of the most ancient form and kind of buildings that
ever were used in this world But after the fear of a new deluge was past and
gone, men began to draw them selves down, and to erect their habitations in
the plains, until the Terror of Armies, and the swarm and fear of fyerce
and cruel people, enforced the^ a fresh to save them selves, on the steepenes
of the hills, or in the Islands of the Seas, or in the maryshes and bogges, or
other such like places.

When the Moors subdued Spain, and brought it into miserable servitude and
bondage: Such as escaped with their lives, out of the lamentable slaughter,
that was made of them: Some retired themselves up to the highest mountains of
Biscay and of Aragon; and Biscay* Aragon.
some betaking them to their shipping, saved themselves in the Island of the
seven Cittyes, so called, because seven Bishops seated themselves therein
with their people.

The cru^ll Ruin that Tamberlan carried with Tamberlan.
him wheresoever he came, made the people of Persia, and the cou^tryes
bordering thereupon, to abandon and forsake their ancient native countries,
(like birds that are scattered*) and to save their lives by flight: Some, upon
the mount Taurus, some upon Antitaurus, and some fled into the little Islands of
the Caspian Se^. And, as the people of Istria, at the coming of the Slaui
retired to the Island Capraria, and th^re built Giustinopoli. Gallia tra^spadana.
Giustinopoli: So the people of Gallia Transpadana at the entry of the Lombards
into Italy, saved themselves within the maryshes, where they built the Town
of Crema.

But, forasmuch as to the natural strength of those places, neither great
conueniencie, either of Territory or Trafique, or good means to draw Trade or
intercourse, lent (for the most part) any help unto them: there was never seen
City there, of any great fame or memory. But if the places whereto men are
driven of necessity to fly, have in them besides their safety, any commodity of
importance: it will be an easy thing for them to increase, both with people,
and with riches, and with buildings.

In this manner, the Cities of Leuant, and of Barbary, became populous and
great thorough the multitude of Jews, that Ferdinando the King of Spain, and
Emanuel the King of Portingall, cast out of their Kingdoms, as in particular,
Salonica and Rhodes. And in these our days in England many Cittyes have much
increased within few years, both in people and in Trade, through the resort
of the low country people to it: and especially London, whereunto many
thousands of famylyes have resorted themselves.

About the year of the Lord. 1400. while the Saracenes.
Saracenes did put to fire and sword the Genouaes, and all the country there
about; Pisa did mightily increase: For to the strength of the place, the
country yielded also plenty of al good things, and commodity of trafique.

At the coming of Attyla into Italy, the people of Lombardy being wonderfully
affrayd, thorough the horrible wast and ruin he brought with him: fled to save
themselves, into the Islands of the Adriaticke Seas, and there built many Towns
and Cittyes. And after that, in the wars that Pypin raysd against the^,
forsaking the places that were not secure and safe enough, Rialto. Venice.
as Ex quilinum, Heraclea, Palestin, and Malamocco, they drew themselves near
to Rialto, into one body, and so by that means grew Venice magnificent and
great.

CAP. IIII. How the Romans increased the City of Rome, by wasting their
neighbors Towns.
THe Romans, to make their own country in any sort great and famous,
furnished themselves very carefully ever, with strength and power. For to make
their neighbor people of necessity glad, and willing to draw themselves to
Rome, and there to dwell: they ouer-threw their Towns even down to the
ground. So did Tullus Alba. Cornicolo. Pometia. Veios.
Hostilius cast Alba down to the earth, a most strong City: Tarquinius
Pris^us laid also plain Cornicolo, a City abounding in mighty wealth. Seruius
Tullus made Pometia desert: and in the time of liberty they utterly destroyed
Veios, a City of such strength and power, that with much a do, after a siege
of ten years, it was by cunning more than strength vanquished and overthrown.

Now these people and such other, having no dwelling place to draw themselves
unto, nor to live secure and safe, they were enforst to change their countries
with Rome, which by this means wonderfully waxed great, both in people and in
riches.

CAP. V. That some have gotten the Inhabitants of other towns in to their own
Cities.
THe like means to the former, but somewhat more gentell, the Romans used to
appopulate and make great their own City: And that was, to bring the people
home, whom they had subdued, or the most of the^ to Rome. Romulus in this
manner, drew into the City the Seninenses, the Antennates, and the Crustumini.
But no country amplified more the City of Rome, then the Sabines. For in a
sharp and mighty fight with them, after a long and hard conflict, he made a
peace; And the condition Tatius King of the Sabines.
was, that Tatius the King of the Sabines, should come with all his people to
dwell in Rome. Which condition Tatius did accept, and made choice of the
Capitol, and of the mount Quirinalis for his Seat and Palace. The same course
did An^us Martiu^ take, who gave the hill (...) (...) to the Latins, when they
were taken from their cittyes Politorio, Tellena, and Fic^na.

The great Tamberlan also, he amplified and enlarged Tamberlan. Sarmacanda.
Ottoman.
mightily the great Sarmacanda, in bringing to it the richest and the
wealthiest persons of the cittyes he had subdued. And the O^tomans to make the
city of Constantinople rich and great, they have brought to it many thousand
families, especially artificers out of the cittyes they have subdued: As,
Mahomet the second Mahomet. Selim.
from Trebisonda; Selim the first, from Cairo; and Soliman from Tauris.

CAP. VI. Of Pleasure.
MEn are also drawn to live together in Society, thorough the delight and
pleasure that either the Site of the place, or the art of man does minister
and yield unto them. The Site, by the freshnes of the air, the pleasant view
of the valleis, the pleasing shade of the woods, the commodity to hunt, and
the abundance of good waters; Of all which good things, Antioche in Soria, is
liberally endowed, and Damascus no less, and Bursia in Bithinia, Cordoua and
Civil in Spain, and many other good towns elsewhere. Unto art, belongs the
strayte and fair streets of a cittye, the magnificent and gorgious buildings
therein, either for Art or matter, the theaters, Porches, Circles, Rases for
running horses, Fountains, Images, Pictures, and such other excellent and
wonderful things, as delight and feed the eyes of the people with an
admiration and wonder at them.

The city of Thespis, was freque^ted for the excellent Thespis. Samos.
Alexandria. Menisis.
workmanship sake of the Image of Cupid. Samos, for the merualous greatness of
the temple. Alexandria, for the tower of Pharo. Menisis, for the Pyramides,
Rhodes, for the Colossus. And, how many shall Rhodes.
Babylon.
we think, have gone to Babylon, to see the wonderrous wailes that (...) had
made about it? The Romans many times willingly went for their recreation sake
to (...), (...), Smyrna, Rhodes and (...), even to take the benyfit of the
air, and to behold the bewty of those same cittyes. To conclude, all that ever
feeds the eye, and delights the sense of man, and has any exquitite and
curious workmanship in it: all that ever is rare, strange, new, unwonted,
extraordinary, admirable, magnificent, great, or singular by cunning,
apperteyneth to this head.

And, amongst all the cittyes of Europes Rome and (...), are the most
frequented, for the pleasures and delights they minister to all the beholders
of them. Rome.
Rome, for the exceeding wonderful relics of her ancient greatness. And
(...), for the gloriousnes of her present and magnificent (...). Rome, fills
the eye with wonder and delight at the greatness of her (...), the rarenes of
her ^athes, and ^enes of her o^ossi; a^ also at the Art of her admirable works,
both in Marble and in ^rasse, wrought by excellent (...); ^t the hei^th and
^enes of her Obelis^es, at the (...) and variety of pillars; at the diversity
and (...) of strange marble, the exquisite and curious cutting of it; The^
or^ery, Alablaster, Marble, White, Black, Gray, Yellow, and mixed, and
Serpentyne; The great ruins, the hel-gates, and a number of other sorts and
kinds besides which were too hard to recount, and impossible to distinguishe.
What shall I say of the triumphall arches, of the seven Zoanes or circles? of
the Temples? and what of a number of other wonders else? And what shall we
imagyne that City was, when she floryshed and triumphed; if now, while
shelyeth thus defaced, and is none other then a Sepulture of her self, she
allureth us to see her, and feeds us unsatiably with the ruynes of her self.

On the other side Venice, with the wonder of Uenice.
her incomparable Situation (which seems the Act of nature, by giving laws
to the waters, and setting a bridell on the Sea) ministers unto us no less
admiration and wonder at it. The greatness also of her inestimable Arsenall, the
multitude of ships both of war, of trafique and of Passage: The incredible
number of warlike instruments, ordinance and munition, and of all manner of
preparacions for the Seas: The heygth of the towers, the riches of the
Churches, the magnifice^cy of the ^allaces, the beautifullnes of the Streets,
the variety of Arts, the order of her government the beauty of the one and
other sex, does dazell and amaze the eyes of the beholders of them.

CAP. VII. Of Profit.
THis Profit is of such power, to unite and tie men fast unto one place; as the
other causes aforesaid, without this accompany them with all, are not
sufficient to make any city great. Not Authority alone: For, if the place
whereto men are drawn thorough the Authority of any, afford them no
commodityes, they will not abide nor tarry there.

Neither yet necessity: For, such a congregation and collection of people
increases, multiplieth, and las^eth for many years. And, necessity is
violent; And violence cannot produce any durable effect. So that it comes to
pass, that not only cities do not increase, but also States and
Principalityes gotten with mere strength and violence, cannot be long
mainteyned. They are much like Land floodes, that have no head nor spring, as
Rivers have that minister perpetually plenty of waters to them; But casually,
and in a moment rise and swell, and by and by assuage and fall again. So that,
as they are to trauaylers fearful in their swellings, so do they fall again
wthin a while to fast as trauailers may soon pass away on soote again dry.

Such were the conquests of the Tarters* that have so vast invaded (...), and
put it to the sword: Of Alexand^ the great, of Att^la, of great (...), of (...)
the eight and of (...) the twelueth King of france. And the reason thereof is,
that our nature is so great alouer, and longs after commoditye so much, as
that it is not possible to quiet and content her with that which is no more but
necessary. For* as Plants, although they be set deep enough within the ground,
cannot for all that, last and be long kept without the favor of the heavens,
and the benefyt of rain: Even so, the habitacions of men, enforst at first by
mere necessity, are not maynteyned long, if profit and commodity go not
companions with it; much less then is pleasure and delyght of any moment. For
man is borne to labor, and most men attend their business: and the ideler sort
are of no account nor reckoning, and their idleness is built and founded upon
the labors and the industry of those that work. And pleasure cannot stand
without profit and commodity, whereof she is as it were the very fruit.

Now, suppose that profit is the very thing from whence, as from the
principal cause, the greatness of cities grows* (For the same profit is
not simple and of one sort, but of diverse forms and kinds.) It rests
therefore now, that we see what manner of commodity and profit is most fit, for
the end whereof, we have disputed all this while. We say then, that to make a
city great and famous, the commodity of the site, the fertility of the
soil, and easiness of conduct, helps sufficiently enough.

CAP. VIII. Of the commodity of the Site.
I Call that a commodious Site, that serves in such sort as many people have
thereof need for their traffic, and transportation of their goods, whereof
they have more plenty than they need; or for receiving of things whereof they
have scarsitie: so that this site standing thus between both, partaketh with
both, and grows rich with the extremes. I say partaketh with the extremes,
because it cannot otherwise increase the greatness of a city: ^or as much as
it must either remain desert, or else not serve but for a simple passage.

Derbentum, a Town seated in the Ports of the Derben u^.
Caspian Seas, is a very necessary place* to go from Persia into ^artary, or
from ^artary into Persia: yet notwithstanding it never grew great, nor no
famous city, and in these our days there is no reckoning made of it: and the
reason is, for that it partaketh not of these extremes, but serves for
passage only, and receives those that ttauaile too and fro, not as merchants,
and men of commerce and traffic, but as passengers and trauailers; and to
speak in a word, it is seated sure in a very necessary place, as the case
stands, but not profitably unto it self.

For the self* same cause, in the streyts of the Alps, which for the most
part do compass Italy, although the Frenchmen, Swyzers, Dutch men, and
Italians continually do pass by them: there never yet was found a mean
city; much less any great and stately one.

The like may be said of many other good cities Sues.
and places. For Sues is a very necessary place for them that came out of the
Indies by the red Sea, to C^yrus. The Islands of Saint James, and the Palm and
Terzeras, are necessary for the Portugals, and Spaniards to sail to the
(...), Brasill, and to the new World: yet neither is there, nor never will be
in those same places, city of good importance. As neither also is there in
the Islands, between Denmark, and Suetia, nor yet between Mare Germanicum, and
Mare Balticum. And Flushing, although it be situated in a passage of
incredible necessity, for the commerce and traffic that is between the
Flemings, Englishmen, and other Nations: yet never grew it great, but still
remains a very little town. But contrariwise Geneua is a great city, and
so is Venice, because they partake of the extremes, and serve only for
passages, but much more for Store houses, Cellerage, and Ware houses of
merchandise, most plentifully brought unto them: And so is likewise Lysborne,
An^werpe, and some other. It suffices not enough therefore to the making of a
city magnificent and great, that the site thereof be necessary; but it must
withal be commodious to other countries that are borderers or near unto it.

CAP. IX. Of the fruitfulnes of the Soil.
THe second cause of the greatness of a city, is the fruitfulnes of the country.
For, the Sustenance of the life of man, consisting on Food and Cloa^hing, and
both of them gotten out of those things the Earth does produce; the fruitfulnes
of the country cannot but be a mighty help unto it. And, if it fall out to be
so great, as it not only well suffices to mantaine the Inhabitants thereof,
but also to supply the wants of their bordering neighbors: It serves our
purpose so much the better. And, forasmuch as all Soyles produce not all
things; How much more rich and more able a country shall be to produce diverse and
sundry things of profit and commodity: So much the more sufficient and fyt it
will be found to raise a great city. For, by that means it shall have the
less need of others, (which enforces people other while to leave their
habitations,) and be able to afford the more to others (which draws our
neighbors the sooner to our country.)

But, the fruitfulnes of the Land, suffices not simply of it self alone to
raise a city unto greatness: For many Provinces there are, and they very rich,
that have never a good city in them. As for Example, Premont is one: And there
is not a country through Premont.
out all Italy, that has more plenty of Corn, Cattle, Wine, and of excellent
fruits of all sorts, than it has. And it has maintained for many years, the
Armies and forces both of Spain and France. And in England (London excepted,)
although the country do abound England. London.
in plenty of all good things: yet is there not a city in it that deserves to
be called great. As also in France (Paris excepted) which notwithstanding,
France. Paris.
is not seated in the fruitfullest country of that great kingdom. For, in
pleasantnes, it gives place to Turen; in abundance of all things, to Xanton
and Poitiers; In varyety of Fruits, to Languedock; in co^modiousnes of the
Seas, to Normandy; In store of wine, to Burgundy; in abundance of Corn, to
Campagna; In either of both, to the country of Orliens; in Cattle, to
Britain and the territory of Burges.

By all which it does appear, that to the advancing of a city unto greatness,
it suffices not simply of it self alone, that the territory be fruitful.
And the reason thereof is plain; For, where a country does plentifully
abound with all manner of good things, the Inhabitants finding all those things
at home that are fit, necessary, and profitable for their use; neither care,
nor have cause to go any where else to seek them, but take the benefit and
use of the^ with ease where they grow. For, every man loves to procure his
commodity with the most ease he may: and when they find them with ease at
home, to what end should they travail to fetch them elsewhere? And this reason
proves the more strong, where the people affect and long least after vain
and idle delights and pleasures.

It suffices not therefore to the gathering of a Society of people together,
to have abundance of wealth and substance alone; But there must be besides
that, some other form and matter to unite and hold them in one place together.
And that is, the easines and commodiousnes of conduct, the carrying out and
bringing in I mean of commodities of wares too and froe.

CAP. X. Of the Commodity of Conduct.
THis commodity is lent unto us, partly of the land, and partly of the water.

Of the Land, if it be plain. For, by that means, it conduces easily the
marcha^dize and goods of all sorts and kinds, upon Carts, Horses, Mules, and
other beasts of burden. And men make their journeys the more commodious you
foot, on Horse, in Chariot, and in other such like sort and manner.

The Portugalls do write, that in some large and spacious plains of China,
they use Coaches with Coaches with fails
fails: Which some assaid not many years since in Spain.

Of the water: this commodity is lent us, if it be nauigable. And without
comparison, the commodity is much better, and more worth far* which the water
does assord us, than which the earth does give us both for ease and speedines*
for as much as in less time, and with less charge and labor (without
proporcion in it) greater cariages are brought from countries most remote, by
water, than by land.

Now, your nauigabl water is either of the Sea, ^
or of the river, or of the lake, which are natural helps and means: or of
Chanells or of Pooles as that of Mi^ (...), which was 45^* miles about, made by
art* and man's industry and labor.

It seems in very truth, that God created the water, not only for a necessary
Element to the perfection of nature* But more than so, for a most ready means
to conduct and bring goods from one country to another. For his divine
majesty, willing that men should mutually embrace each other, as members of
one body* divided in such sort his blessings as to no nation did he give all
things, to the end that others having need of us, and contrariwise ^
we having need of others, there might growa * Co^munitie, and from a
Community Love, and from Love an unity between us.

And to work this co^munity the easier, he produced the water. Which of nature
is such a substance, that through the grossenes thereof, it is apt to bear
great burdens: And through the liquidnes, helped with the winds, or the oars,
fit to carry them to what place they list. So that by such a good mean, the
West is joined with the East, and the South with the North. And a man might
say, that what so grows in one place, grows in all places, by the easy
means provided to come by them.

Now without doubt, the Sea, for her infinite greatness and grosnesse of the
water, is much more profitable than the Lakes, or the Rivers. But, the Sea
serves you to little purpose, if you have not a large and safe Port to ride
into: I say large, either for the greatness, or for the depth in the entry
thereat, the midst and the extremes. And I say safe, either from all, or
from many winds, or at least from the most blustering and most tempestuous.

It is held, that, amongst all winds, the Northern is most tolerable, and
that the Seas that are troubled on the Greekish coast, cease their rage and wax
quiet as soon as the wind is laid, But the Southern winds trouble them, and
beat them so sore (whereof the Gulf of Venice is an undoubted witn) esthar
even after the wind is laid, they swell and rage a great while after.

Now the Port shall be safe, either by nature, as that of Messina and Marsiles;
or else by art, the Imitato^ of nature, as that of Genoua and of Palermo.

Lakes are, as it were little Seas. So that also they Lakes.
for the proporcion of the place, and other respects besides, gave a great
help to appopulate towns and cities; As it is found in Noua Hispania, where
as Noua His pania. Mexico.
is the Lake of Mexico, which extends nine hundred miles in compass, and
contains 50. fair and goodly towns in it: Amongst the which there is the
Town Themistitan, the Metropolitan seat of Themistita^.
that great and large Kingdom.

The Rivers also import much; and most of all they Rivers.
that run the longest course, especially through the richest and most
merchantable Regions, such as is Po in Italy, Scaldis in Flanders, Ligeris and
Sona in France, Danubius and the Rhene in Germany. And as Lakes are certain
several remembrances of the bosoms of the Gulphes of the Seas, formed and
made by nature: Even so Chanells, whereinto the water Channel.
of the Lake or the River runs, are certain Imitations, and as it were
shadows of the same Rivers made by skill and cunning.

The ancient Kings of Egypt made a ditch that from Nilus. Heroum. Marerubrum.
Nilus ran to the city Heroum: and they assaid to draw a Channel from the Red
Sea to Mare Mediterraneu^, to knit our Seas with the Indian Seas, and so to
make the easier transportation too and fro of all kinds of merchandise, and by
that means withal to enritch their own Kingdom. And it is a thing well
known, how ost it has been attempted to break up Isthmus, to unite the Sea
Ionium with Mare Aegeum. A Cayrus. Alepo. Gant and Bruges.
Soldier of Cayro drew a Channel from Eufrates to the city of Alepo. In
Flanders you may see both at Gant and at Bruges, and in other places else
besides, many Channels made by art, and with an inestimable expense and charge;
but yet of much more profit for the ease they bring to merchandising, and to
the trafique of other nations. And in Lombardy many cities have wisely procured
this ease unto them: But none more then Milan, that with one Channel (worthy of
Milan.
the Romans glory) draws the waters to it of Thesinum. Lago maggiore.
Thesinum and of the Lake called Lago Maggiore, and by such means enricheth it
self with infinite store of merchandises, and with an other Channel also
benefiteth much by the River Adda: through the opportunity and means it has
thereby to bring in the fruits and the goods of their exceeding plentiful
country, home unto their houses: And they should make it much the better, if
they would cleanse and scower the Channel of Pauia and Iurea.

Now in Chanells and in Rivers, for their better ease of conduct and of
trafique, besides the length of their courses we have before spoken; the depth,
Depth. Pleasa^tnes. Thicknes. Largenes.
the pleasantnes, the thicknes of the water, and the largnes thereof is of much
moment to them. The depth, because deep waters bear and sustain the greater
burdens, and the navigations is the more safe without peril. The Pleasantnes,
because it makes the navigations easy up and down which way soever, you bend
your course. Wherein it seems to some, they have been much mistaken that had
the ordering of the Channel that comes from Thesinum, to Milan. Forasmuch as by
the great fall of the water, and the great advantage given to the water, it
has so strong a current, and is so violent, that with infinite toil, and labor
and loss of time, they have much a do to sail upward. But as towching Rivers,
nature has showed her self very kind to Gallia Celtica Gallia. Belgica.
Celtica.
and Belgica: for as much as in Gallia Celtica, the rivers for the most part,
are most calm and still, and therefore they sail up and down with incredible
facility, because many of them come forth, as it were in the plains and even
grounds: By the means where of their course is not violent, and they run not
between the mountains, nor yet a short and little way, but many hundred miles
through goodly and even plains. Where, for their recreation and their
pleasure, otherwhile men take their course one way, another while another, now
go on forwards, and then turn back again: and so, by this winding and
turning too and fro, they help diverse cities and provinces with water and
victuals, or other such things as they need. But there is not a country in
Europe, better furnished and provided of Rivers, than that part of Gallia
Belgica, that commonly we call Flanders. The Meuse, the Schelde, the Mosella,
Tevora, Flanders.
Ruer and Rhene, divided into three great Arms or branches, run pleasantly
and gallantly forthright and overthwart the Province, and mightily enritch it
by the commodity of navigations and trafique of infinite treasure, which
certainly wants in Italy. For, Italy being long and strait, and parted in the
midst with the Apenine Hills: the Rivers of Italy, through the shortness of
their course, cannot neither much increase, nor yet abate the violence of their
Streams.

The Rivers of Lombardy, come all as it were, either Rivers of Lombardy.
out of the Alps, as Thesinum, Adda, Lambro, Seruo, and A^liga: or out of the
Apenine hills, as Tarro, Lenza, Panarus, and Rhene, and but a short way
neither, wherein they rather deserve to be called land floods, than Rivers:
For, they soon find out the Po* which takes his course between the Appenine
hills, and the Alps. So that he only rests nauigable. For washing this
Province over by all his whole length, he has time to grow great, and enrich
himself with the help of many Rivers, and to moderate his natural swiftness
by the long way he makes. But this take withal, that forasmuch as the said
Rivers, thorough the shortness of their course, enter and meet together with a
mighty rage and violence, they wax great otherwhile, and swell and run with
such a raging course, as they make the strongest Cities afraid of them, much
more the Country thereabout. But the Rivers of Romagna, and of other parts of
Italy, Rivers of Romagna.
falling like raging Land-flouds, partly on this side, and partly on that side
of the Appenine hills, soon find out the Adriaticke, or the Tyrrhenian, or the
Ionian Seas. So that the most of them have no time to slake their rage, nor
none of them have so much time to grow great, as might make them nauigable. For
that little that is nauigable in Arn^, or in Tiber, it is not worth the
speaking.

The thickenesse of the water, is also a very good help in this case. For, it
cannot be denied, that the water of one River, bears great and weighty
burdens much better, than the water of some other. And in particular, when the
Obelisk (set up in the time of Sextus the fifth) which is to be seen at this
day in Saint Peter's street, was brought to Rome; It is well known by good
experience, the water of Tiber was of more strength and of more force and
Tiber. Nilus.
firmness, than the water of Nilus.

And Seina a mean river in France, bears ships of such bulk, and carries
burdens so gr^ the that sees it not, will not believe it. And the^e is not a
river in the world, that for proportion, is able to bear the like burden. So
that, although it exceed not a mediocritie, and be but a small river; yet
notwithstanding, it suplieth wonderfully all the necessities and wants of
Paris, a city that in people and in abundance of all things exreedeth far all
other cities whatsoever within the scope of Christendom.

Here a man might ask me how it comes to pass, Question.
that one water should bear more burden than another?

Some will, that this proceeds from the nature of the earth that thickneth
the water and makes it stiff, and by consequence firm and solid. This
reason has no other opposition but Nilus, the water Nilus.
whereof is so earthie and so muddie, that the Scripture calls it the
Troubled river. And it is not to be drunk before it be purged and settled well
in the Cesterne. And it does not only water and mellow all Egypt over with its
liquidnes, but more than that makes it fertile, and mucketh as it were the
ground with its satnes. And yet it is not of the fittest nor the strongest to
sustain and bear ships, boats, or barks of any good burden, whereupon I
should think, that for such effect and purpose, we should not so much
prefer the muddinesse of the water, as the sliminesse thereof: for that does
glue it, as it were together, and thicken it the better, and makes it more
fit, and more apt to bear good burden.

But some man might ask me here again* from whence comes this quality, this
diversity (I mean) of waters? I must answer, it comes of 2. causes. First,
from the very breaking or bursting of it out, and passage along thorough
Resolutio.
rich, rank, and fat Countries. For, rivers participating of the nature of the
grounds that make them their beds and banks, become thereby themselves also fat
and slimy, and of quality much like to oil. The next cause, proceeds from
the swiftnes and the shortness of the course. Forasmuch as the lengh of a
voyage, and the rage of the Rivers makes thin, and subtileth the substance,
and breaks and cuts in sunder the slimines of the water: (which happens in
Nilus) For, running in a manner as it does, 2000. miles by a direct line, (for
by an oblique and crooked line, it would be a great deal more) and falling
from places exceeding steep and headlong, where (through the vehemence and
violent force of the course, and by the inestimable rage of the fall, it
breaks and dissolueth all into a very small and fine rain as it were) it
waxes so fine and subtle, and so tyreth his waters, that they loose all their
slimie properties, which rests all at the Rivers of Almaigne and of France.
For, they grow and walk thorough most rich and pleasant Countries, and they be
not ordinarily swift nor violent. Now, that this is the true reason thereof:
the water of Senna shall make a true proof of it: for if you wash your hands
with it, it scowreth like soape, and cleanses you of all manner of spots.

But let us now pass to the wideness: and that is necessary to begin
withal in Rivers, and in Channels of which we speak of, that they should be
wide and large, that Ships may commodiouslly wind and turn here and there
at their will and pleasure, and give way each to other. But the wideness of a
River without depth, serves not for our purpose: for it dissipateth and
disperseth the water in such sort, that it makes it unfit for navigations,
which happens to the river of Plate, which through over much wideness, is
for the most part low, and of uneven bottom, and full of rocks and little
Islands. And for the self same cause, the rivers of Spain, are not greatly
nauigable; for they have large bellies, but they spread wide, and uneven they
are, and uncertain. And thus much suffices to have said of Rivers.

Now, forasmuch as the commodities and profits are such and so great which the
water brings to advance the greatness of a City: of consequent those
cities must be the fa^rest and the richest that have the most store of
nauigable Rivers. And even such are those cities that are seated upon good
Havens of the Seas, rivers, or lakes, that are commodious, apt and fit for
sundry nauigations

It may seem to some, that with the easiness of conduct, the foundation is
now found out, and full complement and perfection of the greatness of a
city. But it is not so, for it behoues besides that, that there be some
matter of profit, that may draw the people, and cause them to repair to one
place more than to another. For where there is no commodity of conduct, the
multitude of people cannot be great, which the Hills and Mountains teaches
us; on which we may well see many Castles and little towns, but no store of
people, that we might thereby call them great. And the reason is, because of
the craggidnesse and steepness of their scites, such things as are necessary
and commodious for a civil life, cannot be brought unto them without an
infinite Fiesole.
toil and labor. And Fiesole became desert, and Florence.
Florence frequented upon none other cause, than that Fiesole stands on too
steep, and too high a place almost inaccessible: and Florence in a very
plain, easy to have access unto it. And in Rome we see the people Rome.
have forsaken the Auentine and other hills there, and drawn themselus
altogether down to the plain and places nearest unto Tyber, for the
commodity which the plain and the water affords to the conduct of goods and
traffic.

But where conduct and carriage is easy, you see not for all that, a notable
and famous city by and by. For without question, the port of Messina is far
Messina.
much better* than the port of Naples, that notwithstanding Naples, if you
behold the people, exceeds Naples.
more than two Messinas. The port of Carthagena Carthagena.
exceeds in all respects, the port of Genoua: and yet Genoua for multitude of
people, for wealth, and Genoua.
for all manner of good things besides, mightily exceeds Carthagena. What
Port is more fair, more safe, or more spacious, than the Channel of Catharo?
Catharo.
And yet is there not any memorable City in that place.

What shall I say of Rivers? In Peru, there is the River Peru. Maragnone a
river in Peru.
Maragnone, which (it is said) does run (a marvelous thing to report) six
thousand miles in length, and is in breadth, at the mouth thereof, three score
miles and more. You have the River of Plate there The river of Plate.
by* which though it give place to Maragnone for the length of his stream and
course: it bears yet more water a great deal. And, at the mouth of it, they
say it is one hundred and fifty miles wide. In new France, there is the River
of Canada, wide at the mouth River of Canada.
thirty five miles, and 200 fathame deep. In Africa, there are also very
great Rivers, Senaga, Gambea, and Coanza, which last, is a river late found out
in the Kingdom of Angola, which is thought to be Angola foce.
wide at the mouth 35 miles: And yet amongst these, there is not a famous city
to be found. Nay further, on the river of Coanza, the barbarous people there,
River of Coanza.
live in dens, and hyde themselves in caves covered with boughs, in the
company and fellowship, as it were, of crabbes and lobsters, which through use
and custom grow wondrous familiar and secure with them.

In Asia, although Menan, which in their language Rivers. Menan. Meicon. Indus.
Obuius.
signifies the mother of rivers, and Meicon, which is nauigable for more than
two thousand miles, and likewise Indus, and other royal rivers be sufficiently
inhabited: yet for all that Obuius, which is the greatest there amongst them.
(For, where it falls into the Scithian Ocean, it is 80. miles broad: which
makes some men think the Mare Caspium disburdeneth it self that way into the
Ocean) has not any famous city in it.

After this, another question also ryseth; how it comes, if the commodious
means of conduct do at full accomplish the greatness of a city; How, I say it
comes to pass, where upon the Shore of one self river, the conduct is even
easy, and a like; that one City yet, is greater than an other? Without doubt,
it suffices not alone that the transportation of goods too and fro, be easy
and commodious: but there must be else besides that, some peculier virtue
attractiue, that may draw men, and allure men more to one place than to
another, whereof we shall in the next book speak more at large.

OF THE CAUSES OF the greatness and magnificencie of Cities. THE SECOND BOOK.
Hitherto have we spoken of aptnes of the site, of the fruitfulnes of the
soil, and of the commodious transportacion of commodities, too and fro, for the
help and increase of our City. Let us now se what those things are, that may
allure the people (who are of nature indifferent to be here or there) to the
choice of one place before another, to make their habitacions in; and what
causes commerce and traffic. And let us first declare the proper means, the
Romans took, and then afterward, the means that generally were common to
them and others.

CAP. I. The proper means of the Romans.
THe first means the Romans used, was the opening of the Sanctuary and giving
liberty and fredome to all that would, to come unto them which Romulus did, to
the end (his neighbors at that time evil entreated by Tyrants* and the
country swarming full with discontented persons) Rome might by that means, be
the sooner peopled through the benefit of their safety they were sure to find
there, neither was he therein deceived a whit; for thither flockt with their
goods a number of people that were either thrust out of their habitations, or
unsafe and unsure of their lives in their countries. But when they found
afterward a want of women necessary for propagation; Romulus Romulus.
proclaimed certain great and solemn feasts, at which he stole and held away
by force, the greatest part of the youngest women that did resort to see them:
so that it is no marvel, if out of so fierce and stout a people, there rose
so fierce and stout an issue.

The very same reason in a manner in these our days, has increased so much
the city of Geneua: forasmuch Geneua.
as it has offered entertainment to all comers out of France and Italy, that
have either forsaken, or been exiled their countries for religion sake. And the
same Country of Germany (they call Francorum Vallem) by the sufferance of
Cassimire one of Cassimire.
the Count Palatins of Rhene, later erected by the Belgians, that were for
Religion thrust out of their countries* has doneth like.

Cosmus the great Duke of Tus^an, to appopulate Cosmus.
the Port Ferato, gave protection to such as would fly theth^r and confined a
number, that for their offenses had worthily deserved punishment. Which course
the great Duke Franciscus his Son observed afterward for the peopling of Pisa
and Liuorno. But as we have before said, it is neither strength nor necessity,
that have power to make a city frequented, or to raise it unto greatness. For a
people enforst, and violently driven to rest in one place: is like unto seed
sown in the Sands, wherein it never takes root to grow unto ripenes.

But let us return unto our sanctuary. It cannot be denied* but that a
moderate liberty and a lawful place of safety, very greatly helps to draw
a multitude of people to a resting place. And, hereof it comes, that free
Cities are (in comparison of other places) more famous and more replenished
with people, then Cities subject unto Princes and to monarchies.

The second means wherewith Rome increased was, that they made the towns that
well deserved of the^, (which they after called Municipia) to be partakers
Municipiu^. is every City or town having the liberty that Rome had.
of their Franchises and of their offices. For, these honors, to be Citizens of
Rome, and to enjoy the great privileges annexed to their enfranchiseme^t,
drew into the City all such, as through adherencie, through favor, or through
service done unto the common weal, might have any hope to bear office or rule
therein: and such as looked not so high, resorted yet thither, to serve their
kinsmens turns or their friends with their voices, to advance them to some
good office. And, thus Rome was frequented and enriched with concourse of an
infinite sight of people, both noble and rich, that in particular or in common
were honored with the enfra^chisement and freedom of Rome.

The third means, was the continual entertainment the Romans gave to
curiosity. And, that was the great number of admirable things they did in
Rome: The triumphs of the victorious Captains; the wonderful buildings; the
battles on the water; the fights of sword players; the hunting of wild
beasts; the public shows and sights; the plays of Apollo: the Seculars and
others, which were performed with unspeakable pomp and preparation, and many
other such like things that drew the curious people unto Rome. And for as much
as these alluring sights, were as it were perpetual: Rome was also as it were
perpetually full of strangers and foreign people.

CAP. II. Of Colonies.
WHat shall we say of Colonies? were they a good help to the greatness of Rome,
or no? That they were a great help to the increase of the power, it cannot be
doubted: But, that they multiplied also the number of the Inhabitants, it is a
thing somewhat doubtful. How beit for mine own opinion, I should think they
were a great help and means unto it. For, if any man think, by taking the
people out, and sending them to Colonies else where, that the Cittye thereby
comes rather to diminish then increase: happily for all that, the contrary may
happen. For, as plants cannot prosper so well, nor multiply so fast in a
nurserie, where they are set and planted nere together, as where they are
transplanted into an open ground: even so men make no such fruitful
propagation of children, where they are enclosed and shut up within the walls
of the City, they are bred and borne in; as they do abroad in diverse other
parts, where they are sent unto. For, sometimes the Plague, or other contagious
sickness or disease consumes them; sometimes Famine enforces them to change
their habitations; sometimes foreign Wars takes out of the world the
stowtest men amongst them; sometimes civil wars make the quietest sort
forsake their dwellings; And, from many, poverty and misery takes away the
mind, the means, and the spirit to wedde, or think on progation.

Now, they that might have died in Rome, with the aforesaid evils, and without
children; being removed to other places, escape the foresaid perils; And,
being bestowed in Colonies, and provided for both of house and ground to it;
betake themselves to wives and children, and to propagate and breed them up,
and so increase infinitely, and of ten, become an hundred.

But, what is this to the purpose (may some man say?) Let us suppose that they
that are sent into Colonies, would not increase their Country, if they tarried
at home? How should they then increase it, when they are sent thence abroad to
other places? well vno^gh. First, because Colonies with their mother, out of
which they issued, make, as it were, but one body. Then next, because the love
of our original Country, which every man affects, and the dependencie
thereof (which many ways help) and the desire and hope to aspire to dignity
and honor, which evermore draw unto it the worthiest and most noble minds. By
which means the Country grows to be more populous and rich.

Who can deny, but that the 30. Colonies, that issued as it were out of one
stock, from Alba Longa, Alba longa,
and so many desides as Rome has sent out; brought not much magnificencie and
greatness, both to the one and the other? And, that the Portugalls issued out
of Lysbone, to possess and inhabit the Islands of Astori, Capo Verde, Medera,
and others; have not amplified and increased Lys bone a great deal more, than
if they had never removed thence to those same Islands?

How beit, true it is, if Colonies must increase their mother; It is very
necessary then they beeneere neighbors: otherwise, through long distance of
place, love waxes cold, and all commerce is cut off clean. And, therefore the
Romans for the space of 600. years, sent not a Colonie out of Italy, and This
chatter here me^cioned, is written at large in the end of this bo^ke.
the first were Carthage and Narbona; as is at large be fore declared, in my
sixth Book Di Ragion di stato, in the ^hapter of Colonies.

And these be the means, wherewith the Romans either through their singular
dexterity, or excellent wits have drawn strange Nations unto their City.
Let us now speak of the means that other Nations also, as well as they, have
used in this case; where it shall not be from the purpose, that we begin at
Religion first, as at the thing, that ought to be the head and spring of all
our works and actions.

CAP. III. Of Religion.
REligion, and the worship of God, is a thing so necessary and of such
importance; as without all doubt, it not only draws a number of people with
it, but also causes much commerce together. And, the Cities that in this kind
excel and flourish in authority and reputacion above others: have also the
better means to increase their power and glory.

Jerusalem (as Pliny writes) was the chiefest and most flourishing City of
all the East, and principally for religion, whereof she was the Metropolitan,
as also of the kingdom. The high priests, the prelates and the Levites, kept
there their residence; there offered they their beasts: there celebrated they
their Sacrifices, and rendered unto God their prayers and peticions; thither
repaired thrice a year, all the people 2. Millions and a half of people in
Jerusalem which was but 4. miles about.
almost of Israel. Insomuch as Josephus reckons, that at the time that Titus
Vespasian laid his siege unto it, there were in the City two millions and a
half of people: a number in truth very strange, that I may not say incredible,
in respect the City was not much above 4 miles about. But, it is written by a
man that might have perfect knowledge of it, and had no cause to lie.

Jeroboam, when he was chosen King of Israel, advisedly considering his
subjects could not live without exercise of religion and use of sacrifice, and
that, if they should repair to Jerusalem to celebrate and make their
sacrifice, his people would soon unite themselves with the Tribe of Judah, and
the house of David: casting religion off, he set up straight Idolatry. For, he
caused to be made two calves of gold, and, sending the^ to the uttermost parts
of his kingdom, turning to his people, he said unto them: Nolite vltra
ascendere in Hierosolimam: Ecce dij tui Israel qui te eduxerunt de terra
Aegypti.

Religion is of such force and might to amplify Cities, to amplify Dominions,
and of such a virtue attractiue: that Jeroboam, to give no place to his
competitor, in this part of allurement and entertainme^t of the company,
impiously brought in Idolatry in place of true religion. And this man was the
first, that, for desire to reign, did openly tread down the law, and all due
worship unto God, and thereof gave a lewd example to posterity: A notable note
in truth, not so much of follye, as of extreme impiety.

Some that arrogat too much wisdom to themselus in matters of state and
government, spare not to say and teach, that, to hold the subjects in due
obedience to their Prince, man's wit and pollicye prevails more, then dyuine
or godly counsel: A speech and an invention in very truth, rather of a
miscreant and caterpiller of a common weal, than of a lover and a fauorer of
the majesty of a state. For, such are the Ruins of Kings, the plague of
Kingdoms; the scandal of Christianitye; the sworn enemies of the church, nay
rather of God, against who^e, to the Imitacion of the ancient Giants, they
build up a new Tower unto Babell; which shall breed and bring unto them, in the
end, confusion and utter Ruin. Qui habitat in coelis irridebit eos, and
dominus sub^annabit eos. Hear ye Princes, what the prophet Isay says of the
counselors of King Pharao. Sapientes consiliarij Pharaonis, dederunt consilium
insipiens: Deceperunt Aegyptu^, angulum populorum eius. Dominus miscuit in
medio eius spiritum vertiginis, and errare fecerunt Aegyptu^ in omni opere suo,
sicut errat ebrius vomens.

If this place would suffer it, I could easily show, that the greatest part,
of the loss of States and ruins of christian Princes, have proceeded of this
accursed variance in religion. Through the which we are disarmed and deprived
of the protection and favor of allmighty God; And, have thrust into the hands
of the Turks and Irreligious people.
(...), the weapons and the scourges of Gods divine Justice against us. But it
suffices here to advise Princes, that tread down the laws of God by that
preposterous and wicked kind of government; that they learn of Jeroboam, and
fear the issue of him, whose acts they imitate: that they may hereafter the
better beware by other men's harms. For, in revenge of his impiety, God raised
up against Nadab his son* the King Baassa, who slew him and all his race. Non
dimisit ne vnam qui^em animam de semine eius, donec deleret came. But let us
return where we left.

Of what strength and power, to make a place populous, Religion proves to be,
and to have the opinion of some famous relic, or notable argument and token
of Gods divine assistance, or some authority in the administration and
government of ecclesiastical causes: Loretto in Italy, Saint Michaell in
France; Guadalup, Monferrato and Compostella in Spain, do all of thme^declare
and manifest it plain; and many places more besides, though solitary and
desert, though sharp and rocky: unto the which, for no respect but for
devotion sake and piety, people daily do resort infinitely in flocks from
the farthest parts that are.

And no marvel, if you look into it thoroughly. For, there is not any thing
in this world of more efficacy and force to allure and draw to it the hearts of
men, then God, which is the Summum bonum. He is carefully desired and sought
for continually of all creatures whatsoever, with soul or without. For, all
regard him as their last end: Light things, seek their Summum bonum above;
heavy things, beneath, within this center of the earth; the heavens, in their
Orbiculary period.
Reuolucions; the Herbs, in their flowers; the Trees in their fruits: Beasts,
in the preseruacion of their kind; and man, in seeking his tranquillity of
mind and everlasting joy.

But, forasmuch as God is of so high a nature, as the sense of man cannot
attain it* so sh^ning bright, as the eye of man's understanding cannot conceive
it every man directly turns him to that place, where he leaves some print of
his power, or declares some sign of his assistance; which ordinarily have been
and are seen in the mountains, or the deserts.

Is not then Rome indebted much for her magnificency Rome.
and greatness, to the blood of the Martyrs? to the relics of Saints? to the
holy consecrated places? and to the supreme authority in beneficial and
spiritual causes? Would she not become a very wilderness, if the opinion of the
holiness of the places* drew not the innumerable sight of people from the
uttermost parts of the Earth? Would she not become a desert, if the
Apostolical seat, and the power of the keys, caused not an inestimable
multitude of people daily to repair unto it, for some buisines or other?

Mylan, a most populous and famous City, shall ever be a witness what praise
and glory, and how much increase it has gotten, by the singular piety and
religious life of that great Cardinal Borromeus. Princes resorted, even from
the uttermost ends of the South, to visit him; Bishops made access from all
parts, to consult with him for his opinion in any controversies that sprang
amongst them; The Clergy likewise harkned unto his counsels; And the
religious people of all nations, held Milan for their country, and the house of
that godly man for their Port, his liberality for their refuge, and his godly
life, for a most fair and clear glass of ecclesiastical discipline for all
men to look into, and to take example by.

I should happily be too long, if I should declare unto you with what singular
praise and comendation, he celebrated every year his Synodes, and with what
magnificency he visited every year his Provinces, how many churches he either
built new, or being old, set in good order; how many he adorned and bewtified:
How many monasteries of men and women he erected; how many well ordered
Colleges of young men, and Seminaries of priests he instituted; how many sorts
of Academies he set up and founded, to the inestimable good of the people; How
many kinds of entertainments and promotions he bestowed upon arts, and on
artificers; And, I should never end, if I should recount the manner and the
means wherewith, by amplifying Gods service and adua^cing of religion, he
increased also the City, and doubled the concourse of people unto Milan.

CAP. IIII. Of Schools and Studies.
THe commodity of learned Schools, is of no small moment to draw people,
especially young men to a City, of whose greatness we are in speech. For,
inasmuch as there be two means for men of wit and courage to rise by to some
degree of honor and reputation in the world, the one by arms* the other by
book: the first is sought for in the field, with the spear and the sword; and
the last, in the Academy, with pen and book.

And, forasmuch as men long for honor, or for profit: And of liberal arts and
sciences, some bring certain wealth to men, and some promotions and
preferments to honorable functions: It is a thing of no small importance; that
in a City there be provided an Academy or such a school, as young men,
desirous to attain to virtue and learning, may thereby have occasion to
repair, rather thither, than to any other place. And that will be effected
soon, if besides the commodity of the school and good teachers, they may
enjoy* convenient immunities and privileges: I say convenient, for that I
would not have impunitie afforded unto faults, nor license given to fall to
vice and wickedness, but honest liberty allowed to them, that they may the more
commodiously and cheerfully attend their studies.

For, to say truth, study is a matter of great labor and travail, both of the
mind and body. And thereupon, our forefathers in times past, called the
Goddess of Arts and Sciences Minerua, because the toyl^ of speculation,
weakeneth the strength, and cutts the synewes: For, an afflicted body
afflicts many times the mind, whereof grows melancholy and sadness. And
therefore it stands with good reason, that all convenient privilege and
liberty be granted unto scholars, that may maintain the^ in contented and
cherefull minds: but no dissolutenes* allowed in any wise unto them* whereof
the Academies in Italy are grown too full. For, the pen is there turned
into a poynado; and the penner, into a flaske and tutch-box for a gunne: the
disputations, in to bloody brawlings; the Schools, into listes; and the
Scholars, into cutters and to hacksters: Honesty is there flowted at and
scorned: and bashfulnes and modesty, accounted a discredit and a shame. (...)
that a young man that were like enough to lead the modest and sober life of a
good student, shall have much to do, if he escape to be undone. But, let us
leave complaints: And yet I must needs say thus much first, no Academy can
flourish aright, without quarrels, cards and dice be banished quite, and clean
cast out.

Francis the first, king of France, because the scholars of the university of
Paris (which in his time were almost an infinite sight) should have commodity
and means to take the air, and to recreate themselves with honest exercises;
he assigned them a great meadow near the City, and the River; where without
let or trouble to them, they might disport and solace themselves at their will
and pleasure. There they fell to wrestling, there they played at the barriers,
at the ball and the foot ball; there did they cast the sled, and leap and
run, with such cheerefullnes and pastime, as it delighted the beholders
thereof, no less then themselves. And so cease by this means, the clatter
and the noise of weapons and of Armor, and also play at cards and dice.

For the same reasons, it is necessary that the City wherein you will found
an Academy, be of an wholesome air, and of a pleasant and delightful^
^cituatio^; where there may be both rivers, fountains, springs, and woods.
For, these things* of themselves without any other help, are apt to delight
and chere up the spirits and minds of Students. Such were in times past,
Athens and Rhodes, where all good arts and learning flourished most above all
other.

Galeazzo Viscount (besides these inuitings and allurements,) being earnestly
desirous to illustrate and appopulate Pauia, was the first that forbad his
subjects, under a great pain, to go any where else to study: which course,
some Princes else of Italy, have since his time followed.

But these are means full of distrust and trouble. The honorable and notable
means to retain subjects in their country, and to draw strangers also home to
it, is to procure them means of honest recreation, to provide them plenty of
victual to maintain to them their priui^edges, to give them occasion to rise
to degrees of honor by their learned exercises, to make account of good wi^ts*
and to reward them well: but above all, to store them with plenty of doctors
and learned men of great fame and reputation.

The great Pompey was not ashamed to enter into the Schools. For, after he had
conquered all the East, he went to the Schools at Rhodes to hear the
professors there dispute.

But, for a far greater reason, Sigismond king of Polonia gave a strait
commandment, that none of his subiect^ should wander abroad out of his
kingdom to study any where else. (And the King of Spain.
Catholic king commanded the like not many years since.) And it was to this
end* that his Subjects should not be infected with the New Doctrine. Sects.
Heresies that began in the time of king Sigismond, and are at the height in
these our days throughout all the Provinces of the North.

CAP. V. Of the place of Justice.
Our lives, our honor, and our substance, are all in the hands of the Judge.
For, love and charity failing in all places; the violence and covetousness of
wicked men does daily the more increase: from whom, if the judges do not
defend us, our business what soever we do, will ill go forward. For this cause,
Cities that have royal audience, Senators, Parliaments or other sorts and
kinds of Courts of Justice, must needs be much frequented; as well for
concourse of people that have cause of Suite unto it, as also for the execution
of justice. For, it cannot be ministered without the help of many presidents* I
mean, Senators, Advocates, Proctors, Sollicitors, Notaries and such like. Nay
more then that (which it greeues me to think on) Expedition of justice cannot
be had in these our days, without ready money. For nothing in the world does
make men run so fast as current money. For, the Adama^t is not of such force to
draw Iron unto it, as gold is to turn the eyes and the minds of men, this
way, and that way and which way they list. And the reason is plain, because
gold, even thorough the very virtue thereof, contains in it all greatness, all
commodities, and all earthly good whatsoever: To be short, he that has money,
has, you may say, all worldly things that are to be had.

In these days, through the plenty of money, which the administration of
justice does carry with it, the Metropolitan Cities, if they may not have the
whole administration of Civil and Criminal causes: they will yet reserve at
least unto them, the chiefest causes, and all appeals. Which is well done for
matter of State (whereof the judicial authority is a principal member; by the
means whereof, they are the patrones and protectors of the life and goods of
the Subject:) But there must be a regard to the proffit that we have poynted at.

This goes current in all places, especially where in judicial causes they do
proceed, according to the common use and course of the laws of the Romans: For,
that course and form is longer, and requires more Ministers than the other.

In England and Scotland, but especially in Turkey, where a short course is
taken in trial of causes, even as it were, at the first sitting of the Judge:
It profits little, to increase the greatness of a City, to hold pleas there.
Forasmuch as difficult and hard causes, are in an after none, as it were,
decided there and ended, if sufficient witness be produced at the hearing of the
cause. These adiornaments and many Terms, are there cut off: And Instruments,
Process, Officers and Mediators, have there no place. Within a few blows
given, they come to the half Sword. So that the time, the expense, and the
number of persons, are far less and much fewer, then the civil Laws do
require.

I speak not these things, to the end I would have causes prolonged, and
suites made eternal. For, they are to long already without more a do: And in
doing justice; delay (which receives no excuse, by color or pretense of
warines and care to commit no error) is very plain Injustice. And therefore in
our City we speak of here, it shall be very necessary and expedient, to have in
it a principal seat of Justice and course of suites and pleas depending in it.

CAP. VI. Of Industry.
FOrasmuch as I have already sufficiently said my mind concerning Industry
and Art, in mine 8. book of the Reason of state, wherein I have at large
discoursed concerning the propagation of States: I will therefore for brevity
sake, refer the gentle reader unto that same chapter*

Because the Chapter above mentioned, is pertinent to the purpose; and happily
the reader hereof may long as much to understand it, as be desirous to read
this book: I have thought good, as well for the coherencie of the matter, as
for the satisfaction of the reader, to insert it here in this place*

Of Industry. CAP. III. LIB. VIII.
THere is not a thing of more importance to increase a state, and to make it
both populous of Inhabitants, and rich of all good things; than the industry
of men, and the multitude of Arts; of which, some are necessary; some
commodious for a civil life; other some for a Pomp and ornament; and other
some for delicacy, wantonness, and entertainment of idle persons; by the means
whereof does follow, con^ourse both of money, and of people, that labor and
work, or trade that is wrought, or minister and supply matter to Laborers and
worke-men; or buy, or sell, or transport from one place to another, the
artificious and cunning parts of the wit and hand of man.

Selim, the first, Emperor of the Turks, to appopulate and ennoble
Constantinople, procured some thousand of excellent Artificers to send unto it,
first from the kings City of Tauris, and after from the great Cayrus. The
Polonians were also of that same mind. For, when they elected Henry Duke of
Angio for their King; amongst other things which they required of him, one was,
that he should bring with him into Polonia, an hundred families of good
Artificers.

And, for as much as Art does contend and strive with Question.
nature, a man may here well ask me, which of these two do most import to
increase a place with multitude of people; Resolution.
the fruitfulnes of the Land, or the Industry of man? The Industry of man
without all doubt. First, for that such things as are wrought by the cunning
hand of man, are of much more, and of far greater price and estimation, then
such things as nature does produce. For as much as nature gives the matter and
the subject, but the Art and Cunning of man, gives an unspeakable variety of
forms and fashions.

Wool, is but a simple fruit and rude of nature: but, Wool.
what a sight of good things, and what variety and sundry forms and fashions,
does Art make thereof? How many and how great commodityes, does the Industrye of
the Clothier draw out of it, who does get it carded, picked, spunne, warpt,
weaued, dyed, fulled, thickt, fashioned, and formed after a thousand ways. And
do not the transportation of it from place to place increase a great proffit
too?

Sylke, is also a simple fruit of nature: But, what varietye Silk.
of most gallant and beautiful clothes does Art frame thereof? It makes the
very excrement of a base and baggage worm, hyghly esteemd with Princes, and
greatly apprizde of Queens; to be short, it makes every man to brave him and
bedeck him in it.

A number of more people far, do live upon their Industrye and labor, then upon
their rents or revenues. Whereof, many Cities in Italy can bear good witness:
but principally Venice, Florence, Genoua, and Mylan, of whose magnificency and
greatness I will not speak here: And yet with the Art and skill to dress Sylke
and Woll, two third parts in a manner, of the Inhabitants amongst them, do live
upon it.

But, to pass out of the Cities unto the provinces: They that have made ^n
exact account of the strength of France, say, the fruits of that kingdom
amount to 15. millions of Crowns a year. And they themselves affirm, that
France has in it more then 15. millions of Souls. But, admit it have no more
then 15. By that reckoning, there should be one Crown a piece for every
Powle. All therest then must needs proceed of Industry. But who is so void
of reason, that he sees not this in all things?

The reuenew gotten out of the Iron Mines, is not the greatest. But of the
proffit that is drawn out of the work, and upon the trade and traffic
thereof, a number of people live and are maintained; such I mean, as dig it
out of the Mine, scowre it, melt it, forge it, cast it, sell it by whole sale,
or by retayle; Such as make engynes thereof for War; Armor for defense and
offense; And an innumerable kind of Iron works and tools besides, for
husbandrye, for building, and for all manner of Arts, for daily use and
business, and for Innumerable necessities of life, that have no less need of
Iron, then of bread: In so much as he that should compare the reuenews the
owners reap of their Iron Mines, with the proffit the Artificers draw out of
the workmanship thereof, and the merchants with their Industry (and hereof
the Princes are mightily enriched also, by the custom that grows upon it)
shall find, that Industry and Art exceeds Nature far.

Compare Marble with the Images, with the Colosses, with the Pillars, the
caruing, and the infinite and curious workmanship, the Artificers do set upon
it: Compare Timber with the Galleys, Galliownes, Ships, and other vessels of
infinite sorts and kinds, both for war, burden, and for pleasure: together
with the carved Images, furnitures of house and other things without count,
that are built and made thereof, with the plane, the chisell, the caruing
tool, and turners wheel: Compare colors with the Pictures, and the price of
the^, with the worth of the colors: And you shall soon perceive how much more
the workma^ship is worth than the matter: And what a number of people are
maintained more upon the means of Art, the^ upon the immediate benefit of
Nature. Zeuxes the excellent paynter, gave his best works away for naught,
because he valued them above any price that could be set upon them.

At a word, such a wealth there is in Art and Industry, that neither the mines
of Silver, nor the mines of gold in Noua Hispania nor in Peru, can be compared
with it. And the custom of the merchandise of Milan, bringes more money to the
king of Spaines cofers, than the Mines of Zagateca and of Salisco.

Italy is a province, in which (as I have before declared) there is not a mine
to speak of, neither of gold nor silver: No more there is in France. And yet
both the one and the other, through the help and means of Art and Industry,
abound exceedingly in money, wealth and Treasure.

Flaunders also has no veins of Metal; And yet, before the troubles there,
while it stood in peace and quietness; for, and in respect of the number and the
sundry and the admirable works there wrought with inestimable Art and
Cunninge; It gave not a jot of ground to the mines of Hungary, nor yet of
Transiluania. There was not a Country throughout all Europe, neither more rich,
nor more inhabited then it: no not one part of Europe, nor of the world, that
had so many good Cities, so great and so well frequented of forreiners and
strangers. So that, not without good cause, by reason of the incomparable
treasure the Emperor Charles drew out of it, some called those countries, the
Emperors Indies.

Nature brings forth her forms in Materia prima: And man's Art and cunning,
works upon the natural compound, a thousand kinds of artificial forms.
For, nature is to the workman, the same, that Materia prima is to the natural
agent. A Prince therefore that will make his City populous, must draw to it all
sorts and kinds of Art and cunning. Which he shall bring to pass, if he bring
out of other countries excellent artificers, and give the^ enterteinment and
convenient seat to dwell upon: if he reckon of good wits, and est^eme of
singular and rare inventions and workmanship: if other while also he do
reward perfection and excellen^y in things of Art and cunning.

But above all things, it is very necessary the Prince suffer not rude and
unwrought things to be carried out of his dominion, Viz: neither Wool, nor
Silk, nor Timber, nor Metal, nor any other such like thing. For, with such
matter, the artificers will also go away. And, upon the trade of unwrought
stuff or matter, live a greater number, than upon the simple matter it self
alone. And the Princes reuenew comes to be much greater, by the exstraction of
the worker, than by the stuff or matter: As for example by the Veluets, then
by the Silks; by the Rash, the^ by the Woolles; by the Linen, then by the
Flax; by the Cordage, than by the Hemp.

The Kings of England, and of France, aware of these things, not many years
since made a law against the carrying out of Woolles out of their dominions. And
the King of Spain did afterward the like. But these laws could not be
observed so strictly by and by. For, these provinces abounding with an infinite
deal of fine Wool, they had not so many workmen, as could over come it all.
And although the Princes before said happily made this law for their own
particular good, because the profit and the custom that ryseth of the clothes,
is far greater then that, which rises of the wool alone: yet notwithstanding,
this law was good for the benefit of the whole country; inasmuch as a number
of people more, do live upon the wrought clothes, then upon the rude and
unwrought Wool, out of which, grows the riches and the greatness of the King.
For, the multitude of people, is it, that makes the Earth fruitful, and it,
that with the hand and with Art, gives a thousand forms to the natural
stuff or matter.

And thus far the 3. chapter of the 8. book of Boterus, of the reason of State.
CAP. VII. Of Privileges.
THe people are in these our days so grievously oppressed and taxed by their
Princes, who are driven to it, partly of covetousness and partly of necessity
that they greedely imbrase the least hope that may be of privilege and
freedo^e whenever it is offered. Whereof the Martes, Faiers and Markets bear
good witness, which are frequented with a mighty concourse of trades men,
merchants and people of all sorts, not for any respect else, but that they are
there free and frank from customs and exactions.

In our days, the Princely City of Naples, through the exemptions and
freedoms granted to the Inhabitants, is most notably increased, both in
buildings and in people: And it would have increased a great deal more, if
through the greeses and suits of the Barons there, whose lands were unfurnished
of people, or for some other peculiar reason; the King of Spain had not
severely forbidden to enlarge it with further buildings.

The Cities in Flaunders, are the most merchantable and the most frequented
Cities for commerce and traffic, that are in all Europe. If you require the
cause: surely, the exemptions from custom is the cheifest cause of it. For,
the merchandise that is brought in, and carried out (and it is infinite that is
brought in, and carried out) paid but a very small custom.

All such as have erected new Cities in times past; to draw concourse of people
to it; have granted of necessity, large Immunities and privileges, at least,
to the first Inhabitants thereof. The like have they done, that have restored
Cities emptied with the plague, consumed with the wars, or afflicted
otherwise with some other scourge of God.

The plague mentioned by Boccas, that languished all Italy near 3. years
together, was so fierce; that from March to July, it took out of the world
about an hundred thousand souls within Florence. It slew also such a number
within Venice, as in a manner it became a desert. So that the Senate, to have it
reinhabited, caused proclamation to be made, that all such as would come
thither with their families, and dwell there two years together, should have
the freedom of the City. The same common weal of Venice, has been also more
than once delivered out of extreme necessity of victuals, by promising
privilege and freedom to such as brought them corn.

CAP. VIII. Of having in her possession some merchandise of moment.
IT will also greatly help to draw people to our City, if she have some
good store of vendible merchandise always in her possession. Which happily may
be, where, through the goodness of the soil, either all of it does grow, or a
great part, or that at least, which is more excellent than other: All, as the
Cloves. Incense. Balsame. Pepper. Sinamom. Salt. Sugar. Wool.
Cloves in the Moluccaes: the Frankincense and sweet smelling goomes in Sabea:
the Balsam in Palestin: Or where a good part of it does grow* as Pepper does in
Calicut, and Sinamom in Zeilan: or where it is most excellent, as Salt is in
Ciprus: Sugers at Madera; and Wool in some Cities of Spain and England. There
is also to be added unto this, the excellency of Art and workmanship; which,
through the quality of the water, or the skill and cunning of the Inhabitants,
or some hidden mystery of theirs, or other such like cause; chances to be in
one place more excellent then another: As the Armor in Damascus and in Scyras;
Armor. Tapestry. Velvet. Cloth of gold ad silver. Ch^a.
Tapestrie in Arras; Rash in Florence; Veluets in Genoa; Cloth of Gold and
Silver in Milan; and Scarlet in Venice.

And to this purpose I cannot pass it over, but I must declare unto you, that
in China, all Arts in a manner, florishe in the highest decree of excellency
that may be, for many reasons, but amongst the rest, chiefly for this, because
the children are bound to follow their fathers mystery and trade. So that,
forasmuch as they are borne, as it were, with a resolute mind to follow their
fathers Art, and the fathers hide not from them any thing, but teach them and
instruct them with all affection, assiduity, diligence and care: workma^ship is
by this means there grown to that fulness of excellency and perfection that
may be possibly desired. As it may be seen in these few works that are
brought out of China, to the Philipinas, from the Philipinas, to Mexico, and
from Mexico, to Siuile. But let us return to our purpose.

There are also some other Cities, masters of some commodities; not because
the goods do grow in their country, or be wrought by their inahbitants; but
because they have the command either of the country, or of the Sea that is
near them: the command of the Country, as Siuil, unto which infinite wealth
and riches are brought from Noua Hispania and Peru: the command of the Sea, as
Lisborne, which by this means draws to it the Pepper of Cocin, and the
^inamom of Zeilan, and other riches of the Indies, which cannot be brought by
Sea, but by them, or under their leave and license.

After the same sort in a manner, Venice, about a four score and ten years
agone, was Lady of the Spyceries. For, before the Portugalls possessed the
Indies, these things being brought by the Red Sea to Suez, and from thence upon
Camells backs to Cayrus, and after that by Nilus, into Alexandria; there were
they bought up by the Venetians, who sent thither their great Argosyes, and
with incredible proffit to them, carried them in a manner, into all the parts
of Europe.

But all this commerce and trade, is now quite turnde to Lisborne; unto which
place, by a new way, the Spiceries, (taken as it were, out of the hands of the
Moors and the Turks) be yearly brought by the Portugalls, and then sold to
the Spaniards, Frenchmen, Englishmen, and to all the Northern parts. This
commerce and trade is of such Importance, as it alone is enough to enrich all
Portugal, and to make it plentiful of all things.

There are some other Cities also, Lords as it were, of much merchandise and
Traffic, by means of their commodious Situation to many Nations, to whom
they serve of warehouse Room and stoare houses; such are Malacca and Ormuze in
the East; Alexandria, Constantinople, Messina, and Genoa in the Mediterranean
Sea, Andwerpe, Amsterdam, Danske, and the Narue in the Northern Seas; and
Franckford and Norimberg in Germany. In which Cities, many and great merchants
exercise their traffic and make their ware houses; unto the which the nations
thereu^to adjoining use to resort to make their provisions of such things as
they need, because they have commodious means for transportation of it. And
this consists in the largenes and the safenes of the Ports; in the
opportunity and fytnesse of the Gulphes and Creekes of the Seas; in the
nauigable Rivers that come into the Cities, or run by or near them; in the
Lakes and the Channels: As also where the ways be plain and safe. King of
Cusco.


And here to the purpose, because I speak of ways, I cannot pass over those
two ways, which the Kings of Cusco (called in their language, Inghe,) in long
process of time cut out throughout their dominion, about 2000* miles in
length, so pleasant, so commodious, so plain, and so level; as they give no
place to the magnificent works of the Romans. For, there shall you see steep
and high hills, laid even with the plain; and deep valleys filled up; and
horrible huge stones cut in pieces: There shall you see the trees, that are
planted here and there, in excellent good order even by a line, yeald both
with their shade, a comfort; and with the charm of the birds, that there
abound in great plenty, a maruailous delight and pleasure to the trauailers
that pass those ways. Neither are there wanting on those ways, many good
Innes for lodging and for entertainment, plentiful of all necessary things;
Nor Palaces and goodly buildings, that in eminent and open places, as it were
to meet you, present you with a pleasant and bewtifull show of their
excellencye and rarenes; nor pleasant Towne^, nor sweet countries, nor a
thousand other delights and pleasures to feed both the eye with variety, and
the mind with admiration at the infinite effects, partly wrought by nature, and
partly by the handy work of man. But, to return to our purpose.

It is a good matter and a great help to a Prince, to know the natural Site
of his country, and with judgment to have an understanding how to amend it by
art and industry. As for example, to defend his Ports with Rampires and with
Bulwarks; to make the Ladyng and vnladyng of Merchandise both quick and easy;
to scour the Seas of Pirates and of Rouers; to make the Rivers nauigable; to
build storehouses apt and large enough to contain great quantity of wares;
and to defend and maintain the ways, as well on the plains, as on the
mountains and hilly places.

In this point, the Kings of China have deserved all praise that may be. For,
they have with an incredible expense and charge, paued with stone all the high
ways of that most famous Kingdom; and have made stone bridges over mighty
great Rivers; And cut in sunder hills and mountains of inestimable height and
craggednes; They have also strewed the plains and bottomes with very fayer
stone: So that a man may there pass either on horse or a foot, as well in the
Winter as in the Summer time, and merchandise may be easily carried too and fro
there, by load, either on Carts, or on Horse, Mules or Camels.

And in this point no doubt, some Princes in Italy are much to blame; in whose
countries in the winter time, horses are bemired in sloughes up to the belly,
and carts are stabled and set fast in the tough durte and mire. So that
cariadges by cart or horse, are thereby very combersome: And a journey that
might be well dispatched in a day, can hardly be performed in three or four.
And the ways are as bad in many parts of France, as in the country of
Poytiers, Santongia, Beaussia, and in Burgondy. But this is no place to censure
so famous Preuinces. And therefore let us proceed.

CAP. IX. Of Dominion and power.
THe greatest means to make a City populous and great; is to have a supreme
Authority and power: For, that draws dependency with it, And dependency,
concourse, and co^course greatness: In the Cities that have jurisdiction and
power over others; as well the public wealth, as the wealth of private men, is
drawn by diverse Arts and means unto them. Thither do repair the
Ambassadors of Princes, and the agents of Dukes and commonweals* there are
the greatest causes heard, as well criminal as civil, and all appeals are
brought to trial there. There are the suits and causes, as well of men of
quality, as of the common weal and common persons debated, and decided.
Thereuenues of the State are there laid up, and there spent out again when
there is need. The richest Citizens of other countries, seek to ally
themselves, and to get an habitation there.

Out of all which causes here recited, there must needs follow an abundance of
wealth and riches; a most strong and forcible bayte to allure and draw forth
the merchants, the artificers, and the people of all sorts that live upon their
labor and their service, to run amain from the furthest coasts, unto it.
After this sort, a City soon increases both in magnificency of building, in
multitude of people, and abundance of wealth, and also grows to the
proportion of a principallity.

The truth whereof, these Cities all of them declare it plain, that either
have had or have any notable jurisdiction in them, Pisa, Siena, Genoa, Luke,
Florence, and Bressia: Whose countries do extend an hundred miles in length,
and forty in breadth, and not only contain the most fruitful and fertile
playnes, but also many rich and goodly valleis, many towns and castles, that
have above a thousand Draudius, sexce^ta milia.
houses in them, and do feed very near three hunand forty thousand persons:
Many free and imperial Cities in Germany are like to these; Norimberg, Lubeck,
and Augusta. And such was Ga^nt in Flanders, that, when the Standard was
aduanst and spread, sent out at once an hundred thousand men of war.

I speak not here of Sparta, Carthage, Athens, Rome, nor Venice; whose
greatness grew as fast as their power: even so far; that, to pass the rest,
Carthage, in the height of her pride and glory, was 24 miles about; Carthage
24 miles about. Rome 50. miles about besides the Suburbs.
and Rome was 50 besides the Suburbs, which were in a manner so infinite and
great, as, on the one side, they extended even to Hostia, and on the other side
in a manner to Ottricoli^; and round about they occupied and possessed a mighty
deal of the country. But, let us proceed. For, to this chapter, belongs
all that shall be said hereafter, of the residence of Princes.

CAP. X. Of the Residency of the Nobility.
Amongst other causes why the Cities of Italy are ordinarily greater then the
Cities of France, or other parts of Europe; it is not of small importance this,
that the gentlemen in Italy do dwell in Cities; and in France, in their
castles, which are for the most part Pallaices, compassed and surrounded with
moates full of water, and fenced with walls and towers sufficient to sustain
a sudden assault.

And although the noble men of Italy, do also themselves magnificently dwell
in the villages, as you may see, about the countries of Florence, Venice, and
Genoa, which are full of buildings, both for the worthynes of the matter, and
the excellency of the workemanshippe, fit to be an ornament and an honor
rather to a Kingedome, than to a City: yet not withstanding, these buildings
generally, are more sumptuous and more common in France, then they are in
Italy. For, the Italion deuideth his expense and endeavors, part in the City,
part in the country, but the greater part he bestows in the City. But, the
Frenchman imployes all that he may, wholly in the country, regarding the City
little or nothing at all. For, an Inn serves his turn when he needs. How
beit, experience teaches the residence of noblemen in Cities, makes them to be
more glorious and more populous; not only by cause they bring their people and
their families unto it, but also more, because a noble man dispendeth much more
largely, through the access of friends unto him, and through the emulation of
others in a City where he is abiding, and visited continually by honorable
personages, then he spends in the country, where he lives amongst the brute
beasts of the field, and conuerseth with plain country people, and goes
apparelled amongst them in plain and simple garments. Gorgeous and gallant
buildings necessarily must also follow, and sundry arts of all sorts and kynds
must needs increase to excellency and full perfection in Cities, where noblemen
do make their residence.

For this cause, the Inga of Peru, that is, the king of Peru, meaning to enoble
and make great his royal City of Cusco: would not only that his Cacichi and
Cusco, a princely City in Peru. Cacicha, viceroy, or Lieuetena^t.
his Barrons should inhabit there; but he did also command that every one of
them should erect and build a Palace therein, for their dwelling; which when
they had performed, each striving with the other, who should erect the fairest;
that City in short time grew with most princely buildings, to be magnificent
and great. Some Dukes of Lombardy, have in our days attempted such a thing.

Tygranes King of Armenia, when he set up the Armenia. Tygranocerta,
great Tygranocerta, enforst a great number of gentlemen and honorable persons,
with others of great wealth and substance, to remove themselves thither
withal their goods whatsoever, sending forth a solemn proclamation withal,
that what goods so ever were not brought thither, and could be found of theirs
else where, should be confiscat clean.

And this is the cause, that Venice in short time, increased Venice.
so notably in her beginning. For, they that fled out of the countries there
adjoining, into the Ila^ds, where Venice is miraculously seated, as it were;
were noble personages and rich, and thither did they carry with them, all
their wealth and substance; with the which, giving themselves, thorough the
opportunity of that Gulf, to navigations and to traffic; they became within
a while, owners and masters of the City, and of the Islands thereunto
adjoining; and with their wealth and riches, they easily enobled the country
with magnificent and gorgeous buildings, and with inestimable Treasure; And, in
the end, brought it to that greatness and power, in which we do both see it,
and admire it at this present.

CAP. XI. Of the Residencie of the Prince.
FOr the very self same causes we have a little before declared, in the
chapter of dominion and power; it does infinitely avail, to the magnifying and
making Cities great and populous, the Residency of the Prince therein;
according to the greatness of whose Empire, she does increase. For, where the
Prince is resident, there also the Parliaments are held; and the supreme place
of justice is there kept; all matters of importance have recourse to that
place; all Princes and all persons of account, Ambassadors of Princes and of
commonweals, and all Agents of Cities that are subject, make their repair
thither; all such as aspire and thirst after offices and honors run thither
amain with emulation and disdain at others; thither are the revenues brought
that appertain unto the state; and there are they disposed out again. By all
which means, Cities must needs increase a pace it may easiely be conceived by
the examples in a manner, of all the Cities of Importance and of name.

The ancientest kyngdo^e, was that of Aegipt, whose Egypt the ancientest
Kingdom. Thebes. Memphis.
Princes kept their Court partly in Thebes, and partly in Memphis. By means
whereof those two Cities grew to a mighty greatness, and to beautiful and
sumptuous buildings; Forasmuch as Thebes (which Homer calls poetically the
City of a hundred gates) Thebes 17. miles about.
was in circuit (as Diodorus writes) 17. miles about, and was beautified with
proud and stately buildings, both public and private, and also full of
people. And Memphis was but little less.

In after ages, other kings succeding (which were called Ptolomei) they kept
their court in Aelxandria, Alexandria.
which did by that means mightily increase in buildings, in people, in
reverent reputation taken of it, and in inestimable wealth and riches; and the
other two Cities afforesaid, that by the ruin of that kingdom, falling first
under the Caldaeians, and afterward under the Persians, were exceedingly
decayed, are now utterly defaced

The Soldanes after that forsaking Alexandria, drew themselves to Cayrus,
which, even for this very cause Cayrus.
became (within a little time to speak of) a City so populous, as it has
gotten, not without good cause, the name of the great Cayrus. But the Soldanes,
because they thought themselves not to be secure, in respect of the innumerable
multitude, if so great a people should perchance rise up in arms against them;
divided it with large and many dicthes filled full of water, so that it might
appear not to be one City alone, but many little towns united and joined
together. At this day it is divided into ^. Draudius.
towns, a little mile distant one from another, whose names are these:
Bulacco, old Cayrus, and new Cayrus. It is said there are 16. thousand, or (as
Ariosto writes) 18. thousand great streets in it, that are every The greatness
of Cayrus.
night shut up with iron gates. It may be 8 miles about, within which compass,
for that these people dwell not so at large, nor so commodiously for ease as we
do, but for the most part within the ground, stowed up as it were, and crowded
and thrust together; there is such an infinite multitude of them, as they cannot
be numbered.

The plague in a manner, never leaves them; but every seaue^th year they
feel it most exceedingly. And, if it dispatch not out of the way above 3.
hundred thousand, they count it but a flea*byt. In the time of the Soldanes,
that City was accounted to stand to health, when as there died not in it above
a thousand persons in a day. And let this suffice that I have said of Cayrus,
which is of so great a fame in the world at this day.

In Assiria, the Kings made their residence in Niniue: Niniue 60. miles about.
whose circuit was 480. furlongs about, which comes to three score miles: And
in length it was, (as Diodorus writes) one hundred and fifty furlongs. The
Suburbs thereof no doubt, must needs besides that, be very large. For the
Scripture affirms that Niniue was great; three days journey to pass it over.
Diodorus writes, there was never Draudius.
any City after that, set up of so great a circuit and of so huge a greatness.
For, the height of the walls was a hundred foot, the breadth able to
contain 3. carts a breast together; Towers in the walls a thousand and five
hundred, in height an hundred foot as Viues says. The residence of the Kings
of Caldaeia, was in Babylon. Babylon was 480* furlongs in circuit.
This City was in compass four hundred and foure-score furlongs; so writes
Herodotus: her walls were wide fifty cubits; high two hundred and more.
Aristotile makes it much greater. For, he writes that it was said in his time,
that when Babylon was taken, it was three days ear one part took knowledge
of the conquest. The people thereof were such a number, as they durst offer
battle unto Cyrus, the greatest and the mightiest King for power that ever was
of Persia. Semiramis did build it; but Nabucodonoser did mightily increase it.
When it was ruinated afterward at the coming in of the Scythians and other
people in those countries, it was reedified by Califfe.
one Bugiafar Emperor of the Saracines, who spent upon it, 18. Millions of
Gold. Giouius writes that even at this day it is greater then Rome, if you
respect the compass of the ancient walls. But there are not only woods to hunt
in, and fields for tilladge, but also orchardes and large gardens in it.

The Kings of Media, made their residence in Ecbatana: Media. Ecbatana.
Persepolis.
the Kings of Persia in Persepolis; of whose greatness there is no other
Argument then conjecture. In our time, the Kings of Persia have made Tauris in
Persia 16. miles in compass.
their residence in Tauris. And, as their Empire is not so great as it has
been, so also neither is their City of the greatest. It is in compass for all
that, about sixteen miles; yea some say more. It is also very long, and has
many gardens in it; but it is without any wall, a thing common, in a manner,
to all the Cities in Perfia.

In Tartaria, and in the Oriental Asia, thorough Tartaria.
the power of those great Princes, are far greater Cities, then in any parts
else in the world. The Tartars hauea^ this day two great Empyres, whereof the
one is of the Mogoria^ Tartars, the other of the Cataians. The Mogorian
Tartars, have in our time Mogora* Cataia.
incredibly enlarged their dominion. For Mahamud their prince, not contented
with his ancient confines; sudued not many years since, in a manner all that
ever lies between Ganges and Indus. The chief City of Mogora, is
Sarmarca^da, which was incredibly enriched Sarmarcanda enriched by Tamberlane.
by the great Tamberlane, with the spoils of all Asia; where, like an horrible
tempest, or deadly raging flood, he threw down to the ground the most ancient
and worthyest Cities, and carried from thence their wealth and riches; And, to
speak of none other, he only took from Damascus eight thousand Camells laden
with rich spoils, and choicest moveable goods. 8000. Camells laden with
spoil. 60. M. Draudius.
This City has been of such greatness and power, that in some ancient reports
we read, it made out forty thousand Horse; But, at this day, it is not of
such magnificency and greatness, through the dominion of the Empire. For, as
after the death of the great Tamberlane, it was suddenly divided into many
parts, by his sons: So is it likewise in our time divided amongst the sons
of Mahamud, who has last of all subdued Cambaia.

And, forasmuch as I have made mention of Cambaia, I must tell you there are in
that kingdom, two The Kingdom of Cambaia. Citor.
memorable Cities; the one is Cambaia, the other is called Citor. Cambaia, is
of such greatness, that it has gotten the name of a province. Some write that
it does contain one hundred and fifty thousand houses; to the which allow as
commonly the manner is, to every house five persons, and it will then come to
little less then eight hundred thousand inhabitants. But, some make it to be
much less. Howbeit, in any sort howsoever, it is a most famous City, the
chiefest of a most rich kingdom, and the Seat of a most mighty King, that
brought to the enterprise against Mahamud King of the Mogorians, five hundred
thousand footmen; and a hundred and fifty thousand horsemen, whereof thirty
thousand were armed after the manner of our men of arms.

Citor is 12. miles about, and is a City so magnificent Citor, a City 12.
miles about,
of buildings, so beautiful for goodly streets, and so full of delights and
pleasures, that few other Cities do come near it; and it is for that cause
called by the people that inhabit there, the shadow of the heavens. It has
been in our time, the City of residency of the Queen Crementina, who by cause
she rebelled from the said King of Cambaia, was with maine force deprived
thereof in the year 1536.

The Emperor of the Cataian Tartars (commonly called the great Chame) deriueth
himself from The great Cham.
the great Chiny, who was the first, that 300. years agone, came out of
Scythia Asiatica with a valiant expedition and power of arms, and made the
name of the Tartars famous. For, he subdued China, and made a great part of
India tributary unto him; he wasted Persia, and made Asia to tremble. The
successors of this great Prince, made their residence in Chiambalu 28. miles in
compass, besides the suburbs.
the City of Chiambalu, a City, no less magnificent, then great. For, it is
said, it is in compass twenty eight miles, besides the suburbs; and* that it
is of such traffyque and commerce, as besides other sorts of Merchandise, there
are every year brought in to it, very near a thousand Carts all laden with
Silk, that come from China. Whereupon a man may guess, both the greatness of
the trades, the wealth of the Merchandise, the variety of the Artificers and
Arts, the multitude of people, the Pomp, the magnificency, the pleasure, and
the bravery of the inhabitants thereof

But let us now come to China. There is not in The kingdom of China.
all the world a Kingdom, (I speak of united and entyer Kingdoms) that is
either greater, or more populous, or more rich, or more abounding in all good
things, or, that has more ages lasted and endured, than that famous and
renowned Kingdom of China. Hereof it grows, that the Cities wherein their
Kings have made their residence, have ever been the greatest that have been in
the world. And those are Suntien, Anchin and Panchin. Three great Cities in
China.


Suntien (by so much as I can learn out of the undoubted testimonies of other
men) is the most ancient, and the chiefest and the Principallest of a certain
Province, which is called Quinsai, by which name they commonly call the same
City. It is Seated as it were in the extremest parts almost of the East, in a
mighty great Lake, that is drawn out of the four Princely Rivers, that fall
there in to it, whereof the greatest is called Polisanga. The Lake is full of
little Islands Polisanga.
which, for the galla^tnes of the Site, the freshnes of the air, and
sweetness of the gardens; are very delightful without measure. His banks are
^apestred with verdure, mantled trees, watered with clear running brooks, and
many springes, and adorned with magnificent and stately Palaces. This Lake, in
his greatest breadth is four leagues wide at the mouth, but in some places not
above two. The City is from the mouth of the river, twenty Suntien a City
in Circuit 100. miles about.
eight miles or there about. In circuit it is an hundred miles about, with
large passages both by water and by land; The streets thereof, are all of
them, paued gallantly with Stone, and beautified with very fayer benches or
seats to sit upon. The Chanells of most account are happily fifteen, with
bridges over them, ^o s^ately to behold, that Ships under all their sails
pass under them. The greatest of these Chanells, cutteth thorough the midst,
as it were, of the City, and is a mile wide, a little more or less, with
four score bridges upon it: A Sight, no question that does exceed all other.

I should be to long, if I should here declare all that might be said of the
greatness of the walks and galleryes, of the magnificent and Stately buildings,
of the beauty of the Streets, of the innumerable multitude of Inhabitants, of
the infinite concourse of Merchandise, of the inestimable number of Ships and
vessels, some in laid with Ebony, and some with Iuory and chekered some with
Gold, and some with Silver, of the incomparable riches that come in thither,
and are carried out continually; to be short, of the delights and pleasures
whereof this City does so exceedingly abound, as it deserves to be called
proud Suntien, and yet the other two Cities, Panchin and An^hin, are never a
whitlesse then this is.

But, forasmuch as we have made mention of China, I think it not a miss in
this place to remember the greatness of some other of her Cities, according to
the relations we receive in these days. Cantan Cantan.
then (which is the most known, though not the greatest) the Portugalles that
have had much commerce thither these many years, confess it is greater then
Lisborne, which yet is the greatest City that is in Europe, except
Constantinople and Paris. Sanchieo, Sanchieo.
is said to be three times greater then Siuile. So that ^ith Siuile is six
miles in compass; Sanchieo must needs be eighteen miles about* They also
say, Vechieo exceedes them both in greatness. Chinchieo, Vechieo. Chinchieo.
although it be of the meaner sort, the fathers of the order of Saint
Augustine, who saw it, do judge that City to contain three*score and ten
thousand houses.

These things I here deliver, ought to be not thought by any man to be
incredible. For, (beside that, that Marcus Polus in his relations affirms far
greater things) these things I speak, are in these days approved to be most
true by the intelligences we do receive continually both of seculer and
religious persons, as also by all the nation of the Portugalles. So as he that
will deny it, shall show himself a fool. But for the satisfaction of the
reader, I will not spare to search out the very reasons, how it comes to pass
that China is so populous and full of such admirable Cities*

Let us then suppose, that, either by the goodness of the Heavens, or by the
secret Influence of the stars to us unknown, or for some other reasons else
what soever they be; that part of the world that is oriental unto us, has
more virtue, I know not what, in the producing of things, than the west.
Hereof it proceeds, that a number of excellent things, grow in these happy
countries, of which others are utterly destitute and void: As Sinamome, The
Indian Nut is called Cocus and is full of milk, and said to be restora^e.
Nutme^ges, Cloves, Pepper, Camph^re, Saunders, Incense, ^ Aloes, the Indian
Nuts, and such other like. Moreover, the things that are common unto both, to
the East, I say, and the West; they are generally much more perfect in the
East, than the West; as for proof thereof, the Pearls of the West, in
comparison of the East, are as it were, lead to silver. And likewise the Bezaar
that is brought from the Indies, is a great deal better far, than the Bezaar
that comes from Peru.

Now, Chyna comes the nearest to the East of any part of the world. And
therefore does she enjoy all those perfections that are attributed to the
East. And first, the Air (which, of all things imports the life of man so
much as nothing more) is very temperat; whereunto the neerenes of the Sea,
adds a great help, which imbraceth as it were, with arms cast abroad, a
great part thereof* and looks it in the face with a cheerful aspect, and
with a thousand creekes and gulfes penetrateth far, within the very Province.

Next that: The country is for the most part plain, and of nature very apt to
produce not only things necessary for the use and sustenance of the life of
man; but also all sorts of dainty things for man's delight and pleasure. The
Hills and Mountains are perpetually arrayed with trees of all sorts, some
wild, and some fruitful: The plains manured, tilled and sown with rise,
barley, wheat, peaze and beans: The Gardens, besides our common sorts of
fruits, do yeald most sweet Mellons, most delicat Plommes, most excellent
Figs, Pomecitrons, and Orenges of diverse forms and excellent taste.

They have also an herb, out of which they press a delicate juice, which
serves them for drink in stead of wine. It also preserues their health, and
frees them from all those evils, that the immoderat use of wine does breed
unto us.

They also abound in cattle, in sheep, in foul, in dear, in wool, in rich
Skins, Cotton, Linen, and in infinite store of Sylke. There are Mines of Gold
and Silver, and of excellent iron. There are most precious pearls. There is
abundance of Sugar, Honny, Rewbarbe, Camphire, red Lead, Woad, Musk, and
Aloes; and the Porcelan earth is known no where but there.

More then this: The Rivers and the waters of all sorts, run gallantly
through all those countries, with an unspeakable profit and commodity for
navigations and for tillage. And, the waters are as plentiful of fish, as the
land is of fruits. For, the Rivers and the Seas yield thereof an infinite
abundance.

Unto this so great a fertility and yield both of the land and water, there is
joined an incredible culture of both these elements. And that proceeds out of
two causes, whereof the one depends upon the inestimable multitude of the
inhabitants (for it is thought that China does conteyne more then threescore
Millions of Souls,) and the other consists in the extreme diligence and
pains that is taken, as well of private persons in the tillage of their grounds,
and well husbanding their farms; as also of Magistrates, that suffer not a man
to lead an idle life at home. So that there is not a little scratt of ground
that is not husbandly and very well manured.

Now, for their Mechanical Arts, should I commit them here to Silence? When
as there is not a country in the world, where they do more flourish both for
variety and for excellency of skill and workmanship? Which proceeds also
out of two causes, whereof the one I have commended before, in that idleness is
every where forbidden there, and every man compeld to work; no man suffered to
be idle, no not the blind, nor the lame, nor the maimed, if they be not
altogether impotent and weak. And the women also, by a law of Vitei King Vitei.
of China, are bound to exercise their fathers trades and Arts, and how noble
or how great soever they be, they must at least attend their distaffe and their
needell. The other cause is, that the sons must of necessity follow their
fathers mysteries. So that hereupon it comes, that Artificers are infinite; and
that children, as well boys as gyrles, even in their infancy, can skill to
work, and that Arts are brought unto most excellent and high perfection.

They suffer not any thing to go to loss. With the dong of the bus^es and
oxen, and other cattle, they use to feed fish; and of the bones of dogs and
other beasts, they make many and diverse carved and engraven works, as we do
make of Iuory. Of rags and cloutes, they make paper; To be short, such is the
plenty and variety of the fruits of the earth, and of man's industry and
labor, as they have no need of foreign help to bring them any thing: For,
they give away a great quantite of their own, to foreign countries. And, (to
speak of no things else) the quantity of Silk that is carried out of China,
is almost not credible. A thousand quintals of silk are yearly carried thence
for the Portugalls Indies; for the Philippinaes they lade out fifteen ships.
There are carried out to Giapan an inestimable sum; and unto C^taia as great
a quantity as you may guess by that we have before declared; is yearly carried
thence to Chiambalu. And they sell their works and Chiambalu.
their labors (by reason of the infinite stoare that is made) so cheap and at
so easy price, as the Merchants of Noua Hispania that trade unto the
Philippinaes to make their martes (unto which place the Chinaes themselves do
traffic) do wonder at it much. By means whereof, the traffic with the
Philippinaes, falls out to be rather hurtful then profitable unto the King of
Spain. For, the benefit of the cheapnes of things, is it, that makes the
people of Mexico (who heretofore have used to fetch their commodities from
Spain) to fetch them at the Philippinaes. But the King of Spain, for the
desire he has to win unto familiarity and love, and by that means to draw
to our christian faith and to the bosom of the catholic church, those people
that are wrapped in the horrible darkness of idolatry; esteems not a whit of
his loss, so he may gain their souls to God.

By these things I have declared, it appears plain, that China has the
means, partly by the benefit of Nature, and partly by the industry and Art of
man, to sustain an infinite sight of people. And that for that cause, it is
credible enough, that it becomes so populous a country as has been said. And
I affirm this much more unto it, that it is necessary it should be so, for
two reasons; the one, for that it is not lawful for the King of China to make
war to get new countries, but only to defend his own, and thereupon it must
ensue, that he enjoys in a manner, a perpetual peace. And what is there more
to be desired or wished, than peace? What thing can be more profitable than
peace? My other reason is, for that it is not lawful for any of the Chinaes to
go out of their country, without leave or license of the Magistrates. So that,
the number of persons continually increasing, and abiding still at home; it is
of necessity, that the number of people do become inestimable, and of
consequence, the Cities exceeding great, the towns infinite, and that China it
self should rather in a manner, be but one body and but one City.

To say the truth, we Italians do flatter our selves too much, and do admire
too partially those things that do concern our selves; especially when we will
prefer Italy, and her Cities beyond all therest in the world. The shape and
figure of Italy, is long and streyte, divided withal in the midst with the
Apenine Hills. And the pancitie and rarenes of Nauigable Rivers, does not bear
it, that there can be very great and populous Cities in it. I will not spare to
say, that her rivers are but little brooks in comparison of Ganges, Menan,
Meacon, and the rest: And that the Tyrrhenian and the Adriatic Seas are but
gullets in respect of the Ocean. And of consequence our trade and traffic is
but poor, in respect of the Marts and fayres of Cantan, Malacca, Calicut,
Ormuze, Lisbon, Civil, and other Cities that bound upon the Ocean.

Let us add to these aforesaid, that the difference and enmity between the
Mahumetanes and us, depriueth us in a manner of the commerce of Africa, and of
the most part of the trade of the Leuant. Again, the chiefest parts of Italy;
that is, the Kingdom of Naples, and the Dukedom of Milan, are subject to the
King of Spain. The other States are mean, and mean also the chiefest of
their Cities: But, it is time we now return from whence we have digressed
long.

The residence of Princes is so powerful and so mighty, as it alone is
sufficient enough to set up and form a City at a trice. In Aethiop (Francis
Aluarez Aethiop.
writes) there is not a town (although the country be very large) that
contains above a thousand and six hundred houses, and that of this greatness
there are but few. For all that, the King (called by them the great Nego, and
falsely by us the The great Nego.
Prete John) who has no setteled residence; represents with his only court,
a mighty great City; forasmuch as wheresoever he be, he shadoweth with an
innumerable sight of tents and pauilions, many miles of the country.

In Asia, the Cities of account, have been all of Asia.
them, the Seats of Princes; Damascus, Antioche, Angori, Trebysonda, Bursia,
and Jerusalem. But let us pass over into Europe. The translating of the
imperial Seat, diminished the glory of Rome, and made Constantinople great,
which is mainteyned in her greatness and Majesty with the reside^ce of the great
Turk.

This City, stands in the fairest, the best, and Constantinople.
most commodious Site that is in the world. It is Seated in Europe; but Asia
is not from it above four hundred pases. It commands two Seas, the Euxin
and Propontis. The Euxin Sea, compasses Mare Euxinum. Propontis.
two thousand and seven hundred miles. The Propontis stretches more then two
hundred miles, even till it join with the Archipelagus.

The weather cannot be so foul, nor so stormy, Archipelagus.
nor so blustering, as it can hinder in a manner, the ships from coming with
their goods to that same magnificent and gallant City in either of those two
Seas. Is this City had a royal and a Nauigable River; it would lack nothing.
It is thirteen Constantinople 1^. miles about.
miles about; and this circuit contains about a seven hundred thousand
persons. But, the plague makes a mighty slaughter every third year amongst
them. But to say truth, seldom or never is that Plague every third year in
Constantinople.
City free of the plague. And hereupon is offered a good matter worthy to be
considered, how it comes to pass, that, that same scourge, touches it so
notably every third year like a Tertian Ague Plague every seventh year in
Cayrus.
(as in Cayrus, it comes every seventh) especially because that City is
seated in a most healthful place. But I will put off this speculation, to
another time, or leave it to be discussed, by wits more exercised therein
than mine.

There are within Constantinople seven Hills; near the Sea side toward the
East, there is the Serraglio of the great Turk, whose walls are in compass
three miles; There is an Arsenall consisting of more then one hundred and
thirty Arches to lay their ships in. To conclude, the City is for the beawty
of the Site, for the opportunity of the Ports, for the commodity of the Sea,
for the multitude of the Inhabitants, for the greatness of the traffic, for
the residence of the great Turk, so conspicuous and so gallant; as without
doubt, amongst the Cities of Europe, the chiefest place is due to it. For the
very Court alone of that Prince, mainteineth of horsemen and of footmen, not
less than thirty thousand very well appointed.

In Africa, Algier. lately become the Metropolitan of a great State, is now by
that means Tremise.
grown very populous. Tremise, when it flourished, Tunis.
contained a sixteen thousand households. Tunis, nine thousand; Marocco, an
hundred thousand; Morocco.
Fess, which is at this day the seat of the mighty Fess.
King of Africa, contains threescore and five thousand.

Amongst the Kingdoms of Christendom (I speak of the united, and of one
body) the greatest, the richest and most populous is France. For, it France.
contains twenty seven thousand parishes, including Paris in them. And the
country has above fifteen Millions of people in it. It is also so fertile,
through the benefit of Nature, so rich, through the industry of the people, as
it enuieth not any other country. The residence of the Kings of so mighty a
Kingdom, has for a long time hitherto been kept at Paris. By the means
whereof, Paris is become Paris 12. miles in compass.
the greatest City of Christendom. It is in compass twelve miles, and
contains therein about four hundred and fifty thousand persons, and feeds
them with such plenty of victuals, and with such abundance Paris contains
450 M. persons.
of all delicate and dainty things, as he that has not seen it, cannot by any
means imagine it.

The kingdoms of England, of Naples, of Portugal, England. Naples etc.
and of Bo^mia; The Earldom of Flaunders, and the Dukedom of Milan, are
States, in a manner, a like of greatness and of power. So that the Cities,
wherein the Princes of those same kingdoms have at any time made their
residence, have been in a manner London*
also a like, as London, Naples, Lisbon, Prage, Milan, and Gaunt, which have
each of them a sonder, more or less an hundred and threescore thousand persons
in them. But, Lisbon is in deed somewhat larger Lisbon*
then the rest, by means of the commerce and traffic of Aethiop, India, and
Brasil; as likewise London London.
is, by means of the wars and troubles in the low countries. And Naples is
within these thirty years Naples.
grown as great again as it was.

In Spain, there is not a City of any such greatness, Spain.
partly because it has been till now of late, divided into diverse little
kingdoms; and partly, because through want of nauigable Rivers, it cannot
bring so great a quantity of food and victual into one place, as might
maintain therein an extraordinary number of people. The Cities of most
magnificencie, and of greatest reputation, are those, where the ancient Kings
and Princes held their Seats; as Barcelon, Saragosa, Valenza, Cardoua, Toledo,
Burges, Leon, all honorable Cities and populous enough, but yet such as pass
not the second rank of the Cities of Italy.

Over and besides the rest, there is Granada, where Granada.
a long time the Moors have Reigned, and adorned the same with many rich and
goodly buildings. It is situated, part upon the Hills, and part upon the
plain. The hilly part, consists of three Hills divided each from other. It
abounds of water of all sorts, with the which, is watered a great part of
her pleasant and goodly country, which is by the means thereof, so well
inhabited and manured, as none can be more.

Siuil is increased mightily since the discovery of Siuilia 6. miles about.
the new world. For, thither come the fleetes that bring unto them yearly so
much treasure as cannot be esteemed. It is in compass about six miles; It
contains four score thousand persons and above. It is situated on the left
shore of the River Betis, which otherwise some call Guadalchilir. It is
bewtified with fair and goodly churches, and with magnificent and gorgeous
Palaces and buildings. The country there about it, is as fertile, as it is
pleasant.

Vagliadolid is not a City; but for all that, it may compare with the noblest
Cities in Spain; And that, Uagliadoid.
by reason of the residence the King of Spain has long time made there in it:
As Madrid is at this day much increased and continually increases by the
Madrid.
Court that King Phillip keeps there: Which is of such efficacy and power,
as although the country be neither plentiful nor pleasant, it does yet draw
such a number of people to it, as it has made that place, of a village, one of
the most populous places now of Spain.

Cracouium and Vilna are, the most popuous Cities of Polonia. The reason is,
because Cracouium was Polonia. Cracouium. Vilna.
the seat of the Duke of Polonia, and Vilna the seat of the great Duke of
Lituania.

In the Empire of the Muscouites, there are three great and famous Cities;
Valadomere, the great Nouoguardia, and Muscouia; which have gotten their
reputation, because they have been all three of them the seats of great Dukes,
and Princes of great dominions. The most renowned of them at this day is
Muscouia, thorough the residence the Duke holds there. It is in length five
miles, but not so wide. There is unto it a very great castle that serves for a
Moscouia.
Court and Palace to that same Prince; and it is so populous, that some have
reckoned it amongst the four Cities of the first and chiefest ranckes of
Europe; Moscouia, Constantinople, Paris and Lisbon the chiefest Cities in
Europe. Scicilia. Siracusa.
which, to their judgments are, Moscouia it self, Constantinople, Paris, and
Lisbon.

In Scicilia, in ancient times past, the greatest City there, was Siracusa,
which as Cicero does write, consisted of four parts divided a sunder, which
might be said to be four Cities. And, the cause of her greatness was, the
residence of the Kings, or of the Tyrants (as they were termed in times past)
call them as you will. But, when the commerce with the Africanes did fail them
afterward, through the deluge of the Infidels; and that the royal seat was
removed to Palermo; Palermo did then increase apase her glory, and Siracusa did
loose as fast her luster.

Palermo is a City, equal to the Cities of the second Palermo.
rank of Italy; beautified with rich temples and magnificent Palaces, with
diverse relics and goodly buildings made by the Saracines. But, two things
chiefly made of late, are worthyest to be noted. The one, is the street made
throughout the whole City, which, for streyghtnes, breadth, length, and
beautifulnes of buildings is such, as I know not in what City of Italy a man
should find the like. The other is the Peer, edified with an inestimable
expense and charge; by the benefit whereof, the City has a very large and
spacious Port a work in truth worthy of the Romans magnanimity.

But, what mean I to wander thorough other parts of the world, to show how
much it does import the greatness of a City, the residence and a bode of a
Prince therein? Rome, whose Majesty exceeded all the world, would she not be
more like a desert, then a City, if the Pope held not his residence therein?
if the Pope, with the greatness of his court, and with the concourse of
Ambassadors, of Prelates, and of Princes did not ennoble it and make it great?
If with an infinite number of people, that serve both him and his ministers, he
did not replenish and fill the City? If with magnificent buildings, Conduits,
Fountains and streets, it were not gloriously adorned? If amongst so many
rich and stately works, belonging as well to Gods glory, as the service of the
common weal, he spent not there a great part of the revenues of the church?
And, in a word, if with all these means, he did not draw and entertain
withal, such a number of Merchants, trades men, Shopkeepers, Artificers,
workmen, and such a multitude of people, for labor and for service?

OF THE CAUSES OF the greatness and magnificency of Cities. THE THIRD BOOK.
CAP. I. Whether it be expedient for a City, to have few or many Citizens.
THe ancient Founders of Cities, considering that laws and Civil discipline
could not be easily conserved and kept, where a mighty multitude of people
swarmed. (For, multitudes do breed and bring confusion) they lymited the
number of Citizens, beyond which, they supposed the form and order of
government they sought to hold within their Cities, could not be else
maintained? Such were Licurgus, Solon, and Aristotle. But, the Romans,
supposing power (without which, a City cannot be long maintained) consists
for the most part in the multitude of people, endeavored all the ways and
means they might, to make their country great, and to replenish the same with
store of people, as we have before, and more at full declared in our books
della ragion distato.

If the world would be governed by reason, and all men would content them
selves with that, which justly does belong unto them: Happily the judgment of
the ancient law makers were worthy to be embraced. But, experience shows,
through the corruption of humane nature, that force preuailes above reason, and
arms above laws; and teaches us besides, the opinion of the Romans must be
preferred before the Grecians; Inasmuch as we see the Athenians and the
Lacedaemonians (not to speak of other commonweals of the Graecians) came to
present ruin, upon a very small discomfiture and loss of a thousand Draudius
17. thousand.
and seven hundredth Citizens or little more. where, on the other side, the
Roma^es triumphed in the end though many times they lost an infinite number of
their people in their attemptes and enterprises. For it is clear, more Roma^es
perished in the wars they had against Pyrrhus, the Carthaginensians,
Numantians, Viriatus, Sertorius, and others, than fell without comparison of
all their enemies. And yet for all that, they rested always conquerors by
means of their vnexhausted multitude* with the which, supplying their loss
from time to time, they overcame their enemies as much, though they were strong
and fyerce, as with their fortitude and strength. In these former books, I
have sufficiently declared the ways and means whereby a City may increase to
that magnificency and greatness that is to be desired. So that I have no further
to speak thereunto, but only to propound one thing more that I have thought
upon, not, for the necessity so much of the matter, as that, because I think
it will be an ornament unto the work, and give a very good light unto it. And
therefore let us now consider.

CAP. II. What the reason is, that Cities once grown to a greatness, increase
not onward according to that proportion.
LEt no man think, the ways and means aforesaid, or any other that may be
any way devised, can work or effect it that a City may go on in increase,
without ceassing. And therefore it is in truth a thing worth the consideration,
how it comes to pass, that Cities grown to a point of greatness and power,
pass no further; but either stand at that stay, or else return back again.
Let us take for our example Rome.

Rome at her beginning, when she was founded and built by Romulus (as Dionisius
Halicarnasse^s writes) was able to make out 3300. fit men for the wars.
Romulus reigned thirty seven years, with in the compass of which time, the
City was increased even to 47000. persons fit to bear arms. About 150.
years after the death of Romulus, in the time of Seruius Tullius, there were
numbered in Rome 80. thousand persons fit for arms. The number in the end, by
little and little grew to 450. thousand.

My question therefore is, how it comes to pass, that from three thousand and
three hundred men of war, the people of Rome grew to 450. thousand; and from
450. thousand, they went no further: And in like manner, sith it is 400.
years, since Milan and Venice made as many people as they do at this day; How
it does also come to pass, that the multiplycation goes not onward accordingly.

Some answer, the cause hereof, is, the plagues, the wars, the dearthes and
other such like causes. But this gives no satisfaction. For, plagues have ever
been: And, wars have been more common and more bloody in former times, than
now. For, in those days they came to hand strokes by and by, and to a maine
pictht battle in the field, where there were within three or four hours
more people slain, than are in these days in many years. For, war is now
drawn out of the field to the walls, and the mattock and the spade, are now
more used than the sword. The world besides, was never without alteration and
change of plenty and of dearth, of health, and of plagues. Whereof I shall not
need to bring examples, because the histories are full.

Now, if Cities with all these accidents and chances begun at first with few
people, increase to a great number of inhabitants; How comes it that
proportionably, they do not increase accordingly?

Some others say, it is, because God the governor of all things, does so
dispose, no man does doubt of that. But, forasmuch as the infinite wisdom of
God, in the administration and the government of nature, works secondary
causes: My question is, with what means that eternal providence makes
little, to multiply; and much, to stand at a stay, and go no further.

Now, to answer this propounded question; I say, the self same question may
be also made of all mankind: Forasmuch as within the compass of three
thousand years, it multiplied in such sort from one man and one woman, as the
provinces of the whole continent, and the Islands of the Seas, were full of
people: Whence it does proceed, that from those three thousand years to this
day, this multiplycation has not exceeded further.

Now, that I may the better resolve this doubt; I purpose so to answer it; As,
mine answer, may not only serve for the Cities, but also for the universal
theater of the world.

I say then, that the augmentation of Cities, proceeds partly out of the
virtue generatiue of men, and partly out of the virtue nutritive of the Cities.
The virtue generatiue, is without doubt to this day, the very same, or at
least, such as it was before three thousand yeaeres were past. Forasmuch as men
are at this day as apt for generation, as they were in the times of David or of
Moses. So that if there were no other impediment or let therein, the
propagation of man kind, would increase without end, and the augmentation of
Cities would be without term. And, if it do not increase in infinite; I must
needs say, it proceeds of the defect of nutriment and sustenance sufficient
for it.

Now, nutriment and victuals are gotten, either out of the Territories
belonging to the City, or out of foreign cou^tryes. To have a City great and
populous; It is necessary that victuals may be brought from far unto it. And
that victuals may be brought from remote and foreign parts unto it; It
behooues that her virtue attractiue be of such power and strength* as it be
able to overcome the hardness and the sharpnes of the regions, the height of the
mountains, the descent of the valleies, the swiftnes of the Rivers, the rage
of the Seas, the dangers of the Pirates, the uncertainty of the winds, the
greatness of the charge, the evil passage of the ways, the envy of the
bordering neighbors, the hatred of enemies, the emulation of co^petitors, the
length of the time that is required for transportation, the dearthes and
necessities of the places from whence they must be brought, the natural
dissension of nations, the contrariety of sects and opinions in religion, and
other such like things, all which increase as he people increase and the
affairs of the City. To conclude, that it grow to be so mighty and so great,
as it can overcome all the diligence and all the industry that man can use
whatsoever. For, how shall Merchants be peeswaded they can bring corn, for
example, out of the Indies or Cataia to Ro^e, or the Romans expect to have it
thence? But, admit that either of them could so persuade themselves; who can
yet assure them, the seasons will be always good for corn, that the people
stand to peace and quietness, that the passages be open, and the ways be safe?
Or what form, or what course can be taken to bring provision to Rome, by so
long a way by land, in such sort and manner as the conductors thereof may be
able to endure the travail and to wyeld the charge thereof? Now, any one of
these impediments or lettes, without adding more, to ouertwhart and cross it
more; is enough to dissipate and scatter quite a sonder the people of a City
destitute of help and subject to so many accidents and chances. Even one
dearth one famine, one violence of war, one interruption or stay of trade
and traffic; one common loss to the Merchants, or other such like accident,
will make (as the winter does the Swallows) the people to seek an other
country.

The ordinary greatness of a City, consists in these terms, with which it
can hardly be contented. For, the greatness that depends upon remote causes or
hard means cannot long endure. For every man will seek his commodity and
ease, where he may find it best. We must also add to these things aforesaid,
that great ^ities are more subject unto dearthes then the little For, they
need more sustenance and victualles. The plague also, afflicts them more
sorely and more often, with greater loss of people. And to speak in a word,
great Cities are subject to all the difficulties and hardness we have before
declared, because they need a great deal more.

So that, although men were as apt to generation in the height and pride of the
Romans greatness, as in the first beginning thereof: Yet for all that, the
people increased not proportionably. For, the virtue nutritive of that City,
had no power to go further. So that in success of time, the Inhabitants
finding much want, and less means to supply their lack of victual, either
forbear to marry, or, if they did marry, their children oppressed with penury,
their parents affording them no relief, fled their country, and sought abroad
for better fortune. To the which inconvenience, the Romans willing to provide
a remedy; they made choice of a number of poor Citizens, and sent them into
Colonies; where, like trees transplanted, they might have more room to better
themselves both in condition and commodity, and by that means increase and
multiply the faster.

By the self same reason, man kind grown to a certain complete number,
has grown no further. And it is three thousand years agone and more, that
the world was replenished as full with people, as it is at this present. For,
the fruits of the earth, and the plenty of victual, does not suffice to feed
a greater number. In Mesopotamia, man kind did first begin to propagate.
From thence by success of time, it increased and spread apase daily both far
and near. And having replenished the firm land, they transported themselves
into the Islands of the Sea; and so from our countries, they have at length
arrived by little and little, to the countries we call the new world. And what
is there under the Sun, that does make man, with more horrible effusion of
blood to fight for, and with more cruelty, than the earth, food, and commodity
of habitacion? The Sueuians accounted it an honor and a glory to them, to
bring their co^fines by many hundred miles into a wast and wilderness. In the
new world, in the I Will of Saint Dominick and the borders thereabout, the people
chase and hunt men, as we do dear and hares. The like do many of the people
of Brasill, especially they, whom we call Aymurij: Who tear in pieces and
devour young boys and young gyrles alive, and open the bellies of the women
great with child; And take the creatures out, and in the presence and sight of
the fathers themselves, eat them roasted upon the coals; a most horrible
thing to hear, much more to see it.

The people of Ghynea for the most part, live so poor and needy, as they daily
sell their own children for very vile price to the Moors, who carry them into
Barbary, and to the Portugals, who send them to their Islands, or sell them to
the Castiglians for the new world. The people of Peru do the like, who for
little more than nothing, give their children to them will have them: which
proceeds of misery, and of the impotency they have to bring them up, and to
maintain them. The Tartarians, and the Arabians, live upon stealth and rapine.
The Nasomonj, and the Cafrj; the most savage and barbarous people of all
Aethyop, live upon the spoils of others Shipwrackes, as the Portugalls have
many times felt.

It is also a thing known to all men, how often the French, the Dutche, the
Goths, the Hunnes, the Auarj, the Tartars, and diverse other nations, unable,
through their infinite multitude of people to live in their ownes countries,
have left their confines, and possessed themselves with other men's countries,
to the utter ruin and destruction of the inhabitants therein. Hence it came to
pass, that within few Ages, all the Provinces of Europe and of Asia, became
possessed in a manner, of strange people, fled and run out of their countries
and habitations, either for the mighty multitude of people their country
could not sustain; or for desire they had to lead a more commodiouse and easy
life else where, in greater plenty of good things.

The multitude again of thieves and murderers, whence does it I pray you, for
the most part grow, but of necessity and want? differences, Suites, and
quarelles, whence do they proceed, but out of the streightnes and the scantnes
of confines? bou^daries, ditches, hedges, and enclosures, which men make about
their Farms and Manors: watchmen of the viniardes and of ripe fruits, Gates,
Locks, Bolltes, and Mastiues kept about the house; what do they argue else*
but that the world is hard, apd either ministers not sufficient to our
necessities, or satisfies not our greedy covetous desires? And what shall I
rememberarmes, of so many kinds, and of so cruel sorts? what shall I speak
of continual wars both on Sea and Land, that brings all things unto utter
ruin? what of fortes on passages? what of Garrysons, Bulwarks and Munition?

Neither does this Lake of mischeifes contain all. For, I must add to these,
the barrennes of Soyles, the Scarcity and dearthes of victual, the evil
influence of the air, the contagiouse and dangerous diseazes, the Plagues,
the Earthquakes, the Inundacions both of Seas and Rivers, and such other
accidents which destroy and overthrow, now a City, now a kingdom, now a
people, now some other thing, and are the let and stay, that the number of men
cannot increase and grow immoderatly.

CAP. III. Of the Causes that do concern the Magnificency and greatness of a
City.
IT now only rests, having brought our City to that dignity and greatness,
which the condition of the Site and other circumstances afford unto it: that
we labor to conserve, to maintain and uphold the dignity and greatness of the
same. And, to speak all at a word; these helps may very well serve to do it:
that is Justice, Peace, and Plenty. For, Justice assures every man his own.
Peace causes tillage, trade and Arts to flourish. And, Plenty of food and
victual, susteineth the life of man with ease and much contentment to him.
And, the people embrace nothing more gladly, than plenty of corn. To conclude,
all those things that cause the greatness of a City, are also fit to conserve
the same. For, the causes, as well of the production of things, as also of the
conservation of them, are ever all one and the same, whatsoever they be.

JOHANNES BOTERVS IN HIS SIXTH BOOK del ragione di stato.

CAP. IIII. Of Colonies.
THe Romans, to keep their enemies under, and to hold the stout and warlike
people down; In the beginning of their Empire, they founded and set up
Colonies in their confines: where, placing a good number of their own
Citizens, or of the Latins their fellows and companions (on whom they
bestowed the lands and goods they got and took from their enemies by war)
they did the better secure themselves from sudden assaults.

Here a question may very well be made, which is the greater safety of the
twain, the Colonie or the Fortress? But without doubt, the Colonie is the
better. For, that includes a Fortress, but not e contra.

The Romans, (expert men in government of States) used Colonies a great deal
more, and took more good by Colonies, than they did by Fortresses. But in our
time, Fortes are a great deal more in use, then Colonies. For, they are more
easily prepared, and happily of more present good. For, Colonies require much
dexterity and wisdom in the establishing and setting them in order. And, the
benefit and good that proceeds of them (for they cannot grow to maturity and
perfection without some time) is not had by and by. Howbeit, Colonies are much
much more safe; and almost a perpetual profit is ever in them; As Septa and
Tanger can witness the truth hereof; Towns of much importance to the Portugalls
in the Coast of Mauritania; which, reduced to the form of Colonies, have
valiantly fought against the power and force of Seriffo, and the Barbarians.

Calys witnesses as much, an English Colonie, brought thither by Edward the
third. An. Dom. 1347. And it was the last Town that country lost in the firm
land.

It is no wisdom yet, to set up Colonies far off, in places too remote from
your state and government. For, in that case, it being no easy thing for you
to succor them; they must either become a pray to their enemies, or else
govern themselves as the occasion and time does offer, without respect had of
their original beginning, or of whom they depend. A number of the Colonies,
of the Graecians and Phoenicians, which they had planted upon all the regions
almost of the Mediterranean Seas, have done the like. But, the Romans
considering this inconvenience, established more iudicially, more Colonies in
Italy, then in all the rest of their Empire else besides. And out of Italy
they carried none, till after the sixth hundred year that Rome was built: And
the first were Carthage in Africa, and Narbona in France.

In the laws of the Gracchians, Paterculus found fault that they had made
Colonies out of Italy. Which the ancient Romans did avoid; finding how much
more powerful Carthage was become, then Tyrus; Marsiles, then Phocea;
Siracusa, then Corinth; Bizantium, then Miletum; Vt Colonos Romanos ad
censendum ex prouineijs in Italiam reuocarent. That they might recall into
Italy out of their Provinces, there to be taxed, those Romans, who were
translated into their Colonies.

I will not leave unspoken what Tacitus writes of the disorders growe^ in the
planting of Colonies. The Cities of Taranto and of Anzo greatly wanting of
inhabitants, Nero sent thither the old trained soldiers; who for all that,
yealded small help to the solitarines of those forsaken places. For, the most
part of them returned into the Provinces, where they had ended the time of
their warfare. For, not being used to the laws of just matrimony, nor to the
charge of education of children, they left their houses without posterity.

This mischief grew, because the entier legions with Tribunes, with
Centurions, and with Soldiers, each in his order, were not sent, as in ancient
times past was wont to be, to the end that commonweals might be founded and
maintained with concord and with charity; But men, that kn^w not one another,
onsisting of diverse companies, without a hedd, and without mutual affection,
drawn upon the sudden into one place together, made rather up a number, than
a Colonie.

Forasmuch as mention is made in this Treatise, of diverse Towns and Cities not
described therein at full, which happily the reader would long to hear for the
rarenes and novelties of them: Having perused another book of the author
hereof entitled: Relationes Vniversals: wherein I found some of those Towns
and Cities dispersedlie in diverse places of that book, described more at
large: I have for the readers better satisfaction and delight, chosen out some
such as I found to my likeing, which here present themselves as follows.

Cuzco.
THere follows in 17. degrees Southward, the City of Cuzco; in a scituacion
environed with mountains. It has a Castle built of Stone, so great and so
huge; that it seems rather the work of Giants, than of ordinary men:
especially forasmuch as those people had neither Beasts to draw them to the
place, or use of Iron tools to work withal. This City was the Seat of the
Inga, or King of Peru, and the Metropolitan of the Empire. There was not in it
any thing else, that, either for greatness or for policy deserved the name of a
City. It had great streets, but narrow, and houses made of Stone joined
together with maruailous care and diligence. But the ordinary dwellings were
built of timber, and covered with thatche. There was in Cuzco the rich temple
of the Sun. There was also diverse other Palaces of the King of Gold and Silver
without end. There was a large and spacious market place, out of which were
drawn four ways, to four Ports of the Empire. The Kings of Peru, to
appopulate and ennoble this City, ordained that every King or Prince should
build his Palace, and send his children thither to inhabit there. And, to show
the largnes of the Empire, and the sundry nations that were subject thereunto;
commanded that every one should apparel themselves, according to the attire
and fashion of their own native country, and that they should also carry some
certain note thereof upon their hedds: An invention that bare a brave and
gallant show. This City was reedified after a new form in the year 1534. by
Francesco Bizzaco. It contains 50* thousand inhabitants, and within the
compass of ten leagues about it, two hundred thousand. It has a territory
full of pleasant, rych, and goodly valleis: I mean these Andaguayla,
Xaguisana, Bilcas, and Succay. This last, is of such a notable good air, so
pleasant, so temperat, and of such a gallant and delightful site, as it would
not be slightly passed over here. It is all bestrewed over thick, as it were,
with sumptuous country houses of the Spaniards, and full of great and well
peopled towns of Cuzca^es. Our country fruits prosper as well there, as they
do in Spain.

Ormuz.
Ormuz, imbraseth a part of Arabia Felix, and the best Islands of the Persian
Sea, with that part of the coast of Persia which is watered with the Rivers
Tubo, Tissnido, and Drutto. The chiefest part of the Kingdom, is the Island of
Ormuz, which is situated in the mouth of the haven, distant from Arabia,
thirty, and from Persia, nine miles. It has two Ports, divided with a long
ridge of land running into the Sea like a tongue, the one in the East, the
other on the West. It has a hill, that on the one side is of brimstone, and on
the other side of salt. It has no other water than of three wells. And it is
barren almost of every thing else, and for all that, it abounds with all
manner of delicacies and deinties, as well as it does of all necessaries else
besides, thorough the goodness and opportunity of the Site. Forasmuch as great
wealth and riches are brought thither out of Arabia, Persia, and out of
Cambaia, and out of the Indies. Inasmuch as the Moors say, that if the world
were a Ring, Ormuz should be their Inell. The Merchants of all nations use to
trade thither. The natural people there, are partly Arabians, and partly
Persians, (the Arabians of a yealowish color, and the Persia^s of a white) of
a good aspect and much given to Music, to neatnes and to cleanlynes, to the
knowledge of Histories and other such like pleasant studies. The King (which is
a Mahumetan) draws out of the customs of the City of Ormuz 140. thousand
Serafi; Serafo, is ^ coy^e in India worth 4. shillings Sterling. and of Spanish
many a piece of 8. which is 4. shillings.
out of Arabia twenty eight thousand; out of Mogosta a country in Persia,
seauenteene thousand. Babaren yealded unto him 40. thousand. His revenues would
be doubled, if exemptions had not been granted to the Kings of Persia, and to
other States, and the Portugalls for the goods they enter in their names. He
pays to the King of Portugal, who holds a very strong Fortress there,
twenty thousand Seraffes every year.

Tauris.
THere follows along the Sea, which some call Mar maggiore, Media. The
chiefest City whereof is Tauris, some would that Tauris should be Echatana,
the Seat of the ancient Kings of Media. This City is Situated at the root
of a hill, seven days journey from the Mare Caspium, or little more. It has
an wholesome air, but wyndy and cold; And the soil abounds with all
things. It is sixteen miles about; but some do make it more. It contains
about two hundred thousand souls. But it has no building of importance. For
many inhabit within the earth, and their houses are of mudd, according to the
manner of the East. They lack no Springes, Brooks nor gardens. Is was
sometime that Seat of the Kings of Persia. But, Tammas transferred it to
Cusbin. it was first destroyed by Selim, and afterward by Soliman. (For, it
has no walls) and after that taken by Osman the general of Amorat King of
the Turks, who has there erected a very strong Castle.

Derbentum.
Derbent: is seated under the command of a Hill; And with two walls, that do
extend even down to the Sea; It imbraseth the suburbs and the Haven. One wall
is dista^t from another, 300. pases. It has two Iron gates with perpetual
watch and ward. Arasse and Ciro, two notable and famous Rivers, do make this
country fruitful. It was sometimes under the King of Persia: But it has been
destroyed by the Turks in the last wars.

Aleppo.
Comagena: is that part of Siria, that follows the course of Euphrates, even
to the co^fines of Armenia. The chiefest City thereof, is the rich City of
Aleppo. This City (which holds the third place amongst the Cities of the
Turkish Empire) lies upon the River Singa, and has a Cha^ell under ground,
which produces diverse fountains public and private. It contains four
hills; upon the one of which, is raised a goodly castle* and it has great
suburbs. It has no building there of importance, except the Temples and the
storehouses for Merchants of forreyne countries, all of hard quarry stoane,
archt and vaulted, with fou^taines in the midst of the courts. It abounds
of corn, and of the best wynes, and of herbs and ^ fruits; which are
notwithstanding exceeding dear, by reason of the quantity that is thereof
there spent and eaten. For traffic, he that has not seen it, will never
believe it. For, the Soap only that is made in that country, bringes in 200.
thousand crowns a year. But, the Art of Silk, is an infinite work. There
has been brought from Venice, Merchandise for 350. thousand crowns. This
great manner of traffic is mightily helped by the neighborhoode of our Seas,
and of Euphrates. For, from us, it is not above five reasonable days journey;
And from Euphrates also less. The multitude of the people may be comprehended
by this, that in the year 1555. between the City and the Suburbs, there
dyed more then an hundred and twenty thousand persons in three months.

Fessa.
Fess: is the fairest, the greatest, the most populous, and the richest City
of all Barbary; consisting all of it, except the midst, which is plain, in
Hills and mountains, with a River that crosses it clean thorough, and
serves it wonderful commodiously. It consists of three parts, the one, on
the East side of the River; And that contains four thousand housholdes, and
is called Beleyda; The other on the west side, and has 70. thousand houses,
and is called the old Fess; The third is new Fess, consisting of eight thousand
neighbors. It has 700. Moschees. The principal is Carue, which is a mile and
a half in compass, and has ^ and thirty gates unto it. The Merchants have
there a Court enclosed with a wall, with twelve gates and fifteen streets.
There is also a College, amongst many other, whose buildings cost the King
Abuhenon 400. thousand crowns. There are to be seen in the Cities, more the^
six hundred springs of water, and it is 360. miles upon the River.

FINIS.
A Brief Table, directing the Reader of this Book, to the principal things
in the same.
A
Abundance of Corn, Cattle, Wine, and Fruits in Piemont, more than in other
places of Italy, Fol. 16. Academy of Paris well provided for, for the sollace
and recreation of the Scholars. Fol. 43. Academies of Italy, full of
dissolutenes and great disorder. Fol. (42. and 43. Academies of Athens and
Rhodes, flourished most. Fol. 44. Academies would be seated in a good Air and
pleasant Situation. Fol. 43. Alexandria, by what means it increased. Fol. 66.
Africa, how many people it does yield. Fol. 81. Anchin, a City in China. Fol.
71. Antwerpe, a great City, and by what means. Fol. 15.
B
Babylon, her greatness. Fol. 67. Balsame, the best from Palestine. Fol. 55.
Bezaar, from whence the best comes. Fol. 74. Brescia, the description thereof.
Fol. 61.
C
Cayrus, why it is called great. Fol. 66. Cayrus, every seventh year visited
with a mighty plague. Fol. 67. Cantan, a great City in Chyna. Fol. 73. Cain,
built the first City. Fol. 2. Chanells made for transportation of goods and
Merchandise. Fol. 20. Chanells in Flaunders. Fol. 20 Channel in Milan. Fol. 21.
Castells and Towers on Hills and Mountains, little peopled. Fol. 27. China and
the praise thereof. Fol. 71. China, how many people it does contain, and the
multitude thereof. Fol. 76. and 78. China, the description thereof and of her
great riches. Fol. 74. 75. Chiambalu, the description thereof. Fol. 70. City,
said great, not for the Site and compass of the walls, but for the multitude
of the inhabitants thereof. Fol. 1. Cities how necessary they were to be
erected. Fol. 2. Cities built by many Princes, and by whom. Fol. 3. and 4.
Cities inhabited and built by the authority and power of great Princes. Fol.
3. Cities seated on Hills and Mountains, for antiquity most noble. Fol. 8.
Cities, which are said fair for Site, and which for Art. Fol. 9. Cities by
what manes they become great. Fol. 13. Cities that serve for passage only, few
of them prove great. Fol. 14. Cities grow great by granting freedoms and
immunities unto them. Fol. 30. Cities that are free, more eminent, and better
stored with people, than Cities subject unto Monarchies. Fol. 3^. Cities made
great by imparting their freedoms and their offices, to others. Fol. 32.
Cities made great by erecting goodly monuments and buildings in them. Fol. 33.
Cities made great by the help of near Colonies about them. Fol. 35. Cities
made great by erecting universities in them. Fol. 42. Cities made great by the
residence of the Nobility in them. Fol. 63. Cities made great by the residence
of the Prince in them. Fol. 65. Cities seated on the Ocean, are the best for
Merchandise. Fol. 79. Cities exceeding great, are more subject to Plagues and
dearth, than the lesser Cities are. Fol. 81. and 93. Commodious conduct of
ware, is not enough to make a City great, but there must be some other virtue
attractiue unto it. Fol. 29. Cities once grown to a certain number, increase
not further on, and the cause why. Fol: 92. 94. Cities are maintained by
justice, peace and plenty. Fol: 97. Cities that have delight and pleasures in
them, draw forrey^ert to come unto them. Fol: 9. 10. 11. Cities which are of
greatest reputation in Spain. Fol: 83. Crema and her beginning. Fol: 7.
Children in Chyna, bound to learn their fathers art and occupation. Fol: 56.
Cloaues had from the Moluccaes. Fol: 55. Constantinople, the principallest
City in Europe. Fol: 80. 81. Constantinople and the description thereof. Fol:
80. Constantinople every third year visited with the plague. Fol: 81.
D
Dominion makes a City great, and by what means. Fol: 60. Dominion gotten by
mere strength and force, holds not long. Fol: 12.
E
AEthiop has no great Cities. Fol: 79. Europe and her great Cities. Fol: 82.
F
France, the Nobility and gent. there, do mostly inhabit the country, and not
the Cities. Fol: 62. France, plentiful of all necessary things. Fol: 17.
France, and the greatness thereof, with the number of people it does contain.
Fol: 82.
G
Gaunt, how many people it does contain. Fol: 82. Genoua, serves for passage,
and yet a great City. Fol: 15. God, how he is desired of all creatures. Fol:
39.
H
Jerusalem, the greatest City of the East. Fol: 36. Honor, is atteyned by
Arms and by learning. Fol: 41. 42.
I
Immunity, increases a City. Fol: 42. Immunitie, the means to cause people
to come together. Fol: 42. Incense from Sabea. Fol: 55. Idolatry, by whom and
for what cause it was set up. Fol: 37. Industry of man of more importe than
the fruitfulnes of the land. Fol: 48. 49. Italy, the description thereof. Fol:
79. Justice ministered with expedition in Rome, England, Scotland, and Turkey.
Fol: 46. The Tribunal seat of Justice, is the most principal member of a
State. Fol: 46. The s^at of Justice, makes great repair to Cities, and makes
Cities great. Fol: 45. 46.
L
Lisborne, a great City. Fol: 15. 82. Lisborne, how many people it does
contain. Fol: 82. London increased by the resort of the Hollanders. Fol: 6.
83. London how many people it does contain. Fol: 82. Lakes are in a manner
little Seas, avail much to people a City. Fol: 19.
M
Media, the Kings thereof made their residence in Echatana. Fol: 68. Memphis
and the greatness thereof. Fol: 66. Milan advanced by the religious life of the
Cardinal Boro^meo. Fol: 40. Moscouia, three famous Cities in that Empire. Fol:
84. Money makes men trudge from place to place. Fol: 45. Multitude breeds
confusion. Fol: 87. Merchandise helps greatly to thencrease of a City. Fol:
55.
N
Naples, how many people it does contain. Fol: 82. Necessity enforces men to
draw themselves together. Fol: 4. Nilus the river and his effects. Fol: 24. 25.
Niniuie, and the greatness thereof. Fol: 67.
P
Palermo, and the description thereof. Fol: 85. Panchin, a mighty great City
in China. Fol: 72. Paris exceeds all the Cities of Cristendome in people and
plenty of all things. Fol: 24. 44. Pepper, a good part thereof does grow in
Calicut. Fol: 55. Pearls, where the best are had. Fol: 74. Persia, the Kings
thereof made their reside^ce in Persepolis. Fol: 68. Pysa grew great upon the
sacking of Genoua. Fol: 6. Plague mentioned in Boccace, most fierce and cruel.
Fol: 54. Poloma and her Cities. Fol: 84. Ports of the Sea, which are good. Fol:
19. Power consists in the multitude of people: Fol: 87. 88. Prage how many
people it does contain. Fol: 82.
R
Reputation of a religious zeal and fear of God, makes a City great. Fol:
36. Residency of the Nobility causes the increase of a City. Fol: 62.
Residency of the Prince, magnifieth a City. Fol: 65. Residency of the Pope
causes the greatness of Rome. Fol: 86. Rhodes grew great thorough the multitude
of Jews that repaired thither. Fol: 6. Rome and the praise thereof. Fol: 10.
Rome great by the ruin of her neighbor Cities. Fol: 7. Rome great by means
of her relics, and the Popes residency therein. Fol: 40. Rivers how much they
import for caryage of goods. Fol: 20. Rivers some better then some for
transportation. Fol: 23. Rivers of name. Fol: 28. Rivers in Spain not greatly
nauigable. Fol: 26* Romans, how they came fierce. Fol: 31. Rivers in Italy,
but few that are nauigable. Fol: 79.
S
Salonicha grew great by the multitude of Jews that fled thither out of Spain
and Portugal. Fol: 6. Sarmacanda and the greatness of it. Fol: 69. Sena a
river, and the properties thereof. Fol: 24. Situation, what manner of one is
fit to make a City great. Fol: 13. Spain contains no very great Cities.
Fol: 83. Suntien, a City in China, which is in circuit an 100. miles about.
Fol: 72. Sinamom, a good part thereof does grow in Zeilan. Fol: 55.
T
Tartaria, and the Empire thereof. Fol: 68. Tauris a City in Persia 16. miles
about. Fol: 68. Tamberlane, the mighty spoil and pray ^e made upon Damascus.
Fol: 69. Thebes and the greatness thereof. Fol: 65. 66. Towers the most ancient
manner and form of building that we have. Fol: 4. 5. Trades and occupations
brought into a City, make it great. Fol: 48. 52.
V
Venice by what means it grew great. Fol: 7. 64. Venice and her praise. Fol:
11. Venice serves for passage, and yet a great and mighty City. Fol: 15. Usages
and manners most barbarous, and horrible of the new world and other countries.
Fol: 95.
W
Water created of God not only for an Element, but also for a means of
transportacion of goods out of one country into another. Fol: 18. Water more
commodious then the land. Fol: 18. Water, one sort more apt to bear burdens
then an other. Fol: 23. Ways: 2. most famous, made and cut out of about 2000.
miles in length, by the King of Cusco. Ways very bad thorough out Italy. Fol:
60. Wool most excellent in England, and in Spain. Fol: 55.
FINIS.

