A true Copy Of a Letter sent by the Prince of Parma to the general States of
the low Cuntries, assembled at Antwerpe. With their Answer to the same the
xii. day of March. 1579.

Translated out of French into Dutch, and from the Dutch into English.

According to the Dutch Copye, printed at Antwerpe by Christopher Plantyn,
Printer to the Kings Majesty.

The copye of the Prince of Parma his Letter.
MY Lords, for that we have caused a treaty to be made with diverse of the
particular Provinces concerning the matter of reconciliation with his Majesty,
and fynding, the same well inclined thereto, albeit their desire is, that it
should rather proceed from you that are assembled at Antwerpe (his Majesty's
intention and ours concurring therewith.) We have thought good to advertise you
of the same his good meaning, that in case you have any desire to do the like
with convenient expedition: (yet lying in you either to hinder or further all
those harms, wrongs and oppressions, which these present wars do bring) you
would signify your meaning unto us. Assuring you that on our b^halfe there
shall be no defaulte, as h^herto there has not, to proceed therein with all
sincerity and up rightnes. Presenting in the name o^ his Majesty and the
foresaid Provinces in particular, to ratify and establish the pacification of
Gaunt, the unity which followed and the perpetual Act and Edicte in all
Articles and poinctes thereof, and to give such assurance in that behalf, as
reasonably may be demanded, condicionally that only the exercise of the
catholic Roman Religion, and dutiful obedience to his Majesty be observed
and kept, as it was in ye time of the late Emperor of blessed memory Charles
the fifth. And as yourselues have sol^m^elye taken your oaths to his Majesty,
and promised by so many Writtings and Letters, and wh^runto by all godly and
pro^^table laws you are bound, without (...) expecting any further matters
(...) your hands. Considering that ^^^ein consists the perfect stay and
^^^sing of these cruel Wars, and (...) tranquillity and ease of these
Coun^^^s, which his Majesty and we do ^^^sh and regard, and you as good
^^biects ought to endeavor to pro^^re for their safeties and your own ^^nefits.
Requiring you openly and ^^ainely, and with expedition to ad^^rtise us which of
the Provinces ^o accept or refuse this offer, that ^^ervpon we may take order
to im^^oy ourselves as shall be expedient (...) the service of God and his
Ma^^^ty. Thus (my Lords) the Lord ^^ue you in his keeping.

Written at ^^^ershem the xii. of March. 1579. Subscribed. Alexander. And
below. F. le Vasseur.
The Superscription.
To my Lords the Deputies of the Provinces assembled at Antwerp.



The answer of the general States, to the Prince of Parma his Letter.
MY Lord we have received your Letter, dated the xii. of this instant March,
touching the agreements of the Provinces, with our sovereign Lord the King of
Spain: For answer whereunto, we advertise your excellency, that in regard of
us there has not bin any duty or good occasion omitted that might tend to the
concluding of a good and assured peace, as by our actions may plainly appear
to the whole world. For in the month of August last, the Ambassadors of the
imperial Majesty, of the King of France and the Queen of England being
assembled with our Deputies at Louan a place of the appointment of the late
Lord Do^ Ihon of Austriche, with good hope t^ conclude a peace. The cause was
i^ good forwardness, and like to succeed to a good effect. How be it the King
of Spain, took the matter ou^ of the hands of the said Don Ihon o^
Austriche, and referred the treaty and negosiation thereof to the Imperial
Majesty. Whereupon for that no endeavor on our be half should be slacked,
which might advance the foresaid treaty of peace: the Earl of Swartzenbergh
Ambassador to the Emprours Majesty, by our consent and request, iorneyed twice
to your excellency to treat and pac^fy the vissagrement betwixt the Kings
Majesty and those Countries according to the meaning and assent of the King of
Spain, and our-submission. But notwithstanding all his endeavor employed
therein, we find that your excellency, was not only far from ionyng: but
also the better to oppose your selves to the same, entertained the said
Ambassador with many delays, and in steed of upright dealing with ye
generalty touching the said treaty of peace, practiced by means thereof and by
indirect and particular treatings, to procure a separation and dissension of
the Provinces: So that we cannot perceive any reason that your excellency has
to say, that the same has not bin in any fault to agree to a good peace with
all uprightness and syncerity. Neither can we see by what means your
excellency can discharg your self either before the Imperial Majesty for the
delays and (...) used toward his Ambassador* or before God and the whole
world, for the shameful suspicions and misstrustinges used in y^ matter. Which
are increased in all trusty and discret hearts: by reason that (the King of
Spain having openly revoked, disallowed, and disanulled the pacification of
Gaunte, when the Countries might and greatly desired to observe and keep the
same.) Your excellency now in this time after so many alterations and troubles
presents again by the aforesaid Letter, the ratification of the same peace
with this condition, that the only exercise of the Catholic Romish Religion
and the dutiful obedience to his Majesty should be maintained and observed, as
it was in the time of the late Emperor Charles: the which is altogether
contrary unto the foresaid pacification and a manifest breach thereof, and such
as all the States in general have found to be directly against the commonwealth
and other Countries. For that in the time of the late said Emperor Charles,
the cruel burninges, Statutes and other Rigors were in such force and so
sharplye executed for the preservation and defending of the foresaid exercise
of the Ronush Religion, that the fore said States generally and with one
common accord, for the maintenance of the profitable trade and traficke of
merchandise with other Countries that were for their benefit, were constrained
to procure ye same to be mitigated and restrained.

Whereby your excellency may well perceive, what proceedings and effects we may
hope for, by means of such presentations which are impossible to be practiced
or put in effect. Being most sorye that a case of so great waighte and
importance, proceeds not with more speed and discretion. Not withstanding to
express our good wills and ready affections to the peace, we are still
conteut according to the offer of the imperial Majesty and consent of the
King of Spain that the same shall be negotiated and treated by the said
Ambassador wh^^e the oportunieye of the affairs of these parties, and the
treaties whereinto we are entered with others shall permit the same: yet if
your excellency has an earnest and zealous meaning to make a short treaty
and conclusion, and to reduce the matter to a good end and assured rest, it may
please the same by virtue of his aucthority without so many delays and
retreaties to take a shorter way to make provision against the destruction and
oppression of the cuntreyes so greatly and so long time afflicted, agreeing
with sinceritye and vprightnes to that which will be the prosperity and rest of
the subjects and inhabitants of the same, by the general States and
consultations which are to be holden and used in that behalf according to
equity and reason. And we for our part (if your excellencye through long
delay hencesorth do not hinder all occasions and commodities to do the same)
will not fail to harken to all reasonable conditions, for the performance
whereof we may have good assurance and warrant. Protesting as we have already
protested to the Barron of Selles and others, that all inconueniencies and
alterations which hereafter may happen, shall be known, which with pursuing of
wars against these Cuntryes, do give occasion of greater mistrusting
misliking and alterations of the subjects. With this we pray the almightye God
(my Lord) to have your excellency in his keeping.

From Antwarp the* xix. of March. 1579. The general States of the low
Countries. The Ordinance of us the Lords, the general States.

Underwritten. A. Blyleuen.
The Superscription.
To my Lord: my Lord the Prince of Parma.



Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones.


