A BOOK OF SECRETS: Showing diverse ways to make and prepare all sorts of
Ink, and Colors: as Black, White, Blew, Green, Red, Yellow, and other
Colors. Also to write with Gold and Silver, or any kind of Metal out of the
Pen: with many other profitable secrets, as to color Quils and Parchment of
any color: and to grave with strong Water in Steel and Iron.

Necessary to be known of all Scriueners, Painters, and others that delight
in such Arts. Translated out of Dutch into English, by W. P.

Hereunto is annexed a little Treatise, entitled, Jnstructions for ordering of
Wines: Showing how to make Wine, That it may continue good and faint not,
Neither become sower, nor loose color. And how you may remedy faint Wine,
take away the hoarinesse, with other instructions for the preservation of the
same.

Written first in Italian, and now newly translated into English, by W. P.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip for Edward White, and are to be sold at his shop
at the little North door of Pouls, at the sign of the Gun. 1596.

A Book of Secrets, showing diverse ways to make and prepare all sorts of Ink
and colors.
And first to make Ink in diverse manners.
IT is first to be understood that if you will make a great quantity of Ink
together, you must increase the weight, and measure, according to the
proportion you mean to make, as for example, if you will make ten quarts of
Ink, then take four quarts of water, and six quarts of vinegar and wine,
that is, three of each sort, which together with the water make ten quarts, and
so must you do with other quantities, either more or less. The like must you
do in the weight of your other stuff that belongs thereunto, as for a pint
of water, six ounces of gaul, four ounces of victriall, and four ounces of
gum, and if you take four quarts of water (which is eight pints) if you give
to every pint his proportion, then multiplying eight by six they make forty
eight, so many ounces of gaul must you put to ten quarts, mixed as before said
with wine, vinegar, and water, and of victrial and gum, of each xxxii ounces,
according to the first proportion, and so must you observe your quantities, of
weight and measure in each proportion, as you are minded to increase the same,
as in this treatise you shall read.

To make Ink to write upon paper.
Take half a pint of water, a pint wanting a quarter of wine, and as much
vinegar, which being mixed together make a quart and a quarter of a pint more,
then take six ounces of gauls beaten into small powder, and sifted through a
sieve, put this powder into a pot by it self, and pour half the water, wine,
and vinegar into it, take likewise four ounces of victriall, and beat it into
powder, and put it also in a pot by it self, whereinto put a quarter of the
wine, water, and vinegar that remains, and to the other quarter, put four
ounces of gum Arabike beaten to powder, that done, cover the three pots close,
and let them stand three or four days together, stirring them every day three
or four times, on the first day set the pot with gauls on the fire, and when
it begins to sees, stir it about till it be thoroughly warm, then strain it
through a cloth into another pot, and mix it with the other two pots,
stirring them well together, and being covered, then let it stand three days,
till thou meanest to use it, on the fourth day, when it is settled, pour it
out, and it will be good ink. If there remain any dregs behind, pour some
rain water (that has stand long in a tubor vessel into it, for the older the
water is, the better it is, and keep that until you make more ink, so it is
better the^ clean water.

To make Ink for parchment.
Make it in all points like to the ink aforesaid, only take a pint of water,
and of vinegar and wine a pint more, that is, of each half a pint.

Another sort of Ink.
Take a quart of clear water, and put it in a glass, put into it thirteen
ounces beaten victriall, let it stand three days, and stir it three or four
times every day, then take thirteen ounces of beaten gauls, and put them into
a new earthen pot, that is well leaded, pour into them a quart of clean water,
that done, set it on the fire, and let it sees till it consumes about a
singer deep, but suffer it not to sees so fast that it sees over the pots
brim, then strain it through a wolle^ cloth, into another pot, that is leaded,
pour into the cloth a cup full of good vinegar, and strain it though
likewise, that done, if there remains any thing in the cloth, cast it away,
then put into the matter, four or five ounces of beaten gum and stir them well
together, then again strain them through a clean woollen cloth, and pour
into it a cup full of good vinegar, and strain it through the cloth, and let
it stand till it be cool, then put it into a straight-necked glass, stop both
the glasses well, till you have occasion to use them, then take of each water a
little quantity, and mix them together, so have you good ink.

Another of the same sort, but easy to make.
Take the beaten gauls, and put them in the water do the like with the
victriall in a pot by it self let those two waters stand, and when you have
cause to use ink, pour out of each pot a like quantity, and it will be
black, then put into it a little beaten gum, and it will be good ink.

Another.
Take a quart of strong wine, put it into a new pot, and set it on a soft fire
till it be hot, but let it not sees, then put into it four ounces of gauls,
two ounces and a half of gum Arabike, and two ounces of victriall, al beaten
into small powder, and sifted through a sieve, stir it with a wooden stick,
and it will be good ink.

Another.
Take an ounce of beaten gaul, three or four ounces of gum Arabicke, put them
together in a pot with rain water, and when the gum is almost consumed, strain
it through a cloth, and put into it almost half a cup of victriall beaten to
powder.

Another.
Take a pint of beer, put into it an ounce of gauls beaten to powder, let it
sees till it seem somewhat red, then put to it three quarters of an ounce of
green victriall, in small powder, and let it sees again, when you take it
off the fire, cast into it three quarters of an ounce of gum, and a small piece
of alum, both in powder, and stir them all together till it be cold.

Another.
Take two handful of gauls, cut each gaul either into three or four pieces,
pour into them a pint of beer or wine, (which you will) then let it stand
eight hours, strain it from the gauls, and put victriall therein, and to the
victriall a third part of gum, set it on the fire to warm, but let it not
sees, and it will be good ink: and of those gauls you may make ink four
or five times more.

To make ink upon a sudden, to serve in an extremity.
Take a wax candle, and light it, hold it under a clean basin or a
candelsticke, till the smoke of the candle hangs thereon, then put a little
warm gum water into it, which tempered together will be good ink.

To keep Ink that it sinketh not into the paper neither that it come not off,
and that moths nor mise hurt not the paper.
Take the shells of hazell nuts, and put them into the ink, and it will not
sink through the paper.

And that it may not come off, put a little salt into it.

To keep that neither Mise nor eat or fret the paper, put a little wormwood
water into the ink.

To write without ink, that it may not be seen, unless the paper be wet with
water.
Take powder of victriall, and put it into a clean inkehorne, put a little
clean water to it, when the victriall is dissolved, write with it either upon
paper or parchment, and let it dry, and it cannot be read: when you will read
it, take half a pint of water, and put thereto an ounce of powder of gauls,
mix them well together, then strain them through a linen cloth into a clean
pot, then draw the paper through the water, and the writing will be clacke, as
if it had been written with ink.

To take Ink out of paper or parchment.
Take Colofoniam, which is called pix graecum, beat it small, and cast it on
the paper that is written, then wet a cloth, and lay it on the Colofoniam,
upon the cloth lay some fresh horse dung, and upon that set a smooth tile
stone, then if it be in winter let it stand a whole night, but if it be
summer, let it stand but from morning till nine of the clock.

Otherwise.
Take Salarmoniacke, and alum, still it in a limbeck, and with this water wet
the writing and it will go out.

Of red color, and first of Brasill.
You must take care when you sees Brasill, that you do it when the element is
clear, without clouds rain, or wind, otherwise it will not be good you must
make it thus:

Take quicklime pour rain water upon it, let it stand all night, in the
morning pour the water softly from the lime, or strain it through a cloth,
and for a quart of water, take an ounce of Brasill, let it sees till it be
half consumed, then put into it one ounce of beaten alum, one ounce of gum
Arabike, two ounces of gum of a Cheritree, or else two ounces of clean glue,
strain it from the wood: you may likewise put into it some chalk beaten to
powder.

To sees Brasill another way.
To an ounce of Brasill, take the third part of a quart of beer, wine, or
vinegar, put it in a new pot* let it stand a night, in the morning set it on
the fire, and let it sees till it be half consumed, then for every ounce of
Brasill, take two penny worth of alum, beaten to powder, and as much beaten gum
Arabike, stir them well together, and let them sees again, but if you desire
to have it somewhat dark, then scrape a little chalk into it: when it
seetheth, let it not sees over the pot, and being cold, strain it through a
cloth, and put it into a glass well stopped.

Another red color.
Mingle salt and honny together in a basin, let it stand eight days, then
sees it, and it will be a red color.

Purple color.
Take two pound of blew Heidleber, two ounces of alum, one ounce of ashes of
copper, which you may have at the brasiars, a pint of water, put them into a
ketle, let it sees till it consume two fingers deep, when it is cold, strain
it through a clout, in a clean glass or pot, let it stand a while, then
strain it into another pot, and let it stand till it be thick enough.

To make Rosin.
Take strong vinegar, or wine, and put powder of alum therein, when the alum is
dissolved, then make a strong and thick lee with quickelime, and take four
times as much Brasill as your alum waieth, put it in a clout, and hang it in
the lee, and let it stand a day and a night, then strain it, and hang the
Brasill again in the lee, and let it stand as long as it did the first time,
which do in like manner three or four times, when you have done so* let it
stand and dry, and it is perfect.

Another Rosin.
Take two parts red lead, one part white lead, and mingle them together, or
take Auripigmentum and red lead, of each a like quantity, and mingle them
together.

Fire color.
Take sout of a chimney, and a little alum, let them boil, then take gineper,
granded with water, and temper it together, with alum and gum Arabike.

Tawny color.
Take blacking, and mingle it with red lead and gum Arabike.

Yellow color.
Take hauthorne berries, gather them eight days after Saint Laurence day,
bruise them and put a little beaten alum unto them, stir them well together,
and let them stand one night, and it will be a fair yellow.

Another good yellow.
Take the bark of a tree, cut off the outside, and throw it away, cut the rest
in small pieces, and pour water unto them, let them sees two or three times,
then put powder of alum into it, stir them well together, and let them sees
again.

Another yellow.
Mix saffron with the yolke of an eg, and it makes a fair shining color.

Otherwise.
Put saffron and alum inco a clout, and put vinegar into it, and strain it out:
or take saffron, the yolke of an eg, gum Arabike and alum, and mix them
together.

Auripigmentum.
Take gaul of Eeles, or of other great fishes, or ox gaul, put some vinegar
to it, and a little chalk, and make a paste thereof.

Green color.
Take the black berries that grow on the hauthorne tree, and gather them eight
days after Michaelmas day, bruise them, pour water unto them, and put therein
a little beaten alum, stir them well together, and let them stand two days and
a night, and it will be good green.

A fair green color.
Take honey, put a little quantity of vinegar more then the honey is, into it,
mingle it well in a leaded or a copper pot, stop it well, and set it twelve
days under another pot, and put thereto a little chalk.

Also take copper plates, put them in a copper pot, and put stilled vinegar to
them, set them in a warm place, till the vinegar become blew, then put it into
another leaded pot, pour vinegar into it again, let it stand so till it
become blew, this do so many times, till you think you have enough, then let
it stand till it be thick.

To temper or prepare Verdigreece.
Grind it with wine, and put two or three drops of honny to it.

To make good green.
Take copper plates, let them lie six months in vmeger in a warm place, then
take them out, and dry them in the sun, and the flower you find upon the
plates, scrape it of, for that is the color.

Blew color.
Grind chalk with the juice of the elder berries, strain it through a clout,
put a little alum water unto it, let it dry, and keep it til you need.

In the same sort you may make color of the blew corn flowers.

Also the juice of the blew corn flowers alone, with alum and gum tempered
together, is a good blew.

Also mulberies boiled with alum.

Also take blew corn flowers that are not too much blown, and gather them in a
morning before the sun rises pluck the blew leaf, and let not any of the
white come among them, and put them into a copper kettle, and hang it in
seething water, till they be dry, keep them in a glass well covered. When
you will make color of them, then take some of the blew leaves, and put them
into a drinking glass, pour water into them, till it be thick like dowe, let
it stand covered twelve hours, then press the liquor through a cloth into
another glass, and put a little glue into it, and set it in a warm place, or
else in whote water, until it be dry and thick to use.

To make Azure.
Take one ounce of white lead, nine ounces of Indicum, pour good vinegar unto
it, put them in a leaded dish, let them sees well, and that which swimmeth on
the top is the color.

Or take two parts of chalk made of egshels, one part of Verdigreece, one part
of Salarmoniacke, mingle them together with strong vinegar, put them in a new
pot, stop it well, that no air issue forth, set it in a warm place for a
month long, and it will be Azure.

To temper or prepare Azure.
Wash it well in clean water, and that swimmeth on the top, cast it away, and
that which lies in the bottom, is good, do so three or four times one after
another, and let the water be clean poured from it, then take white of eggs,
that are well beaten, put thereto a little beaten gum Arabike, and let it stand
till the gum is dissolved, then put the Azure into it, and mingle them well
together, strain it through a linen cloth into an inkehorne, and use it when
you will.

A fair blew.
Grind the Azure with fair water very well upon a stone, then put it in a
horn or shell, and pour water thereon, stir them well together, then let them
stand half a day, then pour out the water, and take the gaul of a great fish,
and grind it with gum and the white of eggs, and use it when you think good.

White color. To write with chalk out of a pen upon black tables or paper.
Grind quicklime, egshels, and chalk, together with the milk of a goat.

To make chalk of egshels.
Take egshels, and let them lie three days in vinegar, then wash them well in
fair water, dry them in the sun, and beat them to powder, then grind them
upon a stone.

A good white color.
Take white glass well beaten to powder, put thereto some brimstone in powder,
and keep it in a pot well covered, set it upon a soft fire, til it be red hot,
then let it cool, and grind it on a stone.

Gold colors.
To make Aurum Musicum.
Take one ounce of Salarmoniack, one ounce of quick silver, one ounce of
Conterfein, half an ounce of brimstone, bruise the brimstone, set it on the
fire, but let it not be over hot least it burns, or become black, then take
the Salarmoniack, and the quick silver, being in powder, mix them well together,
then mingle them with the brimstone, stir them well and quickly with a stick,
till the brimstone becomes hard, then let it cool, grind it on a stone, and
put it in a glass with a long neck well stopped with luttum, and set it in a
pan with ashes, make a fire under it, and let it stand half a day; in such
manner, not over hot, till a yellow smoke rises upon it, and when the yellow
smoke is gone, then it is prepared.

Otherwise.
Take an ounce of Cin, melt it in a pot, put into it half an ounce of Tartarum,
and one ounce of quick silver, stir them together, till it be hard, and
congealed into a cake, then grind it well upon a stone, put to it one ounce of
beaten Salarmoniack, mix them well together, the^ melt one ounce of brimstone,
but make it not too hot, pour the ground powder into it, stir it well
until it be hard, let it cool, and do as before is said.

You must temper it thus.
Grind it well, wash it well in clean water out of one mussell shell into
another, till it be very clean, then put it into a pewter pot, put some gum
water therein, stir it about, and write therewith, let it dry, and polish it.

Argentum Musicum.
Melt an ounce of Tin, and put thereto an ounce of Tartarum, an ounce of quick
silver, stir it well tu it be cold, beat it in a mortar, then grind it on a
stone, temper it with gum water, and write 0 therewith, then polish it.

To write a gold color.
Take a new laid hens eg, make a hole at the one end of it, and let the
substance out, then take the yolk of an eg without the white, and four times
as much in quantity of quick silver, grind them well together, slop the hole of
the egshell with chalk and the white of an eg, the^ lay it under a hen that
sits with six eggs more, let her sit upon it three weeks; then break it up
and write therewith, some say it must be laid under three several hens, and
under each hen three weeks.

To write with gold out of a pensill.
Take honey and salt a like quantity, grind them well, put to it a leaf of gold
with a little white of an eg, put it into a mussell shel, and let it purify,
temper it with gum water, and write therewith, let it dry, and polish it with
a tooth.

Or grind saltstone well with the white of an eg, put into it a leaf or two of
gold, and write therewith as before.

Or grind a leaf of silver or gold very small with gum water, and wash it in a
mussell shell as aforesaid.

To write all metals out of the pen.
Grind cristall well, temper it with gum water, or the white of an eg, write
with it, then let it dry, then take the metal which you will, and rub it upon
the letters written, till the letter be well colored with the color of the
metal, then polish it with a tooth.

Or take cristall and pomestone, both ground very small, put thereto a little
verdigreece, beaten likewise to powder, and put them all into a leaded pipkin,
set it upon a soft fire, but let it not be too hot, let it not stand so long
on the fire, that it becomes as black as a coal, then grind it on a stone,
temper it with gum water, write with it as aforesaid.

A good gold color.
Take linseed oil, put into it a little Aloe Epaticum, and alum, let them
sees well in a leaded pot.

To lay gold upon any thing.
Take red lead, temper it with linseed oil, write with it, and lay gold upon
it, so let it dry, and polish it.

Or lay gum Arabike in vinegar, so long til it waxes white, take it out and
put it into the white of eggs, till it melts, write with it, when it is almost
dry, lay the gold upon it, then let it stand one night, and polish it.

To lay gold upon glass.
Grind chalk, and red lead in like qantity together, with linseed oil, lay it
on, when it is almost dry, lay your gold upon it, and being well dried, polish
it.

End of the colors.

How to grave in iron and steel, or in other metals with strong water.
FOr as much as that every man in this our age, is given to write, learn, and
practice all manner of arts, I am of opinion it will not be unprofitable unto
such as are desirous to learn, it I set somewhat before them that may teach
them to write letters, and grave any other thing in freele, iron, or other
metals, which I willingly present unto them, although it be but a small
matter, if it be profitable unto them, I wish them to use it.

Take two parts of verdigreece, one part of common salt, beat it in a mortar,
put thereto sharp vinegar, and when you will grave, anoint your plate first
with red lead tempered with linseed oil, let it dry, this substance lay upon
the plate, and the warmer the place is, when it lies, the sooner it will eat
in, and when it is dry, take away the powder, and make the plate clean again.

Or take two parts victriall, one third part Salarmoniack, grind it together
upon a stone with brine, and lay it on as aforesaid, but lay it cold upon the
place where you grave, and set it in a seller four or five hours.

Another way to grave with water.
Take verdigrecce, Mercury, sublimated victriall, and alum, of the one as much
as the other, beat them all to powder, put them into a glass, let them stand
so half a day, and stir it often about, then lay wax mingled with linseed oil,
or red lead with linseed oil, and write in it that you mean to grave, then put
the water upon it, and let it remain so half a day, if you will have it very
deep, then let it stand longer, if you will grave any other work as images,
etc. Then lay the wax upon the iron or steel very thinly on, and draw what you
will therein with your instrument, that it may touch the metal, then put
water into the strokes, and it will be graven.

Another way, but more piercing.
Take one ounce of verdigreece, half an ounce of Alum plumosum, half an ounce
of Salarmoniack, half an ounce of Tartarum, half an ounce of victrial, and
half an ounce of common salt, all beaten to powder, mingle them together, and
pour strong vinegar unto them, let them stand one hour, and when you will
grave, write upon the iron or stecle with linseed oil and red lead, and let it
dry, then heat the water aforesaid in a leaded pan, and let it stand on the
fire, and hold the iron or steel over the pan, pour the hot water upon it
with a spoon, and let it run again into the pan, which do for the space of a
quarter of an hour, then rub it off with ashes or vns^eact lime, but be sure
that the places you will eat into be all well covered with red lead.

To color quils and parchment of diverse colors.
Take the quils, and cut away the feathers, and rub the^ well with a woollen
cloth, that the skin go clean off, that the quil may be smooth, which must
always be done before you die the^, cut off a little of the end of the quil
that the color may enter into the^ lay them in alum water, for half a day
take them out and dry them, then die them, when they are died, as I will teach
you, let them be well dried, and strike them over with a cloth between two
fingers, then stick them in a board that is full of holes, and let every one
hauea space berweene it that they touch not together, and dry them in the air.

To die quils green.
Take two parts verdigreece, a third part Salarmoniacke, grind them well
together, steep them in strong vinegar, and put the quils into it, and cover
them close, let them lie therein till they be green as you desire to have the^:
you may die likewise bones and wood in the same manner, lay the quils, wood, or
bones, in a leaded pot, pour vinegar upon them, wherein Greekish green is
mixed, cover it, and set it seven days or more under warm horse dung. You may
also temper verdigreece with vinegar, till it be somewhat dry, put the quils
into it, let them lie long therein, then take them out, and put them in warm
horse dung, and let them continue therein eighteen days together: you may die
red quils in that sort and make them green, also take strong vinegar, put it
in a copper pot, or kettle, put verdigreece into it, let it stand til it be
green, put the quils into it, and let the^ lie til they be green.

Red quils.
Sees the^ in Brasil, as before you are taught, having first laid them in alum
water.

Yellow quils.
Sees them in yellow color, as before you are taught what you shall do with
the bark of aple trees.

Black quils.
Sees beaten gauls in strong vinegar, lay the quils in it, and let them sees
likewise, then lay them in the white of eggs, and put unto them the green pills
of walnuts, and let them sees all together.

To color parchment and velim of diverse colors.
Take as much parchment or velim as you will, and fasten it at the corners and
sides with nails unto a board, with the smooth side outward, anoint it then
with what color you will, be it yellow, blew, red or black, such as you find
set down in this book, let it dry well, then stroke it over, and let it dry
in a place, where no dust is stirring.

FINIS.
Certain Instructions for ordering of Wines: Showing how to make Wine, that it
may continue good and faint not, Neither become sower, nor loose color. And
how you may remedy faint Wine, take away the hoarinesse, with other
instructions for the preservation of the same.
Of the preparation for the Vintage, or gathering in of the grapes, where Wine
is made.
WHen the time of the Vintage approaches, you must prepare and make ready the
vessels in the places where the wines are used to be boiled, and the chests,
baskets, presses, and other instruments that are fit for every kind of work
belonging thereunto, according to the manner and diversities of the places, the
vessels ought likewise to be washed and made clean, and look for old rushes
that have been long gathered, because they are better, and endure longer then
the new that are in a manner but half grown.

Of the time when the vintage or gathering of grapes should be.
Some gather grapes before the berries be ripe, and thereby make their wine
small, weak, and not durable, others gather them late, and thereby do not
only hurt their vines, (their strength and virtue being already come forth)
but make their wine of less force, and not endure so long as otherwise it
would, so that for a general rule to be observed, the time to gather grapes is
to be known, by the sight and taste of the same, for if the kernel of the
grape be not green, but rather black, or of another color, then the grape
wherein it grows does commonly bring forth, it is a sign that it is ripe,
there are some that crush the grape between their fingers, and if the kernel
come forth clean without any meat sticking upon it, they say the grape is ripe,
and that it should be gathered, but if the kernel come forth with the meat
upon it, they say it is not ripe: some cut a branch out of the stock of a
vine, that is thick, and when a day or two is past, they look if the place
where the bra^ch grew be in like manner as it was when the branch was taken
away, and if the other branches that were about that place be not any thing
more grown, they make ready to gather their grapes, but if the place where the
branch grew be less then it was, they stay gathering their grapes till such
time the grapes wax riper. Grapes ought to be gathered when the Moon is in
Cancer, Leo, Libra, Scorpion, Capricornus, or Aquarius, but the Moon going out
of those signs, they must make have to gather their grapes. They should be
gathered after three or four of the clock, when the dew is all consumed, and
dried up, and that the air is hot and clear, and the wine will be the
stronger, and endure the longer: the grapes that shine and are not fat, that
are not withered, nor rotten in any part, make the wine stronger, and
continues better, and the contrary work the contrary effect. Grapes that
are over ripe make the Wine the sweeter, but less in strength, and continues
not so long as those that are first gathered. The grapes that are over sour,
make the Wine so much the souerer: but those that are indifferent, make the
wine strong, and continue better. Grapes gathered in the increasing of the
Moon make the wine to continue less time, but those gathered in the
decreasing, make it better: if the black grapes be boiled in the bottom of the
vessel, the wine will be the redder: if the ripe be lowest, it makes the wine
the riper: if the sour, it makes the wine sour, if they be boiled with honey
it will be sweet: if with sage, it will taste thereof: and for a general rule,
the wine receives the taste of the thing that is put into it, boiling
moderately together for certain days. If the grapes that are gathered lie
certain days in heaps together, the wine will be the riper: if the Must
boileth in the tun without grapes, it will be good and continue long, but it
will be longer before it waxes clear then that which boileth with grapes.

How grapes should be gathered and dressed to make wine.
They that put the grapes into the baskets, do part and choose out the leaves,
and if they find any branches or berries that are bitter, putrified or dry,
they cast them away: it is requisite likewise that such as tread the grapes, do
take out the leaves, if those that put them in out of the baskets, do chance to
forget themselves, the leaves bruised with the wine, make it the sourer, and
sooner to corrupt and become faulty: and of the grapes that are sour,
putrified and dry, there proceeds great damage unto the wine.

How to purge wine, that is made of sour grapes.
It is good to separate all the sour grapes, likewise such as are corrupt, and
keep them by themselves from the better sort, and the Must that is made of
such grapes, is cured in this manner: sees rain water till it consumes half
away, and of this sodden water put thereof into the wine, as much as you esteem
to be the tenth part of the Must, and then boil it again with the wine, till
the tenth part consumes in the boiling.

To cure the wine that is faulty by reason of rain water fallen upon it.
If the grapes growing yet upon the vine, or after they be gathered, be moist
and wetter then they should be, by reason of the water and rain fallen upon
them, if you perceive the Must be too weak, (which is known by tasting
thereof) after it is put into the vessel, presently after the first boiling,
you may pour it out into other vesseis, because that all the slune and
thicknes by reason of the weight thereof sinketh to the bottom: some boil it
upon the fire til it consumes the twenty part, putting into it the hundredth
part of Gesso.

How to put Must into the vessels.
It is good to wash the vessels with pure salt water, and make them clean with
a sponge, and perfume them with insence before the Must be put into them, but
fill them not too full, nor yet too little but do it with a mean, boiling the
Must till it rise up unto the top, but not run over, then with your hands or
else with glasses, (when the must is in the vessels) take away the froth or any
other skum that rises upon it, and cast it far off from the fat, for if it it
lies near, it ingendreth hoarines and causes a filthy smell, which two
things make the wine to turn, wherefore it is convenient that in such places
there be asweet smell.

How you must keep Must all the year.
Before the grapes are stamped, put the Must that comes from them, (the same
day it is made) in a vessel by it self, which shall be well cleansed both
within and without, fill the vessel half full, and stop it well with Gesso,
because the Must may continue sweet a long time, but if you put the vessel
(being stopped with copper) into a well, it will continue much longer, because
that not being able to boil, it will always be Must.

How to know if there be water in the wine or Must, and how to separate the one
from the other.
Put into the Must either pears, or mulberies, and if there be water in the
wine or must, they will sink unto the bottom, and if there be none, they will
swim on the top: others put the wine into a new earthen pot, not washed, and
let it continue therein for the space of two days that the water may distill
out of the pot, and nothing remain but the wine: others anointing a sponge
with oil, stop the mouth of the vessel therewith, and then turn it clean
over, and if there be water in the wine, it will soake into the sponge. Water
is taken from wine in this manner, put alum into the wine vessel, then stop the
mouth of the vessel with a sponge dipped in oil, then turn it in such sort,
that there may nothing but water issue forth.

When you shall draw or rack wine, and open the vessels.
You must rack wine when the wind is in the North, but never when it is in the
South, the weakest in the spring time, the strongest in the summer, but those
wines that grow in dry places, shall be racked after the sun is in the
equinoxiall hiuernall. When wine is racked the Moon being in the full, it
makes it sharp: when wine is taken from his lees it makes it more subtle and
weak: it is necessary to rack wine when the Moon increases, and is under
the earth, and to observe the rising of the stars, because the lees (when the
stars rise) does move and stir up, especially when roses bud forth, and vines
begin to spring, when the vessel is opeued, it is good to spend the wine that
is on the top of the vessel, and that which is in the bottom, and to keep
that which is in the middle thereof, because it is of more strength, and
continues longest, for the wine that is near unto the mouth of the vessel, as
being nearest unto the air, is weaker, because it casts forth a vapor from
it, and that which is in the bottom, or in the lees, does soon decay. It is
requisite when the wine is drawn into other vessels, not to let it run at the
mouth of the vessels, but somewhat lower, that it stop not at the mouth, but
have some air in the running out, least you fear it will become sour, which
if you doubt, let it not take any air, but make the vent of green willowes,
the bark or outward peele scraped clean away: if you open the fat by day, you
must beware that the heat of the sun touch not the wine, and if you open it by
night, you must keep the light of the Moon from it, and when the fats are
empty, you must wash them presently with salt water, and ashes, or dry them
with clay earth, if the wine be weak, but if it be very strong, it is
sufficient to close it up on all sides, because the smell and strength of the
wine preserves the vessels.

What time and how you shall taste wine.
Some taste wines when the wind blows in the North, but it is better to taste
when it blows in the East, because the Eastwind moves the wine more, and
shows what it is. It is not good to taste wine being fasting, because it
spoileth the taste, neither is it good to taste it after much meat or drink.
Further, he that tastes Wine, must not have eaten any bitter or salt meat, nor
have eaten much, but a little meat, and that it be disgested. Some seeking to
deceive those that buy wine, take a new vessel, which they dip into old wine
that is good, and has a good smell, and then put that wine into it that they
mean to sell, which I set down to give you instructions that you be not
deceived.

How to know wines that will endure and continue long.
Herein you must have care oftentimes to smell unto your wines, least there be
any alteration in the lees, ingendring hoarines or white mouldines that grows
under the buts, or diners other like things, because that such things are
signs that the wine decaieth, but if no such things appear, it is to be judged
that the wine will continue long. Some borie a little Wine, and being cold,
they taste it, and as they find that in the taste, so they esteem the rest of
the wine will fall out in goodness, but it is requisite to taste the wine in the
middle of the but.

Of diverse infections that happen unto wine.
It happens unto wine by means of the corrupt waterishnes that is in the
vines, or in the vessels, that it infecteth and spoileth by diverse means,
wrought in it by the strange heat thereof, as you shall perceive, for if there
fall into it a little lees, or a little wine that has lees in it, and be put
into the vessel without opening it, it will convert into hoarines, and infect
the wine: besides this, all other wine that is put into it, is thereby
infected. And if any of that wine be put into a good butt, or be mingled with
other Wine, it does infect it, and conuerteth it into the same corrupt nature:
further, wine that is perfect good and strong, and especially that which is
sweet above measure. When the weather is hot, the vessel not being full, and
not close above, the heat and moistnes thereof issues forth, the coldness and
dryness thereof remaining, whereby it turns to be sour.

At what time wine does soon change, and corrupt.
All wines do oftentimes change in the rising of Charles waine, and in the
Solstitio estinall, and in the dog days, which commonly are called Cumma, and
generally when the wind is Westwardly, and in heat, or frost, or in great
tempests, or by overmuch wind, or by earthquakes, or thunders, or at the
springing of roses and of vines.

How to prevent the changing of wine.
Salt burned, and put into wine, does keep it from changing, and that it
boileth not up more then it should, nor that it rises with any great scum: put
sweet almonds into black grapes, and letting them stand, they conserve the
Wine. Grapes being gathered, the kernels taken forth and mixed with sand, and
put into the Must, or wine being sodden, makes it fat, and endure long. Gesso
when it is first put into the Wine makes it bitter, but in time, the
bitterness goes away, and the Gesso works this effect, that the wine
indureth a long time, and suffers it not to change: the quantity that must
be put in, if the wine be small and of a humide taste, or troubled with
tempests, is the hundredth part of Gesso. But if it be strong by reason of the
strength, the half of an hundredth part of gesso will serve. Wines that change
being taken from their infected lees, and put unto the lees of good wine, they
will endure long. Some men put into Wine the fruit of the Ledar tree, well
bruised to powder, and therewith do mingle gauls likewise bruised to powder.
Some beating the ashes of a vine being burnt, with fennel seed, mixing them
together, do put them into wine. Others put the wine that changes into other
vessels, and remove it into another house, for if it be hurt by reason of heat,
they remove it into a fresher place, and if it spoil by reason of the
humiditie and coldness of the place, where it is, they put it in some other
place that is drier and hot Clay put into wine after it has boiled, does
purge it, drawing down with it the infection thereof into the lees, but if it
be stamped it makes the wine of good savor, and sweet, because the birds that
eat of it in winter time, are preserved thereby and live, for it comfort the
wine and makes it continue long. A little yuie both white and black put into
wine, makes it continue, the like does sodden wine, mixing a third part
thereof in the must. Wheat flower makes it durable. The root of the pine tree,
keeps wine from changing.

An excellent infection to preserve wine, which is called Panaccia.
Take two ounces of Aloes, two ounces of insence, and two ounces of amomo, bind
all these fast in a linen cloth, and put them into the vessel after the wine
is therein, and that it has purged, and of this mixture, put into each vessel
a measure called a cluchiero, full, then shake it out of the cloth, and leave
the powder in the wine, and three days after do it again with roots of canes

To keep wine from changing.
Let it boil two or three days in the grapes, and draw it out in the month of
February, and of this boil the third part and mix them together, then into
twelve corses of wine put a common poringer full of salt. Or do it in this
sort, and it will be excellent and pleasant to drink what wine soever it be:
scum the grapes, and all the Wine that is not boiled with the grapes boil it
on the fire, and scum it, and so put it in the vessel.

How to remedy wine that is changed.
Temper wine that is turned or changed, with a good quantity of honey, throwing
it into the vessel wherein the wine is. Then stir it in the butt with a
stick, at the bung, letting it remain so, and the wine will clear it self,
by reason the honny makes the dregs that are in the wine to descend into the
bottom: it is good to put into the vessel where the wine is changed, (at the
time when grapes are gathering) diverse berries of grapes, which shall lie
therein in steed of the mother, because those grapes, after a certain time,
will turn the wine that is changed, to his right goodness and savor. And before
you do any thing unto wine that is changed, you must draw it forth and take
it from the infected lees. Also put the wine into vessels out of the which wine
has been newly taken forth, that it may clarefie therein, and let it remain
therein as long as it is needful, but if there be any quantity of wine, it
must not be done all at one time, but a little at once, that the wine do not
extinguish the heat of the grapes and hinder not the boiling thereof, wherein
it clarefieth, and how little a time the Must continues in the grapes, so much
the stronger it works. Wine is clarefied and made good when you beat twenty
grains of pepper and twenty pestachie, putting thereto a little wine, then
put afterward thereto six cesternes of Wine, having first stirred every thing
together, then letting them rest quietly, that they may work, a foggie wine is
presently clear, if in a sexter of wine you put seven kernels of a pine aple,
stirring them often, and then letting them stand, by little and little the Wine
will clarefie, that you may draw it and use it. Some clarefie it with white of
eggs, and with salt, but take white stones out of a river and bake them in an
oven till they begin to crack, then beat them into powder, take likewise white
salt beaten into small powder, and in a vessel of ten messers put six ounces
of powder of stones, and four of salt, and stirring them together, put the
wine into the vessel, and if for every measure you put therein two or three
eggs it will be good. This may be done likewise with the same stones not baked,
being beaten to small powder, and without salt, and it shall be good to put
thereunto a little honey, because honey that is red, restores the color of
white wine that has lost the color, and honey is clammy, and heavy, and a
preserver of all liquors. But if the wine be over much troubled and thick,
put thereto a little more of each of the things aforesaid, because those
things, by reason of the weight, do keep down the lees, and drive the
thickenesse to the bottom that it can not so easily rise up unto the top and
it gives likewise no evil savor to the wine. But if the wine be so much
troubled, that being as it were rank and in a manner fatty like oil, the
natural heat thereof being in a manner wholly extinguished, then there is no
remedy to be had, no more the^ for a dead man. It will clarefy also in this
manner, if you put into a vessel of forty measures, twenty eggs, which you must
beat well in a basen or boule with a clean spoon, the^ put into them a poringer
full of Tartarum, and mingle them together, adding thereto a little wine, then
put it into the vessel, which done, stir them well at the bung with a cloven
wooden stick, and thrust it oftentimes down into the lees, then put it again
into the vessel, and when it is clear take out all the thick matter on the sides
of the vessel: but you must understand, that into white wine you must only put
white of eggs, but into claret or red both whites and yolks, and into Wine that
is much troubled, you must put in more quantity: further in place of Tartarum,
you may put salt, and lastly there is put into the vessel a little clear water.
Wine is clarefied, and helped of the il savor and changing, if in a vessel of
three measures, you put half a pound of clear roch alum, and as much sucket
of roses, with eight pounds of honey. In this manner, sees the honny very well,
and skum it, and when it is cold, put the Alum into it, being beaten into small
powder, and the sucket dissolved, which mingle all in a measure of wine, then
put them into the vessel, and stir them well with a cloven stick, and the
vessel being open, let it stand so till the next day, and the second or third
day it will be clear: but if the wine be much troubled and spoiled, put so
much the more of the things aforesaid: nevertheless you must understand that
before you do it, you must draw the Wine out into another vessel, and take it
from the infected lees.

How wine and the vessels are preserved from hoarines.
If wine be hoary or have any other evil savor, take a white grapes sprigs with
the roots, and set it in the ground under the butt, in such sort that the roots
may be right against the mouth upon the butt, and put the branches in the wine
a handful deep, at the bung above the butt, let it stand there three days,
and till it loses the evil savor. Some take a white grape branch and put the
head of it into the vessel in place of the bung, and set it on the ground,
setting it fast that it stirs not, and so the hoarines daily issues forth
by the branch, by which means the evil savor deminisheth. For the same, take
Medlers that are bitter, being hanged on three or more pack thrids, put them in
at the bung that they may descend into the wine, letting them remain therein
fifteen days or a month, and they remedy the wine and the vessel of the
hoarines. It is said likewise it is done, if every morning and evening there
be hanged in the wine a bundle of sage, that touches not the wine, and being
taken out again, wash it in water, stopping the bung well. Take likewise a
handful of the herb called Nierella or Morella, and being bound with a
little string, in the morning put it into the vessel at the bung, that it
descend not into the wine above two fingers deep, and the cord being made fast
upon the vessel, stop the vessel hard, and let it hang therein the space of
one day, and at night take it out, putting other fresh herbs therein, letting
them remain therein till the next day in the morning, which you must do for
three or four days one after the other. Those vessels that are hoarie are
cured in this manner, put a quantity of sleacked lime, into a butt of twelve
baskets, and put into the same butt being stopped, either boiled water or wine,
and let it be so well stopped that no air issue forth. Let it stand a little
space, then roll it up and down diverse times: that done, open it, and let the
liquor that is in it issue forth, and wash the butt again with cold water. Or
otherwise, put gineper (being sodden in a chaldron of wine, and that is
seething hot) into the vessels, and do as I said before, and it will be
better, if both the remedies be used one after the other, that is, the second
after the first. In the same manner the fats are remedied, but because they
cannot be stopped in such sort as the buts may be, they are covered with
clothes, so that they cannot send forth any air: the buts are preserved from
mouldinesse, if when they are to be emptied, they stand open until there be
but a small quantity of wine in them, and that they be very well dried, and
after that well washed with salt water, or wine, or else not emptieng forth
that little quantity of Wine that is in them, the butt being well stopped, that
the smell or sent may not issue forth.

FINIS.

