A book of prayers called ye ordynary fasshyon of good lyurnge.

Mathewe.vi.

Seek first the kingdom of god: And than all things shall be laid before
you.

He that will live well (says saint Hierome) must pray at night and in ye
morning at the lest.

CVM PRIVILEgio ad imprimendum solum.

THIS little treaty^e is made for the erudicion of the simple, and young babes
of god. And yet not to be despised of the great clerks, and mighty ydel
loubers: ye live here in earth like as hogs do i^ wodes: which goes under
ye crabbe trees, and eat up the crabbes ye lie upon ye ground, and never look
up to the tree from whens they fell but wander on, sekyng upon ye ground for mo,
even so do these ydel lobers, ye devour ye gifts of god, and do receive
innumerable rewards and benefits at his hands: and yet never look up to give
him thanks: but live here in earth ydelly, and wretchedly (as I may say(. This
little book therefore shall. be to put them in mind of a peace of their duty.
And to exhort the^ to use an ordinary fassyon of prayenge because they shall
not forget their duty use therefore prayer at night and in the morning all
busynes laid a side.

The exhortacyon to the reder.
MOst christian reder I will exhort the to three things (that is) pray se god,
fear god, and love god, avoid sin, and follow virtue, avoid I say all
sins and the occasyons of the^. And specially those abhomynable sins which
ask for vengeauns be fore god, as abhomynable Sweryng and blasphymynge the
name of god: deceyuynge the infaunt, the wydowe and the poor man wylfull
perjury or procuremente of any man's death wrongfully: also sin against
nature called the dumme sin: or wyllyngely to proceed and continue in sin
contrary to the inspyracyon of god: these be to abhomynable to be spoken of:
use therefore virtue and means to attain grace (which be these.)

Repentance, prayer, restitucyon, reconsylemente, alms and fasting, and
specially to exersyce that virtue which is contrary to the sin wherein ye are
most corrupted (as shall be declared here after) but now to return to my
purpose of praysynge god and fearing him: Let us consider the cause of our
creacyon how that god has created us like to his own Image and has given
us a soul wit, reason, and understanding more then he has done to other
beasts. And why has he created man thus verily not because he should only
eat and drink and sleep, and take his pleasure in this world like a swyny or
a best, or that he should gather the goods of this world together: and strive
with his neighbor for ye gifts and benefytes that god has sent: the^ like as
dogs does fight for a bone which their master has cast them: or that he
should only follow, or occupye his craft and science what so ever it be (be it
never so lawful) and do nothing else: nay god ordained not him therefore: but he
gave him wit and reason because he should praise his lord god (as the angels
do) and give him thanks for all his benefyces: And therefore he gave us this
commandment: Remember to keep holy thy Saboth day: as who should say thou
shall honor me: I made the therefore this is the commandment of god which if
we mark well we may perceive the cause of our creacion. Let us therefore praise
and magnyfye our lord god as our duty is: and live in the fear of him, let
us fear him (I say) for he is the lord of power: which utterly abhors
sin. As it appears in yt he banished Adam from the joys of paradyse because
he agreed to ye sin of Eve. Also he caused almost ye hole world to be
drowned at Noyes flood for sine. And at another time he caused fire and
brymstone to rain down from heaven upon the cytyes of Sodoma and Gomore for
their wykednes. And so the people there were burnt and the city sanke into the sea: yea truly god hated sin so much, that when christ being in the bosomme
of his father did pray him to be favorable and to forgive the sin of the
world yet he would not be entreated, but caused his only son christ to come
down into the world: and to take man's shape upon him. And to suffer death (he
being without fault or sin) for to redeem us wretched sinners: so straytely
does god look upon syne therefore let us fear him and love him: Let us love
him (I say) because he made us and created us like to his own Image, and
spared not his only son christ for our sakes, but send him down for to
make us fre and to redeem us: when as our sins could not be taken away by
any other means: but only by him yt was without sin. And let us love him
also because he takes us not away at ye worste out of this present life: but
suffers us to live that we might repent. and ler ne to know him: it is he
also ye preserves us. And daily gives us meat and drink and al things
necessary to our living: when we be sinners and do nothing deserve it, yet
does he preser ue us then and holds his holy hand over us: or else the devil
might tear us in pieces as we go, or we inyght syncke into the earth for our
sins (as we be well worthy) but only that god is more merciful to us then we
do deserve, let us therefore praise him and love hi for his great favor and
mercy showed to us so many ways. As in yt he has redeemed us by his only so^
ne Jesu christ. And also has appointed yt ye self same christ our mercyful
lord (which suffered death for us (shall be our judge at the great day of
judgment (here is comfort) who can despair, or what heart will not be in
flamed now to love god. And to magnyfye him and thank him for all his
benefytes. And to keep his law even for very pure love, considering his
great mercy and love toward us so many ways, or who will not fear him
considering the things before rehearsed: therefore if thou haste either eyes to
read this, or ears to here it and understanding for to perceive it, then
consider who has given the these gifts. And who may punisshe y^ suddenly, and
take the^ away again consider therefore the goodness of god and cause of thy
treacion. And praise him contynually. And follow the example of holy men, as
Dauyd Job. Danyell, and diverse other which used customably to make their
prayers unto god at diverse times both in the day and in the night, because
they would not forget their duty toward him. As Dauyd says Psalm. 42. My
heart was troubled at mydnyght, and I called upon the lord, and watered my
bed with ye tears of mine eyes (Also he says) Psalm. 54. I will cry to god.
And my lord will save me, at night and in the morning and at mydday shall I
pray hertely unto him that he may here my voice. Lo here Dauyd does prescrybe
three solemn times when a man ought to pray: As at night wha^ he goes to
bed, in ye morning when he ryseth, and at mydday when he goes to meat.
Danyell also the prophet used to pray three times in the day, at whose example
the church did ordain the three hours which be song or said at this present
day in the church after pryme. And thereof the three hours took their
begynnyg with diverse other examples which were to long to rehearse: but let us
take an example at the^ for to serve god in prayer twyse a day at ye least, ye
is at euenyng and morning (al busynes laid a side) according as I have
exhorted you before. And it were conuenyent that we should also give thanks
unto him at our meal times, tor who will give a man his dinner. And will not
look to be thanked of him for it, or who will give a child but anapple, and
look not to have thanks for it, much more arre we bound to thank and
magnyfie our lord god that fedeth us daily, and asks none of our goods for
it, who dar therefore sytte down at his table. (except he be worse then a
best) and eat of the meat that god has sent, and not give him thanks for
it? or who dare rise in the morning and look upon the bright sone which god
has created for to give light unto us, and will not thank him for it? or who
darre go abroad in the world amongst his enemies, and among the temptacyons
of the devil? And will not call first upon god for help: or who dare go to
bed at night (like a beast) without thanks gyuynge to god, for such be
nefytes as he has received that day and for such dangers as he has escaped?
yea and also knows not, whether he shall live till the next morrow or no, let
us therefore repent every hour and call upon god for mercy, and trust only in
him. And let us take an example at these holy fathers to use an ordynary
fasshyon of prayeng because we shall not forget our duty. And chefely, let us
follow the example of our master christ: Which prayed unto god his father
diverse times in the mount olyuete, and also when he made he last soper, and
did institute ye sacrament of his most blessed body he both prayed and gave
thanks to his father in heaven. And also he commanded his discyples and
apostels to pray contynually lest they should be led into temptacion let us
therefore to low both his example and commandments, if we will be called his
discyples or christian men. And let us not lead our life like beasts, but like
men and remember (as I said first) the cause of our creacyon: and use an
ordynary fasshyon of prayenge. And although that I have appointed three times in
the day for prayer: as in the morning: at mydday: and at night as times most
co^uenyent, and approbated by Dauyd and other holy fathers yet would I that
every man should pray as often as he is moved in spryte and not to defer it to
these three times only: nor again I would not that any man should think that
I would bind him of necessyte to these three times a day: as to a thing which
may not be left undone, upon pain of utter damnacyon (nay truly I would not
have any man so scrupulous) but yet I would not have them leave it undone,
specially at night and in the morning. And although yt I ought not to teach
other me^: but have more need to learn my self: yet I may exhort them as one
christian man should do an other: for as this ordynary fasshyon of prayenge. And
such other: trusting that by my exortacyon they will not do ye worse: but
rather amend and proceed by little and little to most parfyte perfeccyo^: to
which he bring us all: that lives and reygneth world without end. Amen.

In the morning bless the and say thus.
BLessed be the name of the father, the so^ue, and ye holy ghost now and for
ever more And blessed be the father of heaven that made me: and blessed be his
son Jesu Christ that redeemed me, and blessed be the holy ghost that preserves
me: to the^ three as to one god and one power, which is my lord and god, in
whom I trust be all honor and praise, world without end Amen. Our father
which art in heaven. etc.

And then say this prayer following.
O Lord I thank the for all thy benefits: and for that thou haste preserved
me alive this night and brought me forth to the beginning of this day: behold
therefore lord I enter into it, all things to do according to thy will and
pleasure: keep me lord and defend me, and se^de down thy holy spryte for to
istructe me that I may live this day in thy service.

An other prayer for. morning.
O Lord my god most mighti and merciful have mercy on me wreched liner, lord
I say which art the most hiest power, to whom al powere be subject both in
heaven and in earth, and knows the secrets of our hertes, to the O lord do I
call upon for help, dsyrynge ye to strenght me this day, against al ye
teptacions and assaults of the devil and the world, and to confyrme me with
thy pryncypal spryte, that I may continue this day in thy service: give me
therefore lord these gifts. Give me the heart that may repent: the will and
desire to have knowledge of thy law and commandments, the ears that will be
ready to here the, and not the world: the eyes that shall behold ryghtwysenes
and regard the poor man: the hands (I say) that shall work no evil, the
mouth in which shall be found no deceyte, ye tongue yt may ever show forth thy
praise, to who^ be all honor and glory by the mouths of all men: world
without end.

Amen.
Also say this prayer.
Lord behold me yt am thy handy work, and put forth thy helping hand unto
me.

And when ye have said thus, the^ go about your wordly busynes, remembrynge
always this great and special co^mau^dme^t of god (which is) Thou shalt not
do nor go about to do ye thing to an other, which thou would not have done to
thy self.

Remember this well, if thou desire to be saved.

At night say these prayer following.
AT night knele down on thy kneys and make thy confession to god: and ask him
mercy, and repent truly in thy heart.

Repentance.
TRue repe^tau^ce is to lament and be sorry for thy sins, and utterly to
forsake the^, and never to use the^ again But to use and practyse yt virtue
which is contrary to the vice wherein ye arre most corrupted.

As contrary to covetousness, make restitucyon again out of hand where as ye
have done wrong, and dispose the resydue of your gooddes lyberaly to the pore.

Contrary to swerynge, use rather scilens and learn to use sobernes and pa
cyens. Contrary to malice and wrath, use pacyens and show love and gentylnes
both in word and deed and forgive, reme^brynge yt christ did forgive and
suffered pacyently the words of the Jews: yea he suffered death wrongfully
among them.

And thus in every degree of sin, use and practyse yt virtue which is co^
trary to ye sin wherein ye arre most corruptdd. And so by virtue ye shall
overcome vice and sin: for it is the best means that can be devised to
bring a man to perfyte living.

Here folowith a prayer to be said at night after confession made and true
xepentaunce had. The prayer of the penytent
O Heavenly father yt creator and maker of all things to whom both heaven and
earth is obedient. And to whom the algels do service and do sing with a
contynuall voice, Holy holy, and most holy lord god of power calling the even
so, for thy great power and almyghtynes whose excellent majesty no thought
nor tongue of men or angels ca^ express. Now when I have sinned against the,
and do remember with my self, what a lord of power I do offend, with my
great and innumerable sins: then I abhor mine own folisshenes. And also
when I consider how gentle and loving a father I have forsaken. I utterly
dis pyse my madness, and great unkindness And when I behold and se from what and
how blessed a lyberte my spryte is banysshed from (which is the joy yt I was
wont to have. In the my lord god) and now in what a myserabte case and
bondage of sin and the devil I have wrapped my self in: then am I al
together myscontented with my self and sore troubled in my co^sciens. And have
nothing else before mine eyes but hell, and desperacyon: for then my conscience
trembeleth and fears much the great Justice of god (which in dead is
inevitable) and no man can escape it. But yet contrary wise on the other side:
when I behold lord thy unmeasurable love and goodness toward mankind. And thy
mercy wherein (as the prophets do testify) thou do pass and excelle. Which
sadyst, I will not the death of a sinner: but rather that he should live and
be converted. I therefore reme^bryng thy great kyndenes (always showed unto
us) and these thy most gentyl words: do say unto my self. A wreche (that I
am) why have I offended so merciful a lord: and thereat I am half astoned
again and discu^forte i my self. But the^ comes into my mind a another
sweet saying of thy mouth (which saydest) That in what hour so ever the sinner
does repent: I will no more remember his unkindness. And therewith I am so
much conforted again: that I am compelled even to marvel and lay with my
self. O the wonderful love of god toward us for his mercy is without end.
And then I say unto my self: why should I be in despair to have remyssyone
of my sins at his hands: which in the time of my noughty living has
preserved me that I might live and learn to know him. And now of his own
mere mocyon calls me to repentance because he delyteth in me and would have
me saved: sor truly he has great delight and comforth. In a repentant sinner
that comes unto him as he has declared unto us, by many parables: As in
the.x. Chapter of Luke by the parable of the woman having ten groses which if
she lose one: then she lygh tethe a candell and swepethe the house and sekethe
dylygently till she have found it. And when she has found it she calls in
her neyhgbours and lo, uers: saying my friends reioce with me For I have found
the grote again that I lost, even so likewise more joy and reioysynge shall be
in heaven over one sinner yt repe^teth: then over nynety and nine just psons yt
have not offended. And sykewyse it is let forth in the parable of the hundereth
sheep yt were let upon the hill for to go to seek one sheep yt was lost: with
diverse other parables: but it is most expressly set forth in the parable of
the prodygall ionne whose Image I utterly recognyce and konwlege in my self
for unhappily left I So loving a father buthryftely myspe^ding his substance
and gifts. And whiles I do follow still the carnal desires of my own will:
utterly forgetyng, lord thy pre ceptes. I do tomble my self all to gy there in
the seruytude of vice: And so I being blind and void of all bertu brought to
extreme pouerte can not se whether to fle. But unto hi again that I did
forsake for he is the lord of power and father of mercy. Yes truly I am
unworthy lord to be received of the. Or to lift up mine eyes unto the: or yt
I should call the by the name of a father: but I most humbly beleche the to
look gently toward me with the eye of thy mercy: for thy gentyl look and the
inspyracyon of thy spryte is of such strength yt it reuyueth a sinner being
dead. And it restores a sike man to his health again: For truly in yt I am
dyspleased now with my self and do perceive mine own fault. I must needs
refer it unto the: for it comes of the grace. And not of my self for I
being long blind and wandering far out of the right way: thou have wytsafe
to look toward me and to restore me my right again: that I may se now and
perceive in what case I am. And what danger I have escaped: And with what
myscheffes, and trobles. I was laden and cu^bred withal: I therefore lord being
an unthrifty servant and worthy of much punysshement. Am nothing worthy to be
honored and regarded like a son, nor I will not desire it, but it shall be
suffycyent for me. If it would please the of thy goodness but to admytte me into
thy service. And to accept me amongst the sympleste and lowest sore of thy
servants: that I may attain to Salvation through thy mercy: for in thy holy
place there be many mencyon places or seats. And it shallbe suffycyent for me
if I may but sit at the feet of thy blessed servants: have merci therefore on
me my lord and father, for I do utterly abhor mine old corrupt life. And
am come now for to dwell with the. And will never forsake the again: But will
continue in thy service all the days of my life. And I will forsake all the
pompes and pleasures of this world and a^ the desceytful ways that I have
used. And will not be afshamed here in this world to live aster a pore sort:
and to be acumpted a mongest ye most abiecte and symplew: so that I may win
everlasting honor with the to whom be al praise and glory now and forever
more.

Amen
The prayer of Solomon.
O Lord great riches: or extreme pouerte give me not: but provide for me in
the mean: according to thy will and pleasure for by having the one I shall
forget the, and by having the other I shall be driven to forsake the.

Prayers to be said at mess time in the beginning say thus at coufiteor.
O Lord I am not worthy to enter and come into this noble house of thine
which is ye house of prayer: but lord behold I come as a penye^t sinner I do
say with the publycane Lord be merciful to me a sinner: for I have offended
the many ways and am not worthy to lift up mine eyes into the: not to live
upon the earth but lord be thou merciful unto me a sinner according to the
great mercy and I will confess my sins vntd ye which if I would I can not
hyde from the: for thou art ye lord of power you knoweste the secrets of our
hertes: have mercy therefore on me, O Lord according to thy great mercy and
let me not cast away y^ thing throught my wrechednes: which thy almighty
goodness has created and redeemed: but forgive me lord and send thy holy
spryte into me: that I may keep thy law and commandments.

A prayer to be said at the sacrament of mess.
BLessed and praised be the father of heaven yt sent down his only son
Christ for to redeem us. And blessed be our lord Jesus christ yt shede his
blood for our sakes. And has left his body here among us in form of bread
and wine. As a pledge for to witness unto us: yt he has been all ready here
in the world and has shed his blood plenteously for our redempcyon.
Therefore O father of heaven I pray the accept his death as a suffice^t
oblacion and satystactyon for my sins. And set his passion between thy
judgment and my soul. And look not upon my sins: but have mercy on me for
his sake, and send thy holy spirit into me: that I may keep thy laws and
commandments.

Amen.
When ye do kiss ye pax say thus to your self
O Lord give me grace to forgive mine aduerlaryes freely for thy sake: yt I may
kiss worthily together with my neighbors in ye holy kiss of charity according
to thy commandment.

When ye take holy bread say thus to your self.
Like as there be many graynes of corn in these bread: even so be we al me^bres
of one bodi i^ our lord Jesus christ: in who^ there was never malice nor
co^trauersyfou^d: let us therefore agree together as the members of one body. And
so take bread lovingly together.

Amen.
When ye take holy water say thus.
BLessed and praised be our lord Jesus christ which has washed away our
sins in his blood: And is merciful to us for ever.

The holy water also is a token of our Baptyme.

Grace to be said be fore meat.
LEt us eat in the name of ye lord and satysfye our body temporaly with such
meat as he has sent.

The answer.
ANd let us desire him like wese to satysfy our soul with y^ gift of good
living that we may be ever as ready to all good works: as we be now to our
meat.

Grace to be said after meat.
Thanks be to our lord god: that has sent us thus.

The answer.
ANd let us praise him that causes both fisshes to swymme in the water. And
beasts to live on the earth for our sustenaunce: to him be praise and glory
for evermore.

Amen
A prayer to be said of a syke man at the point. (...) ^^ath
O Lord I thank the: for yt thou have preserved me from al soden death. And
have given me now this syckenes and knolege of my death and end: that I might
repent and believe and trust in the my lord god: which art merciful and do
all things for the best: for I know that thou love them: whom thou do
chastyse. And I thanked the yt you have given me know lege and faith in thy
sone lesu christ by whom I know that I shall be saved even as well as the thief
was, or Mary Magedelyne: or any other creature which were sinners as well as I
am. I will therefore lord sing forth thy praise: come forth now all people
and say with me: let us rejoice in the lord our saving health: and let us
praise him in psalms and cantycles.

For he is the great lord: And is above all gods and will not cast away his
people.

For he has looked from his hight holy place above: yea he has looked from
heaven into earth.

* That he myhht here the grievous syghes of the penitent: and yt he might save
and deliver the children of the^ that were lost.

Let us therefore praise the lord: And say that he is good unto us: for his
mercy is without end.

He has not done unto us according to our sins: nor he has not rewarded us
according to our wyckednes: but as the father should have mercy over his
children: even so has the lord taken mercy upon us that love him and here him.

For look how far dystaunce there is between ye East and the west. And so far
has ye lord set our sines from us

Let us therefore praise hi continual ly: yt was borne of the virgyn Mary.

* And suffered death for us so mercy fully: and ascended up into heaven so
glorously.

To prepare a way for us and to be our medyatour: contynually before god the
father.

And will be our judge at ye great day of Judgment: to judge us in mercy is
his intent.

Into his hands therefore I commytte my soul: trustyng only in the father the
son and the holy ghost: to whom be all praise and glory now and for ever
more.

Amen.
Here after follows rules of wisdom and virtue.xx. i number.
MAke thy prayer to god, twyse in a day at the least. 2 Avoid ydelnes, and be
always occupied in so^me honest busynes or study. 3 Be obedye^t to kings and
princes: and to their officers. 4 Here much but be not rasshe thy self in
speaking. 5 Use sobrenes and humylyte, and thou shall be called wise. 6 *
Rebuke light and wanton persons and specially swerers. 7 Show good example of
virtuous living to the people, 8 Order thy household quietly, and instruct
them in gods words. 9 * If thou be called to promocion mynyster Justyce:
without brybes or false dissymulacyon. 10 Give fair language to all people:
and specially to pore folks. 11 Be not percial for favor or lucre: nor agree
not to wrong doers. 12 Get thy goods truly: and spend them acordynge to thy
degree mesurably. 13 In prosperyte beware of pride remember thy old estate: and
live in the fear of god. 14 Desire some friend of thine to tell the of thy
fautes, and so shalt thou live suerly. 15 * Here thy friend in wisdom and
mystrust ever thine own judgment. 16 In matters of wayght: be not hasty in
answering: but take respyte. 17 For of hasty answeryng par adventure
repentance might follow but in process of time commethe wisdom and knolege. 18
In aduersite forgive and be pacyent and trust to gods help. 19 * Study
always how to be stowe thy time here: in this world to gods pleasure. 20
Remember well thy last day: and think often upon death.
FINIS.
Imprynted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the George next to saint
Dunstons church by Wyllyam Myddylton.

printer's or publisher's device


