A book of sovereign approved medicines and remedies, as well for sundry
diseases within the body, as also for all sores, wounds, goutes, and other
griefs whatsoever, that grieve or moleste the body, or any part thereof:
with other proper experimentes.

Not only very necessary and profitable, but also commodious for all such as
shall vouchsafe to practice and use the same.

Imprinted at London, nigh unto the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas
Dauson, and Thomas Gardyner, Nouembris. 24. 1577.

Sovereign medicines and remedies for sundry purposes.
To make Flos vnguentorum.
TAke Rosen and Perrosen, of each half a pound, Virgyn wax and frankincense,
of each a quarter of a pound, Mastick an ounce, Hearts talow a quarter of a
pound, Camphere two drammes: melt that is to be molten, and beat into fine
poulder, that which is to be poudred, that don, searce it, and boil them all
together, save the Camphere, then strain them into a pottel of white wine,
through a Canuas cloth, and so let them boil together: when it is boiled, set
it a cooling, until it be blood warm, then put into it your Camphere, and a
quarter of an ounce of Turpentine, and keep it with styrryng until it be
through cold: when it is cold, make it into roules, and so keep them to your
use, for one of ^he purest salues that can be made. For this ointment or salve
is most excellent for all the dyseases under written. Wherefore ye must have
respect in making it, that ye put not the Camphere and Turpentyne into the
rest, before it be as cold as blood, for then it is all lost. These be the
dieases that it is good against: viz. for old wounds, it cleanses and gendreth
good flesh, it heals faster then any other, for it will suffer no corruption
or dead flesh to be in a wound. Also it is good for the head ache, and
syngyng in the brain, and for all manner of impostumes in the head or body, for
blowyng in the ears and cheeks, for sinues sprung, stark or shronke: it will
draw out any thorn or broken bone, it is good against the biting or stinging
of any venomous beast, it will rot and heal al manner of botches, and it is good
for a Fester or Canker. Also it will draw all manner of aches out of the Liver,
spleen, or Reins. It is good for houlyng in the members. Also it being laid
upon a woman's Navel as a plaster, it will sease the flyre of menstrues, it
heals the Hemerhoides, and is special good to make a Searcloth for the gout,
ache, botche, or pestilence. This Intret is called Flos vnguentorum, for that
it is supposed for his virtues to have come to knowledge by revelation.

An other for shrinking of sinues.
TAke March Malowes one handful, of Rosemary tops as much, and stamp them
together; that done, myngle there with May butter molten, and so let it stand
ten days. then sees it on a soft fire until the strength of the herbs be
gone, when it is well sodden, strain it through a canuas cloth into an earthe^
pot, and so keep it close.

A sovereign ointment for an ache or bruise.
TAke a pound of Sage, a pound of Rue, half a pound of Wormewoode, and half
a pound of Bay leaves, then cut them small, and after beat them in a mortar,
that done, take three pound of sweet sheep suet, if ye can, of a sheep new
killed, and mynce it small, then beat it with the herbs in the mortar, until
the herbs have drunk up the suet, and be of color grene: when ye have so
don, take it out, and put it into a basin, with a pottel of oil Olive, and so
work it with your hands into the herbs, till it be al of one softnes, and
then put it into an earthen pot, and so keep it eight days close covered: at
the eight days end, sees it in a Brass Pot with a soft fire, till the
strength of the herbs be gone. And to prove it to be enough, take a
spoonefull thereof, and put it into a new canuas cloth, and wring the iuise from
the herbs, if in ye end there come any licor like broune water, it is not
soden enough. If it be enough, there will come nothing but ointment. In like
manner prove al other ointments. When ye have so done, keep them in a fair
stone pot or vessel very close, not forgetting to strain them into the vessel
wherein ye preserve it. When ye have need to occupy it, you must anoint the
pacient therewith euenyng and morning very warm, where the pain is, and being
well anointed, lay thereto a fair lynnen cloth very hot, and if ye can, keep
it to the grief with a Rouler.

An ointment for the stone, and Collike, to be made in May
TAke the buddes of Broom flowers near the shuttyng, half a pound clean
pyked from the stalks, and beat them in a mortar very small, that done,
myngle them with claryfyed May butter, as much as ye shall think meet, and so
keep it close in a vessel eight days, then sees it and strain it, as the
other ointments before: and therewith annoint the pacients grief very warm,
evening and morning.

An ointment for all manner of lamenesse, or swellynges.
TAke an handful of Time, an handful of Lauender Cotton, an handful of runnyng
Strawberyes that be like to a stryng, and cut them small, then beat the^ in a
mortar, with four or five young Swallows taken out of the neast very fleg, and
quick beat them together until ye see never a fether or piece of the^ whole:
that done, take a. i.d. of May Butter clarifyed, and myngle it in the mortar
with the herbs, and so let it stand. 24. hours before ye seth it: When you
have sodden it, use it as before ye are taught, as well in preseruyug of it, as
also in vsyng it.

A sovereign plaster for a burning or scalding, the fire being out.
TAke of Rosen in fine polder a pound, a pound of unwrought ware minced small, a
pound and half of clarifyed May butter, and put the^ all into a brass pan,
and set it upon the fire till it begin to rise, always stirring it: then take it
of the fire, and incontinent put it into a vessel with fair cold water, and
stir it together, and so let it stand a day or a night: when ye have so don,
make it up in roules, and keep them till your need, making thereof a plaster
with a knyfe upon a soft lynnen cloth, dressyng the sore twice a day.

A sovereign bath for all lamenesse.
TAke a black sheep head with the wool on it, and do out the brains and
tongue, and wipe the head clean, then put it into two gallons of fair water,
with a pecke of Culuerage, otherwise called Arse smart, being first clean
pyked and washed, and so sees them al together, till the bones fall from the
flesh, and scum it clean in the seethyng, that don, take out the bones, and
the rest put into a close earthen pan, or pot, and so keep it, taking at once
as much of the broth, flesh, and herbs, as shall suffice to bath the lame
place withal, vsyng it euenyng and morning, as hot as it may be suffered,
keeping the place warm with a linen cloth betwixt the bathyngs.

To break any sickness, sore, or felon.
TAke the grease leaves of a barow hog and pyl of the skyn, and beat the
grease in a mortar till it be enough, which ye shall know by the whytenes
thereof, then put it into a fair stone pot, not an earthen pot, and so keep it
close till May, when ye shall gather Stabies and stamp it, and strain it,
and to one quart of the grease cold, put a pottell of the iuise of Stabies,
and in like sort more or less: that done, work the grease till it have drunk
up the iuise, with your hands, then cover it, and let it stand ten days:
then press the water out of it with your hands, and after with as much of the
same iuise work it again, till it has drunk it up, and so let it stand ten
days. In like manner use it at the end of every.x. days, during May and June.
In the end preserve it till need require, and as you need take thereof as much as
will make a thick plaster, to the bygnes of the sore, and lay it
thereto.xxiiii. hours, and it will break it: and being broken, heal it with a
drawyng plaster.

A sovereign proved medicine for the pin and web in the eye, to be made in May.
TAke the tops or crops of the herb Christopher, with the stalks and leaves
thereon, of a finger length, if they be so far tender, a good quantity, and
stamp the^ very small, that done, myngle it with a good quantity of May
butter, and in a fair platter, or such like vessel stamp them together, and
use to set it in the hot sun every day, when the sun shyneth clearly, the
space of.ii. or.iii. months, till it be rotten, and if it be sooner rotten,
then strain it through a clean lynnen cloth, when as it has molten in the
sun the space of a whole day: that which is strayned out, is the medicine
which ye must keep, taking as much as a mean pynnes head, and put it into
the eye of the pacie^t lying upright, the space of a quarter of an hour. This
medicine may never be made nor myngled, but in May. It may be strayned in June,
July, or August.

A special good salve for any old sore, also good for a green wound, called
Salve Robert.
TAke a pound of weathers suet being first molten, and clarified into a cake,
and scrape it into a brass Pan or Postnet, then take a pound of virgin wax,
and in like manner scrape it into ye pan or other vessel, that done, strain a
pound of Rosen being beaten into fine polder, and so with styrryng, boil them
upon a fire of coals, until it be molte^ al into one likeness, then put to it
two ounces of black soap, and stir it a while after, then when it begins
to rise, take it of, and set it aside till it be through cold: then cut it in
pieces, and so work it up into small roules, so as there be no knots in the
roules: that ye may the better work it, anoint your hands with soft grease or
oil, and it shall not cleave to your fyngers, having thus done, keep them in
a close box.

A water to be used with this salve to wash the sore, before ye lay to the
plaster, as often as ye dress it: good to cleanse the sore, and to abate proud
flesh.
TAke a good handful of Sage, wash it clean, and sees it in a quart of stale
ale, or strong beer, and in the seethyng scum it, and put thereto a piece of
Roche Alam as byg as a Walnut, and so let it sees half away: that done, keep
it in a stone pot close, and as ye need take a saucer full thereof with some of
the leaves, and luke warm bath the wou^d or sore therewith, then wype the sore
dry with a soft lynnen cloth, and afterward lay to a plaster of the said
salve Robert; and if need be, put in a tent made of Lint and the salve
together, before ye lay on the plaster. In this manner dress the sore twice a
day, til ye think it waxes almost whole: afterward if ye list, once a day will
be enough, because it may else heal too fast.

A sovereign medicine for a burning or scalding, called Mother Cammockes
medicine, to be made in May.
TAke Daysy leaves, roots, and flowers, and the inner bark of Elder, of each
an handful, of the leaves of Briars, such as bear the beryes, a quarter of a
handful, and bruise them well together in a mortar, then put thereto a pound of
clarifyed May butter, and myngle them together, and so boil them until the
strength be out of the herbs: then strain it through a fair lynnen cloth
into the vessel wherein ye mean to keep it, as before. When you will occupye
this ointment, ye must, after ye have anointed the pacient, lay over the place
anointed a piece of the skyn of hogs grease, or the filme of sheep suet, to
keep the clothe from cleauyng to the sore. For a need this ointment may be
made in any other month wherein the Daysies may be gathered.

For a Canker.
TAke herbs Robert, red Sage, herb Grace, of each like much, stamp them in a
mortar with good ale. When ye have so done, put the herbs in a lynne^ cloth
and wet your cloth well in the iuise, then lay the cloth with the herbs to
your tooth at night and in the morning in like manner, and by the grace of God
it will draw out the Canker.

A plaster for all manner of sores, and specially for green sores.
Take of fine Sugar and Burnet, of each like much, and bruise them in a mortar,
and wash the wound with the iuise of the same, then take the herbs
fynly-beaten, and myngle with them and the iuise a quantity of english honey
and unwrought wax, so boil them together till it be all of one color: then
take them from the fire, and let them stand a while, the^ put it into a basin
of fair water, and so work it out into roules, as before is taught, in
ordring the wound. Prob. per T. Colby.

An other medicine for a Canker.
Take Sage, Rue, Woodbine leaves, Peneryall, and of Filbert leaves or buddes of
each an handful, if neither can be gotten, then take of the inner bark of the
youngest boughs, one handful, and sees it with the rest in a quart of good ale
over a soft fire, til half be consumed: wha^ it is half soden, put thereto
three sponefuls of honey, and as much Roche Alam ^^ thre^ Walnuts. When it is
consumed take it of, and keep it as your other waters: if you need hereof,
take a saucer full and warm it, then wet a lynnen clothe therein, and so wash
the sore, after that lay the cloth to the grief.

For a swellyng or bruise.
Make a Poultesse of Wheat bran and water, and when it is well sodden, put to a
dish full of it, a saucer full of oil of Rue, and stir them well together, and
so lay it to the swellyng or bruise, as warm as may be suffered, shifting it
twice a day.

For a sore breast.
Take a handful of fygges and stamp them till the kernels be broken; then take
a little fresh grease and temper it with the fygs: then make a plaster thereof,
and as hot as the pacient may suffer it, lay it to their breast, and it will take
away the anguish and swellyng, and if it be apt to break, it will break it,
else not.

For a sore leg.
Take Lie made of the ashes of clean ash wood, also take a little Alam and as
much Maddar and sees it, then strain it, and wash the sore therewith. This
water is good to clear a sore, moderating your Allam and Maddar to the
quality of the sore, and also it will further the healing of it, using
therewith a good healing plaster.

To take the fire out of a burning or scalding.
Take a quantity of restye Bacon, and burn it with fire, having a Basin of
water under it, that the dropping thereof may fall into it, then take the
dropping from the water with a fether, and put it in a dishe with the iuise of
Singrue, otherwise called Houslik, a convenient quantity to your Bacon, the
said iuise being strayned into it: also put thereto a yolke of an eg hard
roasted, then beat them together until you have made a perfect myxture thereof,
and annoint the pacie^t therewith as often as the heat of the fire shall drink
it up, or dry it, and it will take away the heat of the fire, and heal the
sore. This was proved by M. White, being sore burned with Gun poulder, who
before the use hereof, dypped that part of his body that was so burned, into
cold Bryne, to assuage the grief.

To assuage the stinging of an Adder, or other venomous beast.
Take shel Snailes which in summer time keep in Gardens, and in Winter in old
houses, break the shelles, and lay the Snayles in a peauter dishe, and prick
them with a pynne, and there will come an oil out of them, with the which ye
shall annoint the pacient with a fether, and as it dries in, still lay on more
with your fether, till you may perceive where the styng stycketh: then take one
of the Snailes vnpricked, and lay it to the grief. To keep the swellyng from
the heart, you must lay that part of the body so stong, higher the^ the
heart. Also betwixt the heart, and the place so stong, bind a plaster of
Triacle upon a lynnen clothe an ynche broad, and it will drive the swelinge
from the heart.

An other remedy to take out the fire of a burninge or scaldinge.
Take the yolks of.xx. or mo hard roasted eggs, and fry them in a frying pan,
breaking them all to pieces, and in the frying there will rise a frothe, and
after the frothe there will also rise an oil, which oil ye shall take out of
the pan, and with a fether annoint the sore as fast as the fire shall drink
it up, and in a small time it will both kill the fire, and also heal the sore.

To heal a green wound.
Take the herb Salindine and Houselyke equal quantity, then bruise them in a
mortar, and take the iuise of them, and put it in the wound, and annoint the
same therewith: that done, fyl the wound with part of the bruised herbs, and so
bind it up, and in short time it will heal the sore: as by proof has been
seen.

For watering eyes.
Take Bittanie, and eat it, or drink it, whether ye list, and it will take
away the watering of the eyes.

For a woman's sore breast.
TAke and temper clean wheat flower with yolks of eggs, and make thereof a
plaster and lay thereto, shifting it twyse a day, and it will heal the sore

To kill the worm that bredeth in a man's eye
Take Rewe otherwise herb grace, and stamp it, and temper it with the urine
of the same man, that done, give it him to drink, and it shall kill the said
worm.

An other medicine for sore eyes.
Take the oil of Eggs, the iuyse of stamped Dayses. and the oil of black
Snayles, which you must get in this manner: Bray them in a mortar, then put
them into a fair linen clothe, holdyng it over a sauser, that it may drop
into the sauser: that done, take the said drops with the other things before
written, and boil them altogether with skymming: then put it in like vessel
as your other ointments, and as ye need thereof, take a feather, and dip it in
the vyall, or other vessel, wherein it remains, and so annoynte sore eyes so
often as need requires.

To staunch a wound of bleeding.
Fill the wound full of Orpin chaufed in, or betwixt your hands, and it will
staunche.

Also fill the wound full of the blades of English Safforne, and it shall
stanche.

Oil of Exiter poured into a wound, will also staunche the same.

This oil of Exiter will also heal a bruise, if it be anointed therewith, and
after rolled up with a warm rowler, and so shifted once in.xxiiii. hours.

An other to staunch a wound.
Take Veruin made in fine poulder, and put thereof in the wound, and it will
stanch.

To staunch bleeding at the nose.
Take the iuise of red Nettles, and good red wine, of each like quantity,
putting thereto the poulder of white Chalk as much as half a Hasel nut shel
will hold: that done, warm it luke warm, and give it the pacient to drink.

A proved medicine for the gout.
Take a pretty quantity of green flies called Cantarides which the Apothecary
does seek, and twyse as much crummes of sower Rye bread, and stamp them in a
mortar with a little vinegar, so as ye may make thereof a plaster the breadth of
a groute, then lay it upon the sore place, that is, where the most grief is,
for the space of sire or feuen hours: then lift up the plaster with the point
of a knife, and so let it lie half an hour. When you have so done, pull it
of, and you shall see a blyster gathered under it, which with a needle you must
prick in the lowest part thereof, and with your finger thrust out the water
softly, and if the water be cold it will be yellowe, if the pain be out, it
will be white like the gelly of a Pyg: having thus don, take a sear Oken leaf,
and cuttyng out of it all his veins, prick it full of holes, and lay it to the
blister, lettyng it remain there until it be whole. The blyster being broken,
the pain of the disease is gone, notwithstanding the leaf must heal the skyn
anewe, and also you must make the blyster beneath the joint, as if it were on
the knee, the^ to make it a little beneath it, or else where in like manner.

An other for a bruise or swelling.
Take the roots of March Mallows three handfuls and cut them small, and one
handful of wild Mallows, and sees them in a gallon of fair water, until
the roots be soft, and the water almost consumed: then take out the roots and
leaves, and draine them through a fair cloth, and stamp them: Then bath the
bruise or swellyng with the same water wherein the roots were sodden, a good
while together, with a lynnen cloth dipped therein, for the more ease to the
sore. When you have so bathed the sore, take your roots and leaves well stamped,
and myngle them with a good handefull of Line seed fynely beaten, and a good
quantity of Bores grease, and make thereof a plaster of great thycknesse, and
heat it very hot, and so lay it to the sore, and within four or five days it
will heal it.

A proved medicine for a Fellon.
Take the iuise of Smallage, the iuise of Fetherfue, of each like quantity,
and myngle them with Wheat flower, to the quantity of a peauter dyshe full,
and put thereto as much black soap as the quantity of a Walnut: the^ work it
with your hands until the Soap can not be seen, then make thereof a plaster,
and lay it to the Fellon very warm.

A medicine for all manner of Goutes.
Take a lapfull of Rue, of Hysope as much, of water Mint as much that grows
in the water, of Arsmart as much, and boil them together in a great vessel
till the color of the herbs be changed: Then having a baine tub ready, with a
round stool in it, and therein a hole as byg as the palm of an hand, and a
soft stool to set his foot upon, and put in the water seethyng hot, the bayne
being close covered that the air get not out: and let the diseased set him
down as if he were at his stool of easement, with his feet upon the other, so
as no part of his body be touched with the water, and so let him sweat an
hour, if he can endure it, and in sweating let him rub him with his hands
where most grief is. If he be constrained by faintness or otherwise to
drink, give him stale Ale with a toste, but it is best to abstain. After this
let him lie down in a warn bed, and when he is dry, give him half an ounce
of Cassia Fistula drawn with a water that longs to a Laske, and after let
him sleep, and by Gods grace it shall help him.

For to knyt a vain.
Take the herb called Bledith Bustaporus, the iuise of Bays, and bray them
together, and give it the pacient to drink in warm Posset ale.

For the Siatica passio.
Take Deares suet, Rosen, and stone Tar somewhat more in quantity, and boil
altogether till al be moulten, then spread it on a lynnen cloth in manner of a
plaster, and prick the cloth very thick with a knyfe, and lay it where the
pain is as hot as may be suffered, It has been proved.

Stubbes medicine for the Gout.
Take a quart of red wine lees, a quarter of a pound of Bean flower, half a
quarter of a pound of Cummyn fine beaten, a sponeful of bole Armianake, half
an ounce of Camphere, which must be put in at twice, and beyle them altogether
till they be somewhat thick, then make it plaster wise, and lay it to the
pain.

R. Osbornes medicine for the Gout.
Take three pyntes of fair runnyng water from a spryng, and put to it three
handfuls of red Rose leaves that be new dried, but not distylled, and sees
them together till the leaves be very tender, and the water more then half
wasted: then put thereto half a pynt of good Rose water, and let them boil
together a great while after. When the leaves be as tender as may be, and the
water well consumed, put to it of tartest leauened white bread crummes finely
grated, and styre it with a stick till it be as thick as may be possible: then
make thereof a plaster upon a lynnen cloth, and as hot as may be suffered,
bind it to the place grieved with roulers. In this manner use it twice a day.

Stubbes plaster for the Gout.
Take Occicronu^ Galbanum, and Melitonum, of each. i.d. and still them: then
take a pound of stone Pitche, an other pound of fine Rosen: one half ounce of
Camphere, one quarter of Deeres suet, half a quarter of a pound of Cummyn, and
boil them on a soft fire together, and thereof make a plaster upon a piece of
lether: using it as the other.

An other for the Gout:
Take the Gall of an Ox, and Aqua composita, of each like quantity, and put
thereto as much oil of Exiter, as of both the other, and labor them al
together in a pot with a stick, by the space of half an hour: when you have
so done, annoint your pain therewith, then wet a lynnen cloth therein, and as
hot as ye can suffer it, bynd it to the sore.

A proved water to heal as well new wounds, as old sores.
Take of Camphere. vi.d. of white Coporas. iiii.d. and boil them together in
an earthen pot for such a purpose upon a chafyn dish of coals till they be
moulten, and also till it be hardened again. When it is hard, take it of, and
beat it in a mortar with.ii.d. of Bole Armoniake into fine poulder: then take a
pan with a quart of fair runnyng water, and so set it on the fire till it begin
to sees, and then take it of, and put into it two sponfuls of the same
poulder, and against the fire let it boil a little together. When it has
boiled a while before the fire, take it of, and ere it be cold, put it into a
stone pot to keep, as your other waters or oyntmentes, stoppyng it very close.
When ye need to occupye thereof, take two or three sponfuls of it, and in a
saucer warm it on the fire, and wetting a linen cloth therein, lay it to the
wound or sore, and so roll it hard with roulers, vsyng it on this manner. And
if it heal over fast, the^ dress it with the water being cold, once or twice,
and it will cause that it shall not heal too fast, and in this manner use it as
your judgment, and discretion shall seem best.

The L. Capels salve for cuts or ranklyngs, coming of rubbing. It is also a
good lyp salve.
Take a pound of May butter, and clarifye it, then take the purest thereof,
also take.iii. ounces of English wax, and.ii. ounces of Rosen, and clarify
them by the^ selves: then boil them altogether upon a soft fire with styrryng
that it burn not, and when it is boiled, cool it, and after keep it in the
cake or otherwise, as your other salues.

To eat out the dead flesh in any wound.
Take Henbane, and eggeshels, and burn them together: then stamp them into
fine powder: Put thereof such quantity into the wound, as shall seem
needful: and it will eat out the dead flesh.

To heal a wound within ten days, as by proof has been seen.
Stamp Camphere with Barrowes grease, and put it into the wound, and it will
heal it.

To ripe and break botches.
Dip Dragon leaves in oil, and lay it upon the botch, and it will break it.

To clear the sight of eyes.
Take as many red Snayls as ye can get, which in rain or hayle crepe about,
and sees them thoroughly in well water, and in the seething, gather or skym of
the fat that will come out of them, and preserve it as the other ointments, and
when ye need, take and anoint your eyes therewith.

An other remedy for sore eyes.
Take the iuise of Fenell and drop thereof into the sore eyes euenyng and
morning, and it shall heal the grief and pain.

To assuage the swelling of the gignitors.
Take coorse meal and melte yt with honey, that don, stamp it with Cummin till
it be well myngled: then make thereof a plaster, and lay it to the sore, and it
will take a way the swelling.

An other medicine to break a byle.
Take branne and woman's milk, and put them together, when it is thoroughly
soken, lay of it to the sore, and it will break.

To make oil of Exiter.
Take one poounde of Cowslips in the month of May, and steep them in oil
Olive in as much quantity as they may easily be steeped in, and let them lie
till June, when you must gather of Calamint, herb John, Sage, Ambrose, wild
Sage, Egremont, Sothernwod, Penerial, Lauender, Peritory, Rosemary Camamil,
Hearif called Sliuers, Peritory of Spain, Laurel leaves, flowers of Lylly, of
each of these an handful: then grynde the^ in a mortar as small as Grensing,
that don, take the Cowslip flowers, above said, and wring them out of the oil,
and put them into a mortar with the oher herbs, and grynd them all into one
lykenes: when ye have so done, put it into as much white wine as may easyly
steep it in a day and a night: then take the herbs with the wine, and boil
them together with the oil Olive, wherein the Cowslyps were steeped first,
and so let them sees together till the wine and water be wasted away. To know
if it be enough, take out of the neathermost of it a spoonefull, and if there
be no water in the spoone, it is enough. If it be enough, take it of, and put
it into a strong lynnen bag, and strain it betwixt two staves, and so keep it
in a vessel either of Tynne or Glass, for no other will hold it.

This ointment or oil is very good against all manner of maladyes that be in
the synues or other place, taken through cold: as goutes, Palsies, and old
bruises of the bones and joints, and must be used in this manner. In the Summer
time the place so grieved shall be anointed against the sun, and in Winter
against the fire, and after the anointing the sore must be over laid with
black wool un washed, being warmed very hot, and so bound to with roulers.
Also this ointment, otherwise called oil Olive keeps his virtue or strength
three years, and is not to be made, but as before is said, in May, and June.

A proved medicine for the bleeding at the nose, called the L. Maryes medicine.
Take the shel of an egg, the meat being very clean out, and put it in the
fire until it be burnt very black, and ready to break: then take it out, and
make thereof fine poulder, whereof ye shall blow through a quyl part thereof into
the nose that bleedeth, and it shall staunch.

For the Migrue in the eyes.
Sees new milk, and when it is soden, pour it into a Basin, and cover the
basin with a peauter platter, and with the water that comes of the Basin,
wash the sore eyes and brows, and in few dressynges of them in this manner,
you shall be helped.

To kill the Palsy.
Drink the root of Valerion in polder, and it will destroy the Palsy, so that
ye eat no hogs flesh.

A remedy for the Dropsy.
Scrape an Elder root very clean, and break it in many pieces, or shred it
into white wine, and let it steep therein, then drink the wine, and it will
heal your disease.

An other for the same.
Take the herb called Arnoglosa, and sees it in white wine, and use to
drink thereof fasting, and it will help you of the dropsye.

An other for the same disease.
Take the poulder of Smallage and Fenel roots, and the iuise of Fenitory, and
cleanse it with sugar, then make a Sicop thereof, and give the pacient to drink,
and with Gods help he shall recover.

For ache in the back.
Take Egremont and Mugwort both leaves and roots, and stamp them small then
myngle them well with old Deeres suet, then smere or annoint thy grieved place
therewith very warm, and after roll it up hard.

An other for the Palsye, called Esbe pater.
Take and still the Primeroses with their leaves, and drink thereof fasting,
and within thryse drinking it will help you: also it is good against the head
ach or other aches.

Against the Crampe.
Take and beat Brymston, and Veruin together, and so bind it to your arm or
other place grieved, and it shall kill it for having the pain again.

An other medicine to break any sore upon the breast.
Take of Mallows one handful, and of Wormwood as much, and seth them in
runnyng water upon a soft fire till they be tender: then take them clean from
the water, and chop them upon a board with Barrows grease, to the quantity of
half the herbs, and thereof lay to the sore as much as you think meet for
it, as hot as ye may suffer it, and once in.xxiiii. hours change it, and when
it is broken, dress it with a drawing plaster.

For the bloody Flixe.
Sees milk, and in the seething put in a piece of Roche Allam, which will
cause a curd, which curd being clean taken from the whay, you must drink the
said whay as hot as is possible: also if your stomach can possible bear it,
you must eat the curd, and with Gods help you shall recover.

An other to stop the bloody Flixe:
Take of the purest red Rose leaves dried, and make them in fine polder, then
take half as much fine Sinamone: that done, take fine white bread, and make
tostes of them, and being tosted, soke them in good red wine, and when they are
soked, take them out and strain the polders upon the^, one or two of these
tostes be sufficient at one time, use them fasting, and also at your going to
bed, being new made, but ye may not drink in two or three hours after: if
you have not Roses ready dried, dry some in an Oven, or before the fire, and
this by the help of God shall help you within few eatynges.

A proved medicine for a Stiche.
Grate a good quantity of Setwell, and half as much Gynger, then take.vi. or
vii. spoonefuls of water Ascabies, and put them together, shaking them well
together in the pot or glass, and so drink it of being warmed before, then
lay you down, and sweat, if you can.

An other for the same.
Take an handful of herb Grace, a quarter of a pound of Cummyn well bruised,
then take a pottle or a quart of the dregs of good ale, and boil all these
together, puttyng into it cru^mes of leauened bread sufficient to make the
rest very thick, the^ put it into a very strong lynnen bag, and so lay it to
the grief, if the pain remove, remove also your bag ever with the pain,
refreshing it with warmth, and it shall help.

An other for the same, proved.
Annoint your side with the Oil of Melilote, then make a plaster of the same
Melilote upon a piece of Leather, and lay it to your side, and change it not
but once in a week.

A proved medicine to cause sleep.
Take four spoonefuls of good vinegar, and as much Rose water, and of oil of
Roses two sponfuls, and of crummes of coorse leauened bread made of clean
Wheat, with an handful of Rose leaves dried, as you shall think will make the
licour thick to lay upon a lynnen cloth: these being boiled together upon a
chafyndish of coals. When it is enough, lay it upon the foreheade and temples
from the one ear to the other, and so let him lie upon a bed, making no noise,
and by the grace of God he shall sleep within one quarter of an hour.

An other for the same.
Stamp Lettise seed and Smallage seed together in a mortar, then temper it
with the white of an egg, and so bynd it to the forehead, and he shall sleep.

For the head ach, and clensing thereof.
Chawe Pellitorye of Spain in thy mouth, and it will cleanse the head, and also
take away the ache or pain.

An other for the head ache.
Take the iuise of Byttanie, Veruin, Wormwood, Colodine, green Mallows, and
Sage, claryfyed Honey, and fine Pepper corn beaten in poulder, and seth al
these well in fair water as much as by your indgement shall be sufficient for
to drink the other compounds before, which must be in equal quantities, use
this drink fasting as you find pain, and it shall help.

An other medicine to cause sleep.
Take a spoonful of oil of Roses, a sponful of Rose water, and half a
sponful of red Vyneger, and temper them all together, then with a fine lynnen
clothe annoint the pacients head.

To purge and cleanse the head.
Take a pint of white vinegar.i. d. of the poulder of Spemial, and.i. d. of the
polder of Pellitorye, which is like to small styckes.ii. d. of good stone
Honnye, then sees them altogether, and when it has soden something, take it
of the fire, and put to it a sponful of good Mustard styrring it well together,
and in that manner preserve it as before ye be taught in the others. Use one or
two hours after dinner, to put of this water or medicine into your mouth,
roulyng it up and down with your tongue, keepyng close your lips, and beware
that none go down your throat. In like manner use thereof to the number of.ix.
spoonefuls one after an other, always puttyng them out into a peauter basin,
or such like vessel, the better to peruse that which will come out of your
head by the operation thereof. And in vsyng this medicine three days together,
you shall find remedy.

An other for all manner diseases in the head.
Take.iiii. penny worth of the root of Pellitory of Spain, which is the same
in the other before mentioned, with half a penny worth of Spilonard, and beat
them into poulder: then boil them as the other, with good red vinegar, if you
have not white, and being boiled and cold, put to it a sauser full of
clarifyed honey, and an other of good mustard, with styrryng as you did the
other. Also let him use it in iyke manner and quantity, as the other, either
after dynner or supper, whether he list, and in few times vsyng this, you shall
perceive the disease to wear a way: mary he must use every spoonful a good
while in his mouth, though some what to his pain.

A proved medicine for pain in the head.
Sees Alehofe in fair water, and being sodden, bind the herbs to the noddle
of the head hot, and it shall help.

A proved medicine for the coughe, and ach in the breast by reason thereof.
Boil Stabies in fair water, and with the water bathe or wash the breast,
then lay the herbs thereto in manner of a plaster, as hot as you can suffer
it. This must be done at your going to bed, and in once or twice so doing, you
shall recover.

For pain in the stomach.
Take Woormewoode, Fetherfewe, Mynts, crummes of brown bread, and
Frankincense, or Cummyn beaten to fine poulder, by equal portions, and boil
the^ al in Malmesey very thick, as you are taught before, puttyng it when it
is sodden, into a thick lynnen bag, and very warm lay it to thy stomach.

An other for the cough.
Take a handful of good Fygges, and sees them in Ale or Beer till they be
somewhat tender: then slyt them a sunder, and in a lynnen bag for the purpose
lay them as hot as ye can suffer upon the stomach, and when it is cold, warm
them with the bag in the licor that before they were boiled in, and thus doing
you shall by Gods help be healed.

An other for the same.
Take like quantity of great Raysons as you did of the Figs, or twice as
many, and boil them in Claret wine, the stones being first taken out of them,
and when they be tender, use them as you did the Fygges, to your breast, warmyng
the^ as they cool, in their hot licour.

A very good drink for the said cough.
Take a quart of white wine, and boil it with Licoras, Anise seeds, and Sugar
Candy, of each like quantity, putting therein ten Fygs of the best, till it be
half consumed, and so preserve it to drink thereof euenyng and morning three or
four spoonefuls warm.

For the Murre or pose.
Take Sticcadose, or for want hereof half a handful of Spyke, of Nigella
Romana half a handefull, of Rose leaves half an handful, and of Masticke as
much with a quarter of an handful of Cloves. these being beaten into fine
poulder, make a fine quilte of Syndale, and puttyng them into it, lay it to the
moulde of your head.

For the Migrue.
Take half a pint of Knit Madde^, an ounce of Cummyn seed, and a handful of
Sengrue, then braye them all together small in a mortar, and then boil them in
the milk of a cow of one color, thicknyng it with Wheat meal, and being
very thick, lay it plaster wise to your forehead and temples.

An other medicine for the headache.
Take the iuise of Walworte, Salt, Honey, Wax, and Incense, of as equal
portions as you can guess them, and boil them together: being boiled preserve
it as you do other ointments, and as you find pain, annoynte your head
therewith, and it shall help you: also it is written that if ye wear the herb
Bittanye about your neck, then it will assuage the ache.

An other drink for the coughe.
Take a handful of Rue, and of Sothernwood as much, with like quantity of
Rosemary, a quart of claryfied Honey, and a quart of white wine, then seethe as
these together, and being sod, put out the licour and stamp the herbs in a
mortar, that done, put them again into the licour, and so let it boil a
while: when ye have so done, strain your licour through a fine strayner or
cloth, into a vessel wherein you shall keep it close, and use to drink thereof
in the morning cold, and at night hot, such quantity as ye think good.

An other drink for the same.
Take Hysope, Rosemary, Cerfloure, Plantine, Elrentaure, and Redish root, of
each like quantity, and seethe them in white wine from a pottle to a quarte,
and being sodden, put out the licour from the herbs, and beat them in a
mortar, the^ put them together, and myngle it with styrryng: then strain them
into an other pot, puttyng thereto half a pound of clarifyed honey, and a
pretty deal of clarifyed May butter: then sees them the space of a quarter of
an hour, the^ strayn it, and when it is cold, put it into a fair glass, and
so keep it close, geuyng therout so often as the diseased shall drink
thereof.vi. spoonefulles, being warmed with as much stale ale.

For boiling of the stomach.
Take of Fennel and Ash roots like quantity beaten into fine poulder, and
drink thereof in white wine, and it will help you.

To clear the pypes.
Take the roots of Elena Campana, two handfuls of Hysope, and one handful of
Lycoras fine beaten in a mortar, then sees the^ in a pottle of white wine, to
a pynt, then keep it in a close vessel, and drink thereof in the morning
cold, and at euenyng warm.

Against the stopping of the pypes.
Take Hysope, Myntes, Rosemarye, Daysies, and Consond, of each like quantity,
and sees them in ale with Licoras and use it as the other before.

Against horsenesse.
Take a good quantity of Veruine and sees it with Licoras in fair water,
the^ strain the water, and use no other drink with your meat, until ye find
remedy.

A broth to cool the stomach and Liver, and to make one sollible.
Take a Capon, or a leg of Veale, or a shoulder, whether be easiest to be
gotten and sees it in an earthe^ pot, with skimmyng, then take a handful of
Endiffe, a handful of Violet leaves, a handful of Dandelio^, of white Beets
half a handful, and half a handful of Mallows, with three Succory roots,
the pyth being taken out of them, also half a handful of Burrage, and as
much Borage, half a pound of great Raisons, the stones taken out, a pound of
Prunes, and half a dosen slyps of wyld Margerome, with a few whole Maces, and
a little Salt, then boil all these together to a Gellye, and after strain it
through a fair cloth into an earthen pot, without any compulsion, then keep
it as your others, warmyng thereof so often as ye list to drink.

A sovereign and proved medicine for heat in the stomach, coming by an
ague, or otherwise.
Take a piece of Scarlet in Grain, cut after the proportion of the knotte of
the stomach, and sees it in a little vinegar and Saunders, until the lycour
be consumed, and so lay the Scarlet as hot as can be endured, to the stomach,
then cover it close with lynnen very thick of foldes, to keep in the heat,
and when it is cold, heat it in like licour as before, twice or thrice
together. Use this as often as ye find pain, and it shall help you.

Two proved medicines to stop vomiting.
Give the pacient to drink a draught of warm ale or beer, a quantity of
fine Synamome, and it shall stay the vomityng: if it do not, then take three
spoonfuls of the water of Mynts, and give it the pacient to drink, with a
draught of ale or beer, as the other. Both have been well proved.

To cause good tasting of meat.
Drink wine sodden with Sentorye, and Plantine, evening and morning, and it
shall soon help thee.

A very wholesome water to be drunk all the month of May.
Take Ribwort, Endiffe, Violet leaves, Buglas, Synkfoyle, and Mercurye, of each
of these herbs a great handful, and sees them in a pottle of morning whay
half an hour, and so keep it being strayned, or rather drayned through a
fair clothe into a vessel, wherein it shall remain, and give a draught
hereof luke warm to drynk every morning, during that month, to as many as ye
will, as well in health, as otherwise, and it shall preserve their health. The
more that ye make, if your number be great, the better it is for the age
thereof, using the quantity after this rate.

To avoid fleame.
Sees Slose in fair water a good quantity, and being sodden, draine out the
water clean, and put the Slose into a vessel of.iii. gallons of good ale,
letting them stand so.iiii. or.v. days close, as ye use to keep Ale, after the
standing let the diseased drink thereof evening and morning.

An other to drive fleame downewarde, and to cleanse one.
Take ye root of flower de Bawte, otherwise Lyllye clades, and stamp it, then
wring out as much iuise as will fyl an eg shell, then take in any other vessel
as much fine Sugar as will fill the like shel, and first strain half the Sugar
in a boule or such like cup, and after put into it the licour, or iuise, and
then strain the other half of Sugar upon the licour, and so let him, or her
drink it of at one draught, and it shall help by Gods grace.

To provoke a good stomach or appetite.
Take a handful of herb Grace, and as much Hysope, and sees them in a potel
of Vinegar, and a pottell of runnyng water, until it be al but one quart, then
strain it, and keep it as the others, vsyng as often as need requires fasting
to drink thereof four spoonfuls.

To cause one to perbrake.
Take two spoonfuls of red vinegar, and one of Mustarde, and boil them
together, with a little Triacle, and when it is boiled, cool it, and ere it be
altogether cold, drink it of, and it shall help you.

To make laxatiue pottage.
Pare the roots of Eladine, and wash them clean, and sees the^ in fair
water till they be tender: then chop them with Borage, Parsely, Violets,
Mercury, Mallows, and such other herbs as be good for pottage, and make
thereof pottage, with other fresh broth, and give the diseased as much of the
same pottage as he can well eat, and it shall help him.

For one that is costiffe.
Stamp Maleworth, and strain the iuise into a pretye quantity of Honye, of
each like much, then melt or heat them together, and beying molten, drink it,
and ye shall have ease.

An other for the same.
Steep Line seed in water, and when it is well steeped, sees it in other
water, and being sodden, and the water clean drayned from the seed, eat of
the seed as ye may, and it shall help you.

For one that is loose bodyed.
Give him Persely seeds beaten into fine poulder to drink in warm strong
ale, and it shall help him.

An other for the same.
Sees clean red wheat till it be broken, then take it from the water, and
stamp it, and after strain it, then take the best of it, and strain it into
a Postnet with a little Salt in it, and so sees it again a while in other
water, and being soden, strain it again, and give the diseased to eat, and
by Gods help he shall recover.

An other for the same.
Take the milk of a Cow that has not had a calfe in one year before, and
mingle it with like quantity of good old red wine, of both as much as may be
drunk at a good draught, and give the pacient to drink, and he shall be healed.

Against Consumption in man or woman.
Take Smallage, Growedswel, chikwede, of altogether one handful, but of
Smallage most part, then take a leg of Beofe, and cut the flesh from the
bone, and the fat from the lean, and after hack the flesh, or fyl it full of
cuts, so that it may hang together, and in that manner seethe it until it be
almost enough, and in the sething skym away the fat clean as it ryseth, then
put in the herbs, and so let them sees together with such quantity of water
as shall be sufficients for that flesh: when it is sodden enough that will be like
a gelly, then take and strain it through a gelly bag, that done take a
chicken, and boil it in fair water vntl it be enoughe, and then stamp the
chicken in a mortar, and strain it with the gelly made of the beofe, and so
preserve it, giving the pacient thereof as often as he can be content to take it,
four or five sponefuls at once milk warm. In thus doing the pacient shall
recover with gods help, for it is a special remedy well proved, by recovering
some diseased herewith.

For the black Iaundise.
Take Worms of the earth called of some Heses, otherwise Maddes, in the
mornings at such time as they appear above ground, and slit them, and being
well ciensed within, frye them until they be thorough dried, that done, make
the^ into fine poulder in a mortar, and so preserve your poulder in a box, and
as ye need take thereof as much as ye think mete, and give it the diseased to
drink with a little fine Saffrone in Beer, Ale, or Wine, and within three or
four days drynking thereof, he shall recover.

For the yellowe Iaundise
Take the reddest Docke roots that ye can get, and being washed clean, put
them into a vessel of good Ale, and when it is stale, let the diseased drynk no
other drynk to his meat but of Ale, and it shall help him.

Remedies against the Collicke, stone, and strangulion, first called Doctor
Corsons medicine against the stone.
Scrape the quantity of two sponfulls of white Castle Soap into a pint of
stale Ale, and heat them together in a Goddard, or other like pot, or vessel
till the Soap be consumed: use to drink of this fasting as warm as ye can
abide it, abstayning two hours after from meat and drink, stering about in
that space: in like manner at night two hours before ye go to bed, and in thus
doing.ix. days together ye shall find recovery, or as occasion shall serve,
more or less.

Doctor Argintines medicine for the Stone.
Take the red Bark of Yewe tree dried and beaten into fine poulder, and after
searce it through a fine Searcer, also take a like quantity of Black Iette
beaten, and searced in like manner, and being mingled together, drink thereof
with wine or Ale blood warm five or six times, as the other before.

Another to break the Stone in the bladder.
Take Alexander, Loueache, and water Cresses; of each like much, and boil the^
in a gallon and half of fair water, being boiled put thereto for want of
Licoras, a portion of claryfied Sugar, use to drink thereof euenyng and
morning xxi. days, and it will without fail break the stone.

An other medicine to be used after this, or other that breaks the stone,
which being used a certain time, will cause the stone broken, never after to
harden in the bladder.
Take a pound of Gromwel, a pound of Saxafrage seed, and a pound of Coliander,
with a quarter of a pound of Soras white, and read, and grynde all these in a
mortar very small, and so keep it vsyng to eat thereof in your pottage every day
a spoonefull.

An other proved medicine for the stone.
Take Time, Ramsons, Bean cods, Pellitory of the wall, and Saxifrage like
quantities, and steep them one night in white wine, then distyl them, and use
to drink thereof.

An other proved medicine to break the stone in the bladder, and to void it in
the urine.
Take Sampiere, and Pellitory of the wall distylled together, and drink thereof
four spoonfuls at once, with like much white wine, or for want hereof, of the
strongest ale you can get, and for want of Sampiere, take Camamile, Alexanders
and Persely, and distyl them with Pellitory, vsyng it as before, in your drink.

An other remedy for the stone, and to cause the voydance of urine.
Take Pellitorye of the wall, and Sothern wood, and sees them in water or
white wine, with a quantity of sheep suet till it be tender, then put the
herbs and tallow in a lynnen bag, and warm lay it to the bottom of the
belly, using this you shall find remedy.

To make an oil for the stone, that lasts one year, also good to provoke
urine.
Sees Persely, Sothern wood, and Pelitory of the wall with swines grease, til
it be al very grene, and in the boiling keep it with styrryng that it burn
not, and when it is so sodden, put it in like vessel, as ye before are taught,
by the other ointments, and as often as ye occupy thereof, annoint the pacient
therewith very warm upon the nauel and small of the belly.

Another for the Stone, and to provoke urine.
Take of Persely.iii. handfulles.ii. of Time, of Sentory.iii. and.iiii. of
Sampier.ii. of Alexander leaves, and one of Camamel, and sees them together in
a pottel of fair water to a quarte. But beter is white wine, then put to it
two spoonefuls of Aqua vitae, and after strain, or rather drayne out the water
or lycour, and give thereof presently to the sick to drink, that done, lay
the herbs so strained to the belly of a sick very warm, and it will break
the stone, and also boyd it, with the help of the drink being drunken.iiii.
days together.

A very good medicine for the Collicke and stone.
Take Parsely seed a quarter of an ounce, Broom seed, Gromwell seed, Fe^nel
seed, Anyse seed, Plantine seed, or Coliander seed, of each of these a
quarter of an ounce, Nutmegs half an ounce beaten very fine, Sugar.iiii.
ounces beaten fine, and searced through a Searcer, and mingle al these
together, then take.viii. spoonfuls of white Wine, and put to it half a Walnut
shel full of those mingled poulders, and give the sick to drink, and within
twice drinking it shall help him.

But if the pain be very sore, take an ointment called Altea, and oil of
Roses of each one ounce, and annoynte the place most grieved against the sore
so hot as is possible to suffer, and it will cause the stone to void.

For the collicke in the belly.
Take a pint of Malmesy, and of Saffron one half penny worth, and two
Nutmegges, and bray them both in a mortar, then take as much of the Wine
warmed, as ye may well drink at a draught, with as much of the poulder as you
think meet for the wine, and give it the pacient at such time as the fervent
pain comes on him, and it shall in short time help him.

An other for the Collicke.
Take Mustard, Fygges, and vinegar stamped together, and lay to the belly of
the diseased cold, in manner of a plaster, and it shall help.

Fenel roots in syrrop be good against the Collicke, being made in this manner.
Wash Fe^nel roots clean in fair water, and slyce them small the whole
length of the root, if ye can, and sees them in fair water, not breakyng
them, and when they be almost soden, put to them a pound of clarifyed Sugar,
with a quarter of a pound of Honey, and so let them boil together a while
softly, as the Sugar rise not much in the boylyng. You shall perceive them to
be enough by the tenderness of the roots. Being thus sodden, reserve them in
an earthen pot, and eat thereof as often as ye think good and needful.

A proved medicine to avoid urine, that has been long stopped. Also for the
stone.
Take Radish roots, one if it be of bigness and strong, is sufficient, and
scrape it very clean, and lay it in white wine a night in steep, then strain
the wine, and give the pacient to drink, and he shall void water.

An other to provoke urine, proved.
Take of Time one handful, of Parsely four handfuls, the^ sees them in white
wine till they be tender, then put to the^ three or four spoonefuls of Aqua
vitae, and so strain or drayne the licour from the herbs, and give the
diseased to drink. Also ye must lay the herbs to the belly of the pacient
very warm, in a lynnen cloth or bag, and he shall make water.

An other proved medicine for the stone, to be used once in a month, at such
time as is best to take a purgation, before the receyt of the medicine.
Take Gromwell seed, Parsely seed, Alexander seed, the hard row of a red
Hearing, dried, and beaten into polder, the leaves of she Holly dried, and
beaten into poulder, which be those that have no pricks and grains, of each
like quantity beaten into fine poulder, and then myngled together, taking
hereof half a spoonful in a draught of Malmesey, taking before an easy
Purgation. Proved by maistresse Blage.

An other to loose, and purge the urine stopped in a man.
Take of Englysh Saffron beaten to fine poulder, and of pure black Soap equal
portions, and being well mingled together, spread it upon a plaster of
Le^^^^^ and that upon (...) side, then lay it upon the Navel of the sick, and
it ^^ll help the auoydaunce of the urine ^^^hin an hour.

An other to break the stone.
Take a Hare flead, and put it into an (...) then pot, covering the same with
^^^cke paste, then upon the fire, or in an oven bake it until it be both
flesh and bones, so dried, as ye may beat it into fine poulder, the best is
upon fire, for it will of it self cast licour, and also it will ask a great
fire and time ere that it be thoroughly dried also ye must put it in without
washing it, when it is thus dried, and beaten to fine poulder, as well bones as
fleesh, keep it as other poulder, and as ye need, give of it to the sick in
drink, and it will in few times drinking break the stone.

An other, which may be called a marvelous strange experience.
Take the blood of an Vrchin, otherwise quart, then keep it, using to drink a
little thereof warm at night, the space of.^^. days, and it will help.

For a saucy visage.
Mortify quick silver, and myngle it with Brimston viuif. of each half an
ounce, of Rose water an ounce, of Exungia, otherwise swines grease half a
quarter of an ounce, and myngle al together: the^ preserve it in a box, and as
ye occupy it, take thereof with a slice or knife, and spread it upon a little
piece of Scarlet, and smere thy face therewith at thy going to bed, where it is
sore, and in the morning wash thy face with a piece of Scarlet wet in warm
water, and then wype it with a fair lynnen cloth.

A proved medicine for a woman that has her throws before her time.
Sees a good handful of whole Cheruil in a quart of Claret wine, and when the
herbs be well sodden, wring them into the wine, and cleanse it: then make
therewith an Hypocras, with Sugar, Sy^^(...) (...) Gynger of Synomome, and give
(...) warm at times needful, and (...) the pain.

For the falling evil.
(...) diseased in a draught of drink (...) of a Be, he not knowing thereof and
he shall have ease.

To assuage sweatyng.
(...) Line seed and Lettise together and lay it to thy stomach, and it
shall help.

For the pockes.
Take the iuise of Peneryal and young Tansie, and give the sick to drink.

To increase a woman's milk.
Give her the iuise of Veruine and Fenel to drink, and it shall increase her
milk.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, nigh unto the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas
Dauson, and Thomas Gardyner.


