A SERMON CONCERNING DECENCY and ORDER in the Church. Preached at
VVOOD-CHURCH, in the Diocese of CANTERBURY, April. 30. 1637. By EDWARD
BOUGHEN Parson of Wood-Church.

(...). Constit. Apost. l. 8. c. 31.

The Church is the School not of disorder, but of good (or decent) order.

LONDON, Printed by I. Raworth for I. Cowper, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the East end of Saint PAVLS Church. 1638.

1. Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently, and in order.


THat it is the duty of a Bishop, not only to be careful, that his flock be
trained up in the faith and fear of Christ, but that they know, how to behave
themselves in the House and Church of Christ; that is, that they not only
pretend faith, but that they also observe order and decency, Saint Paul
manifests not only in this Chapter, but in the eleventh also of this Epistle.

In the 11. Chap. men must be uncovered in the time of divine service, verse. 4.
But women at that time must be vayled or covered, verse. 5. But neither must
come to the Lords Table upon a full stomach, verse. 21. That we repair not to
the Lords Table but upon due examination of our selves, verse. 28. That we come
not to that blessed Supper straggling, one at this hour, and another at that,
but all together, verse. 33. That the Church be not made an house to feast in,
to eat and drink in. verse. 22.34.

In this Chapter, That Preaching be in a known tongue, verse. 2. Prayer in the
like tongue, verse. 14. That while we are at Church we be all doing one and the
same thing, at one and the same time, verse. 26. not one Praying, another
Singing, and a third Prating; to say no worse. God is not the author of such
confusion, and disorder, verse. 33. That women be silent in the Church, verse.
34. There Is no speaking for them, unless they be asked a question.

Preaching is commendable, and Tongues are commendable; and are not Psalms and
Prayers necessarily to be used in the House of God? And yet Omnia decenter, a
care of decency, and a care of order must be had in every one of these.

Here then is that general rule for our behavior in the Church, whereby
Principales magistri, our chief Rulers ought to square out their Injunctions;
and whereunto passivi discipuli, we that are subject to authority, must submit
our selves with all alacrity.

Calvin therefore tells us, That the whole policy of the Church, and the whole
duty of a peaceable Christian, is briefly comprised in this short Canon, Calvi.
in 1. Cor. 14.40.
or exhortation: Haec est regula (says he) ad quam omnia, quae ad externam
policiam spectant, exigere convenit; namely, Let all things be done decently,
and in order.

Here is Fiant, a word of action: This word is like an Image of Juno's, Lucian
de Dea Syria.
which I have read of; it looks this way, and that way, and every way: it has
an eye upon those, that govern, and an eye upon those that ought to be
governed; not only upon the Lawmakers, but upon the Law-keepers too.

For the Lawmakers, Omnia fiant, Let all your Laws, let all your Canons be
made according to decency, according to order. And, blessed be God (I speak it
from the heart) they have done their parts, they have done all things decently,
and in order.

I would to God, we were as ready with our Fiant, to answer their care with
our duty; that is, that All things were done by us, with that decency and
order, which they have prescribed.

I know, it is an easier matter to prescribe, then to perform a duty: I have
therefore always endeavored to show you, that the duties enjoined are easy,
and fit to be performed.

Easy, I show by my example. For you know, The duties enjoined are easy,
that I persuade you to do, to obey no order, that is common to me with you,
but what I my self strictly observe. And (I hope) that all those, which are
not the children of disobedience, see it to be decent.

That they are fit to be performed, and fit to be performed.
I have manifested unto you heretofore, by doctrine, reason, and authority. And
now I shall endeavor more fully to satisfy you in these points; that so I may
stir you up to a cheerful performance of those duties, which are more
strictly exacted now (then heretofore) by the care of our religious and
circumspect Diocesan and Metropolitan; not without authority from the Laws
both of State and Church, and Gods own book, which advises, that All things
be done decently, and in order.

First, here is a Fiant for us, we must be doing, we must obey the
Bridegroom and his spouse, that is, Christ and the Church of Christ.

Next, we are to view the matter and the manner of this Fiant, of these our
doings.

The matter is universal, Omnia fiant, Let ALL THINGS be done.

The manner is twofold. 1. Omnia DECENTER, All things must be done DECENTLY.
2. Omnia SECVNDVM ORDINEM, They must be all done IN, or ACCORDING TO ORDER.

And this proposition is conjunctive, it couples both together, Decenter ET
secundum ordinem, decently AND in order: one of these will not serve the turn
without the other, Decency and Order must go hand in hand.

The parts are five. 1. Fiant, Let them be DONE. 2. Let ALL THINGS be done. 3.
Let them be done DECENTLY. 4. In ORDER. 5. Decently AND in order.

The first will manifest, that we must not be idle in the Church of God. The
second, that we must not be negligent, or slack in our duties. The third, that
we must not behave our selves rudely in the Church. The fourth, that we must
not be disorderly. The last, that we must be alike careful of order, as of
decency, of decency as of order, of the one as of the other. Begin we with the
Fiant, Let them be DONE.

I FIANT.
We find in Scripture several duties imposed upon every one of us in
particular: some are enjoined us, as we are the immediate members of Christ;
the other, as we are members of the Church, which is the Ephesians. 1.23.
body, or Ephesians. 5.23.32.
Spouse of Christ.

Quaedam ut homines, quaedam ut cives agimus; As it is in the State, as it is
in every City or Corporation, so is it in the City of God, and Church of
Christ. Some things, we do, or ought to do, as mere men by the light of
nature; as namely, we ought to be sober, harmless, provident for our selves:
but as we are subjects of a Kingdom, there are laws and statutes of the
Kingdom, that require obedience at our hands. And as we are freemen of a
Corporation, we must observe the Orders settled in that Corporation, whereof we
be members; whether they be for the general benefit; or whether they be for
decency only and conformity.

Thus in like manner, as we are Christians, there are credenda and agenda for
every one of us, Articles to be believed, and Commandments to be kept. These
are common to all Christians in general; he that will be saved, must thus
believe, and do; be he of what Nation or Church soever. But as we are members
of this, or that National Church, there are (to keep S. Paul's word) Facienda
enjoined us, matters of Order, and matters of Discipline.

The former two we receive from Christ only; but for the other, we must stoop
to that National Church, wherein we live, we must conform our selves to the
Canons of that Church; and perform all things in that order and manner, which
she has appointed; for so reason, and S. Paul require.

If I become a member of some great man's family, or of any City or Corporation,
I must not bring in any new orders with me, but I must observe those, which I
find already established. Ye expect as much from your servants in your
particular families. And is it fit, that the Governors of the Church should
suffer us, to use what new fashions, and fantastical orders we list in the
house of God? All reasonable men will grant this to be very unreasonable.

Yea it has been concluded long since by those great Reformers under King
Edward the sixth, Acts and Mon. in Edw. 6. p. 1193. col. 1.
that The externe Rites and Ceremonies are APPOINTABLE BY SVPERIOR POWERS; in
choosing whereof WE MVST OBEY THE MAGISTRATES. And if any man shall use old (or
other) Rites, and thereby DISOBEY the superior powers, the DEVOTION of his
Ceremonies is made NAVGHT by his DISOBEDIENCE; so that that, which else might
be good, by pride and DISOBEDIENCE is now MADE NAVGHT. This doctrine in those
days was held so pure, and justifiable, that Bishop Bonner was commanded by
the Kings Council to preach it at S. Paul's Cross. Ibidem
Indeed fit it is, that the ancient and settled orders be in force, and find
obedience; for they only are allowed of by authority, and therefore
justifiable.

Fiant (says S. Paul) Let them be done. We may not then (it seems) be like
stocks and stones, like the pillars or pues in the Church, always in one
posture; something or other we must be doing.

We must be sometimes kneeling, sometimes standing, otherwhiles bowing, when
and as we are commanded. We must either be confessing our faith, or our sins,
or receiving absolution for our sins. We must be praying with the Priest, or
answering to the Priest, or diligently observing, what the Priest delivers you
from God; or praying God, to incline your hearts, to keep those laws, which
the Priest in Gods behalf exhorts you to obey. There is no idle time spared us
in the house of God; no time for sleep, or wandering thoughts.

If any man doubt of the Churches authority in these points, the Scripture will
clear these doubts: for, does not S. Paul say plainly, 1 Cor. 11.34.
Caetera, cum venero disponam, The rest will I set in order, when I come?

Neither was this authority proper and peculiar to the Apostles; by no means:
for S. Paul tells Titus, Eusch. hist. l. 3. c. 4.
the first Bishop of Crete, that Titus 1.5.
he had left him at Crete for this very cause, that he might set in ORDER the
things, that were wanting, such as S. Paul had not disposed of, when he was at
Crete. So much for the general.

In particular, if the Preacher turn seducer, (...), it is the Bishops duty to
stop his mouth, Tit. 1.11. If an heretic break forth, (...), after the first
and second admonition REJECT him, In this sense (...) is used. Constit. Apost.
l. 2. c. 8.
cast him out of the Church, Tit. 3.10. If any man fall into loose and foul
sins, (...) Cumomni imperio. Beza.
rebuke him with ALL AVTHORITY, Tit. 2.15.

If any man grow stubborn or refractory (...), signify so much by Letter,
present him to the Bishop of the Diocese, that he may be made ashamed of his
doings. 2. Thessalonians 3.14.

1 Timothy 6.3.
If any man teach disobedience to Authority, Ibid. ver. 5.
(...), keep aloof from him, have no communion with him.

Besides, as we read of those that teach well, so we read also of those, that
rule well in the Church, 1. Tim. 5.17. But these Rulers could be no other then
Bishops, since by them Cypr. ep. 27. n. 1.
Omnis actus Ecclesiae gubernatur, every action of the Church is guided; so
Saint Cyprian. Indeed manifest it is, by all histories sacred and profane, that
in those times (and in some hundreths of years after) there were no Governors
in the Church but Bishops only; for Cypr. ep. 65. n. 65
the Apostles themselves were Bishops. Saint Paul therefore can intend no other
Rulers there besides Bishops.

Since then we are under their authority, let us submit our selves to their
authority; let us do, what we should do; and consider, that this Canon is
universal, OMNIA fiant, Let ALL THINGS be done. Which is the second part.

II. OMNIA fiant.
Let ALL things be done: ALL, that are enjoined. Here is nothing at all left to
our discretion; nothing may be left undone, when and where we please.

It is not for us then to take the Canons upon liking, to observe one, and
neglect another: we must make a conscience of obedience. Romans 13.5.

We may not think it enough to stand at the Creed unless we say it also with
the Minister audibly, Can. 18.
with a loud voice.

Nor is it enough for us to stand up only at the Gospel, according to the
Quedam Canone, quaedam consuetudine observanter. Cod. Afric. in prin.
Churches custom, but we must also Can. 18.
bow at the name of Jesus; not as if we were ashamed of what we did, but with
due and lowly reverence, as it has been accustomed. Remembering that our
Savior says flatly, Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, of him shall the Son
of man be ashamed, when he comes in his glory. St. Luke 9.26.

Neither is it sufficient for us to be bare in time of Divine service, unless
we also Ibidem
reverently kneel upon our knees, when the General Confession, Letany,
Prayers, and Commandments are read; according as is prescribed in the book of
Common prayer.

But we must not do these things, or any of them, negligently or carelessly, as
if we cared not, whether we did them, or so; the Apostle says, they must be
done decently. The third part.

III. DECENTER.
Decenter, decently. Decency stands first in order; and reason good; for
decency makes way for all good order, and draws all wise men to be in love
with that order, which in it self is decent, and decently observed.

We are met in the house of God, in the house of Prayer, to do God service. If
we were to wait upon some great person, we would have a great care of decency.
And shall we not be as careful, when we are to wait on God, and to do him
service? Especially in this House, wherein we are commanded to Psalm. 96.9.
worship the Lord in decore sancto, in an holy kind of decency; or (as we) in
the beauty of holiness. The reason is given ver. 6. Decus and magnificentia
est ante eum. Munster.
HONOR and MAJESTY are before him; and BEAVTY is in his Sanctuary. God
therefore may not be served (in this place of all other) slovenly, or
dishonourably. Indeed Munster in his translation shows, how God will be
worshipped, Psalm. 96.9.
Incurvate vos coram Domino in magnificentia sanctitatis, Bow your selves
before the Lord in a magnificent kind of holiness. As if God would have every
one of us to strive to outstrip one another in the worship of God, when we meet
together in his House. God would have us so; but who does so? Verily we forget
the place to be holy, and our selves to be servants.

Whereas we ought so to behave our selves in this place, that if a stranger, or
unbeleever should look in upon us (by chance) at our devotions, our reverent
and devout demeanor might work upon his understanding and affections, and win
him to Christ, whom we thus serve, and reverence.

What a wonderful decency it is, when we behave our selves in this place, as
in the presence of God: when every man begins with due obeisance to God, with a
Psalm. 95.6.
Venite adoremus, O come, let us worship, and fall down; when first we
worship, and then fall down upon our knees.

When the Minister, like an Angel of light, appears in his white vestment,
behaving himself with that gravity, and reverence, and decency, which well
befits his calling, and the religious duty he has in hand.

When the whole congregation shall appear in the presence of God as one man,
decently kneeling, rising, standing, bowing, praising, praying altogether, as
occasion shall be offered, and we enjoined, tanquam unanimes in domo, like men
of one mind and religion in the house of God; as I have heard it credibly
reported of the Lutherans.

But how unseemely is it, to see some kneel, some stand, some fit, some lean
upon their elbowes? As if they thought of any thing rather then of God, and his
service; as if necessity, and not devotion, brought us hither.

Distraction in our behavior manifests distraction in our minds, and gives a
just advantage to the enemies of our Church.

Now, S. Paul's censure is, that where there be such divisions, such differences
in our behavior, we come together in the Church, not for the better, but for
the WORSE. 1. Cor. 11.17. And those divisions, which S. Paul there speaks of,
were not in points of faith, but in matters of discipline.

We must not therefore fancy a decency to our selves, such as we affect, but
this decency must be secundum ordinem, in order, even according to that order,
which is enjoined. The fourth part.

IV. (...).
Secundum ordinem, in, or according to order. We have seen, how decency makes
way for order, and now we come to see, what good this order brings with it to
the Church of Christ. This we shall the better discern, if we observe
(according to S. Paul) that where divisions are in any Congregation, where one
man serves God in this fashion, another in that, and a third in a manner
different from both, there heresy is at the next door by. For our Apostle
has no sooner told the Corinthians of divisions among them in the Church, 1.
Cor. 11.18. but in the very next verse he adds, that 1 Cor. 11.19.
there must be heresies. So suddenly does disorder usher in heresy. God
therefore to prevent heresy, discards disorder, He is not the God of
CONFVSION, but of peace. 1. Cor. 14.33. What then have the sons of God to do
with confusion, or disorder?

Where disorder is, there is confusion, where confusion, there is dissension,
where dissension, there is tumult, and tumult turns to sedition. Indeed all
these (if interpreters mistake not) are contained in that one word (...), 1
Cor. 14.33.
for which we read confusion. And where these are, there can be no peace, nor
the God of peace. For are we not too too apt to laugh and jeere at those, that
are not of our own cut, that are not in the Church as unmannerly and
disorderly, as our selves are? From hence arises heart-burning, and hatred,
which at last break forth into flat combustion.

But, where one and the same order is observed through out the whole National
Church, there is quietness, and peace, and love on every hand; and the God of
peace and love is ever with them. Such order well beseemes the Churches of the
Saints, and glads the hearts of all good men: Colos. 2.5.
and such order as this S. Paul rejoiced to behold amongst the Colossians. God
of his mercy settle our hearts to embrace the orders of this Church, and to
delight therein.

To keep us in order and uniformity, Laws, and Canons are provided, but not
without some penalties annexed for the offenders. Imperfecta dicitur
constitutio, quae poenam contra facientibus non impo^it. Lindwode. l. 1. c. de
constitut. verbo, sub poena.
Otherwise as good no law, as no penalty. For, where there is no penalty,
authority is but a scar-crow, and every man may do, what he please. And then,
says Calvin Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 10.. 31.
Nunquam futurum est, ut OMNIBVS IDEM placeat, si res velut IN MEDIO positae
singulorum arbitrio relictae fuerint. It can never be, that one and the SAME
ORDER will please ALL, if such matters be LEFT INDIFFERENT, for every one to
use, or not use at his own pleasure.

Fit therefore it is, that an order should be agreed upon, and observed alike
by ALL in every National Church. And if all things must be done according to
order, then surely some there are, that have power to appoint and enjoyne
order. And when orders are once agreed upon, and enjoined, it is not for us to
question, whether they be fit or no.

Wise men know, Ante legem tam licet quide deliberare; sed lata lege nemo in
suo sensu abundet; sed eam admittat, and eidem obtemperet. Benig. Milletot. de
delicto communi, etc.
laws must be obeyed, not disputed. Those Governors, that make them, dispute
them sufficiently; and know, why they make them, though they do not always
acquaint us with the reasons. It is resolved therefore by King Edward the Sixth
his Council, that Acts and Mon. K. Edw 6 p. 1212. col. 2. In the directions
given to Dr. Hopton by the Kings Council, to be delivered to the Lady Mary
(afterward queen) Anno 1549. June 14.
The fault is great in any subject to disallow a law of the King, a law of a
Realm, by long study, free disputation and UNIFORM DETERMINATION OF THE WHOLE
CLERGY, consulted, debated and CONCLVDED.

This is most agreeable to our Saviors doctrine, S. Mat. 23. S. Mat. 13.2.3
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair. (in the chair of the
Lawmakers, the power is now in their hands) ALL therefore, whatsoever they bid
you observe, that observe, and do.

Neither did our Savior only teach this doctrine, but he practiced it in his
own person, giving us an example, how to behave our selves in the like kind.
For our Savior submitted himself freely to the orders of that Church, wherein
he lived; as is to be seen by S. Ioh. 2.13.
his observing the feast of Easter, and of S. Ioh. 10.22.
the Dedication of the Temple. S. Luke 2.22.
When his mother had been purified, himself was Ib.
presented to the Lord; and S. Luke 2.24.
for him an offering was made of a pair of Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons.
And which was most intolerable, S. Luke 2.21.
he was circumcised the eighth day.

If I should tell you of the severe Laws in the Primative Church, and those
Penalties, and Penances, which were strictly imposed, and submissively
undergone by Offenders in those times; it would strike you into an amazement.
You could not but wonder at the rigor of the Canons, as also at the humility
and patience of those Christians.

But our Church imposes no such sharp Orders, it enjoyneth no such rigorous
courses. We complain of ease, we cannot of rigor. And yet how few of us
willingly obey these easy, these decent Orders. But Saint Paul is very strict
for them, he will have us to do them, and to do them, as they should be done,
even Decenter, and secundum ordinem, Decently, and in, or according to Order.
My last part.

V. Decenter and secundum ordinem.
Decently, AND according to Order. To do our duties but in one of these only,
is to submit our selves by halfes; but Saint Paul will have both. It is not
then for us, to judge of decency; we must hold that to be decent, which is
according to order prescribed: for both these go together in my Text, and we
must keep them so.

We may not then conceit a decency to our selves without order. This is to
affront the Apostle, and all authority. This is to side Numb. 16.
with Korah; and is nota distinctionis, a sure token, whereby to discern the
Schismatically minded from peaceable and orderly Christians.

Consider (good brethren) where there is no order, there can be no decency; and
where there is no decency, there is as little order: and there can be neither,
where every man is left to his own liberty.

It is an observation of a great learned man, that Franc. a victor. Relect. 1.
Sect. 5. n. 1.
in the state of innocence order should have been observed: and for that end,
if man had continued in that state, there should have been a power directive,
though not coercive, to have prescribed order. Non enim esset decora Respublica
(says he) si quilibet SVO RITV Deum coleret, etiamsi omnes recte viverent:
for the face of the Church could not be decent and comely, if every man should
serve God after his own fashion, though all men lived never so uprightly.

And what he speaks, is not without reason; for Paradise and hell are as
different as may be. But in hell there is no order. Job 10.22. Therefore in
Paradise there must have been order. In heaven also there is decency and
Order, and uniformity; as it is to be seen. Apoc. 7.

c In the ninth verse the Saints are all clothed Revel. 7.9.
with white robes; Ibidem.
all stand before the Lambs throne: Ibidem. v. 10.
all cry with a loud voice; Ibidem.
all use one and the same thankesgiving. And as it is with the Saints, so is it
with the Angels, verse. 11. Ibidem. v. 11.
They all stand round about the throne together: Ibidem.
they all fall down before the throne together on their faces: Ibidem. v. 12.
they all use one and the same doxologie, saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory,
and wisdom; and thankesgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our
God for ever and ever, Amen.

That the Saints have white robes, is decent; but that they are all clothed
with white robes, is orderly. That they stand before the throne, and fall down
before the throne, is decent; but that they all stand together, and all fall
down together, is orderly. That they cry with a loud voice is decent; that
they all do so together, is orderly. That they praise, and glorify God, is
seemly; but that they all praise God in the self same words, is secundum
ordinem, most agreeable to order.

Thus (you see) they 1 all worship together, 2 after the same manner, 3 in the
same posture, 4 the self same way, 5 with robes of one and the same color, 6
and in the self same words; not muttering between the teeth, 7 but with a
loud voice.

And is not this to give us an example, how we ought to behave our selves in
the Church of God? surely our Church (if you well observe) may seem to have
set this heavenly pattern before her, when she made her Canons and
Constitutions. Let us then humbly, and religiously submit our selves, and do
all things, according to that heavenly order, which is enjoined.

Enjoined? By whom? By them, that have power to injoyne it. And who are they?
Kings, and Bishops. Kings, Romans 13. the most part of that Chapter tells you so.
And S. Peter seconds S. Paul in this point. Submit your selves to EVERY
ORDINANCE of man for the Lords sake: to the KING as SVPREME, as also to them,
that are sent, or put in authority by Kings. 1. S. Pet. 2.13, 14. So then to
Bishops, because they are put in authority by Kings; if they had no other
claim. But (blessed be God) they hold not only by this, As touching the
Reverend Ordinaries of this land, if there be any, that dislike of their
callings, or conceive of the same as not grounded upon Apostolical, and (for
all the essential parts thereof) upon Divine Right; I would he were with Mr.
Cotton in New England. The holy Table. c. 3. p. 64.
but by an higher tenure, Romans 13 1.
since all powers are of God; from him they have their spiritual Jurisdiction,
what ever it be. S. Paul therefore (ye see) assumes this power to himself, of
setting things in order in the Church, before any Prince became Christian. 1
Cor. 11.34. The like power he acknowledges to be in Titus. Tit. 1.5. And in
all Bishops. Heb. 13.17. Where he commands us, to Heb. 13.17.
obey them, that have the rule over us. And who are they? Even those, Ibidem.
who watch for your souls, and must give an account for your souls. Calvin.
in Heb. 13.17.
These (says Calvin) without doubt are the Pastors of the Church. And a part
of their duty it is, to put us in mind to be subject to Principalities, and
Powers, and to obey Magistrates. Tit. 3.1.

Every private man in his own family expects, that good order should be kept.
And what order is that? Such as the Master of the house prescribes. For he may
in his own family injoyne what orders, he pleases, so that they be not
repugnant to the Laws of our Superiors, or contrary to the plain word of God.

And shall a Prince or Bishop be in worse case, then an ordinary housekeeper?
shall not the Prince have the same power in his own dominions, and a Bishop in
his Bishopric, that every private man has in his own family? shall it not be
lawful for them, to provide such orders, as are decent; that may raise
devotion, and increase piety?

Surely if our Savior, or his Apostles, had enjoined all orders in particular,
there had remained little or nothing for Bishops, to show their authority in,
Heb. 13.17.
Obedite praepositis vestris, might have been spared, S. Paul needed not
command us, to obey our Rulers, or Bishops. For if we perform, what God
injoynes directly in terminis in particular, we obey God herein, and not our
Governors. But we are commanded to obey our Governors; and therefore something
is left to their disposing, to their ordering.

Kings make Laws, and Bishops Canons. Thus indeed it was of necessity in the
beginning of Christianity; Kings made laws for the State, and Bishops for the
Church; because then there were no Christian Kings either to authorize them to
make such laws; or that would countenance them, when they were made. But after
that Isa. 49.23.
Kings became nursing Fathers to the Church, Bishops, in those pious and
regular times, made no Canons without the assent, and consent, and confirmation
of Christian Kings. And such are our Canons, so made, so confirmed.

This is one of those Prerogatives, which Reges Iudaeorum non res modo civicat
domi militiaeque moderati sunt, sed religionibus etiam sacrisque and ceremoniis
praefuerunt. P. Cunaeus de Rep. Heb. l. 1. c. 14.
godly Kings enjoyed, and used in the Book of God. King David ordered all
things for the Arc, and Tabernacle. 1. Chron. c. 15.16.24. Thus Solomon for
and in the Temple. 2. Chron. 8.14. And Hezekiah did in like manner. 2. Chron.
c. 29.30.31.

And does not David order our behavior in the Church? O come, let us 1.
worship, and 2. fall down, and 3. kneel before the Lord our maker. Psalm.
95.6. This charge comes from 1 Samuel i3.i4.
a man after Gods own heart; and he that disobeyes, is not a man after Gods
own heart. It comes from a King, and subjects must obey. It comes from such a
King, whom all good Kings are bound to imitate in his religious commands: and
all religious Christians are bound to obey these and the like commands.

No sooner did Kings and Emperors embrace the Christian faith, but they made
use of this Prerogative. Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor
Eusebius. de vita Constable. M. l. 4. c. 23.
ordained, what days should be kept holidays. Ib. c. 17.
He appointed orders for the Church. Ib. c. 18.
He provided a set form of Common Prayer. Ib. c. 25.
He confirmed under his seal the Canons made by Bishops in their several
Councels, that so the greatest of his Princes and Commanders might not slight
them. Socrates l. 1. c. 6. and Theod. l. 1. c. 10.
Yea the Emperor himself professes, that his chief care was, that there
might be but 1. one faith, 2. sincere charity, 3. Et Consentiens religionis
cultus, and one manner of religious worship throughout his Dominions. And
Donati vox est, Quid est imperatori cum Ecclesia. Optat. l 3. Sic and
Petilianus apud D. Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 92.
I find not, that any but Schismatickes and Heretics were offended at it.

That in these matters, the Emperor used the advice of Bishops is evident; in
that he had Eusebius. de vita Constable. M. l. 1. c. 35.
the Bishops always in his company; that Sozom. hist. l. 1. c. 9.
he made an Act, that the Decrees of Councels should be unchangeable; Ibidem.
and that it should be lawful, to appeal from the civil Magistrates to
Bishops; but no appeal from them. I could justify as much for William the
Conqueror, and Charles the Great; but I hasten.

If a set order were not concluded upon by authority; if every man should use
that behavior in the Church, that likes him best; and if every particular
congregation should have that form of service, which they conceit best, and
might alter it at their pleasure; Lord! what diversity should we have? we
should have every year at least new Service books, as we have new Almanacks:
work, work, more work for the Printers; and as much variety of gestures, as
of faces, in the Church. And then 1 Cor. 14.23.
if there come in some, that are unlearned, or that are unbeleevers, will they
not say, that ye are mad?

Whereas if they enter into a mannerly congregation, and behold therein one and
the same decency according to order, Ibidem. v. 25.
cadentes in faciem adorabunt Deum, they will fall down on their faces, and
worship God, professing, that God is in you of a truth.

Remember, that 1 Samuel 15.22.
obedience is better then sacrifice. True (say you) obedience to God is so. But
obedience to our Superiors is obedience to God. For has not God commanded,
Romans 13.1.
Every soul to be subject to the higher powers? Has he not commanded us to 1
S. Pet. 2.13.
submit our selves to every ordinance of man?

If we teach servants to obey their Masters, or children to honor their
parents, you like wonderful well of this doctrine, you see it plainly set
down in holy Scripture. And are not the other commands as plain? That we must
submit to the higher powers for conscience sake. Romans 13.5. For the Lords sake.
1. S. Pet. 2.13. As unto Christ. Ephesians. 6.5. Surely (says Primasius, S. Austines
Scholar) Primas. in Ephesians. 6. In his quae sunt commissa hominum potestati,
homines g^runt vicem Dei Tho. 1. ^ae. q 100. and 3 m.
Christo facitis, quicquid propter Christum hominibus exhibetis; ye do Christ
service, when ye obey your superiors for Christ's sake.

So then in obeying our Bishops and Governors, we obey 1 S. Pet. 2.25.
that great Bishop of our souls, who has commanded us to Heb 13.17.
submit our selves to them, that have the rule over us. And if we do not our
duty to them, that are set over us, with what conscience can we expect
obedience from those, that are under our government? Our Saviors rule is, S.
Mat. 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would, that men should do to you, do ye even so to them. Obey
then, that ye may be obeyed; obey heartily, that ye may be obeyed
accordingly: the servants of Christ, do so, they obey from the heart. Ephesians. 6.6.

Consider, that as your children are commanded to obey you, so you are
commanded to obey your Governors. But your children are commanded to obey you
in all things. Col. 3.20. And shall you obey the Fathers of the Church in what
you list? surely where the Scripture has made no limitation, it is not for us
to make any.

S. Paul calls upon us in general terms, without limitation, to Heb. 13.17.
obey, to submit our selves to our Rulers, that watch for our souls, and must
give an account for our souls. And gives this reason for it; Ib.
that so they may give up their account with joy, and not with grief; for that
is unprofitable for you. Unprofitable it is indeed for you, if Calvin say
right; for thus he writes. Calvin in Heb. 13.17.
Significat nos sine propriae salutis iactura, non fore Pastoribus molestos,
vel immorigeros. The Apostle acquaints us, that we cannot be offensive, or
undutifull to our Pastors, or Bishops, without the loss of our own salvation.
And then he adds; Calvin. Ib.
Quum vix decimus quisque hoc cogitet, hinc apparet, quantus vulgo sit salutis
neglectus; since there is scarce one of ten, that takes this into
consideration, it is too too evident, that there is a general neglect of
salvation amongst us.

But, it may be, you are doubtful, whether that, which is commanded, be
lawful or no. If so, then must you seek for a resolution from persons worthy
to be credited in this case. And Calvin tells us, Calvin. Ib.
that it is necessarily required, ut plebs FIDEM ac simul reverentiam
Pastoribus habeat, that the people BELIEVE and reverence their Pastors. Indeed
who so fit to be trusted, as he that is trusted with your souls, and must
account to God for them? If the Parson or Vicar cannot satisfy the parties
doubting, they are then Preface before the book of Common prayer.
to resort to the Bishop of the Diocese. And if the Bishop of the Diocese be
in doubt, he is to be advised by the Archbishop; and to rest upon his
resolution. Thus we are taught by the Church of England; and this is a safe
and warrantable course.

If you obey, and trust them, (though the case be questionable) you may
justify your obedience Heb. 13.1^.
by this, and the like texts of Scripture. But if you hearken to any other,
that have not the charge of your souls, and disobey them, to whom the cure of
your souls is committed by your mother the Church, Ib.
u the grief will be your rulers, but the discommodity yours. Hoc enim non
expedit vobis (says S. Paul) for this is unprofitable for you.

It is not for us then to question their commands, or to deliberate upon them;
we must believe our Governors, and reverently obey them, when they command
nothing, that is expressly contrary to the word or honor of God. S. Paul
requires obedience, not examination; submission, not consultation.

To this add the oath of the Churchwardens; they cannot avoid presenting
those, that observe not the orders of the Church without manifest perjury.

Consider the warning given them at the Visitation; namely, that if they
present not truly and sincerely, according to the Articles, they are liable to
the High Commission, and upon just proof to be censured for perjury.

Pity the danger, that you are like to draw upon your own heads, or the heads
of your neighbors, and conform your selves.

Our Diocesan desires rather to amend us, then to censure us; and hence it is,
that time is given us to redress, what is amiss.

Consider, that pride and disobedience are reckoned amongst those sins,
whereinto they usually fall, whom God has given over to a reprobate sense.
Romans 1.28.30.

Consider, that to walk after the flesh, and to despise government, are joined
together. 2. S. Pet. 2.10. Yea (says Calvin) Calvin. in ep. B. Iudae. v. 8.
these two are almost inseparable, ut qui projecti sunt ad nequitiam, OMNEM
ORDINEM abolitum esse cupiant; that they who have given themselves over to work
wickedness, have always a stitch against order, and would feign have it utterly
defaced. And if Haec duo semper s^c coniuncta sunt. Calvin. Ib.
these two be almost inseparable, then surely they, that are such enemies to
order (in Calvin's judgment) are projecti ad nequitiam, lewd, dissolute
persons. A blemish not to be washed off, without submitting our selves to order.

Consider, that REBELLION is as the sin of WITCHCRAFT, and STVBBORNNESSE as
IDOLATRY. 1. Sam. 15.23.

Consider, that when false teachers, profane and blasphemous seducers are
decypher'd by the Apostles, one of their marks is, that they are audaces, sibi
placentes, bold, presumptuous, selfewilled men, DESPISERS OF GOVERNMENT. 2. S.
Pet. 2.10. Such as DESPISE GOVERNMENT, and speak evil of authority. S. Jude 8.

Consider, that they, who mislead you, are discontented, ambitious men, such as
Korah, Nolentes obedire, quod nequeant imperare, that cannot endure to obey,
because they cannot get into a Rochet.

Consider, that those, who speak against authority, are undeserving, ignorant,
unlearned men; Proud, knowing nothing. So S. Paul 1. Tim. 6.4. In his, quae
ignorant, blasphemantes, speaking evil of those things they UNDERSTAND NOT. So
S. Peter in his second Epistle 2.12. And S. Jude says the same. v. 10. Nay, if
Beza be not mistaken in his translation, they are no better then mad;
Insanientes circa quaestiones ac pugnas de verbis. 1. Tim. 6.4. growing stark
mad about questions, and quarrels concerning words. As if like mad men, they
left the apple, and fell together by the ears about the shadow.

Observe, what sentence is already passed upon these selfwilled, stubborn,
disobedient persons. In the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.8.9.12
The man, that will not (in matters of controversy) hearken unto the Priest,
that IN THOSE DAYS stands to minister IN THAT PLACE before the Lord, that
man shall die. In the Gospel; Romans 13.2.
Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God; and they that
resist shall receive to themselves DAMNATION: damnation at least of that which
is commanded to obey, and that is the Soul, Romans 13.1. S. Jude therefore says
plainly, that to these is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever, S. Jude
v. 13.

Look upon Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, they murmured against Moses and Aaron,
Prince, and Priest; and they suddenly went down alive into the pit of hell.
Number. 16.33. Tertul.
Hoc vero erat futuri judicij praejudicium; this doom is a forerunner of the
day of Doom, and a true President of that sentence, which shall pass upon
disobedient persons in that dreadful day: that so all those, that read it, or
hear it read, may take warning by their example, and avoid the wrath to come.

God of his mercy grant, that all of us may gain wisdom by their loss; that
with all alacrity we may submit our selves to the higher powers, that we may do
all things in the Church decently and according to order: that so we may pass
from Church to Church, from this Church militant to that triumphant, through
Jesus Christ our Savior, to whom, with the Holy Ghost, three persons and one
God, be ascribed all honor, and glory, etc.

FINIS.
Imprimatur haec concio.

JOHN OLIVER. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Domino, Domino Arch: Cant.
Capell. Dom.

Vbi metus in Deum, ibi gravitas honesta, and diligentia adtonita, and cura
sollicita, and adlectio explorata, and communicatio deliberata, promotio
emerita, and subjectio religiosa, and apparitio devota, and processio modesta,
and ecclesia unita, and Dei omnia.

Tertull.

