THE BREVIARIE OF health: vvherin does FOLLOW, REMEDIES, FOR all manner of
sicknesses and diseases, the which may be in Man or Woman. Expressing the
obscure terms of Greek, Araby, Latin, Barbary and English, concerning Physic
and Chirurgerie.

Compyled by Andrew Board, Doctor of Physic: an Englishman.

Now newly corrected and amended, with some approved medicines that never were
in Print before this impression, and are aptly placed in their proper Chapters,
by men skillful in Physic and Chirurgerie.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON by Thomas East. 1587.

A PROLOGVE to Phisicions.
EGregious doctors and masters of the Eximious and Archane Science of physic
of your Vrbanitie Exasperate not your selves against me, for making of this
little volume of physic. Considering that my pretense is for an utility and
a common wealth. And this not only, but also I do it (for no detriment) but
for a preferment of your laudable science, that every man should esteem,
repute, and regard the excelent faculty. And also you to be extolled and
highly to be preferred, that has, and does study, practice, and labor, this
said Archane Sience, to the which none inarcious persons can nor shall attain
to the knowledge: yet this notwithstanding, fools and incipient persons, yea
and many that does think themselves wife (the which in this faculty be
fools in deed) will enterprise to smatter and to meddle to minister medicines,
and can not tell how, when, and at what time the medisine should be ministered,
but who is bolder then blind Bayerd, for a Lady, agentilewoman, a blind priest,
a fie on such a one now a days wilt practice either by a blind book, either
else that they have been in the company of some doctor of Physic, or else
having an Author of Physic, or Authors, and will minister after them, and can
not tell what the auctour meant in his ministration. The philosopher says, when
the Philosopher does make an end, the Physician does begin, where shall he or
she begin that can but write and read, and does understand little learning or
none. O Lord what a great detriment is this to the noble Science of physic,
that ignorant persons will enterprise to meddle with the ministration of
physic, that Galen, prince of phisicions in his Terapenticke does reprehe^d
and disprove, saying. If phisicio^s had nothing to do with Astronomy,
Geomatry, Logic, and other sciences, Cobblers, Curriars of lether, Carpenters
and Smithes, and al such manner of people would leave their crafts, and be
phisicions, as it appears now a days that many cobblers be, fie on such ones,
whereupon Galen reprehended Tessalus for his ignorance: for Tessalus smattered
and meddled with physic, and yet he knew not what he did, as many does now a
days, the which I may account Tessalus folish disciples. Auenzoar says,
every physician ought to know first learning, and then practice, that is to
say, first to have Gra^mer to understand what he does read in latin. Then to
have logic to dicusse or diffine by argumentation the truth from the
falsehode, and so econuerso. And then to have a rethorick or an eloquent
tongue, the which should be placable to the hearers of his words. And also to
have geomatry, to ponder and way the dregs or porcions the which ought to be
ministered. Arithmetic is necessary to be had concerning numeration: but a
boue all things next to Grammar, a phisicio^ must have surely his Astronomy,
to know, how, when, and at what time every medicine ought to be ministered, and
then finally to know natural philosophy, the which consists in the knowledge
of naturll things. And all these things had, then is a man apt to study
physic by speculation. And speculatio^ obtained, then boldly a man may
practice physic. And whosoever he or she be that will practice physic in
ministering medicines, not having these aforesaid sciences, shall kill many more
then he shall save, for and any such blind physician help or heal one
person, the person so healed is healed more by chance then by any cunning, even
like as the blind man does cast his staff, peradventure he hit the thing that
he does cast at, peradventure not hit it, wherefore I do advertise every man
and woman, of what degree or estate soever they be, lacking the speculation of
physic, to beware to minister mediciens although they take nothing for their
labor, nor for the medicines, for if they have not a doctourrs learning and
also knowing their simples how they shall co^pound them, and what operation
they be of, and how, and when, and at what time they should be ministered, such
ignorant persons may do great harm, although they do think no evil, and let
them think and make the best they can, yet for their presumption they shall
offend both god and man. There be some blind phisicions that will excuse
themselves saying, that they do follow their book or books, nay, nay it is
not so, for they do follow their folish presumptuous mind, for if doctors of
physic should at al times follow their books, they should do more harm then
good. And some blind phisicions will say, I was taught of such a doctor to
practice this thing and that thing, such practicing does kill many men that
might live many years. Wherefore to conclude, I advertise al marcious
phisicions to beware hereafter in the ministration of interial medicines, for
they do not only offend god and their neighbor, but also they offend the
kings acts and laws, the which wills and commands with great penalty
that no man should enterprise to meddle with physic, but they which be learned
and admitted, as it does appear more largelier in the Introduction of knowledge
desiring all manner of Phisicions to be contented and to practice them with this
my writing, for in this matter I have now discharged my conscience in showing
the truth as god knows, who send al manner of phisicions a true knowledge in
physic, that they the which be sick and diseased, may have a remedy.

A Propheme to Chierurgions.
CHierurgerie is a laudable science and worthy to be esteemed and regarded for
the great utility of it, for it is a science urgent, needful, and necessary
for the preservation of man's life, wherefore masters of chierurgery, ought to be
expert in their faculty, having good wits and memory, evermore to be
diligent and attendable about their cures, and to be of a good judgment in
the knowledge of the disease, and to minister such salues and medicines as is
according to the infirmity, sickness, or sore.

Also they must have a good eye and a steadfast hand, for chierurgerie takes
the name of two words of Greek, of Chier, which is an hand, and of Ergasomei,
which is operacion, which is to say, operation or working with the hand, for
Chierurgerie consists in working medicienes and other necessary things
concerning the science with the hand. Also Chierurgions ought to be wise,
gentil, sober, circumspect and learned, and not dronken, and to promise no more
then they be able to perform with gods help, and not to be boisterous about
his pacients, but lovingly to comfort them.

Also every Chierurgion ought to know the complexion of his patient, and to
consider the age, the weakness, and strenth, and diligently to consider if
the sickness, sore, or impediment, be particular by himself: or else that it
have any other infirmity concurrant with it: or else that the sickness in the
exterial parts have any feeding from the interiall parts, and that they be
circumspect in incisions and Scarifications and Flebothomy, and sure in
Anothomy, and in no wise to let blud in any particular place, there where the
sign has any dominion.

Furthermore chierurgions must be circumspect in serching green wounds that be
festered and fistiled, and that they cleanse and scour the wounds from all
corruption, and that they heal not the wounds to quickly, making the wound
whole above, and false underneath. And in any wise let them be sure in serching
of the deepnes of wounds and fistules, and according to the deepnes to make the
tents. Moreover Chierurgions must know the oposicion and the conjunction of
the Moon, and in what sign the Moon is in every day, and to know what
signs be attractiue, what signs be recentiue, what signs be expulciue, and
what signs be digestive. Also they must konw the operacion of all manner of
breades, of drinks, and of meats. And to have ever in a redines their
instruments and their salues, and their ointments, and in periculus causes one
Chierurgion ought to consult with an other, and to have the counsel of a
doctor of physic, for there is no man can be to sure to help a man, as god
knows, who keep us al. Amen

A Preamble to sick men, and to those that be wounded.
I Do advertise every sick man, and al other men the which has any
infirmytie, sickness, or impediment, above all things to pacify himself, or to
arm himself with patience, and to fire his heart and mind in Christ's death
and passion, and to call to his remembrance, what pain, what adversity, and
wat penury, and poverty Christ did suffer for us. And he yt can thus pacify
himself, and feel his own pain in Christ's passion, shall mittigate his
pains and anguish, be it never so great. And therefore let every sick person
stick as fast to Christ in his pains and sickness, as Christ did stick fast to
the Cross for our sins and redemption. And then if the pacient will have any
counsel in physic: first let him call to him his spiritual physician, which
is his Ghostly father, and let him make his concience clean, and that he be
in perfect love and charity, and if he have done any wrong let him make
restitution if he can, and if he be in debt, let him look to it, and make a
formal will or testament, setting every thing in a dew order for the wealth of
his soul, wise men be sure of their testaments making many years before they
die, and does renew it once a year as they increase or decrease in goods or
substance. Al these aforesaid things ghostly and godly provided for the soul,
then let the pacient provide for his body, and take council of some expert
physician, how and in what wise the body may be recovered of his infirmity,
and than to commit his body to the industry of his physician, and at all
times ready to follow the will, mind, and counsel of his physician, for
whosoever will do ye contrary, Saint Augustine says. Seipsum in terimit qui
precepta medici obseruare non vult, that is to say. He does kill himself that
does not observe the commandment of his physician.

After all this, mark this matter well, that if there be any Physicion or
Surgeon, which is with any sick man, woman or child, let no man disquiet
them that be in the house, nor tell them what they should do, let every
person be tendable about them, and do as they shall Command them.

And let every man in the house please and serve the physician or Surgeon
honestly, and let them lack nothing, to the end, that they may be the more
deligent to do the thing that they go about: which is to recover the sick
person, for and if the Physician or the Surgeon be checked, and not gently
intreted, and have no more then they do command, it will discourage them so
much, that they will have no joy nor pleasure to do their cure. I had rather
not to meddle with phisicions and chirurgions, then to have them, if I should
displese them: for if they be displesed, there is neither Lord nor Lady, nor no
other person can have any service or pleasure of them, for this matter look
further in the Introduction of knowledge, and there shall you see what is good
both for the Soul and body in God. Amen.

THE PREFACE TO the readers of this book.
GEntle Readers, I have taken some pain in making this book, to do sick men
pleasure, and whole men profyt, that sick men may recuperate their health, and
whole men may preserve themselves from sickness, (with Gods help) as well in
physic as in chirurgerie. But for as much, as old ancient and autentike
autours or doctors of physic, in their books, does write many obscure
terms, giving also to many and diverse infirmities, dark and hard names,
difficile to understand, some and most of all being Greek words, some and
few being Araby words, some being latin words, and some being barbar^^^
words. Therefore I have translated al such obscure words and names into
English, that every man openly and apartly may understand them.

Furtheremore all the aforesaid names of the said infirmities be set together
in order, according to the letters of the Alphabete, or the A.B.C. So that as
many names as does begine with A. be set together and so forth, all other
letters as they be in order. Also there is no sickness in man or woman, the
which may be from the crown of the head to the soole of the foot, but you
shall find it in this book, as well the sickness the which does pertayne to
chirurgerie as to physic, and what the sickness is, and how it does come,
and medicines for the self same. And for as much as every man now a days, is
desirous to reed brief and compendious matters. I therefore in this matter
pretend to satisfy men's minds as much as I can, naming this book according
to the matter, which is. The Breuiarie of health: and where that I am very
brief in showing brief medecines for one sickness. I do it for two causes,
the first cause is, that the Archane science of physic should not be manifest
and open, for then the eximious science should fall into great detrement, and
doctors the which has studied the faculty should not be regarded so well as
they are. Secondarilie if I should write all my mind, every bongler would
practice physic upon my book, wherefore I do omit and leave out many
things relinquishing that I have omitted to doctors of high judgment, of whom
I shall be shent for part of these things that I have written in this book:
how be it in tihs matter I do set God before mine eyes and charity,
considering that I do write this book for a commonwealth, as god knows my
pretense, not only in making this book, but al other books that I have
made, that I did never look for no reward, neither of Lord, nor of Prynter,
nor of no man living, nor I had never no reward, nor I will never have none as
long as I do live, god helping me, whose perpetual and fatherly blessing
light on us all.

The apendex to all the premises that follows.
Lords, Ladies, and Gentle men, learned and unlearned, of what estate or
degree so ever you be of, think not that no man can be helped by no manner of
medicines, if so be God do send the sickness, for he has put a time to
every man, over the which time no man by art nor science can not prolong the
time: for the number of the months and days of man's life god knows. But
this aforesaid time these months and days, a man may shorten or a breuiate
many ways concerning that God has given man in this life free will, the which
of his righteousness as long as we do live, he can not take it a way from
us. Now we having this free will, diverse times we do not occupy it to the will
of god as it ^ppereth both for soul and body, we do kill our souls as much
as does lie in us, when that we do break any of his commandments, or do
sin deadly, for that matter he has provided a spiritual medicine, which is
repe^tau^ce and ame^deme^t of life. Also we do kill our bodies as much as lies
in us (except that a man do kill himself wilfully) as many daily does
(contrary to gods will) as well the one as the other, when a man does a
breuiate his life by surfeting, by drunkenness, by pencifulnesse, by thought
and care, by taking the pockes with women, and leprousnes, and many other
infectious sicknesses, beside robbing, fighting, killing, and many other
mischances, which is not gods will that such things should be done, but God
knowing at the beginning of the creation of the world, that man would be prone
many ways to a breuiate his life, made them provision that man might be
helped, by his grace, and then the virtue the which he did give to herbs,
weeds, trees, roots, fruits, and stones. The property and virtue of the
which, few men or none does know them, except doctors of physic, and such as
do labor to have the knowledge of their operations.

And this knowledge notwithstanding let no man think that there is no physician
nor chierurgion can make a man sodenlie whole of his infirmity, as Christ and
his disciples and many other Saints did, for they must have leisure, time and
space as their living and practice is, for sick men, and women, be like a
piece of rustie harnis, the which can not be made bright at the first scouring,
but let a man continue in rubing and scouring, and than the harnis will be
bright, so in like manner a sick man can not be made whole of his malady or
sickness the first day, but he must continue with his mediciens.

But here let every man that is sick, beware of blind phisicions and
chirurgions the which be ignorant and can not tell what things does pertain to
their science, and therefore let all men beware of vacabounds and runnagates
that will smatter with physic, for by such persons many sick men have been
deceived, the more pity, God knows, who help us all now and ever. Amen.

The Breuiary of health.
The first Chapter does treat upon abstinence.
ABstinencia is the Latin word. Abstinence.
In Greek it is named Apochi. In English it is named abstinence, or fasting,
or forbearing of meats and drinks.

There be many manner of fastings. The first fasting is not to eat either
meat or drink. And this fasting ought to be used after repleation, or
surfeting for a time. The second abstine^ce is to eat one meal a day, or else
twice a day, and this is not properly Abstine^ce, but it may be called
Te^perance. The third abstinence is inuoluntary, for many men would eat meat
if they had it, and therefore nole^s volens, they do abstain. The.iiii.
abstine^ce, is when a man for devotion, or by commandment of the church does
abstain from flesh, keeping one meal a day, which is laudable. How be it to be
long fasting, or fasting to much, it dries and macerateth the body, it makes
the color salow, it does engender melancoly humors, and it does hurt the
sight, and it clarifieth ye body. This notwithstanding, abstinence is the most
perfectest medicine ye can be after repletion or surfeit. And then if it be
moderate, it does consume superfluities, and in consuming them, it does clarify
ye humor and so consequently it makes ye body fair colored, and not only
keeps out sickness, but also where sickness is entered nothing more helps,
used at the beginning of ye sickness: wherefore abstinence moderately used, is of
a high efficacitie for the sauetie of man's body. And there is not so great a
detriment to man's body, as is replecion or surfeting.

And whosoever he be that uses not temperance in eating and drinking, lives a
beastly life. And man having wit and reason to govern himself, should keep a
due order in eating and drinking, for sauegard of his soul and body.

The.2. chapter does show of the abhorring of a man's stomach against meat or
drink.
Abhorri^g of a man's meat.
ABhominacio stomachi, or else fastidium stomachi, be the latin words. In
English it is named the abhorring of the stomach, for many men and women being
sick or diseased, their stomakes does abhor ye sight of meat, or the sauer
of meats and drinks.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of debilitie of the stomach and weakness of the
brain. And diverse times it does come by corrupt humors, the which be in the
stomach. And otherwhile it does come by repletion, and otherwhile by over much
and wilful fasting, but as for fasting, that rule now a days need not to be
spoken of, for fasting, prayer, and alms deeds of charity, be banished out
of all regions and provinces, and they be knocking at Paradise gates to go in,
weping and wailing for the Temporalitie and spirituality, the which has exiled
them.

A remedy for them the which does abhor their meat through debilitie and
sickness.
Whosoever he or she be, the which does abhor any meats or drinks, let them
use to eat ye confection, de aromatibus, the confection of xiloaloes, and all
oderiferous and redole^t savors does comforth the stomach, the heart and the
brain, for this matter look in the Chapter of the stomach, or stomachus.

The.3. Chapter does show of Abhorsion, which is when a woman is delivered of
her child before her time.
Abhorsio^
ABhorsus or Abhortus be the latin words. In Enlishe it is named Abhorsion.
And that is when a woman is delivered of her child before her time. Or else
Abhorsion is also when a child is cut out of the mothers belly.

The cause of Abhorsion.
Abhorsion does come many ways. First it may come by ventositie and lubricitie
of humors in the matrix. Or it may come by a great fear or by extreme
thought, or by extreme sickness, or death, it comes also by a stripe or a
stroke, or a fall. Also it may come by receptes of medicines, or by extreme
purgacions, pocions, and other laxatiue drinks, of the which I dare not to
speak of at this time, least any light woman should have knowledge by ye which
wilful abhorsio^ may come of the multitudenes of the flowers of a woman.

A remedy for Abhorsion.
I do advertise every good woman to beware of al manner of things above
rehearsed. And to beware what medicines they do take: except it be of and by
the council of expert doctors of physic.

If it do come of the lubricitie of humors in the matrix, use Yeralogodian.

If it come of the multitudenes of the flowers, take of the juice of saint
John's wort, and of the juice of plantein, of either like porcio^, and drink it
with red wine and wine elega^t.ix. days.

If it come of ventositie. Take of Anis seeds, of Fenel seeds, of zeduall, of
each the weight of.xii. d. of Comin seeds the weight of.iii. d. of Organu^,
of Calamintes, of each the weight of.viii. d. make fine powder of all this, and
drink of it with white wine, or stale ale.ix. days, morning and evening. And
let boys, folishmen, and hasty men, the which be married beware how that they
do use their wives when they be with child. And let women the which be with
child beware of any occasion that should make Abhorsion.

For Achante, look in the Chapter named Spina.

The.4. chapter does show of a scurse in the skin of the head.
ACor, or Acoris, be the greek words, Fursur, is the latin word, Acora is ye
Barbarus word. In English it is na^ed da^druffe, or a skurse A skurse.
in ye head like bran or otmel, ye which does penetrate the skin of the
head, making little holes, differing from an other infirmity in the skin of the
head, named Fauus, as it shall appear in the Chapter of Fauus.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmytie does come through great humiditie and moystnes in the head, it
may come also of a melancoly humor, or of a salt humor.

A remedy.
Take the gall of a Bull, and mix it with vinegar, and anoint the head, or else
take of blanched Almons, and grind the^ small, and mix them with white wine,
and wash the head v. or.vi times. Or else take of Mellilote three ounces, of
Fenugreek, ii. ounces, of black soap an ounce, sees this in water or wine, and
wash the head.v. or vi. times.

For Acrochordones, look in the Chapter of Analipsia.

For Achinodis orexis, look in the Chapter named Canina appetencia.

For Adustio, look in the Chapter named Combustio.

The.5. Chapter does show of a wild or running skabbe.
A running skab.
ACria, is the greek word, Celsus does name it in latin Fera scabies. In
english it is named a wild or running skabbe, ye which does infest a man more
in one time of the year then in an other.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity comes to man, after his complexion, by superabu^dant
humors, or by lying with infectious persons having the said infirmity, or by
ariditie or dryness of coler or melancoly, the which does engender a dry
skabbe, which is the worst amongst all the kinds of skabbes.

A remedy.
Take Mercury mortified with fasting spettil.iii. ounces, incorporate it with
the oil of Bays, and anoint the body. Or else take Mercury mortified.iii.
ounces, of ye powder of Brimstone.ii. ounces, of the powder of Enula campana.ii.
ounces, co^fect this together with Barowes greece and anoint the body often.

The 6. chapter does show of an impediment in the corner of the eye.
AEgylops is the greek word. An impediment in the eye.
In English it is a superfluous flesh in the corner of ye eye toward the nose,
whereunto corrupt humors be gathered. And if this impediment do increase, and
a remedy by time not had, it will fester and fystle, the which is dangerous to
meddle with all, for it does stand in a dangerous place.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come through a reumatike humor mixed with corrupt blood,
or it may come with a strype, or hurt done in that place.

A remedy,
First if it do come of reume or corrupt blood, purge reume and blood, as it
does appear in the Chapiters Reuma et sanguis. If it do come otherwise, be let
blood in a vain named Mediana, and use local medicines, as waters to mundifie
the place, and than use salues sanatiue

For Aegineta, look in the Chapter named Estara.

The.7. Chapter does show of Vlcerations
AGria, is the greek word. In Latin it is named Vlcera. A byle
In English it is named Byles or botches, or such like apostumacions. A
difference is betwixt, Acria and Agria: for the one is with swelling, and the
other is with skabbes with out swelling.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity comes through gross and rauinous feeding, or else by
corruption of blood mixed with fleume.

A remedy.
First purge fleume and cleanse the blood, as it appears in the Chapiters of
blud and fleume. Then make maturacions, and after that make incision, or else a
corsiue, than abstract with plasters abstractiue ye corrupt matter, as it
appears in the Chappiter of Vlcus or Vlcera.

The.8. chapter does show of the green sickness, or the green Iaundes.
The grene Iaundes.
AGriaca is no greek word, nor no latin word, but a term in physic
signifying a sickness named ye green sickness, or ye green Iau^des, some
Arabyes does use this word.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment comes of corruption of blood and debilitie of nature, and
faintness about the heart.

A remedy.
Take Cordialles and restoratiues, and cleanse the blood, as it appears more
plainly in ye Chapter of Sanguis. And for this matter use the sirupe of
Fumitory and the confecton of Fumitory.

The.9. Chapter does show of the white Morphewe.
The vvhyt morphevv
ALboras, is an Araby word, and some do name it Albaras, it is named in Latin
Morphea alba. In English it is named the white of Morphewe.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmytie does come by defaulte of nutritive virtue. And it may come by
using to much of Venus acts in youth.

A remedy.
Take ye roots of Gencian made in fine powder. Or take the juice of Gencian
iii. ounces. mix it with white vinegar, and wash ye face or place often with it.
Or else take a skarlet cloth and rub the face or place with Mandragor leaves. And
to bedward annoynte the face with oil of ye Ash keys. Or else take the roots
of Madder.iii. ounces, stamp it with white vyneger, and rub the face or place
with it.

For Alchites, or as some say Alsclites, look in these words in the Chapiters
named Astites and Hidroips.

For Albernalieth, look in the Chapter named Polipus.

For Alaxos ligmos, look in the Chapter named Singultus.

For Alsoach, look in the Chapter named Singultus.

For Alburlo, look in the Chapter named Argemita.

The.10. Chapter does show of a fistulus impostume in the corner of the eye.
ALgarab, is ye Araby word. Apostum in the eye.
Auicen does name it Algaras. In english it is an impostum in ye corner of ye
eye.

The cause of this Apostumacion.
This impostume does come of a Reumatike humor mixed with corrupt blood having
a recourse to the eye.

A remedy.
Take of the water of Roses, and of the water of Plantaine, of each an ounce: of
Tutrie prepared a dram and a half: of the flowers of Mirtilles, an ounce and a
half, of the leaves of houselike or Syngrene, half an ounce, of Camphyre a
drame and a half, of the white of Eggs.iii. beat all this together in a
mortar, and put of the confection in the corner of the eye upon the impostume.

For Albugo, look in the Chapter named Argemita.

Alcola, is a Barbarous word, look for it in the Chapter of aphtis or aphtas.

And for Almusagari, look in ye Chapter of Almusat for both the words has
one signification.

And for Albugo, look in the Extrauagantes in the end of this book.

For Albaras, look in the Chapter named Alopecia.

Albatin is a sinew the which does grow out of ye middle of the spondils,
joining to the pillicles of the kidnes.

The.11. Chapter does show of the inflacion of the eyes.
ALinthiser, is the Araby word. In Latin it is named Inflatio oculorum, or
Tumor palpebrum. Inflation of the eye.
And some does name it Almusagari. In English it is named a Tumore, a swelling,
or an inflacion in the eyes.

The cause of this infirmity
This infirmity does come of reume, or else taking of a vaperous humor
coniunct with reume.

A remedy.
First purge reume as it does eppere in ye Chapter named Reuma. And once or
twice a weke take of ye pills of Cochee And beware of drinking of wine or of
other hot drinks. And use a good diet, and sit not up to late, and use some
labor or manual occupatio^ to sweat at the brows, except it be in a time of
infection, or when any universal sickness is in a country, then open not the
poores, neither by labor nor travel, neither by bathes, neither by stuphes
nor such like. And as I do show my mind for this infirmity. Above all other
things let every man beware of the premises, rehearsed in the time when the
pestilence, or the sweating sickness, or fevers, or agues does reign in a
country. For these sicknesses, be infectious, and one man many infecte
another, as it does appear in the chapiters named Scabies, morbus Gallicus. And
specially in the dietary of health, wherefore I would that every man having this
book, should have ye said dietary of health with this book, considering that
the one book is concurrant with the other.

Blohosos is a bone in the back.

The.12. Chapter does show of the four kinds of Leprosy, named Allopecia.
A kind of Leprosy
ALopecia, is the greek word. Ophiasis, both the greeks and ye Latins does
use ye word. The barbarus word is Alopecia. The Araby word is Albaras. In
English it is a sodein falling of a man's hair of his head and beard, having
growing upon ye skin, under ye hair an humor like bran or otmel, and
betwixt the finger is a white drines, it is named Alopecia, for as much as the
word is deryued of greek named Alops: which is in english a Fox, for a Fox
once a year has that infirmity shedding his hair, having also a little
skurfe under the hair upon the skin.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of the heat of the stomach and of the corruption of
the brain, for the skin of the head will stincke through the vaporing of evil
and corrupt humors. Also this infirmity does come diverse times of the
defaulte of humiditie or moist humors. And then the skurfe is like otemell,
but some looks whitish, and other blackish.

A remedy.
First drink no hot wines, nor eat dry meat, nor leperous fyshes. Than
shave the head and berd, and anoynte the head with the greece of a Fox. Or else
wash the head with the iuce of Beetes.v. or.vi. times, or else stamp Garlik and
rub the head with it, and after that wash it in vinegar, do this.v. or vi.
times. Or eles make ashes of Garlike and temper it with honey and anoint the
head. If it do come through any opilacio^s, anoint the head with the oil of
bitter Almons, or with the oil of woormwod, or with the oil of Spicnard, and
such like oils. If it do come otherways, ye oil of Myrtilles is good, or the
oil of Galls, or the oil of Walnuts, or the oil of Maiden hair.

The.13. Chapter does show of a Carbocle.
ALtois is ye Araby word. In greek it is named Althoea. In Latin it is named
Carbunculus. In English it is named a Carbocle Carbocle.
or a botch, Carbunculus does take his name of Carbo, which is to say in
english a Cole, for a ^^ole being a fire is hot, and so is a Carbocle.

The cause of this infirmity.
Most commonly a Carbocle does come in the time when the pestilence does
reign, or else when the air and the blood is putrified and corrupted. This
vlceration and infirmity most co^monlie does breed in ye emu^ctory places,
there where the three principal members has their purging places the which be
under the ear or throat, or else about ye arm holes or breast, or else about the
secret parts of a man or woman, or in the share, or thigh, or flank. And of
Carbocles there be four kinds. The first is black. The second is read. The
third is of a glass or a greenish color. And the fourth is of aswart or dim
color. The black color comes of melancoly and of a venomous matter. And
therefore it is dangerous. The red color of ye carbocle comes of a corrupt
blood. The glass color comes of coler, and the swart color comes of
coler adusted. And if the carbocle do appear, and after that does return to ye
body again, commonly it is an evil sign. And if the sick person do vomit
and be sompnouent or sleeping. And ye pulces subverted, and cold sweats with
alteracion of color, with a vehement agew, it is a sign of death.

A remedy as much as I can tell.
Before the sore be fixed, take purgacions according to ye age and strenght of
the person, and be let blood with ye counsel of a doctor of physic, and as
it is specified in the dietary of health, and if the sore be fixed, lay this
plaster to it. Take of Doves du^g three ounces, stamp it with vinegar and lay
it over ye sore. And to break the carbocle take of Dasies half an ounce, of
Cancarides the weight of.ii. d. stamp this together and lay it on the head of
ye Carbocle. Than take salues to draw out ye corrupcion, and otherwhile
mu^difie the sore-with the juice of smalage. For this matter look further in
ye Chap. named Epedinua.

For Ambustro, which is a scalding, look in the Chapter named Combustio.

For Amor, a sickness, look in ye Chapters named Hereos.

For Ambustio meretricis, look after the Chapter named Anastropha.

The.14. Chapter does show of little cornels in the root of the tongue.
AMigdale, is the latin word. Cornels.
In English it is little cornels in the root of the tongue as some say, but I
do say it is two fleshly pieces, the which does ly to the two vmyles like the
fashion of an Almon.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come through reume, the which does descend from the head
to the root of the tongue, and otherwhile it does come by heat of the stomach,
the which does vapor up to the root of the tongue, and it may come of
drinking to much of hot wines and strong ale.

A remedy.
First use gargarice, and then take sternutacions, and purge the head and the
stomach with piles of Cochee. And beware of late drink and eiull diet, as
surfeting and drinking of hot wines and strong ale, for Omne nimium vercitur
in vicum.

The.15. Chapter does show of one of the kinds of the falling sickness.
ANalepsia is the greek word. A kind of the falling sickness.
The barbarus word is named Analencia. In latin it is named Morbus caducis, and
Morbus co^micialis. In english it is one of ye kinds of the falling sickness.
And they that have this sickness when they do fall they do not foam at the
mouth, but they do defile themselves other by vryne or by egestion, or both at
once.

The cause of this infirmity
Many Auctors in diverse matters be of sundry opinions, but for this matter I
do say, that for as much as it is one of the kinds of the falling sickness,
it does take his original of a reumatike humor, opylating the celles of the
brain, and the brain so opilated and stopped, the pacient lives pitifully
unto the time that nature has removed the cause.

A remedy.
For this matter a great circumspect must be had. First in the diet of the
pacient for the pacient not only in this kind of the falling sickness, but in
all other kinds must abstein from white meats, and befe, heart flesh, and
venison. And they must beware of clyming up to high places, they must eat no
Salades, Garlike, Ramsons, Onions, Chybolles, or Scalions, or such like things:
ye pacient must refrain from eating of water fowls, and from eating of ye
fatness of fish, as Eles Co^ger, and Salmon, or such like. And then use the
seeds and the roots of Piony as well in meats and drinks, as to wear the
root and seeds about the neck, and purge often the head, and do as it is
specified in the Chapter named Epilepcia.

The.16. Chapter does show of warts.
A Crochordones, is the greek word. The barbarus word is named Acroconides, in
latin it is named Varuce. And some do name it Tubercula, look in Tubercula. in
english it is named wartes. vvartes.


The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of gross and evil humors.

A remedy.
First with a pair of sissers cut of the heads of the wartes, and then rub
them with garlike and bay salt stamped both together, do this six or seven
times. And lay over them a little plate of lead. For this matter look in the
Chapter named Tuber.

Anthus is a crooked elbow, the Barbarous word is named ancha.

The.17. Chapter does show of a sickness in the flesh, which is puffed up like
a sponge, the flesh being soft and the skin dankish.
A kind of hidropsye.
ANasarca, or Iposarca, be the greek words. In english it is one of the
kinds of Hydropsies, it is a waterish humor which runs bytwixt the flesh
and the skin, and some does say, it is in the flesh and the skin. And this
infirmity does make the flesh and the skin to puff like a sponge and does
make ye flesh dankysh. Some auctours does name this infirmity Iposarca, and
some does name it Sarcites.

The cause of this infirmity
This infirmity does come of a salt waterish humor.

A remedy.
First use a precise diet, not to eat contagious meats, than use stuphes, and
easy purgations, as it appears in the dietarie of Health.

The.18. Chapter does show of casting up of a man's meat.
ANastropha is the barbarus word. In greek it is named Anastrophae. In English
it is named a vomiting Vomiting
or casting up a man's meat as Catastropha is a quick casting downward of a
man's egestion or seege, for the one infirmity comes not so fast upward, but
the other goes as fast downward.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come through great replecio^ of meats and drinks, or else
it comes through the malice of the stomach, or of lubrysation of the
intestines or intrayles.

A remedy.
First mundifie the stomach with pills of Cochee. And confort ye stomak with
Dyagalanga, and use odoriferous savors, and good meats and drinks, and have
a merry heart, for pencifulnes does hurt the stomach.

For Anciloglossi, look the Chapiters of Balbucientes, and in Mogilali.

The.19. Chapter does show of burning of an harlot.
AMbustio meritricis be the latin words. Burninge of an harlot.
In english it is named, burning of an harlot, or of an hoore.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come when an harlot does hold in her breath, and clapse
her hands hard together and toes in like manner. And some harlot does stand
over a chafinge dyshe of cooles, into the which she does put brimestone and
there she does perfume her self.

A remedy.
If a man be burnt with a harlot and do medel with an other woman with in a
day, he shall burn the woman that he does meddle withal. If one be burnt let
them wash their secrets two or three times with white wine, or else with sack
and water. And if the matter have continued long go to some expert Chierurgion
to have help, or else the gottes will burn and fall out of the belly.

The.20. Chapter does show of a man's breath or end.
The breath
ANhclitus is the latin word. In greek it is named Asthma. The Barbarus word
is Anelitus. And in English it is named the breath or end of man, the which
other while does stink or has an evil savor and diverse times in many men it
is short that he must puff and blow and gasp for wind.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come from the brain or else from the stomach, or else from
the lo^ges, if it do come from ye longs, look in the chapter named Asthma, if
it do come out of the head, reume which is putryfied and corrupted, infectynge
the brain is the cause, and if it do come by or through ye throat, it does
come of putrified humor of the stomach or else of corruption of the longes.

A remedy if this impediment come of the brain.
First purge the head and brain with a gargarice, or with pillpul, Elphangine.
And then use ye Electurari de Ge^mus, or a confection de Musto, or Tiriaca
diatessero^, for this matter look in the Chapter named Asthma.

A remedy if this impediment come of the stomach.
First purge the stomach with Yerapigra galem. Than take of Cloves the weight
of vi. d. of Ligni Aloes, the weight of viii. d. of Galingale, the weight of
vi. d. make powder of this and drink of it morning and evening, as much as an
Hasel nut. And use to chew in the mouth a cloue without maces in the morning
and after dinner and to bedward.

A remedy to pal or make sweet the breath, which way so ever it does come.
First in ye morning eat or swallow ii. or iii. cloves, and keep betwixt ye
gummes and the cheeks ii. cloves, or else do as I said before. Or else take of
Sauery an ounce, of Galingale half an ounce, of the wood of aloes a qurter of an
ounce, make powder of this, and eat or drink a portion in the morning, and a
little after diner, and as much to bedward.

The.21. Chapter does show of the squince.
ANgina is the latin word. Squyncy
Sinachi or Chinanchi be the greek words. The barbarus words be named
Squinancia or quina^cia. In english it is named the Squincy The which is an
impostum in the throat, ye which does let a man to swalow either meat or drink.
And diverse times it does stop up a ma^s wind or breath, and there be iiii
kinds. The first kind does not appear outward and that is death, except it be
quickly cured. The second kind does somewhat apere more inward then outward,
and that is not so dangerous as the first is. The third kind does appear both
inward and outward, and that is not so periculus as the other be, how be it, it
does continue longer then the other does. The three kinds does only appear
outward, and in it is no peril.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of Reume ascending from the head to the thro^e. And
it may come of vaporous humors, discending from the stomach to the throat.

A remedy.
Three things is requisite to help these infirmities: The first is letting of
blood in a vain named Cephalica. The second is to purge ye head with the
pills of Cochee. And ^he third is to use gargarices, and to use Clysters. And
than let the pacie^t for a space abstain from meat, except it be of the broth
made of a chiken, and let the patie^t take Ydormel or Oximel. And take a little
piece of porke or bacon, or else a little piece of a sponge, and encinet it in
oil Olive and tie about any of these things a strong thread and let ye pacient
swallow in this matter and by and by pull it out again and be sure of the thread
that he that shall do this feate in holding fast the thread, do pull it out
again quickly.

The.22. Chapter does show of the Soul of man.
A Soul.
ANima, is the latin word. In greek is named Psichae. In English it is named ye
Soul of man: The soul of man is the life of the body, for when the soul is
departed from the body, the body is but a dead thing that can not see, hear,
nor feel. The Soul can not be felt nor seen, for it is like ye nature of an
Angel, having will, wit, wisdom, reason, knowledge and understanding. And is
partaker of good or evil, as the body and it does or has deserved or
operated. The soul also is a creature made with man and connexed to man, for
man is of two natures, which is to say, the nature of the Soul, and the nature
of the body, which is flesh and blood, the flesh or body is palpable and may
be seen and felt: The Soul is not paly ^le nor can not be seen nor felt, but
both being together now and shall be after the general Resurrection in time to
come, does and shall do, feel joy or pain. etc.

It is not the soul only does make a man, nor ye body of a man is a man,
but soul and body connexed or joined together makes a man: and the one
decepered from ye other be of ii. natures as I have said, unto the time that
they do meet again at the day of dome. Therefore let every man in this life so
provide by ye merit of Christ's passion, that soul and body being perfect
man, may enter into everlasting joy and glory, to be in heaven with God. The
electuary of Gemmis: and the confection named Alchermes be good to comefort ye
soul or the spirits of man, foul and body being together here in earth.

The.23. Chapter does show of a man's mind.
ANimus is ye latin word. In greek it is named Thimos. A mind
In English it is named a man's mind. The mind of a man is very mutable and
inconstant, more in one man then in an other, but the most part might be
amended.

The cause of this Mutabilitie.
This mutabilitie does come through wavering and inco^stant wits, lacking love
and charity to God, to a man's own self and to his neighbor regarding more
other sensualitis, or prodigality, couetis or lucre, the^ the wealth and
profit of the soul. Yea, ye mind of man is so occupied about worldly matters
and business, that God and the soul of man is forgotten, by the which great
dangers follows.

A remedy.
First let every man reconcyle himself in and to God, and not to set by the
world, but to take the world as it is, not being parmanent no abiding place,
but to live as one should dye every hour. And if a man have this memory, he
will not be mutable, nor set by the world, but constant having ever a respect
to god his creator, and to his neighbor which is every man wheresoever he
dwell.

The.24. Chapter does show of a byle named Antrax.
ANtrax is ye latin word. In english it is named a Felo^, A Felon
and is like a carbocle, but not so great in quantity or substance.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a venomous matter, and otherwhile it does come of
interial cause, or of an exterial cause. The interiall cause does come of some
evil humor, the exterial cause does come of some venomous stinging of a worm

A remedy.
If it do come of an evil humor, eat Triacle and make a salve or a plaster of
triacle and lay upon the place. Or else take the white of a raw egg and put
in salt to it and beat it well together and make a plaster.

For Antiades, look in the Chapter named Glandule and Cherade.

The.25. Chapter does show of a man's ars or fundement.
An ars.
ANus, is the latin word. In greek it is Grans. In english it is a man's ars,
let every man keep that place clean. And let not other man make no
restrictions that nature would expel, other by egestion, or by ventositie. In
the aforesaid place is inge^dred ye pyles or Emerodes, Fystles, and Festures,
Ca^kers, ye Poxes, and Ficus in Ano, and diverse times ye longatio^ which is the
ars gut, does fall out of ye body, and otherwhile many men can not keep their
egestio^ but fleeping and waking they do defile themselves, for all which
matters look in the Chapiters of the prenominated infirmities.

A remedy for falling out of the fundement.
First beware of taking cold in that place. And beware of costifnes. And keep
the ars and buttokes warm. And sit not on ye could earth, nor upon stone or
stones, nor upon no hard thing, but take somewhat under the buttockes, but
only for falling out of the longacion, or ars gut, but for all other
infirmities that may be in the longation engendered.

For falling out of the longacion.
Take of Myrtilles.iii. ounces, of Iuneper cut in small pieces iiii. ounces, sees
it in water and wash the place. And after that make a perfume of Iuneper and
sit over it. Or else make a perfume of Benguin, Mire, or Frankensence. Or else
take the inward rine or bark of an Oak, sees it in water with Galls and wash
the place, and drink of Galbanu^ with stale ale, and lay the substance of it to
ye nauel, it is good for the falling of the mother. And for these impediments in
a man's fundeme^t or ars, it is good to anoint ye place with oil of linsedes

The.26. Chapter does show of an hot Vlceration in the rough of the mouth.
APhtae, is ye greek word. Alcola, is ye barbarus word. Ulcers.
And Vlceracio in palato be the latin words. In english it is named a hot
Vlceracion in the rough or palate of ye mouth.

The cause of this infirmity.
This byle, or vlceracion in the palate or rough of the mouth, is engendered of a
hot stomach, fuming and meeting with reume at the vnels in the rough of the
mouth, and that is the cause of this impediment.

A remedy.
First qualify the hot and the vaparous fumositie of the stomach, and the
reume the which does descend out of the head to the vnels, as it does appear in
the Chapiters named Stomachus, and vnele. And whosoever that will have help
for the mouth, or for the tongue, or for the ears, for the teeth, for the
nose, for the eyes, or for any dolor or pain, the which may be in these parts
or places, let them use otherwhile sternutacions, and pills of Cochee. And
once or twice a month, let them use gargarices to exhaust and draw out the
reume out of the head, ye which reume is the cause of many infirmities in man's
body, as it does more largelyer appear in the Chapter named Reuma.

For Anathomia, look in the Introduction of knowledge.

For Apepsia, look in the Chapter named Gruditas.

The.27. Chapter does show of a man's appetide.
APetitus, is ye latin word. In English it is a man's appetide to meat. There be
diverse apetides, some be natural and some be unnatural. And one appetyde
Appetide
is without order, and that is when a man would eat and cannot. And some have
lost their appetyd that they have little stomach or none to eat any meat. A
natural appetyd is to eat in due order and due time, after a digestion. An
unnatural appetide is to eat and drink at all times without dew order, or to
desire to eat raw and unlawful things, as women with child does and such
like.

The cause that a man has lost his appetyde.
The cause of lesing of a man's appetyd is that the stomach is repleted with
evil humors. And it does come either through sickness, or else it comes of to
much drinking in ye morning, or else it does pronosticate sickness to be with in
short time.

A remedy.
First refrain early drinking, than purge ye stomak with pills of Cochie, and
use to eat the confection de aromatibus, and so is the sirupe of Wormwood
good for that matter.

A remedy for women that have unlawful lusts
I have known yt such lusts has been put away by smelling to the savor of
their own shoes, when they be put off. In such lusts it is best ye women have
their desire if it may be gotten, for they shall never take surfect by such
lusts.

The.28. Chapter does show of the Apoplexi.
APoplexis, Apoplexi
Is the greek word. Apoplexia, is the Barbarous word. In latin it is na^ed
Percussio. In english it is named a sodeyne striking down, taking away a man's
wit, reason and moving.

The cause of this infirmytie.
This infirmytie does come of a cold humor, the which does opilate or stop the
ventrycles of the brain, and does fill the celles of the head. And some say it
is a cold and a gross Apostumacion that lies in the hinder part of the head.

A remedy.
First purge the head, and use this sternutacion. Take of Eliborus albus, of
Peper, of Castory, of each.ii. drames, make powder of it, and blow or snuff a
little in the nosethryles. And use clisters and fricacions with salt and warm
vinegar. And use Oximel diuretike, and Oximel squilitike, and purge the matter
with Yeraruffi, or else with Yeralogodian. And the medicines ye which does serve
for Epilepsia, which is named in English the Falling sickness, or the foul
evil, will, serve for this sickness

The.29. Chapter does show of impostumes general.
APostema, is the latin word. In greek it is named Apostima. In english it is
a postume. A postume Apostu^e.
is no other thing but a collection or a running together of evil humors. And
some be interial, and some be exterial. The interiall Apostumes either be in
the head, in the stomach, in the lunges, in the spleen, or in the bowels. The
exteriall apostumes be in the flesh, under the skin.

The cause of this infirmity.
All apostumacions do come by corrupt blood, or else by co^geiled fleume, or
fleume unnatural. Or else by coler, or else by melancoly. If the impostume do
come of corrupt and infectious blood, then the impostume is named Hegmon. And
if it come by congeyled or unnatural fleume, the impostume is named Zimie, and
some do name it Zumma. And if ye impostume do come by coler, ye impostume is
named Herisipula. And if ye impostume do come of melancoly, or coler adusted,
the^ the impostume is named Cancri or Scliros. Yet there be many other
impostumes ye which do come of mixed humors, as the botch and byle, and such
like. These impostumes that be interiall and can not be seen, be more
periculus the^ they the which a man may see and feel. For this matter and for
a remedy, look in the proper names of the impostumes, and specially in the
Chapter named Suffocacion or Suffocacio.

The.30. Chapter does show of the Citryne water in manns body.
AQua citrina be the latin words. In English it is named citrine water, Citrine
water.
like the color of an Ore^ge which is engendered in the body. In greek it is
named Hidor medicon.

The cause of this impediment.
The cause of this impediment comes of superab unda^ce of Citryne coler and
evil humors.

A remedy.
Use pills of Mesereon.ii. times in a week. And beware of eating of broiled
meats, of fried and burnt meats, and of all manner of meats that is dried in
ye smoke, and of crusts of bred of pie crustes, and cake bread, and sodden
bread and sower drink.

The.31. Chapter does show of a sore in the eyes.
Sore eyes
ARgemata is the barbarous word. In greek it is named Argema. In English it is
named a sore in the eyes, for a white does grow over the black of the eye, and
the white of ye eye is red. In latin it is named Albugo or Nebula.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of reume, and of corrupt blud, the which does
distill out of the head of the eyes.

A remedy.
First purge reume, as it does appear in the Chapter named Reuma, and than make
a plaster with the white of.ii. eggs, and beat it well together, and than put
to it a little honey, and after that put to it flexe or two, and to bedward lay
it over thy eyes, and let it lie al night, and in the morning wash the eyes with
cold water, and a fine clout, do this.iii. nights one after an other.

The.32. Chapter does show of the gout Artheticke.
The gout arthetike.
ARthetica is the Physic word. In latin is named Morbus articulari. And in
greek it is named Articularis: The Barbarus word is Gutta artetica. In english
it is named the Arthetike passion, or the gout Arthetike, it is a pain or a
passion of ye joints, for it will run from one joint to another, for ye
matter or the humor is so subtle that it will dis^end and ascend into the
joints, and otherwhile the pain is so vehement that it will break ye joints.
And this is named the very gout, there be other kinds of goutes named
Chira^gra, Podagra, Sciatica, as it does appear in their Chapters.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity either it does come of corrupt blood, or else of a fleumatike
humor, or else of a colericke humor, if it do come of blud or of reumaticke
fleume, ye place will swel and be red, and the vein will be full, if it do come
of coler, ye place does not swell greatly but is dry, and the place will prick
and burn.

A remedy.
First beware of contagious meats and drinks, as new ale, new bear, read
wine, new hot bread, oysters, Eles, muscles, samon, dog fysh, raye or
thornebacke, fresh befe, water fowls, goose and ducke, and such like, be not
costiue, and use ge^til purgacions, and beware of riot and late drinking, and
taking of cold on the feet, or going or ryding wet shodde or booted. Than use
stupes, and these oils if the matter come of cold humors, the oil of
Walnuts, Oleum vlpinum, Oleum philosophorum, and Oleum de lapide gagatis. If ye
matter do come of heat, than is good Oleum de Ranis.

The.33. Chapter does show of the eye when it is blood shot.
ATarsati is the Araby word. In latin it is named Macula. In english it is when
the eye is blood shotten, A blood Shorte^ eye
and some say it is a blemish in the eyes.

The cause of this infirmity.
This impediment does come by a stripe or a blow or some other casual hurt by
some evil chance, or else of some evil humor, look for this matter in the
chapter named Macula. in the Extrauagantes.

A remedy.
Take the white of.ii. eggs, and beat it too a waterish spume, than put in
tow, and.iii. nights one after an other lay such plasters over the eye or
eyes, and in the mean space ha^g over the eye or eyes a grene sarsenet, and
plonge the eyes in cold water.

The.34. Chapter does show of Arters.
Artery is the greek word, and the Latin word. In english it is named Arters.
Arters
Arters be like veins, in the which be the vital spirits, having their
beginning of ye heart. And upon the arter does lie ye veins, except it be in
the back, whereas a great arter named Trachea, does lie upon the vein. To the
arters does fall displeasures, as by brosing, lifting, and otherwise hurting
them, for such matters use to annoyot the body with oil of Turpentine.

The.35. Chapter does show of pushes and whelkes in the head.
ASaphati is the greek word. In English they be named whelkes or pushes, the
which be red, and they be in ye roots of the hair, and in the skin of the
head. And there be two kinds, the one is moist, and the other dry.

The cause of this infirmity.
The pushes which be dry comes of coler adusted, and they the which be
moist, does come of corrupt blood mixte with fleume.

A remedy for dry pushes.
Take of Camomil an handful, of Fenugreke an ounce, of Rose leaves an handful,
seth this in white wine and wash the head.v. times at night. Or else take ye
oil of Linsede.ii. ounces and anoint the head.vii. times.

A remedy for the moist pushes or whelkes.
Take the rust of iron the which does lie about ye smithes handfile ii. ounces,
of Brimstone an ounce, of the pulpes of colequintida half an ounce, beat this
together and put it into a pint and a half of white vinegar, and wash the
head three or four times with it. Or else take Arsneke and mortify it ii.
ounces, mix it with greece and with the oil of Bays, and anoint the head three
or four times.

The 36. Chapter does show of worms in a man's belly, named Astarides.
AStarides, is the Greek word. In English it is little small worms, Worms.
the which most commonly does lie in the longacion otherwise named the ars gut.
And there they will tickle the fundement.

The cause of the breeding of such worms.
Such worms be engendered of coler or of flegmatike humors.

A remedy.
The usage of eating of Garlike does kill all manner of worms in a man's belly,
as it does more largelier appear in the Chapter named Lumbrici. Or else take
of the juice of Lauander cotton and put to it the powder of wormeseede, and
drink it three times every morning fasting, and drink not an hour or two
after.

The 37. Chapter does show of the putrefying of the flesh.
ASchachilos is the Greek word. The barbarus word is named Aschachilis. In
English it is putrefying of the flesh, Putrefying of the flesh.
for in some men the flesh shall be putrified and corrupted to the bone or bones,
Achachilos comes of two words of Acia, the which does signify in the Arabie
tongue corruption. And of Chilos, a Greek word, which is to say, juice.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a venomous matter as by some melancholy humor,
or by stinging of a venomous worm or serpent.

A remedy.
First take ye dregs of wine and mix it with an ounce of the powder of roch
Alome, and wash and scour ye place with it, than take of ye bran of beans,
and the bran of barley.ii. ounces, of the seeds of Nettles made in powder an
ounce, mix this together with ye juice of wormwood and honey, and make a
plaster. Or else take ye oil of Roses.iiii. ounces, of wax.ii. ounces,
incorporate these together: and wha^ it is cold, put to it.v. ounces of ceruce
that is washed. Than take of ye powder of Henba^e seeds the weight of.xii. d.
of black popy seeds made in powder ye weight of.xii. d. and make emplaisters of
this and lay the^ to ye sore place. Also for this matter is good Vnguentum
egiptiacum.

For Ass, look in the Chapter named Nicta lopis.

The.38. chap. does show of one of the kinds of the hidropsies
AStites or Asclites be ye greek word. The barbarus men do name it Alchites or
Asclites. In english it is of the kinds of hidropsies, Kinds of hidropsies
and is engendered in ye belly, for ye belly will bol and swel, and make a noise
as a botel half full of water.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of superabundance of water in the belly. For look
as the Timpany comes of wind, so does this sickness come of abundance of
corrupt water.

A remedy.
First use Trocis. de lacea, and use purgacio^s and clisters and suppositors.
And if it be ouergrowne there is no remedy without incisio^ or cutting ye
belly. And in this matter there must be of counsel expert phisicio^s and
chirurgio^s, ye which be expert in incision. And after ye to wash the guts in
white wine, and than to stich up ye place again and to minister salues
according to the matter: and let the pacient use a precise diet in meats and
drinks. First not to drink no new ale, nor new beer, nor syder. Also the
patie^t must refrain from eating of new bread, and sodden bread. Also to
abstein from al manner of white meats, specially hard cheese, and in no wise to
eat any sort or kind of nutes. Also ye pacie^t must not eat no manner of
fruits, nor no other thing ye which inge^der wind: also ye pacie^t must abstein
from al kind of shows and potages. Also not to eat fresh beef and al other
stirring meats, as all manner of waterfoules as well wild as tame. And ye
pacie^t must abstin from eating of Eles, samo^, fresh heiri^g, dog fish, ray,
thornbacke, and other such like fishes. Also salt meats is not good, and no
more be beans and peso^ for any man or woman having this aforesaid sickness

The 39. Chapter does show of Asmaticke persons the which be short winded.
ASthma is the greek word. Asma is ye barbarus word. Anhelosi or Suspiciosi,
or Constrictio anhelitus, be the latin words. In english it is named shortness
of wind. Shortness of vvind


The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come either by Viscus or tough fleume being in ye pips,
or else by some apostumacio^ in ye pipes, or else there is some fault in the
lunges that the lunges is putrifyed.

A remedy.
A co^fectio^ of musk is good. Also loch de pino, loch de squilla, loch
alfesceta be good, and so is ye sirupe of Isope, and the sirup of Calami^t. For
I have practiced these things, and have sped well. First I have made a ptisan
under this manner. Take of Enula ca^pana rotes, picked and made clean, and cut
in slices.vii. ounces of ye rots of fenel washed, and ye pith pulled out.vi.
or.vii. ounces, of Anes seeds half a pound, of figs half a pound, of great
reso^s ye sto^es pulled out a quartro^ of a pound, of Isop iii. good handfuls,
of barley cleansed.v. ha^dfuls, seth all this together in.ii. galo^s of running
water, to half a galo^, and xv. days I have given to my pacie^t morning,
noone, and neight.ix spo^efuls at a time, and at the xv. days end I have given
pills of Cochee, and after that I have ministered Diasulfur, and have made many
whole. Also the confection of Philoni, of the first inuencion is good: And so
is to anoint the stomach with ye oil of Philosophers, named in latin, Oleum
philosophorum: And beware of Nuttes, Almons, Cheese, and milk, and cold, and
the pills of Agaricke is good for this sickness.

For Athoromata look in the Chapter named tubercula.

For Ascelle, look in the Chapter named Fetor assellarum.

For Atrabilis, look in the Chapter named Cardiaca passio.

For Auditus, look in the chapter named Aures.

For Auriga, look in the chapter named Hictericia.

The 40. Chapter does show of a man's ears.
AVres is the latin word. In English it is a man's ears, the which be the
organs of hearing. Ears.
And in the ears be many infirmities, as singing in the ears, apostumacion,
pushes or whelkes, worms, and defnesse, and such like.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of corrupcion of the brain, and by opilacions, and
evil humors.

A remedy.
If there be any pain in the ears, the oil of bitter Almons is good, and so
is oil of Been.

If there be any ringing or noise in the head, look in the chapter named
Tinnitus aureum.

If there be any ventositie in the ears, instill into ye ears the oil of
Nardine.

If there be any deafness in the ears, look in the chapter named Surditas.

If there be pushes or whelkes in the ears, look in the chapter named Pustule.

If there be worms in the ears, look in the chapter named Vermes.

If any Apostumacion be in the ears, the oil of bitter Almons is good.

If there be any other impediments in the ears, you shall find it out in the
chapters of this book.

Put nothing into the ear that is cold, but let it be a little warm.

Thus ends the letter of A.
And here follows the letter of B.
The.41. Chapter does show of a stutting or stamering.
BAlbucis is the latin word. Stutting stameri^g.
In English it is named stutting or stamering. In greek it is named Magillali
or Ancinoglosi.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come three manner of ways, one does come by nature. The
other does come by humiditie of the senewes of the tongue, and the third
comes to be in the company of a stutter or stamerer.

A remedy.
First as stutting that does come by nature, it can not be helped, except it be
reformed in youth by some discrete tutor. If it do come with being in the
company of a stutter or stamerer, a man must refrain the company of a
stutter. If it do come by the humiditie of the senowes, this is the remedy.
Take Basil an handful, of Couselippes an handful, sees all this together in
white wine, and drink of it morning, none, and night, thus continue xv. days.
Or else take vi. or vii. figs, or vi. or vii. fair grains of Castorie, beat
this together with clarified honey: and then diverse times put the quantity of a
Nut upon ye tongue, and use three times a week of gargarice.

For Barba, leesing of the hair of the beard, look in the chapter named
Alopecia.

For Basilica, look in the chapter named Principal vein or Mediana.

The.42. Chapter does show of a greedy appetite.
BVlimos is the Greek word. Hunger.
Bolismus is the barbarus word. Ingens fames be the latin words. In English it
is named a great hunger, how be it when these the which has this impediment,
if they do eat gredely a morsel or two, they be satisfied.

The cause of this infirmity.
This impediment does come of a cold stomach.

A remedy.
In this impediment I do advertise al men and women, first to use odoriferous
and redolent savors, as Amber de Greece, Storax, Calamint, Lignum Aloes,
Cloves, Lapdanum, and Nutmeges. And to this reuocate inordinate appetid. I would
that a Cockerell or a pullet might be sodden or roasted, and with butter and
vinegar asperged, with the premises, and to drink to it Muscadel or Basterd,
or Elegant, but in any wise see that the body be not constupated, so yt the
pacie^t may have daily a natural egestion, other by course of nature, or elss
by suppositors, or else by some other easy purgacions.

The.43. Chapter does show of a horsnesse.
BRanchos is ye greek word. Branca, is ye barbarus word. In latin it is named
Ra^cedo, in english it is named horsenes Horsenes


The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of reume disending from the head to the throat. And
some say it is a reume discending from the head to the cheeks or throat. And
some do say it may come by opilacions.

A remedy.
For this matter first purge fleuem, use gargarices, and sternutacions, and use
pills of Cochee, and use to drink buttred ale, or butred beer, and for a
space which is to say, iii. or iiii. days, keep the pacient warm, that he do
not come into the open air, and let there be a good fire where the pacient is.

The 44. Chapter does show of a push or an impostum in the eye.
Apostu^e in the eye
BOthor is the Araby word. In latin it is named Pustula or Appostema. In
english it is named a push, a wheale, or an impostume in a man's eye. And there
be some auctours says that it is a little white whelke or wheale in the face,
named as I do think, an ale pock. And some auctours say it is a wheale in the
mouth or tongue.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of late drinking or surfetinge disorder or diet in
drinking of wine strong ale or beer out of due time.

A remedy.
First use temperance in drinking to late, than take of the ashes of wylowes,
and mix it with vinegar and wash the place. Or else take of the bran of Cocle
and myxe it with ye juice of Radish, and wash the place. Or else take of the
powder of Radish mix it with vinegar and wash the place with a fether, or a
fine linen cloth.

The 45. Chapter does show of an impostume growing in the throat or neck.
BOcium or Nauta be the latin words. Apostu^e in the neck.
In english it is a swelling the which does grow in the throt and in the neck.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of reume distilling from the head to the aforesaid
places, it may come of corruption of blood. And there be two kinds, the one is
natural, the other is accidentell, naturul bocions commonly children has, and
so has young persons that be full of reume, accidental bocions comes to age,
or by mischaunce.

A remedy.
First eat no Nuts, nor hard cheese, nor fresh biefe, and use the medicines,
the which be in the Chapters named Sephiros and Scrophule.

The 46. Chapter does show of a man's codde.
BVtsa testaculorum be the lattin words. The Cod.
In english it is a man's Codde, in the which diverse times does inge^der diverse
diseases, as ye three kinds of hernies and otherwhile ye siphat is relaxed or
broke, that the Guts of man does fall into the Codde, and then it is named
a Rupture. And otherwhyle ye Stones may be inflated and inflamed and swollen. A
remedy for all the which look in the Chapters of the aforesaid sicknesses and
infirmities.

The 47. Chapter does show of a man's arms.
An arm.
BRachium is the latin word. In English it is a man's arm, the arms of man may
have diverse impedime^ts, as the gout named Chiragra. Also in the arms may be
aches, in the joints and bones, for the gout in the arms, look in the
chapter named Chiragea, and for aches and peine in the arms, use sear clothes
that be attractiue. Or else take the oil of Turpentine and mix it with
Aquauite, and anoint the place or places.

The 48. Chapter does show of an impostume, or swelling in the face.
A swelling in the face.
BVriga is the latin word. In English it is named an impostume or an inflacio^,
the which is in all the whole face of man. Some doctors does name this
infirmity Ruonia. And some do name it Gutta rubea. There is great difference
betwixt Gutta rubea and Gutta rosea, for the causes of the infirmities be not
like, as it shall appear in this Chapter, and in the Chapter of the other
infirmity or impediment named Gutta rosea.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a venomous matter ascending out of the stomach
meeting with reume that would descend or distill out of the head. And the one
ascending and the other discending, and meeting both together, vehemently does
cause the vapors to break out, and does make apostumacion.

A remedy.
First for this matter Flebothomie is very good, and so be purgacions of
pills of Fumitorie, and the pills of Cochee. Also the sirupe of Numfer is
good to take of it, morning and evening. And the medicines the which be in the
Chapter named Vndimia, be good for this impediment.

The.49. Chapter does show of a gross impostume named Bubo.
BVbo is the Latin word. Apostum.
In english it is named a gross impostume. And there be certain kinds, some
be pestiferous, and some be not pestiferous.

The cuase of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come under this manner, gross feeding does make gross
humors, and gross and corrupt humors does make many diseases, speicially it
does engender this aforsayd infirmity.

A remedy.
If this infirmity does come of a pestiferous matter look in the chapter
named Carbu^culus. If it do come of no pestiferous matter. First take a
clister, or a suppositor, or some easy purgacion. And after yt take of oil
olive an ounce, mixed with bay salt, and lay it over the sore. And after that if
it do not break, make an incisio^ or a corosiue. And then use salues with
te^tes attractiue. And ye matter abstracted which is the cause of the anguishe
or pain, then I do say as the Philosopher does say. Deficient causa defecit
effectus, that is to say, take away ye cause, or else the cause lacking, the
effect is to no purpose. Or else take the matter as thus. Take away the cause of
ye sickness. And ye sickness can do no harm, but health shall follow. And the
cause not taken away of the infirmity, ye sickness must needs remain and
continue in the body, or else in some particular member it must remain or rest.

Thus ends the letter of. B.
And here follows the letter of. C.
The.50. Chapter does show of an infirmity the which is concurrant with an
hydropsy.
CAcecia, or Cacexia, or Cathesia, be ye greek words. An evil dvveller
In latin it is named Mala habitudo. In english it is named an evil dweller,
for it is an infirmity concu^ra^t with the hidropsies.

The cause of this impediment.
This infirmity does come through evil, slack, or slow digestion.

A remedy.
Use the confection of Alkengi, and keep a good diet, and beware of drinking
late, and drink not before thou do eat somewhat, and use temperate drinks,
and labor or exercise ye body to sweat. I was in this infirmity, and by great
travail I did make my self whole, more by labor than by physic in recytes
of medicines.

The.51. Chapter does show of a man's heels.
A man's heels
CAlcanei is the Latin word. In English it is named the heels of a man or
woman, the which may diverse times have infections, as the gout, strayning, the
cramp, the kybes, and such like.

A remedy.
First keep the feet from cold, and then take of oil of netes feet and put
to it a little oil of Turpentine anoint the heels diverse times and often. Or
take of Fenel.ii. handfuls, of smalage.ii. handfuls, of Malowes.iii. ha^dfuls,
sees this in wine or dregs of wine, and put thereto Dear suet, and wash ye
heles often.

For Calculus, look in the Chapter named Nefresis.

The.52. chapter does show of the pipes of the lunges.
Pipes of the lungs.
CAnales pulmonis be the latin words. In english it is named the pipes of the
lunges, or the canes of the lunges, the which diverse times be opilated or
stopped.

The cause of this opilation.
There is nothing that does opilate or stop these canes or pypes, so much as
viscus fleume does.

A remedy.
First eat no manner of fyshes nor sinews, the which will adhere or cleue to
the fingers in ye eating, drink no red wine, nor thick or muddy ale or
beer, specially if it be new, eat no new bread, nor Almons, nor Nuttes, nor
white meats nor tostes. And for this matter either eat Garlike or else
Locsanum de pino. And a Ptysane is very good, and tha^ take a dram of pills of
Cochee, or else some equiuolent purgation, and beware of to much venerious
acts.

For Cacexia, look in the Chapter named Tacecia.

The.53. Chapter does show of a canker.
CAncer is the latin word. In english it is named a Canker, A Ca^ker
the which is a sore which does corode and eat the flesh, corrupting the
Arters, the veins and the sinews coroding or eating the bone, and does
putryfie and corrupt it, and then it is seldom made whole.

The cause of this infirmity
This infirmity does come of a melancoly humor, or of a Coleryck humor
adusted, or it may spring of an hurt or a harm taken, and not looked unto
betime, does fystle and festure.

A remedy.
If the bone be black there is no remedy, but to cut of the bone flesh and
all, specially if it be the arm or legs, if the bone be not putrified, first
scour ye cankerous place three or.iiii. days with white wine. After that take
burnt lead and mix it with the oil of Roses, and anoint the place diverse
times and use pills named Pillule Inde. And after that take of white Popy an
ounce, of Opium and Henbane, of either of them a dram, of Gu^me arabic half an
ounce, of the oil of Roses.iiii. ounces, incorporate this together and anoint
the Canker often. Or else use the oil of Iuneper. Or else take of Terre
sigillate, of boole Armoniake of each an ounce, of Ceruce of Muscilage, of
either half an ounce, compound all this together with ye juice of Letuse, and
the water of juice of house leke, and use Yerologodion, and the confection of
Hamech.

The.54. Chapter does show of swellings
CAncrena is the Latin word. In English it is a swelling Swelling.
the which may be in every member in a man, having a greenish color or else a
black color.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of melancoly humor if it be black. And if it be
green it does come of cytrine color.

A remedy.
In this matter purge coler and melancoly. And for this matter Flebothomy is
good, if so be strength and age will permit it, and take of honey half a pint,
the white of.iii. raw eggs, of barley an handful, incorporat this together and
make a plaster. Or else take of Rapes.iii. ounces, stamp them together with honey
and playsters.

The.55. Chapter does show of a canine or a dogs appetide.
A canine appetyde.
CAninus Apetitus, be ye latin words. In english it is named a canyne or a
dogs appetide, or it may be named an insatiable apetide to eat. In greek it
is named Achinodis otexis, which is to say in latin, Canina appetencia. In
english it is named as I have rehearsed.

The cause of this infirmity.
There be two kinds of this infirmity, the one does come of a melancoly
humor, ascending from the spleen to the orifice of the stomach, or else it may
come of a cold distemperaunce of the stomach. The other kind does come through
a hot liver, and a hot stomach. And thus shall you know the one kind from the
other if it do come of a melancoly humor, a man shall have a running stomach
to eat whatsoever he can get. And when ye stomach is full repleted, then it is
troubled, and then the pacient is provoked to vomittinge.

And after that the stomach is so euacuated or emptye, then the pacient does
fall to eating again. There is another canine appetide, which is, when a man
is ever hungry and is never satisfied, nor is not well but when he is eating or
drinking, ignorant men will say that such persons has an eaton in the belly.

A remedy for the first impediment.
First purge melancoly with Diasene and the stomach, and the^ use to eat fat
meats, as Goose, Pyg, and such like, and drink good drinks. And if it do
come of Fleume, let the matter be digested with Organu^ and Calamint, and with
Anis seeds, and Fenel seeds, and purge the matter with Yerapigra or such like.
And use to eat meats ye which inge^der fleume, as potage made of milk and
appels and such like.

A remedy for the second impediment.
First rectify the Liver and stomach from their caliditie or heat, and use
gross meats, as Bese, Beans, hard eggs, tripes, podings, and such like, and
anoint the back and the stomach with oil of Myrtilles, or the oil of Roses,
or the oil of Sumacke. And for this impediment use no sauces, specially sour
sances that does provoke an appetyde.

For Camo look in the Chapter named Combustio.

The.56. Chapter does show of the hair of a man.
CApillus or Capilli be the latin words. In greek it is named Thrix. In
English it is a hair Hair.
of a man's head.

Crinis is the latin word for a woman's hair. Pili is the latin word for
beasts hair. And all manner of hairs be ingendered and does come of a gross
matter or fume being hot, wherefore this common proverb is used in latin, that
Vir pilosus semper est luxuriosus, that is to say, man that is full of hair is
ever venerious, unless grace (as I say) work above nature. There be.vii.
principal colors of hairs. There is first alborne hair, yelow hair, red
hair, black hair, flexen hair, gray hair, and white hair. Albrone hair,
and yelow hair comes of a gentill nature, grounded upon a good co^plexio^
which is blood, flexen have is engendered of fleume, the red hair is engendered
of the multitude of gross humors, specially of gross blood. The black hair
comes of colericke humors mixed with melancoly humors. The gray-haires do
come of the defection of natural hair, or else it does come of corrupt
fleume. Every hair has a hole, and beside every hair is a pore where the
sweat does come forth. The hairs of man have diverse impediments, it may be
eaten with worms, it may fall of, it may stink.

The falling of the hair, look in the Chapter named Alopecra.

A remedy.
If ye hair be eaten with worms, take a pint of white wine and stamp.iii.
heads of Garlyke with.ii. handfuls of wormwood and boil al together and wash
the head. Or else an oyntme^t named Psilotiu^. Or else desolue an ounce of Aloes
cabalin in a pint of wine and wash the head ii. or.iii. times.

To make hairs to grow and that they shall not fall.
Take of the oil named in latin, Olium costinum, and anoint the head with it
often.

To make hairs to fall.
Take of arsnecke an ounce, of vnstaked lyme half an ounce, myxe this together
with vinegar, and wash or anoint the place diverse times. Or else take of the
oil of Henbane, of the oil of Mandragor of each half an ounce, compound this
with the blood of a back or a flytter mouse, and anoint the place.

The.57. Chapter does show of a man's head.
The head.
CApud is the latin word. In greek it is named Cophales. In English it is
named a man's head, the which is the seat of the soul, and therefore when the
hend does ache, all the body is out of temper. In the head may be many
infirmities, or the Apoplexi, the S^otom^, the Megrym, the Seed, the Phrenises,
the falling sickness, and diverse other infirmites beside aches, as it shall
appear in their Chapters. As for aches in the head be many. First sher is an
ache ye which does come by extreme labor. There is an ache the which may come
by s(...) of reume. Then is there ache the which does come, by extreme cold.
There is an ache ye which may come by ^dition or dryness in the head. There is
an ache the which may come by a bilus humor or by some Apostumacio^. There is
an ache ye which may come by or through dronknnesse* There is an ache in the
head, ye which may come by ventositie. There is an ache the which may come by a
blow, a strype, or a fall, or any great hurt in the head. There is head ache,
the which may come by any manner of fever and by other certain sicknesses. And
beside al these, aches may be in the head through the calyditie or heat of the
sun, or by intemporancy of the air corrupted. And it may come by the evil
operacion of the planets and signs.

A remedy for all these premises. except drunkenness.
First use in all things temperaunce, and an order in all things, rule the
body that it fall not into infirmities, and purge the head often with gargarices
and with shernutacions, with pills of Cochee, Pillule aggregate Peraviora
Galeni, or Yeralogodian ruffi, or Yeralogodian, and Aqua, mel is good.

The.58. Chapter does show of a carbocle or botch.
CArbunculus is the latin word. Altoin is the Araby word. In English it is
named a carbocle Carbocle.
or botch, carbunculus, is derived out of a word of latin named carbo, the
which is a cole in english, for this infirmity has the property of a cole yt
is hot burning, for a Carbocle does hurt and prick. For this matter look in ye
chapter named Altoin.

The.59. Chapter does show of the sickness of the prysons.
Sickness of the prison
CArcinoma is the greek word. In English it is named the sickness of the
prison. And some auctours does say that it is a Canker, ye which does corode
and eat the superiall parts of the body, but I do sake it for the sickness of
ye prison.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of corruption of the air and the breath and filth
the which does come from men as many men to be together in a little rome,
having but little open air.

A remedy.
The chief remedy is for man, so to live, and so to do, that he deserve not to
be brought into no prison. And if he be in prison, either to get friends to
help him out, or else to use some perfumes, or to smell to some odoriferous
favors, and to keep the prison clean.

For Cardiaca look in ye Chapter of veins named Mediana.

The 60. Chapter does show of a canker in a man's nose.
LArcinodes is the greek word. In Latin it is named Cancer in naso. In English
it is named a Canker Canker
in the nose.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of collor adusted, mixed with corrupt blood and
reume, for reume is the cause of many infirmities.

A remedy.
First mudifie the place with white wine and roche alome, and then if there be
any dead flesh, corode it with Aqua arde^s or with Aqua fortis, and than take
of honey half a pint, of the white of.iiii. eggs, of barley bran, an ha^dful,
incorporat this together and make a plaster, or else do as you shall find in
many places of this book of other kinds of Cankers.

The.61. chapter does show of the Cardiacke ^assion.
CAardiaca passio, be the latin words. In Engl^^^ it is named the Cardiacke
passion, The Cardiacke passion.
or a passion about the heart, for the heart is depressed and overcome with
faintness.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of evil humors the which be in the celles about
the heart, it may come also of to much sweating. Also it may come of
imbecilitie or weakness of the body. And it may come of grossnes of blood, or of
melancoly if it do come of an evil humor in ye celles about the heart, either
it does come of gross blood, or of a colericke humor. And then is there about
the heart trembling with heat, the which causes thyrst, and deep fetching of
wind if it do come of imbesilitie or of melancoly, then the pacient is in
fear, in dullness, and sorrow.

A remedy.
For this matter use maces in all manner of meats, and use the confection of
Aromatibus, and purge evil humors, and use mirth and merry company, and beware
of pencifulnesse.

The.62. Chapter does partract of the flesh of man.
CAto is the latin word. Flesh.
In greek it is named Sarx but I did learn amongst ye greeks creas, as thus
to say, give me some flesh. In greek they say Dos so moo creas, this is no
true greek although it be the common speech in greek. There be many manner of
fleshes as every man does know, but I do not pretend to speak of no other
flesh, but of the flesh of man, the which may be putrified and corrupted, as
by Hyedropsies and putrefying of the blood, if the flesh be in temperance and
not corrupted, naturally it is hot and may, if it be putrified with any of
the kinds of Idropsies, look in the Chapter, if it be infected with evil
blood, look in the Chapter named Sanguis, and in the Chapter of Leprousnesse.

The.63. Chapter does show of the privation of man's wit.
Priuacio^. of wit.
CAros, is the greek word. Suqueth and Sabara be the Araby words. In latin
it is named Dormitacio Vigilatiua. In English it is named priuacion of man's
wit, it does differ from a sickness named the Letherge, for Caros does draw the
breath in, and expels it out, and so does not the Letharge that can not be
perceived. And the pacient that has this infirmity named Caros, if any man do
ask him a question, he will answer. And the Letharge pacient can not. Also
it does differ from an infirmity named Apoplexia, for the Apoplexy is ever
with vehement aspiracions and drawing deeply the breath. And so is not Caros.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a cold humor perturbating the brain.

A remedy.
First purge rume, and keep the feet warm, and use sternutations and
gargaricies.

Caros as some men say is a surfeit.

The.64. Chapter does show of one of the kinds of the falling sickness.
CAtalepsis or cathocha be the greek words. In latin it is named congelacia.
The barbarus word is named catalencio. In English it is named the Catalency,
which is one of the kinds of the falling sickness. A kind of the falling
sickness.


The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of cold rume, the which does molest and trouble the
brain and head, that it does deprive one of his wit, and does fall to the
ground, and can not move nor stere, for as one is taken so shall he lie, other
while open eyed, and otherwhile close eied. And although ye eyes be open yet
one shall not see, hear, nor speak, nor scarce draw any wind in or out yt can
be perceived, for one shall lie as he were dead for a space

A remedy.
First purge rume which is ye chiefest cause of the infirmity, and the^ use
the diet ye which is specified in ye Chapter named Analepsia. And in any wise
let not the person or pacient be in fear, nor let him resort where there is
great company, as in market places, churches, scooles, and great men's houses,
for such things does induce all the kinds of the falling sickness. And so it
does if ye pacient be under a vaute, or a church, yt is vauted, or any other
close house, specially if there be any Charcole or sea cole burned and has no
vent, but that the fume of it do enter into the body, the pacient wll fall, for
this matter look in the Chapters named Epilepsia and Analepsia.

The.65. Chapter does show of a dead or a deep sleep.
CAtaphora is the greek word. In english it is named a dead or a deep
sleep, A deep sleep.
or a disposicion to be ever sompnouent and heavy.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a rumatike head, and superabundance of fleume.

A remedy.
First purge reume, and diminish fleume, and use not to much drinking of wine
and strong ale.

For caroli, look in the second book named Extrauagants.

For cartilago, look in the Extrauagantes in the end of this book.

The 66. Chapter does show of a Catharact.
CAtharacta is ye barbarous word. In greek it is named Ypechime. In English
it is named a Catharact, A catharact.
ye which does let a man to see perfectly.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a gross and a waterish humor, the which does
lie before the sight, letting a man to see clerelie, for he can not deserne a
far of a crow from a man, nor a beast from a bush, and of one thing, he shall
see two things, although it be but one thing.

A remedy.
First beware of any thing the which should fume into the head, as wine,
Garlike, Onions, the fatness of fish, and such like. Then use gargarisacions
and sternutacions, as I have rehearsed in this book in many Chapters. And
beware of costiuenes, and use purgacions to purge the head and stomach, as
pills of Cochee and such like.

The 67. Chapter does show of a Catarice or a Murre.
CAtarrhos, is the greek word, caterrus is the barbarous word. In latin it is
named Inundacio or Distillatio. In English it is named a Catarue or a Murre.
Murre.


The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of reume, the which does distill from the head into
the stomach, and otherwhile it does make Suffocacions.

A remedy.
For a Catarue is good Dyacodion and the syrup of Popy, and sternutacio^s and
gargarices be good for this matter. And if there be any suffocacions which by
strangulacion does follow a Catarue, use to eat Dianucu^, ye which in greek is
named Diacordon, and Pillule contra catarrhes be very good, and beware of
costiuenes, and therefore use the aforesaid pills. Carm be.v. small
spondylles, the which be v. small bones in the back bone.

For Catastropha, look in ye Chapter named Anastrupha

For Cathesia, look in the Chapter named Cacecia or Cacexia.

For Cathoca, look in the Chapter named Catalepsis.

For Causos, look in the Chapter named Febris ardens. Cauterisacio, is
Cauterisacion, yt is to say, burning or sering with a hot iron or scale of
gold.

The 68. Chapter does show of pain in the head, named the Cephalarge.
CEphalargia is the greek word. Soda is the Araby word. In English it is named
Cephalarge, or an universal pain in ye head. Pain in the head.
Some auctours does hold opinion that Soda and Cephalta is one infirmity.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come either by extreme labor or by surfeting, or of the
corruption of the air, or by some extreme heat, or else by extreme cold, or
drinking of hot wines.

A remedy.
First beware of all things the which does hurt the head, as Garlyke, Onyons,
Chibolles, wine, stooping down with the head, extreme labor and such like, and
beware of surfeting and drunkenness, and purge the head with gargarices, and
sternutacions, and purge the head, and the stomach twice a week with pylles
of Cochee or such like.

The.69. Chapter does show of a pain in the head named the cephale.
CEphalea is the greek word. Cephale H^^dache
In latin it is named Dolor ingens in capite. In English it is named the
Cephale, the which is an extreme pain in the head that a man can not abide no
light nor no noise, and the pacient does love to be in dark places, and his
head he does think does go in pieces, and a pillow is better for the pacient
then a cote of defense.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either of extreme heat, or else of extreme cold, or
of some maliuolus humor.

A remedy.
First see that the pacient be not costiue. And then use all manner of things
the which is rehearsed in the Chapter named Cephalargia. And beware of using to
much venerious acts, specially in summer.

For Cephalica, look in the chapter named Mediane and Vene.

The.70. Chapter does show of a man's Sculle.
CRaneum is the latin word. In greek it is named Cranion or Cranos. In English
it is named a man's Skul, Skull.
the which may be fractered or broken, or else it may be putrified or corrupted.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment may come of a fall or a broose, or by a stripe, it may also
come of some interiall sickness, or some exteriall disease.

A remedy.
First the Chirurgions must know how the Skul was broken, and then shave the
head, and make incision of the skin, to see aparently the Skul, then mundifie
the place with white wine warm. Then take of Mirre an ounce, of Aloes Apaticke,
two drams, of Sarcocol, of Frankensence, of Sanguis draconis, of Mader, of each
the weight of two d. incorporate all this together, and in Sandil lay it upon
the place, and after that do as you do in other fractures.

The 71. Chapter does show of the brain of man.
CHrebrum is the latin word. In greek it is named Eucephalos. Brain.
In English it is a man's brain, the which is the second principal member in
man. In the which principal member does rest the animal spirits. The brain
is cold and moist. And in it self it is without blood, and without filth. The
beast, the fi^h, the foul, the which has no brain can not sleep. And if the
brain be perced or hurt, perell of death consequently follows. And diverse
times the brain is inflated and has diverse other impediments.

The cause of this inflacion.
The cause is, when the poores be opened out or above all natural courses, it
does let in subtle wind, the which does make inflacion, or else the poores
opened, coldness descending from the brain, is reuerberated into the
ventricles of the brain again, and makes inflacion which is a periculus
passion, and does put a man in peril and ieopardie of death, for the which is
good the confection of Musk, and diatesseron and the electuarie of Gemmis, and
pills of Elephangyne is good to purge the brain, and Oximell squilite
compound, is good for opilacions of the brain. And to know whether a man be
infected with this infirmity or not, one may know it by these signs,
inflacion or swelling will be about the temples, and the head or face they will
swell and be read, and the pacient shall not well hear, and an ague will be
concurrant with the infirmity.

A remedy.
First use sternutacions and gargarices. And purge the head with pills of
Elephangine, and use the medicines the which be rehearsed in this Chapter in the
cause of the inflacion of the brain.

The 72. Chapter does show of the hinder-part of the head.
COrnix is the Latin word. The poll
In greek it is named Epomis. In English it is the hinder part of the head,
in the which may be many impedimentes, as Letharges.

Obliuiousnesse, the apoplexi and such like, for the which impedimentes or
sicknesses look in their Chapters, and use the medicines that there be
specified. And beware of hurting the hinder part of the head, for the brain
does lie there.

Chilis is the name of a vein, the which does spring out of the liver.

The.73. Chapter does show of an infirmity in the eye lid.
The eye lid.
CHimosis is the greek word. In English it is an impediment ye which is in the
skin, the which does enclose ye eye

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a salt humor.

A remedy.
For this matter gargarices be good to bring the humors another way, that it
have no recourse to the eyes, for if the salt humor have a recourse to the
eyes, it will make a man blere eyed, beside this aforesaid impediment.

For Chinanchi, look in the Chapter named Angina.

The 74. Chapter does show of the ciphac.
CIphac, Ciphac.
is the Araby word. In English it is a call or a pellycle the which does
compass about the guts. And diverse times the said Ciphac may be relaxed or
broken.

The cause of the breaking of the ciphac.
The ciphac, is broken through a great lift, or a fall, or a broose, or by great
crying, or extreme halowing, or by leping into a laddel, or otherwise leping or
strayning a man's self.

A remedy.
For a remedy for this infirmity look in the Chapter named Ruptura.

For cirsocella, look in the Chapter named Ramex.

The.75. chapter does show of carnells.
CHerade is the greek word. Some auctours do call it Strume, and some do call
it in greek Antiades. The latins do call it Glandule. The barbarus people do
name it Scrophule. In Einglish it is named carnells Carnells
in a man's flesh, for this matter look in the chapter named Glandule, and use
the medicines, that there be specified.

The.76. Chapter does show of the gout in the hands.
CHiragra is the greek word. In english it is the gout, The gout in the
hands.
the which is in ye hands and fingers of man. And it does run from one joint
to an other, as other goutes does.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of reume and evil diet. And there be two kinds of
the gout in the hands, the one is confirmed and can not be made whole, for if
it do come by kind, so that the joints be broken, the sickness is incurable.
The other the which is not confirmed may be made whole.

A remedy.
Take of Coleworts.iii. handfuls, sees it in a little lie with three
sponefulles of vinegar, and half a sponeful of salt, stamp all these together
and make a plaster. Or else take Triacle and make a plaster of it, and lay it
to the place. And mark that if ye matter do come of a hot cause, minister hot
medicines. And if it do come of a ^old cause, minister no hot medicines, but
cold medicines, and let the pacient beware of eating and drynking of those
things that be over hot or over cold.

The.77. Chapter does show of carnal copulacion betwixt man and woman.
COitus is the latin word. Iaping.
In greek it is named Ochia or Synousia. In English it is named carnal
copulacion betwixt man and woman, and it is a natural thing among beasts,
fowls, and fyshes, and all other things having life and does engender.

The cause of this natural copulation.
This natural copulacions does come of three causes. The first is yt when god
had made man, beast, fyshe and foul, and all other things that does inge^der,
he bid them to increase and to multiply the world or the earth. The second
cause is, that naturally every male desires copulacion with his make, for the
Philosopher says. Every like desires to have one like to him, for and if any
copulacion be had with unlike, then is engendered a monstrous thing. The third
cause is, that every thing bearing or having life, desires his make except
man, for a man has reason, in whom grace may work above nature, and if grace
do not work above nature, for carnal copulacion a man may live chaste, as well
in youth as in age. And an old man to fall to carnal copulacion to get a
child, he does kill a man, for he does kill himself, except reason with grace
do rule him. But often times in this matter old men do dote, for it is hard to
get out of the flesh, that is bread in the bone. And further more I do say.
Quid multum coniunt diu viuere non possum, for it does engender diverse
infirmites, specially if venerious persons use carnell copulacion upon a full
stomach.

Medicines for a man which can not do the act of matrimony through impotency.
The elctuary de Aromatibus, and a confection of ginger is good for this
matter. Also a confection made of the stones of a Fox, and the electuary of
Aleschof is very good for this matter, and so is the confection of Alharif, and
the second confection of the stones of a Fox. For the making of these things
and many other things in this book, the Poticary must do it, or else any other
man shall mar all that he does go about, and the medicines shall not take
none effect, except the matter be well ordered and truly made.

Medicines to help a man or a woman to have children.
First a man must know whether the fault be in the man or in the woman. If the
fault be in a man it does come through weakness or debilitie of nature, or for
lack of erection of the yerde, let such men use restoratiue meats and
drinks, and use good diet, and use no venerious acts after a full stomach. If
the woman be in ye faut, it does come of lubricitie of humors in the matrix or
place of concepcion. For this matter look in the Chapter of concepcion.
Furthermore this is good to make a woman to conceive. Take of Mandragor aples,
confect the^ with Rose water and Sugar roset, and take a portion of it.ix.
days. And here is to be noted for married men that Aristotle says Secondo de
anima, that every perfect thing is, wha^ one may genarate a thing like to
himself, for by it he is assimiled to the immortal God. Auicene de
naturalibus, glorified natural procreacion. And for this cause God made man
and woman to increase and multiply to the worlds end. For this matter look
further in yt Extrauaga^ts in ye end of this book

Medicines to keep a man or woman low of courage.
To keep one low, is the usage of eating or of drinking of vinegar, or
smelling to it, and so daly use Rewe and Camphire for this matter is good to
smell to. And Tutsane otherwise named Agnus castus, and Singrene otherwise named
house like, and strong purgations, watch and study, and all bitter and sour
things does mittigate or swage the courage of man, for this matter look in the
Chapter named Priapismus.

For contorcio oris, look in the Chapter named Tortura oris.

For Columella, look in the Chapter named Gargarion.

The 78. Chapter does show of the Colicke.
COlica passio, be ye latin words. In English it is named the Colyke, Colicke.
and it is named a passion, for as much as the pain is very extreme. The
Colycke does take his name of a gout, the which is in man, named Colon.

The cause of this infirmity
This infirmite is engendered of ventositie or wind, the which is intrused or
enclosed in the gout named Colon and can not get out. And otherwhile it comes
of a Colerike humor the which does dry up a man's egestion or order.

A remedy.
First beware of costiuenes, and beware of cold, and of eating of cold meats
and fruits, and al manner of meats that honey is in. And use Clysters and
suppositors, or some easy or gentle purgacions, and keep the belly warm, and
be not long fasting, and use Diaciminum, or the confection of the first
inuencion of Philonii, and the oil of Lyllies, and so be Pillule feride
minores.

The.79. Chapter does show of an humor named Coler.
Coler.
COlera is the latin word. In greek it is named Cholae. In english it is named
Coler, the which is one of the fourth humors. And is hot and dry lying or
being in the stomach, and is mouable. There be five kinds of coler. The first is
naturul coler, which is reddish, clear, and pure. The second is glassy, the
which is inge^dred of waterish, fleume, and of red clear coler. The third is
whytishe, viscus, and clammy like the white of a raw egg, the which is
engendered of congellacion of fleume and of clear red coler. The fourth is
green, the original of the which comes of malice of the stomach. The.v. is
a dark grene coler, and does burn in the stomach, and is engendered of to much
adusted humors.

A remedy to purge coler.
Coler adusted does purge, ye pills of Lapidis lazule, and so does
Yeralogodion ruffi, and the confection of Hameth. And to purge citrine coler is
good ye co^fection of Manna, and the pills the which be good against colerike
fevers and pillule pfilij. And to purge gross and viscus coler, use Sirupus
acetosus. And it is good for red coler, and for all superfluous coler, use the
pills named Pillule scomatrice, pills of Turbith, or pills of Coloquintida,
and so does Sirupus acetosus laxatiuus, and so does the co^fectio^ made of
Fumiterre, this must be don of a Poticary, ye which has ye practice of al
matters, for I nor no man else cannot in their maternall tongue express ye
whole terms of physic.

The 80. Chapter does show of a passion that is in the belly.
COlirica passio, as Alexander says, is derived out of a word of greek named
Colides, Belly ache
the which is named the inwards of a man. Some Grecians does name this sickness
Colidica, or Ciliaca, or Cocliaca passio, and some greeks with latinests does
name it Cholera. In latin it is named Ventralis passio. In English it is named
the belly ache, or a passion in the belly.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come for lack of perfect digestion, for a man shall
exonerate or discharg by egestio^ and vomet both his body and stomach in an
hour, upward and downward.

A remedy.
First beware of cold, and eating of cold meats and liquid meats, as of all
kind of Potage, sewes, posset ale, ale brues, and caudelles, and every thing
that is laxatiue, as plomes, appels and such like. And comfort the stomach with
the confection of Aromatickes, and use Cordialles and roasted meat and broyled
meats.

The.81. Chapter does show of a man or a woman's color.
COlor is the latin word. In greek it is named Choma. In English it is named a
man or woman's color, Color.
and some be good and many be evil.

The cause of good and evil colors.
A good color comes of a good complexion, and an evil color does come of
an evil complexion, as by sickness or a sodein fear, or anger, or malice, or
by extreme heat or cold, and by great labor or dronkennes, and such like
causes.

A remedy.
First I do say that physic can not help none of all these impedimentes,
except it do come by sickness. And the most of the other does come by nature,
and that thing that nature does give to man, no Physician can take it away, how
be it in diverse infirmities many and expert Phisicions may mitigate the pain
for a time, but they can not clearly take it away, for this matter look in the
Chapter named Cutis, and use good meat, bread and drink.

For Collum, which is ye neck of man, look in the second book named the
Extrauagantes in the end of this book.

The 82. Chapter does show of Burning.
Burning.
COmbustio is the latin word. In greek it is named Pyritasta. In English it is
named burning with fire. Then is there Ambustio, the which is the latin word,
and in english it is named scalding with licor.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment of burning does come two ways, either it does come by burning
of fire, or else by burning of a woman through carnal copulacion. And Ambustio
which is to say scalding, does come by hot and sething licour, as water, lie,
oil, wort, and such like.

A remedy for burning with Fire.
Take the white of a raw egg and beat it with an ounce of the oil of Roses,
than put to the juice of Houseleke an ounce, of Nightshade, of Plantaine, of
each of them half an ounce, of the rust that is under the handfyle of a smith
ii. ounces, compou^d all this together and wash the place often. And than take
Populio^ and ad to it a little of the of oil Roses, as much of the juice of
Plantaine, and incorporate all together and make plasters. Or else take the
ointment of Ceruse, and the ointment of Sericine named in latin Vnguentum
scricinum. And popilyon is good, and such other like.

A remedy for scalding with water.
Take of the juice of Houseleke and incinet a linne^ cloth in it and lay it
upon ye place. Also boil Armoniake and camphire is good when it is desolued in
ye oil of Roses, and lay upon the place. The water of purslaine and Myrtils,
Ceruse and the white of raw eggs, and such like be very good for all manner of
scalding.

A remedy for burning of or with a woman.
Ignorant persons that be burnt of an harlot, as soon as he has don his
carnal and filthy concupicence, let him wash al his secret places with white
wine three or four times, as soon as the matter is done, least at length the
guts fall out of the belly. And if he get a dorsor, or two dorsors and a ryder,
let him look in the Chapter named Ambustio meretricis.

The 83. Chapter does show of a terrible and deep flepe. An evil sleep

CAmo is the greek word. In latin it is named Crauis et profundis sompnus. In
english it is named a long and a grievous sleep wc exhaustio^ of wind, for he
or she having this impediment, will snort and snore, the head lying high or low.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of superabundance of humors, specially of reume and
other corrupt humors mixed with it, the which does cause immoderate and
unnatural sleep.

A remedy.
First purge the head, and after use sternutacions, and drink not late, and
use a good diet and surfyt not, and lay the head high.

The.84. Chapter does show of conception.
COnceptio is the latin word. In greek it is named Sillepsis. In English it is
named conception, Co^ceptio^
or when a woman is conceived with child.

The cause that a woman can not conceive.
The cause that when the seed of man is sown and the place of conception is
lubrifact and can not retain the seed but does slip away from the woman,
there can not be concepcion, therefore let the matrix or place of conception be
kept in a temperance, neither to moist nor to dry, neither to hot nor to cold.
And that the woman have the due order of her terms, and if the man or woman be
fat, let them eat pepper in their meats and drinks, and use purgacions.

A remedy.
Let barren women use to eat in powder the matrix of an Hare, or drink ye
powder of the stones of a Bore, with wine. And let her keep an order in her
meats and drinks, and use no venerious acts after a full stomach. Look for
this matter in the Chapter named Embrico.

For condolamita, look in the Extrauagantes.

For coniunctiua, look in the Chapter named Oculus.

The 85. Chapter does show of sleeping with open eyes.
Sleeping with open eyes.
COngelacio is the latin word. In English it is when a man lies a sleep
having his eyes open as a Lion does without moving of the eyes and the eye lids.

The cause of this impediment.
The cause of this impediment Aristotle does show in his Metheor, that it does
come of a cold watreish humor, the which as I do think, does lie in the
hinder part of the brain.

A remedy.
First purge that watrish humor with Clissers, than make frications or
rubbinges with the hand of man upon the forhead, and use gargarices and
sternutacions, and anoint the head with the oil of Lyllyes.

The 86. Chapter does show of the heart of man.
COr is the latin word. In greek it is named Cardia. In English it is named an
heart, the heart Heart.
is the principal member in man. And it is the member that has the first life
in man, and is the last thing that does dye in man. The heart does viuificate
all other members, and is the ground and foundation of all the vital spirits
in man, and does lie in the middle of the body, and is hot and dry. And there
is nothing so evil to the heart as is thought and care, and fear, as for
other impedimentes that be longing to the heart, does appear in their
Chapters, as Cardiaca.

To comfort the heart.
There is nothing that does comfort the heart so much beside God, as honest
mirth and good company. And wine moderately taken, does letificate and does
comfort the heart, and good bread does confyrme and does stablyshe a man's
heart. And all good and temperate drinks the which does engender good blood,
does comfort the heart. All manner of cordialles and restoratiues, and all
sweat or dulcet things does comfort the heart, and so does maces and ginger,
rere eggs, and poched eggs not hard, their yolks be a cordial. Also the
electuarie of Cittons, Rob de pitis, Rob de ribes, Diambra, Aromaticum
mustatum, Aromaticum rosatum, and so is Electuarum de gemnis, and the
confection of Xiloaloe, and such like be good for the heart.

The.87. Chapter does show of defnes.
COpolisis, is the greek word. Defn^s
In latin it is named Surditas. In English it is named a man that can not hear.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment may come to a man iii. manner of ways, either it does come by
nature, or else accide^tal, by some strok, or stripe, or brose, or fall, or else
it does come by an humor, the which does opilate or stop the Organs of
hearing.

A remedy.
It does come by nature, yt is to say, that one is borne def, there is no manner
of remedy, but only God to do a miracle. It it come accidentally, as by a
stroke, a stripe, a brose, or a fall, or such like, and that by it the Organs of
hearing be closed up, there is no remedy but only God, if it do come of an
humor there is remedy, as thus. First put nothing into ye ear except it be
warm as blood. Than take the gall of an Hare and mix it with the greece of a
Fox, and with black wol instill it into the ear. Or else take the fatnes of a
balson ele and intinct black woll into it, and put it into the ear. Or else
take of the juice of Wormwood and temper it with the gall of a bull, and
intinct black woll into it, and put it into the ear.

The 88. Chapter does show of Ilica passio.
COrdapsis is the greek word. In latin it is named Emullicio intestinorum or
Illica passio. Illica passion.
John Mesues does name it domine miserere mei. In english it is named Illica
passion This sickness is derived out of a word of greek named Ilia, which is a
gout in the belly of man. Some men does name this sickness Volnulus.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of ventositie or wind the which is intrussed and
enclosed in a gout named Ilia, and does ascend diverse times to the heart, and
will cause a man to vomit.

A remedy.
First beware of cold, and be not long fasting, eat no cold meats, nor no
meat ye honey is in, beware of eating of petages and of fruits, and of all
other things the which does engender ventositie, for this matter look in the
Chapter named Illiaca passio.

The 89. Chapter does show of a man's body.
COrbus is the latin word. In greek it is named Soma. In English it is named a
body. A man's body A man's body.
is of v. disposicions. The first is equality, the which consists in
equality of humors. The second is grosenes, the which has ii. kinds, the one
is fatnes and the other grosenes of flesh, fatness does come of cold and
moist humors, grosenesse does come of abundance of hot humors. The third
disposicio^ is lenenesse the which does come of a dry colericke humor. The
fourth is named Sintesis, the which leannes is swarte and black, and it does
come of a cold and a dry melancholy humor. The fifth disposicion is named
squalicitie or fogginesse. And it does come of cold and moist humors of the
disposicion of them the which be infected with the Hiedropsies. The body yt is
sick may be made whole many ways, first by attraction, by expulcion, by
dissoluing, by mortificacion, by instriction, and by restoring, To comfort the
body Diacalamite is good, and so is Trifora sarta magna, and so is Acetum
insquilitis, and Pillule lucis, or Yerahermetis, and Yeralogodion ruffi.

The.90. Chapter does show of Corpulence.
COrpulencia is the latin word. In greek it is named Pachos. In English it is
named Corpulence corporatnesse or grosenes Grosenes.
of the body, or fatnes.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either by nature or else by gross feding, or else by
great drinking and yt does make a great belly.

A remedy.
It does come by nature there is no remedy, if it come by gross feding, or
great drinking, use much Peper both in drinks, and use purgacions and
laxatine meats, and use labor and exercise the body in open air and
te^perate weathers.

The.91. Chapter does show of the Pose.
COriza is the barbarous word. In greek it is named Corriza. In latin it is
named Rupia or grando. In English it is named the pose, Pose.
or reume stopping or opilating the nosethrilles, that a man can not smell.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of reume the which does distill from the head to the
nose, or nosethrilles. And this reume is engendered through imperfite digestion,
and through fumositie or vaporous humors. And diverse times it is engendered of
cold taken in the feet, and it may come of late drinking or surfeting.

A remedy.
For this matter labor and fastings is good. And sternutacions or nesings is
good. And to cause nesing, take of Eliborus albus and make powder of it, and
snuff it into ye nose, or take a rish or a straw and tickle it within the
nosethrils, and beware of drinking of wine, and of surfeting, and use warm
meats for a space.

For Coxa, look in the Extrauagants in ye end of this book

For Coxendrix, look in the Chapter named Sciatica.

The.92. Chapter does show of surfeting.
CRapula, is the latin word. In greek it is named crepalae. In english it is
named a surfeit, Surfite
and some say it is a headache.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of an evil diet, eating and drinking late, or taking
to much meat or drink, or eating of raw or contagious meats, or taking evil
drinks drinking.

A remedy.
For this matter nothing is so good as abstinence, and to beeware what a man
does eat and drink, and what diet he does keep, there does mo persons dye by
surfeting, than by the swearde or killing, or hanging, wherefore I advertise
every man that no sensuality overcome him. And after a full stomach that which
is hard of digestion, drink two or three draughtes of wine specially Sack.
And with meat drink no wynes, except it be Gascone wine, or Renishe wine, or
French wines. And after a surfeit eat no meat, nor drink little or nothing
unto the time the stomach be euacuated. And for this matter vometing is a
perfect medicine, so be it that age and strength will permit it.

For craneum look in the Chapter before cerebum.

The 93. Chapter does show of the stringes that a man's stones does hang by.
CRemasteres is the greek word. Strings of the stones
The Barbarus word is named cremastres. In English it is the stringes whereby
the stones of a man does hang, and they may have impedimentes many ways.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either by strayning or by brosing, or by some
putrified humor.

A remedy.
Take the fatness of a Cony and anoint the cod and the stones, and than wrap
the cod in a Conyes skin, do this ix. times, and labor not for ix. days.

For crines, look in the Chapter named capillus.

For cronea, look in the Chapter named Oculus.

The.94. Chapter does show of a man's skin.
CVtis is the latin word. In greek it is named chros or Derma. In English it
is a skin, The Skin.
the which is in diverse men of diverse colors, much after the complexion of
man, for some has white skins, and some has red skins, and some has black
skins, and some has glase and dankishe skins, and some has tanny skins,
and some has grass or greenish skins.

The cause of this impediment.
These impedimentes does come many ways. First if the skin be white it does
come of fleume, and if the skin be red, it does come of blood, and if the skin
be black, it does come of black coler, and if the skin be tawny or glase it
does come of coler adusted, and if it be grass or greenish, it does come of
melancholy and cold humors.

A remedy to mundify the skin.
The confection of Hamech is good to purge and to cleanse the skin, and so is
Trifera mustata, or Diamorosion, oil of beans is good, and so is the oil of
the yolks of eggs, or the oil of Iuneper, the oil of wheat, or the oil of
ash kayes.

The 95. Chapter does show of square worms in a ma^s body
CVcurbiti is the latin word. In English it is square worms Worms.
in a man's mawe and guts.

The cause of these worms.
These worms comes through corruption and abu^da^ce of fleme

A remedy.
Eat Garlike with meats daily for ix. days, and that does kill all worms in
a man's body. Aloes cicotrine is good to kill worms, and so is wormeseed, if it
be used and drunk with milk or malmesy. For this matter look in the Chapters
named Lumbrici and Vermes.

The 96. Chapter does show of imperfite digestion.
CRuditas is the latin word. In greek it is named Apepsia. In English it is
named imperfite digestion, Imperfite digestion.
or when a man does egost his meat it does come from him as he did eat it, or
does see the substance of it.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of intemperance of the ventricles of the stomach and
the belly, or through inflamacions, or else an evil liver may be she cause.

A remedy.
First purge the stomach with pills of Cochee or such like, and use to eat
grene ginger. Diagalanga is good for this matter, and so is Ipocras and Serke,
and other odoriferous wines, and all manner of odoriferous savors for this
matter is good.

Thus ends the letter of C.
And here follows the letter of D.
The.97. Chapter does show of a man's tooth.
DEus is the latin word. In greek it is named Odons. In English it is named a
tooth. A tooth A tooth.
is a sencible bone, the which being in a living man's head has feeling, and so
has none other bone in man's body, and therefore the tooth ache is an extreme
pain.

The cause of this pain.
This pain does come either by an humor disce^ding out of the head to ye
teeth or gu^mes, or it may come by coroding or eating of worms, or it may come
of corrupcion lying and being upon and betwixt ye teeth, or it may come by
drinking of hot wines, eating of hot spices, or eating of hot appls, pears,
and such like, or it may come of a hot liver or stomach.

A remedy.
First purge the head with pills of Cochee, and use gargarices. And if it
doxome of any cold cause, chew in the mouth diverse times the rote of Horehound.
And if it come by worms make a candel of wax with Henbane seeds and light it
and let the perfume of the candle enter into the tooth and gape over a dish of
cold water and than may you take the worms out of the water and kill them on
your nail, the worm is little greater than the worm in a man's hand. And
beware of pulling out any tooth for pull out one and pull out more. To mundifie
the teeth, wash them every morning with cold water and a little Roch alome.

Dia is a notable word in Greek, and the Grecians has used and does use to
set this word Dia before al their notable words, as well in Physic as
music, as it shall appear in the Chapter of Music.

The 98. Chapter does show of them that can not keep their water but piss as
much as they do drink.
In ordinat pissing.
DIabete is the greek word. And some greeks does name it Dipsacos, or Sipho.
The latins do name it Afflictio renum. The barbarus men do name it Diabeitca
passio. In English it is named an immoderate pissing.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of imbecilitie of the raynes of the back and of the
secret members of man or woman, and it may come of caliditie or heat of the
raynes, and the back, it may come of lechery, and of labor, and such like.

A remedy.
First purge the matter with Manna and Cassia fistula. And than drink cold
water and by and by vomet it up again. And than take of Coriander preparated,
of Spodium, of Coral, of Carabes, of each an ounce, confect this with Whay, and
use to drink of it diverse times in a day. If it do come through imbecilitie or
weakness of the back, use Clary stewed with a crekerel, or fry Clary dipped first
in the yolks of eggs, and use restoratiue meats and drinks. If it do come
by weakness of a man's privy member, use to eat in the morning ii. or iii. rere
eggs, and put into them the powder of red nettels and sugar. If it do come of
heat in the back, use to anoint the back with the oil of Newniser, or the
oil or juice of Se^grine, otherwise named Houseleke, or such cold things.

The 99. Chapter does show of pain or dolor.
what pain is
Dolor is the latin word. In greek it is named Lipe. In English it is named
pain or dolor, the which may be many ways, as by sickness of the body, or
disquietnes of a man's mind.

The cause of this pain.
Diverse times of great pleasure does come great pain, as we see daily that
through riot and so seting, and sensuality does come diverse sickenesses. Also
with sport and play, taking great heat, or taking of extreme cold does
engender diseases and pain. Also for lack of patience many men's and women's
minds be vexed and troubled.

A remedy.
If a man will exchewe many pains and dolours, let him live a sober life, and
distemper nor disquiet the body by any excess or sensuality. And let him arm
himself with pacyence, and evermore thank god what soever is sent to man, for
if adversity do come, it is either sent to punish man for sin, or else
probacio^, and with sorrow use honest mirth and good company. For Demoniaci,
look in ye second book named ye Fxtrauaga^ts.

The 100. Chapter does show of a man's Mydryffe.
DIaphragma is the greek word, and the latin word. In english it is named the
Mydryffe Mydriffe.
in a man, the which is a gross skin, or pannicle, or musculles, the which
deceper the spiritual members from the nutrytiue members, dividing the heart
and the longes from the stomach and bowels, Isaacke does say, that a pluryse
is an hot impostume, and is engendered in the Middriffe, otherwise named
Diaphragma, for a remedy for this impostume, look in the chapter named
Pluritres, and in the Chapter named Apostenia.

The 101. Chapter does show of Flyxe or laske
DIarthea is the greek word. In latin is named Fluxus. A flyxe.
In English it is named the flyxe.

The cause of this infirmity
This infirmity does come of a salt and malicious humor. For this matter
look in the chap. named fluxus in ye Extrauaga^ts.

A remedy.
Take of Sugar roset made of dry roses, of Trisa^dal, of each an ounce and a
half, mix this together and eat it with meats, or drink it with drinks,
but ye best remedy yt I could find is, to take three handfulls of saint John's
wort, and as much of Plantaine, and as much of Cressis, and sees this in a
galon of rain water, or read wine to a pottel, and strain it, and put to it
two ounces of the powder of Synamon and drink of this drink warm.

Didimes be two little skins the which does compass the stones and does hold
them hanging, and through them certain veins and artures does pass, by the
which the seed of man is conduced to the yerde.

The 102. Chapter does show of rysinges or lyftings up of the heart and brain.
Rising of the heart and brain
DIastole is the greek word. In English it is a rising or lifting up of the
heart or brain.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of some evil humor the which does pass or go by
the heart or brain, and does cause them to move from the humor. And this a man
may know by rising of the pulses.

A remedy.
Use no contagious meats and drinks, specially such meats and drinks as be
vaporous, the which should perturbe either the heart or the brain, than see that
the belly be not constupated or costiue, and use Cordials and dregs to break
wind. And in any wise beware of evil savors, and use Aromatike fumes and
savors.

For Digma, look in the Chapters named Morfus.

The 101. Chapter does show of a man's digestion. Digestion.

DIgestio is the latin word. In greek it is named pepsis. In English it is
named digestion, that is when a man has dygested his meat that he has eaten.
Egeistion is when the meat is digested, and the gross substance being in the
mawe and guts, then must it needs be egested and put forth, if a man's
dygestion be perfyt and good, it does cause health, and if it be weke and
vnperfyt it does cause many infirmities.

The cause of weak digestion.
The weakness of digestion, either it does come of debilitie of the stomach, or
else it may come of superabundance of unnatural fleume, or else coler, or to
much calyditie or heat in the stomach may be the cause.

A remedy.
If unnatural Fleume be ye cause, use to eat of Diacitoniton. And if it do
come of heat in ye stomach, use Diarodon. And if it do come of Coler use the
sirupe of wormewod with Diaromata, or Diarodon. Also these things be good for
the stomach that is weak. First is Aromaticum rosatum, Maius, Dyambra,
Diaciminum and Diatriompiperion.

The.104. Chapter does show of the fyngers of man.
DIgitus is the latin word. In greek it is named Dactile. In english it is
named a finger. A finger.
A man may have many impediments in the fingers, as the gout, and
appostumacions, the cramp, and chappes, and such like, for these infirmities,
look in their own Chapters.

To make the hands and fingers to look white.
Wash the hands twice or thrice a week with water somewhat warm, and put to it
wheten bran, or ye bran of Beans, and as it is specified in the Chapter named
Pulchritudo.

The.105. Chapter does show of whesing and stopping of a man's nose.
DIsma is the latin word. And some greeks does name this infirmity Cithomia.
In english it is named whesing. vvhesinges


The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of viscous fleume the which is in the pipes or
organs ye man's breath does enter in and out, and the wind does enter straiter
inward and outward.

A remedy.
For this matter a Ptisane is good preparatiue, using it.xv days, and after ye
take pills of Coche, and than use Loc. de pino.

The.106. Chapter does show of a perilous Flyxe, named the Disentery.
DIsenteria is the Greek word. In latin it is named Exulceratio intestinorum.
In english it is named ye disce^tery, A flyxe.
or exulceracion of the guts, or vlceracion of the bowels, the barbarous word
is named Discenteria.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come either of vnnatarul coler, either else of a salt
fleume, either of asperite of the blood, either of a melancoly humor, or else
by some appostumacion of ye liver, either else by ye recepts of evil medicines,
or else it does come by vlceration in the bowels the which excoriate the guts.
Also it may come of a great strayning of ye body, the which does hurt the
inward parts, breaking a vein through the which vlceration of blood does issue
from the body, with the egestion of a man, or else it may come of coler and
melancoly, and than the egestion or seege will be black.

A remedy.
First beware of coldness and of labor, and use not to eat of meats that be
laxatiue, or does engender ventositie. Tha^ take of Ipericon otherwise named
saint John's wort, an hand full, of Plantaine water iii. ounces, or else of
Plantaine leaves iii. handfulls, sees this in running water, and drink at
morning, noone, and at night ix. sponefulls. Or else roast iii. or.iiii. eggs
unto the time the yolks be blewe and hard, the^ crimble them into a pint of
red wine, and than put to an ounce of the powder of Cynamon, and boil all
together, and than drink it in the morning, at noone, and at night to bedward,
and do this ix. days, and drink but a little, and beware of posset ale,
milk, butter, and fruit.

The.107. chapter does show of him that can make no water.
One that can not pysse.
DIsuria is ye greek word. In latin it is named Difficultas mingendi. In
english it is named ye disury, which is wha^ a man or a woman yt can not well
make water but with pain.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come many ways, first it may come by the colike and the
stone, or ye grauel, stopping the condites of ye vryne, or else an impostume, or
a lompe of a flesh may grow or be inge^dred in ye condites of ye urine, or else
it may come of congelacion of blood, or of matter the which does stop ye
condities of the urine, or else of long holding of the water.

A remedy.
First let every man and woman beware of long holding of their water, or
co^straining of their egestio^, let ye body be discharged that nature would
expel, and tha^ take ye greece of a Cony and anoint the back and the coddes
and the yerd. If it be a woman let her anoint the back and privy place. And be
it man or woman let them lay over their secrets a Conis skin, and for this
matter these things be good. Triacle, ye oil of Balm, the oil of Scorpions,
Mitredatum, and Aurea Alexandrina, so be it that with this sickness, a fever be
not co^currant with it, and in this matter beware of costiuenes and evil diet.

For Dipsacos, look in the Chapter named Diabetis.

The.108. Chapter does show of a man's back.
DOrsum is the latin word. In greek it is named Noton. A man's back.
In english it is named a back ye which may have many infirmities, as
debilitie and weakness, curuitie, and gibbositie, beside other infirmities in
the raines of ye back, as Nehpresis and such like.

The cause of these impediments.
These impedimentes in the back does come either by nature, or else they may
come accidentally, if it come by nature it does come by kind, if it do come by
kind there is no remedy. If it do come accidentally, as by mischaunce or
fortune, or sickness, they may be helped, so be it that ye infirmity or the
impediment be not veterated or of long continuance.

A remedy.
Clary is good for the back, and the pills named Pillule aggregate maiores,
and Pillule de Serapino, and pillule de Oppoponaco. And these oils be good for
ye back. Oleum de piperibus. Oleum vulpinu^, Oleum Philosophoru^, and Cerotu^
andromachi is good. And I have proved these oils to be good for the back, the
oil of Nardine, or ye oil of Alabaster, and the oil of water lillies, in hot
causes, ye oil of popy is very good, in cold causes, the oil of Lillies, and
the oil of Mastix, or the oil of musterd is good for the back. Also use
scications and then anoint the back with the oil of Lillies.

Diuramator is the latin word. In english it is a pillicle or a skin ye which
is within a man's skul compasing ye brain, it may be perced and hurt, and
diverse times there is no ieopardy in it, but for a more surety take of
colifony ye weight of xii. d of Mirre, Aloes, and mastix, of each the weight
of.iiii. d. of Sarcocol, of Saffron, of every one the weight of.ii. d. co^pound
them and insandle lay it over the place.

The.109. Chapter does show of knobbes and burres in the flesh.
DVbaleth, is ye Araby word. The latins do name it Nodi. In english it is named
knottes, knobbes, knorres, or burres, Burres.
the which is in man's flesh or fatnes, and there be three kinds. The one is
hard, and the other is loft, and the other is indifferent, but they be viscusly
congelated, if there come any matter out of it, it is named in latin Millinus,
and if it he hard it is named Ingia.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of corrupt fleumatike humors, the which be
putrified, the one taking the more, and the other the less, and the neuter
consists in the middle.

A remedy.
First purge the matter with pills of Hermodactils, or with Pillule feride.
The^ excoriat the skin, and maturate the matter, and than abstract them out
with the instruments of Surgery, and after that incarnate the place, and so
skin it and for this matter in the healing and skinning, Melliote and water of
Cresses, and Honey is very good, and so is Galbanum desolued in a little of the
juice of Fenell.

Thus ends the letter. D.
And here follows the leter. E.
The 110. Chapter does show of drunkenness.
EBrietas is the latin word. In greek it is named Maethae. Drunkenness.
In English it is named dronkennes.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either by weakness of the brain, or else by some
great hurt in ye head, or of to much riot.

A remedy.
If it do come by an hurt in the head, there is no remedy but patience of al
parts. If it do come by debilitie of ye brain and head, drink in ye morning
a dish of milk, use a sirupe named Sirupus Acetosus de prunis, and use
laxatiue meats and purgations if need do require, and beware of superfluous
drinking, specially of wine and strong ale, and beer, and if any man do
perceive yt he be drunk, let him take a vomit with water and oil, or with a
fether, or a Rose mary branch, or else with his finger, or else let him go to
his bed to sleep.

The 111. Chapter does show of any swelling that is soft.
EDema is ye greek word. In latin it is named Eumor mollis. In english it is
named a swelling Swelling.
the which is soft.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of abundance of corrupt humors.

A remedy.
First maturate the matter, and than either by incisions or else by Corosiues
make an issue, and the^ with tents and salues to make the impediments whole,
as it does appear in the Chapter named Vulnus.

The 112. Chapter does show of a man's egestion.
EGestio or Sessum be the latin words. In english it is named the egistion or
sege Seege.
ye which does come from man, it is necessary when the meats ye man does eat
be digested, that then the grossnes of it be egested, and by the egestion the
Physician in sick parsons has a great noticion and knowledge of man's
infirmities, many men be laxatiue and costiue, and some be indifferent. For
laxatiue men, look in ye Chapters of Diarthea, and Disenteria.

The cause of imperfite egestion.
Who so ever he be that does eat little meat, and is a small drinker, his
egestion can be but little, but they the which can eat their meat and does
lack egestion, can not long live without infirmities.

A remedy for costiuenes.
First let no man restrayn his egestion, when that he is provoked to it. And if
he be constupated let him use Suppositors or Clisters, or some gentle
purgacions, as Mercury, Polipody, Seen, Cassia fistula, Turbithe, Reuberbe,
Rapu^tica, Aloes cicotrine, and such like, and without council of a doctor of
Physic. Beware of Colloquintida, of Asaraby, Opinum, Scamony, Catapuce, Aloes
oabalin, Aloes epaticum, and such like. And let every man beware, specially
weak men how that they do take any pills or porcions of any ignorant person,
except he do know how, when, and what time medicines, specially purgations
ought to be ministried.

A knowledge in egestion.
If the meat do come from a man as in a manner he did eat it, the stomach is
weak, and the bowels be lubricated, and it is an evil sign. If the egestion
do not stink, it is an evil sign. If the egestion do look like the earth,
it is a sign of death. If the egestion do look like lead, it is an evil
sign. If the egestion be black as ynke, it is an evil sign. If the egestion
be black and adusted, and does look like shepes tretles, there is abundance
of coler adusted, and pain in the spleen. If the egestion be yelow, and eating
no Saffron before, the body is repleted with coler and cytrine water. If the
egestions have straynes of blod, there is impedimentes in the liver and in the
bowels. If the egestion be bluddish, there is vlceracion in the guts. If the
egestio^ look like the shauing of guts, beware then of an extreme flyxe and
debilitie of ye body. If a man be to laxatiue it is not good, for in such
persons can be no strength, but much weakness. If a man be not costiue and can
not have a natural egestion once in a day, he can not live long without
sickness.

The 113. Chapter does show of burning in the Sun.
EFfilla is the latin word. In English it is burning of the Sun. Sun
burning


The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come through great heat of the sun.

A remedy.
Take the oil of Tarter and anoint the face. For this matter look in the
Chapter named Pulchritudo.

The 114. Chapter does show of a kind of leprousnes named the Elephansy.
ELephas or Elephantia be the greek words. A kind of leprousnes.
In latin it is named Cancer vniuersalis. In English it is named the Elephancy,
or ye Oliphant sickness, for an Oliphant is sturdy and has no joints, and
whosoever that has this kind of Leprousnes can not move his joints and is
stiff: wherefore he is bedred and can not help himself.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a melancoly humor, and may come of a gross and
viscus fleume.

A remedy.
First purge the cause with pills of Fumitory, or with Diacatholicon, and then
cotidially as the pacie^t may bear, use stuphes wet and dry, and exhaust no
blood, and after the stuphes anoint the joints with the oil of Turpentine, and
Netes foot oil, and use Hiarodon abbatis.

There is an other infirmity named Elephancia, which is a swelling in the
feet and legs, and the cause does come as the other Elephancy does,
wherefore the matter must be first purged, and after that use cere clothes
attractiue.

For Elmita, look in the Chapter named Lumbrici.

The 115. Chapter does show of the Conception of a child.
Concepio^
EMbria is the latin word. In greek it is named Embrico^. In english it is a
child conceived in the mothers body, having not the perfect shape or liniments
of a man or woman.

The cause of this matter.
The cause of this, is carnal copulation betwixt man and woman.

To preserve this procreation, look in the Chapter named Conceptio.

Use good meats and drinks, and let such women have their lusts, and beware
of abhorsion.

The 116. Chapter does show of sickness.
EGritudo is the latin word. In english it is named sickness, Sickness.
there be many manner of sicknesses, as it does more largelyer appear in the
Chapter named Morbus.

The cause of this sicknesses.
Sicknesses does come many ways, as by surfeting and evil diet, and to company
with infectuous people to eat and drink, or colly with the^, and it may come
by the punishment of god.

A remedy.
If god send the sickness I know no medicine. If it do come other ways, either
it is hot or cold sicknesses. If it be a hot sickness, use the electuary of
Roses. If it be a cold sickness, use, Diacalamint, and anoint the body with the
oil Benedict, or with the oil of Nardine. If it do come of a melancoly
humor, a decoction made of Epithemie is good.

For Emig^anes look in the chapter named Hemigranea.

The 117. Chapter does show of spitting of foul corrupt matter.
EMpima or Empirema be ye greek words. In latin it is named Supputacio. In
English it is named a collection or a gathering together of filthy matter
Fillthy matter.
in the breast upon Diafragma, spitting and coughing viscus and filthy fleume.

The cause of these impedimentes.
These impedimentes does come of rume distilling from the head to the breast,
covering Diafragma.

A remedy.
First make a Ptisan with hoore hound, and Enula campana roots and Yspoe, and
so forth after the common making of a ptysaine, and after that use the pills of
Cochee, and anoint the breast with the oil of Lawry mixed with butter.

For Enterocela, look in the Chapter named Ramex.

The 130. Chapter does show of spitting of blood.
EMoptoica passio be the latin words. In greek it is named Haemoptoicon
pathos or Phthisis. And the true latin word is named Tabes. In english it is
named spitti^g of blud Spitting of blood


The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come through some vlcerous matter in the breast or in the
lunges.

A remedy.
First if age, time, and strength will permit it, let the pacient be let blood
in a vein named Sophena, and abstract a little blood out of Cephalica. And
then after that let them use to eat milk or whay, and certain times let the^
eat Triacle, and let them ye which has this passion beware of great labor or
lifting, and venerious acts or straining of the^ selves, and let them use to
drink ye juice of the waters of Plantaine and saint John's wort, or use
Purslain to ^ate it or drink ye juice or water with sugar. Also for this matter
is good Spodium, Carabies, Roses, Coral, Saunders, Sanguis draconis, Saffron,
Myrre, Sumacke, Coriander, Boole hermoniacke, Mastix, Storax, Calamint and such
like.

For Empirema, look in the Chapter named Empima.

For Emoroides, look in ye chapter named Hemorchoides

For Emprosthotonus, look in ye Chap. named Spasmus.

For Epatica a vein, look in the Chapter of veins named Mediana.

The 119. Chapter does show of the Mare and of the spirits named Incubus, and
Succubus.
EPhialtes is ye greek word. Epialtes is the barbarus word. In latin it is
named Incubus and Succubus. In English it is named the Mare. The mare
And some say that it is a kind of spirit the which does infest and trouble
men when they be in their beds sleeping, as Saint Augustine says. De
ciuitate dei. Cap. xx. and Saint Thomas of Alquine says in his first part of
his divinity, Incubus does infest and trouble women, and Succubus does infest
men. Some holds opinion that Marlin was begotten of his mother, of ye spirit
named Incubus. Esdras does speak of this spirit, and I have red much of this
spirit in Speculum exemplorum, and in my time at saint Albones here in
England, was infested an Ancresse of such a spirit as she showed me, and also
to credible persons, but this is my opion that this Ephialtes otherwise named
the Mare, the which does come to man or woman when they be sleeping, does come
of some evil humor, considering that they ye which be thus troubled sleeping,
shall think that they do see, here, and feel, the thing that is not true.
And in such troubles sleeping, a man skarse draws his breath.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment (...) come of a vaporous humor or fumositie rising out and
from the stomach to the brain, it may come also through surfeting and
dronkennes, and lying in the bed upright, it may come also of a reumaticke
humor suppressing the brain, and the humor disce^ding does perturbate ye
heart, bringing a man sleping into a dream, to think that the which is nothing
is somewhat, and to feel that thing that he feels not, and to see that thing
that he sees not, with such like matters.

A remedy.
First let such persons beware of lying upright, least they be suffocated, or
dye suddenly, or else at length they will fall into a madness, named Mania,
therefore let such persons keep a good diet in eating and drinking, let them
keep honest company, where there is honest mirth, and let them beware of
musing or studying upon any matter, ye which will trouble the brain, and use
diverse times sternutacions with gargarices, and beware of wines and every thing
the which does engender fumositie.

If it be a spirit. etc.
I have read as many mo has done, yt can tell if I do wryt true or false, there
is an herb named Furga Demonum, or as the Grecians do name it Ipericon. In
english it is named saint John's wort, the which herb is of that virtue that it
does repel such maliciousnes or spirits.

The 120. Chapter does show of a man's Liver.
EPer is the latin word. In greek it is named Aeper. In english it is named a
liver, The liver.
which is no other thing but a co^geyled blood, ye which does calify ye stomach
like the fire under a pot, and does make digestion, and it is the third
principal member in a man, in whom also rests ye animal spirits, and where
as incipie^t persons do say that a man's liver may waste, it is not so, how be
it the liver may have diverse and many infirmities, as heat, water galls,
carnelles and opilacions, and such like diseases. The liver of his nature is
hot and dry.

A remedy for heat in the Liver.
If the liver be hot, pain and heat is felt in ye right side, and for it
open the Epaticke vein, and exhaust of it.ij. or.iii. ounces of blood, if age
and strength will permit it, and use to eat Diarodon with the Sirupe of Roses.
And for the heat of the Liver is good Liuerwort, three kinds of Saunders,
Dandelion, Southistle, Endive, Cicory, and such like.

If the Liver be opilated.
If the liver be opilated the face will swell, and pain will be in the right
side, wherefore clisters be good, and the confection of Fumitore. Also this is
good for the liver, ye confection of Galingale, and ye confection of Xiloaloes,
also Pillule scomatice, and Pillule aggregate, be good to mundify the liver.
Al^^ Emplastrum stomaticum, and Sirupus de thimo, and if the liver be inflamed
I have showed a remedy, and if the liver be weak, a plaster made of wheat is
good, with Diale nicon, and so is Emplastrum Andromachi.

For Epatica passio, look in the Extrauagantes in the end of this book.

For Epenictides, look in the Chapter named Aegineta.

The.121. Chapter does show of the Pestilence.
EPidimea is ye greek word. In latin it is named Pestilencia, or Febris
pestilencialis. In English it is named the pestilence. The pestilence.


The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come either by the punishment of God, either else of a
corrupt and contagious air, and one man infected with this sickness may infect
many men, this sickness may come also with the stench of evil dirtie streets,
of Channelles not kept clean, or standing puddles, and stinking waters, of
seges, and stinking draughtes, of shedding of man's blood, and of dead bodies
not deeply buried, of a great company being in a little or small rome, or
common pissing plases, and of many such like contagious airs as be rehearsed in
the Dietary of health.

A remedy.
The chiefest remedy that I do know, is for every man to submit himself to
God, and than to amend our living, and to flee far from infectious plases,
and not to go into the company of the^ which be infected, or do resort to
infectious persons, and to beware of the clothes, or any other thing that does
perteine to such infectiue persons. Then use a good diet in eating and
drinking, and use perfumes in your chambers and houses, go not abroad in ye
open air, late in the night, nor rise not early in ye morning, let the sun
have dominion over the ground, to waste and consu^^ all co^tagious mis^^ and
airs, or you arise, and than arise and (...) wh^^^ does give health to all
men, and follow my (...) this matter, as I have showed in the Dietary of healh.

For Epiplocela look in the Chapter named Ramex.

The 122. Chapter does show of the falling sickness.
EPilepsia is the greek word. Epilencia is the Barbarous word. In latin, it is
named Conuulcio, or Morbus commicialis, or Morbus sacer, or Morbus herculeus,
or Morbus caducus, And in diverse regions it is named Morbus mahometus, for
Mahomete in whom the Turks do believe, had the said sickness. In English it is
named the falling sickness, The falling sickness.
or the foul il. Also it is named in latin Ira dei, and some do name it Pedon,
and some do name it Iaracionem.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity is engendered either of a reumatike humor, or else of a gross
and a cold wind, or else of a melancoly humor the which is bred in the hinder
part of the head, or else of evil humors abounding in the stomach, the which
does vapor and fume up to the brain, opilating the v^t^l spirits Galen says
it is a cold humor the which does epilate the celles of the brain, unto the
time that nature has removed the cause. There be three kinds of the falling
sickness, ye first is Epileptia, the second is named Analepsia, and the third
is named Catalepsia. They ye which be enfected with Epilepsia, in their falling
shall foam at the mouth, and this is the common falling sickness, and they the
which has Analepsia, when they do fall they shall defyle them selves and not
foam at the mouth. And they the which has Catalepsia, whether they be taken
open eyed, or half closed, for the time they shall see nothing, as it shall
appear in the Chapter named Catalepsis.

A remedy.
Use the confection of Diamusti and Tiriaca diatesseron, Sirupus de sticades,
Acetum squiliticum, Oximel squilliticum. Also the ointment of Philosopher be
good for the three kinds of the falling sickness, and other while purge the
matter with Yerahermetis, and use the diet as is specified in the Chapter named
Analepsia.

The.123. Chapter does show of Pusshes and Wheales.
EPinictides is ye greek word. In latin it is named Pustula nocturna. In
english it is named a wheale A vvhele.
or a push, which does rise in the skin, ye which is engendered in ye night.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of evil diet, or else of an evil humor proceeding
from the liver, or drinking late, or else of some venomous worm.

A remedy.
First refrain for the occasion of it, and touch not the matter, and it will
go away within two days, if you nyp or touch it, for one wheale you shall
have two.

The 124. Chapter does show of eructuacions or belchinges.
ERuctuacio, is the latin word. In english it is named eructuacion or belching.
Belchinge


The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of ventositie or of sower humors in the stomach.

A remedy.
If it do come of ve^tositie or fleume. For it is good confectio^ de acetosis.
If it do come of a sower humor in the stomach, then is the confection of
Galingale good, Diaciminum and the simple Oximell squilit.

The 125. Chapter does show of inflamacions of the eyes.
EPiphora is the greek word. Pain in the eyes.
In latin it is named Inflamacio oculorum. In English it is named inflamacion
of the eyes.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of some salt humor, or else corrupt blood myxt with
reume.

A remedy.
First purge the head, and after that use gargarices, and beware of eating of
Garlike and Onions, and such things as is not good for the eyes or head.

For Erisipulas, look in the Chapter named Herisipulas. Eschara is ye scabbe
or crust that lies on a sore that comes of burning made of some instrument
by the industry of some Physician or Surgeon.

The 126. Chapter does show of a hard push or whele.
EScara, or Essare or Essara be the latin words, in greek it is named Aegineta
or Epinictides, in english it is named a hard push, or a whele vvheles.
much like to stynging of a wasp, or a hornet, or a nettle, and some say it is
the place that a man is burnt with a hot iron and not made whole.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a salt fleumatike humor or else of adusted
collar, or melancoly.

A remedy.
Take of the leaves of Colewortes three handfuls, stamp it and temper it with
honey, and make a plaster, and lay it to the place. Or else take Corianders
seeds in powder, and co^pound it with oil Olyue, and lay it to the place, and
drink this drink. Take of Sumacke half an ounce, sees it in rayn water, or
in white wine, and drink it warm.

For Esthisis look in the Chapter named Sensus.

The 127. Chapter does show of an infirmity corrupting the flesh, finewes and
the bones.
Putrefying of the flesh.
EStiomenus is the latin word. In Araby it is named Esthiominos. In english it
is when the flesh, the sinews, and the bones be putrified or corrupted. And
here it is to be noted, that these infirmities named Cancrena and Aschachilus
be gradiant or concurrant with this aforsayd infirmity. For Cancrena is a way
to Aschachilo, and Aschachilus is away to Esthiominos.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a corrupt mela^coly humor, or else it does come of
some venomous matter corrupti^g ye flesh.

A remedy.
In this matter must be used Cauterisations, and to cleanse the place or places
the water the which does deceuer gold from silver, and then use the medicines
ye which be in the chapter named Escara. In this matter a diet must be used,
the pacient must refrain from contagious meats and drinks, as new ale, new
beer, hot wines, new bread, except it be.xxiiii. hours hold. Also the pacient
must eat no fresh beef, nor no manner of waterfoules, be they wild or tame,
or if they do use the water with vnclouen feet. Also Eles, fresh Samon, shel
fishes, as Oysters, crabbes, and Crauices, and such like. Also dog fish, Ray,
Thornebacke, and such like, be good for any man that has this impediment, or
any other sickness and disease, and beware of venerious acts, and look that
they be laxatiue, and costiue, that has this infirmity or disease.

For Etica passio, look in ye Chapter named Febria hectica.

The 128. Chapter does show of strertyng in a man's sleep.
EXpergifactio sompni be the latin words. Sterting in the sleep.
In english it is sterting in or out of a man's sleep suddenly.

The cause of these impedimentes.
This impediment does come of a melancoly humor or else of an angery or a
fearful heart, or else of a pe^cifull mind, or a fearful dream.

A remedy.
For this matter is nothing so good (beside god) as is the co^fection of Musk,
and otherwhyle use Secamabine, and beware in any wise to lie upright, and not
to go to bed with a full stomach, and if the pacient do groan in the sleep,
awake him leysurably.

The 129. Chapter does show of wheles or pushes.
EXanthemata is the greek word. The Masels and the small pockes.
In Latin it is named Tumores puscule in cute. And there be three kinds named
in latin, Morbilli vatiole, and Mentagra morbilli is named in english the
Maselles, Variole in english is named the small pockes, for Mentagra, look in
the Chapter named Lichim.

The cause of these impedimentes.
These impedimentes may come of corruption of ye blood, it may come of corrupt
Air, and one man may infect another, most commonly this does happen or come
unto young persons.

A remedy.
First and chefely keep ye pacient warm, and in no wise let him go or stand
in the open air, drink no drink but that it be turned out of the cold, eat
nothing but cheken or Mutton stewed for five or six days. Also roche,
whytings, playse, or such like is good to feed of, beware of new ale, or beer
and wine, and use to eat Triacle or Metridatum.

The 130. Chapter does show of excrements.
EXcrementa is the latin word. In English it is these things the which be
digested and expulsed, and there be excrements Excrements.
of the egestion, of vryne of fleume of coler, Melancoly, of sweat, of milk in
woman's breasts, of spetil, of the filth of the nose, and filth of the ears.
For this matter look in the Chapters of every prenominated impediments or
sicknesses.

The 131. Chapter does show in general of all appostumacions.
EXitura is the latin word. Upon what word it is grounded, I can not tell, but
they which have written upon this word, does say it is named every
Appostumacion, in the which is matter and filth, and there be many kinds of
these Appostimacions. The first is named Cammarate caurine, ye second is named
Albir, or toplaria, and ye third is Talpa. The first is named as I have said
Ca^marata, and this is inge^dred of an evil and corrupt flesh, the second is
named Albir or toplaria, the which is most commonly in chyldrens heads, the
third is named Talpa, the which is engendered in the head upon the skin
penitrating the flesh.

The cause with the remedy look in ye prenominated words or Chapters.

The 132. Chapter does show of excoriation.
EXcoriacio is the latin word. In english it is named excoriacion, Excoriacion.
which is when the skin is away from any place of mas body, or else when a
man shall flee or take away universal or particular a man's skyn.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity may come many ways, as by ryding, or going, or great labor,
or by some sore, or by skalding or burning, or else by fleying or pulling of a
man's skin from him.

A remedy.
Anoint the place with vnguentum serisinum, or wash the place often with the
water of Roch alome, and then cast upon the place the powder of a Post, and if
once will not, wash the place with the water of Roche alome, wash the place then
with white wine, and use the fine powder of a Post, and there is nothing will
skin so soon as it will do. Peradventure some persons reading this book,
specially this matter will laughe me to scorn, but for all that for skinning
of a place there is nothing shall skin so sone as it will do if it be used,
except the place be to much vlcerated, but for a man's yerd and other secret
places, I have proved this powder to be ye most best. Look for this matter in
the Extrauagants.

Thus ends the letter of E.
And here follows the letter of. F.
The.133. Chapter does show of a man's face.
FAcies is ye latin word. In greek it is named prosopon. In English it is
named a face, the which is the fairest thing that ever God made in the compass
of a foot, and it is a wonderful thing to behold, considering that one face is
not like another. The face The face.
may have many impediments. The first impediment is to see a man having no
berd, and a woman to have a berd. In ye face may be moles, weartes ye morphew
ale pockes, sauce fleme, da^druffe, skurfe, scabbes, pockes, mesels, fystles,
cankers, swellings. For all such matters look in the Chapters of the
infirmities.

A remedy to mundify the face.
To clear, to cleanse, and to mundify the face, use stuffes and bathes, and
every morning after keyming of the head, wipe the face with a Skarlet cloth,
and wash not ye face often, but ones a week anoint ye face a little over with
the oil of Castine, and use to eat Electuary de aromatibus, or ye confection
of Anacardine, or the sirup of Fumitory, or ye co^fection of Manna, and do as
it is written in the Chapter named Pulchritudo.

For Fastidium, look in ye Chapter named Abhominacio stomachi.

For Fauces, look in the Chapter named Branchos, and in the Extrauagantes, in
the end of this book.

For Fatigacio, look in the Chapter named Lassitudo, and in the Extrauagantes,
in the end of this book.

The 134. Chapter does show of a named Fauus.
A kind of Scaller
FAuus is the latin word. In English it is scabbes in the skin of the head,
like to an impediment named Acor, but the holes of Fauus is much more bigger
then Acor is.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come through great humiditie in the head, or it may come
of a salt humor.

A remedy.
First shave or cut away the hairs of the head. Then take of Ceruse, of Soote
of ye chimney, of Vinegar, of each an ounce, compound this together with the oil
of nutes, and anoint the head, or else take of Doves dung.ii. ounces, of Chalk
half an ounce, of powder of Muster seeds an ounce, of Mastix half an ounce,
confect or compound all this with ye oil of Nutes and viniger, and anoint the
head.iii. or.iiii. times.

The 135. Chapter does show of the kinds of fevers in general.
FEbris is the latin word. In greek it is named Piretos. In English it is
named a Fever Fevers.
of an Agne. A Fever is an unnatural heat grounded in the heart and liver,
setting all the body out of temper or temperance. And there be twenty kinds
of Fevers. First is Febris ephimera, otherwise named Febris diaria, then is
Febris cotidiana, Febris interpolata, Febris terciana, Febris puartana, Febris
sinochos, otherwise named Febris continua, the^ is Febris sinocha, Febris
homothena, Febris augmastica, Febris epamastica, Febris causon or causos, or
Febris ardents, the^ is Febris putrida, or humoralis, Febris emphisodes, Febris
emitricea, Febris epialtes, or Febris epiala, or Febris epialia, then is Febris
lipparia, Febris tetrathea, Febris erratica, Febris hectica, and Febris
pestilencialis, for all these Fevers look in their Chapters following, and
there you shall see the English words for these aforesaid latin words.

The 136. Chapter does show of a fever named the Ephimer fever.
FEbris ephemera be the greek words. Ephimes fever.
Febris diaria be the latin words. In English it is named the Ephimer Fever.
And this Fever is the cause of all other Fevers. This Fever does take his name
of a beast, some say it is a Fish, and some say it is a worm the which does
die that day that he begins to live. So they the which has this Fever, the
Fever does dye that day in the which he does infest any man. And if this fever
continue any longer then a day, or an hour passing his course, then it runs
into some other kind of Fevers.

The cause of the Epihimer Fever.
This fever does come by inflacion of the spirits vital, natural, and animal,
if this fever does come of the vital spirits, it does come through anger, or
wrath, thought or sorrow, or else of extreme heat, or cold, if it do come by the
spirits natural, it does come by great hunger or thurst, or else by eating or
drinking of hot meats or drinks, or else of breaking of a diet, or by
surfeting, or by repletion, eating diverse meats and drinking sundry drinks,
laxes, and costiuenes, great abstinence, watching, and wearines of riding or
going, and venerious acts, in such like may be the occasion of this fever.

A remedy.
The chiefest remedy is for every man to order and rule him self in a
temperance, and neither for friend nor foe, to eat nor to do the thing the
which he does know by experience should hurt him, and the^ upon this Ephimer
fever, no other fevers will follow nor spring.

The.137. Chapter does show of a cotidian Fever.
A cotidian.
FEbris quotidiana be the latin words. In english it is named a quotidiane,
the which does infest a man every day.

The cause of this fever.
Every quotidiane is inge^dred of a salt fleume or of a sweet fleume, or else of
sower fleume. If it be engendered of a salt fleume, the pacient shall be in
great heat, and will be thursty. If it be come of sweet fleume, the pacie^t will
be sompnole^t, dull and heavy, and his stomach will abhor meats and drinks,
having taste or talage to comfort ye palate of ye mouth. If it do come of sower
fleume the pacient shall have pain in the stomach, and ever is disposed to
vometing, and the coldenes of the fever will be great, and the heat little.

A remedy.
First purge salt fleume, and use a Ptysan. And if it do come of sweet fleume,
Diacalamint with Oximel squilit. And if it do come of sower fleume, use
Diatriapiperio^ with water diuretike.

A pendex to the aforesaid Chapter showing of a fever interpolate.
FEbris interpollata be the latin words. In english it is named an interpolate
fever. Interpolate fever
And there be three kinds, simple, double, and treble. A simple interpolate
fever does infest a man once in a day. A doble interpolate fever does infest a
man twice a day. And a trible interpolate fever does infest a man thryse a day.
For a remedy look amongst the xx. kinds of fevers as they be here before and
after specified.

The.138. Chapter does show of a fever Tercian.
FEbris terciana be the latin words. In English it is named a fever tercian, A
tercian Fever.
the which does infest a man every second day, and there may be a double
tercian.

The cause of this impediment.
This fever does come of coler, and it does differ from a fever causon, for a
fever tercian does operate, or work his malice in the veins, and the fever
causon does work his malice in the concauitie of the liver and the lunges, and
about the heart.

A remedy.
The medicines the which does help the fever causon, will help a fever
terciane. First purge coler, and three or four hours before the fit does
come. I do thus. I cause a man to lie in his doublet, and a woman in her wast
cote then do I cause them to put on a pair of gloves, and with two garters I
do bind the wrestes of the arms and do lay their arms and hands into the
bed, and do cast on clothes to bring them to a sweet before the fit do come
three or four hours, and out of Gose quilles one put into an other, they do
take their drink, because they shall take no air into the bed, then I do give
them first an ale brue, and suffer them to drink as much Posset ale as they
will, and when the burning do begin, I do withdraw the clothes, and thus I do
three courses, and have made many hundred whole, but their good days I do not
suffer them to go in the open air.

The 139. Chapter does show of a Fever quartaine.
FEbris quartana be the latin words. A quartayne.
In English it is named a fever quartaine the which does infest a man every
third day, that is to say, two days whole and one sick, and there may be a
double quartayne.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment or Fever does come of melancholy, or else of coler adusted, and
if the black Iawnes be concurrant with it, it is a difficile sickness to make
one whole.

A remedy.
First purge melancoly, and use the pills of Inde once or twice a week, and
take often of the Sirupe named in latin Sirupus de thimo, and for the heat, and
for the inflacion of all manner of Agues, or fevers, use the infection of
prunes, and a Iulib of violets. And in all manner of fevers, first purge the
cause, for every Fever either does come of the malice of blud or of fleume, or
of coler, or else of mela^coly. It may come also of mixed humor, and do as I
have rehearsed in a fever tercian.

Febris acuta et continua, al is one, and that thing that will help Sinochos,
will help this.

The.140. Chapter does show of a continual fever named Synoch.
Sinoch fever.
FEbris Sinochos is the greek word. In latin it is named Febris sinocha, or
Febris continua. In English it is named a continual Fever. Sinochos is derived
out of 2. words, sin that is to say without, and Choos which is to say
travel, and that is as much to say as Fever without rest.

An other fever.
Sinoch fever.
There is an other Fever named Febris Sinocha the which does differ from the
Fever Sinochos. For this fever Sinocha has interpolacion that is to say, some
rest or interpolacio^. And there be three kinds of the fever Sinochos, which be
to say, Homothena, Augmastica, Epamastica, and how a man shall know the one
from the other.

Febris Homothena.
Hemothe^ fever.
He that has this Fever has a dim and a swart vryne.

Febris Augmastica.
Augmastick fever.
Whosoever has this fever has a bluish urine or water.

Febris Epamastica.
Epamastick fever.
Whosoever has this fever has a red bright urine, and the fever will increase,
and it will not in Augmastica, for the water is thick in the bottom, and that
does signify health.

The cause of these fevers.
These fevers does come of abundance of blood, or else of putrified blood. And
the^ the skin will be dankish, and all the body will be out of temper, ye face
will swell, ye eyes will be redish, and the veins will be full, and the urine will
be red with great spu^e

A remedy.
First if age, time, and strength will permit it, be let blood in a vein named
Mediana. And if the pacient be dry or thursty, A dormitary.
use the electuary of prunes, with the sirup of Acetose. And if ye pacient can
not sleep, make a dormitary. Take of the leaves of he^baine 2. handfulles, of ye
leaves of Ma^dragore an ha^dful, stamp both together, and put them in a cloth
and lay it to ye temples, and forehead, Fomentacion.
or else take a scarled cloth and intinct it into ye oil of Roses and vinegar,
and lay it over the head, or else take fow and perfume it with frankensence, and
lay it hot to the head and temples, and morning and evening use this
fomentacion to the feet. Take of violet flowers or leaves ii. handfuls, of Roses
leaves, of malowes, of either of them ii. ha^dfuls, of barley 3. handfuls, seth
all this in running or rain water, and the^ make this Epithime. Take of the
juice of nightshad half a pint, of red saunders, and white saunders an ounce of
Camphire ii. epithime.
dra^es of Roses leaves an ounce, of rose water as much as will suffice, co^pound
al these together with a blewe or a scarlet cloth, lay it to the right side.
And if the fever do cause co^stupacions, use Clisters or else suppositors. And
if age, time and strength will permit it, open a voyne named Mediana, and
exhaust an ounce or two of blood as the pacie^t is of strength. If it be a man,
take a vein in the right arm. And if if be a woman open the vein in the left
arm, and use this diet, eat no gross or contagious meats, A diet.
and abstain from drynking of new ale, new hiere and wine, eat no eles
Eggs, nor fresh Samon, nor shall (...), nor the fish the which does adhere to
the fingers.

The 141. Chapter does show of a fever named Causon.
FEbris causon or causos be the greek words. In latin it is named Febris
ardens. Causon Fever.
In English it is named the fever Causon, which is one of the worst fevers that
can be.

The cause of this fever.
This fever does come of coler, and does differ but little from a fever
tercian, considering that the matter is in the concauitie of the liver, and
therefore the fever Causon is more vehement and sharp then a terciane, and the
mouth of the pacient having the fever Causon is very dry, and the urine is as
red as fire.

A remedy.
First purge coler with Cassia fistula, and extince ye thirst with the sirup of
Violets or Roses, or with the water of Goordes, and rub the wrestes and the
hands with the water that prunes be sodden in, and do as I have written in the
fever tercian.

The 142. Chapter does show of the putrified Fever.
Putrified Fever.
FEbris putrida or humoralis be the latin words. In English it is named the
putrified or humorall Fever.

The cause of this Fever.
This fever may come many ways. It may mome by the fervent heat of the sun,
and the air, it may come by inordinate labor, or by great riding, or great
labor in going, it may come by surfeting or co^tagious meats eating, it may
come by to much drinking, specially drinking of hot wines, it may come by
disordering of a man's usage, that he has been accustomed to do, it may come by
disordering of any of the four humors, as well by steps as by excess of meat
or drink as by labor, wherefore if this fever take any principal humor, as
blood or fleume, coler or melancholy, then this fever does take of other names
of fevers, as it appears here among the fevers.

A remedy.
First use good diet, and eat good meat, and little at a time, drink no
wines, use temperate drinking and drink posset ale, made with cold herbs
sodden in it, go not in the open air, use to drink of a Ptisane, or else take
of the juice of grapes, of the water or juice of sorell, or ye juice of pome
Garnades, of each half an ounce, of white vinegar a quarter of an ounce, of sugar
plate iii. ounces, boil this together over a soft fire, and lay it under the
tou^ge diverse times, and take some of it inward.

The 143. Chapter does show of the emphisode Fever.
FEbris emphisodes is the greek word. Emphisode fever.
In English it is named the Emphisode Fever.

The cause of this fever.
This fever does come of vehement heat, the which through inflacions does cause
whels and scabs to be in and about ye mouth.

A remedy.
First qualify the heat of the liver and the stomach, with cold herbs, as the
complexion of the pacient is of, give no churlish herb nor medicine to a
gentle complexion, or to them the which has been with meats and drinks
laciuiously educated, let every complexion have medicines ministered according
to their nature, education, and strength, and for this fever policy must be
taken for the safety of health, among other fevers rehearsed and shall be
expressed.

The 144. Chapter does show of the Emitricke fever.
FEbris hemitricea is the greek word. Hemitrik fever.
The barbarous word is named Emitricia. In English it is named the Emitricke
fever.

The cause of this fever.
This fever does come of a colerick humor mixed wc fleume.

A remedy.
First purge coler and fleume as it is specified in the chapters of Coler and
flume, and use a good diet, and beware of open air into ye time the pacient be
whole, and sweates in a man's head be good, for this fever, and al other fevers
taken before the fever does come.

The 145. Chapter does show of a Fever named the fever Epiale.
^pial fever.
FEbris epialtes is the greek word. Febris epialia may be taken for the
harbarous word and the latin word. In english it may he named the Epial Fever,
and some do name this fever febris epiala, Epi that is to say above, and Algor
that is cold.

The cause of this fever.
This Fever does come of a gross fleumaticke matter causing the interial
parts of the body to burn, and the exter^all parts of the body to be cold,
opilating the poores, ye which does prohibit that the fume can not be
desolued, and this fever causes the pacient to be thrystie, and the tongue to
be rough and out of taste.

A remedy.
First purge gross fleume with the sirupe acetose, and after ye take a drame
and a half of the pills of Sarcocoll, and the pills of Coloquintida, and do
as it is written in the fever tercian.

The 146. Chapter does show of the Lypery fever, I do not speak of the Leprose
sickness.
Lipery fever.
FEbris liparios is the greek word. In latin it is named Febris liparia. In
English it is named the Lipary Fever.

The cause of this Fever.
This fever does come of a hot colericke humor mixed with corrupt fleume,
causing the inward parts of the body to be cold, and the outward parts to be
hot.

A remedy.
First purge the superfluite of Coler with Pillule stomatice, and before the
first or ye second course come, sweat iii. or iiii. hours, and go not in the
open air, and keep a good diet, and use in the sweat to drink posset ale, or
else a Ptisane.

The 142. Chapter does show of the Tetrach Fever.
FEbris tetrathea, be the Physic words. Tetrach fever.
In English it is named the Fever Tetrath, and this fever may be as well in a
particular member as universal.

The cause of this fever.
This Fever does come of the dragges of melancoly, or of the juice of
melancoly, the which juice is putrified or not putrified, if it be not
putrified either it is universal, or else it is particular, if it be particular
it is in a particular member, if it be in the whole body, it does engender the
black Iawnes, if it be in a particular member it does engender an impostume
named Scliros, and there will be a pain in the spleen, and the pacient will be
cold, and often yeane or gape, if this fever be putrified, either it is
universal or else particular, if it be universal it does engender the fever
quartayne, if it be particular it does engender Fever quartayne, if it be
particular it does engender fever quartaine not vehement nor perticulus.

A remedy.
First purge melancoly with the pills of Inde, and the pills of Sebely, and
the piles made of Lapides lazule, and than look for a remedy in the Chapter of
the infirmities prenominated, specially in this Chapter named Febris quartana.

The 148. Chapter does show of the Erraticke fever.
FEbris erratica et commixta, Erraticke. fever.
be the latin words. In english it is named the Erraticke and commixt Fever.

The cause of this fever.
These fevers does come of two causes. The one does come by the indencion or
thickenes of blood, and the other does come of color and fleume not naturally,
and if any of these fevers do continue in a man, at length they will come to a
fever.

A remedy.
If it do come of intencion of the blood. First purify the blood, as it does
appear in the Chapter named Sanguis, if it do come of coler and fleme, purge
coler and fleume, as it does appear in the Chapters named Colera and Flegma,
and use suppositors and clisters, and use boxing betwixt the shoulders, and
certain times exhaust blood out of the veins named Cephalica, Mediana,
Sophena, and Cardiaca, in portion as the pacient is of age and strength, and
use this sirup. Take of Endive, and of Letuse of each an ounce, of the flowers of
water Lillies, and of the flowers of Lillies, of each half an ounce, of the
juice of pome Garnades two ounces, make a sirupe of this and eat it, and this is
good for all hot Fevers.

The 149. Chapter does show of the fever Eticke.
Eticke fever.
FEbris hectica be the grek words. The latins does name it Hectica passio. The
barbarous persons with some latinist does name it Febris etica. In English it
is named the Fever Etick or Etick passion, or one of the kinds of a
consu^ption, for this fever does consume the natural humidity of man, yt is to
say, it does consume blood, and so consequently nature.

The cause of this fever.
This Fever may come many ways. First it may come by to much meddling with a
woman, or else through long continuance of some sickness, or else it may come by
extreme labor, or else through debility of some of the principal members, ye
arters, sinews, and veins. And there be three kinds of this fever. The first
is a vehement heat the which is in the blood, ye which blood does run in the
artures and veins, heating the heart and the other members. The second is an
arde^t heat inflaming the principal members through the caliditie of the blood.
The third does arify and dry up the natural humidity in man.

A remedy.
First qualyfie the heat of the blood with cold herbs sodden in posset ale, or
use a Pitisane and use the confection of Anacardi^e, and troces of Camphire,
and a decoction of Maiden hair is good, and use a good diet, and take
restoratiue meats and drinks, or else take ye confection made of stones of a
Fox, Locsanum, troces of Camphire or ye oil of sweet Almo^s.

The 150. Chapter does show of the Fever pestilence.
FEbris pestilencialis, be the latin words. The pestilence fever
In greek it is named Epidimea. In english it is named the fever pestilence
and this fever is ye most venomous of all other fevers, and does most infect.

The cause of this Fever.
This fever does come many ways, either by infection of the air, or one man
infected does infect an other, as it does appear more larglier in the Chapter
named Epidimia.

A remedy.
For a remedy look in the Chapter named Epidimea, and in the Dyetary of health.

The 151. Chapter does show of an evil fever the which does comber young
persons, named the Fever lurden.
AMong all the fevers I had almost forgotten the fever lurden, with the which
many young men, The fever Lurden.
young women, maidens and other young persons be sore infected now a days.

The cause of this infirmity.
This fever does come naturally, or else by evil and slothful brynging up. If
it do come by nature, then this fever is incurable, for it can never out of the
flesh yt is bred in the bone, if it do come by slothful brynging up, it may
be helped by diligent labor.

A remedy.
There is nothing so good for ye fever lurden as is Vngentu^ baculinum, that is
to say. Take a stick or wan of a yeard of length and more, and let it be as
great as a man's finger, and with it anoint the back and the shoulders well,
morning and evening, and do this.xxi. days, and if this fever will not be
helped in that time, let the^ beware of wagging in ye galowes, and whiles they
do take their medicine, put no Lubber^wort into their potage, and bear of
knauering about their heart, and if this will not help, send them to Newgate,
for if you will not, they shall bring them self thither at length.

The.152. Chapter does show of a man's Gal.
FEell is the latin word. In greek it is named Cholae. In English it is named
a gall, and it does lie upon ye Liver like a bladder, having a thin skin easy
to break, and it is named Cistafellis, and that that is with in, is named Fell
in Latin. In English it is called the Gall. The Gall.
In this matter if there be any coldness let the^ beware of the^ self,
considering yt the skin of ye gal is easy to break, but such men be at a great
vantage of other men, for they ye which has their galls borke^ shall never be
drowned in good ale except yt they be dro^ke^.

The 153. Chapter does show of a dead child in a woman's body.
FEtus mortuus be the latin words. In English it is named a dead child A dead
child.
in a woman's body.

The cause of this infirmity.
This great displeasure may come to a woman many ways, by great sickness, or
extreme thought, by a fall, or a stripe, or such like.

A remedy to expel a dead child.
First give to the woman a purgation, or else two purgacions, as she is of
strength and able to bear it. Then make a suffumigation after this manner: Take
of Malowes three handfulles, of March, of Camomyl, of each of them two
handfuls, of Fenugreke three ounces, sees al these together in a galo^ and a
half of fair water, and ye water being seething hot let the woman sit over it
in a close chair or stool half an hour and more, and after let that the
Midwife do her dewty.

The 154. Chapter does show of stench or evil savor that may come out of a
man's mouth or nose, or the arm holes.
FEtor oris, or fetor narium, or fetor assellarium, Sinking breath.
be the latin words. In English it is named stench of the mouth, stench of the
nosethrylles, and stench of the arm holes.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come diverse ways, if it do come out of the mouth or
nosethrylles, either it does come out from the head or stomach, or by some
rotten to the, if it do come from the arm holes, it does come of ranknes of
blood.

A remedy.
Use every morning and after meat to eat four cloves, and keep one cloue in
the mouth, and cleanse the blood, as it does appear in the Chapter named
Sanguis, look specially in the Chapter named Anhelitus.

The 155. Chapter does show of fleume.
FLeuma is the greek word. flegma is the latin word. In English it is named
Fleume, fleume.
the which is a natural humor in man, how be it, it is but an humor half
decocted, and there be four kinds of Fleume. The first is natural fleume
which is dulset or sweet, and natutal it is cold and moist, but for as much as
this fleume which is sweet, gree for gree, is hot and moist like the Air,
therefore out of fleume is blood derived. The second fleume is named salt
fleume, the which is dry and is corrupt with coler. The third is tart or sower,
ye which is cold and dry, and corrupted with Melancoly. The fourth is vitrious
or glassy, the which is engendered of to much cold and of congulacion of
Melancoly.

The cause of this fleume.
Aristotle says that fleume is the superfluity of meats that is not
digested. And I do say that fleume is substance of the meats and drink that be
digested, of the which is engendered blood, which is the life of man, for
without blood no man can live.

A remedy.
Yeralogodion does purge fleume, and so does pills of Turbyth, or pills of
Euforbium, or pills of Sarcocol, or pills of Coloquintida, and pillule
Stomatice, or pills of Serapyne does purge diverse fleumes, and pills of Coche
does purge the head and the stomach, and the Sirupe of Fumitory does purge
gross and viscus fleume, and a decoction of Alhasce is good for all fleumatike
men, and let al Fleumatike persons beware of eating of raw aples, and of cold
taking in their feet, and of late drinking, and late sitting up, and let them
not rise to early in the morning, for they must have much sleep.

The.156. Chapter does show of an impostume named Flegmon.
Apostu^e
FLegmon is the greek word. In latin it is named Apostema calidum, or
Perticulare: in English it is named an impostume or an inflacio^ engendered in a
particular place, and it is very hot and burning, and does swelll.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of abundance of corrupt blood, or else of a
mela^coly humor, if it do come of abundance of corrupt blood, it is named
Herisipula, and if it do come of melancoly, it is named Sephitos, which is an
intolerable pain.

A remedy.
For both of these matters phlebothomy and purgatio^s is good, if strength,
age, and the time will permit it. And after ye if it do come of Mela^coly,
take of oil Olive an ounce, of whete^ bra^ an handful, co^pound both together,
and make a plaster, purge the matter with pills of Inde, and with Pillule
Lucis of both kinds, and the pills made of ye Lazule stone, and pills
Sebely. And if it do come of abundance of corrupt blood, use the co^fection of
Anacardine, and make a plaster with the white of v. eggs, and of the oil of
roses, and with tow make a plaster.

The 157. Chapter does show of Chappes in a man's body.
FIssura is ye latin word, In English it is named a chap or chappes Chappes
being in ye lips, tongue, hands and feet of a man.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a dry humor, of a march wind or else of some
other hot cause, or hot winds.

A remedy.
Take of the oil of sweet Almons an ounce, and anoint the place. And any of
these things following is good, the powder of the rines of pome Garnades, the
mary of a Calfe, or of a Heart, the fatnes of a Capon, goose, or ducke, and such
like.

The.158. Chapter does show of a Fystle.
FIstula is the latin word. In greek it is named Seruix. Fystle.
In English it is named a fistel, ye which is a corrupt appostumacio^ in a
vein, or a fistle is an vlceratio^, long, and straight, and most commonly it
will be in a man's foundement.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity is inge^dred either by a wound or a sore, or by corruption of
some evil humors, and it may come by nature.

A remedy.
First open the orifice of the Fystle, and then mu^difie it with white wine, in
ye which seth two ounces of ye powder of Yreos, or else mu^difie it with ye juice
of Plantaine, wc Boole armoniake, or else take of Aristology that is round, of
Phe^taphilo^, of each an ounce, make powder of them, and mix the powder with
Honey, and the^ make tents and put them in to the Fystle, and tha^ take the
egestion of a man, and burn it, and make powder of it, and with the powder of
pepper, lay the substance over the Fystle. Also vnguentum egipciacum does
mu^difie a fistle, and Yeralogodion rufie does purge ye matter, and Diaphenico^
does make whole the infirmity, and the oil of eggs is good.

Fistula cimbalaris is a pype in the throat the which does moliorate a man's
voice or breast.

The 159. Chapter does show of a sickness named ficus in Ano.
FIcus in ano be the latin words. In english it is named a fig A fig.
in a man's foundeme^t, for it is a postumacion like a fig or a lump of flesh
in the longacion like a fig. And some men say it is a lump of flesh like a
fig growing in the longacion which is in the foundement.

The cause of this infirmity.
This impediment does come of a melancoly humor the which does descend to the
longacion or fundement.

A remedy.
First purge the matter with the confection of Hameke, or with ye pills of
Lapides lazule, or with Yera ruffini, than take of ye powder of a dogs head
burnt, and mixed it with ye juice of Pimpernel, and make tents and put into the
foundement.

The 160. Chapter does show of Flebothomy or letting of blood.
Letting of blood.
FLebothomia is derived out of two words of greek of Flebi, that is to say a
vein, and Temno, that is to say opening or cutting, so that Flebothomia is
opening or cutting of a vein. In latin it is named Minucio sa^guinis. In
english it is named letting of blood, there be two weyes, one in opening of a
vein, and the other is by boxing or cupping. Here I do advertise every
Surgeon, how, when, and at what time they do let any man blood, except that
they do know the operacion of the signs, and do consider the age and strength
of the pacient, and for what manner of disease the pacient should be let blood.

For Fluxus, look in the Chapter named Diarrhea.

For Fluxus sanguinis, look in ye Chapter named Sanguis

The.161. Chapter does show of a wheale named Formica.
vvheale.
FOrmica is the latin word, In greek it is named Mirmichia. In English it is
named a little wheale growing out of the skin, some does call this sickness in
latin Formica milliara, as who should say briefly biting of Amites, or
Pismares, or antes, for this infirmity does take his name of an Ant or
pismare, or Amit, all is one thing, and why this sickness, is so called, is
because the similitude is like the biting of an Ant. etc. And there be three
kinds of this infirmity, the first is running, the second is coroding or
eating, and the third is named Formica miliaris, the which I do take it for ye
singles, look in the Extrauagantes for that word.

The cause of these infirmities.
These infirmities does come of diverse humors, he that is running does come of
coler, he that does corode or eat, does come of coler adusted, and the last
does come of melancoly mixed with salt fleume.

A remedy for the first.
First purge the cause, and then for the first take the electuary of the juice
of Roses, as well interially as exterially and use it.

A remedy for the second.
The cause purged, than take the confection of Hamechinterially and exterially.

A remedy for the third.
First take of the pills aggregated, and of the pills of Fumytory, of either
of them a dram, and take of Houseleke, and of the flowers of Newnifer,
otherwise named water lillyes, and of Letuse leaves, of either of them an
handful, bray them together with white wine and make a plaster of it, and use
it.

Furfur or Furfures, is named dandruffe Da^druffe
or skurfe, or little seals like to otmele or bran, the cause and the remedy
you shall find in the Chapter named. Acor.

The 162. Chapter does show of an hard impostume under a man's arm.
FVgila is the latin word. Apostu^e
In English it is named an hard impostume under a man or woman's arm hole, or
there about.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a melancoly humor, and otherwhile it may come of
a fleumaticke matter, converted to hardness.

A remedy.
First purge ye matter with Diaturbyth or with Yera ruffini, and after that use
the medicines the which is in the Chapter named Scrophule.

For Frenisis look in the Chapter named Frenitis.

For Formiculus look among the kinds of impostumes, the which is engendered of
an evil and gross blood.

Thus ends the leter of F.
And here follows the letter of. G.
The 163. Chapter does show of Joy or Mirth.
Mirth.
GAudium is the latin word. In English it is named Joy or Mirth. In greek it
is named Hidonae.

The cause of Mirth.
Mirth comes many ways, the principal mirth is when a man does live out of
deadly sin, and not in grudge of conscience in this world, and that every man
does rejoice in God, and in charity to his neighbor, there be many other
myrthes and consolations, some being good and laudable, and some vytuperable,
laudable mirth is one man or one neighbor to be merry with an other, with
honesty and virtue, with out swearing or slaundering, and rybaldry speaking.
Mirth is in Musical instruments, and ghostly and godly singing, mirth is when
a man lives out of debt, and may have meat and drink and cloth, although he
have never a pany in his purse, but now a days he is merry that has Gold and
silver, and riches with lechery, and all is not worth a blew point.

A remedy.
I do advertise every man to remember that he must die, how, when, and what time
he can not tell, wherefore let every man amend his life and commit himself to
the mercy of God.

For Gala, look in the Chapter named Lac.

For Gangina, look in the Chapter named Tubercula.

The 164. Chapter does show of crokednes or curuitie in the back or shoulders.
GIbbosita is ye latin word. Crooked shoulders.
In English it is named crokednes of ye back, or shoulders, making a man to go
stoupi^gly.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either by nature, or by some humor or sickness, or
else of some brose, or a stripe or such like things.

A remedy.
If it do come by nature, the impediment is incurable. If it do come of an
humor or sickness or a brose, take of the oil of Lillies, and of the oil of
Castory, of either an ounce, and anoint the back or shoulders, and drink
Oximel compound, etc. For Gingine, look in ye Extrauagants in ye end of this
book.

The 165. Chapter does show of Carnelles in the flesh.
GLandule is the latin word. Carnels.
In greek it is named Antiades or Cherade, or Strume. In English it is named
carnelles in the flesh. And there be two kinds, the one is hard, and the other
is soft.

The cause of this impediment.
The cause of hard Carnelles comes of colericke humors, and the soft
carnelles does come of corrupt blood mixed with fleume.

A remedy.
Take of Fig leaves two handfuls, of burnt lead half an ounce, sta^p this
together and make plasters, and lay it to ye place,

The 166. Chapter does show of a Gomory passion.
The gomer passion.
GOnorhea is the greek word. In latin it is named Proflunio somnis, the
barbarous word is named Gomerra passio, it is named so because Gomer and Sodom
did sincke for such like matter, but this matter is not voluntary, and they did
it voluntarily. And there be three kinds. The first is against nature. The
second does come of some infirmity. The third does come of imbecilitie or
weakness.

The cause of these kinds.
If it be against nature, the diuill and man's wretched mind is the cause. Alas
what pleasure should any wretch have to meddle with any brute beast, or to
pollute him self wilfully, I know no remedy for this but great repentance, for
the vengeance of God hangs over the heads of them that so does. For this sin
Sodom and Gomor did sink to hell suddenly. If polutions do come to any man
through sickness, or of abundance of nature, if it be not wilfully done nor no
delectacion had in it, it is no sin. If it do come sleping or waking, through
imbecility and weakness, having no delectacion nor pleasure, nor consenting to
sin, it is no offense, if it do come sleping, of any foul dream, and no
delectacion or pleasure had before nor after, it is no sin.

A remedy.
I^it do come naturally, those that be unmarried let them marry. If it do come
otherwise use Flebothomy and vomites, use also the sirup of Roses, of
Mirtilles, of Nuniphar, or water of Lillies, or Melo^s, or use to eat Letuce,
or Purslaine, and for this matter Camphire is good mixed with Opinum and
Henbaine in the oil of Roses compound.

The.167. Chapter does show of a nans tasting.
GVstus is the latin word. In greek it is named Gensis. In English it is named
a man's tasting, Tasting.
the which many sick men does lack.

The cause of these impedimentes.
This impediment does come of heat of the liver, and vntemperance of the
stomach.

A remedy.
Take of Lymons or of Oranges.v. or vi. slyce them and eat them, and than use
to eat stewed prunes and cleanse the tongue, that it be not furred with filth,
with sage leaves and Alome water.

The 168. Chapter does show of an impediment in the roufe of the mouth.
GArcarion or Kyon be the greek words. In latin it is named Gurgulion, or
Golumella, or Granosa. In English it is named an impediment in the roufe of the
mouth.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of an inflamacion rising out of the stomach, or else
it may come of a hot and a corrupt blood.

A remedy.
First for this matter use gargarices and sternutacions, and than use pills of
Cochee to purge the head and the stomach, and wash the mouth with Rose water in
the which Roche Alome is disolued in, and use this four or five times.

Guidegi be veins upon the which great artures be cituated For Genu look in
the extrauagants in the end of this book. For G^^ter look in the extrauaga^ts
in the end of this book.

The 169. Chapter does show of Gurgulacio^s in a ma^s body
GVrgulacio or Gurgulaciones Gurgulacions.
be ye latin words. In English it is named Gurgulacion or croking in ones belly.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of wind and cold, and emptines of the guts, and
it may come by nature, and to use long fasting in youth.

A remedy.
First be not long fasting, beware of cold, desolue wind by dragges and easy
purgacions, and beware of eating of potage, and other sew, and of fruits, and
of cold herbs, and cold meats, and any thing that honey is in, and keep the
belly laxatiue and warm. For Gutta taken for the gout, look in the Chapter
named Gutta in the Extrauagantes.

The 170. Chapter does show of a saucefleume face.
Sauce fleume face.
GVtta rosacea be the latin words. In english it is named a sauce fleume face,
which is a rednes about the nose and ye cheeks with small pi^ples, and is a privy
sign of leprosnes.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of evil diet, and a hot liver, or disordering a
man's complexion in his youth, watching and sitting up late.

A remedy.
First keep good diet in meats and drinks, drink no wine, feed not of fresh
beef, eat no shel fishes, beware of Samo^ and Eles, and eggs, and qualify
the heat of the liver and the stomach with the confection of Acetose, and than
take this ointment, take of Bores greece two ounces, of Sage pouned small an ounce
and a half, of quick silver mortified with fasting spettle an ounce, compound
all this together, and morning and evening anoint the face, and keep the
chamber.vii. days, or else take of burre roots and of Affodil roots, of
either ii. ounces, of white vinegar two ounces, of Auripigment. 2 dra^s, of
Brimstone a drame, make powder of all that, yt should be made powder of, than
put altogether, and let it stand 24. hours, and after that anoint the nose and
the face.

For Gurgulio look in the Chapter named Gargarion.

For Granosa look in the Chapter named Gargarion.

Thus ends the letter of G.
And here follows the letter of H.
The.171. Chapter does show of the dullness of a man's wit.
HEbitudo is the latin wore. Dulnes of wit.
In English it is named dullness. In greek it is named Amblisis.

The cause of Dullness.
Dullness comes many ways. First it may come by nature, it may come of to
much studying or musing upon one matter, it may come of drunkenness and great
surfeting, it may come of studying of supernatural things, or of matters that
man's wit can not comprehend, and such studying or musing does bring many men to
diverse inconveniences, and at length they do fall mad, or mischief them selves.

A remedy.
First use mirth in measure with honest company, study nor muse not to much
upon one matter. If a man love no good company, then let him recreate or
refreshe his mind with some manuel operacion. And for this matter let him
look further in the Chapter named Memoria.

Halohonis is named a bone in the back.

The 172. Chapter does show of the Pyles and the Emorodes.
HAemorthoides is the greek word. In old time the latins did use this
barbarous word named Emorordes. Emerodes and pyles.
In english it is named ye Emorodes or piles, yt which be veins in the extreme
part of the longacio^, to whom does happen diverse times two sundry passions,
the first is like pappes and teates, and they will bleed, and they will be very
Emerodes, the other be like wartes and they will itche, water, and smart, and
they be named the pyles, and in the said place does breed other infirmities,
as Ficus in ano, Fistula in ano. For the which look in their Chapters.

The cause of this impediment.
This infirmity or impediment does come of malicious humors in the maw and
intrayles, or it may come of a colericke humor.

A remedy.
Take of the powder of Sumacke an ounce, co^fect it with honey, and make a
suppositor and drink bdellium, and make fumigacio^ with it. Or else take of
Bole armoniake, of Terra sigillat, of Sanguis draconis, of either an ounce, of
Carabe, of Aloes cicortine, of either half an ounce, confect this together with
the white of an egg, or two, and suppositarely use it, and drink of Millifoly
with the powder of a little Carabe.

The 173. Chapter does show of the Megrim.
HEmicrania is compound of 2. words, of Hemi, which is to say in English the
middle, and of Graneum which is to say the skul. In English it is named the
Megrim, The Megrime.
which is a sickness that is in the head keeping the middle part of the skull
discending to the temples, and does fetch a compass like a Rain bow, and yet
diverse times it will lie more at the one side the^ at the other, the Barbarus
men does name this sickness Emigrania.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of reume and winds intrused in the head and can not
get out but by medicines.

A remedy.
First purge ye head with gargarices and sternutacio^s, and other while use
Yerahermetis or pills named Pillule holla^de, and anoint the temples with ye
oil of Nardine, or with ye oil of euforby, or ye oil of Laury, a plaster
made of mustard is not worst to lay to the temples, and beware of to much
venerious acts, and refrain from eating of Garlike, of Ramsons, of Onions, of
Chibolles, and such like. And wine, strong ale, and strong beer is not good
for this matter, and above all things beware of costiuenes for constupacion,
and keep not the head to hot nor to cold, bue in a temperance, and use no
potage, nor new ale nor beer, nor hot nor new bread, except it be.xxiiii
hours old, as it does more plain appear in the Dietary of health.

For Hectica passio, look in the Chapter named Febris hectica.

For Heper, look in the Chapter named Paralisis.

The.174. Chapter does show of an infirmity named Hereos.
HEreos is the greek word. In latin it is named Amor. In English it is named
love sick, Love sick
and women may have this sickness as well as men, young persons be much troubled
with this impediment.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of amors which is a fervent love, for to have
carnal copulacion with the party that is loved, and it can not be obtained,
some be so folish that they be ravished of their wits.

A remedy.
First I do advertise every person not to set to the heart that an other does
set at the hele, let no man set his love so far, but that he may withdraw it
betime, and muse not but use mirth and merry company, and be wise and not folish.

The 175. Chapter does show of an impostume named Herisipula.
HErisipulas is the greek word. In latin it is named Apostema calidu^. Some
latins does name it Ignis sacer, Auicen does name it Spina, because it does
prick and burn. In English it is named shingles, Shingles.
or the shingilles, and the Barbarous word is named Erisipule.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity most commonly does come of Coler.

A remedy.
Take of Rose water, and of plantaine water, of either of them half a pint, of
white wine as much, put this together and wash the place often. Or else take of
red worms the which do come out of ye earth and bray the^ in a mortar, and put
to them a little vinegar and make plasters. etc. Or else take of the flowers of
Camomil, of Rose leaves, of Violets, the weight of either of the^ an ounce, of
Mirtilles, of Sumacke, of either of them an ounce and a half, seth all this in
white wine and make a plaster and lay it to the place, or else take ye ointment
of Ceruse, I have taken houselike and have stamped it with a little Ca^phire and
have put to it white wine and have laid it to the place, and have healed the
pacient, and the oil of Roses, or the oil of Violettes be good for this
impediment, mixed together with the white of eggs and the juice of Plantayne.

The.176. Chapter does show of the kinds of the hernies.
H^rnyes.
HErnia or Ramex, be ye latin words. In greek it is named Kyh. In english it
is a postumacion in the coddes, and there be three kinds named in latin. Hernia
aquosa, Hernia ventosa, Hernia carnosa, which is to say in English, a waterish
herny, a windy herny, a fleshey herny, and some do say yt there be 7. kinds of
the herneys. For this matter look in the chapter of this book named Ramex.

The cause of these impediments.
These impedimentes be engendered in the codde, either of a gross fleshey
humor, or of a gross waterish humor, or else of windy humor.

A remedy.
If it do come of a fleshey humor or matter. First purge the matter with
Diaturbyth, and mollify the codde with Pultesos, and with the oil of Spike and
Diaquilon, and after that make incision, and if any of the stones be perished,
putrified and corrupted, cut away the stone with the Hernia, and than take
Mastix, of Sanguis draconis, and Dragagant, of either half an ounce, beat it
and searce it, and compound it with the white of ii. eggs, and with a fine
linen cloth make a plaster, and lay it on the wound, and when this has
sucked out the corrupsion left behind, than make the pacie^t whole with any
salve yt will incarnate the flesh and make whole the skin, and stablish and
knit the veins and sinews that the stone hang by. If the Hernia do come of a
watrish humor, first anoint the cod with the oil of Lyllies, and then make
incision, and draw out the water, and with te^ts attractiue, and gentle salues
minister. etc. If it do come of ve^tositie or windy cause, use clisters and
suppositors, that the pacient may be laxatiue, and desolue Bdelium in vinegar,
and with a fine linen cloth make a plaster to the codes, and use to eat
diverse times of the electuary named Diapoliticon.

The 177. Chapter does show of a Tetter.
HErpes or Herpethe be the greek words. In latin it is named Herpera and some
do name it Flaua bilis. In English it is named a Tetter, Tetter.
and some does name it Lupus or Lupie, because a wolf has oftentimes such
impedimentes, it does creep and corode and eats the skin, and waxes broader
and brother.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of putrified blood, and of coler, or else by corrupt
blood only, or of coler only, and Lupus or Lupie is engendered of a
fleumaticke matter, the which does make a difference.

A remedy.
Trose de Arsenico is good, and if it come of blood, exhaust ii. or iii. ounces
of blood, and more if need shall require, and that age, time and strength will
permit it. If it come of coler, as it appears in the Chapter named Colera, and
if it be Lupte, cut of the heads of them and rub them with bay salt and
Garlike stamped together, and lay over them a plate of lead.

The 178. Chapter does show of the lawnes.
HIcterica is the latin word. The barbarus word is Icterica. In English it is
named the Iaunes, Iaunes.
or the gulffe, and there be three kinds of this infirmity, which is to say,
the yelow Iaunes, the black Iaunes, and the grene sickness named Agriaca, and
some do name it Penefeleon, and Melankyron or Melanchimon is the black Iaunes.

The cause of this infirmity.
The cause of the yelow Iaunes does come of red coler mixed with blood, or else
as I have had experience, ye yelow Iaunes does come after a great sickness or a
thought taken, ye which has consumed the blood, and then the skin and the
exterial parts must needs turn to yelownes, for lack of blood, coler having
the dominion over it. The black Iaunes does come of coler adusted, or else of
melancoly, the which putrifieng the blood does make the skin black or tawny,
and commonly the body lean, for ye body or flesh is arifyed and dried up. The
grene Iaunes does come of yelow coler myxt with putrified fleume, and
corruption of blood.

A remedy.
First for ye yelow Iawnes, take of Iuory made in small powder half an ounce, of
Turmarycke three quarters of an ounce, of English saffron the weight of a
groate, compound all this together and drink of it a portion of the powder
morning and evening with stale ale. And for ye black Iaunes, first purge
Melancoly, as it does appear in the Chapter named Melankyron. And for the grene
Iaunes, or the grene sickness, look in the Chapter named Agriaca, which is the
grene Iawnes.

For Hiocianum, look in the second book named the Extrauagants, in the end
of this book.

For Hidrocela, look in the Chapter named Ramex.

The 179. Chapter does show of the Hidropsies.
HIdrops or Hidropes or Hidropesis is derived out of a word of greek, named
Hidor, which is water, for ye sickness, does come of a watrish humor. The old
au^cie^t greks did name this sickness Lercoplegmatia. In English it is named
the hiedropise or the dropsy. Dropsy
There be two kinds of the dropsies, the first is named Ascites, the second
Alchites. For this matter look in the Chapter named Aschites. The second kind
of the hidropses is named Timpanites, and for that matter look in the chapter
named Timpanites. The third kind of the dropsies is named Sarcites, and some
does name it Iposarca. For this matter look in the Chapter named Anasarca.
These things be good for the hiedropsies diamorosion, Pillule sebelie, Pillule
alkengi, and pills of Reuberbe.

The.180. Chapter does show of a watrish humor in the skin of the head.
HIdrocephalos is the greek word. In latin it is named Morbus aquosus in cute
capitis. In English it is named a watrish humor in and under the skin of the
head, and it may be other particular members nigh to the place.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of abundance of reume in the head and with coldness
there taken.

A remedy.
First exchew coldness, and than use sternutacions and gargarices, than purge
reume, and use labor an stuphes wet and dry, and see that the body be
laxatiue, and use Clisters, and beware of contagious meats and drinks, and
specially beware of ale, new wine, and new beer.

The 181. Chapter does show of one of the kinds of shortness of wind.
HOccomia or Occomia be the lattin words, In English it is named rotlyng in the
throat, Rotli^g in the throat
or shortness of wind.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come when that Asthma and Disma be joined together.

A remedy.
First use a Ptisane, and than take an easy purgation, and keep the belly
warm and laxatiue, and use Lucsanum de pino, and beware of eating of hard
chese and nuttes.

For Histera puiux, look in the Chapter named Isterichi puiux.

The 182. Chapter does show of a man.
A man.
HOmo is the latin word. In greek it is named Athopos, or Auir. In English it
is named a man or a woman, which be reasonable beasts, and man is made to ye
similitudenes of God, and is compact and made of.xv. substances. Of bones, of
gristles, of sinews, of veins, of artures, of stringes, of cords, of skin,
of pannicles, pellicles, or calls, of hair, of nails, of greece, of flesh, of
blood, and of mary within ye bones, a man has reason with Angels, feeling with
beasts, living with trees, having a being with stones.

For Hypophtalmia, look in the Chapter named Ophtalmia.

The 183. Chapter does show of standing up of a man's hair.
Standing up of hair
HOrripilacio is the latin word. In English it is named standing up of a man's
hair.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a cold reume mixed with a melancoly humor and
fleume. It may come by a folish fear when man is by him self alone, and is a
frayde of his own shadow, or of a spirit. O what say I, I should have said,
afraid of a spirit of the buttry, which be peryllous beasts, for such sprites
does trouble a man so sore that he can not diverse times stand upon his legs.

All this notwithstanding, without any doubt in thundering and in lightining,
and te^pestious wether, many evil things has been seen and done, but of al
these aforesaid things, a whorle wind I do not love, I in this matter might
both write and speak, the which I will pass over at this time.

The second cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a faint heart, and of a fearful mind, and of a
man's folysh conceyte, and of a timorous fantasy.

A remedy.
First let every man, woman or child, animate them self upon God, and trust
in him that never deceued man, that ever had, has, or shall have confidence in
him, what can any evil spirit or devil do any man harm, with out his will.
And if it be my Lord Gods will, I would all the devils of hell did tear my
flesh all to pieces, for gods will is my will in all things.

The 184. Chapter does show of the four humors of the four complexions of
man.
THere be four humors, The iiii. co^plexions.
otherwise called the four complexions of man, which is to say fleume, blood,
coler, and melancoly. And whosoever he be that has the one humor has ye
other, but not of equal portion, for lightly every man has more of the one
complexio^ then of the other, for it does not keep an uniformity but in few
men.

The cause of the humors.
God made them in man, when he made man, and he did make man perfect of four
humors, in true portion, but after that through sensuality man did alter his
humors or complexion, setting them out of order and frame.

A remedy.
To purge humors, use Acetum squilliticum, and pills named Pillule agregate,
the greater Pillule fetide. etc. And to disolue humors, the which does come to
the sinews, use Pillule euforbij, and such like.

The 185. Chapter does show of the Hypocondre.
HIpocondrion is ye Greek word. In latin it is named Hipocondrium. In english
it is named the Hipocunder the which does keep the compass of both the sides
about the breasts or pappes, in ye which places may be diverse impedime^ts

The cause of this impediment.
The impediments of the Hipecunder does come either of ventositie, or else of
some evil humor there lying and being, it may come of the impediments of the
splen, or the impedyments of the liver, or else of some Appostumation and some
such like things.

A remedy.
If this matter do come of ventositie, use Mellicrat conditie and the decoction
of Alhas. If it do come other ways, use the sirupe of Eupatory. And if it do
come of the spleen, or of the Liver, look in the Chapters named Splen and
Ephar.

Thus ends the letter of H.
And here begins the letter of I.
The 186. Chapter does show of a wind under the skin.
IEctigacio is the latin word. In english it is named a wind, vvinde.
ye which may be in many members of man, specially and most commonly it is
under the skin.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a vaprous ve^tositie or wind intrused under the
skin and can not get out, it may also be in many other members.

A remedy.
The remedy of this infirmity does much rest in the rectificacion of
digestion, that is to say, the meat the which a man does eat, be not of
ventositie ingendring wind, and than use purgations, scarificacio^s, boxing,
flebothomy, and stuphes. And for this matter the medicines the which does serve
in the Chapter named Tromos, is good for this impediment.

The 187. Chapter does show of a sickness named saint Antonyes fire.
IGr^s sancti Anthonij. Ignis persicus and Pruna be the latin words. In English
it is named saint Anthonyes fire, Saint Anthonis fire.
they be like wheales ye which does burn as fire, howebeit, Ignis persicus or
saint Antonyes fire is not so vehement as is the infirmity named Pruna, for
Pruna is more grosser and greater, and does burn more then does saint
Anthonyes fire.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of the corruption of blood, or of collar adusted

A remedy.
Take of houselike two handfuls, stamp it and mix it with the juice of
Plantaine, and make a plaster of it, and lay it to the place infected, or else
take of the juice of Smalage half a pint, of the bran of Barley three handfuls,
mix this together with a little Honey and make a plaster, or else take of ducks
meat which be little green things the which does lie upon water three
handfuls, of Violet leaves an ha^dfull, stamp this together with a little of the
oil of Roses and make a plaster.

For Ignis sacer look in the Chapter named Heresipulas.

The 188. Chapter does show of puffing or swelling of the flesh.
IOterus is the greek word. Bilis is the latin word, Swelling.
and Celsus does name it Aurigo, and some latins does name it Arquatus. In
english it is named a puffing or a swelling in the flesh, puffing up the skin
as one were poisoned or stonge with some venomous worm or beast, and some
greeks says that Icterus is he the which has any of the hernyes in the codde,
look in the Chapter named Hernia.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a corrupt and venomous humor.

A remedy.
First take of Triacle or else of mitridatu^.iiii. or.v. times, tha^ take easy
purgations, as ye pacient is able to receive, and after ye use Seuphes and
bathes, and flebothomy, as need shall require.

For Illica passio, look in the Chapter named Cordapsis.

The 189. Chapter does show of the kinds of Scabbes and Ring worms.
A kind of ring worms.
IMpetigo is ye latin word: and some latins do name it Zerna or Zerma, this
sickness does differ in the more and less, the Greeks does name this sickness
Lichin, the Barbarus word is named Lechena. In english it is named roughness
of the skin, or scabbes in the skin, and there be two kinds, the one is a dry
scabbe and the other is wet, or an vlcerous scabbe named in english a Ring
worm, or being of ye force.

The cause of these infirmities.
These infirmities does come under this manner. First by lying with any scabious
person, by evil drinks drinking, and eating of evil and naughty meats, and
diverse times it does come after a great sickness. And if the scabbes be dry, it
does come of melancoly, and if they be wet, and water issuing out of them, it
does come of putrified fleume or else of corrupt blud.

A remedy.
First if it be dry scabbes, purge melancoly with Pillule lucis and Pillule
Indie. And if it do come of ye corruption of blud or putrified fleume, purge ye
body with pills stomaticke. Pills of Sarcocol, and pills of Serapion, and
after ye anoint ye boby with ye oil of Tarter, or else take of dock roots.iii.
or.iiii. ha^dfuls bruise the^ and sees the^ in vinegar, and wash the body, or
else take of the powder Yreos three or.iiii. ounces, of the bran of beans two
handfuls, myx this with honey and white wine and wash the body. Or else this is
the best to kill all kinds of scabes, take of ye oil of Bay three ounces, and
mix it with an ounce of mortified Mercury, the which is mortified with fasting
spittle and anoint ye body three times, and the oil of eggs, and the sirupe
of Fumitory is good for this infirmity. And for this matter look in ye
Chapter Psora, and Scabies and Lichen.

For Incubus, look in the Chapter named Ephialtes.

The.190. Chapter does show of incisions or cuttinges.
INcisio is the latin word. In English it is named incision or cutting. There be
diverse incisio^s or cuttings, Incision or cutting.
as cutting of a man's arm or leg, or any other particular member, but the
very true incision does belong to the cutting out of stones of a man's body, or
else of cutting of ruptures, or herneyes, and other impediments in the belly,
and some says letting of blood in a vein or cupping or boxing be incisions.
For this matter, look in ye Chapter named Flebothomia.

For Intestina, look in the Extrauagantes in the end of this book.

For Incendium ignis, look in ye chapter named Cumbustio.

The 191. Chapter does show of inflasions or swillenges.
INflacio is the latin word. In english it is named an inflacion, Inflacion.
or swelling, or bolling, or rising of humors in ye flesh.

The cause of this impediment.
THis impediment does come, or is inge^dred many ways as by rumatike humors,
corruption of blood, or by the admixtion of evil humors. And where many
doctors in physic, does hold diverse opinions in this infirmity, saying that
inflacions does differ from Apostumacions, considering that all inflations does
appear exterially, and Apostumacions most commonly be interiall, I do say, al
inflacions and Apostumacions be nuters, for they may be as well exterial, as
interiall.

A remedy.
Take of the dung of a Got three ounces, of Yreos two ounces, make powder of it,
compound this together with clarified honey, and make a plaster, and take an
easy purgation made of ye coddes of Seen, or else take of Cassia fistule two
drams, or seth of Polipody three drames in stale ale clarified, and stamp it
and drink it.

For Intellectus look in the Chapter named Memoria.

The.192. Chapter does show of suppression of a man's body.
Stopping of water.
ISchuria is the greek word. In latin it is named Suppressio urine. In english
it is named suppression of urine, that is to say, that when a man would piss
and can not.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come many ways, either by opilacion or stopping of the
stone, or some gross humor, or else through some evil humor growing in ye
condite of the urine, or else it may come through long retencion, or long holding
in a man's water.

A remedy.
Take of ye seeds of Gordes three drams and they made in powder, drink it with
white wine or renish wine or renish wine. Or else take half an ounce of Parcely
seeds, and of Geate stones a drame, make fine powder of it, and drink it with
white wine.

For Ischiadici, look in the Chapter named Sciatica passio.

For Isophagus look in the Chapter named Isophagus

The 193. Chapter does show of suffocacion in the belly.
ISterichi puiax be the greek words. In latin it is named Suffocacio vteri.
Suffocacion of the mother.
In english it is named the suffocacion of the belly or matrix.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of ventositie and coldness taken, this sickness in
women is named the suffocation of the matrix.

A remedy.
For a remedy look in the Chapter named Melon and Matrix.

The 194. Chapter does show of a man's joints.
IVnture is the latin word. In Greek it is named Chondili. In English it is
named the joints Joints
of a man, which may have diverse diseases.

The cause of the diseases of the joints.
The diseases of the joints does come either by cold taking, or else by some
strain or broose, it may come by the pockes or by the gout, or other diseases
like to these.

A remedy.
If it do come of cold, purge the matter with Yera pigra, and Yera hermetis.
If it do come of heat, take the Electuary of the juice of Roses, and then use
Local playsters, and among all other things a hot Cowtorde is not the worst.

Thus ends the letter of I.
And here follows the letter of K.
For Karabitus, look in the Chapter named Phrenitis.

For Kyon, look in the Chapter named Garcarion,

For Kili, look in the Chapter named Hernia.

Thus ends the letter of K.
And here begins the letter of L.
The 195. Chapter does show of a man's lips.
LAbia is the latin word. In Greek it is named Chili. In English it is named
lips, Lypps.
the which may have chappes and other diseases.

The cause of Chappes.
Chappes in a man's lips, may come of a sharp or bitter wind, or it may come
through heat of the liver and stomach.

A remedy.
Anoint thy lips with the oil of sweet Almons. And for this matter look in
the Chapter named Fissure.

The 196. Chapter does show of tears of water, the which does distill from the
eyes.
LAcrime is ye latin word, In Greek it is named Dacria. In english it is
tears Tears
or water distilling from the eyes.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a salt humor in the head, discending out of the
head to ye eyes. Also to go or to ride against a sharp wind will cause tears
or water to come out of the eyes, sorrow, care or pain, will cause one to shed
tears, unkindness of a man to displease God in offending or displeasing him, will
cause man, woman, and child, to weep and shed tears, for the which the grace
and mercy of god is sufficient.

A remedy for salt humors the which does desend to the eyes.
First use to drink the water of the juice of Betony, and use to take
Gargarices liquid and vnliquide, and otherwhile take of the pills of Coche to
purge the head and the stomach.

For Lapis, look in the Chapter named Lythasis, and Nephresis.

For Latus, look in the Extrauagantes in ye end of this book.

The 197. Chapter does show of the curding of a woman's milk.
LAc is the latin word. In greek it is named Gala. In english it is named
milk. And here I do speak only of the curding of woman's milk, for other
milkes look in the Dietary of health.

The cause of Curding of woman's milk.
Woman's milk Milk.
is curded through evil digestion of meats and drinks, and through opilacions,
and otherwhile it does come for lack of exhausting, or sucking, or drawing out
the milk when it should be drawn.

A remedy.
For this matter look in the Chapter named Mamil, and if there be any
appostumacion there, exhaust some blood the contrary side in a vain named
Cardiaca, and keep the breasts warm, and use a good moderate diet, eating no
meat the which does engender gross and corrupt humors, and here springs
the original of them whose arm holes does stink, for it does come of gross
and superfluous humors, as well in man as in woman.

The 198. Chapter does show of werines Copos
LAssitudo is the latin word, in greek it is named or Comatos. In English it is
named werines. vverines.


The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of to much labor, or else it does come of debilitie
and weakness, or of great sluggishnes, not lust to labor.

A remedy.
First use moderate labor, and then take good meats and drinks, and lie in a
soft and easy bed, and drink posset eye to bedward. And further for this
matter, look in the Chapter named Fatigacio in the Extrauagantes.

Lacerti is the latin word. In english it is named lacertes which be bones, and
some say it is little strains ye which does come from the head to the neck,
and to the ears and the face.

Lacuna it is a little hole in the roufe of the mouth.

The.199. Chapter does show of Leprousnes.
LEpra, is the Latin word. In Greek it is named Psora. In English it is named
Leprousnes, Leprousnesse.
and there be four kinds of Leprousnes, which is to say, Elephancia, Leonia,
Tiria, and Alopecia. These four names or kinds of leprousnes does take their
names of four kinds of beasts, for these four kinds of Leprousnes has the
porperties of the beasts as it appears plainly in the Chapters of the
sycknesses.

For Lecoflegmancia, look in the chapter named Idrops.

The 200. Chapter does show of Fracles in a man's face and body.
LEntigo or lentiginos, be the latin words. In Greek it is named Phacos. In
english it is named fracles, Fracles.
the which is in ones face and body.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come either by the caliditie of the sun, or else by the
corruption of ye Air, or by some interiall cause in reteining some superfluous
humor.

A remedy.
First be let blood of a vein named Cephalica. And if the Fracles do go over
all the body, be let blood in a vein named Mediana, and then purge the body
with Pillulis aureis and Yera pigra, and than wash ye body with the water that
these things following is soden in, the bran of Barley, of beans, of Fenugrek,
and put in violets and an ounce of ye oil of bitter Almons and such like, and
anoint the place or places.

The 201. Chapter does show of depilacion, otherwise named Tankerbalde, or
knave balde.
LEpus marinus be the latin words. Dipilcicion.
In Greek it is named legos thalasios. In English it is named depilacion of a
man's hair, which is to say, having hair before in the head and no hair
behind, for the hear of the sea, has no hair on ye hinder part, for this
matter look further in ye chapter named Capilli, and in the second book named
the Extrauaga^tes, in the end of this book. And some does name this sickness a
watrish scabbe that runs abroad, and some does take it for a kind of
vometing, look in the Chapter named Lepus marinus in the Extrauagantes in the
end of this book.

The 202. Chapter does show of a web rooted in the eye.
LEncomata or Lencoma is the Greek word, as some do say. In English it is a
web A vvebbe
the which is rooted in and upon the eye or eyes.

The cause of this infirmity
This infirmity is engendered of a viscus humor or rume, and it may come of a
strype or some great broose.

A remedy.
For this matter purge the head and the stomach with ye pills of Cochee, and
use Gargarices, and after that use Colices, but I would counsel every man not
to meddle with it if it be veterated and old. etc.

The.203. Chapter does show of a kind of Leprousnes named Leonia.
LEonia is the greek word. A kind of Leprusnes.
In english it is named the Lions prosperity, for this word is derived out of
Leo leonis, which is in English a Lion, for as the Lion is most fearcest of all
other beasts, so is ye kind of Leprousnes most worst of al other sicknesses,
for it does corode and eat the flesh to the bones, and the flesh does rot away.

The cause of these infirmities.
This infirmity does come either by kind, or else a child conceived when the
mother is menstrumous, it may come also of putrified collar and melancoly.

A remedy.
If this infirmity do come by nature or kind, or by any menstrous humor there
is not remedy, but only God and patience. If it do come of a venomous humor,
as a mela^coly humor or such like, purge the humor, as it is specified in ye
Chapter named Melancolia, and use stuphes and bathes, and purgations, and use
the diet and the medicines, as is specifyed of Lignum vite, or Guaicum, and
beware of gross meats eating, and of repletion.

The 204. Chapter does show of imperfect digestion and egestion.
Imperfect digestion.
LIenteria is the greek word. In latin it is named Leuor. In english it is
named the lientery or imperfit digestio^, which egestion does differ from
Colerica passio, and from Catastropha, as it does appear in their Chapters.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of lubricitie, of slyding of the meat out of the
stomach, the mawe and guts without perfect decoction or digestion.

A remedy.
Drink of rain water v. or vi. draughts in a day, or else take of water
cresses, and stamp the^, and drink ye juice of it with the iuce of plantain,
or else take of plantaine three handfuls, of saint John's wort three ha^dfuls, of
Cresses as many ha^dfuls, seth this in a galo^ of rain water, or a galo^ of
red wine to a potell or more, than strain it, and put to it.ij. ounces of the
powder of Cinnamon, and drink of it diverse times.

The 205. Chapter does show of blere eyes.
LIptitudo is ye latin word: in english it is named blere eyes Blere eyes.
which is when ye vnderlid of ye eye is subverted. Rasis does say ye Liptitudo
is when ye white of ye eye is turned to rednes.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a salt humor or of super-abundance of rume with
corruption of blood.

A remedy.
First purge ye head as it does appear in the Chapter named Caput, and use
daily gargarices and sternutacio^s, and wash the eyes often with cold water and
a fine linen cloth, and to bedwarde anoint the eyes diverse times with Tutty,
and than wash them in the morning with cold water.

For Ligmos, look in the Chapter named Singultus.

The 206. chapter does show of the kinds of Scabbes.
LIchem is ye greek word. Lichena is ye barbarus word. In latin it is named
Zerna, or Impetigo, and some does name it Mentagra, and some grecia^s does name
it Psora. For this matter look in the Chapter of ye aforesaid names. But Psora
in greek is taken for one of ye kinds of leprousnes, which is a perilous
sickness and is infectious, and so be al manner of kinds of scabbes, Scabbes.
wherefore I do advertise al manner of persons, ye which be infected, not to ly
in bed with these infirmities or any other disease, like as ye pestilence ye
sweating sickness, or any of the kinds of the ague or fevers, or any of the
kinds of ye falling sickness and such like, and Mentagra is ingendered of a
gross melancoly humor.

For Liena look in the Chapter named Splen.

The.207. Chapter does show of a man's spleen.
LIen is ye latin word. Splen is ye greek word. The spleen.
In english it is named a splen, ye which does lie on the left side and does
make a man to laugh, ye which may have diverse impedime^ts as it does more
plainly appear in the Chapter named Splen: great study, and long writing, and
pe^cifulnes, thought, and care does hurt the splen, and honest mirth, with
honest company, does comfort the spleen, and so does all redolent and odiferous
sauors.

For Limphaticarom look in the second book named the Extrauagantes.

The 208. Chapter does show of a man's tongue.
LIngua is the latin word. In greek it named Glossa or Glotra. In english it
is named a tongue. A tongue
The tongue of man is an instrument or a member, by the which not only tasting
but also ye knowledge of man's mind by ye speaking of ye tongue is brought to
understanding, ye reason may know the truth from the falsehood, and so converse.
The tongue is ye best and the worst official member in man, why, and whefore, I
do remit the matter to the judgment of the readers. But this I do say ye the
tongue may have diverse impedime^ts beside slaundering and lying, the which is
ye greatest impediment or sickness of al other diseases, for it does kill ye
soul without repentance. I pass over this matter, and will speak, of the
sicknesses which may be in ma^s tongue, ye which may swel, or else have
fissures, or wheales, or carnelles, or the Palse.

The cause of these infirmities
If the tongue do swell, it does come of the corruption of blood, or else of
superabundance of rume, or evil diet, as sur^^ting, etc.

A remedy.
If it do come of corruption of blood, exhaust two or three ounces of blood, as
age and strength will permit it with time convenient, and then purge the head
with pills of Cochee, and use gargarices. If it do come of rume, take of ye
juice of night shad otherwise named Solatrum, and let the pacient hold in his
mouth, as long as he may v^spo^efuls one after an other. If it do come of a
palsy, it does come of a great anger or fear, or else of extreme cold, or else
of drinking of to much wine, and drinking of evil drinks of sundry brewings,
some good and some badde, some new and some stale, and it may come of eating
of evil meats, use therefore diverse times to lay a grain of Castory upon the
tongue, and refrain from such things as may be the occasion of this sickness
rehearsed. If there be fissures in ye tongue or chappes, it does come of some
colerike humor which does cause ariditie and drives of the tongue, for such
matters use mellilote and moist things. If there be wheales in the tongue, it
does come of surfeting and keeping of evil diet, and drinking late of hot wines
and strong ale, and it may come of heat in the stomach, for this matter first
use good diet, and than purge the head, and use of Gargarices with
sternutacions.

For Lipothomia look in the Extrauagants in the end of this book.

The.207. Chapter does show of the stone in the bladder.
LIthiasis is the greek word, in latin it is named Calculus in vesica, and
Lapis is taken for all ye kinds of the stones. The stone
In english Lithiasis is ye stone in the bladder. And some does say that
Nefresis is the stone in the raines of the back, therefore look in the Chapter
named Nefresis.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either by nature, or else by eating of evil and
viscus meats and evil drinks, as thick ale or beer, eating broyled and fried
meats, or meats yt be dried in ye smoke, as bacon, martinmas beef, red,
herring, sprottes, and salt meats, and crustes of bread, or pasties, and such
like.

A remedy.
If it do come by nature, there is no remedy, a man may mittigate the pain and
break the stone for a time, as shall be rehearsed. If it do come accidentally by
eating of meats ye will engender the stone, take of the blood of an Hare, and
put it in an earthen pot, and put thereto three ounces of Saxafrage roots, and
bake this together in an oven, and than make powder of it, and drink of it
morning and evening. For this matter this is my practice, first I do use a
diet eatting no new bread, except it be.xxiiii. hours old. I refuse
Cake-bread, Saffron bread, Rye bread, leven bread, Cracknels, Simnels, and al
manner of crustes, tha^ I do drink no new ale, nor no manner of beer made with
hoppes, nor no hot wines. I do refrain from flesh and fish, which be dried
in the smoke, and from salt meats and shel fishes. I do eat no grosso meats
nor burned fish nor flesh, thus using my self I thank God I did make my self
whole and many other, but at ye beginning when I went about to make my self
whole, I did take the powder following. I did take of Brom seeds, of percilie
seeds, of Saxafrage seeds, of Gromel seeds, of either of the^ an ounce, of
Iete stone a quarter of an ounce, of date stone as muhe, of egg shelles that
chekin has lain in the pith pulled out half an ounce, make powder of all this
and drink half a sponefull morning and evening, with posset ale or white wine.
Also the water of hawes is good to drink.

For Lumbe look in ye Extrauaga^ts in ye end of this book

The 210. Chapter does show of obliuiousnes.
LEthargos is the Greek word. And some Grecians does name it Sirsen. The
barbarous men does name it Litergia. In latin it is named Lethargia or Obliuio.
In english it is named obliuiousnes Obliuiousnes
or forgetfulness.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come through cold rume, the which does obnebulate man's
memory, and does lie in the hinder part of a man's head, within the scull or
brain pan.

A remedy.
First if need require use Flebothomy, and above al things mark or see that
the body be not constupated or costiue, but laxatiue, and use gargarices, and
other while vomites, and anoint the head with the oil of Castory, and the oil
of Roses, compound with Aceto squilitico, and let such men having this
impediment, beware of drinking to much strong drinks, as wine and ale, and
eating of Garlike, Leekes, and Onions, and such like.

The 211. Chapter does show of a skurfe in all the body.
LVce or leuci be the greek words. In latin it is named Vitiligo. In English
it is named a scurfe Skurfe.
in all the body.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a colerick and melancoly humor.

A remedy.
For this matter I do take iii. ounces of bores greece ye skins pulled out, the^
I do put to it an ounce of the powder of oister shells burnt, and of ye powder of
brimstone, and iii. ounces of Mercury mortified with fasting spettle, co^pound all this together and anoint the body.iii. or iiii. times, and take an easy
purgation.

For Lugia, look in the Chapter named Dubaleth.

The.212. Chapter does show of long white worms in ones belly.
Lumbrici is the latin word. In greek it is named Elmitha. In English it is
named long white worms Worms.
in the maw, stomach and guts.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of superabundance of fleumaticke humors.

A remedy.
If any man will take a Plow man's medicine, and the best medicine for these
worms, and al other worms in ma^s body, let him eat Garlike. For this matter
look further in the Chapters named Vermes, and in Affarides and in Cucurbiti.

The 213. Chapter does show of Lunatike men and women.
LVnaticus is the latin word. In English it is named for a lunatike person ye
which will be ravished of his wit ones in a moon, for as the moon does change
and is variable, so be those persons mutable and not constant witted.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment may come by nature and kind, and then it is incurable, or else
it may come by a great fear or study.

A remedy.
First be not solitary, nor muse not of studious or supernatural matters, use
merry company, and use some merry and honest pastime, be not long fasting, use
warm meats, and drink well to bedward, to make or to provoke sleep: sleep not
in the day, and use the medicines which be in the Chapters named Memoria,
Sensus, and Anima.

The 214. Chapter does show of intemperance.
LVxus is the latin word. In greek it is named Asotia. In english it is named
inte^perance. Intemperance.
Te^perance is a moral virtue and worthy to be praised, considering yt it
does set al virtues in a due order. Inte^pera^ce is a great vice, for it does
set every thing out of order, and where there is no order there is horror. And
therefore this word Luxus may be taken for all kinds of se^suality, ye which can
never be subdued without ye recognisio^ and knowledge of a man's self what he is
of him self, and what god is. And for as much as God has given to every man
living free will, therefore every man ought to stand in the fear of god, and to
look to his conscience, calling to God for grace, and daily to desire and to
pray for his mercy, and this is the best medicine that I do know for
intemperance.

Thus ends the letter of L.
And here after follows the letter of M.
The 215. Chapter does show of the principal veins in man.
Principal veins.
MEdiana I do take him here for the first vein, tha^ is cardiaca and Sophena,
and Cephalica, and Basilica, and Saluatella, and Epatica, and Sciatica, and ye
hemorodial veins, Mediana does lie in the middle of ye arms, and any of the
veins be opened for any passion or grefe about the heart. Cardiaca is at ye
one side in the middle of the arm, and is opened for passions and diseases
about ye heart. Sophena does lie a little from ye ankle, and is opened for
passions in ye liver and ye stones. Cephalica does lie a little under ye thome
and is opened for passions of ye head and eyes. Basilica is opened for passions
of ye liver and for the fever quartain. Saluatella does lie betwixt ye little
finger and the lech finger, and is opened to cleanse all the body. Epatica is
opened to cleanse ye liver. Sciatica does lie in ye outward part of ye feet and
is opened for the Sciaticke passion. The hemorodial veins be opened to purge
mela^coly. There be many other veins opened for other impedimentes long to
rehearse at this time.

The 216. Chapter does show of a sodeine sickness.
MAlus morbus be the latin words. In English it is named an evil sickness. Every
sickness in it self is evil to ye body, but this has his name of a proper
sickness named a sodein sickness A sodeyn sickness.
ye which does fall to a man. And there be many sodein sicknesses, as ye
pestilence, the kinds of fevers, ye sweating sickness, the masels, ye small
pockes, the cramp, the palsy, and sou^ding, and many such like sicknesses, but
here it is taken as many and diverse does hold opinion yt it is the French
pockes, wherefore look in the Chapter named Maly frantizoz, and the Chapter
named Morbus Gallicus.

For Madaroses look in the second book named the Extrauagantes.

The 217. Chapter does show of the French pockes.
MAla frantizoz is the Araby word. In latin it is named morbus gallicus or
Variole maiores. In english it is named one of ye first kinds of the french
pockes French pockes.
ye which be scabs and pimples like to leprositie, wherefore for this matter or
sickness look in the chap named Morbus gallicus. The grecia^s cannot tell what
this sickness does mean, wherefore they do set no name for this disease, for it
did come but lately into spain and france, and so to us about the year of our
Lord. 1470.

The.218. Chapter does show of a filthy scabbe corrupted.
MAlum mortuum be the latin words. In English it is named a filthy scabbe A
filthy Scabbe.
the which most commonly is in the arms and legs.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come most commonly of a menstruous woman, and it may come
by corruption of blood, and diverse times it does come of a melancoly humor
adusted.

A remedy.
First make this preparatiue, take of Enula ca^pana roots cleansed and cut in
pieces three ounces, of Fenell roots the pith pulled out ii. ounces, of the
kayes of Ash trees an ounce and a half, of Scabiouse ii. handfuls, of
honisuckles three handfuls, of Fumetory two handfuls, of ye tender croppes of
burres ii. handfuls, of Seen and Polipody of each two ounces, of the flowers of
Rosemary and of Violets an ounce, of Sicados and Epithime an ounce, confecte all
this together with sugar plate and Rose water, and make a sirupe, and use to
eat it morning, noone, and at night, and than take Yera ruffini, or
Yeralogodion ruffi, or Theodoricon a dram or two at a time. For this matter
look further in the Extrauagantes.

The 216. Chapter does show of woman's breasts.
MAmille is the latin word. In greek it is named Mastos, or Mazion. In english
it is named women's breast ye which may have many impediments, as lacking of
milk, curding of milk, inflaming of the breasts, and otherwhile they may be
long and great, and otherwhile the skin may go of from the niples.

The cause of these impedimentes.
These impediments does come many ways, it may come for lack of sucking or
drawing of the milk, it may come by grossenes of the blood, it may come of
debility and weakness or opilacions, as when a woman does lack milk it may
come by to much handling of them, and it may come by nature or grossenes of
humors.

A remedy.
If a woman do lack milk, take of Cristal a drame and a half, and make fine
powder of it, and drink it with Bastard or Muscadell, do this v. or vi. times.
Or else take of Fenel, of Malowes, of Anis, of March, of each of them ii.
handefulles, sees it in Basterd or Muschadel and strain it, and drink it
often. If the breasts be long, big, and great, make a plaster with hemlockes
sodden in white wine, and lay it to the breasts. If there be any inflaminges in
ye breast, take the whits of two eggs, and two handfuls of houseleke, compound
both together and lay it to the breast. Or else take Southistell and Dandelion,
Violet leaves, the tender croppes of wild hoppes, of each a handful, sees it
in posset ale and drink it. If the milk be cruded in the breast, some old
auctours will give repercussiues. I would not do so, I do thus, I do take
Dragagant, and gum Arabicke, and do compound them with the white of raw
eggs, and the oil of violets and do make a plaster. Or else I do take pitch,
and do liquifie it in ye oil of Roses, putting a little dove dunge to it, and
dregs of wine or ale and make plasters.

For Macula in Oculo look in ye chapter named Tarphati.

The 220. Chapter does show of one of the kinds of madness.
MAnia is the greek. In lattin it is named Insania or Furor. In English it is
named a madness Madness.
or woodnes like a wild beast, it does differ from a phrenisey, for a
phrenisey is with a fever, and so is not Mania, this madness that I do pretend
to speak now of.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a corrupt blood in the head, and some does say
that it does come of a bilous blood intrused in the head, and some says it
does come of weakness of the brain the which lets a man to sleep, and he
that can not sleep must needs have an idle brain, and some say it is a
turning up so down in the head, the which does make the madness.

A remedy.
First in the chamber where the pacient is kept in, let there be no picters nor
painted clothes about the bed or chamber, than use in the Chamber all things
that is redolent and of sweet savors, and keep the pacient from musing and
studiing, and use mirth and merry communicatio^, and use the pacient so that he
do not hurt himself nor no other man, and he must be keept in fear of one man
or an other, and if need require he must be punished and beaten, and give him
three times a day warm meat, and use to eat Cassia fistula, and Epithime
used is very good.

The.221. Chapter does show of a man's hands.
Hands
MAnus is ye latin word. In Greek it is named Chir. In english it is named a
hand or hands, ye which may have many impediments as chappes, worms, or
dryness in the palm of the hands, or some moist humors and such like.

The cause of these infirmities.
These infirmities does come either by corruption of blud, or else through a
humor, or else through the heat of ye liver, or else through the ariditie of
collar.

A remedy.
First he that will be whole in the body and hands, let him use to wash the
hands often in a day, specially in ye morning and after diner and supper, and for
any impediment in ye hands take of dear suet an ounce, of Malowes three
handfuls, of water two pintes, of secke a pint, sees all this together and
diverse times in a day specially morning and evening wash the hands and keep
them warm out of the wind. Or else take of the powder of Enula campana roots
an ounce and a half, of bores greece iii. ounces, of mercury mortified with
fasting spittle an ounce and a half, of Camphire a dram and a half,
incorporate all this together, and morning and evening anoint the hands and
keep the hands warm from the wind.

The 222. Chapter does show of the Matrix of a woman.
MAtrix is the latin word. In Greek it is named Mitra. In english it is named
the Matrix or the mother, The mother.
or the place of conception the which has diverse times many impediments, as
Suffocacions, lubricitie, ye mole of the matrix. the risting of the matrix the
which no maid can have for ye orifice of that place in a maid is very strayt,
considering there be five veins the which does break when a maid does leese
her maydenhead.

The cause of these impedimentes.
These impediments does come of distemperance of the body and of superfluous
and moist humors, or disordering of the midwife, in disordering any woman when
she should be delivered.

A remedy.
If it come through suffocacion. Take of Betony leaves half an ounce, stamp it
small and drink it with white wine and smell to Galbanum and Serapine and make
a perfume of Iuneper, either of old lether and sit over it, or else take of
Piony seeds iii. drames, drink it with Mellicrate. If the matrix do fall
out, first wash the place twyse or thryse with white wine, or else take of
Iuneper cut in pieces three ounces, of Mirtiles three ounces, seth this in
running water, and wash the place two or three times, than take of Galbanum
three drames, drink it with red wine, every thing that will help the falling
out of a man's foundeme^t will help this impediment, wherefore look in the
Chapter named Anus.

For Melanchima look in ye chapter named Melankyron.

The.223. Chapter does show of the virtue of medicines.
MEdicina is ye latin word, in grek it is named Pharmacia or Acesis. In english
it is named a medicin, Medicine
The ministracio^ of medicines does consist in two things, in Theorick which
is speculacion, and in practice. The theorcion does teach ye practicioner. The
virtue of medicines is to keep a man yt is whole in health, and he that is sick
by medecines may be recovered. And the art of medicines is to govern and keep
the natural complexion of man in whom it is, and to turn the complexion ye is
out of a natural course into a natural course wherefore this science of
mediciens, is a science for whole men, for sick men, and for neuters which be
neither whole men nor sick men, wherefore I do advertise every man not to set
little by this excellent science of medicines, considering the utility of it,
as it appears more largelier in the introduction of knowledge.

For Meli, look in the Chapter named Membra.

For Mediana, look in the Chapter of M.

For Mellicerides, look in the Chapter named Tubercula.

The 224. Chapter does show of the black Iawnes.
MElankyro^ is the Araby word. Melanchima is the greek word. In latin it is
named Hictericia nigra. In english it is named the black Iaunes. The black
Iaunces.


The cause of this infirmity
This infirmity does come of the maliciousnes of melancoly the which does
bring in death, for melancoly and death be concurrant together.

A remedy.
If a man have the black Iawnes with a Fever quartaine I do remit him to ye
mercy of god, if there may be any remedy purge mela^coly, and the^ do as I have
written in ye Fever quartaine, and for ye black Iaunes without a fever
quartaine, first purge mela^coly with pillule Indie, and pillule Lucis, pillule
de lapide Lazuli, Pillule Sebely, and a co^fection of mus ke is good.

The 225. Chapter does show of a man's memory or understanding.
MEmoria is the latin word. In Greek it is named Muime. In english it is named
the memory Memory
of man, which is concurrant with understanding named Intellectus in latin, the
which both be two powers of the soul, as it appears in the Chapter named
Anima.

To acute and to make quick a man's memory and understanding.
Use the confection of Anacardine, and to savor Amber de greece, and to other
odiferous savors.

The 226. Chapter does show of the principal member in man.
MEmbra is the latin word. A member.
In Greek it is named Meli. In English it is named members, the which be many
in man, and they be divided in principal members, and official members,
Principal members be four, the heart, the brain, the liver, and the stones of
man, and the place of co^ception in woman. All other members be official
members, an odoth office to the principal members, for in the heart be the
vital spirits, in the brain be the Animal spirits, in the liver be the
natural spirits and in the stones of man, and in the place of co^ception is
generation. If any of ye principal members be infected or hurt, or out of
temperance all the other official members must needs be out of due order and
quietness, but an official member may be hurt and infected, and yet it may be
recovered with medicines or salues. etc. Although the lunges, the spleen, ye
tongue, and the eyes be dangerous members to heal, specially if there be in
any of the^ old greefes. Also there be spiritual members beside ye principal
members, the which be both principal and spiritual members, and these be
spiritual members, which is to say, ye longs, ye midriffe, the arter track, the
Epiglote, and they be named spiritual members, for as much as they do draw
the breath or wind into the body, and does expel it out again. Also there be
other members named in latin membra hetrogenia, which is to say in english
co^pound members as ye face is compou^d of many things, and so be the legs,
and arms, and such like.

The 227. Chapter does show of a woman's terms.
vvomans flovvers.
MEnstrua is ye latin word. In greek it is named Rousginechios. In english it
is named a woman's terms, the which most commonly every woman and maiden has,
if they be in good health and not with child, nor giving no child suck, from
xv. years of their age to l. not two years under or above, and where I did say
that the woman's terms in latin is named Menstrua, that word of latin is
derived out of a word named Mensis, which is a mouth, for every mouth they ye
have their health has their terms or flowers. And there be four kinds of
woman's flours, red, tauny, white and blackish, the red is natural, and the
other be unnatural and not profit, and they betoken infirmity or sickness to
come when they be not red.

The cause of this matter.
The cause of this matter is that God has ordained it to all women from.xv.
years of their age or there a bout, to l. and as long as a woman can bring
forth their flowers or have their terms, so long they may bring forth fruit
and have children or else not.

A remedy for them that has not their terms, and for them that has to much
of them, and a remedy for them that have them vnnatuarlly.
If a woman's terms do flow to much, exhaust two or three ounces of blood out of
a vein named Cephalica, or else Basilica, or else of Both Sophenes, then let her
use to drink of the juice of Tansy, and of the juice of Plantaine with red
wine. If a woman have not their terms, take of Materwort, of Isope, of Organum,
of Calamint, of Colloquintida, of Calamus, Aromaticus, and of Ameos and such
like, and take the^ in simples or compound, and use it ix. times, one day after
an other, twice or thryse.

The 228. Chapter does show of a certain kind of Madness named Melancholia.
MElancholia is derived out of two words of Greek which is to say of Molon,
which is to say in latin Niger. A kind of madness.
In English it is named black and of Colim, which is to say in latin Humor. In
English it is named an humor, the deriuation of this word is as well referred
to this sickness as to ye humor which is one of the complexions. This sickness
is named the melancoly madness which is a sickness full of fantasies, thinking
to here or to see that thing that is not heard nor seen, and a man having this
madness, shall think in himself that thing that can never be, for some be so
fantastical that they will think themself God or as good, or such like
things perteyning to presumption or to desperation to be dampened, the one
having this sickness does not go so far the one way, but the other does
despair as much the other way.

The cause of this impediment.
The original of this infirmity does come of an evil mela^coly humor, and of
a stubberne heart, and running to far in fantasies, or musing or studying
upon things ye his reason can not comprehend, such persons at length will come
and be very natural fools, having gestes with the^, or else peuish fantastical
matters nothing to the purpose and yet in their conceyt do think themselves
wise.

A remedy.
First in the beginning let them beware of mela^coly meats, and let them use
company, and not be alone nor to muse of this thing nor of that matter, but to
occupy him in some manuel operation, or some honest pastime, and let them purge
mela^coly, and use to eat Cassia fistula, and use mirth, sport, play, and
musical instruments, for there is nothing does hurt this impediment so much as
does musing and solicitudenes. For this matter look in the Chapter named Mania.

The 229. Chapter does show of an humor named Melancoly.
MElancolia is deryued as I have said in the Chapter before this, of two words
of Greek, and the Latins does name this word Melancolia as the Grecians does.
In English it is named melancoly Mela^coly
otherwise named black collar which is one of the four complexions or humors,
and is cold and dry, and there be two kinds of Melancoly, the one is natural
and the other is unnatural Natural Melancoly is like ye dreggs of blood which
is blackysh: unnatural Melancoly is inge^dred of collar adusted, and of the
dregs of fleume, and of the dregs of blood, Diasene, pills of Inde, pills
lapide lazuli, Pilluli de lucis be good to purge Melancoly.

A remedy to purge collar and melancoly if it be superfluous or unnatural.
Catholicon and Diaphenicon, and Polypody and such like, be good to purge
collar, and melancoly humors Yeraruffini, and as it does appear more largely
in ye Dyetary of health.

For Meri, look in the Chapter named Isophagus.

For Mentagra look in the Chapter named Lichen and in the Chapter named Morbus
gallicus, and in the Chapters named Variole and Morbillia.

The 230. Chapter does show of an evil vlceration named Metasinerisis.
MEtasincrisis is the Greek word. In latin it is named mala vlceracio. In
english it is named an evil vlceracio^. An evil vlceratio^.


The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of corruption of blood and fleume

A remedy.
First purge blood and fleume, as it does appear in their Chapters, and use
the medicines specified in the chapter named Vlcus or Vlcera.

The 231. Chapter does show of a passion under.
A passion under.
MIrachia is the Greek word. In Latin is is named passio ipocundriata. In
English it is named a passion in or under ye Hypocu^der, wherefore look in
Hipocu^drio^.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come through official siknes, common siknes or co^simyl
siknes, for this member named in ye intrach is se^sible, therefore many
accide^tal infirmities does hape^ unto it.

A remedy.
First keep the belly warm, and as the cause of the sickness does come, so
minister the medicines.

For Mitra look in the Chapter named Matrix.

For Mirach look in the Extrauagantes, in the next book after this.

Meceraice be certain veins so named. Look in the Anthomy in the Introduction
to knowledge.

The 232. Chapter does show of pissing.
MIctus or mictura, be the latin words. In greek it is named Vria. In english
it is named pissing, pyssing.
and there be many impedime^ts of pissing, for some can not hold their water
and some can not piss or make water, some does piss blood, and some in their
pissing does avoid foul water, and some does avoid grauel, and some stones,
and some when they have pissed it does burn in the issue as well in woman as
in man.

The cause of this infirmity.
These infirmities does come either natural or else accide^tal. If it do come
naturally or by nature, few Phisicions can help it, but they can mitigate the
pain of the infirmity. If it do come accidentally, it may be helped.

A remedy.
First for him that can not hold his water, take of Mushreo^s otherwise named
Tode stools ii. ounces, of ye scales of Iron the which is about a Smithes
Handfile an ounce and a half, sta^pe these two things together in a brase^
mortar as fine or as subtle as one may do it, and then put it in a quart of red
wine, and let it stand iiii. or v. hours, then strain it and drink it morning
and evening ix. sponefuls at a time, and if need require make fresh and fresh.
Or else take of Enula Campana roots, of A^orns, of either of the^ two ounces,
make fine ponder of the^ and drink it at times with the juice of Plantain, and
saint John's wort sod with red wine. Or else take a Goats blader or a sh^pes
bladder, or a Bulls bladder, make powder of it and drink it with vinegar or
water, and drink it morning and evening iii. days. If a man can not piss,
take of Mellifoly.ii ha^dfuls, of Percely ii. handfuls, of Nettles or Nettle
seeds an ounce and a half, co^pound all this together and infuce it in white
wine and drink it morning and evening ix. sponefuls at a time, and anoint the
raines of the back and the sides and fla^kes with conies greece. Or else take of
the roots of Rapes, of Burres, of Dockes, of Persely, of Nettls, of each two
ounces, seth all this in white wine and drink of it morning and evening, and of
the substance make a plaster and lay it over the sides and the belly. If a man
do piss blood, take of Alkakenge, of Burres, of either an ounce, of Musherons
an ounce confect this with the sirupe of Roses, and drink iii. sponefuls at a
time. Or else take of horehou^d, of mader, of each ii. ounces, sta^p it and drink
it with vinegar. If it burn in the end of ye yerd, take tha^ of the seeds of
Goordes, and of the seeds of Citrulles excoriated, of each ii. ounces, infuse it
in the water of hawes, and use to drink of it, and anoint the cods and the
raynes of the back with it, and oil of Nunifer.

For Muime look in the Chapter named Memoria.

The 233. Chapter does show of an impostumacion in a woman's matrix.
An impediment in the matrix.
MOlon is the greek word. In latin it is named Mola matricis. In English it
is named an impostumation or a lump of flesh engendered in a woman's matrix,
which is the place of concepcion.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of gross humors the which be engendered in the
matrix, making a woman to think yt she is with child when she is not with
child.

A remedy.
First let her beware of eating of any meats the which does engender wind,
than let her use stuphes and take than this medicine, take of Moderwort, of
Garmander, of Calamint, of Betony, of each an ounce and a half, of Anys seeds,
of Fenel seeds an ounce, of Calamus Aromaticus, of Cipres, of each an ounce, of
white vinegar two ounces, of Roset honey an ounce make a sirup of this and purge
this matter with Theodorico^ and use Stuphes, and let the midwife for water
occupye Petrosium, every thing that is good for Abhorsion is good for this
impediment named Mola matricis.

The 234. Chapter does show of Stutting or stamering.
MOgilali or Ancinoglosi be the greek words, in latin if is named balbucies. In
english it is named stutting or stamering. Ancinoglosi does come by nature,
mogilali comes by usage to stamer, being continually in the company of a
stamerer. For this matter look in the Chapters named Balbucies.

For morbilli look in the Chapter named Exhanhemata.

For mirmachira look in the Chapter named Formica.

For mola matricis look in the Chapter named molon.

The 235. Chapter does show how all manner of sickenesses be divided.
MOrbus is the latin word. In greek it is named Nosos. In english it is named
a sickness A sickness.
or a sore. And there be three kinds of sores or sickness, universal,
particular, and consimel. An vniuersel sickness does occupate all the parts
of man's body. A particular sickness or sore does occupy a particular member or
place in man.

A co^simel sickness or sore is when an universal and a particular sickness or
sore be co^curra^t one with an other like one to an other. For this matter
look in ye Chapter named Egritudo.

The 236. Chapter does show of the Kings evil.
MOrbus regius be ye latin words. In english it is named the kings evil, The
kings evil.
which is an evil sickness or impediment

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of the corruption of humors, reflecting more to a
particular place the^ to universal places, and it is much like to a Fystle, for
and if it be made whole in one place it will break out in an other place.

A remedy.
For this matter let every man make friends to the kings majesty, for it does
perteine to a king to help this infirmity, by the grace the which is given to a
king anointed. But for as much as some men does judge diverse times a Fistle or
a French pocke to be the kings evil, in such matters it behooves not a king to
meddle withal, except it be through and of his bou^tiful goodness to give his
pitiful and gracious council. For kings and kings sons and other noble
men has been eximious Phisicions, as it appears more largely in ye
Introduction of knowledge, a book of my making.

For Morbus caducus and Morbus comicialis, look in the Chapter named Epilepsia

For Morbus aquatus, look in ye Chapter named Hicterica.

The 237. Chapter does show of the French pockes.
MOrbus gallicus or Valiore maioris, be the latin words, and some do name it
Mentagra, but for Mentagra look in Lichen. In English Morbus Gallicus is named
the French pocks, when yt I was you^ge they were named the Spanish pockes, the
which be of many kinds of the pockes, some be moist, some be waterish, some be
dry, and some be skoruy, some be like scabbes, some be like ring worms, some
be fistuled, some be festered, some be cankarus, some be like wens, some be
like biles, some be like konbbes and knurres, and some be vlcerous having a
little dry scabbe in ye middle of ye vlcerous scabbe, some has ache in the
joints, and no singe of ye pockes, and yet it may be the pockes. And there is
the small pock, look for it in the Chapter named Valiore maiores.

The cause of this sicknesses.
The cause of these impediments or infirmities does come many ways, it may
come by lying in the shetes or bed there where a pocky person has the night
before lien in, it may come with lying with a pocky person, it may come by
sitting on a draught or sege, there where a pocky person did lately sit, it may
come by drinking often with a pocky person, but specially it is taken when one
pocky person does sin in lechery ye one with an other. All the kinds of the
pockes be infectious.

A remedy.
Take ye greece of a bore yt skin clean picked out, ye weight of a pound, of ye
powder of brimstone iii. ounces of powder of oyster shells.ii. ounces, of
verdigrece ye weight of xii. d. ye inward bark of ye branches of a vine.v.
ounces, tha^ stamp all this together in a mortar and anoint ye body, specially as
nigh ye sores as one may, and the^ lay ye person in a bed and cast clothes
enough over him, let him sweet.xx. or xxiiii. hours, do this iii. times in ix.
days, and after that take an easy purgation, and take of the water of
Plantaine half a pynte, of Mercury sublimated ye weight of viii.d. of Roch
Alom half an ounce, make powder of it, and mix all together, and with a fether
anoint yt places. Or else take of Turpentine well washed an ounce, of Leterge, of
burnt Alome, of each an ounce, myxe this together, than take two ounces of the
fatnes of a got or a kydde, and anoint the places. Or else take of fresh butter
an ounce and a half of Barowes greece half a pound, of old Treacle an ounce, of
Metridatum half an ounce, of quick silver mortified the weight of vi. grotes,
of Lyterge and salt of each half an ounce, myxe all this together and make an
ointment.

The 238. Chapter does show of the Morphewe.
MOrphea is the latin word. In English it is named the Morphewe. And there be
two kinds of the Morphewe, the white Morphewe, and the black Morphew. Morphew
The white Morphewe is named Alboras, for it, look in the chapter named
Alboras.

The cause of this infirmity.
These infirmities does come by default of the nutritious virtue, or by using
venerious acts in youth.

A remedy.
If the place be pricked and will not bleed, the Morphewe is not curable. If
it do bleed, take of Rapes, of Roket, of each an ounce and a half, stamp it
with Vynegre, and after that wash the place. Or else take of a Cow horn, and
burn it, and with Vinegar wash the place, or else take earth of Afric and
mix it with Vinegar and wash the place often.

The 239. Chapter does show of an impediment in the brows and the ears.
MOrus is the latin word. In english it is named a more A More.
or a little lump of flesh the which does grow in ye brows or ears, or in
any man's foundeme^t or other places, it does differ from Veruca which is a
wart, as it does appear more plainly in the Chapter named Acrocordones.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a gross and superfluous humor, of corruption of
blood, and of collar adusted.

A remedy.
Take of sheep doung an ounce, bray it with Honey and a little of vinegar, and
make a plaster, or a suppositor, or a tent. Or else take of Rue an ounce, Salt
peter half an ounce, bray this together and make a plaster. Oo else pare as
deep of ye matter as the pacient may suffer, and drope then upon the place red
wax, as one will do to an agnell.

The 240. Chapter does show of a monster.
MOnstrum is the latin word. In greek it is named Teras. In english it is named
a monster, A mo^ste^
or a thing to be wondered of, that is to say, to see a man to have two heads,
or two thombes, or six fingers on one hand, or to lack legs, or arms, or any
other member, and was so borne, or any thing that is disfourmed, is a Monster.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either of abundance of nature, or else of little
nature, it may come by the vengeance of God, or by unnatural copulacion
betwixt man and woman, or to meddle with any unreasonable beast of one kind to
cople with any other beast of a contrary kind.

A remedy.
In this matter God must only remedy it, and follow the council of saint
Paul, saying, Masculus super feminam in timore Dei. This is to understand,
betwixt man and wife, the which may lefully and lawful use the act of
matrimony, and other persons can not do so without deadly sin: and beasts, to
use them selves contrary to their kind, I do couple the^ together unreasonable
to reasonable, using not reason.

The 241. Chapter does show of biting or stinging of a venomous worm.
MOrius is the latin word. In greek it is named Digma. In English it is named a
biting, Biting.
the which may come many ways, as by biting of an Adder, or stinging of a
Scorpion, Snake, or Waspe, pissing of a Tode or Spider, and such like, the
venim of all the which may hurt man.

The cause is showed.

A remedy.
First take a sponge and put it in hot water and wring out the water and lay it
hot to the place, do thus diverse times and than cup the place, and after that
make a plaster of Triacle and lay it to the place. And for the stinging of a
waspe or be, or Hornet, put over the place cold Stele.

The 242. Chapter does show of a woman.
MVlier is the latin word. In greek it is named Gyuy. In english it is named a
woman, A vvoma^
first when a woman was made of god she was named Virago, because she did come
of a man, as it does appear in the second chapter of Genesis. Furthermore now
why a woman is named a woman, I will show my mind. Homo is the latin word, and
in english it is as well for a woman as for a man, for a woman the silables
converted is no more to say as a man in woe, and set woe before man, and then it
is woman, and well she may be named a woman, for as much as she does bear
children with woe and pain, and also she is subject to man, except it be there
where the white mare is the better horse, therefore vt homo non canter cum
cuculo, let every man please his wife in all matters, and displease her not but
let her have her own will, for that she will have whosoever say nay.

The cause of this matter.
This matter does spring of an evil education or bringing up, and of a sensual
and a perverse mind, not fearing God nor worldly shame.

A remedy.
Physic can not help this matter, but only God and great sickness may subdue
this matter.

Vt mulier non cocat cum alio viro nisi cum proprio. etc. Believe this matter if
you will.
Take the gale of a Got and the gal of a Wolf, mix the^ together, and put to
it the oil of Olyue ETNVS virga. Or else take ye fatnes of a Got that is but
of a year of age ETNVS virga. Or else take the brains of a Choffe and mix it
with honey ETNVS virga. But ye best remedy ye I do know for this matter, let
every man please his wife and beat her not, but let her have her own will as I
have said.

The 243. Chapter does show of Music and musical instruments.
MVsica is the latin word. In greek it is named Musicae In English it is named
Music Music.
which is one of ye vii. liberal sciences and a science which is comfortable to
man in sickness and in health: this science is divided in Theoricke or
speculacion and in practice, the Grecians in music does use their terms, as
they do in physic, for they do put before al notable words in music Dia, as
they do in physic, as Diatesseron which is a fourth, Diape^t is a fifth,
Diapasa^, is an eight, Diaphonia, is a concord. For this matter look in the
Introduction of knowledge.

Muscilago, Musculi, or Mussulagines be ye latin words. In english it is named
muscles, Muscles.
or mussulages ye which be little strains descending from ye head to ye neck
and face, and other parts, and they be compou^d of sinews, filmes and
ligaments, and pannicles, and some say that they be little gristle bones.

Here ends the letter of M. And hereafter follows the letter of N.
The.244. Chapter does show of a man's Nosethrilles.
NAres is the latin word. In greek it is named Riues. Nosethrils
In english it is named a man's nosethrilles, the which be the Organs of the
brain, by the which the brain does attract and expulce the air without the
which no man can live, and without the nosethrilles no man can smell, and the
nosethrils be the emunctory places of the brain, by the which rume is expelled
and expulsed with other corrupt humors, and otherwhile the nosethrylles be
opilated and stopped that a man can not smell.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come three manner of ways, the first is through abundance
of rume. Or else it does come through some Apostumacion lying betwixt the brain
and the Organes of the nosethrilles, or it may come by some Apostumacion
growing in the nosethrilles.

A remedy.
First take sternutacions and gargarices, and use once or twyse in a week a
drame of pills of Cochee, and use labor or walking, and beware of drinking of
wine, and abstain from the fatnes of Samon, the fatnes of Conger, and the
fatnes of Eles, as it does appear in the Chapter named Reuma.

The 245. Chapter does show of a man's buttockes.
NAtes is the latin word. In english it is named a man's buttocks Buttockes
the which diverse times will chafe, and some will be galled.

The cause of these impedimentes.
These impedime^ts does come either by great labor, going a foot, or riding
upon an evil horse in a naughty saddle.

A remedy.
There is nothing better then to rub, anoint, or greze the place with a tallow
candell, and they that has great butockes before they do travel, let them
anoint themselves betwixt the buttockes with oil Olyue.

The.246. Chapter does show of the nature of man.
NAtura is ye latin word. In greek it is named Phisis. In English it is named
ye nature Nature.
of man, the which is the chefest blood in man, and it does change into
whitenes when it does come in the cundites by ye stones. The nature of man does
differ from ye seed of man although they by coniuncted together, for ye feed
of man is like ye seed of rice, when it is sode^ but it is nothing so big, and
yt is the nature of man, which is whitish and thick, without ye which can be no
procreation, and it may wast and consume, or be putrified.

The cause of these infirmities.
If nature do wast and consume it does come through some sickness, and if it be
putrified it does come through the corruption of the blood.

A remedy.
First heal the cause, that is to say, heal the sickness, and cleanse the
blood, and all things that is sweet is nutritive, and does increase nature.

For Naucea look in the Chapter named Abhominacio stomachi.

The 247. Chapter does show of a pain in the back named Nephresis.
NEphresis or Nephritis be the greek words. Nefresia is the barbarous word. In
latin it is named Dolor renum, and some do say it is Galculus in rembus. In
english it is named the stone The stone
in the raynes of the back.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come many ways, as by great lifti^g, or great straining,
or to much meddling with women, and it may come by kind, or by eating of evil
meats inge^dring ye stone.

A remedy.
Claryfeyed with the yolks of eggs is good for the back, and so is Muscudell
and bastard drunk next a man's heart. Also these oils be good for the back,
oil of Alabaster, oil of Scorpions, oil of Nunifer, otherwise named the oil
of water Lillies, and such like, and beware of Costiuenes, and use clisters or
suppositers, and use the medicines the which be in the Chapter named Lithiasis.

The 248. chapter does show of an impostume in the back. An impostume in the
back

NAtta or Narra be the latin words. In English it is a great fleshy impostume
like a wenne, and is soft, and it does grow in the back or shoulders.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of rume, and of ye grossenes of blud.

A remedy.
First give the pacient a Drame of pills Aggregate, and than make incision under
this manner, cut the skin crossewise, lift up the skin and cut out the matter,
and wash the place with white wine and lay down the skin, and then minister
salve to heal it.

Nephoi, look in the Chapter named Renes.

The.249. Chapter does show of an impediment in a man's sight.
NYctalopis is the greek word. In latin it is named Nocturna caecitudo. In
araby it is named Amica lopis, or Sequibere or Superati, or Ass, or
Tenebrositas. The barbarus word is named Nictisopa, in english it is named
darkness of the sight, for when the sun is down and the evening in, a man can
see nothing in darkness, He that can not see in darkness.
although other men can perceive and see somewhat that has not this impediment.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of an humor, ye which does ly before the sight, and
it may come of daseling of a man's eyes upon the sun, or else of small printed
letters, or such like.

A remedy.
First purge the head and the stomach with pills of Cochee and use gargarices
and sternutacions, and beware of costiuenes and of the occasion of the
impediment.

The 250. Chapter does show of the sinews of man.
A sinevv.
NEruus is the latin word. In greek it is named Neuron. In English it is named
sinews the which may have diverse impedimentes.

The cause of these impedimentes.
The impediments which doih fortune to the sinews may come by cutting of a
sinewe, or by strayning, or by starkenesse, or by the crampe, or such like
matter or causes.

A remedy.
If a sinewe be cut in sunder there is no remedy to make it whole, if
impediments do come to the sinews through the crampe, look in the Chapter
named Spasmos. If any impediment do come otherwise, use the oil of Turpentine
and netes foot oil.

The 251. Chapter does show of a certain kind of blisters.
NOma is used for a latin word. In English it is for a certain kind of blister
or blisters, Blisters.
the which does rise in the night unkindly.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of corruption of fleumatike humors mixed with
putrified blood.

A remedy.
First for matter beware of surfeting, and late eating and drinking. And for
this impediment I do neither minister medicines nor yet no salues, but I do wrap
a little clout over or about it, and as it does come, so I do let it go, for
and a man for every trifling sickness and impediment should run to the Phisicio^
or to the Surgeon, so a man should never be at no point with himself as long
as he does live. In great matters a ske substanciall counsel, and as for small
matters let the^ pass over.

For Nodi look in the Chapter named Dabaleth.

For Noctilopi look in the Chapter named Nictalopia.

The 252 Chapter does show of a disease named Noli me tangere.
NOli me tangere be the latin words. In English it is named touch me not, Touch
me not.
and some does name it an ale pocke, which is a whele about the nose, or the
lips or cheeks or in some place in the face, and why it is named touch me not,
for if one do nippe or broose him, or do make him to bleed, he will rise and
break out in an other place, or else it will festure and breed to a further
displeasure.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of late drinking or evil diet.

A remedy.
The chief remedy is, not to touch nor meddle with it, but look as it does
come, so let it go, and beware of eating of garlike and onyons and such like,
and drink not to much hot wines, and use the medicines the which be in the
Chapter named Salsum flegma.

For Nucha look in the Extrauagantes in the end of this book.

For Nuretitur look in ye second book in ye Extrauaga^ts.

Thus ends the letter of N.
And here follows the letter. O.
The 253. Chapter does show of an impediment named Obliuiousnes.
OBliuio is the latin word. In greek it is named Lithi. In English it is named
obliuiousnes Obliuiousnes.
or forgetfulness.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of reume or some ventositie, or of some cold humor
lying about the brain, it may come of solicitudenes or great study, occupyi^g
ye memory so much that it is fracted, and the memory fracted, there must needs
then be obliuiousnes, and it may come to young men and women when their mind is
breeched.

A remedy.
First beware and eschew all such things as do make or engender obliuiousnes,
and than use the co^fection of Anacardine, and smell to odiferous and redole^t
savors, and use the things or medicines the which is specified in the chapter
named Anima and Memoria. A medicine for breeched persons, I do not know except
it be Vnguentum baculinum, as it does appear in the Chapter named the Fever
lurden.

For Ocdema look in the Chapter named Vndemia.

For Occomia look in ye Extrauaga^ts in ye end of this book.

The 254. Chapter does show of a man's eyes.
OCulus is ye latin word. In grek it is named Opthalmos. In english it is named
a man's eye, The eyes.
which is ye tenderest place in a man's body. And of ye eyes be four colors,
which be to say, gray, whitish, blackish, and variable, and every eye has vii.
tunicles, or cotes named in latin Rethina, Secu^dina, Sclirosis, Tela arena,
nueca Cornea, and Coniunctiua. The first is Rethina, which is like a net that
does compass the eye. The^ is Secundina, which is a pellicle ye bredeth of an
other pellicle named Pia matter. The co^iunctiue is white and thick and it does
compass the eyes. Then is Cronea which does take his orginall of Dura matter
which is a pellicle about the brain as Pia matter is: Then is Tela arena,
which is like a spiders web the which does compass the eye. And then is
Scliros, the which is a moist pannicle. The eye also has or is made of four
humors, or four substances, the first is in the mids of the eye, and is like
an hail stone, the which is a cristalline humor or substance, and it does
rest ye sight. Then there is a glasy humor or substance the which is in the
hinder part of the christalline humor. The third humor or substance is the
white of the eye. The fourth humor or substance is the clerenes of the eyes,
the which does compass the cristalline humor, and there may be impedimentes
in the eye, as a blered eye, a watring eye, the pin and the web, an
impostumacion, and blindness, pore blind, gogill eyes, and dim sighted, and such
like, for the which look in the Chapter of such impedimentes.

These things be good for the eyes.
Every thing that is green or black, is good for a man to look upon it. Also
to look upon Gold is good for the sight, so is glass, cold water and every
cold thing, except the wind, is good for the eyes and no hot thing, nor
warm thing is good for the eyes, except woman's milk and the blood of a dove.

These things be evil for the eyes.
Every thing that is hot is naught for the eyes, the sun, the fire, the snow,
and every thing that is white is not good for the sight, and smoke, weping, the
wind, sickness, rume, reding in small printed books, specially greek books, and
onyons, garlike, chybolles, and such like, be not good for the eyes.

To clarify the eyes and the sight.
Take of the seeds of Ocult Christi, and put into the eyes ii. iii. or iiii.
seeds, or else take cold water and with a fine linen cloth wash the eyes
diverse times in a day, the ofter the better and change the water often that it
may be fresh and cold.

The 255. Chapter does show of Smelling.
OLtactus is the latin word. In greek it is named Ofphrisis. In English it is
named smelling Smelling.
the which diverse times is opilated or stopped that one can smell nothing, or
have any savor by the nose or nosethrils.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come through rume that causes the murre, or by some
appostumacion or humor the which does opilate and stop the Organs of
smelling, or through some fleshly apostumacion the which does grow in the
nosethrilles.

A remedy.
Take the water or urine of an Heart, and instill it into the Nosethrilles
diverse times fasting, and use sternutacions, and also for this impediment is
good to use gargarices.

Opilacio is the latin word. In English it is named opylacion or stopping,
that a man can not take naturallye in and expel out of his body the air
requysitie beside other members the which may be opilated as it does more
plainly appear in the Chapters of this book.

For Ophiasis look in the Chapter named Alopecia.

The 256. Chapter does show of the kinds of the Cramp.
OPisthotonos is the Greek word, in Latin it is named Conuultio retrossa. In
english it is named a Cramp, A kind of Cramp
the which does draw the head backward toward the shoulders, some latenist
does name it Rigor ceruicis, and some does name it Spasmus retrossus.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come through the attraction of the sinews and for lack
of blude, it may come by a fear or anger, or by a strain.

A remedy.
For this matter beware of anger and fear, and using of venerious acts after
replectio^, and then take of musterd seeds made in fine powder and ounce, put it
into vinegar, and tha^ use fricacio^s and great rubbing about ye neck and
forehead and the temples.

Optique and some do name it Oblique is a sinew that does rule the eye, and it
has two branches.

The 257. Chapter does show of an impediment in the eye.
OPhtalmia or Hipophtalmia be the Greek words. The barbarus word is named
Obtalmia, and some say Hipopia. And the latins does name it Inflacio
inconiu^ctiua or Apostema calidum in co^iunctiua. In english it is named a hot
impostume in the eye. A hot impostume in the eyes


The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a cold reumatike humor, or else of a corrupt
blood mixed with collar as au^tient doctors does declare, but I say it may come
accide^tally, as by a stripe or a blow with a man's fist, or such like matter,
for if there were no cause of an infirmity there should be no sickness, and if
there be no sickness a man shall live as long as bind and nature is in him, and
this impediment may come by Melancoly.

A remedy.
If it do come of a reumaticke humor, ye eyes will be inflated, and therefore
purge the cause with Yeralogodion ruffie, and pills of Turbyth does in like
manner purge the cause. If it do come by corruption of blood myxt with collar,
rednes and blewnes and heat above the eye will show the cause, and tha^ take
ye confection of Anacardine. If it come of a melancoly humor, the eyes will be
dry without moisture, tha^ take the confection of Musk: and if it do come by
collar, than is heat and pricking in the eyes, and it will trouble a man, as
if there were dust or gravel in the eyes, than use Diacitonicon, and pillule
Stomatice.

The 258. Chapter does show of an infirmity like a Barley corn in a man's eye
lydde.
ORdioius is the latin word. In english it is named a corn in the eye A corn
in the eye
lydde, much like a Barley corn.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a reume myxt with corrupt blood, the which has a
recourse more to that place than to any other place.

A remedy.
Take of Affodyll, an handful, seth this in white wine, and tha^ bray it and
make a plaster and lay it to the place and use it often.

The 259. Chapter does show of an evil drawing of ones wind.
ORthopnoisis is the greek word. In latin it is named Recta spiracio. Short
breath.
In english it is named an evil drawing of a man's breath, for if he do ly in
his bed he is ready to sound, or the breath will be stopped.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either of ye malice of ye lu^gs or else of opilacio^
of ye pipes, or else it may come through viscus fleme

A remedy.
First use a Ptisane, and Locsanu^ de pino and after that use once or twice a
week, pills of Cochee, and other easy purgations, and beware of eating of Nuts
and hard chese, and crustes of bread, and such like thing, and above all beware
of all Costiuenes.

For Orthomia, look in the Chapter named Disma.

The 260. Chapter does show of a man's mouth.
OS is the latin word. In grek it is named Stoma. In english it is named a
Mouth, The mouth.
which has many impedime^ts, as heat, impostumes, wheales, and such like.

The cause of these impedimentes.
These impedime^ts does come through reume, or else of fumositie or heat of the
liver or stomach, or else of some collerike humor.

A remedy.
First purge reume with pills of Cochee, if ye cause come of reume. If it do
come of collar, purge collar with pillulis Stomaticis. If it do come of heat of
the liver or the stomach, qualify the heat with cold herbs, as Endyue,
Cycory, Da^delion, Sowthistle, and such like herbs, and surfeting and late
drinking.

The 261. Chapter does show of a man's bones.
OS or Ossa be ye latin words. In greek it is named Ostou^ In english it is
named a bone or bons, Bones.
there is no bone in man the which has any feeling but only a mansteeth, the
which has feeling as well as any part of man's flesh or member. Every man the
which has all his whole limbs, has two hundred.xlviii. bones, as it does
more plainly appear in my Anothomy in the Introduction of knowledge, which has been long a printing for lack of money and paper.

The 262. Chapter does show of Ossitacion, yeaning or gaping.
OScitacio is the latin word. In greek it is named chasma: in English it is
named Ossitacion yeanyng yeaninge
or gaping.

The cause of this infirmity
This infirmity does come either for lack of sleep or else it does come before
a fever, or some other infirmitis, or else by lusknes, brother to the Fever
lurden.

A remedy.
Take away the cause, and take away the impediment, and sleep well in the
morning, and not in the day time as ye after none. etc.

The 263. Chapter does show of the hinder part of the head. The hinder part of
the head

OCciput is the latin word. In greek it is named Luion. In english it is named
the hinder part of the head the which may have diverse impediments, as the
letharge, obliuiousnes, and such like, beside Cankers.

The cause of this infirmity.
The causes be showed in the prenominated infirmities, as it does appear in the
third Chapters.

A remedy.
For a remedy look in the chapters named Lethargos, Memoria, and Cancer.

For Onex look in the Chapter named Piosis.

For Oysophagos look in the chapter named Isophagus.

The.264. Chapter does show of an ulcer in the Nose.
OZenai is ye grek word. In latin it is named Vlcera narium. In english it is
named an Ulcer Ulcer.
or sore in ye Nose.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a filthy and evil humor ye which does come from
ye brai^, and head inge^dred of rume and corrput blud

A remedy.
In this matter rume must be purged, as it does appear in ye chapter named
Reuma, than pick not the nose, nor touch it not, except urgent causes causes
the contrary, and use gargarices and sternutacions. I will counsel no man to
use vehement or extreme sternutacions for perturbating ye brain. Gentle
sternutacions is used after this sort. First a man rising from sleep or coming
suddenly out of a house, and loking into ye eleme^t or sun, shall nese twice or
thrice, or else put a straw or a rish into ye nose and tickle ye rish or straw
in ye nose, and it will make sternutacions, the powder of pepper, ye powder of
Eliborus albus snuft or blown into the nose does make quick sternutacions.
But in this matter I do advertise every mannot to take to much of these pouders
at a time, for troubling ye second principal member which is the brain, and
they ye which will not nese stop the nosethriles with the fore finger and the
thombe upon the nose, and not with in the nosethrils, and if they would they
can not nose, all manner of medicines notwithstanding, how be it I would
counsel all men taking a thing to prouocke such matters to make no
restrictions.

Thus ends the letter of O.
And here follows the letter of. P.
The 265. Chapter does show of an impostume, the which may be in the fingers
and in the nails of man.
PAn^^ticium is ye latin word. In english it may be an impostumacion in the
fingers and the nails of a man's hand, and some does say it is a white flawe
under the nail.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of an hot colericke humor.

A remedy.
Take of the oil of Roses an ounce, of the oil of Henbane half an ounce, of
Vinegar three sponefuls, incorporate this together and anoint the fingers and
the nails, or else anoint the nails with ear wax.

The 266. Chapter does show of Fracles in ones face.
Fracles.
PAnnus is the latin word. In english it is named an impediment in the face,
specially in the face of a woman when she is with child, this impediment is
like a sickness named Lentigi, or Lentigo.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either by heat of the sun, or by heat the which
does fume from the liver and the stomach.

A remedy.
First anoint the face with the oil of sower Almons, and use to drink often of
whay the which does come of chief. Or else take shepes dunge and bray it with
Vinegar, and to bedward anoint the face vi. or vii. nights.

For Panus perteyning to the eye, look in the Chapter after Peripneumonia.

The 267. Chapter does show of a woman's labor or delivering.
Labor with child.
PArtus is the latin word, in Greek it is named Tocos. In english it is named
when a woman is ready to be delivered, the which deliverance is very hard with
many women, and does put them in ieopardy of their lives.

The cause of this matter.
The cause why it is more harder pain and ieoperdy with one woman than with an
other, when they should be delivered, is ye one woman is not so strong of
complexion as an other woman is, and peradventure ye child is turned in the
mothers body, and that the head does not come first, then there is great peril.

A remedy.
If the head of the child do not come forth first, the midwife than must turn
the child yt the head may come forth first, and let ye midwife anoint her hand
with ye oil Olive. Also if the woman be in extreme labor, let her take ye
juice of Diptany a drame, with, the water of Fenugreke, or else take of Serapine
an ounce, and drink it at three times with the water of Cheries, and keep ye
woman moderately in a temperate heat.

The.268. Chapter does show of inflacions in the ear. Inflacions of the ears.

PAristhomia is ye greek word. In latin it is named Tonsille or Inflacions
aureum. In English it is named inflacions of the ears.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of superabundance of corrupt blood, or else of rume,
or else of some hurt.

A remedy.
First be let blood in a vein named Cephalica, and than use gargarices and
sternutacions, and use pills of Cochee, and put into the ear with wol ye oil
of Been. I do not speak of ye oil of Benes, but an oil made of Been the
which ye Poticaries has, and use for this matter, ye medicines the which shall
be most convenient specified in the Chapter named Aures. For Perocela look in
ye chapter named Ramex or Ramicer.

The 269. Chapter does show of Cornels about or behind the ears.
PArotides is the greek word. In latin it is named Inflaciones. In english it
is named Cornels Cornels
about the ears.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of hot blud, or of a bilous humor, and otherwhile
it does come of a melancoly humor.

A remedy.
First be let blood of a vein named Cephalica, if so be that age and strength
will permit it, with a convenient time. As for any other local medicines or
plasters, I advertise al persons not to smatter to much with the impediment,
for it will were away by it self.

The 270. Chapter does show of a white flaw.
PErioniche is derived out of two words of greek of Peri, A white flavve.
which is to say, about, and Onix, which is to say a nail, which is an
impostume about the nail, I do take it for a white flawe, or such like, and
some do name it Paronichius.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a venomous humor suddenly engendered under or
about the nail.

A remedy.
As I did say in the Chapter named Noma, that I would not counsel a man for
every trifeling sickness to go to physic or Surgery, let nature operate in
such matters in expulsing such humors, and meddle no further.

The 271. Chapter does show of the kinds of Palseis.
PAralisis is the greek word. In latin it is named Dissolucio. In English it is
named the palsy, The palsy.
and there be two kinds, the one is universal, and the other particular. The
universal Palsy does take half the body either the right side or the left
side. And what side soever is taken, the said sickness does take away half the
memory, the one eye is dim, and half the speech or all is taken away, the
one leg and the one arm is benumbed or astoned that they can not do their
office, and the proper name of this palsy, amongst the Greeks is named
Hemiplexia, and some greeks and latins does name it Simeapoplexis, the
barbarus word is named Simeapoplexia. The particular Palsy does rest in a
particular member or place, which is to say, in the tongue, head, arm, leg,
and such like members. Ignorant persons does say that when a man's head, hands,
or legs does shake, trimble, and quake, that it is the Palsy, for such
matters look in the Chapter named Tremor.

The causes of Palseys.
A Palsy does come, whether it be universal or particular, by reuolucion or
else compressio^ of ye neruous or sinews, and by opilacion or stoping of the
blood which has not his true course nor recourse, and that does come under
this manner either it does come by a great anger, or else of a great fear, it
may also come by extreme cold ryding, or going in an impetuse wind.

A remedy.
First use a good diet, and eat no contagious meats, and if need be, use
clisters, and anoint the body with the oils of Laury and Camomill, but
whether the Palsy be universal or particular, I do anoint ye body with the
oil of Turpentine compound with Aqua vite, and use fricacions or rubbynges
with the hands, as one would rub with greece an old pair of boots, not
hurting the skin nor ye pacient. And I do give ye pacient Treacle with ye powder
of peper, or else Metridatum with peper, or else take of Diatrapiperion. And if
one will, he may rub ye pacient with ye roots of Lillies braied or stamped,
after ye use dry stuphes, as the pacient is able to abide. Or else take a Fox,
and with the skin and al ye body quartered, and with ye heart, liver, and
lungs, and the fatnes of ye intrails, stones and kidnes, seth it long in
running water with Calami^t and balm, and Carawaies, and bath the pacient in
the water of it, and the smell of a Fox is good for the Palsy.

The 272. chapter does show of an imdedime^t in the Heels.
PErniones is ye latin word, Permoni is ye barbarous word. In English it is
named thy kybbes Kybes.
in a man's heels.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment most commonly does infest or does happen to young persons the
which be hardly brought up, going bare foted or with evil shoes, and it does
come of extreme cold and fleumatike humors

A remedy.
For the kybes beware the snow do not come to the heels, and beware of cold,
nor prick, nor pick the kibes, keep them warm with woollen clothes, and to
bedward wash ye heels and ye feet with a man's propre urine, and with netes
foot oil.

The 273. Chapter does show of lyce in a man's body, or head, or any other
place.
PEdiculacio or Moibus pediculorum be the latin words. In greek it is named
Phthiriasis. In english it is named lowsinesse, Lovvsy.
and there be four kinds, which be to say head lice, body lyce, crabbe lyce,
and nits.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come by the corruption of hot humors with sweat, or else
of rancknesse of the body, or else by unclean keeping, or lying with lousy
persons, or else not changing of a man's shert, or else lying in a lowsy bed.

A remedy.
Take of the oil of Bay an ounce and a half, of Stauisacre made in fine powder
half an ounce, of Mercury mortified with fasting spittle an ounce, incorporate
all this together in a vessel upon a chafing dish of coals, and anoint the
body. I do take only the oil of Bays with Mercury mortified, and it does
help every man and woman, except they be not to rank of complexion.

The.274. Chapter does show of an impediment in the Lungs.
PEripneumonia is the greek word, the barbarus word is named Peripulmonia or
Periplumonia. In latin it is named Inflacio pulmonis, or Respicacio: in english
it is named inflacion of ye Lungs. An impediment in the lu^gs.
And some does say it is an impostume in the flappes of the Lungs, for this
matter look in the Chapter named Pulmonia in the Extrauagants.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of corrupt and gross flume, and certain times it
does come of catarue, and some times of a plurisie, and it may come of
superabu^dance of other gross humors.

A remedy.
In this matter I do praise a Ptisane made as it does appear in the chapter
named Tussis, and the medicine which does serve for a Pluresie and for the
cough, is good for this impediment, the matter perstructed in due order and
fashion in the ministracion of the medicines.

The.275. Chapter does show of Cornels in a man's share.
PAnus is the latin word. In English it is named a Cornell Cornels.
in a man's share, it may be also in other parts of a man's body.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of corrupcion of the liver, and of a waterish blood,
or of coler.

A remedy.
First purge the matter with pills of Fumitorie the greater, of Pills
Aggregatiue, of Agaricke, of each a scruple, make than pills and eat them,
and use a good and a temperate diet, as well in meats as in drinks.

For Petia in oculo, look in the second book named the Extrauagants.

For Pectus look in ye Extrauaga^ts in the end of this book.

For Oepsis look in the Chapter named Digestio.

The 276. Chapter does show of a man's feet.
PES or Pedes be the latin words. In Greek it is named Pous. In English it is
named a foot of a man, which may have diverse impediments, as one of the kinds
of the Gout, named in latin Podagra, also there may be the Cramp, with other
diverse impediments, for the which look in their Chapters.

The 277. Chapter does show of Pia matter.
PIa matter be the latin words. A foot.
In english it is named a pellikle or a skin full of Artures and small veins,
which does wrap or compass about the brauie in many Fellicles.

No remedy.
If this Pia matter or pellicle be pereill there is no remedy but death.

For Phthiriasis, look in the Chapter named Pediculacio. For Phlebothomia,
look in the Chapter named Flebothomia.

The.278. Chapter does show of the Phrenesies.
Phrenesy
PHrenitis is the Greek word. And some Grecians does name it after the
Arabies Sircen or Karabitus. The barbarus word is named Frenisis. The true
latins does use the term after the Grecians. In English it is named a phrenise
or madness, the which absolutely is an impostumation bred and engendered in the
pellicles of the brain named in latin Pia matter, the which Apostumacion does
make alienacion of a man's mind and memory. There is an other accident
phrenise, the which is joined with an other sickness, as a phrenise with a
sickness, or with a plurice, and such other like sickness.

The cause of this infirmity.
For the Phrenise the cause is showed, how be it some holds opinion that a
Phrenise does come of a bilous humor oppressing the brain, and some say it is
an inflacion of the brain, the which does perturbate the reason, and does make
a man out of reason. The accident phrenise does come two ways, the one is
through a hot fume ascending from the stomach to the brain. The other is through
colligacion of the nerves or sinews which the brain has with the midriffe.

A remedy.
First let the pacient blood of a vein named Cephalica, than shave the head
and anoint it with the oil of Roses, or else wash the head with Rose water and
vinegar, and if the pacient can not sleep, use dormitaries, and keep him as
it is specified in the Chapter named Mania.

For Pharmacia look in the Chapter named Medicina.

The.279. Chapter does show of white corns upon the eye.
PHlitanai is the Greek word. The barbarus word is named Vesice. In latin it
is named Pustule. In English it is named pushes, or white corns Corns.
upon the eye, and some say it is a whele or a little bladder in any place of
the body.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of colericke humors boiling under the skin,
penitrating the flesh a little, if it be as some do say it is a bladder, than
it does come of a waterish humiditie, and then this impediment may come as well
through skalding as by labor or any other way, some does name this impediment
Macula in oculo.

A remedy.
First purge collar as it does appear in the Chap. named Colera, and than use
Colirions, or else use the water of Plantaine with Tuttie loted, and ever use
cold things to the eyes, and beware of hot and warm things to be put into the
eyes.

Pastinaco is the latin word. It is taken for a sickness, as well as for a
persnep.

For Pili, look in the Chapter named Capillus.

The 280. Chapter does show of the fatness of man.
PInguedo is the latin word. In greek it is named Puueli. In english it is
named fatness Fatness
or fogginesse, or such like.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of great ease and gross or of lascivious feeding, it
may come also by nature.

A remedy.
The best remedy that I do know is to use purgacions, and with meat and
potages or sewes is to eat much pepper, and use electuary of Lacher, and use
gargarices and sternutacions, as is specified in the Chapter named Ozinei.

For Pitariosis look in the Chapter named porrigo.

The.281. Chapter does show of matter in the corner of the eye.
PIosis or Onix be the greek words. In latin it is named Pus in cronea. The
barbarus words be named Sanies in cronea. In English it is matter in the eye.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of viscus reume other while mixed with a salt humor,
and it may come of corruption of rume.

A remedy.
First purge reume, the head and the stomach, with pills of Cochee, and beware
of eating of viscus meats, the which will adhere or cleue to the fingers,
beware of smoke, and diverse t^mes in the day cleanse the eyes with cold water,
dipping a fine linen cloth in the water, and drop on the eyes.

The 282. Chapter does show of inuoluntary standing of a man's yerde.
PRiapismus is the greek word. In latin it is named Erectio muoluntaria virge.
In english it is named an inuolu^tary standing of a man's yerde. Yerde.


The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come through caliditie and inflasions from the raines of
the back, or else it does come of inflasions of the veins in the yerde and
stones, it may come by the usage of venerious acts.

A remedy.
First anoint the yerde and coddes with the oil of Iuneper and the oil of
Camphory is good. And so is Agnus castus, brayed and made in a plaster and
laid upon the stones, and let Priests use fasting, watching, evil fare, hard
lodging, and great study, and flee from all manner occasions of lechery, and let
them smell to Rue, Vinegar, and Camphire.

The 283. Chapter does show of spitting of blood.
PHthisis is ye greek word. In latin it is named Tabes. In English it is named
an vlceracion in the Lu^gs, and some say it is a spitting blood, and some does
name it Emoptoica passio, for this matter look in the Chap. named Emoptoica
passio, and use the medicines that there is specified, and beware of strayning
or lifting, or great coughing.

The 284. Chapter does show of a man's Spettil.
PItuita is the latin word. In greek it is named Phlegma. In English it is
named a man's spittle. Spettil.


The cause of this matter.
This matter does come of the humiditie or moisters of blood, and specially of
fleume, and otherwhile of reume abounding in the head, discending by the Vuela.

If the spettil be superfluous without viscusnesse, cleanse the head and stomach
with pills of Cochee. If it be viscus, purge the head and stomach with
pillulis also of Cochee. For this matter look in Sputum, in the Extrauagants
in the end of this book.

The 285. Chapter does show of the Pluresy.
PLuritis is the greek word: and some do name it Anaxia. In latin it is named
Lateralia dolor, the barbarus word is named Plurisis. In English it is named a
Pluresy, Pluresy.
which is an impostume in the ceneritie of the bones, but there be two kinds,
the one is inward, and the other is in the gristles of the bones, and the other
is in lacertes in the breast, and Isaac says, that it is an hot impostume that
is engendered in the Midriffe named Diaphragma, and commonly a fever is
concurrant with this sickness.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a fumish blood, and of an hasty heart, which
does perturbate either ye joints, or else ye heart and stomach with ye breast,
it may also come of great heat or extreme cold by ye north winds, and it may
come by dronkennes.

A remedy.
First if the part be co^stupated, take easy purgacio^s, as Cassia fistula, or
else use suppositers or clisters, and I have known old ancient doctors in
this matter, use phlebothomie, the which I did never use in this matter,
considering the periculisnes of it. In this matter a Ptisane is good, or else
the waters of Malowes, Violets, Buglose, or Borage, with Sugar candy, and use
a clean and a good diet, as well in meats as in breads and drinks, as a light
bread being xxiiii. hours old is laudable, stale drink and meats light of
digestio^ I do praise, etc. And for Pluritis look in the Chap. Pulmonia, in
the Extrauagants in the end of this book.

Plura is a thin pannicle ye which does cover the ribs in the which diverse
times is engendered an impost. called Pluritis.

The.286. Chapter does show of fleshy matter in a man's nose.
POlipus is the latin word: and some does name it Excrencia carnis in naso. In
English it is named a fleshy humor growing in the nose. Nose
And there be two kinds, the one is a bitil nose, which is as big as a man's
fist, the other is a fleshy humor or an impostumacio^ growing within the
nosethrills.

The cause of these impedimentes.
These impediments does come of gross humors the which be viscus, descending
out and from the head to the nose or nosethrilles, it may also come of
melancoly humor, or else it may come of hurting the nose.

A remedy.
Take the powder of Dragagant with a little honey, and make a tent and introduce
it into the nose or nosethrils. Or else take the juice of black Iuy and with a
little cotton make a tent, and introduce it or put into the nosethrils.

For Piritasta, look in the Chapter named Combustio.

The.287. Chapter does show of the Gout in the feet.
POdagra is the greek word. In English it is named the Gout The gout
in the feet.

The cause of these infirmities.
These infirmities does come of evil diet sitting or standing long a dice,
cards, or long studying or such like things, taking extreme coldness in the
feet, it may come of late drinking, or it may come by nature, or else long
standing or sitting at writing or studying.

A remedy.
First reform evil diet and surfeting, and than use stuphes both wet and dry,
and beware of drinking of wine, and use to drink Idromel, and make plasters of
Treacle, or Mitridatu^. Or else take of the juice of Letyce and Woman's milk,
half an ounce, compound it with three eggs, and warm lay it to the place
three days. Or else take of ye cromes of white bread a pound and more, of Cow
milk a pint, of the oil of Roses iii. ounces, of the yokes of eggs iii. of
saffron the weight of ii.d. make of this a stiff plaster, and use it, and
this is good for Chiragra.

The 288. Chapter does show of Polusions.
Polucio is the latin word. In Greek it is named Pthora. In English it is
named a polucion Polusion.
or a decepering of nature from man, and there be three kinds, the
inuoluntary, the other is sleeping, and it may be as inuoluntary as voluntary,
and the other is voluntary.

The cause of this matter.
If it be voluntary they yt so does offend in bogari. And they that so does be
those ye which saint Paul does call the^ moles which can not inherit the
kingdom of heaven, and so do I say, without repentance and amendment. The
other is inuoluntary, which is to say, yt when nature does depart against a
man's will, the which does come to a man through inbecilitie and wekenes of the
body. The other does come sleping, and that may be as well voluntary as in
voluntary, for it does come of a foul lascivious dream, and if any
delectatio^, will, consent, or occasion had before the sleep and in the waking
to delight in the matter it is deadly sin, and so it is if it do come by
dronkennes then it is voluntary, and if it do come contrarily without any
occasion or delectatio^, it is no sin, for it does come of superabundance of
nature, or else through debilitie.

A remedy.
For the first, is no remedy but only repentance. For ye other the which be
inuoluntary, if it do come by surfeting or drunkenness it is a deadly sin, and
so it is if any voluntary precogitacio^ does come or is had before ye dream or
polucio^, they the which be infected with this passion most commonly they be
young persons the which be unmarried, and pristes that do live chaste,
therefore for this matter let the^ pray and fast and lie hard, and use no
delicate meats and drinks, ye which is a great prouocacio^ to this foul
impediment. I therefore aduertyse all those that be of strength to use
Phlebothomy, if this matter do come by imbecilitie or great weakness after a
sickness, dismay not ye matter, but use good restoratiue meats and drinks
within due order, without surfeting.

The 290. Chapter does show of a little skurfe in the head.
Skurfe.
POrrigo, or porre, or Furtures, some latenist does use these terms. The
grecia^s does use this word named Pitariasis. In english it is called small
scabbes bigger than the scales of Da^druffe, sprowting out in latitudes and not
in longitudes, like the head of a leke.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a great moister in the head and of reume, or else
of a dry melancoly humor.

A remedy.
Take garlike and stamp it with salt and anoint the place ix. times, or else take
of Literge, of Auripigme^t, of each an ounce, make fine powder of it and mix it
with vinegar and wash ye place ix. times.

For Precipitacio matricis, look in the Extrauagants in the end of this book.

For Pruna look in ye chapter named Ignis sancti Antoni.

The 290. Chapter does show of sprowting out of corrupcion in some particular
place of a man's body.
PRuritus is the latin word. In English it is a sprowting Sprovvting.
or bursting out in secret places of man and woman, and come do name it ych,
for the pacie^t must scrach and claw.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of great humiditie in ye inferiall parts of the
body, specially in the orifice of ye matrix or else in the fou^deme^t, or to ye
parts adiace^t to ye said places.

A remedy.
Take of red Sage an handful, boil it in fresh Butter, and with Cotton make a
tent or suppositer. Or else take of barowes greece two ounces, of Mercury
mortified with fasting spittle an ounce and a half, of Sage finely ground an
handful, co^pound all this together, and then anoint ye place. Or for this
matter ordain a good pair of nails and rent the skyn and tear the flesh
and let out water and blood.

The 291. Chapter does show of bleding at the nose.
PRofluuio sanguinis enaribus be the latin words. In english it is named
bleding Bleding.
at the nose.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come many ways, it may come of a strype or by a fall, or
by extreme labor and heat, or by great sickness, or by some strain, or by
breaking of some vein, or drinking to much, specially wine.

A remedy.
To restryct the blood the which does flow out of a man's nose, let him smell
to an hogs torde, and lay the stones and coddes in vinegar. If it be a woman
let her lay her breasts in Vinegar Dr^els exhaust an ounce or more of blood
our of a vein named Cephalica.

The 292. Chapter does show of Itching.
Itching.
PR^rigo is the latin word. In English it is named itching of a man's body,
skin, or flesh.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of corruption of evil blud, the which would be out
of the flesh, it may also come of fleume mixed with corrupt blood the which does
putrify the flesh, and so consequently the skin.

A remedy.
This I do advertise every man for this matter to ordeyne or prepare a good
pair of nails, to scrach and claw, and to rent and tear the skyn and the
flesh, that the corrupt blood may run out of the flesh, and use than
purgations and stuphes, and sweetes, and beware reuerberate not the cause
inward with no ointment, not claw not the skin with filthy fingers, but wash
the hands to bedwarde.

The 293. Chapter does show of Scabbes.
Scabbes
PSora is the Greek word. In latin it is named Scabies. In English it is named
scabbes, which is an infectious sickness, for one man may infect another by
lying together in a bed, and there be two kinds, the dry scabbes and the
wet scabbes, or moist scabbes.

The cause of these impedimentes.
If the scabbes be dry, it does come of collar adusted, if they be moist it
does come of the corruption of blood.

A remedy.
Take of ye skurse of Iron ye which does ly about a smithes handfile in
handful, make small powder of it and put to it. ii. ounces of the powder of
Brimstone, confect or compound this together with honey and oil Olyue, and
anoint the body. Or else take of the roots of Burres. v. ounces, of the roots
of Enula campana. vii. ounces, broose or stamp this together and put to it two
ounces of ye powder of Brymstone, of Mercury mortified, three ounces, confect
this together with Bores greece the skin pulled out, and compound all this
together and anoint the body. For the dry scabbes, take of Sorel, of Organum,
of each three handfulls, stamp it and put to it the oil of Henban^ and
vinegar, and anoint the body.

The 294. Chapter does show of one of the kinds of Consumpcions.
PTisis is the greek word. In latin it is named Consumpcio. Consu^pcion
In english it is named a consumpcion or wasting, and there be two kines, the
one is natural, and the other is unnatural. The natural consumpcion rests in
aged persons in whom blood and nature does decrece, and so consequently
weakness follows, wherefore in old time old men were named wasted men
consumed by age. An unnatural consu^cion either it is with a fever, or without
a fever, if it be with a fever, there is an other sickness running in the body
with it, as the fever Hectike, or some other long sickness, which does
extenuate or make thin the blood of man, so to conclude a consumpcion consumes
a man away out of this world. And some does say that this impediment does
come of an vlcerous matter in the Lunges.

The cause of this infirmity is showed A remedy.
Old men having this infirmity, cherish the^ with restoratiue meats and
drinks, and let them beware of anger and hastiness. Other medicines I do
knot know for natural co^sumpcion. For unnatural consumpcion, use to eat milk
with sugar, and drink no wine except it be Ipocras, and use nutritive and
restoratiue meats, and morning and evening Diaisopus, or Diairis, or
Diacalamint, or such like, and Locsanum is good for all men the which has this
infirmity, and so is a Ptisane.

The 295. Chapter does show of the web in a man's eye.
PTerigion is the greek word. In Araby it is named Sebel. Wehbe.
In latin it named Vngues. The barbarous word is anmed Vngula. In English it is
named the web in the eye, which is a neruous matter bred upon the eye, and
does cover the pupil of the eye.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come and is engendered of a rumaticke and a viscus humor
congeled together.

A remedy.
In this matter there is two ways to make one whole. The first is by wynding or
cutting away the web with an instrument. And the other is by a water to
corrode and to eat away the web, it may be remedyed by the juice of
Horehounde, Oculus Christi, and Diaseris iniected into the eye. But I take
only the juice of Horehound and the juice of Licoryce, iniected int eh eyes
is very good.

The 296. Chapter does show of a man's Pulses.
Pulses.
PVlse is ye latin word. In english it is named a ma^s pulses, and they be
named pulses because they be ever knocki^g and laboring. For this matter look
in the Extrauaga^tes and in the Chapter named- Artery, and in the chapter
named Vene. two ounces, put all this together in a new earthen pot, and put the
pot in an Oven and let it stand unto the time it be ready to make powder of it,
then take Dragagant, Gum Arabic, or each an ounce, infuse it into the water
of the flowers of Benes, than take and mix all this together with the water of
Lymons, and then let stand xxiiii. hours, strein it, and thent o bedward wash
the face and hands, and let it dry by, and in the morning, with warm water
wash the hands. Or else take Lymons and cut them in pieces, and sees them in
white wine and wash the face and hands, and this must be done diverse times,
look in the Chapter named Facies.

The.298. Chapter does show of a man's Lunges.
PVlmo is the latin word. In greek it is named Pneumon. In english it is named
a man's lungs, The lu^gs
which be hot and moist, and in the Lungs may be many infirmities, as spitting
of blood, vlceracion and filthy matter, and such like. Also it may have iiii.
manner of sicknesses, as Astma, Disma, Sansugiu^, and Occomia, as it does appear
in their Chapters in this book, and in the Extrauagants.

The cause of this infirmity.
This impediment does come of great cold, evil diet, and surfeting, it may
come by great labor, lifting or straining.

A remedy.
A Ptisane is good for the Lungs, and so is the usage of Licorice. Or else take
of Sinamon, Galbanu^, Castory.iii. drams, of Storax, Calamint, of Licorice, Of
Dragagant, of each a dram, of Opium, of Saffron, of each v. drams, confect this
together with Idromel, and make pills of this and use them, and eat no
Nuttes, nor chief, nor Apples, and such like.

The 299. Chapter does show of flees.
PVlicia is the latin word. In greek it is named Psilla. In English it is
named flees, the which does byte and sting men in their beds.

The cause of them.
The cause of the ingendring of flees comes many ways, they be engendered of
a corrupt dust, and the sweat of dogs does engender them, and so does unclean
keeping of houses and chambers, and beds.

A remedy.
First keep the chambers and house clean, and use no old Kishes nor bentes in
the house, sweep the house and chambers often, and make the beds betime in the
morning, and lay a blanket on the ground in house or chamber, and all the fleas
will leap into the blanket that is upon the ground, and so may you take them,
and straw the chamber with Walnut leaves, and if thou will anoint the body with
bitter Almons or with the oil of wormwood.

For Pulmonia, look in ye Extrauaga^ts in ye end of this book

The 300. chapter does show of a certain kind of wheals in the face or mouth
and other places differing from a kind of wheals named in greek Phlitanai.
PVstule is the latin word. In english it is named wheals or pushes, Pushes.
and these that I do speak of most commonly be in the face and mouth, and the
Arabies does name it Saphati which is a preuy sign of leprousnes.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either of corruption of blud, and then they be red,
or else does come of abundance of fleume and then they be white, or else it does
come of collar, then they be dry and hard. And if they be black it does come
of Melancoly, and they do signify death, for melancoly humors does bring in
death.

A remedy.
First look what humor does make the cause of ye impediment and purge it: and
if need be exhaust out of a vein named Cephalica.ii. or.iii ounces of blud or
more, as age and strength will permit it, and to kill or heal exterially al
such wheals the matter purged intierially, take of Ceruse, of literge, of
either of them iii. drams, of burnt lead ii. drams, of the oil of Roses, and
Nightshade, of either of them ii. drams, incorporate all this together and
anoint the place, and if need be compound of mortified Mercury with it, an
ounce.

Here ends the letter of P. And here after follows the letter of Q.
The.301. Chapter does show of sickness named the Squincey.
QVinancia or Squinancia be the barbarus words. The latin word is named Angina.
The greeks does name it Sinanechi. In English it is named the Squincy. Squincy
For this matter, look in the Chapter named Angina.

Thus ends the letter of Q.
And here follows the letter of R.
The 302. Chapter does show of an appostumacion under the tongue.
RAnula is the latin word. In English it is named an impostume under the
tongue. Tongue


The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of to much humiditie flowing to the place there
where the impostume is.

A remedy.
First purge the matter with pills of Cochee, and use a gargarice, and if
need be exhaust ii. or iii. ounces of blood out of a vein under the tongue, or
else out of a vein named Cephalica.

The 303. Chapter does show of chaps in a man's foundement.
RAgades is the Greek word. Ragadie is the barbarus word. In latin it is named
Fissure or Rhyme. In english it is named chappes in a man's foundement, Fu^deme^t
and in the secret place of a woman.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of ariditie or of a dry collericke humor.

A remedy.
Take of Rose leaves iii. handfulls, sees it in white wine and wash the place
often. Or else anoint the place with the oil of Almons, or with the fatness of
an Ele.

The 304. Chapter does show of certain kinds of Hernies.
RAmex is the latin word. In greek it is named Kyli. In english it is named
hernies Hernies.
or swelling in the cod. Hernia is a common name to three diseases, which be to
say Euterocela, Epiplocela, and Hidrocela. First Euterocela is when the guts
do fall out of the belly into the cod where the stones lie. Epiplocela, is when
the guts does fall into the cod, with theoment or Siphac, which is a pellicle
ye which does compass and does bear up the guts. Hidrocela is an humor the
which has a confluence to the stones, as Celsus says. Ramices does somewhat
differ from Ramex, for it has also three sundry kinds, the which be to say,
Parocela, Sarcocela, Sirsocela. Parocela is when the matter is hardened in the
codde or about the stones, Sarcocela is when there does grow a flesh in the cod
or about the stones. Cirsocela is when the veins in the cod does swell
inflating the stone. Also there is an other kind named Bubocela, which is when
the bowels do fall no further then the share. For this matter, and for a
remedy, look in the Chapter named Hernia and Ruptura.

The 305. Chapter does show of the horsenesse of man.
RAucedo is the latin word. In greek it is named Branchos. In English it is
named horsenesse Horsenes
of the voice.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either of a great heat and a sodeine cold taken
upon the heat, or else it may come lewring, halowing, or great crying, it may
come of late drinking and late sitting up, it may come by iniection of the
inward parts, then it is a sign of leprousnesse.

A remedy.
Take of ye water of Scabious, of the water of Fenel, of the water of Licorice,
of the water of Buglosse, of each of them a pint, of sugar Candy a pound,
sees this together, and morning and evening drink.ix. sponefulls.

The.306. Chapter does show of the Pose or Snyke.
RVpia is the latin word. In English it is named the Pose. Pose.


The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of superabundance of reume, taken of cold or of a
surfeit.

A remedy.
First purge the head and stomach with pills of Cochee, and use gargarices and
sternutacions. And for this matter look in the Chapter named Coriza.

The 307. Chapter does show of the raynes of a man's back.
REnes is the latin word. In greek it is named Nephroi. In English it is named
ye raines Raines.
of the back the which may have many impediments, as inflacions, the stone,
ache, and such like. For this matter look in the Chapters of these
infirmities, and in the Extrauagants in the end of this book.

The 308. Chapter does show of reume in a man's head.
REuma is ye latin word. In greek it is named Reumae. In English it is named
reume, Reume.
yt which does inge^der many infirmities descending from the had to the
inferiall parts.

The cause of Reume.
Reume is engendered in the head, which is a viscus humor, and it is engendered
of taking of cold in the feet, and in the head and neck, and it may come
through drinking of wine and strong ale, and it may come through surfeting and
late sitting up.

A remedy.
The usage of Anacardine and sternutacions and gargarices, is very good, and
purge the head with Yerapigra, and use labor, walking, and smell to this ball.
Take of Storax, Calamint, of Amber de Greece, of each a dram, of Cloves, of
Mastix. ii. drams, of Musk iii. grains, of Lapdanum a dram, confect this
together. etc.

For Rouschinechios look in the Chapter named Menstrua.

The.309. Chapter does show of croking in a man's belly.
RVgitus ventris be the latin words. In english it is named crooking Croking.
or clocking in ones belly. In Greek it is named Brichithmos.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of coldenesse in the guts, or long fasting, or
eating of fruits and windy meats, and it may come of evil diet in youth.

A remedy.
First beware of cold and long fasting, and beware of eating of fruits,
porages, and sewes, and beware that the belly be not co^stupated or costiue,
and use dragges to break wind. For Rupia, look before and after the Chap.
named Rancedo. For Reduuie, look in the Extrauagants.

The 310. Chapter does show of a Rupture.
RVuptura is the latin word. In greek it is named Epigo zontaymenon In English
it is named a rupture, Rupture
and that is when the Siphae which is a pellicle or skin the which does
compass about the guts, is relaxed or broken, then the guts does fall into
the cod. And there be iii. kinds of ruptures, the first is zirbale, the second
is intestinal, and the third is nuteral, for he does take his original of both
ye other

The cause of a Rupture.
A rupture does come of crying, or else of a great lift, or of a great fall or
broose, or leping vneasely upon an horse, or clyming over a high hedge or
style, or by a great strain and vociferacion.

A remedy.
First make a trusse to keep in ye guts that they do not fall out of the
belly, and than take ye roots of Knewholme iiii. ounces, of Polipody ii. ounces,
of Auince an handful and a half, of Centinody, of Mouseare, of each of the^
ii. handfulls, stamp all this together in a mortar, and than infuse it in a
quart of stale Ale, and let it stand iiii. or v. hours, then streine and drink
of it morning and evening ix. sponefuls, continue this xxi. days or more. If a
rupture do continue iii. years in a man, he can not be made whole without
incision or cutting, for the belly at that side that the rupture is in must be
cut, and the call or pellicle that the guts does lie in must be cut away that
does hang out, and so must one of the stones, if the stone be putrified, and
than must the Siphac be bound and knit or sewed up again and than sered, and
so than made whole with salues, this must be done of some expert surgeon
with the counsel of some physician, the which has both speculacion and
practice.

Thus ends the letter of R.
And here follows the letter of S.
The.311. Chapter does show of a Sauce fleume face.
SAlsum flegma be the latin words. In English it is named a sause fleume Sauce
fleume.
face, which is a token or a preuy sign of leprousnesse.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come either of the caliditie or heat of the liver, or
else of the malice of the stomach, it does most commonly come of evil diet, and
late drinking, and great surfeting.

A remedy.
Take of Bores greece the skin and strains clean picked out an ounce, of Sage
finely sta^ped an handful, of Mercury mortified with fasting spittel an ounce,
incorporate all this together and anoint the face to bedward. In the morning
wipe the face with brown paper that is soft, and wash not the face in vi. or
vii. days, and keep the pacient close out of the wind.

For Sabara, look in the Chapter named Caros.

For Saphati, look in the Chapter named Pustule.

For Sahara, look in the Chapter named Subeth.

For Saliua, look in the Chapter named Pituita.

For Sarcocela, look in the Chapter named Ramex, or Ramicis.

The 312. Chapter does show of a man's blood.
SAnguinis is the latin word. In greek it is named Haema. In English it is
named blood, Blood.
the which is the principal humor in man, for the life or spirits in man
consists in the blood.

The cause of blood.
Blood is engendered of fleume, and fleume is engendered of good meats and
drinks.

A remedy for blood putrified or corrupted.
First use stuphes and hathes and gentle purgacions, use also meats of light
digestion, and beware of gross meats and evil drinks, and of surfeting, and
of to much repletion, and of venerious acts, specially after a full stomach.

For Saluatella a vein, look in the Chapter of veins named Mediana.

For Sarcites, look in the Chapter named Iposarea.

Sarcoides is named in English a poor. For this matter look in the
Extrauagants.

The 313. Chapter does show of the erection or standing of a man's yerde.
SA^iriasis is the greek word. In latin it is named Desiderium erigendi
virgam. In English it is named a desire or standing of a man's yerde, Yerde.
and some does say it is a continual standing of a man's yerde.

The cause why it cannot stand.
A man that is in great age, or spente, or being in sickness, or grace working
above nature in man unmarried, shall have no erectio^s of his flesh to exercise
any venerious act, if any married man the which would have this matter or
desire and cannot through imbecilitie use the act of matrimony, I will show my
mind to them in the Chapter named Concepcio, and in the Chapter named Coitus.

A remedy.
Use Diagalanga, and in the morning use to eat ii. or three new laid eggs
roasted rere, and put into the^ the powder of the seeds of Netles with sugar.
Also all sweet things is nutritive and helps in this matter. Also Ipocras,
Elega^t, Basterd Muscadel, and Gascon wine is good for this matter, but now a
days few has this impediment, but has erection of ye yerd to sin. A remedy
for yt is to leap into a great vessel of cold water or put netles in the
codpece about ye yerde and stones.

The 314. Chapter does show of the Scotomy.
SCotoma is ye greek word. Scotomaia Scotomy
is ye barbarus word. In latin it is named Vertigo. In English it is named ye
scotomy or musing, or swiming in the fore part of the head.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of a vaporous humor, which does perturbate the
animal powers.

A remedy.
First let the pacient beware of drinking of wine, or strong drinks, they must
beware of eating of Chibolles, Garlike and Onions, and all vaporous meats and
drinks, and let them use pills of Cochee to purge the stomach and the head,
and gargarices be good for this matter, and Yerapigra, and such men having this
passion let them beware of climing or going upon high Hills or round stayres.

The.315. Chapter does show of a Gout named Siatica.
The Siatike.
SIatica passio is the barbarus word. In latin it is named Dolor scie. In
Greek it is named Ischias, of the which word does come Ichiadici, and some
does name this infirmity Coxendrir or Coxendricis morbus.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of hard lying on the hokil bones or lying on the
ground, or upon a form, or such like hard things, it may come by a stripe or
a great fall, and it will run from the hokill bone to the knee, and from the
knee to the ancle, and from the ancle to the little toe, and then it is past
cure, and otherwhile this gout will have reflection to the raines of the
back, and to the flanks, and it may come of a gross fleumaticke humor.

A remedy.
The chiefest remedy that ever I did know practiced is to anoint the places
with the oil of turpentine and Aqua vite, compound together, and so to use to
anoint the place against the fire often, and sere cloth of pitch be good.

The 316. Chapter does show of many infirmities names, which shall be found in
their Chapters.
First for Scabies, look in the Chapter named Psora.

For Scirrhus which is a swelling above nature, and is hard, look in the
second book named the Extrauagants.

Scarisicacio is the Latin word. In English it is named D^^^ificacion, for
the which, look in the second book named the Extrauagants.

For Scliros look in the chap. named Febris tetrathea.

For Sebel look in the chapter named Peterigion.

For Semiapoplexia, look in ye chapter named Paralisis.

The 317. Chapter does show of corns in the neck.
SCorphula is the latin word. Cornele.
In english it is named knots or burres which be in the childrens necks.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a gross fleume, and is like to an infirmity
named Dubaleth, and Glandule, concerning the rotunditie of the sickness, but
it does differ in quantity of Schrophule, for the one is greater then the
other.

A remedy.
First purge the matter with ye pills named Hermodactilis. and after ye wash
the place with decoction of Ireos and tha^ take of the roots of Lyllies an
ounce and a half, of Storax, Calamint half an ounce, incorporate this together
with the mary of a Calfe, and make a plaster or plasters and continue with
this.ix. dais: for this matter in Rome and Mou^tpiller is used incisto^s.

The 318. Chapter does show of a sickness named a burning scabbe or a Tetter.
SErpigo is the latin word. Tetter.
And some auctours does name it Ignis volaritis. And some says yt this sickness
does but little differ from a sickness of scabs named Impetigo, but yt the one
is bygger then the other, and some does name it Impetigo zarna, as it does
appear more plainlyer in this book before this matter and after, as it is
specified in ye chapter of these infirmities, but I do say yt this sickness or
disnamed Serpigo is a burning scab, and it does run in ye skin infecting it
more or less, and is named in English a Tetter.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of hot and corrupt blood mixed with collar.

A remedy.
Take of the oil of wheat and myxe it with the oil of eggs and with a man's
urine wash and anoint the skin, or else take the water of burres, or sees
burres in water and wash ye body.

The 319. Chapter does show of the skin that the child lies in the mothers
belly.
SEcundina Secu^dine
pellis be the latin words. In english it is a skin or a call, in the which a
child does lie in the mothers belly, and a woman must be delivered of it after
the child is borne, or else she does dye, for the one must come after the
other perfect.

The cause of this infirmity.
This skin or Call might nor may not be without the conception, and after the
child is conceived and come to the liniaments, form and shape of a creature,
there is a pellicle, a skin or a call, that does grow incircu^fecence about the
child, and when that does break the child is ready to be borne, and then the
child does come before, and the pellicle or skin does come after, if it do
not follow after the child is delivered from the mother, the mother is in great
danger.

A remedy.
Drink Penirial with posset Ale, and make a fume of Lapdanum.

For Sequibere, look in the Chapter named Hictalopis.

The 320. Chapter does show of an hard or dence apostumacion.
Apostum
SEphiros is the greek word. In english it is named an hard apostumacion in the
flesh under the skin.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either of a gross or viscus fleume, or else of a
melancoly humor, and if it be whitish, it does come of fleum, if it be swart
it does come of mela^coly

A remedy.
First take the sirupe of Buglosse, and of the sirupe of Fumitery, of each an
ounce and a half, myxe them together and drink it with the water of Fumitery,
and than take Doves doung three ounces, of wheaten bran an handful, and sees it
in vinegar and make plasters.

The.321. Chapter does show of the five wits in man.
SEnsus hominis be the latin words. In Greek it is named Esthisis anthropon.
In English it is named the senses or the wits Five wits.
of man. And there be v. which be to say, hearing, feeling, seeing, smelling,
and tasting, and these senses may be thus divided, in natural, animal, and
rational. The natural senses be in all the members of man the which has any
feeling. The animal senses be the eyes, the tongue, the ears, the smelling,
and all things perteining unto an unreasonable beast. The rational senses
consists in reason, the which does make a man or a woman reasonable beast,
which by reason may revile unreasonable beasts, and all other things being
under his dominion. And this is the Soul of man, for by reason every man
created does know his creator, which is only GOD, that created all things of
nothing. Man thus created of God does not differ from a beast, but that the one
is reasonable, which is man, and the other is unreasonable, the which is every
beast, foul, fish, and worm. And for as much as daily we do see and have in
experience, that the most part of reasonable beasts which is man, does decay in
their memory, and be obliuious, necessary it is to know the cause, and so
consequently to have remedy.

This impediment does come either naturally or accide^tally.

A remedy.
If naturally a man's memory is tarde of wit and knowledge or understanding, I
know no remedy, if it come by great study or solicitudenes, breaking a man's
mind about many matters the which he can not comprehend by his capacity, and
although he can comprehend it with his capacity and the memory fracted from
the pregnance of it, let him use odiferous savors and no contagious airs, and
use otherwhyle to drink wine and smell to amber de greece, every thing which is
odiferous does comfort the wits, the memory and the senses, and all evil
savors does hurt the senses and the memory, as it appears in the Chapter
named Obliuio.

The 322. Chapter does show of the rydge bone or the back bone.
SPina is ye latin word. In greek it is named Archantie. In English it is named
the back bone or the rydge bone, the which may have many diseases, as ache,
and other pains.

The cause of the diseases.
This disease may come of great liftes and strains, broses or strypes, and it
may come of meddling to much of or with venerious acts, also a bone or bones in
the back may be dislocated or out of joint.

A remedy.
For the back ye greece of a Fore, or the oil of a Fox is good and so is the
oil of Spyke, or the oil of Camomyll, or ye oil of mastike, or ye oil of
Lilies. In old causes the oil of Nunifer is good, and so is ye oil of
Alabaster, and the oil of Castory, and the oil of Scorpions, and a pytch
cloth is good.

For Siuanchi look in the Chapter named Angina. Siphac is an Araby word, it is
a pellicle or a skin growing out of ye midriffe which does disend to ye
spo^dils of ye back. And does sustain ye stomach and ye guts, and ends in ye
nether part of the belly, and of this Siphac the two didimes be inge^dred the
which does descend to ye stones over a bone named pecten, for the didimes look
in.D.

The.323. Chapter does show of little worms the which does breed under the
skin in hands and feet.
SIrones is the latin word. In English it be worms Worms.
that does breed under the skin. And there be two kinds, the one kind breed
in the hands and wrestes, and the other does breed in the feet, and they be
named degges.

The cause of this impediment.
These worms be engendered of the corruption of blood and fleume.

A remedy.
Take of quick silver mortified an ounce, compound it with black Soap and
anoint the places.

Sintexis is the greek word. In English it is named the weakness and faintnes
the which does come after a great sickness. A remedy is to eat good meats
and drinks, and to have good cherishing.

The 324. Chapter does show of sincopacions or sounding.
SIncopis is the greek word, and so is Lipothomia, in latin it is named
Consicio. In English it is named sincopacions or soundinges, Sounding
and some does name it in latin Parua mors.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of infection about the brain and the heart, making
their opilacions, or else it does come of some extreme sickness, it may come
through great heat and soden cold, and so converse, it may come of doing to
much of venerious acts, doing more then a man is able to perform, it may
come by repletion, taking of superfluous meats and drinks, it may come of and
through great sweats, or sweating, or stuphes, or bathes, it may come of to much
mirth, having to much mirth in fantastical matters.

A remedy.
First and chiefly beware of the premises, use temperance, and than if such
accident causes do come, take and eat a race of grene Ginger, drink a
sponefull of Aqua vite, or else of Aqua composita, and rub the pulses of the
brain and hair, with Rose water, and Vinegar, and hold to the nose of the
pacient redolent savors.

The 325. Chapter does show of Yexing, or the Hicket.
Yexing.
SIngultus is the latin word. In greek it is named Alexos ligmos. In Araby
Alsoach. In English it is named the yexe or the hicket, and of some the dronken
man's cough.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a cold stomach or some evil humor about the
heart, it may also come of to much drinking, and therefore many men does name it
ye dro^ken man's cough

A remedy.
For this matter a sponeful of Aqua vite, or Aqua composita is good, and so is
a race of green ginger, or a race of Ginger pared and cut in iiii. or v.
pieces, and to swalow them over one after an other, as whole as one can. Also
Diatriapiperion is good for this matter, and so is burnt Malmesey or burnt Seck
and so is Yera Constantini, and Yera simplex Galeni.

The.326. Chapter does show of a man's spettil.
SPutum is the latin word. In greek it is named Prisma. In English it is named
a man's spittle the which does show diverse times the infirmity of man's body,
as white and viscus fleume does signify that the sickness does come of
fleume. The spettill Spettil.
the which is viscus and black, or like lead, does signify that the
sickness does come of a melancoly humor. The spettill which is citrine or
glassy, does signify that ye sickness does come of collar. The spettill which
is tauny or reddish does signify that ye infirmity does come of blood. The
spettil which is white and not viscus but indifferent, does signify health.
The spettil which is fomy does signify a raw stomach. The fleume that is like
the white of a raw egg, does signify a raw stomach, slack and slow of
digestion.

For Sideratis, look in the Chapter named Camo.

For Sirsen look in the Chapter named Phrenitis, and Lethargos.

For Sophena, look in the Chapter named Mediana.

For Sopor, look in the Extra in the end of this book.

For Soma, look in the Chapter named Corpus.

For Soda, look in the Chapter named Cephalargia.

For Sparma, look in the chapter named natura.

For Sompnus, look in the Extrauagants in the end of this book.

The.317. Chapter does show of the Crampe.
SPasmos is the greek word. Spasmus is the barbarous word. In latin it is
named Conuulcio, or Contractio neruorum. In english it named the cramp The
Crampe
which is attractio^ of sinews, and there be four kinds, the first is named
Emprosthotonos, the which is when the head is drawn downward to the breast. The
second is named Thetanos, and that is when the forehead and all the whole body
is drawn so vehemently that the body is immovable. The third is named
Opisthotonos, and that is when the head is drawn backward, or the mouth is
drawn toward the ear, for these three kinds, look in their Chapters. The
fourth kind is named Spasmos, the which does draw the sinews very straight,
and asperouslie in the feet and legs.

The cause of these infirmities.
This infirmity does come either of to much veneriousnes, specially used after
a full stomach, it may come also through debilitie and wekenes, for lacking of
blood and nature, and it does come after a great sickness.

A remedy.
The kings majesty has a great help in this matter in halowing Crampe
ringes, and so given without money or peticion. Also for the crampe take of the
oil of Lillies and Castory, if it do come of a cold cause. If it do come of a
hot cause, anoint the sinews with the oil of water Lillies and willowes and
Roses. If it do come of any other cause, take of the oil of Euforbium, and
Castory, and of Pyretory and confect or compounde all together and anoint the
place or places with the parts adjacent.

The 328. Chapter does show of a man's Spleen.
SPlen The splen
is the greek word. In latin it is named Lien or Liena. In English it is named
a man's spleen which is a spongious substance lying under the short ribs in
the left side, and it does make a man to be merry and to laughe, although
melancoly rests in the spleen, if there be impedimentes or sickness in it, as
sorrow, pencifulnes, and care, and anger, or such like, makes many men and
women to have such impedimentes in the spleen, as opilacions and appostumes,
and such like. Melancoly-meates, hard cheese, and fear is not good for the
spleen, and if any man be spleniticke let him use merry company, and let him be
let blood of a vein named Saluatella, of the left side, some does use to let
blood in a vein named Basilica on the left side, but I say that every thing
which does hurt the liver, does hurt the spleen, and every thing that is good
for the liver, is also good for the splen: and whosoever will make the hardness
of the spleen whole, first take the mary of a calfe, and the mary of an heart,
and the fatnes of a hog, of a Capon, and of a Ducke, and the oil of sweet
Almons of like portion, myxe this together, and anoint the region of the
spleen, and dry the lungs of a Fox, make powder and eat it with figs, for
this matter look in the Chapter named Lien in the Extrauagantes in the end of
this book.

For splenatica passio, look in the Extrauagants in the end of this book.

For Sputum sanguinis, look in the Chapter named Emoptoica passio.

The 329. Chapter does show of a man's spirit.
SPiritus is the latin word. In greek it is named Pnoae or Pneuma. In English
it is named a spirit, Spirit.
I do not pretend here to speak of any spirit in heaven or in hell, nor no
other spirit but only of the spirits in man, in the which does consist the
life of man, and there be three, natural, animal, and vital: the natural
spirit rests in the head, the animal spirit does rest in the liver, and the
vital spirit rests in the heart of man

To comfort and to rejoice these spirits.
First live out of sin, and follow Christ's doctrine, and then use honest mirth,
and honest company, and use to eat good meat, and drink moderately. For this
matter, look in the Chapter named Anima.

For Squame, look in ye Extrauag. in ye end of this book

For Squinancia, look in the Chap. named Angina.

The 330. Chapter does show of thirst or dryness of a man.
SItis is the latin word. In greek it is named Dipsa. In english it is when a
man is thirsty Thirst.
or dry.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come many ways, either it does come by some sickness,
or else by dro^kennes, or else by some heat in the liver or stomach, or else
it does come by hotnes of the air or else of extreme labor, it may come by
e^^ing of salt meats.

A remedy.
If it do come of a hot stomach or a hot liver, qualify the heat of the liver,
as it does appear in the Chapter named Epar. If it do come otherwise, eat.v.
or.vi. Prunes, and keep one of the prune stones in the mouth, and otherwhile
roll the stone with ye tongue in the mouth. Oxizacra or the sirupe of Violets,
or Oximell diuretycke is good.

The 331. Chapter does shaw of a sickness named Soda.
SOda is the latin word. In english it is pain in the head, Pain in the head
and there be two kinds, universal, and particular, the universal holds a
man's whole head, and the particular is in a particular place in the head, in
the which is pain.

The 332. Chapter does show of the Strangury.
STranguria is the greek word. In latin it is named Stillicidum urine. In
english it is named the strangury, Stra^gury.
the which is a distilling or dropping of a man's water diverse times in an hour
with great pain and burning in the issue of man or woman, or else it is an
opelacion in the neck of the bladder, and through the stone, or else by some
impostumous humor.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of some vlceracion in the bladder or raynes of the
back, or else it may come through acredite or sharpness of the water, it may
come also of to much heat, or to much coldenes in the back and bladder.

A remedy.
First if ye belly be co^stupated, use clisters or suppositers, the^ reform
the matter the which is offendant. And if it do come of heat, use sugar roset,
and the three kinds of Sanders, compound with the sirupe of Myrtilles. If it
do come of colde-vse Mecridatum, Diaolibanum, Diamynt, or Diagalanga.

For Strangulacio look in the chapter named Suffocacio.

The 333. Chapter does show of nesing.
STernutacio is the latin word. In English it is named sternutacion or nesing,
Nesing.
the which is a good sign of an evil cause.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of dilacion of the pores of the brain, or of
coldenes or heat in the head, or it may come casting up the sight toward the
light or Sun.

A remedy not to nese.
If a man will not nese, let him hold his nose hard with his fingers, and if
a man will nese, take a straw or a rish and tickle himself in the nose, or
else take of the powder made of Eliborus albus, otherwise named nesing powder.

The.334. Chapter does show of barennesse of a woman.
STerilitas is the latin word. In greek it is named Stirolia or Acarpia. In
English it is named a barennes Barennes.
of a woman when she can not conceive a child.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of to much humiditie in the matrix or in ye place of
conception, for when the sede of man is sown, and the woman can not retain it
but does slip away from her, there can be no conception Also if man's nature be
wake he can get no child, therefore the default may be as well in the man as in
the woman.

A remedy.
For this matter look in the Chapter named Conceptis, and in the Chapter named
Coitus, and in ye chapter named Embrio, and in the chap. named Abhorsus, and
let the man yt is weak use restoratiue meats and drinks, and use cordialls
and mirth with honest company, and let the woman take no thought, and use good
things as man drago, Peches, and peper if she be fat.

The.335. Chapter does show of a man's stomach.
STomachus is ye latin word. In greek it is named Stomachos. In english it is
named man's stomach, Stomach
there be two manner of stomakes, the one is an appetide to eat and to drink,
and the other is a vessel in man the which does receive meat and drink into
it, and is like a pot in the which meat and licour is put in, and as the fire
does decoct the meats and the broth in the pot, so does the liver under the
stomach decoct the meat in man's body, and if the liver be out of order, ye
stomach can not be in good temper, wherefore look in the chapter named Epar,
and rectify him and rectify the stomach, and if he be out of order, all the
body is out of temperance. The stomach is rough within and smoth without.

The cause of this matter is showed partly.
But the cause may come otherways, as by anger, or fear, or great studying
upon many matters, or by extreme heat, or by surfeting, or such like, does
hurt the stomach.

A remedy.
To comfort the stomach, use Ginger and Galingale, use mirth and well to fare,
use Pepper in meats, and beware of anger, for it is a shroude heart that
makes all the body fare the worse.

The 336. Chapter does show of stonning of a member of a man.
STupor is ye latin word. In english it is named a stonning Stonning
in ye feet or legs, arms or hands, in a man or woman, some does say that
this impediment is a sleep, as thus if one man does ask an other that has
this impediment, he will say my leg or mine arms is a sleep.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of lacking blood in the member where it is, or else
that the spirits be let that they can not have a recourse to the sinews, or
else blood does lack in the veins.

A remedy.
First rub the place with a blew or a Scarlet cloth, and if need be, use
Phlebothomy, and anoint the place with the oil of Turpentine, or with the oil
of Rosemary flowers, named in greek Anthos, or such like oils.

For Suberati, look in the Chap. named Nictalopis.

For Strathomata, look in the Chap. named Tubercula.

For Strume, look in the chapter named Chirades.

For Succubus, look in the chapter named Epialtes.

For Subeth, look in the Chap. named Caros.

For Surditas look in the chap. named Cophosis.

The 337. Chapter does show of sweating or the sweating sickness.
SVdor is the latin word. In greek it is named Hydros. In english it is named
sweat, Sweat.
and there be diverse sweats, the one does come by labor, the other may come by
sickness and pain, and those be hot and cold, and there is an other sweat
the which is vehement, and that sweat is named ye sweating sickness, and some
sweats does stink, and some does not.

The cause of these impediments.
The cause of sweats, either it does come of heat or corrupcion of the air,
or it may come by one person infecting another, or as I said by labor or some
sickness.

A remedy for the sweating sickness.
First keep the pacient not to hot nor to cold, but in a temperance, and let
him not cast out arms, feet, nor legs out of the bed, let the head be
covered, and the face open, keep a fire in the chamber be the air never so
hot, eat no meat for xxiiii. hours, unless it be an ale brue, drink warm
drink, and no wine, and every thing that is receued, suck it through quills of
a Swan or Gose.iiii. or.v quills put together the one in an other, and they the
which be not infected let them beware of infectuous persons, for the sickness is
infectiue, and is one of the kinds of the plague or pestilence, for unnatural
sweats yt which does come by sickness a Sapphire is good to drink it or to hold
a Sapphire in ones hand, or else take of Mirtills and of Rose leaves, of each of
them.iii. ounces, make powder of it and cast it in the shetes, shert or smock
and lay some to the pulses, and drink of these foresaid things soden in ale,
and anoint the Pulses of the heart brain, and the Liver with ye oil of
Mandrake. And as for sweat that does stink look in the Chapter named Fetor
assellarum.

The.338. Chapter does show of suffocacions.
SVffocacio or Strangulacio be the latin words. In english it is named
suffocacion Suffocation.
the which does come two ways, the one is suffocation of the matrix, and the
other is a strangulation, for the suffocation of the matrix, look in the
chapter named Isterichi puiux. As for the suffocacion or strangulacion I do
pretend now to speak.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come many ways, it does come by hasty eating or
drinking, through ye which eroms or some drops of drink falls into the
wesand or throat bol, it may come by lying open mouthed, and some worm or
fly, or any other gross matter may happen into the throt boll, it may come by
an impostume, or a gross fleume sodeinly rising may make strangulacions, and
so consequently soden death or else ieopardy of death does follow.

A remedy.
If it do come by hasty eating or drinking, first be not auedious in the taking
of it, but eat thy meat and drink thy drink with deliberacion. If it come
by lying open mouthed exchew such matters and the occasion of it, the which
most commonly is through lying upright. If it do come by an impostu^e in the
orifice of the throat, the which will be a rising or swelling there, than if the
teth be clapsed together open ye mouth as wide as may be, and look under the
flap of the tongue, and there shall ye find ye impostume, and with your finger
draw it out, or else sode^ death does follow. If it come by viscus fleume than
drink rather to much tha^ to little. And they the which be infested with
fleume purge it, and let them use Locsanum de pino, but Diacoridon is the
highest remedy, or Dianucum al is one, for the Grecians does use this word
Diacoridon, as the Latins does use Dianucum. Also Serocum andromachum does
maturate and does disolue appostumacions. Also a plaster made of Diaquilon and
oil of Violets, does disolue and maturate hot impostumes, and Cerotum
Sandalinum, and oil of Violets is good for an hot appostumacion that is
inflamed, and the oil of Philosophers named in latin Olist philosophorum is
good for impostume of ye Spleen. Also implastrum de Alus, is good for
impostumes in the bowels. Also the oil of Mastix is good for hard
appostumacions in the stomach.

The 339. Chapter does show of a sqint eye, or goggle eye. Gogil eyed.

STrabositas is the latin word. In English it is named a squint or a gogil eye.

The cause of this impediment
This impediment does come either naturally or accidentally, if it come
naturally the^ the pacient was so borne, and there is no remedy, if it come
accidentally it does come by attraction of the sinewe with in the eye.

A remedy.
Use the medicines that is for a particular Palsy, and for the Crampe, but
beware what is put into the eye, except it be cold, unless it be woman's milk
and the blood of a dove. For Suspirium look in the Extrauagantes.

Thus ends the leter of S.
And here follows the leter of. T.
The 340. Chapter does show of touching the which is one of the.v. wits.
TActus is the latin word. In greek it is named Aphi. In english it is named
touching Touchi^g
or handling, and of handling or touching be two sorts, the one is venerius and
the other is auaricious, the one is through carnal concupiscence, and the other
is through cupitie of worldly substance or goods.

The cause of these impediments.
The first impediment does come either that man will not call for grace to God
not to displease him, or else a man will follow his luxurious sensuality like a
brute beast. The second impediment the which is avarice or couetise, will touch
all things, and take as much as he can get, for all is fish that comes to
the net with such persons.

A remedy.
For these matters I know no remedy, but only, God for there is few or none
that does fear God in none of these two causes, if the fear of God were in us
we would not do so. Jesus help us all. Amen.

For Tabes, look in the chapter named Phthisis.

The.341. Chapter does show of costiuenesse.
TEnismos is the greek word. And some does name it Tenasmon. The barbarous word
is named Tenasmus. And the latinestes does name it Tenesmus, and some
latinestes name it Gemitus. In english it is named sorrow or wayling, and I am
not so good a grecian to declare, discuss, or define, as some auctors does
write in this matter, for as many does say that Tenasmon is a difficil thing
for a man to make his egestion or sege, and all this matter considered, all is
combined or found in one impediment the which is costiuenesse, Costiuenesse.
the which is when a man can not go to his egestion or to sege, how be it, the
fault is in a gut named Intestinum rectum, the which is opilated, for a man
would feign do his egestion and can not.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of to little drinking of ale or beer, and it may
come of to much drinking of wine, and it may come of eating of costiue meats,
or else of superabundance of collar adusted,

A remedy.
Use to eat of laxatiue meats, and twice or thrice a week with milk or
potage eat half a sponefull or more of powder of Seen, with two penny weight
of Ginger, or else use as much as a walnut of Cassia fistula, or some other
gentle purgacions, as Polypody, or Mercury, or such like.

The 342. Chapter does show of the impediment of the eye.
TArphati is ye barbarus word. In latin it is named Macula in oculo. In English
it is named a spot or a push in the eyes. Eye.


The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a reumatike humor disce^ding to the eye.

A remedy.
Be let blood in a vein named Cephalica, and sees Colworts in white wine, and
use to make plasters of it, or else use the water of plantaine.

The 343. Chapter does show of one of the kinds of the Crampe.
THetanos is the greek word. The barbarus word is named Tetanus, out of the
which is usurped a word named Tetanisi, Thetanos. In english it is named a
cramp Crampe.
ye which does pull the head backward, and does draw ye body so vehemently, that
for a space a man shall be immovable, for this matter look in the Chapter named
Spasmos, and use the medicines that there be specified, and beware of venerius
acts after a full stomach, and beware of anger and fear.

For Teras, look in the Chapter named Monstrum.

For Tetanisi, look in the Chapter named Thetanos.

For Talpa, look in the Chapter named Testudo.

For Testiculy, look in the chapter following unto Thorax.

The 344. Chapter does show of a sickness named Testudo.
TEstudo is the latin word. And some do name it Talpa. In English it is a
sickness the which does creep underneath the Skin of the head, and if it do
corrupt the skull, this sickness is incurable, but I do say there is a
difference betwixt Talpa and Testudo, for Testudo is an impostume having a
little bladder, and so has not Talpa.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a venomous humor which is tumorus.

A remedy.
First purge the head and the stomach with the pills of Cochee, and shave the
head, and than make incision crossewise, and pull or rip of the tumorous
matter, and than lay down the skin and use sanatiue salues.

The 345. Chapter does show of a Tympany in the belly.
TImpanitis is the greek word. The barbarus word is named Timpanides. In
English it is named a Timpany, Timpany
the which does make ones belly to swell like a taber or a drounslet, and the
flesh of the body does pine away, and it makes one very short winded and
very faint.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come of ventositie intrused in ye belly.

A remedy.
First beware of all manner meats yt does engender wind, as fruits, cold
herbs, and such like, also beware of drinking of new ale or new beer, and of
eating of new bread, of cheese and nuttes, and such like things. Furthermore
for this matter, ye belly must be kept laxatiue with purgacions and clisters,
and suppositers. And in Mountpiller for this matter is used incisions, for if
there be no incision, there cannot be long life, drags for this matter is good
that does break wind, and so is every thing the which does make a man to
belch or fart.

The.346. Chapter does show of fear.
TImor is ye latin word. In greek it is named Dilia. In english it is named
fear, Fear.
and there is nothing so evil to ye heart as a sudden fear, for fear does
bring in death to the heart.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come many ways, as fear by fire, fear by water, fear
of great displesure of a great man, fear of killing, and such like.

A remedy.
For this matter thank God of all adversity, and use merry company, and so use
thy self that thou fear nothing but God.

The 347. Chapter does show of singing or sounding in a man's ear.
TInnitas aurium be the latin words. In english is named singing or a sounding
in a man's ears, Piping in the ear.
and this does prognosticate defenesse.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of ventositie or wind, which is in the head and in
the ears, and can not get out.

A remedy.
First purge the head, and than take of the oil of Castory, or else of the
oil of radish, and put it into the ear or ears, the oil of bitter Almons is
good, and so is oil of Been instilled into the ears with black wolle.

The.348. Chapter does show of little wheales in the head.
TInca is the Latin word. In English it is named little wheales or scabbes
Wheales or skabs
in the skin of the head, and there be many kinds and sorts of these
infirmities, some be moist and some be dry, some be like feats, and some be
like little honey colmes, and some be like hops or wheten bran.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come either by corruption of blood, or else by abundance
of rume or some vaporous humor.

A remedy.
First shave the head, or clyp away the hairs, than purge the head with
gargarices and sternutacions, and purge the head and stomach with pills of
Cochee, and anoint the head with the oil of Violets, do this three days and
three nights, tha^ after that wash ye head with dregs or lies of white wine,
in the which a little Roche alome is disolued, and after that stamp onyons and
garlike together and rub the head with it three or four times, and after that
anoint the head with the juice of Coriander and honey, or else stamp doves dong
with oil olyue and anoint the head v. or vi. times, or else take three ounces of
Bores greece, and an ounce and a half of Brymstone, stamp all together, and
than put to it an ounce of Mercury mortified with fasting spettyll and anoint
the head.

The 349. Chapter does show of one of the kinds of Leprousnesse named Tiria.
TIria is the latin word. In english it is named the Tire or ye property of an
adder which is full of skales, so is this kind of Leprousnes A kind of
leprousnesse.
full of skales and scabs, coroding ye flesh.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of venomous and a melancoly humor.

A remedy.
For this use Treacle and purgacio^s and vomits, and tha^ take of Mercury
mortified with fasting spittle and brimstone, of each an ounce, of Bores greece
three ounces, compound this together and use to anoint thy body, and tha^ use
stuphs and baths, and sweats

For Tisis, look in the Chapter named Prisis.

The 350. Chapter does show of an impostume named Topinaria.
TOpinaria is ye latin word. In english it is an impostume A postu^e
in childrens heads, and young persons.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of abundance of sweet flemme or else of abundance of
blood with fleume.

A remedy.
First take three Onions of a good quantity, and three eggs, and roast them
together in the hot emeries of the fire, than stamp them together and
incorporate all together with old bores greece, and make plasters, and if need
be make incision, and than mundify the place, and after all this incarnate the
place, and than skin it with salues.

For Tonsille look in the Chapter named Paristhomia.

The 351. Chapter does show of drawing of a man's mouth toward the ear.
TOrtura oris be the latin words. A vvrye mouth.
Almansor does name it Co^tractio. In english it is named a Palsy which is
false, for it is more nearer a cramp then a palsy, for it does attract the
sinews of those parts.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of coldness taken, or else of anger, or of a spice of
a particular palsy.

A remedy.
Take of musterd half a pint, and let the pacient with his own hand take
two or three sponefulles in his hands chafing the one hand with the other, and
than let him make frications, redusing the side of the mouth the which is
drawn to the one side to bring it to the other side, do thus.v. days, and use
diverse times gargarices and sternutacions.

The 352. Chapter does show of pains in the belly.
TOrminum or Tormen be the latin words. In english it is a pain in the belly,
Pains in the belly.
or a fretting in the belly.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either of coldness in the guts, or else of wind
intrused in the belly, and can not get out, and it may come of constupacion.

A remedy.
First keep the belly warm, and see that thou be not costiue, and beware of
eating cold meats and cold herbs and fruits, and use Diatriapiperon and
dragges, and clisters, or else suppositers.

The 353. Chapter does show of the shaking Shaking
of the head and hands.
TRomos is the greek word. In latin it is named Tremor or Iectigacio, or Morbus
officialis. In english it is named an official sickness, for as much as it
does occupate an official member, for it does make a man's head to shake, or ye
hands or other parts to quake.

The cause of these impediments.
These impediments does come through imbecilitie or weakness of the sinews,
also it may come of extreme cold or great fear, or through a great anger, and
beware of drinking in the morning, but eating somewhat before.

A remedy.
First beware of cold, of fear, and of anger, and than use to wash the neck
and the hands with the water that Sage and balm has been sodden in.

The 354. Chapter does show of the Breast bone.
THorax is the Greek word. In latin is named Torax. In English it is named the
breast bone, The breast bone.
the which may have diverse impediments.

The cause of these impediments.
These impediments of the breast bone (...) does (...) of some great broosing,
or else of some putrefying of it, or such like.

A remedy.
First for this matter interially easy and gentle purgacions as these following,
Powder of the coddes of Seen, Mercury, Polipody, Cassia fistula, Pillule aurea,
Pillule Cochie, and such like, and for a broose take Sparmaceti, with warm ale
and Malmesy. And exterially these ointments be good for the breast bone, oil of
Myntes, oil of Spyke and such like.

The.355. Chapter does show of a man's stones.
TEsticuli is the latin word. In greek it is named Orchia. In English it is
named a man's stones, Stones.
the which may have many impediments.

The cause of the impediments of the stones
These impediments does come by some of the kinds of the Hernies, or else by
some other humor descending from the body to the coddes making swellings or
burnings, or some other apostumacions, and it may come by a broose.

A remedy.
If it do come by any of the kinds of the Hernies, look in the Chapter named
Hernia. If it do come any other ways anoint the stones with Vngentum albu^,
or else make pulces and Mollifying bathes, or such like, be good.

The.356. Chapter does show of the Wesand or throat boll.
TRachea arteria be the latin words. In english it is named the wesand, Wesand
or the throat boll, by ye which the wind and the air is conveyed to ye
lungs, and if any crome of bread, or drop of drink, go or enter into the said
wesand, if a man do not cough he should be strangled, and therefore whether he
will or will not he must cough and lay before him yt is in the throat and mouth,
nor he can be in no quietness unto the time the matter be expelled or expulsed
out of the throat, as it does more largely appear in the Chapter named
Strangulacio.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of greedines to eat or drink suddenly, not taking
leisure, also it may come of some fly inhausted into a man's throt sodeinly, as
I have seen by other men, as by my self, for a nyt or a fly coming unto a
man's mouth when he does take in his breath and air, look what small thing is
before the mouth is inhausted into ye wesand, and so it perturbeth the pacient
with coughing.

A remedy.
For the first cause be not to greedy, eat and drink with leisure, fearing
God, and as for the second cause, I commit only to God, for this matter
coughing is good.

For Trixcom look in ye second book in ye Extrauagantes.

The 357. Chapter does show of swelling of wartes and of agnelles.
TVber is the latin word. In English it is named every swelling or rising of ye
flesh. Tubercula is a diminitiue of the latin word Tuber, and in english it is
named a wart wartes.
or an agnel growing in the feet or toes, and in latin they have many kinds
and terms, as Melicerides, Ganglia, Athoromala, and Stratomata.

The cause of these impediments.
These impediments does come many ways, if it be warts in the hands, face, or
other superiall parts, it does come of gross and corrupt humors, if it be
agneles it does come of chafing of the feet and of straight shoes wearing, and
it may come by nature.

A remedy.
First clip of their heads, and than rub them well with Alome water and bay
salt, do this.ix. times, and lay over the places thin plates of lead.

The 358. Chapter does show of a Cough.
TVssis is the latin word. In greek it is named Vix. In English it is named a
Cough. Cough.


The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of the lunges, or else of a reume distilling to the
asperous nature, or the pipes of the lunges.

A remedy.
First for this matter let the pacie^t be kept in a clean air without
corruption of draughtes, dung hills, and evil savors and flauours, let the
pacie^t beware of sweeping of howses and streets, and dau^sing upon rishes
there where much dust is under ye rishes, these things observed and kept, than
the pacient must eschew and refrain from certain meats and drinks and
breades. First from breades, as stale and new bread, from sodden bread, as
Semnells and Crackenelles, and also Cake bread and crustes. After this new Ale
or Beer, sower ale or beer, or sower sider or wine, let ye pacient refrain
from it, Eggs, milk, and specially hard chese and nutes, let them the which
has the cough eat none of it. A Ptisane made under this manner. First take of
Enula ca^pane rotes.iii. ounces mu^dified and sliced thin, of Esope.ii. ha^dfuls
more or les, as ye time of the year shall require, for in so^mer when ye virtue
is in ye herbs, is worth.iii. handfuls in winter, than take of Fenel roots the
pith pulled out, or else Fenell seeds ye weight of an ounce and a half, of Anis
seeds.iii. ounces, of great raisons the sto^es pulled out, a quarter of a
pound: of Figs pulled in pieces half a pound, of Licorice broosed half a
pound, of Barley cle^sed or picked clen and broosed, and so putrified iii.
handfulls, sees all this together in a galon of running water, strained and
boil al together till it be consumed to less tha^ iii. quarters, and than
strain it and let the pacient drink morning, noone, and night.ix. spnoefuls
at a time. And when his drink named a Ptisane is done, let ye pacient purge
himself with the pills of Coche or with pills stomatical, and after that use
Locsanum de pino, I in this matter would not ye suddenly a restrictio^ should be
cured lest paradue^ture through such soden mutacio^s inconvenience might fall,
for a sodein mutacio^ is death. And whosoever he be the which can cough, so
long he can not die, but beware ye after clappes. And I do say, whosoever that
can cough and expulse or expel the viscus matter that would stop the pipes
shall live long, and they the which that would be helped of an old cough and do
pretend to stop up the breath and the life and all, let him go about to stop
the cough, good it is to take medicines to relax, or to lose viscus fleume.

Thus ends the letter of T.
And here follows the letter of V.
The.359. Chapter does show of the small Pockes.
VAliore minores be the latin words. In English it is named the small pockes
Small pockes.
the which will break out first as small pushes, and after that they will be
scabbed after a stinking sort.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come more of the corruption of blood then any other
humor, it may come of me^struous humor in the conceptio^ of a child, wherefore
this infirmity is an accident cause to youth, age is not infested nor infected
with this infirmity, unless it be through a great contagious air recept and
taken of infectious persons, and if the pacient be so generated, beware of
leprositie consequently will follow.

A remedy.
First let al physicians beware, not only in this infirmity but in many
other, not to minister medecines exterial, which should be repercussiue, which
is to say, to drive in the infirmity to the body, and beware in this matter of
ointmentes and bathes, and of cold and open air, or of piking or touching any
of the pushes or scabbes, keep the pacient warm and let him or her be of a
good diet to comfort blood, although that some expert doctors in this matter
would that a man should exhaust blood out of a vein named Mediana.

The 360. Chapter does show of a swelling of the veins specially in the feet
and legs.
VArices is the latin word. In English it is named swellings of veins
Swelling of veins.
in the feet and legs, and in other places above any natural course.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come diverse ways, either by extreme labor with going,
leaping, daunsing, wrestling, or suchiike, or else it does come of some evil
humor descending from ye superiall parts to the inferiall parts, and as I
do precisely know, this matter is much grounded upon ventositie the which is
the principal cause.

A remedy.
First if need be, exhaust blood out of the Basilike vein, and then purge the
matter with Yera ruffini, or with pills of Lapidis lazuli, and tha^ take of the
skurfe of Iron in a smithes forge a handful, of wheten bran three handfuls,
sees this in white wine or in lies, and wash the place three times to bedward,
and purge collar.

For Varuce look in the Chapter named Acrochordones.

The 361. chapter does show of the principal veins.
VEne is the latin word. In greek it is named Sthigmos. In English it is named
veins, veins.
a vein is a cundit that does contain the principal blood in man, taking
their original or beginning of the liver. There be many principal veins in
man, as the ramus veins, then be these veins, Mediana, Cardiaca, Cephalica,
Sophena, Basilica, Epatica, Saluatella, and the hemorodiall veins they be
named principal veins, for as much as they do pertayne to the principal
members, and they be the principal veins, for as much as the principality of
all other veins rests in them, and has a confluence, or a course and
recourse to and from them, furthermore for this matter let the^ look that
would have more knowledge in the chapter named Mediana and in Phlebothomia.

The.362. Chapter does show of venim or poisoning.
VEnenum is the latin word. In greek it is named Ios. In English it is named
venim the which is the most subtilest matter yt can be, for nature does abhore
it, considering that it does infecte and corrupt not only official members,
but also the principal members.

The cause of this matter.
This matter does come of some venomous worm, or beast, biting or stinging,
and poisoning does come by eating or drinking of poison, how be it in Rome
they will poison a man's sterope, or saddel, or any other thing, and if any part
of ones body do take any heat or warmenes of the poison, the man is then
poisoned.

A remedy.
If a man do perceive yt he be poisoned, first let him vomit, and give him
purgacions, Clisters, or suppositers, and let him blood of these veins named
Mediana and Cardiaca, and use to drink Treacle or Metridatum, and also garlike
and Rue is good against poyso^ or poisoning. If one be stonge or bitten with a
venomous beast or worm, look in ye chapter named Morsus reptilium.

The 363. Chapter does show of ventolitie.
Ventosite
VEntositas is ye latin word. In greek it is named Auemodia. In english it is
named ventositie or wind.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come diverse ways, as by long fasting or taking of
extreme cold, or eating of fruits, or eating of potage or sewes, or gross
meats and such like.

A remedy.
For this metter use to eat Diaspermaton, or Diatesseron, or Diaciminu^, or
else teke Anis seeds, of caraway seeds, of Fenell seeds, of Ginger, of
Setual, of Cloves, of Comin seeds, of each v. drames, make powder of all this,
and use a portion every day with meats, drinks, or potages, and beware of
costiuenes and use dredge.

The 364. Chapter does show of diverse kinds of worms.
VErmes is the latin word. In greek it is named Scolices. In English it is
worms. worms
And there be many kinds of worms. There be in ye body three sorts, named
Lumbrici, Ascarides, and Cucurbite. Lumbrici be long white worms in ye body.
Ascarides be small little white worms as big as an hair and half an inch of
length, and they be in a gut named ye longacion, and they will tickle in a man's
foundement. Cucurbiti be square worms in a man's body, and I have seen worms
come out of a man's body like the fashion of a maggot, but they have been swart
or having a dark color. Also there be worms in a man's hands named Sirones,
and there be worms in a man's feet named degges, then is there a ring worm
named in latin Impetigo. And there may be worms in a man's teeth and ears, of
the which I do pretend to speak of now, as for all other worms I have declared
their property and remedies in their own Chapters.

The cause of worms in a man's Ear.
Two causes there be that a man has worms in his ears, the one is engendered
through corruption of the brain, the other is accidental by creeping in of a
worm into a man's ear or ears.

A remedy.
Instill into the ear the oil of biter Almons, or else the oil of wormewode,
or else the juice of Rewe, warm every thing that must be put into the ear,

For V^^tigo look in the Chapter named Scotomos.

The 365. Chapter does show of a man's Bladder.
VEsica is the latin word. In greek it is named Cistis. In english it is named
a man's bladder, ye which does receive the water or urine the which does distill
from ye liver and the raines of the back to it, by the poores named Vritides
or Vrichides. The bladder may have many impedime^ts, as scabs, vlceracions,
inflamacions, also a palsy may be in ye bladder or great debilitie that one
can not hold his water.

The cause of these impediments.
These impediments does come commonly of evil ordering in youth, the other
causes be showed.

A remedy.
First anoint the raynes and the coddes, and other secret places, with the
oil of Scorpions, and drink red wine in the which Musherons is sodden in.
Also I do advertise every man to discharge often the bladder and never to hold in
the water, for by restricting of the water such impediments be engendered, and
so is the gout.

For Vesice, Look in the Chapter named Phlitana^.

The 366. Chapter does show of him or her that can not sleep.
VIgilie is the latin word. In greek it is named Grigoriae. In English it is
named watching Watch.
or they that can not sleeke.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come through Idlnes or wekenes of the brain, or else
through sickness, anger, or fasting, or else through solicitudenes of repletion or
extreme heat, or extreme cold in the feet or such like.

A remedy.
Take of the oil of violettes an ounce, of Opium half an ounce,, incorporate
this together with woman's milk, and with a fine linen cloth lay it to the
temples. Or else take of ye leaves of henbane, stamp it and lay it to the
temples. Or else use to eat of letuse seeds, of white Popy seeds, of
Mandragor seeds, of Saunder, of each three drams, but above al things mirth is
best to bedward.

For Virago look in the Chapter named Mulier.

The 367. Chapter does show of a man's yearde.
VIrga virilis be the latin words. In greek it is named Aedion. And some name
it Psosi or Hoxasis or Opsis. In english it is named a man's yerd A man^ yerde.
the which is a member full of sinews, arters and veins, with lacertes and
other ligaments, the sinews does proceed from the newke which is the mary of
the back. The erection of the yerd does come from the arters of the heart and
the head. The veins does proceed from the liver. The lacertes and the
ligamentes does proceed out and from the thyes, specially of a bone or bones
there being. The yerde may have many impedimentes as well within the condyte as
without, under the skin of the head of the yerde.

The cause of these impediments.
These impediments does come as I said many ways. If it do come interially in
the condite of the yerde, it does come of an hot colericke humor, or else by
some evil humor engendered either in the bladder, or else in the raynes of the
back, and it may come of an evil disposed woman that is either silthy, or else
pretending to do man displeasure. If it do come exterially which is to say,
that the impediment be in, under, or upon the head of the yerd betwixt the skin
and the head of the yerd, either it does come of the heat of the body, or else
through much meddling with a woman, specially if she be menstruous, pocky, or
leprous.

A remedy.
If this impediment be in any interiall cause, use to drink milk, or else
drink often a good portion of the water of hawes, and iniect into the yerde the
matter of Camphire. If the impediment be betwixt the skin and the head of the
yerde and the head self, wash the head of the yearde diverse times with white
wine. And after that use the powder of a rotten post, or any siccatiue
medicines, or else Populion, or vnguentum Egipsiacum is good.

The 368. Chapter does show of a man's sight.
VIsus is the latin word. In greek it is named Oniclies. In English it is named
a man's sight, Sight.
the which may have many impediments as spore blind, stark blind, gogle
eyes, and many other impedimentes, as it does appear in diverse Chapters of this
book, specially in these Chapters named Oculus, Tarphati, Argemata, Bothor,
Epiphora, Lacrime, Lencomata, Liptitudo Macula in oculo, Ophtalmia, Ordiolus,
Panus, Pecia in oculo, Phlitania, Pterigion, Sebel, Vngula, and strabositas.

The cause of these impediments.
There can no impediment come to ye eye, but either it does come of an
interiall cause, or else of an exterial cause, as it does appear in the Chapter
of the aforesaid words.

A remedy to clarify the sight.
First use gargarices and sternutacions, and easy purgacions to purge ye head,
and do as it is wrtie^ in ye Cpap named Oculus.

For Vtiligo look in the Chapter named Luce.

The 369. Chapter does show of Ulcers or vlceracions.
VLcus or Vlcera be the latin words. In greek it is named Helcos or Helcea. In
English it is named an ulcer Ulcers.
or vlceracions, the which is putrified and a corrupt matter in a sore.

The cause of this infirmity.
This matter does come of a colerike and a sharp humor.

A remedy.
First take of vnguentum Egipsiacum ii. ounces mixed with ye juice of Pome
garnades, and mundify ye place and that will kill the malignitie of it. Also it
is good to wash often the ulcer with the water of Pla^tain, in the which a little
roch Alom is desolued in, and let the pacient use a good diet, as well in meats
as in drinks, and let him not be costiue but laxatiue.

The 370. Chapter does show of a man's Navel.
VMbelicus is the latin word. In greek it is named Omphalos. In english it is
named a man's Nauill, Nauill.
yt which may have diverse impediments, for the Navel may fall out, or be
bursten, or there may be some appostumacion.

The cause of these impediments.
These impediments does come either of great crying, or of great halowing, or
lewringe, it may come of a great broose, or lifting, or strayning.

A remedy.
First make a trusse of white fustian, and stuff it with carded wolle or
Cotton, and then trusse in the matter, and after that let the pacie^t drink
with stale ale the juice of Dases, Centinody, Knewholmes roots, Auance, and
the roots of Polypody, or seech all togeter in clarified ale, and drink it
morning and evening.xv. days.

The 371. chapter does show of a soft appostumacion.
VNdimia is the latin word. And some does say it is a barbarous word. In
English it is named cold appostumacion, Apostu^e.
white, and soft.

The cause of this impediment
This impediment does come of a cold fleumatike humor.

A remedy.
First maturate the cause with Pultesis, than make a Corosiue with Cantarides,
then minister tents and after that salues attractiue.

The 372. Chapter does show of a man's Nails.
VNgues is the latin word. In greek it is named Oniches. In English it is
named a man's nails, Nails.
the which may have diverse impedime^ts, as falling of the nails, or rotting of
the nails, and by poisoning or brosing, or by straight shoes wering a man may
leese his nails, and some men's nails be very hard, and some be soft.

The cause of these infirmities.
The cause of the most part of these impediments is showed before, if the
nails be hard, it does come of gross humors, if the nails be soft, it does
come of gentill nature.

A remedy.
Who so ever that has evil nails, use the oil of Roses, and the juice of
Plantaine mixed with the white of an egg, and anoint the nails.

The 373. Chapter does show of vometing.
VOmitus is the latin word. In greek it is named Emitos. In english it is
named vometing, vometing
or a vomit or perbraking.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either voluntary or inuolu^tary, if it be volu^tary,
it does come by provocation, as by putting the finger into ye throat, or else
to put a fether or a bra^ch of Rosemary, or such like, into ye throat. Or else
it may come by taking some pocio^ or some herb, or some other medicine, if it
do come inuoluntary, then it does come of the malice of the stomach.

A remedy for inuoluntary vomiting.
Take of Anis seeds two drams, of Mastike a dram, of Ginger a dram and a
half, of all this make fine powder and put it into v. sponefulls of Rose
water, and with sugar let the pacient drink it. I do give this pocion without
sugar, or else take of Opium a dram, mix it with the juice of Plantaine and a
little Saffron, and drink of this three or four times.

For Volnulus, look in the Chapter named Cordapsis.

The 344. Chapter does show of a man's voice.
VOx is the latin word. In greek it is named Phoni. In English it is named a
man's voice, A man's voice.
the which may have diverse impediments, as horcenesse, braying, and otherwhile
it is taken away.

The cause of these impediments.
These impediments does come many ways, either by sickness, or else by
leprousnesse, or it may come by halowing, or by extreme lewring or crying, or
by to courageous singing, fetching a greater compass then easily a man can
rech. Also it may come through great cold taking after an heat, it may come of
crying and calling upon brute beasts, and it may come of coledust, or any
other dust or smoke, yt which may opelate the organs or pypes of the breast.

A remedy.
First exchew coldness, and drink buttred ale or buttred beer, and use easy
purgacions, and warm and sweet meats, for all sower meats and salt meats,
and bitter things be not good for the voice.

For Vrina, look in the second book named the Extrauagants.

The.375. Chapter does show of the condites of the urine. Vryne.

VRichides or Vritides be the latin words. In english it is the cundits through
the which the water does pass, and some do name the^ the water gates, the
which be tied to the matrix of a woman, the which may have certain
impediments, as stopping of the water by ye stone, or by some gross humor.

The cause is showed.

A remedy.
First use clysters or else suppositers, and to drink Persely seeds and little
Ieat made in fine powder, drink it with renish wine, or white wine, or with
posset ale.

The 376. Chapter does show of a woman's secret membre.
Porta ventris.
VVlua is the latin word. In greek it is namad Histira. In english it is named
a womans secret member, the which is the gate or door of the matrix or belly,
and there may breed many diseases, as ulcers, scabbes, appostumes, fistures,
fistles festures, the pockes, and burning of an harlot.

The cause of this infirmity.
Many of these infirmities does come by lying with an unclean man or men, or
lying with unclean women, or unclean persons.

A remedy.
For a remedy for all these aforesaid diseases, look in the Chapters of the
proper names of the words, and there is remedy sufficient.

The 377. Chapter does show of wounds.
A vvou^de
VVlnus or Vulnera be the latin words. In greek it is named Trauma or
Traumata. In English it is named wound, or wounds, and there be diverse sorts
of wounds, some be new and fresh wounds, and some be old wounds, some be
deep wounds, and other some be plain wounds, and some fistuled, and some be
festered, some be vlcerated, and some has fistures, and some has none.

The cause of wounds.
Most commonly wounds does come through an harlot, or for an hou^d, it does
come also through quareling that some hot knauish blood would be out, and diverse
times wounds does come through drunkenness, for when the drink is in, the
wit is out, and then have at thee, and thou at me, fools be they that would
them part, yt will make such a dronke^ mart

A remedy.
If it be a grene wound, first stanch the blood, and if the wound be large
and wide stych it, and after that lay a plaster and let it lie xx. hours or
more, than open it, and mundify it with white wine. And if the wound be deep
use siccatiue plasters made with Olibanu^, Frankensence, Literge, Ireos, the
bran of Benes, and Aristologia rotunda, and such like. If the wound be plain
take of the roots of Lillies of pomegranade rines, of Galls, of Aloes, or
such like, if the wounds be indifferent, and the wound mundified, use the
powder of mirtilles and rose leaves, and such like, and let the patient beware
of venerious acts and of contagious meats and drinks.

For Vnea look in the addicions after the Extrauagants.

The.378. Chapter does show of the Vuels.
VVele is the latin word. In English it is named vuels the which does lie in
the roufe of the mouth like little long tetes and other while they do swell,
and otherwhile they do fall down out of their place.

The cause of these impediments.
If vuels do swell it does come through abundance of reume or else through a hot
humor, if the vuels do fall eythey it does come by labor or by heat, or else
through great sickness and weakness.

A remedy.
If it do come of reum, use gargarices and sternutacio^s, and purge the head
and the stomach with pills of Coche. If it do come of heat purge collar, and
put up the vuels that does fall with the thome laying Peper on the thome, and
use to eat Peper or else take the powder of a snaile that is burnt and mix it
with Honey and lay it on the end of the thome and than put up the vuels.

Thus ends the letter of V.
And here follows the letter of X.
The 379. Chapter does show of an impediment in the eyes.
XRophthalmia is the greek word. In english it is named a blast or an
impediment in the eye, the which may come certain ways.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of an evil wind or else of some contagious heat or
of an evil humor or such like, for the eye will neither swell, nor water nor
drop.

A remedy.
I might here show of many salubriouse medecines, but the best medecin that I
do know is to let the matter alone and meddle not with it but were before the
eyes a piece of black sarcenet and eat neither garlike nor onions nor drink
no wines nor strong ale, and it will were away.

The 380. Chapter does show of a gut the which does lie behind the wesande or
throat boll through the which meat and drink does pass out of the mouth into
the stomach.
YSophagus is the latin word. In greek it is named Oysophegus or Meri. In
English it is named Isofagon or the merry, or the gut of the stomach the which
does defend from the Epiglote to the orifice of the stomach, there is nothing
that does pass through the throat boll or the wesand but only wind, if by
chance there do at any time any drop of drink or crome of bread or fly,
or any such like things does happen to the wesand, there is no remedy but to
cough it out again. If so be that there do by greedy eating or else by any
other misfortune that any fish or flesh bone, or any other thing do stay in
the orifice of the prenominated Isophagon otherwise named the merry, then do as
it shall fellow.

The causes be showed.

A remedy.
If there happen a bone or a pin, or any other thing into ones throat, first
provoke a vomit, and if that will not help drink a sponeful or more of oil
Olive otherwise named in England Sallat oil, and drink well, and sleep upon
it.

For Ypichima look in the Chapter named Catharacta.

For Yposarca look in the Chapter named Anasarca or Hidropis.

The.381. Chapter does show of them that does abhor water.
YDroforbia or Hidroforbia be the greek words, the vsiall word of latin is
derived out of greek named Ydroforbia as is said, I have seen and red that
the barbarous word is named Euforbium which is false, for Euforbium is a
gum. Hidreforbia in English is abhorring of water as I learned in the parts
of greece, and some does say it is water in the belly, and some does say that it
is an impediment of him that can not see the waves of the sea, or sounding of
the water but his stomach is turned and must, or else is ready to perbreake or to
vomit.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come as many auctours does say of a melancoly humor for
the impotent is named a mela^coly passion, but I do say as I do know not only
by my self but by many other when I did use the seas, and of al ages, and of
al complexions being in my company, that this matter did come more of collor
then mela^coly, considering that collar is mouable and does swim in the
stomach.

A remedy.
For this matter purge collar and mela^coly humors, for I my self, which am a
Phisicio^ is co^bred much with this passion, for I can not away with water nor
waters by nauigacion, wherefore I do leave al waters and to take my self to
good ale, and other while for ale I do take good gascon wine, but I will not
drink strong wines, as Malmesy, Romnie, Romanisk wine, wine Qoorse, wine
greek, and Secke, but otherwhile a draught or two of Muscadel or Basterd, Osey,
Caprick, Aligant, tire, Raspice I will not refuse, but whit wine of Angeo^ or
wine of Orleance, or Renish wine, white or red is good for all men, there is
little red Renish wine, except it grow about Bon beyond Colin, there be many
other wines in diverse regio^s provinces and countries that we have not in
England. But this I do say, yt all the kingdoms of the world have not so many
soundry kinds of wines, as be in England, and yet there is nothing to make
wine of.

Thus ends the letter of Y.
And here follows the letter of Z.
The.382. Chapter does show of dry scabbes.
^cabbes.
ZErma or zerna be the latin words. In greek it is named psora or Lichen the
barbarous word is named Liehena. In English it is a kind of scabbes the which
be infectious.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of drinking of evil drinks and of eating of
contagious meats, specially by lying with infectious persons, it may come of
the corruption of blood, or else by some monstrous humor.

A remedy.
Take of salt water a galon, and seth in it.iii. handfulles of cromes of wketen
bread yt is leuand, and wash the body with the water twice or thrice, or else
wash the body in the sea.ii. or three times, or else take the bran made of Coche
seeds iii. ha^dful, of ye powder of Brimstone.ii. ounces, seth this in a p^tel
of white wine or vinegar, and wash the body.iii. or 4. times

The 383. Chapter does show of an impostume that does come of fleume.
ZIme is the latin word. In english it is an impostume engendered in a
flumatike humor.

The cause is showed.

A remedy.
First purge fleume than maturate the matter, and tha^ lance the impostume, or
else make a corosiue, and make tents and after that minister salues attractiue,
and than maturate the flesh and anoint the place.

The 384. Chapter does show of a Pannicle the which shall be rehearsed.
ZIrbus is the latin word. In English it is a pannicle or a caul co^pou^nd of
ii. thin tunicles of diverse artoures, and veins and sarnesse, it does cover
the stomach and the guts, and it does keep ye heat of them and does defend ye
cold, this pillicle or pannicle or caul may be relaxed or broken.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of some great strain, broose, or fall, or some
great lift or such like things.

A remedy.
First make incision, and after that cauterise the abstraction, and I have
seen the cut cauterised that the flux of blood should not follow, the
overplus of my mind in this matter and al other matters I do commit it to the
industry of wise and expert Physicians and Chierurgions.

Here ends the first book, examined in Oxforde in June the year of our Lord
M.CCCCC.xlvi. And in the rain of our sovereign Lord King Henry the eight,
king of England, France, and Irelande, the xxxviii. year.
The Table.
THe 1. Chapter does show of abstinence. folio. 7 the 2. Chapter does show of
abhorring of a man's stomak. fol. eo. the.3. Chapter does show of abhorsion.
folio. 8 the 4. Chap does show of a skurf in the skin of the head. fol. eo. the
5. Chapter does show of a running skabbe fol. eo. the 6. cha. does show of an
impediment in the corner of the eye. fol. 9 the 7. chapter does show of
vlceracions fol eodem the 8. cha. does show of the grene sickness or the gren
lawnes. fo. eo the 9 chapter does show of the white Morphewe. fol. ^o. the 10.
chapter does show of afistulus impostume fol. 10 the 11. chapter does show
of the inflacion of the eyes. fol. eod the 13. chapter does show of a
Carbocle. fol. 11 the 14. cha. does show of little cornels in the rots of the
^o^gue. fo. 12 he 15. chap. do^th show of one of the kinds of the falling
sickness fol. eo the 16. chapter does show of wartes fol. eo the 17. chap.
does show of one of the kinds of the hidrpsies. fol. 13 the 18. chapter does
show of casting up of a man's meat. fol. eo the 19. chapter death show of
burning of an harlot fol. eo the 20. chapter does show of a man's breath or end
fol. eo the 21. chapter does show of the squinte fol. 14 the 22. chapter
does show of the soul of man fol. eodem the 23. chapter does show of a man's
mind fol. 15 the 24. chapter does show of a byle or a felon fol. eo the 25.
chap. does show of a ma^s ars or foundement. fol. eodem the 26. chap. does show
of an hot vlceracion in the mouth fol. 16 the 27. chapter does show of a man's
appetide fol. eod the 28. chapter does show of Apoplexye fo. eo the 29.
chapter does show of impostumes general fol. 17 the 30 chap. does show of a
Citrin water fol. eodem the 31. chapter does show of a a lore in the eyes fol.
eodem the 32. chapter does show of the gout arthericke fol. 18 the 33. chapter
does show of the eye when it is bloudshot fo. eo the 34. chapter does show
of arters fol. eod the 35. chap. does show of pushes and whelkes fo. eo the
36. chapter does show of worms fol. 19 the 37. chapter does show of the
putrefying of the flesh fol. eod the 38 chap. does show of one of the kinds of
the hiedropsies fo. eo the 39 chap. does show of asmaticke persons which be
short winded folio eodem
B
the 40. chapter does show of a man's ears. fol. eod the.41. chapter does
show of stuting or stamering fol. 21 the 42. chapter does show of a gredy
appetide fol. eo the 43. chapter does show of horsenes fol. eodem the 48.
cha. does show of an impostum or swelling in the face fo. eo the 49. chapter
does show of a gross impostume fol. 23
C
the 50. chapter does show of an infirmity the which is concurrant with an
hiedropsie fol. eo the 51. chapter does show of a man's heels fol. eod the 52.
chapter does show of the pipes of the ^^nges fol. eod the 53. chap. does show
of a canker 24 the 54. chapter does show of a swelling fol. eodem the 55.
chap. does show of a canine or a doges appetipe fol. eod the 57. chapter does
show of a man's head fol. eodem the 58. chapter does show of a carbocle or a
botch fo. 26 the 59. chapter does show of the sickness in the prisons fol. eo
the 60. chapter does show of a canker in a man's nose fol. eodem the 61
chapter does show of the candiake passion fol. 27 the 62. chapter does show
of the flesh of man fo. eod the.63. chapter does show of the priuacio^ of man's
wit fol. eoem the 64 chap. does show of one of the kinds of the falling
sickness fol. eodem the 65. Chapter does show of a deep sleep fol 28 the 66.
chapter does show of a catharact fol. eo the.67. chapter does show of
catarue or a murre fol. eo the 68. chapter does show of the cephelarge fol. 29
the 69. chapter does show of the tephale or head ache fol. eo the 70. chapter
does show of a man's skull fol. eod the 71. chapter does show of a man's brain
fol. eod the 72. chapter does show of the hinder part of the head fol. 30 the
73. chapter does show of an infirmity in the eye lid fol. eo the 74. chapter
does show of the ciphac fol. eod the 75. Chapter does show of carnels fol.
13 the.76. chapter does show of the gout in the hands fol. eod the 77.
chapter does show of carnal copulacion fol. eo the 78. chapter does show
of the colicke. fol. 32 the 80. chapter does show of belly ache. fol. 33 the
81. chapter does show of a man's or woman's color. fol. eod the 82. chapter
does show of burning. fol. eod the 83. chapter does show of a terrible and
deep sleep. fol. 34 the 84. chapter does show of conception. fol. eod the 85.
chapter does show of sleping with open eyes. fol. eod the 86. Chapter does
show of the heart of man. fol. 35 the 87. chapter does show of defenes. fol.
eod the 88. chapter does show of Ilica passio. fol. eod the 89. chapter does
show of a man's body. fol. 36 the 90. chapter does show of corpulence. fol.
eod the 91. chapter does show of the pose. fol. eod the 92. chapter does
show of surfeting. fol. eod the 95 chap. does show of square worms in a man's
body. fo. eod the 96. chapter does show of imperfite digestion. fol. eod
D
the.97. chapter does show of a man's tothe. fol. 33 the 98. chapter does show
of inordinary pissing. fol. eod the 99. chapter does show of pain or dolor.
fol. eod the 100. chapter does show of a man's midriffe. fol. 39 the.101.
chapter does show of rising or lifting up of the head and brain. fol. eod the
103. chapter does show of a man's digestion. fol eo the 104. Chapter does
show of the fingers of man. fol. 40 the.105. chapter does show of whesing
and stopping of a ma^s wind. fol. eod the 106. chapter does show of a
perilous flixe. fol. eod the 107. chapter does show of one that can not piss.
fol. eod the 108. chapter does show of a man's back. fol. 41 the 109. cha.
poth show of knobbes and burres in the flesh. fo. eo
E
the 110. chapter does show of dronkennes. fol. 42 the.111. chapter does
show of any swelling that is soft. fol. eo the 112. chapter does show of a
man's egestion. fol. eod the 113. chapter does show of sunburning. fol. 43 the
124. chapter does show of the elephate. fol. eod the 115. chapter does show
of the conception of a child. fol. od the 116. Chapter does show of sickness.
fol. eod the 117. chap does show of spitting of foul corrupt matter. fo. 44 the
118. Chapter does show of spitting of blood. fol. eod the 119. Chapter does
show of the mare. fol. eod the 120. Chapter does show of a man's liver. fol.
45 the 121. Chapter does show of the pestilence. fol. eod the 122. Chapter
does show of the falling sickness. fol. 46 the.123. Chapter does show of
pushes or wheales. fol eod the 124. Chapter does show of eructacion or
bleedind. fol. 47 the 125. Chapter does show of inflamacions in the eyes. fol.
eod the 126. Chapter does show of a hard push or wheale. fol. eod the 127.
Chapter does show of purifiyng of the flesh. fol. eod the 128. Chapter does
show of starting in a man's sleep. fol. 48 the 129. Chapter does show of
wheales or pushes. fol. eod the 130. Chapter does show of extremities. fol.
eod the 131. Chapter does show of all apostumacions. fol. eod the 132. Chapter
does show of excoriacion. fol. eod the 133. chapter does show of a man's face.
fol. 49 the 134. chapter does show of a kind of scalles. fol. eod the 125.
chap. does show of the kinds of fevers in general. fol. eod the 136. chapter
does show of an Ephimer fever. fol. eod the.137. chapter does show of a
cotidian fever. fol. eod the 138. chapter does show of a fever tercian. fol.
50 the 139. Chapter does show of a fever quartaine. fol. eod. the 140.
chapter does show of the Enoch fever. fo. eod the 141. chapter does show of
a feuea causon. fol. 51 the 142. chapter does show of the putrified fever.
fol. eod the 143. chapter does show of the Emphrison fever. fol. 53 the 144.
chapter does show of the Emirticke fever. fol. eod. the 145. chapter does
show of a fever pyale. fol. eod the 146. chapter does show of the leprous
fever. fol. eod the 147. chapter does show of the Tetrath fever. fol. 54 the
148. chapter does show of the erratike fever. fol. eod the 149. chapter does
show of the fever Etike. fol. eod the 150. chapter does show of the fever
pestilence. fol. 55 the 151 chapter does show of the fever lurden. fol. eod
the 152. Chapter does show of a man's gall fol. eod the 153. Chapter does
show of a dead child fol. eod the 154. Chapter does show of stinking breath
fol. eod the 155. Chapter does show of fleume folio. eodem the 156. Chapter
does show of Apostume fol. eod the 157. Chapter does show of chappes fol. eod
the 158. Chapter does show of a fystle fol. 57 the 159. Chapter does show of
fycus in ano fol eod the 160. Chapter does show of blood letting fol. eod
the.161. Chapter does show of a whele named fornica fol. eo the 162. Chapter
does show of an hard impostume fol. 58
G
the 163. Chapter does show of joy or mirth fol. eod the 164 Chapter does
show of crooked shoulders fol. eod the 165. Chapter does show of carnels fol.
eod the 166. Chapter does show of the gomory passion fol. eod the 167. chapter
does show of a man's tasting fol. 60 the 168. Chapter does show of the rouf of
the mouth fol. eod the 169. Chapter does show of Gurgulacion fol. eod the 170.
Chapter does show of a sauce fleume face fol. eod
H
the 141. chapter does show of dulnes of wit fol. 61 the.172. chapter does
show of the Emerodes fol. eodem the 173. chapter does show of Megrim fol.
eodem the 174. chapter does show of love sick fol. 62 the 175. Chapter does
show of the shlingles fol. eod the 176. chapter does show of the kinds of
herneyes fol. eod the 177. chapter does show of a tetter fol. 63 the 178.
chapter does show of the Iawnes fo. eodem the 179. chapter does show of the
hiedropsy fol. eod the 180. chapter does show of a waterish humor fol. 64
the 181. chapter does show of rattling in the throat fol. eod the 182 chapter
does show of a man fol. eod the 183. chapter does show of standing of
hairs fol. eo the 184. chapter does show of the 4. complexions fol. 65 the
185. chapter does show of the hiepocunder fol. eod
I
the 186. chapter does show of a wind under the skin fol. eod the 187.
chapter does show of saint Anthonies fire fol. 66 the 188. chapter does show
of swelling fol. eodem the 189. chapter does show of ring worms fol. eodem the
190. chapter does show of incision fol. 67 the 191. chapter does show of
inflacions fol. eodem the 192. chap. does show of stopping of a man's water fol.
eod the 193. chapter does show of suffocation in the belly fol. 68 the 194.
chapter does show of a man's joints folio. eo
L
the 195. chapter does show of a man's lips fol. eodem the 196. chapter does
show of tears fol. eodem the 197. chapter does show of a woman's milk fol.
69 the 198. chapter does show of werines folio. eo the 199. chapter does show
of leprousnes fol. eodem the 200. chapter does show of fracles fo. eodem the
201. chapter does show of depilacion fol. eod the 202. chapter does show of a
web in the eye fol. 70 the 203. chapter does show of a kind of leprousnes fol.
eod the 204. chapter does show of imperfyte digestion fol. eod the 205. chapter
does show of blere eyes fol. eo the 206. chapter does show of the kinds of
skabbes fol. 71 the 207. chapter does show of a man's spleen fol. eod the 208.
chapter does show of a man's tongue fol. eodem the 209. chapter does show of the
stone in the blader fol. 72 the 210. chapter does show of obliuiousnes fol.
eodem the 211. chahter does show of skurf in all the body fol eo the 212.
chapter does show of white worms fol. 73 the 213. chapter does show of
Lunaticke men fol. eo the 214. chapter does show of intemperance fol. eodem
M
the 215. chapter does show of principal veins in man fol. eo the 216.
chapter does show of a sodein sickness fol. 74 the 217. chapter does show of
the french pockes fol. eod the 218. chapter does show of filthy skabbe fol.
eodem the 219. chapter does show of a woman's breasts. fol. eo the 220. chapter
does show of a madness. fol. 75 the 221. chapter does show of man's hands. fol.
eod the 222. chapter does show of the matrix of a woman. fol. eod the 223.
chap. does show of the virtue of medecines. fol. eod the 224. chapter does
show of the black Iaunes. fol. eod the 225. chapter does show of a man's
memory. fol. eod the 226 chap. does show of the principal member in man. fo.
eo the 227. chapter does show of a woman's terms. fol. eod the 228. chapter
does show of madness. fol. eod the 229. chapter does show of melancoly.
fol. 78 the 230. chapter does show of an evil vlceracion. fol. eod the 231.
chapter does show of a passion under. fol. eod the 232. chapter does show
of pissing. fol. 79 the 233. chap. does show of an impediment in the matrix.
fo. eo the 234. chapter does show of stutting or stamering. fol. eod the 235.
chapter does show of a sickness. fol. eod the 326. chapter does show of the
kings evil. fol. eod the 237 chapter does show of the french pockes. fol.
eod the 238. chapter does show of the Morphewe. fol. 81 the 239. chapter
does show of a more. fol eod the 240. chapter does show of a monster. fol.
eod the 241. chapter does show of biting. fol eod the 242. chapter does show
of a woman. fol. eod the 243. chapter does show of music. fol. 83
N
the 244. chapter does show of a man's nosethrilles. fol. eo the 245. chapter
does show of a man's buttockes. fol eod the 246. chapter does show of the
labor of man. fol. eod the 247. chapter does show of the stone. fol. 84 the
248. chapter does show of an impostume in the back. fo. eo the 249. chapter
does show of man's sight. fol. eod the 250. chapter does show of the sinews
of man. fo. eod the 251. chapter does show of blisters. fol. 85 the 252.
chapter does show of noli me tangere. fol. eod the 253. chapter does show
of the obliuiousnes. fol eod the 254. chapter does show of a man's eyes. fol.
66 the 255. chapter does show of smelling. fol. eod the 256. chapter does
show of the crampe. fol. 87 the 257. chapter does show of an an impediment in
the eyes. fo. eo. the 258. Chapter does show of a corn in the eye. fol. eod.
the 259. Chapter does show of short winds. fol. eod. the 260. Chapter does
show of man's mouth. fol. 88 the 261. Chapter does show of man's bones. fol.
eod the 262. Chapter does show of yening. fol. eod the 263. Chapter does show
of the hinder heart of the head. fo. eo the 264. Chapter does show of an ulcer
in the nose. fol. eod
P.
the.265. Chapter does show of an impostume. fol. 89 the 266. Chapter does
show of fracles. fol. eod the 267. Chapter does show of a woman's labor. fol.
eod. the 268. Chapter does show of inflacions of the ears. fol. 90. the 269.
Chapter does show of Carnels. fol. eod the 270. Chapter does show of a white
flawe. fol. eod the 271. Chapter does show of the kinds of palsies. fol. eod
the 272. Chapter does show of kybes. fol. 91 the 273. Chapter does show of
Lyce. fol. eod the 274. Chapter does show of impedime^ts in the lunges. fo. eo
the 275. Chapter does show of carnels. fol. 92 the 277. Chapter does show of
Piamater. fol. eod the 278. Chapter does show of phrenisis. fol. eod the 279.
chapter does show of white corns. fol. 93 the 280. chapter does show of the
fatnes of man. fol. eod the 281. chapter does show of matter in the eye. fol
eod the.282. chapter does show of inuolu^tary standing of a ma^s yerd. eo the
283. chapter does show of spitting of blood. fol. eod the 184. chapter does
show of a man's spittle. fol. 94 the 285. chapter does show of the plurisie.
fol. eod the 288. chapter does show of polucions. fol. eod the 289. chapter
does show of skurfe in the head. fol. eod the 290. chapter does show of
sprowting. fol. 96 the 291. chapter does show of bleeding at the nose. fol.
eod the 292. chapter does show of itching. fol. eod the 293. chapter does show
of scabbes. fol. eod the 294. chapter does show of consumpcion. fol 97 the
295. chapter does show of a web in a man's eye. fol. eod the 296. Chapter does
show of a man's pulse. fol. eod the 297. chapter does show of beutie. fol. eod
the.298. chapter does show of a man's lunges. fol. 98 the 299. chapter does
show of flees fol eod the 300. chapter does show of pushes. fol. eod
Q
the 301. chapter does show of the squincy. fol. 99
R
the 302. chapter does show of the tongue. fol. eod the 303. chapter does
show of chappes. fol. eod the 304. chapter does show of the hernyes. fol. eod
the 305. chapter does show of horsenes. fol. eod the.306. chapter does show
of the pose. fol. 100 the 307. chap. does show of the raines of the back.
fol. eod the 308. chapter does show of a reume in a man's head. fol. eod
the.309. chapter does show of croking. fol. eod the 310. chapter does show
of a rupture. fol. eod
S
the 311. chapter does show of a sauce fleume face. fol. 101 the 312. chapter
does show of a man's blood. fol. eod the 313. chapter does show of the
erection of the yerd. fo. 102 the 314. chapter does show of the scotomy. fol.
eod the 315. chapter does show of a gout named Sciatica. fol. eod the 316.
chapter does show of many diseases. fol. eod the 317. chapter does show of
carnels. fol. 103 the 318. chapter does show of a tetter. fol. eod the 119.
chapter does show of a secundine. fol. eod the 320. chapter does show of a
postume. fol. eod the 321. chapter does show of five wits. fol. 104 the 322.
chapter does show of the rig bone or back bone. fo. eo the 323. chapter does
show of worms. fol. 105 the 324. chapter does show of Sinco pacions. fol.
eod the 325. Chapter does show of yexing. fol. eod the.326. chapter does
show of spittle. fol. eod the 327. chapter does show of the crampe. fol. 106
the 328. chapter does show of a man's spleen. fol. eod the 329. chapter does
show of a man's spirits. fol. 157 the 330. chapter does show of a thyrst or
drines. fol. eod the 331. Chapter does show of a sickness named Soda. fol eod
the 332. Chapter does show of the strangury. fol. eod the 333. Chapter does
show of knising. fol. 10 the 334. Chapter does show of barennes of a woman.
fol. eod the 335. Chapter does show of a man's stomach. fol. eod the 336.
Chapter does show of stonnyng. fol. eod the 337. Chapter does show of sweat.
fol. 109 the 338. Chapter does show of suffocation. fol. eod the 339. Chapter
does show of gogle eyes. fol. 110
T
the 340. Chapter does show of touching. fol. eod the 341. Chapter does show
of costiuenes. fol. eod the.342. Chapter does show of the eyes. fol. 111 the
343. Chapter does show of the crampe. fol. eod. the 344. Chapter does show of
a sickness named testudo. fol. eod the 345. Chapter does show of a timpany.
fol. eod the 346. Chapter does show of fear. fol. 112 the 347. Chapter does
show of piping in the ear. fol. eod the 348. Chapter does show of wheales
or scabbes. fol. eod the 349. chapter does show of Leprousnes. fol. eod
the.350. chapter does show of a postume. fol. 113 the 351. chapter does show
of a wrye mouth. fol. eod the 352. chapter does show of a pain in the belly.
fol. eod. the 353. chapter does show of shaking. fol. eod the 354. chap. does
show of the breast bone. fo. eod the 355. chapter does show of a man's stones.
fol. 114 the 356. chapter does show of the wesand. fol. eod the 357. chapter
does show of wartes. fol. eod the 358. chapter does show of the cough. fol.
eod
V
the 359. chapter does show of the small pockes. fol. 115 the 360. chapter
does show of swelling of veins. fol. eod the 361. chapter does show of the
principal veins. fol. 116 the 362. chapter does show of venim. fol. eod the
363. cbapter does show of ventositie. fol. eod the 364. chapter does show
of worms. fol. eod the 365. chapter does show of a a man's bladder. fol. 117
the 366. chapter does show of watch. fol. eod the.367. chapter does show of
a man's yerd. fol. eod the 368. chapter does show of a man's sight. fol. 118 the
369. chapter does show of ulcers. fol. eod the 370. chapter does show of a
man's navel. fol. eod the 371. chapter does show of a postume. fol. 119 the
372. chapter does show of a man's nails. fol. eod the 373. chapter does show
of vometing. fol. eod the 374. chapter does show of a man's voice. fol. eod the
375. chap. does show of the rundites of the urine. fol. 120 the.376. chapter
does show of a woman's secret member. fo. eod the 377. chapter does show of
wounds. fol. eod the 378. chapter does show of the vuels. fol. 121
X
the 379. chapter does show of a man's eyes. fol. eod
Y
the.380. chapter does shkwe of a gut the which does lie behind the wesand or
throat boll. fol eod the 381. chapter does show of abhorring of water. fol.
122
Z
the 382. chapter does show of dry scabbes. fol. eod the 383. chapter does
show of a postume. fol. 123 the 384. chapter does show of a palicle or call.
fol. 124
Finis tabulae.
THE SECOND BOOK of the Breuiary of Health: named the Extrauagantes, follows.

Compiled by Andrew Boorde, Doctor of Physic: an English man.

1587.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON by Thomas East. 1587.

The Preface.
Whosoever will know to number in Algorisme, he may know by ye numbering the
chapter of these two books comprehended in one volume, for it does teach one
to number from one to.CCC. and ^d, and so by it, one for this matter may come
to a further knowledge in Algorisme. Also in this book a man shall know the
Judicials of Vrines and of the P^lc^s with ^i^ers other infirmities, the which
I did omit and leave out of the first book. And for as much as I, nor no man
else can write so plainly the terms of Physic yt every man can perceive ye
recepts. Therefore I do advertise and do council all men to consult with some
expert Poticary in making and ordering of such recepts and medicines.
Furthermore learned men and other may well interrupt and reprehend me for
writing my inco^gruitie that the latin words be not truly settte in their
cases with the english words, using diverse times ye nominative case for other
cases. I do it for no other purpose but ye ignorant persons may ye better
understand the matter. For I do not write these books for learned men, but for
simple and unlearned men that they may have some knowledge to ease themselves
in their diseases and infirmities. And because that I did omit and leave out
many things in the first book named the Breui^ry of health. In this book
named the Extrauagants I have supplied those matters the which should be
rehearsed in the first book. And now to conclude, if I have omitted any thing
necessary to be expressed in these books, or have not satisfied every man's
mind of their infirmities or disease, I do remit this matter to ye further
industry and judgment of discr^te doctors of Physic, (...) masters of
Chierurgery.

Thus ends the Preface.
The Extrauagants.
The first Chapter does show of the distemperance of the stomach.
ANorexia is the Greek words. The Barbarous word is Anarexia. In Latin it is
named Stomachi distemperamentum. In English it is named a distemperance of
stomach or auercion of the stomach from meat.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of evil humors in the stomach, or else through
imbecilitie or weakness of the stomach, or else through great infirmity the which
does take away a man's stomach or appetide.

A remedy.
The cause digested, all sower things and sauces does provoke an appetide, for
this matter look in appeticus in the Br^niary of health.

The second Chapter does show of little fat graynes in the brows.
ASarner or Arnarsa, be the Araby words. In latin if is named Aggregatio or
Materie pinguis in supercilia. In English it is named a fat matter in the
brows, the which be granul^s aggregacions.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of fleume or else or revive.

A remedy.
First wash the place with white wine three times, and after that anoyt the
brows with the oil of wormwood, and purge fleume.

The third Chapter does show of hoar and of white hairs.
CAnicies in the latin word. In greek it is named Polioros. In English it is
named hoar or white hairs.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come either naturally or else accidenttally, if it do come
naturally, it does come through age and melancoly humors, (...) accidentally,
it does come through fear, sorrow, great trouble, greet sickness, ^ it may come
of to much usage of vene^^ous acts.

A remedy.
If it do come naturally, that thing the which nature does give, no man by
lerning can take away. If it do come accide^tally, use ye Electuary de
Aromatibus, or the confection of Alharife, and anoint the head with the oil of
Costin.

The 4. Chapter does show of chafyng specially under the ears.
CAroli is the latin word. In english it is named cha^^ng, specially under ye
ears. And some does say it is an vlceracion betwixt the skin and the head
under the ears.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come diverse ways, as by evil humors in the head, or
lying with unclean or me^struous persons, or eating or drinking some evil
thing.

A remedy.
If age, time, and strength will pounit it, open a vein named Sophena, and
exhaust ii. or iii. onces of the side that ye impediment is in, and after ye
purge the matter, and take of Cassia, of Diacatolico^, of each half an once, of
ye electuary of Roses ii. drames, and with the water of endive make a pocio^
and drink it at.iii. times, and if need be (...) Clist^^s and suppositers, and
make plasters after this manner. Take of Malows, of Roses leaves, of Camomil,
of each an ha^dfull, of Mellilote an ounce and a half, sees all this in fair
water, and put into it the oil of Dil, of the oil of Roses, of the oil of
Camomil of each an ounce, and make plasters of it, and lay it to the place
diverse nights to bedward.

The 5. Chapter does show of Cartilages or Gristles.
CArtilago is the Latin word. In Greek it is named Chondros. In English it is
named Cartilages or gristles, to the which many impedimentes may come, as ache,
and wresting of the joints, and such like.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of some great cold, or else by some evil misfortune
or chance.

A remedy.
First the oil of Turpentine mixed with Netes foot oil is good, or a pich
clothe is good, and so is every thing the which is good for the joints,
therefore look in the Chapter named Iuncture in the Breuiary of health.

The 6. Chapter does show of a Surfeit.
CAros, is the greek word. In latin it is named Crapul^. In English it is
named a surfit.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come most commonly of evil rule or evil diet, or eating
or drinking to much meat or drink, or eating raw or evil meats and drinks.

A remedy.
The best remedy for a surfit is to absteyne long after that the surfeit is
taken, and to sleep much, or else to labor it out, and for this matter
purgacions be good, so be it that age and time will permit it. And after a
surfit a draught of Aqua vitie may be suffered

Chirius, is the juice proceeding of meat digested.

The 7. Chapter does show of Agnelles in a man's feet.
CLauus is the latin word, and some do name it Papule. In english it is named
corns or agnels in a ma^s fete or toes.

The cause of these impediments.
This impediment does come of wearing of strait shoes, by reason of the which
the feet and the toes does not lie at liberty with ease, and then labor with
heat obuiating or being concurant together does procreat or ingendreth this
aforesaid impediment.

A remedy.
First pare the Agnelles of corns with a sharp knife, unto the time it does
come to the quick flesh that the blood run out, wype away the blood and
then drop into the place or places red wax, and let it lie unto the time it be
consumed, and than if need be reitierate this matter.

The 8. Chapter does show of a man's neck.
COllum is the latin word. In greek it is named Auchin. In English it is
named a neck. In the neck may be many diseases, as the cricke, or shaking, or
such like.

The cause of these impediments.
These impedimentes does come either by lying a wrye with the neck, or else it
does come of some cold taken in the neck, or else by some reumaticke humor
distilling from the head to the neck, or it may come of drinking in ye morning
with out bread or meat eating, or else by some great fear, or else anger.

A remedy.
If it do come of reume purge reume, as it is specifyed in the Chapter named
Reuma in the Breuiary of health. If it do come of collar, or of debilitie of
spondilles, anoint the neck with the oil of Anthos, otherwise named the oil
of Rosemary flowers, and beware of stooping with the head and neck, for this
matter the oil of Spike is good. If it do come of a cricke or any other ways,
anoint the neck with oil of Turpentine compounde with a little Aqua vite, and
keep the neck bone warm.

The 9. Chapter does show of Pyles or swelling in the Foundement.
COndiloma is the Greek word. In Latin it is named Rugosum any tuberculum. Ths
Barbarous word is named Condolomata. In English it is named a swellying in the
foundement, and some does take for this pills the which I do take this
impediment of swelling does more infest women then men.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of reume and of the corrupcion of fleume.

A remedy.
First wash the place twice or thrice with white wine, and then use siccatiue
medecines.

The 10. Chapter does show of a man's Buttocke bones.
COxia is the Latin word. In Greek it is named Ichon. In English it is named
a buttocke bone, the which may have many displasurs, as by a fall, a stripe, a
broose, or such like.

A remedy.
Take of Smalage and of Louage, of each two handfulls, of Malowes.iiii.
handfuls, of Dear suet two ounces, sees all this in running water, and after
that bath and wash the place with the water, and then to bedward, lay the
substance upon the place. Or else take of ye oil of Turpentine.iii. ounces, and
compound it with Aqua vitie and anoint the place diverse times, or else take of
Nets foot oil.iii. ounces, of the oil of Spyke half an ounce, and anoint the
place as one should greece a pair of old boots.

For Crassitudo, look in the chapter named Pinguedo in the first book named
the Breuiary of health.

The 11. Chapter does show of a Demoniake person, the which is possessed of or
with the devil or devils.
DEmoniacus or Demoniaci, be the Latin words. In Greek it is named Demonici.
In English it is named he or they the which be mad and possessed of the devil
or deuilles, and their property is to hurt and kill themselves, or else to
hurt and kill any other thing, therefore let every man beware of them, and
keep them in a sure custody.

The cause of this matter.
This matter does pass all manner of sickenesses and diseases, and is a
fearful and terrible thing, to see a devil or deuylles should have so much
and so great a power over man as it is specifyed of such persons diverse times
in the Gospel, specially in the ninth Chapter of saint Mark. Christ sending
his disciples to preach the word of God, giving them power to make sick men
whole, lame men to go, blind to see. etc. Some of them did go by a man that
was possessed of devils, and they could not make him whole. Shortly to
conclude, Christ did make him whole. The disciples of Christ asked of him why
yt they could not make ye possessed man of ye devils whole. And Jesus Christ
said to them: this kind of deuilles can not be cast out without prayer and
fasting. Here it is to be noted that now a days, few or else none does set
by prayer or fasting, regarding not Gods words, in this matter I do fear
that such persons be possessed of the devil although they be not stark
mad, and to show further of demoniacke persons the which be stark mad.
The first time that I did dwell in Rome, there was a gentilwoman of Germani yt
which was possessed of devils, and was brought to Rome to be made whole. For
with in ye precinct of S. Peter's church without S. Peter's Chapel, stands a
pillar of white marble grated round about with Iron, to the which our Lord
Jesus Christ did lie in himself at his delivering unto Pilet, as ye Romynes
does say, to the which pillar, all those yt be possessed of ye devil, out of
diverse countries and nations, be brought thither, and as they say of Rome, such
persons be made there whole. Among all other this woman of Germany which is
CCCC. miles and odd, from Rome, was brought to ye pillar, I then there being
present, with great strength and violently with a xx. or mo men, this woman was
put into that pyller within the iron grate, and after her did go in a priest,
and did examine of the woman under this manner, in the Italia^ tongue. Thou
devil or devils, I do abjure thee by ye potenciall power of the Father and of
the Son our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the virtue of the holy ghost, that thou
do show to me, for what cause that thou do possess this woman: what words
was answered, I will not write, for men will not believe it, but would say it
were a foul and great lie, but I did hear that I was afraid to tarry any
longer, least yt the devils should have come out of her, and to have entered
into me, remembering what is specified in ye chapter of S. Matthew, when ye Jesus
Christ had made two men whole the which was possessed with a legion of devils.
A legion is ix.M.x.C. nynty and nine, the said devils did desire Jesus that
when they were expelled out of ye aforesaid two men ye they might enter into a
herd of hogs, and so they did, and the hogs did run into to Sea, and
were drowned. I considering this, and weke of faith and a feared, crossed my
self, and durst not to hear and see such matters, for it was to stupendous
and above all reason, if I should write it, and in this matter I did marvel of
an other thing if the efficacitie of such making one whole did rest in the
virtue that was in the pyller, or else in the words that the priest did speak, I
do judge it should be in the holy words that the priest did spek, and not in
the pyller, for and if it were in the pillar, the Bishops and the Cardinals
that has been many years past, and those that wear in my time, and they yt
has bin since, would have had it in more reverence, and not to suffer rain,
hayle, snow and such wether to fall on it, for it has no covering, but at last
when that I did consider that ye vernacle ye phis^omi of Christ and scarce the
sacrament of the altar was in manner uncovered, and al. s. Peter's Church down
in ruin, and utterly decayed and nothing set by, considering in old chapels,
baggers and baudes, hoores and thieves did lie within them, asses and moyles did
defyle within the precinct of the Church, and bying and selling there was used
within the precinct of the said Church that it did pytie my heart and mind to
come and see any time more the said place and Church. Then did I go among the
friars mendica^tes, and diverse times I did see reuelathes pro de functis hang
upon friars backs in walettes, then I went to other religious houses, as the
Celestines and to the Chapterhouse, and there I did see nulla ordo. And after
that I did go amongst the monks and canons and cardynalls, and there I did see
horrer inhabitants. Ten did I go round about Rome, and in every place I did
see Lechery and Boggery, deceit and vsery, in every corner and place. And if S.
Peter and Paul do lie in Rome they do lie in an hole under an Altar, having
as much gold and silver, or any other Jewel as I have about mynine eye, and if
it do rain, hayle, or snow, if ye wind stand Estwarde, it shall blow ye
rain, hayle or snow to S. Peter's spelunke, wherefore it makes many men to
think that the two holy Apostles should not lie in Rome, specially in the
place as ye Romans say they do lie. I do meruail greatly yt such an holy
place and so grate a Church as is in all the world, except S. Sophis church in
constantinople, should be in such a vile case as it is in, considering that ye
bishop of Romes pallice, and his castle named castle angil standing upon ye
water or great river of Tiber within Rome, and other of their places, and all
ye Cardinals places be so sumptiously maintained, as well with out as in
manner within, and yt they will see their Cathedral church to lie like a swynes
stie. Our Peter pence was well bestowed to the reedifying of S. Peter's church,
yt which did no good but to norish, and to maintain war. And shortly to
conclude, I did never see no virtue nor goodness in Rome, but in bishop Adrya^s
days, which would have reformed diverse inormites, and for his good will and
pretense, he was poisoned within iii. quarters of a year after he did come to
Rome, as this matter with many other matters mo, be expressed in a book of my
sermons, and now to conclude whosoever has been in Rome and has seen their
usage there, except grace do work above nature, he shall never be good man
after, be not these creatures possessed of the devil: This matter I do remit
to the judgment of ye reders, for god knows yt I do not write half as it is
or was, but yt I do write is but to true, yt more pity, as god knows. Do not
you think ye many in this country be possessed of ye devil, and be mad,
although they be not stark mad, who is blynder the^ he yt will not see, who is
madder the^ he yt does go abut to kill his own soul, he yt will not labor to
keep ye co^mandeme^ts of god, but daly will break the^, does kill his soul, who
is he yt loves god and his neighbor as he ought to do, but who is he yt now a
days does keep their holy days, and where be they yt does use any words but
swering lying or flau^dering, is ye one end of their tale. In all ye world there
is no region nor country ye does use more swearing the^ is used in England: for
a child ye scarce ca^ speak, a boy, a gyrle, a wenche, now a days will swear
as great oaths as an old knave and an old drab, it was used yt when swering
did come up first, that he that did swear should have a philip, give that knave
or drab a philip with a club, that they do stagger at it, and then they and
children would beware after that of swering, which is a damnable sin, yt
ve^gea^ce of god does often hang over them, and if they do not amend and take
repentance, they shall be dampened to hell, where they shall be mad for evermore
world without end. Wherefore I do counsel al such evil disposed persons of
what degree so ever they be of, amend these faults whiles they have leisure,
time and space, and do penance, for else there is no remedy but eternal
punishment.

A remedy.
Would to god that the king our sovereign Lord with his most honorable council
would, see a reformacion for this sweating and for Heresies, for the which
sins we have had great punishment, as by dear price of corn and other
vitailes, for no man can remedy these sins, but god and our king, for there be
a perilous number of the^ in England if they were diligently sought out, I do
speak of heretics, as for swerers a man need not to seek for them, for in ye
kings court and lords courts, in Cities, borows and in towns, and in every
house, in manner there is abominable swering, and no man does go about to redres
it, but does take swering as for no sin, which is a damnable sin, and they the
which does use it, be possessed of the devil, and no man can help them, but
God and our king. For Demoniacus look in the Chapter named Mania.

The 12. Chapter does show of inuoluntary pyssynge.
DIampnes is the greek word, and the Latins does use the said word. In
English it is named a passion of the bladder, of which inuoluntarely does pass
or issues out of the urine of some men that they can not keep their water
neither waking nor sleeping, and some men having this passion in their sleep
shall think and dreme that they do make water against a wall, a tree, or
hedge, or such like, and so dremyng they do make water in their bed.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of great debilitie and weknes of the bladder, or else
through great frigiditie or coldness of the bladder, or else of to much drinkyng
and slouthfulnes.

A remedy.
For a remedy look in the Chapter named Mictus, in the first book named the
Breuiary of health.

The 13. Chapter does show of the emunctory places.
EMunctoria, is the latin word. In English it is named ye Emu^ctory or
clensing places of man's body. Here is to be marked that man has three
principal members, yt heart, the brain and the liver, and every one of these
principal members has emunctorye places to cleanse themselves, as the hearts
emunctory places be under ye arm holes there where ye hairs does grow. The
brain has many emunctory places to purge himself, as the eyes, the ears,
the nose, the mouth, the hairs, and the pore of the head. The liver has
emunctory places, as the bladder, the foundement, and the flanks, or the share.

The 14. Chapter does show of the passion of the Liver.
Epatica passio, be the latin words. In English it is named the passion of the
Liver, and whosoever has this passion, does feel pain in the right side.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a colericke humor, or else of mixed humors, or of
menstruous humors.

A remedy.
First purge collar, and use easy purgacions, and beware of every thing that
doph hurt the liver, as hot wynes and spices, and Aqua vite, and use cold
things, as Sanders, Southistel, Endive, Dandelion, Cicory, and Liuerwort,
Letyce, and such like.

The 15. Chapter does show of a man's wesand.
EPigloton, is the greek word. In English it is named the flappe of the
wesand or the throat bell, yt which does divide the two cundites, the one is
the wesand the which wind does pass in and out^, and the other is named
Isophagon, through the which meat and drink does go into the stomach, as it
does appear in the Chapter named Oysponagos, in the Breuiary of health.

The.16. Chapter does show of excoriacion.
Excoriacio is the latin word. In English it is named excoriacion or taking
away the skin in any place of man's body. In latin it is named Malum Mule.

The cause of excoriacion.
Excoriacion does come two ways, either voluntary, or else inuoluntary, if it
be voluntary then the skin is taken of by some knife, or some other instrument,
and if it be inuoluntary, either it does come by chafyng or else by galling,
that is to say, either by going or riding.

A remedy.
Take of Rose leaves, of Plantaine leaves, of Malowes, of Myrtilles, of each
two handfuls, sees this in water, and put to it a little secke and wash the
place three nights to bedward, and if you can not get this, rub the place with
a talow candle.

The 17. Chapter does show of eructuacions or belching.
ERuctuacio, is the latin word. In english it is mined eructuacion or
belching.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of great ventositie in ye botome of the stomach, and
other while it does come of greedy eating.

A remedy.
In this matter use Diatriumpiperion dronken with wine, Yerapigra in this
matter is good, and so be dregs and Losanges made to break wind.

The.18. Chapter does show of spitting of blood through a cough.
EPima is the greek word. In latin it is named Sputum saniosum exiens cum
tussi. In English it is named spitting of blood with a cough, for this matter
look in the chapter named Emoptoica passio, in the first book named the
Breuiary of health.

The 19. Chapter does show of the kinds of Fluxes.
FLuxus ventris be the latin words. In English it is named the Flyxe, and
there be three kinds named in latin Lienteria, Diarthea, and Dissinteria. In
english it is named the Lyentery, the Diarchy, and the Dissentery. The Lientery
egesteth or does avoid the meat in manner as it was eaten. The Diarchy is a
common laxe. The Dissentery is ye bluddy Flyxe, and some does name these Flixes
after this manner. Intestinal, Epatial, and Sanguine. Intestinal comes day and
night with freting in the belly. Etpaticke or Epaticall Flixe comes without
pain pricking or fretting. The bluddy or sanguine Flixe makes excoriacion of
the guts with pain pricking and fretting.

The.20. Chapter does show of werinesse of a man's body.
FAtigacio, is the Latin word. In Greek it is named Ponos, or Camatos. In
English it is named werines of the body.

The cause of werines.
Werynes does come many ways, as by extreme labor, doing more the^ the
strength of ye body is able to perform, it may come of the debilitie of the
body, it may come through sickness, and it may come through ryding upon an evil
horse, or siting in an evil saddle, specially when ye horse is galled on the
back, or spore galled, then the horse is as weary of his master, as his
master is weary of him.

A remedy.
First after labor and werines, ease and rest is the best medicine. And if
such matters do come of debilitie or sickness, use a good diet, and to be
norished with good meats and drinks, and good lodging, and let no man labor
no more then the strength of the body is able to do, and to perform it. And
if it do come through riding upon an evil horse or saddle, let him never ride
in no saddle nor upon an horse, gelding, nor mare, nor other beast, and he
shall never be weary nor galled for such matters.

The 21. chapter does show of a man's Jaws.
FAuces is the latin word. In greek it is named Pharinges. In english it is
named a man's Jaws the which may have many impediments, as the Crampe and the
Palsy. etc.

The cause of these impediments.
These impediments does come of rume causing ache, or else it may come of a
brose or a stripe causing ye pain, or else it may be a palsy or a Crampe or
they may be out of joint.

A remedy.
If it do come of reume, purge reume, as it does appear in the Chapter named
Reuma. If it be out of joint strike or set it in a gain. If it do come either
of a palsy or of a crampe, use fricacions with the oil of Musterd seeds, or
else with Musterd and Castory.

The 22. Chapter does show of Pushes or wheales unnatural.
FOrmica miliaris, be the latin words. In english it is named pushes, pimples,
or little wheales.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come or collar or else of mixed humors, as of collar and
fleume, or of collar and melancoly. etc.

A remedy.
Use to eat the sirupe of Fumitery, and purge the matter with Diacatholicon
and Diafenicon or other purgacions, as the cause requires, and after that take
of Verdegrece, of honey, of roche Alome, of each half an ounce, of Rose water,
of Plantaine water, of the juice of Celondine, of each half an ounce, of white
Arsnecke the weight of.iii. d. boil all this together and wash or anoint the
place.

The 23. Chapter does show of a man's Knee or knees.
GEnu is the latin word. In greek it is named Goni. In English it is named a
man's knee the which may have diverse impediments, as ache, stifnes, swelling,
straining, and it may be out of joint, or else otherwise hurt, and it may come
by a gout or a siatieke passion, or some extrem cold there taken, or such
like impediments.

The cause of these impediments.
These impediments does come of evil order of a man's self, or evil diet, or
by misfortune, or of some principal sickness. etc.

A remedy.
I do not know a better remedy then fricacions or rubbings with a man's hand,
taking the oil of Turpentine with the fricacion or rubing, and for this matter
an hot Cow toorde is, not the worst medicine, or plaster applicated to the
place. etc.

The.24. Chapter does show of grosenes.
GRossities is the Barbarous word. In latin it is named Grassitudo. In greek
it is named Pachites. In English it is named grossenes.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come naturally, or else accidently, if it do come
naturally there is no remedy, if it do come accidently then it does come either
by great drinking, or by gross and great feeding, or else of to much cherishing
and nourishing of ones self.

A remedy.
Use purgacions and great study, and in meats and drinks use Peper, and eat
vinegar and sower sauces. For this matter look in the Chapter named Pinguedo
in the Breuiary of health.

The 25. Chapter does show of a man's goomes.
GIngiue is the latin word. In greek it is named Oula. In English it is named
the goomes the which may have many impedimentes, as wheles, blisters, fistles,
bleeding, excoriacion, and superfluous growing of the flesh of the goomes and
such like.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment most commonly does come of superabundance of reume distilling
from the head to the goomes and such like.

A remedy.
If it do come through reume, purge reume. etc. If it do come through any
Canker or fystle, look in the Chapters named Cancer and Fistula in the
Breuiary of health. If it do come of superfluous flesh remove the cause with an
ointme^t named Vnguentum Egipsiacum, and the water of Alome is good to the
goomes fricated or rubbed with sage leaves.

The 26. Chapter does show of difficultnes of opening and closing the eyes.
Guess is the Araby word. In latin it is named Difficultas aporiendi et
claudendi oculos. In English it is named when one can not with ease open and
shut the eye liddes.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of viscus reume and gross humors in the head.

A remedy.
First purge the head with gargarices and sternutacions, and than purge the
head and the stomach with pylles of Cochee, and eat not the heads nor brains
of the flesh nor fish, and beware to eat the fatnes of the fishes.

The 27. Chapter does show of the four kinds of the Gout.
GVrta is a Barbarous word, and there be iiii kinds named in latin Chiragra
Podagra, Sciatica, and Arterica, the one is in the hands and fingers, and
arms, the which is named Chiragra, the other is named Podagra, and that is in
the feet and the toes, and legs. The third does keep the hokill bone, and
does run to the knee, and in process of time it does descend to the ancle, and
to the little toe, and is named Sciatica. The fourth kind of the gout is
named the gout arreticke the which does run all the joints and parts of a
man's body. For these matters look in their Chapters in the first book named
the Breuiary of health.

The 28. Chapter does show of a man's throat.
GVtter is the latin word. In greek it is named Lariux. In english it is
named a throat ye which is ye whole space that does contain the principal way
yt is named Isophagon or the Merry and the principal way of the breath, the
which is named in Latin Canna pulmonis or Trachea arteria otherwise named in
English the wesand or the throt boll, and in this place may be engendered many
infirmities, as carnels, swellings, Apostumes, as the squinces, and horsenes
and such like, for the which look in the Chapters named Angina, Rancedo,
Apostema, in the first book named the Breuiary of health.

The 29. Chapter does show of Frantickenesse.
HYostianum is a kind of frantickenes, and it does take the name of a greek
word named Hiostianus the which in English it is named Henbane, for whosoever
does eat of Henbane or of an herb named Dwale shall fall into a
frantickenesse or a fantastical mind.

The cause is showed. A remedy.
First keep the pacient in a close chamber and let him have merry company about
him, and give to him gotes milk with sugar, and set him drink posset ale made
with gotes milk.iii. or.iiii. days. And if one can not get Gotes milk, use
for it Meth or Metheglin, or pure water with Sugar.

The.30. Chapter does show of a man's flanks or share.
INguine is the latin word. In greek it is named Bubones. In english it is
named a man's flanks or sharp the which may have diverse impedimentes, as
Carbocles, Apostumes, and such like.

The cause of these impediments.
These impedimentes and such like does come through the infection of the liver,
for those places be the Emunctory places of the liver.

A remedy.
Take of Malowes soden in ye broth ye flesh has been soden in.ii. handfuls, of
wheat flower, of barley flower, of each four ounces, make a plaster of it,
putting to it.ii. yolks of eggs and a little butter and oil Olive, and make
plasters, and lay it on the sore place, and after that, take of the roots of
white Lyllyes, of Holihocks, of each.iiii, ounces sethe this in water, and then
put to it of ye flower of line seed, of wheat flower three ounces of swines
greece two ounces, and when it is cold compound three yolks of eggs with it
and make plasters.

The 31. Chapter does show of a man's bowels.
INtestina is the latin word. In greek it is named Enteria In English it is
named a man's guts or bowels, the which may have diverse impedime^ts, as
fretting, or aching or such like.

The cause of these impediments.
These impediments does come either of cold or the collicke, or of worms, or
else of some great laxe, or of ye Iliake.

A remedy.
If it do come of cold keep the belly warm, and use warm meats, if it do
come of ye colike, or Iliacke, or of worms, or of any laxe, look in the
Chapter named Colica passio, vermes, and Diarrhea in the Breuiary of health.

The.32. Chapter does show of an hair lipped person.
Labrum leporium be the latin words. In English it is named Hare lypped.

The cause of this infirmity.
This impediment does come either naturally or else accidentally, if it do come
by nature the person was borne so, if it do come accidently it does come either
by a strype or by burning.

A remedy.
If it do come by nature, the flesh which does grow to the gummes must be re^ed
up with a sharp instrument and the vper side must be a little ripped, and
the.ii. sides of the hair lips must be excoriated, and the^ sticked with a
nedle and a good strong threede and the^ lay to it salues, if it do come by
burning look in the Chapter named Combustio. If it do come of a strype, make
it whole like an other wound.

The 33. Chapter does show of a man's side.
LAtus is the latin word. In greek it is named Plura. In English it is named a
side. In the side or sides may be many impediments, as impostumes and stitches,
and such like.

The cause of these impediments.
These impediments does come diverse ways, if it be in the right side, the
impediment does come of ye infection of the liver, if it be in the left side ye
splen may be infected, or else the sides may be impostumes stitches, or Ilica
passio, or such like, the which does come of ventositie or wind.

A remedy.
If the liver be the cause, look in the Chapter named Epar. If ye splen be the
cause, look in ye Chapter named Splen in the first book named the breuiary of
health. If it come other ways, take up the earth within a door that is well
trodden and pare it up with a spade after a cake and cast vinegar on it, and
tostt it against the fire, and in a linen cloth lay it hot to the side, and
use Clisters or suppositers, or else take easy purgacions, so that the belly be
not costiue, and beware of cold and of eating of fruits, or new bread, or new
ale, and of al things that does engender ventositie.

The 34. Chapter does show of a kind of furiousnes.
LImpha^icarom is a barbarous word, and is derived of two words of greek named
Limphati and Carom, of the which does come Limphatici which is to say mad or
furious, running about here and there as their fantasy will lead them.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a water and a wind intrused or enclosed in the
head, and it may come through reuishnes in setting thy mind to much of an
amorous or loving to much.

A remedy.
First purge the head with gargarices and sternutacions and with pills of
Cochee, and keep the pacient in a close chamber, and give to the pacient warm
meat.iii. times a day, and do as it is specified in the Chapter named
Phr^^itis and Mania, in the Breuiary of health.

The 35. Chapter does show of a kind of vometing.
LEpus marinus be the latin words. In English it is named a pain in the
belly, and will cause a man to vomit, and will cause the pacient to tweat for
pain.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of cold, and of ventositie, and it does differ from
the colicke and the Iliake.

A remedy.
First beware of cold, and then take a suppositer or two, and than take an
easy purgacion, and beware of eating of fruits, for this matter look in the
Breuiary of health.

The 36. Chapter does show of a cricke or an ache about the neck and the
shoulders.
LIpothomia is the Araby word. In latin it is named Dolor Scapularum. In
English it is named a cricke or an each about the shoulders and the neck, and
it will prick, and stiche, and ache.

The cause of these impediments.
These impediments does come of gross fumes the which does ascend by the
veins to the aforesaid places, and it may come of abundance of reume, or else
taking cold in those places, or else lying a wrye with the neck.

A remedy.
First keep the neck and the shoulders warm, then use tricacions, and anoint
the place with the oil of Anthos, and purge the head and stomach with pills
of Cochee.

The.37. Chapter does show of of a man's loins.
LVmbi is the latin word. In greek it is named Phrenes. In English it is named
the loins. And diverse impediments may come of them, as ache, sterknes, and
such like.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of taking of cold in the reigns of the back, or
in meddling to much with venerious acts, and it may come of a great strain or
of a great lift or such like.

A remedy.
A pich cloth made with pitch and a little Turpentine and wax, and Peper
worn.iii. or iiii. wekes is good, and the oil of Alabasterd, or else the oil
of scorpion is good.

The 38. Chapter does show of a consumption in old men.
MArasmon is the Araby word. In Latin it is named Consumptio. In English it
is named a Consumption, or consuming of the body in aged and old persons.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come through the dominion of an evil complexion that is
dry ground in aged persons, and is not like Ptisis, nor the eticke passion, for
it is without a fever

A remedy.
The chiefest remedy for this matter, is good cherishing, wherefore the
medicines must come out of the kitchen.

The 39. Chapter does show of a certain kind of scabbes.
MAlum mortuum be the latin words. In English it is named a kind of scabbes
the which most commonly be about the thies, the hammes and bouttockes.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a melancoly humor and some of these scabbes be
wet and some be dry.

A remedy.
First take a purgacion, and then use the medicines the which be specified in
the Chapter named Scabbes in the Breuiary of health.

The 40. Chapter does show of the Isophagon or the merry.
MEri or Isophagon be the latin words, it is a gutte behind the wesande
through the which the meat and drink does pass through into ye stomach, for it
does descend from epigloto^ to the orifyce of the stomach, for this matter
look in the chapter named Isaphagon in the first book named the Breuiary of
health.

The 41. Chapter does show of a blemsh in the eye.
MAcula is the latin word. Alerphati is the Araby word In english it is named a
blemish in the eye, and some does say it is when the eye is bloudshotten.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either of an evil humor or else by some stripe, or
such like matter.

A remedy.
Take the white of two eggs and beat it to a watrish spume, than put tow into
it, and iii nights lay it to the eye, and bynd it fast, and renew it every
night. And for this matter look in the Chapter named Aterphati in the first
book named the Breuiary of health.

The 42. Chapter does show of falling away of the hairs of the brows.
MAdarosis is the greek word. And some does name it Milphosis. In latin it is
named Oculorum morbus. In English it is named a falling away of the hairs in
the eye lyddes, the barbarous word is named Madrosis.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either by some kind of l^prousnes, or else by some
other kind of sickness.

A remedy.
For this matter look in the Chapter named Capillus in the first-booked named
the Breuiary of health.

The.43. Chapter does show of the kinds of madness.
THere be four kinds of madness, which be to say in latin Mania,
Melancholia, Frenisis, and demoniachus. They the which be maniake, in their
madness, he full of diuinacion, as thinking them self to conlure or to
create, or to make things that no man can do but god, and does presume upon
supernatural things, thinking that they can or do the thing the which is
impossible for man to do.

Melancholia, is another kind of madness, and they yt which be infested with
this madness, be cured in fear and dread, and doih think they shall never do
well, but ever be in parel either of soul or of body, or both, wherefore they
do flee from one place to an other, and can not tell where to be except they be
kept in safeguard. Fre^sies is an other kind of madness, and it does ever come in
a fever, they do rave and speak, and ca^ not tell what they say. Demoniachus or
Demoniaci is an other kind of madness. And they which be in this madness be
ever possessed of the diuill, and be diuelysh persons and will do much harm
and evil, worser then they the which be maniake, for maniake persons comes
of infirmities of the body, but demoniake persons be possessed of some evil
spyrite, as it does appear in the Chapter named Demoniachus.

Also there is another kind of madness named Lunaticus the which is madness
that does infest a man ones in a moan the which does cause one to be geryshe,
and wavering wittid, not constant, but fantastical. For all these matters look
further in the Chapters of these words prenominated in the Breuiary of health.

The.44. Chapter does show of a pellicle named the Miracke.
NIrach is the araby word. The Barbarous word is named the Mirac. In English
it is named the Hirack, the which is a pellicle, a call or a skin yt which does
tie ye intestines, and guts together, and is compound of a fat and fleshly
pannycle or skin with muscilages, the which may be relaxed as it does apeare in
ye Chapter named Ruptura in the first book named the Breuiary of health.

The 45. Chapter does show of the misentery that does tie the guts together.
MIsenterium is the latin word. In english it is named the mysentery which is a
pellicle or a skin the which does tie the guts together, and it is compound
of cords or stringes and fatnes the which does make a soft pannicle or
lygament, and some does hold opinion that the misentery and the miracke is one
pellicle, and I could never espy in no belly that I have seen open, that there
is no mo skins then the middriffe and this aforesaid Pannicle or Skin, and the
siphac the which does hold in the guts, as it does appear in the Chapter
named Siphac in the first book named the Breuiary of health.

For milfosis, look in the Chapter named Madarosis.

The.46, Chapter does show of the Maselles.
MOrbilli is the latin word. In English it is named the masels the which is a
faint sickness.

The cause of this sickness.
This sickness does come of a fleumatike humor and of the corruption of blood,
and also one infected person may infect an other.

A remedy.
First in ye morning give the pacient to drink a little Triacle or Metridatum
with a draught of ale warm. And keep the pacient warm, and let him not eat
nor drink nothing that is cold, nor for a space let him not go in the open
air, and use light meats of digestion for a space.

The 47. Chapter does show of the stringe or mary in a man's back.
NVca is the latin word. In greek it is named Nucha. In English it is named
the newke which is the mary of the string in the back bone and it is much
like to the brain of a man's head in coullor and in it may be great debillitie
and weakness, and it may be burst or cut a sunder by some stripe, brose, or
fall, when ye back is broken a sunder and if the newke be broken it can never
be made whole, the back may be set again in joint, how be it there shall
never remain a curuitie and crokednes.

A remedy to comfort the newke.
All restoratiue things does comfort the newke and so does sweet wines as
Muscadell, Basterde, Aligant, and the usage of clary is good to eat sodden or
fried with the yolks of eggs, and every thing that is restoratiue is good.

The 48. Chapter does show of a sinewe that is spronge.
N. Vreticus is the Barbarous word. In Greek it is named Nureticos. And some
latenist does name it Neruicus In English it is named sinowe spronge, as I do
take it now.

The cause of this impediment
This impediment does come of a strain or a fall.

A remedy.
For this matter the oil of Netes foot is good, and so is the oil of
Turpentine and such like.

For Napta look in the Chapter named Bocium in ye first book named the
Breuiary of health.

For Nebula, look in the Chapter named Albugo in the Breuiary of health.

The 49. Chapter does show of Yaning or gaping.
OScedo or Ossitacio be the latin words. In greek it is named Chasma. In
English it is named yeaning or gaping.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of vnlustines or else for lack of sleep, or else it
does come before a fever or an ague.

A remedy.
The chiefest remedy that I do know is to sleep enough, or else exercise the
boby with walking or laboring, for this matter look in the Chapter named
Ossitacio in the first book named the Breuiary of health.

I have read De Ostocopo, but it is long agone that I have forgotten what it
is. And when I did make this book I was there that I had no Auctours nor
doctors to help me, but only by practice

For Papule look in the Chapter named Clauus.

The 50. Chapter does show of a man's breast.
PEctus is the latin word. In greek it is named Itor. In English it is named a
breast the which in a man may have diverse diseases, as strains of the breast,
shortness of the wind or some Apostumacion or such like disease.

The cause of these impediments.
These impedimentes does come of evil diet, or of surfeting, or else taking
great cold upon an heat, and it may come of superabundance of evil humors.

A remedy.
First use easy purgacions, and anoynte the breast with the oil of sweet
Almons, or else take of the oil of sweet Almons, of Hens greece, of fresh
butter, of each of them an ounce, of the mary of a Calves leg or legs, half
an ounce, of wax half an ounce, compound all this together over a soft fire,
and anoint the breast diverse times, and use Locsanum de pino to eat morning,
noone, and at night.

The 51. Chapter does show of the precipitacion or falling down of the Matrix
or the Mother.
PRecipitacio matricis be the latin words. In greek it is named Propetia
mitras. In English it is named the falling down of the Matrix.

The cause of this infirmity.
This infirmity does come diverse ways, as by evil ordering of a woman when
she is delivered, or may come by great striving, or by a fall, or a broose or
such like matter.

A remedy.
If it do come of evil ordering of a woman when that she is delivered, it
must come of an inexpert Mi^wife. In my time as well here in England as in
other regions and of old antiquity, every Midwife should be presented with
honest women of great gravity to the bishop, and that they should testify for
her that they do present should be a sad woman, wise and discrete, having
experience and worthy to have the office of a Midwife. Then the Bishop with ye
council of a docter of physic ought to examine her, and to instruct her in
that thing that she is ignorant, and thus proved and amitted is a laudable
thing for and this were used in England there should not half so many women
miscary, nor so many children perished in every place in England as there be.
The Bishop ought to look on this matter. If the falling down of the Matrix
come any other ways as is rehearsed, do as it is specified in the falling out
of ones foundament. For this matter look in the Chapter named Anus in ye first
book named the Breuiary of health, and also in the Chapter named Matrix in the
first book. etc.

The 25. Chapter does show of a sore ronning over the face.
PEtigo is the latin word. In English it is named a sore, a scabbe, or a skurfe
that does run ^^^r all the face.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a menstruous humor engendered in the generation
of the pacient or else of some blast of wind corrupted, or else of
superabundance of reume.

A remedy.
First purge the head, and after that anoint the face with cream, and the oil
of bitter Almons.

The.53. Chapter does show of a gogle eye.
PEtus is the latin word. In English it is named gogle eyed. For this matter
look in the Chapter named Strabositas in the first book named the Breuiary of
health.

The.54. Chapter does show of a disease in the Lunges.
PVlmonia is the Latin word. In english it is named a eollection of
superfluites of a vile and a corrupt matter the which does engender some
Apostumacion. And there be two kinds, the one is engendered in the lunges and
is named pulmonia, or Pipulmonia, and some does name it Peripneumonia, the
other does cleave to the ribs, and is named Pluritis, or Periplumonia, or
Plurea, or Plurisis, or Pluris, or Pluresia all is one thing, save that some
words be Barbarous words. For these diseases look in the Chapters named
Peripneumonia, and Pluritis in the first book named the Breuiary of health.

The 55. Chapter does show of the pulses of a man.
PVlce is ye lattin word. In greek it is named Sphigmos. In English it is named
pulses. And there be.xii. pulses ye which does take there original of the
vital spirits, three of the which principal does long to the heart, the one
is under the left pappe, the other two does lie in the wrestes directly against
thommes. The brain has a respect to.vii. pulses.iiii. be principal, and three
be minors, the.iiii. principal pullses does lie thus, two in the temples, and
one going under a bone named the right furcle, and the other does lie in the
corner of the right side of the nose. And there be three minor pulses, the one
does lie in the corner of the left side of the nose, and the other two does lie
upon the mandibles of the two jaws. The liver has a respect to the two
pulses, the which does lie upon the feet. By these pulses expert Physicians
and Chirurgions does know by their knocking or claping, which principal
member is distempered, and whether the pacient be in peril, if any of the
principal pulces do not knock or clappe truly, keeping as true course as the
minutes of a clock, the pacient is in peril, how be it the pulses must go with
quicker agilitie then the minutes of a clock, for there is no peril in the
pacient, so be it that they do keep a true course in their knocking without
any pause or stopping, which is to say if the pulse do give v. knockes and do
pause at ye vi. knock, or else does knock vii. knockes, and do pause at the
viii. knock, or else does knock x. knockes and does leap over the xi. and
begins at xii. knockes and so forth, the pacient is in peril or else not, for
it is not in the agility, nor in the hard knocking of the pulses that the
peril is in, but in the pausing of the pulses is the danger, and therefore in
such cases, let the Phisicio^ be circumspect for sincopacions, and sounding of
the pacient, and set him upright in the bed with pillowes and let one sit at
the back, and give the pacient drink, and let the pacient smell to Rose water
and vinegar. Or else smell to amber de greece, or else rub the pulses with Aqua
vite.

The 56. Chapter does show of a white flawe or a blow.
REdunie is the latin word. And some does name it Rediuia. The Barbarous word
is named Redimie. In English it is named a white blow, or white flaw, the which
does grow about the root of the nail, the greeks does name it Paranochia,
medecines may be had for this cause my counsel is not to meddle with no
Chierurgery matters, for as much as Phisicions will not meddle with it.

The 57. Chapter does show of the raines of a man's back, and some do take it
for the Kidneis.
REnes is the latin word. In greek it is named Nephroi. In English it is named
the raynes of a man's back the which may have many impedimentes, as ache, the
cricke, and straining. etc.

Good for the Kidneyes or Raynes.
Bastard, Muscadel, Aligant, and Ipocras, new laid eggs, and rere roasted,
Clary fried with yolks of eggs and sugar. Rice potage, and al young flesh
that does suck, and sweet meats is good for the kidneis and the raines of a
man's back, and these oyntmentes be good, Populion, oil of Alabaster, oil of
scorpions, and such.

The.58. Chapter does show of shreuels in a man's face and hands.
RVge is the latin word. In English it is named shreuels which is a running
together of ye skin in a man's face and neck, or the forehead, and the hands,
or other places.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come diverse ways, as by bending of the brows, leanness
of body, great sickness, age and venerious acts, and such like, and it does
sooner come to lean men then to fat men.

A remedy.
Anoint the face, forehead, neck, and hands with the oil of Costine, and use
the medicines yt is used or written in the Chapters named Cutis, Facies, and
Pulchritudo in the first book named the Breuiary of health.

The 39. Chapter does show of evil taking of the breath.
SAnsugium is the latin word. In English it is named an evil taking of the
breath, for one shall take in more breath then he can expel.

The cause of this impediment
This impediment does come of the lunges, or else of straitnes of the breast, and
it may come of great sighing.

A remedy.
First for this matter above the Chapter named Pectus, and in the Chapters
named Asthma and Disma, in ye first book you shall find remedies, and for this
matter use ptisanes.

The 60. Chapter does show of the poores in a man.
SArcoides is the greek word. In latin it is named Poor. In English it is
named poores the which be in a man's skin, out of the which does issue the
sweat the which does come out of man's body? And in the time that the poores
be open, and that the sweat does come forth. I do council al men to take no
sudden cold, neither to wash hands nor face, nor to go amongst any
infectious people infected with leprousnes, or with the pestilence, fevers or
agues, ye sweting sickness, or the small pockes, the masels, and such like. And
also to beware of contagious airs, as draugtes, dunghilles, prisons, dead
cadauers, or carin, common pissing places, and such like. And to restrickt
sweating is good to take the powder of rose leaves, and myrtils.

The 61. Chapter does show of three kinds of Scabbes.
SCabies is the latin word. In greek it is named Psora. In English it is named
Scabbes. And there be three kinds named in latin. Scabies lupinosa, Scabies
furfuria and Scabies scabina. In English it is named scabbes like hoppes, and
scabs like branne, and scabs like benes. For this matter look in the Chapter
named Scabies in the first book.

Scarificatio is named Scarification, which is when a Chierurgion does with an
instrument scotch and does cut little small cuttes diverse times upon a place
that is appostumated.

The 62. chapter does show of swelling above nature.
SCirtus is the greek word. In latin it is named Tuber. In English it is an
hard swelling above nature. For all such swellings you shall find in the first
book named the Breuiary of health, sufficient remedies.

The 63. Chapter does show of the sinews of the eyes.
SIrrigis is the greek word. In latin it is named Nerui oculorum. In English
it is named ii. little sinews the one of the which does stretch from the right
side of the brain to the left eye. And the other sinew does stretch from the
left side of the brain to the right eye cross wise. And if any of them be
broken, the right side of that side is utterly perished.

The 64. chapter does show of Sleep.
SOpor or Sompnus be the latin words. In greek it is named Hipnos. In English
it is named sleep and some does sleep to much, and some does sleep to little,
and some ca^ not sleep,

The cause of sleeping to much.
The cause of to much sleeping does come of a fleumaticke complexion, or else of
great graueditie in the head through reume, or else it may come through some
great disease, as the phrenise, or pestilence and such like.

A remedy.
First if the cause do come of reume in the head purge the head, if it do come
by any other sickness, remove the cause and take away the impediment.

The cause of them that can not sleep.
They that can not sleep, either it does come of weakness or lightness of the
brain, or else of great fasting and sleeping with an empty stomach, or else
through great pain and extreme sickness, or else it may come of studying or
musing to much of some matter in the which some persons does wade to far,
bringing them selves into fantasies.

A remedy.
Take Populion an ounce and an half, of the oil of Popy, of the oil of water
Lillies, of each half an ounce, mix this together and with low lay it to the
temples. Or else take of wilow leaves of Letuce, of the rynes of white Popy, of
Violettes, of water Lillies, of henbane, of each half a handful, seth this in
the water of Sorell and Nightshade, and with tow lay it to the temples. Or else
make a dormitory of Henbaine and lay it to the temples.

The 65. Chapter does show of grossenes, of the brows.
SIlach is the Araby word. In latin it is named Grosities Palpebrum. In
English it is named grossenes of the brows, having rednes with vlceracion, and
falling away of the hairs.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a reumaticke humor distilling out of the head to
the brows, or else through some leprous humor.

A remedy.
First purge reume and anoint the brows with the oil of sweet Almons.

The 66. Chapter does show of grinding of ones teeth in ones sleep.
STridor dentium be the latin words. In english it is named grynding of ones
teeth sleeping.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of debilitie of the lacertes moving them violently,
and it is a kind of crampe.

A remedy.
First purge the head and stomach with pills of Cochee, and anoint the jaws
with the oil of Musterde.

The 67. Chapter does show of astunning or amassed.
STupor is the latin word. In English it is named astunning or amassed, or such
like,

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either by a fear or a palsy, or else of some great
doubt or admiracion.

A remedy.
If it come of a Palsy, look in the chapter named Spasme, in the first book
named the Breuiary of health. If it do come otherwise, refrain from causes
aforesaid.

The 68. Chapter does show what is the Sinterisy.
SInterisis is the greek word. In latin it is named Attencio or Co^ceruacio
bona. The barbarous word is named Sinderisis. In english it is named a power of
the soul, yt which does reluct against vices and sin, or redargueth or
reprehendeth sin, having ever a zeal to keep his soul clean.

The 69. Chapter does show of the passion of the spleen.
SPlenatica passio be the lattin words. In english it is named the passion of
the spleen.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come by thought, anger or care, or sorrow, of
imprisonment, of fear and dread, and for lack of meat and drink. Also it
may come of great solitudenes, or solicitudenes to study, or to be occupied
about many matters

A remedy.
The chiefest remedy for this matter is to use honest and merry company and to
be iocund and not to muse upon no matter, but to leave of at pleasure, and not
to study upon any supernatural things, specially those things ye reason can
not comprehend, nor use not to lean or stoop down to write or read, and
beware of sle^^ (...) the after none, and use ye medicines, the which be
expressed in the chapter named the spleen in ye first book named the Breuiary
of health.

The 70. Chapter does show of Scaels that may be on the skine and flesh.
SQuamme is ye latin word. In english it is named skales which is a kind of
scabbes that does lie on the skin and flesh.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of collar adusted, or else of melancoly. For a remedy
look in the Chapter named Scabies in the first book. etc.

The.71. Chapter does show of Sighing or sobbing.
SVspirium is the Latin word. In greek it is named Sceuagmos. In english it
is named sighing or sobbing.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come either by thought or pensifulnes, or else by fear,
or weping, or by repletion, or by some evil corruption in the stomach.

A remedy.
First after every sigh make an hem, or cough after it, and use mirth or merry
company, and muse not upon unkindness, and if it do come of the corruption of
the stomach, first purge ye stomach and the^ use to eat a race of grene
ginger, and drink a draught or two of wine, and use to eat in sauces the
powder of mintes.

The 72. Chapter does show of drawing up of the mouth toward the ear.
TOrtura is the latin word. In english it is named a drawing up to the mouth
toward the ear.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come of a spasmous cause, some does say it is a palsy,
but it is a kind of a crampe.

A remedy.
First use gargarice, and then fricacions or rubbinges with musterd reducing
the mouth and lips co^trarily. For this matter look in the Chapter named
Tortura in the Breuiary of health.

The 73. Chapter does show of a man's urine.
VRina is the latin word. In greek it is named Curia. In English it is named an
vryne. The latin word is named Vrina, as Egidius does say, is derived out of a
word of greek named Vrith, which is to say in latin Demo^stratio. In english
it is named a demonstration or showing, for by the urine the human
disposicions be showed.

In vrines or water there be many things to be considered and marked: first
to mark the quantity of the vryne, then to be marked the.iii. regions with
the circle, then to know the xx. colors of vrynes, and the xx. contents, and
what all this does signify.

First as concerning the quantity of an urine if the vryne be but litile in
quantity it is an evil sign. If there be a good quantity that the regions
may be a partly and distinctly decerned with the circle, it is a good sign.

Seconddaryly as concerning the regions. The superiall region with the circle
does pertain to the head and brain. The mediall region does perteyne to the
heart, the lunges, and the stomach, and of all other official members, which be
about the midriffe named in latin Diafragma. The inferiall region does perteine
to ye liver, and to ye kidneys, and the raynes of the back and to the other
inferiall members. And by the contents and the colors the which be in ye
aforesaid regions, an expert Physician shall know what grief, sickness, or
diseases, any man or woman has in their body as it shall be declared more
plainly in the colors and contents.

Thirdly as concerning the circles of the vrines the which does show the
disposicion of the brain and the head.

If the circle be wanne or whitish, it does signify a reumaticke head, and
there is pain in the hinder part of the head.

If the circle be thick, it does signify abundance of reume about the brain.

If the circle be waterish of colur it does signify great frigioicie and
wekenes about the brain letting the brain to cast out superfluities.

If the circle be purple of color and thick, it does signify ache in the
hinder part of the head.

If the circle be pale and thin of color, it does signify distemperance and
coldness in the left side of the head.

If the circle be red and thin of color it does signify pain in the right
side of the head coming of collor.

If the circle be bluish like to lead, it does signify the falling sickness,
and the apoplexi and mortificacion of the brain.

The circle yt which is green in color, in a fever does signify pain in the
head coming by collar, and if it do continue it will engender an impostume yt
which will cause ye frenisy.

The circle the which is quauering or quaking does signify pain in the raines
of the back.

The circle the which is black in the color it does signify mortificacion.

Of the.xx. contents in an urine and first of the ipostasy.
THe ypostasy is one of the chiefest things to be marked in an urine, the
hypostasye is the substance of the urine. I do not speak here of the quantity
of the urine, but of the quality of ye substance the which is with in ye
urine, ye which does hang like a pine appele in an urine, except the urine be
broken and turned out of his proper nature, or else that the pacient making the
urine be of great debilitie, or that the urine be carried, and so the Ipostasy
break, al other vrines having a residence most commonly has an ypostasy, yt
which if it be white it is laudable, and if it be black: it is no good sign.
For this matter a man must mark whether the ipostasy be more in the superiall
region, then in ye mediall regio^ or the inferial region, or whether it does
hold or hang universally in all the regions a like. And also to mark whether
it be whole, round, or fract, and also to know what time in the day it does
fall to his residence, and if the urine be carried, the Ipostasy must needs be
fracted as I say and have no residence, wherefore I advertise all men and women
the which would have their urine truly seen, let them send for an expert
Physician the which may see the urine with the Ipostasi vnfracted, and not be
carried neither a horse back nor a foot, least the physician be diceiued, and
the pacient put to hinderance. Many men will say such a doctor of physic and
such a man that uses the practice of physic, can tell this and that and so
forth. And I do say that an vrin is a strumpet, or an harlot, for it will lie,
and the best doctor of physic of the^ all may be deceived in an urine, and
his cunning and learning not a jot the worse. I had rather to see the egistion
of a sick person, then the urine, both be good to look on as it does appear
in the chapter named Egestion in the first book named the Breuiary of health.
etc. A red or green Ipostasy is no good sign.

Of the spume of urine.
THe spume of an urine is a froth the which is white and does lie upon ye
urine, And there be three kinds which be to say, a windy spume the which is
full of burbles, and that does signify great ve^tositie and much viscositie in
ye body.

The second spume is less the^ the first, and it does signify fleume and
corruption in the stomach.

The third spume is like the foam of a Bores mouth and it does hang together
without breaking, and it does signify unkind heat about the liver, or else of
evil humors with in the body or else it may come of both, that is to say, of
ebullycion of the liver, or of agilitie of evil humors.

If the spume be yelowe, it does signify dystemperance of the liver ingendryng
the yelow Iawnes.

If the spume be grene, it does signify the grene Iawnes or the grene sickness
named in (...) Agriaca.

If the spume be black, it do^^ ^ifie the black iawnes or mortificacion,
except menstruo^ (...) or a great broose does demonstrate the contrary.

Of burbles in vrines.
THere is a differene betwixt a spume and burbles of the spume I have spoken
of, and there be two kinds of burbels the one is resident or permanent, and the
other is not resident nor permanent. Resident burbles does signify ventositie
intrused in the body, or else of a sickness that has continued long, and will
continue with out remedy be found.

The burbles which be not permanent but does break quickly does signify
debilitie or wekenes.

Burbles cleuing to the vrinal does signify that the body is repleted with
many evil humors.

Burbles also does signify the stone in the raines of the back, named in
greek Nephresis, and in latin Calculus inrenibus.

Of clouds in vrines.
Clouds in vrines be much like a spyder web and it does signify the
digestion coming through the imbecilitie of the liver and wekenes of the stomach.

If the clouds be reddish, it does signify that the sickness is very sharp or
strong.

If the clouds be yelowish, swart, or of purple color, it does signify
califaction of the liver.

If the clouds be fattishe, it does signify unkind heat in the spiritual
members, and wasting of natural moisture in man.

Of slimy and congelate matter in an urine like the white of a raw egg half
decocted.
IF there do appear in any urine a slymy matter like the white of a raw egg,
it does signify pain in the raynes of ye back, and in the issue of the
bladder, and pain about the foundement, and in the head of the yerd, and if it
be not helped betime the pacient shall die of that infirmity.

Of distillacions of nature.
When I did dwell in Scotland and did pracctise there phisycke I had two lords
in cure that had dystillacion like to nature, and so has many men in all
regions. For this matter let no man dysmaye himself, for it is a thing soon
helped, as it does appear in the first book in the Chapter named Gomotthea
passio in the Breuiary of health.

Of matter and filth issuing with the urine.
IF there be any matter, or fylth in ye residence of an urine on any vlcerus
matter, either it does come from the raines of the back, or else from the
bladder, or else from the liver, if it do come from the raynes of the back, the
pacient does feel pain about the loins and flanks, if it do come from the
bladder the pacie^t does feel pain about the share, if it come from the
liver, the pacient does feel pain about the right side.

Of fatnes in an urine.
Diverse times a fatnes lying upon an urine does signify consuming of nature,
or else dissoluinge of the kidneys and the fatnes of the raynes of the back and
here is to be noted that there is two kinds of fatnes in an vrin, ye one is
greasy and the other is to an oyley substance, if it be greasy it does signify
debilitie and weknes, and wasting of nature if it be oylyshe it does signify a
fever hectycke or else some other sickness that will fall to the pacient
shortly after.

Of a bloody urine.
AN urine yt which blud has turned it into rednes does come.iii. manner of
ways, it may come from the liver, it may come from a vein named Kyli or else
it may come from the bladder, if it do come from the bladder, the vryn will
stink and the substance will fall to the bottom, and the pacient feleth pain
to the share or bladder and yerde, if the blood do come from the liver ye
urine is clear bloddish and the pacient does feel pain in the right side, if
it do come of a vein named Kyli, than some veins the which has a recourse
to that vein is broken and the blood so stylling from the vein does make it
bloudish, also blood may come in an urine from the raines of the back and than
into the bladder, and than the pacient does feel pain and pricking in the
raynes of the back the which does come of the rasing of a stone in one or
other condyte or side.

Of gravel in a man's urine.
Diverse times grauel does issue out with urine, and there be iii. kinds of
grauel which be to say, red grauel, black gravel, and white grauel, if the
gravel be whytish it does signify that the pacient has or shall have the
stone engendered in the bladder, if the gravel be red the stone does engender
in the raines of the back, and if the gravel be black it is engendered of a
melancoly humor.

Of an urine the which has a content like chopped hairs.
IF in an vryne do appear a content like as hairs were chopped in it: it does
signify resolucion and wasting in the raynes of the back.

Of an urine the which has a content like branne.
A Furfurous water or urine that like as branne were in it, does signify an
unkind heat with a consumption, and if the pacient have no Fever the bladder
is scabbed or scuruie.

Of an urine the which has a content like scales.
AN urine in the which is a content like scales bigger the^ a furfurous
content, it does signify long sickness, and if it be thick and heavy, it does
signify mortificacion.

Of an other sort of scales in the content of an vryne.
IN this matter take good heed, that thou do mark a furfurous urine from a
squamus water, and a squamus water from a scaly water, for as I said the
furfurous water is like branne, and does signify as I have said. The squamous
water somewhat bigger then the flakes of branne, does signifye a consumption,
but a scaly water like the scales of fishes does demonstrate a fever Eticke.

Of motes in the vryne.
MOtes in an vryne be like the motes the which does fall and ascend in the sun
shining in at a door or window, does signify the gout or corruption of
humors in the inferial parts, and reume is a great matter in this cause.

Of distillacion of nature with the urine.
IF nature do appear in an urine, it does signify that some polucion or
decepering of nature was had lately before, if no such thing were before had,
but did come by chance or debilitie, it does signify the Palsye, or falling
sickness, or the apoplexy or such like.

Of a content in an urine like ashes.
A Content in an urine like to ashes, does signify the piles and the Emorodes,
or a woman's flowers or terms, or pain in the inferiall parts.

Of raw humors in an urine.
AN vryne the which has raw humors in it, if they do lie in the bottom of
the urine, it does signify pain in the raynes of the back, and sometime in
the codde, and if the humors be in the middle region, it does signify wind in
the stomach and in the guts and excess of meat and drink, if the humors be
in the supreme region, it does signify an evil spleen, a reumaticke head, and
shortness of wind.

Of the colors of urine, and first of a black vryne.
IN this manner I will begin first with a black water, and so I will end with a
black water. Al auctours in manner affirms, and does say, that it is
impossible to make whole them ye which be sick, in whose vrines any nigerdity
or blackenes has dominion, I was of that opinion my self, unto the time that
I was often deceived and proved this matter contrary, as I will rehearse. I did
practice physic first in Scotland, and after that I had tarried there one
year, I returned then into England, and did come to a Town in Yorkshire named
Cockold, where a bocher had a son that fell out of a high hay ricke: and his
water was brought to me, and when I did see the vryne black, I did judge death
according to ye saying of such auctours as I had red, this notwithstanding, the
father of the child did desire me to give his son so sore broosed, a
medecin for a broose, and the pacient recovered. Also master Edmond Mount
person, had a French priest named sir James, yt which did fall out of the top
of an Elm at his place at wheley, and he being spechles and as dead: for a
space God and I recovered him, his black urine notwithstanding.

A woman in Scotland having the black Iawnes, having a black water was
recovered under my hands at Lychco with the lowgh beyond Edinborowe.

Also diverse menstruous women being gross or corrupted having their terms,
diverse times will have a black water and yet no manner of parel. Al other
black waters does demonstrate death.

Of a bluish urine.
An vryne which is blew or bluish does signify either a flix or else an
Hiedropsie, and pain and displeasure in the liver.

Of a white water like milk.
An vryne like to milk or having a milkish color, does signify pain in the
spleen, and evil degestion and a cold liver, and also such waters does show
infection of the pestilence, and worms, and the kinds of Hiedropsies.

Of a white water like water or glass.
An vryne that is like water or glass, does signify excess in taking to much
drink, or else pains in the raynes of the back, and Ipecrates says in his
afforismus, that a white clear is evil in nefretike and a frantic person, and
Theophilus affirms the said words in his judicial of vrines, and I do say
that they the which does drink much shall have a white and thin water, and
peradventure have none of these aforesaid impedimentes, and yet the liver is
distempered.

Of an vryne named in Greek Inop os the which is a dim water.
AN vryne that is dim and dark, does signify adustion of blood, and look
what judgment is given in an vryne named Kianos, and that is to be judged here
in Inopos, for these vrines does take their color of the superfluity of
blood, or else these vrines be engendered of the distemperance of the liver, for
as much as the liver can not divide ye pure from the vnpure, and if any of
these two aforesaid vrynes have no residence in the bottom of the urine with a
fever, it does signify death, and without a fever it does demonstrate either
some kinds of ye gout or hidedropsies, or else scabbes.

Of an vrin that is green of color.
An urine that is green does signify adustion of coler. The Physician in
Greece and in Constantinoble, does determine that a read urine does signify
adustion of coler: how be it, if it be a green water, it does come of coler,
and it does signify the green Iawnes or the green sickness, and resolucion of
the natural humiditie of the pacient.

Of an urine that is grenish.
An vrin that is greenish does signify adustion of blood, the which does
induce the yelow Iaunes, and the turning of a man's natural complexion into
unnatural.

Of an urine that is dark or a dim green.
An vrin that is dark and dim green, does signify adustion coler and
melancoly, and does induce the black Iaunes.

Of an urine that is falow named in greek Kyropos.
An urine that is falow like the hair of a falowe beast, does signify an
hiedropsie or a wind under the side, or the stone in the raynes of the back,
or Apostumacion in the longes and fleuem.

Of a yelow urine.
An urine that is yelowish like ye yelowishnes of an horn of a Lantern that
is bright: does signifye that the melancoly has great dominion in the body,
and if there be any thing of waterish color, it does signify that fleume has
great dominion in the body.

Of an urine named Cacopos.
An urine the which is betwixt whitish and yelowish of color: does signify
abundance of fleume and melancoly and imperfect digestion, and if there be any
sand or gravel in it, it does signifye the stone.

Of an urine that is pale.
An urine that is pale of color does signifye abundance of fleume, and if it
be spisse or thick, it does signify a cotidiane, and if it be remyshe, then is
there great coldness in the body.

Of an urine that is palishe.
An urine that is palish does signify abundance of fleume and some chler, and
great distemperance of the body.

Of water that is citrine.
An urine that is citrine, is a color the which is betwixt yelow and reddysh,
and if the urine be bright it does signify distemperance of the spleen, and if
the urine be thin of substance, it does signify distemperance of the liver,
and if such an urine be full of burbles, it does signify that the lunges be
out of order, and distemperated.

Of a subcitrine urine.
An urine that is subcitrine is a color the which is betwixt a whitish color
and a yelowe, and it does signify abundance of fleume mixed with coler.

Of an urine that is ruddy like gold.
An urine the which is ruddy like unto gold does signify a beginning of some
sickness engendered in the liver and the stomach, and if it be thin in substance
it does signify abundance of fleume the which will engender some of the kinds
of feueres.

Of an urine that is ruddish, dymmer then gold.
An urine the which is ruddishe somewhat dimmer then gold, does signify in
children distempera^ce, in aged persons it is a good sign of health: so be it
ye conte^s be good, for wise and expert Phisicions does judge more by the
contents the^ by the color of vrines, for there is not the wisest Physician
lyning, but that, I being an whole man, may deceive him by my urine, and they
shall judge a sickness that I have not, nor never had, and all is through
distemperance of the body used the day before that the urine is made in the
morning, and thus I do say as for the colors of vrins is a strumpet or a
harlot, and in it many phisi^s may be deceived but as touching the contents of
vrins, expert Phisicions may know the infirmities of a pacient vnfallybly.

Of an urine which is as read as a burning cole.
An urine the which is red of color like burning coals does signify a fever,
or else inflamacion of the liver, and if the urine be cloudy, it does signify a
pluresy, and if the vryne be thick, then the blood is infected, and if the
urine be thin and cloudy it does signify that color abounds.

Of an urine that is red as blood.
An urine that is red like blood and does stink, it does signify a putrified
fe^e^, or else some impediment in the inferial parts

Of an urine that is reddyshe like waterish blood.
An urine that is like waterish blood does signify putrefaction or corruption
of the inferiall parts and represents those things that an urine the which
is red.

Of a black water.
I said that I would begin with a black water, and so end with a black
water. A black water does signify, except in certain causes, as I have showed
in the beginning of this Chapter, death.

To know a woman's water from a man's water after the course of physic, it is a
dyfficyle thing, for all the rules of physic says that a woman's water is
more remysse then a man's water, and that a woman's water has little spume or
none, except she be with child yt she be past bering of children, or have
retentio^ of her flowers, in such women the urine will be (...): and for as
much as they be full of imbecility, I will not petrate of their vrines forther
then I have done.

Addicions for certain impedimentes.
A Froncle is a little impostume inge^dred of a gross blood.

A remedy.
Take the root of white lillies, of malowes of each ii. ounces, sta^pe the^
together with swines greece and make a plaster, for the rest look in the first
book in the Chap. named Elepmo^.

For a broken shinne.
Take an old Oken lefe that is gentle and fine, and lay it to the sore or
place, but first wash ye place with white wine, if need shall require.

Dislocacion is when a bone is out of joint.

For one that has lost his spech or is tongue tied.
If one have lost his speech, either it is through some great sickness, or else
through a Palsye.

A remedy.
Take a grain of castory and lay it on the tongue, and do so three times and
use gargarices. If one be tongue tied, there is under the tongue a string ye
which must be cut when ye sign is not in the head nor in the throat, and wash
then the mouth with white wine, or with a little secke and water of pla^taine,
and use Yeralogodio^ nimphitum or yara sacra logosti. Children that can not
speak unto the time that they do come to a certain age, does speak
these.iii. words. Aua, Acca, Agon, Aua does signify father, Acca, does
signify joy or mirth, Agon does signify dolor or sorrow, al infantes does
speak these words if a man do mark the^, and what way does signify when they
cry, I could never read of it, if it do signify any thing, it is displeasure
or not contented.

Trifera sarasonica, or else Serpents flesh eaten does make an old man young,
such things is much used in Turkey and christentie in high countries.

Wea is the lattin word. In English it is named a pellicle or a skine in the
eye, she which does cover a part of the eye named Chronea.

SOmnea is the latin word. In greek it is named Enipnia. In English it is
named dreams.

The cause of this impediment.
This impediment does come most commonly of wekenes or emptines of the head, or
else of superfluous humors, or else of fantasticalnes, or collucion, or
illucions of the devil, it may come also by God through ye good Angel or such
like matters: but specially of fraction of the mind and extreme sickness does
hapen to many men.

A remedy.
For this matter use dormitary, and refrain from such matters as should be the
occasion of such matters, and be not costiue. etc.

Thus ends these books to the honor of the father, and the son, and the
holy ghost, to the profit of all poor men and women. etc. Amen.
The Table
THe first chap. does show of the distemperance of the stomoke fol. 2. the 2.
chapter does show of little fat grains in the brows. fol. eodem the 3.
chapter does show of hoar and white hairs fol. eo. the 4. chapter does show
of chafing under the ears. folio. eodem the 5. chapter does show of
Cartilages or grestles. fol. eodem the 6. chapter does show of surfite. folio.
3. the 7. chapter does show of agnels in a man's feet. folio. eodem the 8.
chapter does show of a man's neck. fol. eo the 9. chapter does show of the
pills or swelling in the foundement fol. eodem the 10. chapter does show of a
man's buttocke bones. fol. 4. the 11. chapter does show of ad moniahe person
which is possessed of the devil fol. eo. the 12. chapter does show of
inuoluntary pissing. fol. 6. the 13. chapter does show of emunctory places.
fol. 7. the 14, chapter does show of the passion of the Liver fol eo the 15.
chahter does show of a man's wesand. fol. eodem the 16. chapter does show of
excoriacion. fol. eo. the 17. chapter does show of eructuacions or belching
folio. eodem the 18. chapter does show of spitting of blood through a cough
fol. 8. the 19. chapter does show of kind or fluxes. fol. eodem the 20. chapter
does show of werines of a man's body folio. eodem the 21. chapter does show of
a man's Jaws. fol. eodem the 22. chapter does show of pushes or wheales
unnatural. folio. 9. the 23. chapter does show of a man's knee or knees. fol.
eo. the 24. chapter does show of grossnesse fol. eodem the 25. chapter does
show of a man's gummes. fol. eodem the 26. chapter does show of opening and
closing of the eyes. folio eodem the 27. chapter does show of the four kinds
of gout. folio. 10. the 28. chapter does show of a man's throat. fol. eodem
the 29. chapter does show of frantickenes fol. eodem the 33. chapter does
show of a man's side. fol. eod. The 34. Chapter does show of a kind of
furiousness. fol. eodem the 35. chapter does show of vometing. fo. 12. the
36. chapter does show of a cricke in the neck and shoulders fol. eod the 37.
chapter does show of a man's loins. fol eod the 38. chapter does show of a
consumption in old men fo. eo the 39. chahter does show of a certain kind
of skabbes. fol. eod the 40. chapter does show of the Isophagon or the merry.
fo. 13 the 41. chapter does show of a blemish in the eye. fol. eod the 42.
chapter does show of falling away of the hears. fol. eod the 43. chapter does
show of the kinds of madness. fol. eod the 44. chapter does show of a
pellycle named the miracke. fol. 14 the 45. chapter does show of the
misentery. fol. eod. the 46. chap. does show of the masels. fol. eodem the 47.
chapter does show of the string or mary in a man's back fol. eodem the 48.
chapter does show of a sinewe that is spronge. fol. eod the 49. chapter does
show of yaning or gaping. folio. 15 the 50. chapter does show of a man's breast.
fol. eod the 51. chapter does show of the falling down of the matrix. fol.
eod the 52 chapter does show of a sore running over the face. fol. 16 the 53.
chapter does show of gogle eyes. fol. eod the 54. chapter does show of a
disease in the lunges. fol. eod the 55. chapter does show of the pulses of a
man. fol. eod the 56. chapter does show of a white flawe or a blow. fol. eod
the 57. chapter does show of the raynes of a man's back. fol. eod the 58.
chapter does show of shreuils in a man's face or hands. fol. eod the 59.
chapter does show of evil taking of the breath. fol. eod the 60. chapter
does show of the pores in man. fol. eod the 61. chapter does show of three
kind of scabbes. fol. 18 the 62. chapter does show of swelling above nature.
fol. eod the 63. chapter does show of a sinewe in the eyes. fol. eod the 64.
chapter does show of folio. eodem the 65. chap does show of grossness of the
brows fol. eo. the 66. chapter does show of grinding of a man's teeth in his
sleep fol. 19 the 67 chapter does show of astunning or a mazed fol. eo. the 68
chap. does show what is a sinterisey fol. eodem the 69 chap. does show of the
passion of the spleen fol. eo. the 70. chap. does show of skales that may be on
the skin and flesh folio eodem the 71. chapter does show of sighing or sobbing
fol. eo. the 72. chapter does show of drawing up of the mouth toward the ear
folio 20 the 73. chapter does show of a man's urine fol. eodem for a broken
shinne fol. 25 for one that has lost his spech or else is tongue tied fol.
eodem
Finis Tabula.

