Hereafter follows a compendyous Regyment or a dyetary of Health, made in
Mou^tpyllier, compyled by Andrew Boorde of Physycke doctor, dedycated to the
armypotent Prince, and valiant Lord Thomas Duke of Northfolche.

Galyen prince, of Physycke.


The preface. To the precelle^t and army potent prince, lord Thomas duke of
Northfolch, Andrew Board of Physycke doctor does surrender humyle co^mendacyon.
FOr asmoch as it pleased your grace to send for me (to sir Robert Drewry
knight) which was the year in the which lord Thomas cardynal bishop of york
was commanded to go to his see of york to have my cou^ceyll in Physycke in
certain urgent causes, requyryng to ye sauyte of your body, at yt time I being
but a young doctor in my scye^ce or faculte, durst not to presume to mynyster
any medysone to you without the counceyl of master doctor Butte, which had a
long continuau^ce with you and a great cognyscyon, not only of your
infyrmyte, but also of your complexyon and diet. But he not coming to your
grace, thanks be to God, your grace recuperatyng your health. And conuocated
through the kings goodness to wait on his prepotent mageste: I than did pass
over the sees again. And did go to all the vnyuersyties and scoles approbated,
and being within the precinct of chrystendome. And all was done for to have a
true cognyscyon of the practis of Physycke, the which obtained. I than
cotydyally remembryng your bountyfull goodness showed to me, and also being at
the well head of Physycke, did consult with many egregyous Doctors of Physycke
/ what matter I should write, the which might be acceptable, and profitable for
the sauyte of your body. The said doctors knowing my true intencyon, did
aduertyse me to compyle and make some book of dyete, the which not only should
do your grace pleasure, but also it should be necessary and profitable for your
noble posterite, and for many other men the which would follow the effycacyte
of this book / the which is called the Regyme^t or dietary of health. And where
that I do speak in this book but of dietes, and other things concerning the
same. If any man therefore would have remedy for any syckenes or dyseases, let
him look in a book of my making, named ye Breuyare of health. But if it shall
please your grace to look on a book, the which I did make in Mountpyller, named
ye Introductory of knowledge, there shall you se many new matters / the which I
have no doubt but that your grace will accept and like the book, the which is
a pryntynge beside saint Dunstons church within Temple bar over against ye
Temple. And where I have dedycated this book to your grace, and have not
ornated and florysshed it with eloquent speech and rethorycke terms, ye which
in all wrytynges is used these modernall days, I do submyt me to your
bou^tyful goodness. And also diverse times in my wrytynges I do write words of
mirth / truly it is for no other intencyon / but to make your grace merry, for
mirth is one of the chefest things of Physycke the which does aduertyse every
man to be merry, and to beware of pencyfulnes, trusting to your affluent
goodness to take no displeasure with any contents of this book, but to accept
my good will and dylygent labor. And furthermore I do trust to your
superabundau^t gracyousnes, that you will consydre ye love and zeal, the which
I have to your prosperyte, and that I do it for a common we will, the which I
beseech Jesus christ long to contynew to his will and pleasure in this life.
And after this transytory life remunerate you with celestyal joy and eternal
glory.

From Mountpyllier. The.v. day of May. The year of our Lord Jesus Christ.
M.v.C.xlij.
Here follows the Table of the Chapytres.
THe first Chapter does show where a man should cytuat or set his mancyon
place or house, for the health of his body. The second Chapter does show a
man how he should build his house, and that the prospect be good for ye
conseruacion of health. The third Chapitre does show a man to build his house
in a pure and fresshe air for to lengthen his life. The.iiii. Chapter does
show under what manner a man should build his house or mansyon in eschewynge
things that should shorten his life. The.v. Chapter does show how a man
should order his house concerning the implementes to comfort the spyrytes of
man. The.vi. Chapter does show a man how he should order his house and
howsholde, and to live in quyetnes. The.vii. Chapter does show how the head of
a house, or a howseholder should exercise him self for the health of the soul
and body. The.viii. Chapter does show how a man should order him self in
slepynge, and watchynge, and in his apparel werynge. The.ix. Chapitre does
show that replecion or surfetynge does much harm to nature, and that
abstynence is the chyfest medyson of all medysons. The.x. Chapter treats of
all manner of drynkes, as of water, of wine, of ale, of bear, of cider, of
meade, of metheglyn, and of whay. The.xi. Chapter treats of bread. The.xii.
Chapter of potage, of sewe, of stew pottes, of grewell, of fyrmente, of pease
potage, of almon milk, of ryce potage, of cawdels, of culleses, of alebrues,
of honey soppes, and of all other manner of brothes. The.xiii. Chapitre treats
of whyt meat as of eggs, butter, chese, milk, crayme, posettes, of almon
butter, and of bean butter. The.xiiii. Chapter treats of fysshe. The.xv.
Chapter treats of wyld foul, of tame foul, and of birds. The.xvi.
Chapter treats of flesh, wild and domestycall. The.xvii. Chapter
treats of partyculer things of fysshe and flesh. The.xviii. Chapitre
treats of roast meat of fryde meat, of soden or boiled meat, of bruled
meat and of baken meat. The.xix. Chapter treats of roots. The.xx.
Chapter treats of certain usual herbs. The.xxi. Chapter treats of
fruytes. The.xxii. Chapter treats of spyces. The.xxiii. Chapter shows a
dyate for sanguyne men. The.xxiiii. Chapter shows a dyate for flematycke
men. The.xxv. Chapter shows a dyate for colorycke men. The.xxvi. Chapter
does show a dyate for melancoly men. The.xxvii. Chapter treats of a dyate
and of an order to be used in the pestyferous time of ye pestilence and the
swetyng syckenes. The.xxviii. Chapter treats of a dyate for them the which
be in an agew or a fever. The.xxix. Chapitre treats of a dyate for them the
which have the Ilyacke, or the colycke and the stone. The.xxx. Chapter
treats of a dyate for them the which have any of the kinds of the gowtes.
The.xxxi. Chapitre treats of a dyate for them the which have any kinds of
lepored. The.xxxii. Chapter treats of a dyate for them the which have any
of the kinds of the falling syckenes. The.xxxiii. Chapter treats of a
dyate for them which have any pain in their head. The.xxxiiii. Chapter
treats of a dyate for them the which be in a consumpcyon. The.xxxv. Chapter
treats of a dyate for them the which be asmatycke men, being short wynded or
lacking breath. The.xxxvi. Chapter does show a dyate for them the which
has the palsy. The.xxxvii. Chapitre does show an order and a dyate for them yt
be mad and out of their wit. The.xxxviii. Chapter treats of a dyate for them
which have any kind of the dropsy The.xxxix. Chapter treats of a general
dyate for all manner of men or women being sick or whole. The.xl. Chapter
does show an order or a fasshyon, how a sick man shall be ordered in his
syckenes. And how a sick man should be used that is lykly to dye.
Here ends the Table.
Here follows the dyetary or the regyment of health.
GALIEN PRINCE OF PHISYCKE.


The first Chapter does show where a man should cytuate or set his mancyon
place or house for the health of his body.
WHat man of honor or worship, or other estate, the which does pretend to
build a house or any mancyon place to inhabyte him self. Or else does
pretend to alter his house, or to alter old buyldyng in to co^modyous and
pleasant building, not only for his own proper co^modite, wealth, and health,
but also for other men the which will resort to him: having also a respect to
his posterite. First it is necessary and expedyent for him to take heed, what
counceyll God did give to Abraham, and after that to take heed what counceyll
God did give to Moses, and to the children of Israel, as it appears in
the.xiii chapter of Exodi. and the.xx. chapter of Numeri, and the.vi.
chapter of Deutronomii. And also in the book of Levites, saying first to
Abraham. Go thou forth of thy country and from thy cognacion or kynred. And
come thou in to the country the which I will show to the a country abundynge
or plentyfull of milk and hu^ny. Here is to be noted that where there is
plenty of milk there is plenty of pasture, and no skarsyte of water, and where
there is plenty of hu^ny there is no skarsyte but plentyfulnesse of woddes, for
there be mo bees in woddes, and so consequently abundaunce of hu^ny, than there
be bees, or hu^ny, or wax in ye hyues in gardyns or orchardes, wherefore it
appears that whosoever will build a mancyon place or a house, he must cytuat
and set it there where he must be sure to have both water and wood, except for
pleasure he will build a house in or by some city or great town the which
be not destitude of such co^modytes. But he the which will dwell at pleasure,
and for proffyte, and health of his body he must dwell at elbowe rome having
water and wood anexed to his place or house, for if he be destytuted of any of
the pryncypalles, that is to say first of water for to wasshe and to wrynge, to
bake and to brewe, and diverse other causes specially for parrell the which
might fall by fire were a great dysco^modyous thing. And better it were to
lack wood than to lack water the premysses considered, although that wood
is a necessary thing, not only for fuel, but also for other vrge^t causes,
specially concerning building and teperacyons.

The second Chapter does show a man, how he should build his house or
mansyon, that the prospect be fair and good for the conseruacyon of health.
AFter that a man have chosen a conuenyent soil and place according to his
mind and purpose to build his house or mansyon on, he must have before cast in
his mind, that ye prospect to and fro the place be pleasant, fair, and good
to the eye, to behold ye woods, the waters, the feldes, the vales, the
hills, and the plain ground. And that every thing be desent and fair to
the eye, not only within the precyncte of the place appointed to build a
mansyon or a house to se the commodities about it, but also it may be placable
to the eyes of all men to se and to behold when they be a good dystauntce of
from the place, that it do stand co^modyously. For the co^modyous buyldyng of
a place does not only satysfye the mind of the inhabytour, but also it does
comfort and reioyseth a man's heart to se it, specially the pulcruse
prospect. For my consayte is such that I had rather not to buyld a mansyon or
a house, than to build one without a good respect in it, to it, and from it.
For and the eye be not satysfyed, ye mind can not be contented. And the mind
can not be contented the heart can not be pleased, if the heart and mind be
not pleased, nature does abhor. And if nature do abhor, mortyfycacyon of
the vytall, and anymall, and spyrytuall powers do consequently follow.

The third Chapter does show a man to build his house in a pure and a
fresshe air to lengthen his life.
THere is nothing except poison that does putryfye or does corrupt the blood
of man and also does mortyfye the spyrytes of man, as does a corrupt and a
contagyous air. For Galyen terapentice nono says, whyther we will or will
not we must grant unto every man air, for without the air no man can live.
The air can not be to clean and pure, considering it does compass us round
about, and we do receive it in to us, we can not be without it, for we live by
it as the fysshe lives by the water. Good air therefore is to be praised. For
if the air be fryske, pure, and clean about the mansyon or house it does
conserve the life of man, it does comfort the brain. And the powers natural
anymall and spyrytuall, ingendrynge and making good blood, in the which
consysteth the life of man. And contraryly evil and corrupt airs does infecte
the blood, and does ingendre many corrupt humors, and does putryfye the
brain, and does corrupt the heart, and therefore it does bread many dyseases
and infyrmytyes through the which man's life is abreuyated and shortened. Many
things does infect, putryfye, and corrupts the air, as the influence of
sundry sterres, and standing waters, stynkyng mystes, and marshes, caryn lyinge
long above the ground, much people in a small rome lying uncleanly, and being
fylthe and sluttysshe, wherefore he that does pretend to build his mansyon or
house, he must provide that he do not cytuat his house nyghe to any marsshe or
marysshe grownde, that there be not nygh to the place stynkynge and putryfyed
standing waters, pooles, pondes, nor myers, but at lestwyse that such waters do
stand upon a stony or a grauayle grownde myxt with claye, and that some
fresshe spring have a recourse to nourysshe and to refresshe the said standing
waters. Also there must be circumspection had that there be not about ye house
or mansyon no stynkynge dyches, gutters, nor canelles, nor corrupt dunghylles,
nor synkes, except they be often and diverse times mu^dyfyed and made clean.
Swepyng of howses and chambres ought not to be done as long as any honest man
is within the precynct of the house, for the dust does putryfy the air making
it dence. Also nygh to the place let another flax nor hemp be watered, and
beware of the snoffe of candelles, and of the savor of apples for these
things be contagyous and infectyue. Also mysty and clowdy days, impetous and
vehement wyndes, troublous and vaporous wether is not good to labor in it to
open the pores to let in infectious air. Furthermore beware of pyssynge in
drawghtes, and permyt no common pyssyng place be about the house or mansyon,
and let the common house of casement be over some water, or else elongated
from the house. And beware of emptynge of pysse pottes and pyssing in chymnes,
so that all evil and contagyous airs may be expelled, and clean air kept
vnputryfyed. And of all things let the buttery, the celler, the kytchen, the
larder house, with all other howses of offices be kept clean, that there be no
fylth in them, but good and odyferous savors, and to expel and expulse all
corrupt and contagyous air, look in the.xxvii. Chapter of this book.

The.iiij. Chapter does show under what manner and fasshyon a man should build
his house or mansyon, in exchewynge things that shortneth man's life.
When a man does begin to bylde his house or ma^syon place he must provide
(says Jesus christ) before yt he begin to build for all things necessary for
the performacyon of it, lest that when he has made his fou^dacion, and can not
fynysshe his work that he has begone, every man will deryde him saying. This
man did begin to build, but he can not fynysshe or make an end of his purpose,
for a man must consider the exspence before he do begin to build, for there
goes to building many a nail, many pynnes, many lathes, and many tyles or
slates or strawes, beside other greater charges, as tymbre, bordes, lyme, sand,
stones or brycke, beside the workmanshyp and the implementes. But a man the
which have puruyd or has in store to accomplysshe his purpose, and has
chosen a good soil and place to cytuat his house or mansyon, and that the
prospecte be good, and that the air be pure, fryske and clean. Then he that
will build, let him make his fundacyon upon a graualy grownde myxt with clay,
or else let him build upon a roche of stone, or else upon an hill or a hills
side. And order and edyfy the house so that the pryncypall and chief prospectes
may be Eest and weest, specially North eest, Sowth eest, and South weest, for
the merydyal wind of al wyndes is the most worst, for the Southwynde does
corrupt and does make evil vapors. The Eest wind is temperate, fryske, and
fragrau^t. The weest wind is mutable. The North wind purges ill vapors,
wherefore better it is of ye two worst that the wyndowes do open plain North
than plain Sowth, although that Jeremy says, from the North depends all
evil. And also it is written in Cantica cantorum. Rise up North wind and come
thou Sowth wind and parfyat my gardayne. Make the hall under such a fasshyon,
that the parler be anexed to the head of the hall. And the buttery and pantry
be at the lower end of the hall, the seller under the pantry set somewhat
abase, the kychen set somewhat a base from ye buttry and pantry, coming with an
entry by the wall of the buttry, the pastry house and the larder house anexed
to the kychen. Than deuyde the lodgings by the cyrcuyte of the quadryuyall
court, and let the gate house be opposyt or against the hall door (not
dyrectly) but ye hall door standing a base, and the gate house in the mydle of
the front entering in to the place, let the pryue chamber be anaxed to ye
chamber of astate, with other chambres necessary for the building, so that
many of the chambres may have a prospecte in to the Chapel. If there be an
utter court made, make it quadryuyal with howses of easementes, and but one
stable for horses of pleasure, and se no fylth nor dong be within the court,
nor cast at the back side, but se the donge to be carried far from the
mansyon. Also the stables and the slaughter house, a dyery if any be kept
should be elongated the space of a quarter of a mile from the place. And also
the back house and brew house should be a dystaunce from the place and from
other buyldyng, when all the mansyon is edyfyed and buylte, if there be a moote
made about it, there should some fresshe spring come to it, and diverse times
the moote ought to be skowered and kept clean from mudde and wedes. And in no
wise let not the fylth of the kychen descend in to the moote. Furthermore it
is a co^modyous and a pleasant thing to a mansyon to have an orcherd of
soundry fruytes, but it is more co^modiouse to have a fair gardain repleted
with herbs of aromatyck and redole^t savors. In the gardayne may be a poole
or two for fysshe if the pooles be clean kept. Also a park repleted with dear
and conyes is a necessary and a pleasant thing to be anexed to a mansyon. A
dove house also is a necessary thing about a mansyon place. And among other
things a pair of buttes is a decent thing about a mansyon, and other while
for a great man necessary it is for to pass his time with bowls in an aly,
when all this is fynysshed, and the mansyon replenysshed with Implementes.
There must be a fire kept co^tynually for a space to dry up the contagyous
moysters of the walls, and the savor of the lyme and sand. And after that a
man may ly and dwell in the said mansyon without taking any inconuenyence of
syckenes.

The.v. Chapter does show how a man should order his house consernynge the
Implementes to comfort the spyrytes of man.
WHen a man has buylt his ma^syon, and has his howses necessary about his
place, if he have not howsholde stuff or implementes the which be needful,
but must borowe of his nayghbours, he than is put to a shefte and to a great
after deal, for these men the which do brew in a botyl and bake in a walet, it
will be long or he can by Jack a salet, yet every thing must have a
beginning, and every man must do after his possessions or abylyte, this
notwithstanding better it is not to set up a howseholde or hospytalyte than to
set up household lacking the performacyon of it, as now to ron for malt, and
by and by for salt, now to send for bread, and by and by to send for a
shepes head, and now to send for this, and now to send for that, and by
and by he does send he can not tell for what, such things is no prouysion, but
it is a great abusyon. Thus a man shall lose his thryfte, and be put to a
shefte, his goods shall never increase, and he shall not be in rest nor peace,
but ever in carcke and care, for his purse will ever be bare, wherefore I do
counceyll every man, to provide for him self as soon as he can, for if of
implementes he be destytuted, men will call him light wytted, to set up a great
house, and is not able to keep man nor mowse, wherefore let every man look or he
lepe, for many corns makes a great hepe.

The.vj. Chapter does show how a man should order his house and howseholde,
and to live quyetly.
Who soever he be that will keep an house, he must order the expenses of his
house according to the rent of his lands. And if he have no lands he must
order his house after his lucre winning or gaynes. For he that will spend
more in his house, than the rentes of his lands, or his gaynes does attayn to,
he shall fall to pouerte, and necessite will urge cause and compel him to sell his
land, or to waste his stock, as it is daily seen by experye^ce of many men,
wherefore they the which will exchewe such prodygalyte and inconuenyence, must
deuyde his rentes porcyon and exspences, whereby that he does live in to.iii.
equal porcyons or parts. The first part must serve to provide for meat and
drink, and all other necessary things for the sustencyon of the howseholde.
The second porcyon or part must be reserved for apparel, not only for a
man's own self, but for all his howseholde, and for his servants wages,
deductynge somewhat of this porcyon in alms deed to pore neighbors and pore
people, fulfyllynge other of the.vii. works of mercy. The.iii. porcyon or
part must be reserved for vrge^t eauses in time of need, as in syckenesse,
reparacyon of howses, with many other cotydyall exspences, beside rewards and
the charges of a man's last end. If a man do exsyde this order he may soon fall
in det, the which is a dangerous thing many ways beside the bringing a man
to trouble. And he that is ones behind hand and in trouble, he can not be in
quietness of mind, the which does perturbe the heart, and so consequently
does shorten a man's life, wherefore there is no wise man but he will exchewe
this inconuenyence, and will cast before what shall follow after. And in no wise
to set up a howseholde, before he has made prouysyon to keep a house. For if
a man shall bye every thing that belongs to the keeping of his house with his
penny, it will be long or he be rich, and long or that he can keep a good
house. But he is wise in my conceyte that will have or he do set up his
howseholde.ii. or.iii. years rent in his cofer. And if he have no lands than
he must provide for necessary things or that he begin howseholde, leest that
he repent him self after, through the which he do fall in to pencyfulnes, and
after that in to syckenes and dyseases, living not quyetly, whereby he shall
abreuyate his life.

The.vij. Chapter does show how the head of a house, or a howseholder should
exercise him self, for the health of the soul and body.
AFter that a man has provided all things necessary for his house and for his
howseholde, expedyent it is for him to know, how he should exercise him self
both bodily and ghostly. For there is no catholycke or christen man living, but
he is bound in conscience to be more circu^specter about the wealth of his
soul then the health of his body. Our savior Jesus Christ says, what shall it
profit unto man if he geat all the world and lose him self, and bring him
self to a detryme^t, wherefore it appears that a man ought to be circumspecte
for the health and wealth of his soul. For he is bound so to live, that night
and day and at all hours he should be ready, than when he is called for to
depart out of this world he should not fear to dye, saying these words with
saint Ambrose. I fear not to dye, because we have a good god, when a man has
prepared for his soul, and has subdued sensualyte, and that he has brought
him self in a trade, or a usage of a ghostly or a catholycke living in
obseruyng the commandments of God, than he must study to rule and to govern
them the which be in his howseholde, or under his custody or domynyon, to se
yt they be not idle, for king Henry the eight said when he was young, ydlenes
is chief maistres of vices all. And also the head of a house must over se that
they the which be under his tuyssyon serve god the holy days as dylygently,
ye and more dylygentler than to do their work the feryall days, refraynynge
them from vice and sin, compellynge them to observe the commandments of
God, specially to punysshe swearers, for in all the world there is not such
odyble swearyng as is used in England, specially among youth and children,
which is a detestable thing to here it, and no man does go about to punysshe
it. Such things reformed than may an howseholder be glad not cessynge to
instruct them the which be ygnorant, but also he must contynewe in showing
good example of living, than may he rejoice in God and be merry, the which
mirth and reioysyng does lengthen a man's life, and does expel syckenes.

The.viij. Chapter does show how a man should order him self in slepynge and
watchynge, and in weryng his apparel.
When a man has exercysed him self in the day time as is rehearsed, he may
sleep soundly and surely in god what chance soever do fortune in the night.
Moderate sleep is most praised for it does make parfyte degestyon, it does
nourysshe the blood, and does qualyfye the heat of the liver, it does acuate,
quycken, and refressheth the memory, it does restore nature, and does quiet all
the humors and pulses in man, and does anymate, and does comfort all the
natural and anymall and spyrytuall powers of man. And such moderate sleep is
acceptable in the sight of God the premysses in the aforesaid Chapter observed
and kept. And contraryly i^moderate sleep and sluggyshnes does humecte and
makes light the brain, it does ingendre rewme and impostumes, it is evil for
the palsy whyther it be universal or partyculer, it is evil for ye falling
syckenes called Epilencia, Analencia, and Cathalencia, Appoplesia, Soda, with
all other infyrmytyes in the head, for it induces and causes oblyuyousnes,
for it does obfuske and does obnebulate the memory and the quyckenes of wit.
And shortly to conclude it does perturbe the natural, and anymall, and
spyrytuall powers of man. And specially it does instygate and led a man to
sin, and does induce and infer breuyte of life, and detestably it displeases
God. Our lord Jesus Christ did not only bid or command his dyscyples to
watch, but did anymat them and al other so to do saying. I say not only to
you watch, but to all men I say watch. And to Peter he said, myghtest not
thou one hour watch with me, although these holy scryptures with many other
mo the which I might allygate for me, although they be not greatly referred to
this se^ce, yet it may stand here with my purpose and matter without
reprehensyon. These matters here need not to be rehearsed, wherefore I do return
to my purpose, and do say that the moderacyon of sleep should be mesured
according to the natural co^plexyon of man, and in any wise to have a respect
to the strength and the debylyte to age and youth, and to syckenes and health of
man. First as concerning ye natural complexyon of man, as sanguyne and
colorycke men.vii. hours is suffycyent for them. And now considering the
imbecyllyte and wekenes of nature a flemytycke man may sleep.ix. hours or
more. Melancoly men may take their pleasure, for they be receptacle and the
dragges of all the other humors. Secondaryly youth and age would have
temporau^ce in slepynge. Thyrdly strength may suffer a brount in watch, the
which debylyte and wekenes can not. As I will show by a famylyer example. There
were two men set at the dyce together a day and a night and more, the weke man
said to him I can play no longer. The strong man said to him fie on the
benche whystler wylt thou sterte away now. The weke man to satysfye the
strong man's mind, approyted, and desire plays with his fellow through ye
which he does kyl him self. The strong man does him self little pleasure all
things considered, the which I do pass over, wherefore I will return to the
sick man, which may sleep at all times when that he may get it, but if he
may sleep at any time best it is for him to refrayn from sleep in the day, and
to take his natural rest at night when all things is or should be at rest and
peace, but he must do as his infyrmyte will permyt and suffer. whole men of
what age or complexyon soever they be of should take their natural rest and
sleep in the night, and to exchew merydyall sleep. But an need shall compel a
man to sleep after his meat, let him make a pause, and than let him stand and
lean and sleep against a cupborde, or else let him sytte up right in a chair
and sleep. Slepynge after a full stomach does ingendre diverse infyrmyties, it
does hurt the splen, it relaxeth the synewes, it does ingendre the dropsyes
and the gowte, and does make a man look evil colored. Beware of Veneryous
acts before the first sleep, and specially beware of such things after dinner
or after a full stomach, for it does ingendre the crampe, the gowte, and other
displeasures. To bedwarde be you merry, or have merry company about you, so that
to bedwarde no anger nor heaviness, sorrow nor pencyfulnes do trouble or disquyet
you. To bedwarde and also in the morning use to have a fire i^ your chamber to
wast and consume the evil vapors within the chamber, for the breath of man
may putryfye the air within the chamber. I do aduertyse you not to stand nor
to sit by the fire, but stand or sit a good way of from the fire taking the
flauour of it, for fire does aryfye and does dry up a man's blood, and does
make sterke the synewes and joints of man. In the night let the wyndowes of
your house, specially of your chamber be closed, when you be in your bed lie a
little while on your left side, and sleep on your right side. And when you do
wake of your first sleep make water if you feel your bladder charged, and than
sleep on the left side, and look as often as you do wake so often turn
yourselfe in the bed from the one side to the other. To sleep grouelynge upon
the stomach and belly is not good, oneles the stomach be slow and tarde of
digestyon, but better it is to lay your hand or your bedfelowes hand over
your stomach, than to lie grouelyng. To sleep on ye back vpryght is utterly
to be abhorred, when yt you do sleep let not your neck another your shoulders,
another your hands nor fete, nor no other place of your body lie bare
vndyscouered. Sleep not with an empty stomach, nor sleep not after that you
have eaten meat one hour or two after. In your beed lie with your heed
somewhat high, lest that the meat which is in your stomach through eructuacyons
or some other cause ascend to ye gryfe of the stomach Let your night cap be of
skarlet, and this I do aduertyse you for to cause to be made a good thycke
quylt of cotton, or else of pure flocks or of clean woull, and let the
covering of it be of white fustyan, and lay it on the fether beed that you do
lie on, and in your beed lie not to hot nor cold, but in a temporaunce. Old
ancient doctors of Physycke says. viii. hours of sleep in So^mer and.ix.
hours of sleep in winter is suffycyent for any man, but I do think that sleep
ought to be taken as the complexyon of man is, when you do rise in the
morenynge, rise with mirth and remember God. Let your hosen be brusshed within
and without, and flauour the insyde of them against the fire, use lynen sockes
or lynnen hosen next your legs, when you be out of your bed stretche forth
your legs and arms and your body, coughe and spyt and than go to your stole
to make your egestyon, and exonerate your self at all times that nature would
expel. For if you do make any restryction in keeping your egestion or your
vryne or ventosyte, it may put you to dyspleasure in bredyng diverse
infyrmyties. After you have euacuated your body, and trussed your points,
kayme your head often, and so do diverse times in the day. And wasshe your
hands and wrestes, your face and eyes and your tethe with cold water, and
after that you be apparelled walk in your gardayne or park a thousand pace
or two, and than great and noble men does use to here mass, and other men that
can not do so but must apply their busynes, does serve God with some prayers
surrendrynge thanks to him for his many fold goodness, with askyng mercy for
their offenses, and before you go to your refection moderatly exercise your
body with some labor or playing at the tennys, or casting a bowl, or paysyng
wayghtes or plomettes of led in your hands or some other thing to open your
poores, and to augment natural hete. At dinner and supper use not to drink of
sundry drynkes, and eat not of diverse meats but feed of two or three dysshes
at the most. After that you have dyned and supped labor not by and by after,
but make a pause sitting or standing upright the space of an hour or more
with some pastyme, drink not much after dinner. At your supper use light meats
of digestyon, and refrain from gross meats, go not unto bed with a full nor
emptye stomach. And after your supper make a pause or you go to bed, and go
to bed as I said with mirth. Furthermore as concerning your apparel in
winter next your sherte use to were a petycote of skarlet, your doubletvse at
pleasure, but I do aduertyse you to line your Iacket under this fasshyon or
manner, by you fine skyn^es of white lamb and black lamb, and let your
skynner cut both the sorts of the skynnes in small pieces tryangle wise, like
half a quarrel of a glase wyndow. And than sewe together a white piece and a
black like a hole quarrel of a glass wyndowe, and so sewe up together quarrel
wise as much as will line your Iacket, this fur for holsomnes is praised above
sables or any other furre, your exteryall apparel use according to your
honor. In so^mer use to were a skarlet petycote made of stamele or lynsye
wolsye. In winter and so^mer keep nor your head to hot nor bind it to strayte,
keep ever your neck warm. In so^mer keep your neck and face from the son,
use to were gloves made of goote skynnes perfumed with amber degrece. And
beware in standing or lying on the grownde in the reflyxyon of the son, but
be mouable. If you shall common or talk with any man, stand not still in one
place if it be on the bare grownde, or grass, or stones, but be moveable in
such places, stand nor sit upon no stone nor stones, stand nor sit long
bareheed under a vawte of stone. Also beware that you do not lie in old
chambres which be not occupied, specially such chambres as myse, rattes, and
snayles resorteth unto, lie not in such chambres the which be depryued clean
from the son and open air, nor lie in no low chamber except it be borded.
Beware that you take no cold on your feet and legs, and of al wether beware
that you do not ride nor go in great and impyteous wyndes.

The.ix. Chapter does show that replecyon or surfetynge does much harm to
nature / and that abstynence is the chefyst medyson of all medysons.
GAlen declarying Hypocrates sentence upon eating to much meat says. More
meat than accords with nature is named replecyon, or a surfete. Replecyon or
a surfeit is taken as well by gurgytacyons or to much drinking, as it is taken
by epulacyon of eating of crude meat, or eating more meat than does suffyce
or can be truly dygested. Or else replecyon or a surfyt is when the stomach is
farced or stuffed, or repleted with to much drink and meat, that the liver
which is the fire under the pot is subpressed that he can not naturally nor
truly decoct, defye, ne dygest the superabundau^ce of meat and drink the
which is in the pot or stomach, wherefore diverse times these impedymentes
does follow, the tou^ge is depryued of his office to speak, the wits or
sensys be dull and obnebulated from reason. Sloth and sluggyshnes consequently
follows, the appetyde is withdrawn. The head is light and does ache, and full
of fantasyes, and diverse times some be so sopytyd, yt the malt worm plays
the devil so fast in the head, that all the world ro^neth rownde about on
wheles, then both the pryncepall members and the offycyall members does fail
of their strength, yet the pulsys be full of agylyte. Such replecyon specially
such gurgytacyons does engender diverse infyrmytes through the which breuite
and shortness of life does follow. For the wise man says, that surfetes do kill
many men, and temporaunce does prolonge the life. And also it is written Eccle.
xx.xvii. That there does dye many mo by surfette, than there does by the
sword, for as I said surfetyng ingendreth many infyrmytes, as the Idropyses,
the gowtes, lepored, sausfleme and pymples in the face, vehement impressyons,
^ndygest humors, opylacyons, fevers, and putryfaccyons. And also it does
perturbate the head, the eyes, the tongue, and the stomach, with many other
infyrmyties. For as Galen says, over much replecyon or surfeing, causes
strangulacion and soden death, for as I said the stomach is so inferced, and
the liver is so sore obpressed that natural heat and the poores be extyncted,
wherefore abstynence for this matter is the most best and the parfytest
medysone that can be. And in no wise eat no meat unto ye time the stomach be
euacuated of all ill humors by vomet or other conuenyent ways, for else crude
and raw humors vndygested will multiply in the body to ye detryment of man.
Two meals a day is suffycyent for a rest man, and a labourer may eat three
times a day, and he that does eat ofter lives a beestly life. And he that
does eat more than ones in a day, I aduertyse him that the first refeccyon or
meal be dygested or that he do eat the second refeccyon or meal. For there
is nothing more hurtful for man's body than to eat meat upon meat
vndygested. For the last refeccyon or meal will let the dygestyon of the
first refeccyon or meal. Also sundry meats of diverse operacyons eaten at one
refeccion or meal is not laudable, nor it is not good to sit long at dinner
and supper. An hour is suffycyent to sit at dinner, and not so long at supper.
England has an evil use in sitting long at dinner and at supper. And
English men has an evil use, for at the beginning at dinner and supper he
will feed on gross meats. And ye best meats which be wholesome and nutratyue
and lies of digestion is kept for servants, for when the good meat does
come to the table through fedyng upon gross meat, the appetyde is extynct when
ye good meet does come to the table, but man's mind is so auydous although
he have eat enough when he seth better meat come before him against his
appetyde he will eat, whereupon does come replecyon and surfetes.

The.x. Chapter treats of all manner of drynkes, as of water, of wine, of
ale, of bear, of cider, of meade, of metheglyn, and of whay.
WAter is one of the four Elements, of the which diverse lycours or drynkes
for man's sustynaunce be made of, taking their orygynall and substance of it,
as ale, bear, meade, and metheglyn* water is not wholesome sole by it self for
an english man, considering the contrary usage, which is not concurraunt
with nature, water is cold, slow, and slack of dygestyon. The best water is
rain water so be it that it be clean and purely taken. Next to it is ro^nyng
water, the whithe does swyftly ro^ne from the Eest in to the west upon stones
or pybles. The third water to be praised is river or broke water, the which is
clear ro^nyng on pibles and grauayl. Standing waters the which be refresshed
with a fresshe spryng is commendable, but standing waters, and well waters, to
the which the son has no reflyxyon, although they be lyghter then other
ro^nyng waters be, yet they be not so commendable. And let every man be ware of
all waters the which be standing, and be putryfyed with froth, duckemet, and
mudde, for if they bake, or brewe, or dress meat with it, it shall engender
many infyrmytes. The water ye which every man ought to dress his meat with
all, or shall use bakynge, or bruyng, let it be ro^nyng, and put it in vessels
yt it may stand there.ii. or.iii. hours or it be occupied, than strain the
upper part thoroughe a thycke lynnyn cloth, and cast the inferyall part away.
If any man do use to drink water with wine, let it be purely strayned, and
than seth it and after it be cold let him put it to his wine, but better it is
to drink with wine stylled waters, specially the water of strawberes or ye
water of buglos or the water of endyne, or ye water of cycory, or the waters of
southystell, and dau^delyon. And if any man be combred with the stone or does
burn in the pudibunde places, use to drink with white wine the water of
hawes, and the water of milk, look for this matter in a book of my making
named the breuyary of health.

Of wine.
All manner of wynes be made of grapes, except respyse the which is made of a
bery. Chose your wine after this sort, it must be fine, fair, and clear to
the eye, it must be fragraunt and redolent having a good odor and flauour in
the nose, it must spryncle in the cup when it is drawn or put out of the pot
in to the cup, it must be cold and pleasant in the mouth, and it must be
strong and subtle of substance: And than moderatly dronken it does acuate and
does quycken a man's wits, it does comfort the heart, it does scowre the liver,
specially if it be white win it does rejoice all the powers of man, and does
now rysshe them, it does engender good blood, it does comfort and does
nourysshe the brain and all the body, and it resolves fleume, it ingendreth
heat, and it is good against heaviness and pencyfulnes, it is full of agylyte,
wherefore it is medsonable, specially white wine, for it does mundyfye and
cleanse wou^des and sores. Furthermore the better the wine is, the better
humors it does inge^der, wine must not be to new nor to old, but high wynes
as malmyse may be keep long. And because wine is full of fumosyte, it is good
therefore to alaye it with water. wynes high and hot of operacyo^ does comfort
old men and women, but there is no wine good for children and maidens, for in
high Almayne there is no maid shall drink no wine, but still she shall drink
water unto she be married, the usual drink there and in other high countres
for youth is fountayn water, for in every town is a fountain or a shalowe
well, to the which all people that be young and servants has a confluence and
a recourse to drink. Mean wynes as wynes of Gascony, french wynes, and
specially raynysshe wine that is fined is good with meat, specially claret
wine. It is not good to drink another wine nor ale before a man does eat
somewhat although there be old fantastycall sayings to the contrary. Also
these hot wynes as malmesye, wine course, wine greek, romanysk, romny, secke,
alygaunt, basterde, tire, osay, Muscadell, caprycke, tynt, roberdany, with
other hot wynes be not good to drink with meat, but after meat, and with
oysters, with saledes, with fruit a draught or two may be suffered. Old men
may drink as I said high wynes at their pleasure. Furthermore all sweet
wynes and gross wynes does make a man fat.

Of ale.
Ale is made of malte and water, and they the which do put any other thing to
ale then is rehearsed, except yest, barme, or godesgood, does sofystical their
ale. Ale for an english man is a natural drink. Ale must have these
propertyes, it must be fresshe and clear, it must not be ropy nor smoky, nor
it must have no weft nor tail. Ale should not be drunk under.v. days old.
New ale is unwholesome for all men. And sour ale and dead ale the which does
stand a tylt is good for no man. Barley malte makes better ale the^ oten malte
or any other corn does, it does ingendre gross humors, but yette it makes a
man strong.

Of bear.
Bear is made of malte, of hoppes, and water, it is a natural drink for a
dutche man. And now of late days it is much used in England to the
detryment of many english men, specially it kylleth them the which be
troubled with the colycke and the stone and the strangulion, for the drink is
a cold drink: yet it does make a man fat, and does inflate the belly, as it
does appear by the dutche men's faces and belyes. If the bear be well served and
be fined and not newi,t does qualyfy ye heat of the liver.

Of cider.
Cider is made of the iuce of peers, or of the iuce of aples, and other while
cider is made of both, but the best cider is made of clean peers the which be
dulcet, but the beast is not praised in physycke, for cider is cold of
operacyon, and is full of ventosyte, wherefore it does ingendre evil humors,
and does swage to much the natural heat of man, and does let dygestyon, and
does hurt the stomach, but they the which be used to it, if it be dronken in
haruyst it does little harm.

Of meade.
Meade is made of ho^ny and water boiled both together, if it be fined and pure
it preserves health, but it is not good for them the which have the Ilyacke or
the colycke.

Of metheglyn.
Metheglyn is made of ho^ny and water, and herbs boiled and sodden together,
if it be fined and stale, it is better in the regyment of health than meade.

Of whay.
whay if it be well ordered, specially thai whay the which does come of butter,
is a temporate drink and is moist, and it does nourysshe, it does cleanse the
breast, and does purge read color, and good for sausfleme faces.

Of poset ale.
Poset ale is made with hot milk and cold ale, it is a temporate drink, and
is good for a hot liver, and for hot fevers, specially if cold herbs be
soden in it.

Of coyte.
Coyte is a drink made of water, in the which is laid a sour and a salt
leuyn.iii. or.iiii. hours, the^ it is drunk, it is a usual drink in Pycardy,
in Flaundres, in Holande, in Brabant, and Selande.

To speak of a ptysan, or of oxymel, or of aqua vite, or of Ipocras, I do
pass over at this time, for I do make me^syon of it in the Breuyary of health.

The.xi. Chapter treats of bread.
AVycen says, that breed made of whete makes a man fat, specially when the
bread is made of new whete, and it does set a man in temporau^ce. Bread made
of fine flower without leuyn is slow of dygestyon, but it does nourysshe much
if it be truly ordered and well baken, when the bread is leuened it is soon
dygested as some old Aucthours says, but these days is proved the contrary
by ye stomach of men, for leuyn is heavy and ponderous. Bread having to much
brande in it is not laudable. In Rome and other high countres their loves of
bread be little bygger then a walnot, and many little loves be joined
together, the which does serve for great men, and it is safferonde, I praise
it not. I do love manchet bread, and great loves the which he well mowlded
and through baken, ye brande abstracted and abiected, and that is good for all
ages. Mestlyng bread is made half of whete and half of Rye. And there is
also mestlyng made half of rye and half of barley. And ill people will put
whete and barley together, bread made of these aforesaid grain or corns,
thus poched together may fill the gutte, but it shall never do good to man, no
more than horse bread or bread made of beans and peason shall do, howbeit
this matter does go much by ye educacyon or the bryngyng up of the people, the
which have been nourisshed or nutryfyde with such bread. I do speak now in
barlyes or maltes part to be eaten and also dronken, I suppose it is to much
for one grain, fox barley does engender cold humors, and peason and beans,
and the substance coming from them repletyth a man with ventosyte, but and
if a man have a lust or a sensual appetyd to eat and drink of a grain
bysyde malte or barlye, let him eat and drink of it the which may be made
of otes. For hauer cakes in scotland is many a good lord and lords dysshe.
And if it will make good hauer cakes consequently it will do make good drink
or evil, every thing as it is handled. For it is a common proverb, God may
send a man good meat, but the devil may send an evil coke to dystrue it,
wherefore gentle bakers sophystycate not your bread made of pure whete, if you
do where evil ale brewers and ale wives for their evil brewyng and evil
measure, should clacke and ryng their tankardes at dym myls dale, I would you
should shake out the remnaunt of your sackes standing in the te^mes up to the
hard chynne and.iii. inches above, that when you do come out of the water you
might shake your ears as a spanyell that verily comes out of the water.
Gentle bakers make good bread, for good bread does comfort, confyrme, and
does stablysshe a man's heart, beside the propertyes rehearsed. Hot bread is
unwholesome for any man, for it does lie in ye stomach like a sponge haustyng
vndecoct humors, yet the smell of new bread is comfortable to the head and
to the heart. Soden bread as symnels and crackenels, and bread baken upon a
stone, or upon iron, and bread that saffron is in, is not laudable. Burnt
bread and hard crustes, and pasty crustes, does ingendre color, aduste, and
melancoly humors, wherefore chyp the upper crust of your bread. And who so
does use to eat yt second crust after meat, it makes a man lean. And so
does wheten bread the which is full of brande. Bread the which is nutrytyue
and praised in physycke should have these propertes. First it must be new, but
a day and a night old, nor it is not good when it is past.iiii. or.v. days
old, except the loves be great, nor it must not be moldy nor musty, it must be
well muldyd, it must be through bake, it must be light and not heuye, and it
must be temporatly salted. Old bread or stale bread does dry up the blood,
or natural moyster of man, and it does engender evil humors, and is evil
and tarde of dygestyon, wherefore there is no surfeit so evil as the surfeit of
eating of evil bread.

The.xij. Chapyter treats of potage, of sewe, of stewpottes, of grewell, of
fyrme^te, of pease potage, of almon milk, of ryce potage, of cawdels, of
culleses, and of other brothes.
AL manner of lyquyd things as potage, sewe, and all other brothes does replete
a man that eats them with ve^tosyte. Potage is not so much used in all
crystendom as it is used in England. Potage is made of the lyquor in the which
flesh is soden in, with puttyng to chopped herbs, and otemel and salt. The
herbs with the which potage is made with all, if they be purc, good, and
clean, not warm eaten, nor infected with the corrupt air descendynge upon
them, does comfort many men, the ventofyte notwithstanding. But for asmoch as
diverse times, many parts of England is infected with the pestylence, through
the corrupcyon of the air, the which does infecte the herbs. In such times it
is not good to make any potage, nor to eat no potage. In certain placs beyond
see where as I have traueyled in, in the pestylence time a general
commandment has been sent from the superyoryte to the co^monalte, that no man
should eat herbs in such infeccyous times.

Of sewe and stewpottes.
Sewe and stewpottes, and grewell made with otmell, in all the which no herbs
be put in, can do little displeasure, except that it does replete a man with
ventosyte, but it relaxeth the belly.

Of fyrmente.
Fyrmente is made of whete and milk, in the which if flesh be soden, to
eat it is not commendable, for it is hard of dygestyon, but when it is
dygested it does nourysshe, and it does strength a man.

Of pease potage and bean potage.
Pease potage and bean potage does replete a man with ventosyte. Pease potage
is better than bean potage, for it is sooner dygested, and lesser of
ventosyte, they both be abstercyne and do cleanse the body. They be co^pytent of
nutryment, but bean potage does increase gross humors.

Of almon milk and of ryce potage.
Almon milk and ryce potage, Almone be hot and moist, it does comfort the
breast and it does mollyfye the belly, and provoke vryne. Ryce potage made with
almon milk does restore and does comfort nature.

Of ale brues, caudelles and colesses.
Ale brues, caudelles, and colesses for weke men and feeble stomachs, the
which can not eat solydate meat is sustered. But caudels made with hemp
sede, and collesses made of shrympes does comfort blood and nature.

Of ho^ny soppes and other brothes.
Ho^ny soppes and other brothes of what kind or substance soever they be made
of, they does engender ventosyte, wherefore they be not good nor wholesome for the
colycke nor the Illycke, nor other inflatyue impedymentes or syckenesses,
specially if ho^ny be in it, the sayings of Plyne, Galene, Auycene, with other
Aucthours notwithstanding, for in these days experyence teaches us contrary
to their sayings and wrytynges, for although the nature of man be not
altered, yet it is weker, and nothing so strong now as when they lived. etc.

The.xiij. Chapitre treats of whyt meat, as of eggs, butter, chese, milk,
crayme. etc.
IN England there is no eggs used to be eaten, but hen eggs: wherefore I will
first write and pertract of hen eggs. The yolks of hen eggs be cordyalles,
for it is temporatly hot. The white of an egg is viscus and cold and slack
of digestyon, and does not engender good blood, wherefore whosoever that will
eat an egg, let the egg be new, and roste him rear and eat him, or else
poche him for poched eggs be best at night, and new rear roasted eggs be
good in the morning so be it they be tired with a little salt and sugar, than
they be nutryue. In Turkey and other high chrystyan lands anexed to it, they
use to seth two or three busshels of eggs together hard, and pull of the
shells, and sowse them, and keep them to eat at al times, but hard eggs be
slow and slack of dygestyon, and does nutryfye the body grossly. Roasted eggs
be better than sodden, fried eggs be naught, Ducke eggs and gese eggs I do
not praise, but fesaunt eggs and partreges eggs physycke syngulerly does
praise.

Of butter.
Butter made of crayme, and is moist of operacion, it is good to eat in the
morning before other meats, French men will eat it after meat. But eaten
with other meats it does not only nowrysshe, but it is good for the breast
and lunges, and also it relaxe and mollyfye the belly, douche men does eat it
at all times in the day, the which I did not praise when I did dwell among
them / consyderyng that butter is vnctyous, and every thing that is vnctyous
is noisome to the stomach for as much as it makes lubryfactyon. And also
every thing that is unctious That is to say butteryshe, oil, grese, or fat
does swymme above in the brynkes of the stomach, as the fatnes does swymme
above in a boylynge pot, the excess of such nawtacyon or superfyce will
ascend to the oryse of the stomach, and does make eructuasyons / wherefore
eating of much butter at one refection is not co^me^dable, nor it is nor good
for them the which be in any ague or fever, for the ventuosyte of it does
auge and augment the heat of the liver, a little porcyon is good for every man
in the morenynge if it be new made.

Of Chese.
Chese is made of milk, yet there is.iiii. sorts of chese: which is to say,
grene chese, soft chese, hard chese, and spermyse / Grene chese is not called
grene by the reason of color, but for the newnes of it / for the whey is not
half pressed out of it, and in operacyon it is cold and moist. Soft chese
not to new nor to old is best, for in operacyon it is hot and moist. Hard
chese is hot and dry and evil to dygest. Spermyse is a chese the which is
made with curdes and with the iuce of herbs, to tell the nature of it I can
not / considering that every milk wife may put many iuces of herbs of
sundry operacyon and virtue, one not agreynge with another. But and if they did
know what they did gomble together without true compoundynge, and I knowing
the herbs, then I could tell the operacyon of spermyse chese, yet beside
these.iiii. natures of chese, there is a chese called a rewene chese, the
which if it be well orderyd does pass all other cheses none excess taken.
But take the best chese of all these rehersyd, if a latel do good and pleasur
The overplus does inge^dre gross humors for it is hard of dygestyon, it
makes a man costyfe and it is not good for the stone. Chese that is good
ought not be to hard nor to soft, but betwyxt both, it should not be towgh
nor bruttell, it ought not to be sweet nor sour, nor tarte, nor to salt, nor
to fresshe, it must be of good savor and taledge, nor full of iyes nor mytes,
nor magottes / yet in hyghalmen the chese the which is full of magotes is
called there the best chese, and they will eat the great magotes as fast as we
do eat comfetes.

Of Milk,
Milk of a woman, and the milk of a got is a good restoratyue, wherefore
these mylkes be good for them that be in a consumpcyon, and for the great
temperaunce the which is in them it does nowrysshe much.

Cowes milk and ewes milk, so it be the beestes be young and do go in good
pasture, the milk is nutrytyue and does humect and moysteth the members, and
does mundyfye and cleanse the entrayles, and does alleuyat and mytygate the
pain of the lunges and the breast but it is not good for them the which have
gurgulacyons in the belly, nor it is not all the best for sanguyne me^ / but it
is very good for melancoly men, and for old men and children specially if it
be foddyn, adding to it a little sugre.

Of Crayme,
Crayme the which does not stand long on the milk and soddyn with a little
sugar is nowrysshynge. Clowtyd crayme and raw crayme put together, is eaten
more for a sensual apetyde, than for any good nowrysshement. Raw crayme
vndecocted eaten with strawberyes, or hurtes is a rural man's banquet. I have
known such bankettes has put men in ieoperdy of their lives.

Almon butter.
Almon butter made with fine sugar and good rose water, and eaten with the
flowers of many vyolettes, is a commendable dysshe, specially in lent when the
vyoletes be fragra^t it reioyseth the heart: it does comfort ye brain: and
does qualyfye the heat of the liver.

Been butter.
Been butter, is used much in lent in diverse countres, it is good for plowmen
to fyl the panche, it does engender gross humors, it does replete a man with
ventosyte.

The.xiiij. Chapter, treatyth of Fysshe.
OF all nacyons and cou^tres, England is best served of Fysshe, not only of
all manner of see fysshe, but also of fresshe water fysshe, and of all manner of
sorts of salt fysshe.

Of See fysshe.
Fysshes of the sea the which have skales or many fynnes, be more holsomer than
ye fresshe water fysshe, the which be in standing waters. The elder a fysshe
is so much he is the better, so be it that the fysshe be soft and not
solydat, if the fysshe be fast and solydat the younger the fysshe is, the
better it is to dygest: but this is to understand, that if the fysshe be never
so solydat it must have age / but not ouergrowen: except it be a young
porpesse the which kind of fisshe is another praysyd in the old testament nor
in physycke.

Fresshe water fysshe.
The fysshe the which is in ryuers and brokes be more holsomer, than they the
which be in pooles, pondes, or mootes, or any other sta^dynge water, for they
does labor and does skower them self. Fysshe the which lives and does
feed on the moude, or else do feed in ye fen or morysshe ground does sauer of
ye moude which is not so good as the fysshe that fedyth and does skowre them
self on the stones or gravel or sand.

Of Salt fysshe.
Salt fysshe the which be powderyd and salted with salt, be not greatly to
be praised specially if a man do make his hoole refectyon with it the qualyte
does not hurt, but the quantyte, specially such salt fysshes as will cleue to
the fyngers when a man does eat it And ye skyn of fysshes be utterly to be
abhorryd, for it does engender vyseus fleume and color adust. Al manner of
fysshe is cold of nature, and does engender fleume, it does little nowrysshe /
Fysshe and flesh ought not to be eaten together at one meal.

The.xv. Chapitre, treats of wild foul, and tame foul birds.
OF al wild foul, the Fesaunt is most best: Although that a partreche of
all fowls is soonest dygested* wherefore it is a restoratyue meat, and does
comfort the brain and the stomach: and does augment carnal lust. A wood
cock is a meat of good temperaunce. Quayles and plouers and lapwynges does
nowrysshe but little, for they does engender mela^coly humors, young turtyll
doves does engender good blood. A crane is hard of dygestyon, and does
inge^der evil blood. A young herensew is lyghter of dygestyon than a crane. A
bustarde well killed and orderyd is a nutrytyue meat A byttoure is not so
hard of dygestyon as is an herensew. A shoueler is lyghter of dygestyon than a
byttoure, all these be noyfull except they be well orderyd and dressyd. A
fesaunt hen. A more cock and a more hen except they be sutt abroad they be
nutrytyue All manner of wild foul the which lives by the water they be of
dysco^mendable nowrysshement.

Of tame or domestycall foul.
Of all tame foul a capon is most best. For it is nutrytyue and is soon
dygestyd. A hen in winter is good and nutrytyue. And so is a chyken in somer,
specyallye cockrellys and polettes, the which be untrodden. The flesh of a
cock is hard of dygestyon: but the broth or gely made of a cock is
restoratyue, pygyons be good for coloryke and melancoly men, gose flesh and
ducke flesh is not praised except it be a young grene goose yo^ge peechyken
of half a year of age be praised, old pecockes be hard of dygestyon.

Of Birds.
All manner of small Birds, be good and light of dygestyon, except sparowes
which be hard of dygestyon, Tytmoses, colmoses and wrens, the which does
eat spyders and poison be not co^me^dable, of all small birds the lark is
best: than is praised ye black bird and the thrusshe. Rasis and Isaac
prayseth young staares, but I do think because they be bitter in etyng, they
should inge^der color.

The.xvi. Chapter, treatyth of flesh, of wild and tame beestes.
Beef is a good meat for an English man, so be it the beast be young, and
that it be not kowe flesh. For old beef and kowe flesh does engender
melancolye and leporouse humors: if it be moderatly powderyd that the groose
blood by salt may be exhaustyd, it does make an English man strong the
educacion of him with it co^syderyd. Martylmas beef which is called hanged
beef in the rofe of the smoky house is not laudable, it may fill the belly and
cause a man to drink, but it is evil for the stone, and evil of dygestyon
and makes no good iuce. If a man have a peace hanging by his side and another
in his belly, that the which does hang by the side shall do him more good if a
shower of rain do chaunse: than that the which is in his belly, the appetyde of
man's sensualyte notwithstanding.

Of Veale.
Veale is nutrytyue meat: and does nowrysshe much a man, for it is soon
dygestyd whereupon many men does hold oppynyon that it is the best flesse and
the most nutrytyue meat that can be for man's sustenau^ce.

Of Mutton and lamb.
Mutton of Rasis and Aueroyes, is praised for a good meat, but Galen does not
laud it, and sewrely I do not love it consyderyng that there is no be that
is so soon infectyd: nor there does happen so great murren and syckenes to any
quadrypedyd beeste as does fall to the sheep. This notwithstanding, if the
sheep be brought up in a good pasture and fat and do not flauoure of the
wolle it is good for sick persons, for it does engender good blood.

Lambs flesh is moist and flumatycke wherefore it is not all the best for
old men, except they be melancolye of complexyon, it is not good for
flumatyke men to feade to much of it does hurt.

Of Porke brown, bakon, and pygge.
where as Galen with other ancient and approbat doctors does praise porke I
dare not say the contrary against them, but this I am sure of, I did never
love it: And in holy scripture it is not praised, for a swyne is an unclean
be and does lie upon fylthy and stynkynge soyles, and with stercorus matter
diverse times does feed in England, yet in Hyghalmen and other high countres
except (spain and other countres anexed to spain) does keep their swyne
clean, and does cause them ones or twyse a day to swym^e in great ryuers, like
the water of Ryne, which is above Coleyne, but spaynyerdes with the other
regions anexed to them, keep the swyne more fylthyer than englysse persons
does. Further more the Ieue, the Sarason, the Turks, co^sernynge their
polytycke wit and lerenyng in physycke, has as much wit, wysdom, reason, and
knowledge for the sauyte of their body: as any christen man has, and noble
physycyons, I have known among them: yet they all lacked grace, for as much
as they do not know or knowledge Jesus christ, as the holy scripture tellyth
us and them. They louyth not porke nor swynes flesse, but does vituperat and
abhor it, yet for all this they will rate adders, which is a kind of
serpents, as well as any other christian man dwelling in Rome, and other high
countres, for adders flesh there is called fysshe of the mountayn This
notwithstanding physycke does approbat adders flesh good to be eaten,
saying it does make an old man young, as it apperyth by a heart eating an
adder makyth him young again. But porke does not so, for if it be of an old
hog not clean kept it does engender gross blood, and does humect to much
the stomach, yet if ye porke be young it is nutrytyue.

Bacon is good for carters and plowmen, the which be ever labourynge in the
earth or dunge, but and if they have the stone and use to eat it they shall
sing woe be the pie: wherefore I do say that coloppes and eggs, is as wholesome
for them: as a talowe candell is good for a horse mouth, or a peese of powdered
beef is good for a blereyed mare, yet sensual appetyde must have a swing, all
these things withandynge, porke is conuertyble to man's flesh.

Of Brawne.
Brawne is an usual meat in winter among English men, it is hard of
dygestyon the brawne of a wild boore, is much more better than the brawne of
a tame boore, if a man eat another of them both it shall never do him harm.

Of Pigs.
Pigs specially sow pigs is nutryttyue and made in a gelye, it is
restoratyue so be it the pygge be fleed the skyn taken of, and than stewed with
restoratyues, as a cock is stewed to make a gely. A young fat pygge in
physic is syngulerly praised if it be well orderyd in the rostynge, the skyn
not eaten.

Of Kydde.
Young Kyddes flesh is praised above all other flesh, as Auicen, Rasis, and
Aueroyes says, for it is temperate and nutrytyue although it be somewhat dry.
Old kydde is not praised.

Of wild beestes flesh.
I have gone rownde about crystendome and ouertwharte crystendom, and a
thousand or two and more miles out of crystendom, yet there is not so much
pleasure for heart and hynde, bucke, and do: and for roo bucke and do, as is
in England, and although the flesh be dispraysed in physycke / I pray god to
send me part of the flesh to eat physycke not withstandyng. The opinion of
all old physycyons was and is that venyson is not good to eat pryncipaylly
for two cause, the first cause is that the beast does live in fere: for if he
be a good wood man, he shall never se no kind of dear, but at the.x. byt on
the grass, or brosynge on the tree, but he will lift up his head and look
about him, the which comes of tymorysnes, and tymorosyte does bring in
melancoly humors. wherefore all Phyonsuchons says that venyson which is the
second cause does engender coloryke humors and of truth it does so: wherefore
let them take the skyn and let me have the flesh, I am sure it is a lords
dysshe, and I am sure it is good for an English man, for it does anymate him
to be as he is: which is strong and hardy / but I do aduertyse every man for
all my words not to kill and so to eat of it except it be lefully, for it is
a meat for great men. And great men do not set so much by ye meat as they do
by the pastyme of kyllyng of it.

Of Hares flesh.
A hare does no harm nor dyspleasure to no man, if the flesh be not eaten,
it makes a gentylman good pastyme. And better it is for the hounds or dogs
to eat ye hare after they have killed it, as I said than man should eat it:
for it is not praised another in the old Testament another in physycke, for the
bible says the hare is an unclean beeste. And physycke says hares flesh is
dry and does engender melancoly humors.

Of Conys flesh.
Conys flesh is good, but rabettes flesh is best of al wild beestes / for
it is temperat and does nowrysshe, and syngulerly praised in physycke, for all
things the which does suck is nutrytyue.

The.xvij. Chapter, does treat of pertyculer things, of fysshe and flesh.
THe heddes of fysshe, and the fatnes of fysshe specially of Samon and Conger
is not good for them the which be dysposed to have rewmatycke heddes. And ye
heddes of lampryes, and lamprons, and the string the which is within them,
is not good to eat refrain from etynge of the kynnes of fysshe, and flesh
and bornet meat, and brown meat, for it does engender viscus humors, and
color and melancoly. And does make opylacions. The brains of any be is not
laudable, except the brain of a kydde, for it is evil of digestyon and does
hurt a man's appetyde and the stomach, for it is cold and moist, and viscus
a hot stomach may eat it, but it does inge^der gross humors. The brain of
a wodcocke and of a snype and such like is co^mestyble. The foreparte of all
manner of beestes and fowls be more hotter and lyghter of digesty on, than the
hinder parts be. The marye of all beestes is hot and moist, it is nutrityue
if it be well dygestyd, yet it does mollyfy the stomach, and does take away a
man's appetyde. wherefore let a man eat peper with it. The blood of all beestes
and fowls is not pray fed, for it is hard of digestyon. All ye inwardes of
beestes and of fowls, as the heart the liver the lunges, and trypes, and
trylybubbes: with all the intrayles is hard of dygestyon, and does increase
gross humors. The fatnes of flesh is not so much nutrytyue as the leenes
of flesh, it is best when leene and fat is myxte one with another. The tunges
of beestes be hard of dygestyon and of little nowrysshement. The stones of a
cockrell, and the stones of other beestes that has not done their kind be
nutrytyue.

The.xviij. Chapitre, treatyth of roste meat, of fried meat and of bake meat.
WIth us at Mount pylour, and other vnyuersyties is used boiled meat at dinner,
and roste meat to supper: why they should do so I can not tell unless it be
for a consuetude. For boiled meat is lyghter of digestyon than roasted meat
is. Bruled meat is hard of digestyon, and evil for the stone. Fried meat is
harder of dygeston than brulyd meat is, and it does engender color and
melancoly: Bake meat which is called flesh that is beryd, for it is buryd i^
paast, is not praised in physycke. All manner of flesh the which is inclyned
to humydyte should be rostyd. And all flesh the which is inclyned to drynes
should be sodde or boiled. Fysshe may be sod, rostyd, brulyd and baken, every
one after their kind, and use and fasshyon of the country, as the coke and
the physycyon will agree and deuyse. For a good coke is half a physycyon. For
the chief physycke (the counceyll of a physycyon except) does come from the
kytchyn, wherefore ye physycyon and the coke for sick men must consult
together for the preparacion of meat for sick men. For if the physycyon
without the coke prepare any meat except he be very expert, he will make a
werysse dysshe of meat, the which the sick can not take.

The.xix. Chapitre, treats of Roots and first of the roots borage, and of
buglosse.
THe roots of Borage and Buglosse soden tender and made in a succade, does
engender good blood, and does set a man in atemporaunce.

The roots of Alysaunder and Enulacampana.
The roots of Alysaunder soden tender, and made in succade is good for to
dystroy^ the stone in the Raynes of the back and blader The roots of
Enulacampana soden tender and made in a succade is good for the breast, and for
the lunges, and for all the interyall members of man.

The roots of percelly, and of fenell.
The Roots of percelly soden tender and made in a succade is good for the
stone, and does make a man to pysse. The roots of Fenell soden tender and made
in a succade is good for the lunges and for the sight.

The roots of turnepes and persnepes.
Turnepes boiled and eaten with flesh, augme^tyth the seed of man, if they
be eaten raw moderatly, it does provoke a good apetyde. Persnepes soden and
eaten does increase nature, they be nutrityue, and does expel vryne

Radysshe roots, and Caretes.
Radysshe roots does break wind and does provoke a man to make water, but
they be not good for them the which has the gowte. Caretes soden and eaten
does auge and increase nature and does cause a man to make water.

The roots of Rapes.
Rape roots if they be well boiled they do nowrysshe, if they be moderatly
eaten, i^moderatly eaten they does engender ventosyte, and does anoye the
stomach.

Of Onyons.
Onyons does provoke a man to veneryous acts, and to sompuolence, and if a man
drink sundry drynkes it does rectyfy and reform the varyete of the operacyon
of them: they makes a man's apetyde good, and puts away fastydyousnes.

Of Leekes.
Leekes does open the breast, and does provoke a man to make water, but they
does make and increase evil blood.

Of Garlyke.
Garlyke of all roots is used and most praised in Lombardy, and other countres
anexed to it, for it does open the breast, and it does kill all manner of worms
in a man's belly, which be to say, lumbrici, ascarides, and cucurbitini which
is to say long worms, small little long worms which will tykle in the
foundement, and square worms: it also hetyth ye body and desoluyth gross
wyndes.

The.xx. Chapitre, treats of usual Herbs. And first of Borage, and
Buglosse.
BOrage does comfort the heart, and does inge^der good blood, and causes a
man to be merry, and does set a man in temporaunce. And so does buglosse for he
is taken of more vygor and strength and effycacye.

Of Artochockes, and Rokat.
There is nothing used to be eaten of Artochockes but ye head of them, when
they be almost ripe they must be soden tender in ye broth of heef, and after
eat them at dinner, they does increase nature, and does provoke a man to
beneryous acts. Rokat does increase the sede of man, and does stumulat the
flesh, and does help to dygestyon.

Of Cykory, and Endyue.
Cykory does keep the stomach and ye heed in temporaunce, and does qualyfy
color. Endyue is good for them the which have hoote stomachs and dry.

Of white Beetes, and Purslane.
white Beetes be good for the liver, and for the spleen, and be abstersyue.
Purslane does extynct the ardor of lassyuyousnes, and does mytygate great
heat in all the inward parts of man.

Of Time, and Parsley.
Time brekyth the stone, it does desolue wyndes. And causes a man to make
water. Parsley is good to break the stone, and causes a man to pysse, it is
good for the stomach, and does cause a man to have a sweet breath.

Of Lettyse, and Sorell.
Lettyse does extynct veneryous acts, yet it does increase milk in a woman's
breast, it is good for a hot stomach, and does provoke sleep, and does
increase blod, and does set the blood in a temporaunce. Sorell is good for a
hot liver, and good for the stomach.

Of Penyryall, and Isope.
Penyryall does purge mela^coly, and does comfort the stomach and the
spyrites of man. Isope cleanses viscus fleume, and is good for the breast and
for the lunges.

Of Roosmary, and Roses.
Roosmary is good for palses, and for the falling syckenes, and for the
cowghe, and good against cold. Roses be a cordyall and does comfort the heart
and the brain.

Of Fenell, and Anys.
These herbs be seldom used, but their seeds be greatly occupyde. Fenell sede
is used to break wind, and good against poison. Anys sede is good to cleanse
the bladder, and the raynes of the back: and does provoke vryne and makes one
to have a soote breath.

Of Sawge, and Mandragod.
Sawge is good to help a woman to conceive, and does provoke vryne. Mandragor
does help a woman to concepcion, and does provoke a man to sleep.

Of all herbs ingenerall.
There is no Herb, nor weed, but god have given virtue to them, to help man.
But for as much, as Plyne, Macer, and Diascorides with many other old
ancient and approbat Doctors has written and pertracted of their virtues, I
therefore now will write no further of herbs, but will speak of other matters
that shall be more necessary.

The.xxi. Chapitre, treatyth of Fruytes, and first of Fygges.
AVicen says that Fygges does nowrysshe more than any other Fruit, they does
nowrysshe meruelouslye, when they be eaten with blanched Almons. They be also
good roasted, and stued. They do cleanse the breast and the lunges, and they do
open ye opylacyons of the ^yuer and the spleen. They does stere a man to
veneryous acts, for they does auge and increase the sede of generacyon. And
also they does provoke a man to sweat: wherefore they does engender lyce.

Of great Raysyns.
Great Raysyns be nutrytyue specially if the stones be pullyd out. And they
does make the stomach fyrme and stable. And they does provoke a man to have a
good appetyde, if a few of them be eaten before meat.

Of small Raysyns of Corans.
small raysyns of Corans, be good for ye raynes of the back, and they does
provoke vryne. Howbeit they be not all the best for the spleen, for they makes
opylacyon.

Of Grapes.
Grapes sweet and new, be nutrytyue, and and does stumulat the flesh. And
they does comfort the stomach and ye liver, and does avoid opylacyons.
Howbeit, it does replete the stomach with ventosyte.

Of Peches, of Medlers, and Ceruyces.
Peches does mollyfy the belly and be cold, Medlers taken superfluous does
engender melancolye. And Ceruyces be in manner of like operacyon.

Of Strawburyes, Cherys, and Hurtes.
Strawburyes, be praised above al buryes for they do qualyfye the heat of the
liver, and does engender good blood eaten with sugar. Cherys does mollyfye the
belly and be cold. Hurtes be of a groser substance. wherefore they be not for
them the which be of a clean dyete.

Of Nuttes great and small.
The walnut and the banocke be of one operacyon. They be tarde and slow of
digestyon, yet they does comfort the brain if the pyth or skyn be pylled of,
and than they be nutrytyue. Fylberdes be better than hasell Nuttes: if they be
new and taken from the tree, and the skyn or the pyth pullyd of, they be
nutrytyue, and does increase fatnes, if they be old they should be eaten with
great raysens. But new nuttes be far better than old nuttes, for old nuttes
be colorycke, and they be cuyl for the head and evil for old men. And they
does engender the palsy to the tongue, yet they be good against venym. And
immoderatly taken or eaten does engender corrupcyons, as byles blaynes and
such putryfaction.

Of Peason, and Beans.
Peason the which be young be nutrytyue Howbeit they does replete a man with
ventosyte. Beans be not so much to be praised as peason, for they be full of
ventosyte although the skynnes or husks be ablatyd or cast away, yet they be
a strong meat, and does provoke veneryous acts.

Of Pears, and Appulles.
Pears the which be melow and doulce and not stony does increase fatnes
ingenderyng waterysshe blod. And they be full of ventosyte. But wardens roasted
stued, or baken be nutrytyne, and does comfort the stomach specially if they
be eaten with comfettes. Apples be good after a frost have taken them or when
they be old, specially red apples, and they the which be of good odor and
melow, they should be eaten with sugar or co^fettes, or with fenell sede, or
any sede because of their ventosyte, they does comfort than the stomach and
does make good dygestyon, specially if they be rostyd or baken.

Of Pomegranates, and Quynces.
Pomegranates be nutrytyue, and good for the stomach. Quinces baken the core
pulled out does mollyfy the belly, and does help dygestyon, and does preserve
a man from dronkenshyppe.

Of Daates, and Mylons.
Daates moderatly eaten be nutrityue but they does cause opylacyons of the
liver and of the spleen. Mylons does engender evil humors.

Of gourdes, of Cucubres, and pepones.
Gourdes be evil of nowrysshement, Cucu^bers, restrayneth veneryousnes or
lassyuyousnes, or luxuryousnes. Pepones be in manner of like operacion: but the
pepones ingenderyng evil humors.

Of Almondes, and Chefteyns.
Almondes causes a man to pysse: they do mollyfy the belly, and does purge the
lunges. And.vi. or.vii. eat before meat preserves a man from dro^kenshyp.
Chesteynes does nowrysshe the body strongly, and does make a man fat, if they
be through roasted and the husks abiected, yet they does replete a man with
ve^tosyte or wind.

Of Prunes, and Damysens.
Prunes be not greatly praised, but in the way of medysyne, for they be cold
and moist. And Damysens be of ye said nature: for the one is old and dried,
and the other be taken from the tree.vi. or.vii. damysens eaten before dinner be
good to provoke a man's appetyde, they does mollyfy the belly and be abstersyues
the skyn and the stones must be ablatyd and cast away and not used.

Of Olyues, and Capers.
Olyues condyted, and eaten at the beginning of refectyon does corroborate the
stomach and provoke appetyde. Capers does purge fleume, and does make a man
to have an appetyde.

Of Orenges.
Orenges does make a man to have a good appetyde, and so does the ryndes, if
they be in succade, and they does comfort the stomach, the Iuce is a good
sauce and does provoke an appetyde.

The.xxij. Chapitre, treats of spyces, and first of Gynger.
Gynger does hete the stomach and helpyth dygestyon, grenegynger eaten in the
moreni^ge fasting does acuat and quycken the remembrance.

Of Peper.
There be.iii. sundry kinds of peper, which be to say white Peper, black
Peper, and long Peper. All kinds of pepers to heat the body and does desolue
fleume and wind and does help dygestyon, and makes a man to make water.
Black peper does make a man lean.

Of Cloves, and Mace.
Cloves does comfort the senewes, and does dysolue, and does consume
superfluous humors, restoryth nature. Maces is a cordyall and does help the
colycke: and is good against the blody flyxe and laxes.

Of Graynes, and Safferon.
Graynes be good for the stomach and the head. And be good for women to drink.
Safferon does comfort the heart and the stomach but he is to hot for the
liver.

Of Nutmeges, and Cynomome.
Nutmeges be good for them the which have cold in their head, and does
comfort the sight and the brain and the mouth of the stomach, and is good
for the spleen. Cynomome is a cordyall, wherefore ye Hebrecyon does say why does
a man dye and can get Cynomome to eat: yet it does stop and is good to
restrain fluxes or laxes.

Of Lyqueryce.
Lyqueryce is good to cleanse and to open the lunges and the breast, and does
loose fleume.

The.xxiij. Chapter, shows a dyete for Sanguyne men.
SAnguyne men behoote and moist of complexion, wherefore they must be
cyrcumspect in eating of their meat, co^syderynge that the purer the
complexon is, the sooner it may be coruptyd, and the blood may be the sooner
infectyd / wherefore they must abstain to eat inordynatly fruytes and herbs
and rotes, as garlyke onyons and leekes, they must refrain from eating of old
flesh, and exchew the usage of etynge of the brains of beestes: and from
etynge ye vdders of keyn. They must use moderat sleep, and moderat diet or else
they will be to fat and gross. Fysshe of muddy waters be not good for them. And
if blood do abou^de cleanse it with stufes, or by fleubothomye,

The.xxiiij. Chapyter shows a dyete for Fleumatyke men.
FLeumaticke men be cold and moist: wherefore they must abstain from meats,
the which is cold. And also they must refrain from eating viscus meat,
specially from all meats the which does engender fleumatycke humors, as
fysshe, fruit, and white meat. Also to exchewe the usage of eating of crude
herbs special to refrain from me ate the which is hard and slow of
dygestyon: as it appears in the propertes of meats above rehersyd. And to
beware not to dwell nyghe to waterysshe and morysshe ground. These things be
good for fleumatycke persons moderatly taken, onyons, garlycke, peper, gynger.
And all meats the which be hot and dry. And sauces the which be sour.
These things following does purge fleume polypody, netyll, elder, agarycke,
yreos, maiden here, and stycados.

The.xxv. Chapitre, shows a dyete for Colorycke men.
COlor is hot and dry wherefore Coloryke men must abstain from eating hot
spyces, and to refrain from drinking of wine, and eating of Colorycke meat:
howbeit Colorycke men may eat groser meat than any other of complexions,
except their educacion have been to the contrary. Colorycke me^ should not be
long fasting. These things following do purge color: Fumytory Centory,
wormewod, wild hoppes vyoletes, Mercury, Manna, Reuberbe, Eupatory,
Tamarindes, and the whay of butter.

The.xxvi. Chapitre treats of a dyetarye, for Melancoly men.
MElancoly is cold and dry, wherefore Melancoly me^ must refrain from fried
me ate, and meat the which is over salt. And from meat yt is sour and
hard of dygestyon, and from all meat the which is burnet and dry. They must
abstain from immoderat thirst, and from drinkyng of hot wynes, and gross
wine as red wine And use these things Cow milk, Almon milk, yolks of rere
eggs. Boiled meat is better for Melancoly men than roasted meat All meat the
which wylbe soon dygestyd, and all meats the which does engender good blood.
And meats the which be temperatly hot be good for Melancoly men. And so be
all herbs the which be hot and moist. These things following does purge
Melancoly, quyckbeme, Seen, sticados, hartystounge, maiden here, pulyall
mountane, borage, organum, sugar, and white wine.

The.xxvij. Chapter, treatyth of a dyete, and of an order to be used in the
Pestyferous time of the pestylence and swetyng sycknes.
When the Plages of the Pestylence, or the swetynge syckenes is in a town, or
country, with us at Mountpylour, and all other high Regyons and countrees yt I
have dwelt in, the people does fle from the contagious and infectious air
preseruatyues with other counceyll of Physycke notwithstanding. In lower and
other baase countres, howses the which be infectyd in town or city, be closyd
up both doors and wyndowes: and the inhabytours shall not come a broad, another
to church: nor to market, nor to any house or company, for infectyng other the
which be clean without infection. A man can not be to ware: nor can not keep
him self to well from this syckenes, for it is so vehement and so parlouse,
that the syckenes is taken with ye savor of a man's clothes the which has
vysyted the infectious house, for the infection will lie and hang long in
clothes And I have known that when the straw and russhes has been cast out of
a house infectyd the hogs the which did lie in it, dyed of ye pestylence:
wherefore in such infectious time it is good for every man yt will not fly from
the contagyous air to use daily, specially in the morning and euenyng to
burn Iuneper, or Rosemary, or Rysshes, or Gaye leaves, or Maierome, or
Francke^ce, bengauyn. Or else make this powder. Take of storax calamyte half an
ounce, of frankense^ce an ounce, of the wodde of Aloes, the weyghte of.vi. d.
myxe all these together. Than cast half a sponefull of this in a chaffyngdysshe
of coals. And set it to fume abroad in the chambers, and the hall, and other
howses. And you will put to this powder a little Lapdanum: it is so much ye
better. Or else make a pomemau^der under this manner. Take of Lapdanum.iii.
drames, of ye wodde of Aloes one drame, of amber of greece.ii. drames, and a
half, of nutmegges, of storax calamite of each a drame and a half, confect all
these together with Rose water and make a ball. And this aforesaid Pomemaunder
does not only expel contagyous air, but also it does comfort the brain, as
Barthelmew of Montagnaue says, and other modernall doctors does afferme ye
same: who so ever yt is infectyd with the pestylence / let him look in my
breuyary of health for a remedy. But let him use this dyete, let the Chamber be
kept close. And keep a contynuall fire in the Chamber of clear burning wodde,
or chare cole without smoke, beware of taking any cold, use temporat meats
and drink, and beware of wine, bear, and cider, use to eat stued or baken
wardens if they can begoten if not eat stued or baken peers with comfettes,
use no gross meats, but those the which be light of dygestyon.

The.xxviij. Chapitre, shows of a dyete, the which be in any Fever or agew.
I Do aduertyse every man that has a Fever: or an Agewe, not to eat no
meat.vi. hours before his course does take him. And in no wise as long as
the Agew does induce, to put of shertte nor dowblet, nor to rise out of the
bed, but when need shall require and in any wise not to go, nor to take any
open air. For such prouysyon may be had that at uttermost at the third
course he shall be delivered of the Fever using the medsynes the which be in
the Breuyary of health. And let every man beware of casting their hands and
arms at any time out of the bed, in or out of their agony, or to spraule with
ye legs out of the bed, good it is for the space of.iii. courses to wear
co^tynewelly gloves, and not to wasshe the hands. And to use such a dyete in
meat and drink as is rehersyd in the pestylence.

The.xxix. Cpapitre, treatyth of a dyete for them, the which have the Iliacke,
or the colyck, and the stone.
THe Iliacke and the Colycke be ingendered of ventosyte, the which is
intrusyd, or enclosed in two guts, the one is called Ilia. And ye other is
called Colon. For these two infyrmytes a man must beware of cold. And good it
is not to be long fasting. And necessary it is to be laxatyue and not in no
wise to be constupat. And these things following be not good for them the which
have these aforesaid infyrmytes, new bred, stale bred, nor new ale. They must
abstain also from drynkyng of beer, of cider, and red wine, and cynamom Also
refrain from al meats that ho^ny is in exchew eating of cold herbs, use not
to eat beans, peson, nor potage, beware of the usage of fruytes. And of all
things the which does engender wind. For the stone abstayn from drinking of
new ale, beware of beer, and of red wine, and hot wynes, refrain from
eating of red herynge, matylmas beef and bakon, and salt fysshe, and salt
meats. And beware of going cold about the mydell specially about the
raynes of the back. And make no restryctyon, of wind and water: nor seege
that nature would expelle.

The.xxx. Chapitre, treatyth of a dyete for them the which have any kinds of
the gowte.
THey the which be infectyd with the gowte, or any kind of it, I do aduertyse
them not to sit long bollynge and bybbynge dysyng and cardyng, in forgettyng
them self to exonerat the blader and the belly when need shall require, and
also to beware that the legs hang not without some stay nor yt the boots or
shoes be not over strayte, who soever has ye gowte must refrain from drynkyng
of new ale, and let him abstain from drynkyng of beer and red wine, Also he
must not eat new bread, eggs, fresshe samon, eles, fresshe heryng,
pylcherdes, oysters: and all shell fysshe. Also he must exchew the eating of
fresshe beef, of goose, of ducke, and of pygyons. Beware of taking cold in the
leg, or rydyng, or going wetshod. Beware of veneryous acts after refection,
or after or upon a full stomach. And refrain from all things that does
inge^der evil humors and be inflatyue.

The, xxxi. Chapter, treatyth of a dyete for them the which have any of the
kinds of lypored.
HE that is infectyd, with any of the.iiii. kinds of the lepored must refrain
from all manner of wynes, and from new drynkes, and strong ale, than let him
beware of riot and surfetynge. And let him abstain from etyng of spyces, and
daates, and from trypes and podynges, and all inwardes of beestes. Fysshe and
eggs, and milk is not good for leperous persons: and they must abstain from
eating of fresshe beef, and from eating of gose, ducke and from water foul
and pygions. And in no wise eat no veneson, nor hare flesh and such like.

The.xxxii. Thapytre, treatyth of a dyete for them, the which have any of ye
kinds of the falling syckenes.
WHo so ever he be, the which have any of the kinds of the falling syckenes
must abstayn from eating of white meat, specially of milk he must refrain
from drynkyng of wine, new ale, and strong ale. Also they should not eat the
fatnes of fysshe, nor the hedes of fysshe, the which does engender rewme.
Shell fysshe, eles, samon, herynge, and viscus fysshes be not good for
Epilentycke men. Also they must refrain from eating of garlyke, onyons,
leekes, chybbolles, and all vaperous meats, the which does hurt ye head:
venson, hare flesh, beef, beans, and peason be not good for Epilentycke men.
And if they know that they be infected with this great sycknes, they should
not resort where there is great resort of company, which is in church in
sessyons and market places on market days, if they do the sycknes will infeste
them more there, than in any other place, or at any other time They must beware
they do not sit to nyghe the fire, for the fire will ouercom them, and will
induce the sycknes. They must beware of lyeng hot in their bed, or to labor
extremely, for such things causyth the grefe to come the ofter.

The.xxxiij. Chapter, treatyth, of a dyete, the which have any pain in the
head.
MAny sycknes, or infyrmytes and impedymentes may be in a man's head* wherefore
who so ever have any impedyme^t in the head must not keep the head to hot, nor
to cold, but in a temporaunce. And to beware of ingendryng of rewme, which is
the cause of many infyrmytes. There is nothing that does engender rewme so
much as does the fatnes of fysshe and the heddes of fysshe, and surfestes, and
taking cold in the feet: and taking cold in the nape of the neck or head.
Also they ye which have any infyrmyte in ye head must refrain of immoderat
sleep specially after meat Also they must abstain from drinking of wine, and
use not to drink ale and beer the which is over strong: vocyferacyon
halowynge, cryeng, and high synging is not good for the head. All things the
which is vaporous or does fume, is not good for the head. And all things the
which is of evil savor as caryn, synkes, wyddrawghtes, piss bolles snoffe of
candellys, dunghylles, stynkynge canellys, and stynkynge standing waters, and
stynkynge marshes, with such contagyous eyres does hurt the head and the
brain, and the memory. All odyferous savors be good for the head and the
brain and the memory.

The.xxxiiij. Chapitre, treats of a dyete for them the which be in a
consumpcyon.
WHo soever he be that is in a consumpcyon must abstain from all sour and
tarte things as venegre and alceger, and such like. And also he must abstain
from eating of gross meats the which be hard and slow of dygestyon. And
use cordyallys and restoratyues and nutrytyue meats. All meats and drinks
the which is sweet and that sugar is in be nutrytyue* wherefore sweet wynes be
good for them the which be in consu^pcion moderatly taken. And sour wine,
sour ale, and sour bread is good for no man. For it does freate away nature,
and let them beware that be in consumpcion of fryde meat, of bruled meat, and
bronte meat the which is over rostyd. And in any wise let them beware of
anger and pencyfulnes. These things following be good for them the which be
in co^sumpcions a pygge or a cock stewed and made in a gely, cockrellys
stewed, gootes milk and sugar, almon milk in the which ryce is soden, and
rabbetes stewed. etc.

The.xxxv. Chapitre treats of a dyete for them the which be asmatyke men,
being short wyndyd or lacking breath.
Shortness of wind comes diverse times, of impedymentes in ye lunges, and
straytnes of the breast opylatyd through viscus fleume: and other while when the
head is stuffyd with rewme called the pose lettyth the breath of his natural
course. wherefore he yt has shortness of breath: must abstain from eating of
nuttes specially if they be old: chese and milk is not good for them, no more
is fysshe and feuyte, and raw or crude herbs. Also all manner of meat, the
which is hard of dygestion is not good for them. They must refrain from
eating of fysshe specially from eating fysshe the which will cleue to the
fyngers: and be viscus and slyme and in any wise beware of the skyns of fysshe
and of all manner of meat the which does engender fleume. Also they must
beware of cold. And when any house is a swepynge to go out of the house for a
space in to a clean air The dust also that ryseth in the street through the
vehemens of the wind or otherwise, is not good for them. And smoke is evil
for them, and so is all thing that is stoppynge. wherefore necessary it is for
the^ to be laxatyue.

The.xxxvi. Cpapitre, treatyth of a dyete for them, the which have the palsye.
THey the which have the Palsye, universal, or pertyculer must beware of
anger, hastynes, and testynes, and must beware of fear, for through anger or
fear diverse times the Palsye do come to a man. Also they must beware of
droke^nes, and eating of nuttes, which things be evil for the palsye of the
tongue, coldness and contagyous, and stynkynge fylthy eyres be evil for the
palsye. And let every man beware on lyeng upon the bare ground or upon the
bare stones, for it is evil for the Palsye, the savor of Castory, and the
savor of a fox is good against the palsye.

The.xxxvij. Chapitre, does show an order and a dyete for them the which be
mad, and out of their wit.
THere is no man the which have any of ye kinds of madness: but they ought to
be kept in sauegarde for diverse i^ co^uenye^ce yt may fall, as it apperyd of
late days of a lunatycke man named Mychell, the which went many years at
lyberte, and at last he did kylle his wife and his wyfes suster, and his own
self. wherefore I do aduertyse every man the which is mad, or lunatycke or
frantycke, or demonyacke to be kept in sauegarde, in some close house or
chamber, where there is little light. And that he have a keeper the which the
mad man do fear. And se that the mad man have no knyf nor sheers nor other
edge toule, nor that he have no gyrdyll except it be a week list of clothe,
for hurtynge or killing him self. Also the chamber or the house that the
mad man is in, let there be no painted clothes, nor painted wallys, nor
pyctures of man nor woman or foul or be: for such things makes them full
of fantasyes, let the mad persons head be shaven ones a month: let them
drink no wine nor strong ale, nor strong beer, but moderat drink, and let
them have.iii. times in a day warm suppynges, and little warm meat. And use
few words to them, except it be for reprehensyon, or gentle reformacyon if
they have any wit or perseueraunce to understand.

The.xxxviij. Chapter, treatyth of a dyete for them the which have any of the
kinds of the Idropyses.
Saint Beede says the more a man does drink yt has the Idropise, the more
he is a thurst, for although ye syckenes does come by superabundaunce of water,
yet the liver is dry. whether it be alchytes Iposarca, Lencoflegmancia, or the
tympany. They that has any of the.iiii. kinds of ye Idropyses must refrain
from all things the which be co^stupat and costyue, and use all things the
which be laxatyue / nuttes and dry almondes and hard chese is poison to them.
A ptysane and posset ale made with cold herbs does comfort them: who so ever
he be, the which will have a remedy for any of these four kinds of the
Idropyses, and will know a declaracyon of these infyrmytes, and all other
sycknesses, let him look in a book of my making named the Breuyary of health.
For in this book I do speak but of dyetes, and how a man should order his
mansyon place. And him self and his bowsholde, with such like things: for the
conseruacion of health.

The.xxxix. Chapter, treats of a general dyete, for all manner of men and
women, being sick or hole.
THere is no man nor woman, the which have any respect to the^ self, that can
be a better Phesycion for their own sauegarde, than their own self can be to
consider what thing ye which does them good. And to refrain from such
things that does them hurt or harm. And let every man beware of care,
sorrow, thought, pencyfulnesse, and of inward anger. Beware of surfettes, and
use not so much veneryouse acts. Brehe not the usual custom of sleep in the
night. A merry heart and mind, the which is in rest and quyetnes, without
aduersyte, and to much worldly busynes causes a man to live long, and to
look yongly although he be agyd, care and sorrow brings in age and death,
where let every man be merry: and if he can not let him resort to merry company
to break of his perplexatyues. Furthermore I do aduertyse every man to wasshe
their hands often every day: And diverse times to keyme their head every day
And to plounge the eyes in cold water in the morenyng. Moreover I do council
every man to keep the breast and the stomach warm. And to keep the feet from
wet, and other while to wasshe them, and that they be not kept to hot nor to
cold, but indyfferently. Also to keep the head and the neck in a moderat
temporaunce not to hot nor to cold, and in any wise to beware not to meddle to
much with veneryous acts: for that will cause a man to look agedly: and also
causes a man to have a breef or a short life. All other matters pertaining
to any pertyculer dyete, you shall have in the dyetes above in this book
rehersyd.

The.xl. Chapter, does show an order, or a fasshyon, how a sick man should
be ordered, And how a sick man should be vsyd that is lykely to dye.
WHoo so ever that is sore sick, it is uncertain to man, whether he shall
live or dye. wherefore it is necessary for him yt is sick to have two or.iii
good kepers, the which at all times must be dylyge^t, and not slepysshe
sloudgysshe, sluttysshe. And not to weep and wayle about a sick man, nor to
use many words / nor that there be no great resort to common and talk, For
it is a busynes a whole man to answer many men, specially women that shall
come to him. They the which comes to any sick person ought to have few
words or none: except certain persons the which be of counseyll of the
Testament making, the which wise men be not to seek of such matters in their
syckenes, for wysdom would that every man should prepare for such things in
health And if any man for charity will vyset any person, let him aduertyse the
sick to make every thing even bytwext god and the world and his conscience.
And to receive the ryghtes of holy church, like a catholycke man. And to
follow the counseyll of both Physycyons which is to say the physycyon of the
soul, and the physycyon of the body, that is to say the spyrituall counseyl
of his ghostly father, and the bodily counseyll of his physycyon consernyng the
receytes of his medsons to recover health. For saint Augustyn says he that does
not the commandment of his physycyon does kill him self. Furthermore about a
sick person should be redolent savor, and the chamber should be replenysshed
with herbs and flowers of odyferouse savor. and certain times it is good to
be used a little of some perfume to stand in ye mydle of the chamber. And in
any wise let not many men, and specially women be together at one time in the
chamber, not only for babbling, but specially for their brethes. And the
kepers should se at all times that the sick persons drink be pure, fresshe
and stale, and that it be a little warmed, turned out of the cold. If the
sick man wex sycker and sycker, that there is lykle hope of amendment but
signs of death, than no man ought to move to him any worldly matters or
busynes: but to speak of ghostly and godly matters. And to read the passion of
christ. and to say the psalms of the passion, and to hold a cross or a
pyctour of the passion of christ before ye eyes of the sick person. And let
not the kepers forget to give the sick man in such agony warm drink with a
spone, and a sponefull of a cawdell or a colesse. And than let every man do
indeuer him self to prayer, that the sick person may fynysshe his life
Catholyckely in the faith of Jesus christ And so depart out of this miserable
world. I do beseech the Father, and ye sone, and the holy ghost through the
merit of Jesus crystes passion, that I and all Creatures living may do. AMEN.

Imprynted by me Robert wyer / dwelling in saint Martyns parysshe beside
charynge Cross, at the sign of saint John^ Euangelyste.
For John^ Gowghe, Cum priuilegio regali. Ad imprimendum solum.

printer's device of Robert Wyer (McKerrow 68): "St. John the Evangelist with
eagle"


