The Book of Knowledge / Whether a sick person being in peril / shall live,
or dye. etc.





YPocras most conning of all Physicions, commanded that the Analogy of al
his works of Phesycke should be laid in his Sepulture under his heed which
was so done. And where as the Emperor of Rome coming By his Tomb saw it
t^^helye wrought, supposed that great treasure was hid in it. For the people
i^ those days used much to hyde their money in tombs, And when it was opened
he found the said Analogy, there under his heed, in which all his works were
he took it away and showed it to no man, but to Anadestus a Physician. And in
it they found medicines most wholesome for diseases of man's body. And first
of al was specyfyed the tokens, which follows, that does Pronostyke wh^^her a
syeke person being in peryil, shall dye or live. etc.

The forste token of death.
if a man have swettynge in his face, or pain in hie heed without cowghe / and
puts his left hand often upon his breast, and is besy in clawyng of his
nosethryle, betoken death.

Also an experyment to prove life or death.
Put his spytell upon but^^ynge roses, and if it stink h^ shall dye, and if not
he shall live.

Another experyment of the same.
Cause the syeke person to spytte in a vessel of water, and if it go to the
bottom, he shall live, and if it swymme above he shall dye.

Also the fourth token.
If a man sweet much in any manner disease, it is good, if he dyspayre not.

Another and the fyfte
If the sick turn him often to the wall, it is an evil sign.

Another and the syxte.
If the pacient have thyn nosethrylles or the typ of his nose sharp, or a
sharp look, and holowe temples, hanging lips. and cold ears, and turns
his heed where his fete were it sygnyfyeth soon death.

Another and the seventh.
If the paci^nte put his hands often to his heed and draw his feet up to him,
betoken that he shall escape.

Also other tokens of death, which the conning physyon Galyen set forth as
follows.
He says that these are tokens of death wha^ the forehed is red, the brows
ha^geth down. The left eye is less and waters. The typ of of the nose
white the chynne falls, the fete coleth, and the belly decays, is signs of
death.

Also the nynth experyment to know fyfe life or death.
Take the pacientes vryne, and a woman^ milk, that noryssheth a man child,
and meddle them together, and if they go in to one, he shall live, and if they
depart he shall dye.

For to know whether ye shall dye within.xii. months or not
Let a drop of your blood fallin to a dysshe of water. And if he descend
hole in to the botom, he shall fine that year, and if not, but go a broad, not.

Also another manner.
If ye rub also well the forhed of the syeke with a Tablet, or other such of
Copper fro the one ere to the other, and if he sleep after he shall live, or
else not.

Also of the sharp ague an experymente often proved.
Take a curtesye of the pacientes blood and vryne, and meddle it with the milk
of a woman that noryssheth a man child, and if they myxe together* he shall
live, or else he shall not.

Also another and the eleventh.
If a frantyke man have hard swellynge without disgestyon, he shall dye the.ix.
day.

Also another and the twelfe.
He that vometteth blood, and have swellynge in any lymme, as toghte as a
trumpette like an egipciane bean, shall dye the.xl. day after.

Also another and the thyrtene.
If the eyes be holowe, and the mouth open when he slepeth, and if he be not
accustomed so, and if his left eye water he shall dye the third day.

Another and the fourtene.
If the pacient bydde the Physyion farewell, or stretche forth his feet, and
cast his hands upon his belly, he shall dye the third day.

Another and the.xv.
If the paciente bydde the Physyon farewell and put his hands to his head, and
draw up his feet, he shall escape.

Also the proof of a sick man that can not sleep.
Stamp henbane and mynte, and lay it on his forehed playsterwyse, and if he
sleep not soon after he shall dye.

(...)of Ipocras begins.
WHo that falls sick the first day of the month, it is to be fered of him
the.ii. day, the which if he escape, he shall es^e^ll the.xxx. day.

And if he fall sick the second day, it is to fear of him the.x. day, and
if he escape that he that be long sick, notwithstanding he shall escape.

And if he fall sick the third day, he shall be delivered without doubt.

And if he fall sick the fourth day, he shall be sore in pain till the.viii.
day and then he shall very well escape

And if he fall sick the fyfth day, he shall be sore sick, yet he shall escape.

And if he fall sick the syxt day, he shall seem to be hole, yet he shall dye
some day of the next month.

And if he fall sick the seventh day, he shall be delivered without grefe.

And if he fall sick the eight day he shall be in metely helth^ till the
eleventh day, and then after soon shall dye.

And if he fall sick the nynth day, he shall escape with meruaylous great
pain.

And he that falls sick the tenth day be shall dye without doubt.

And he that falls sick the eleuenthe day, he shall be delivered the next
day.

And if he fall sick the twelfte day, he shall dye the.xv. day

And if he fall sick the.xiii. day, he shall before vexed till the.xvii. day,
and if he escape, then he shall be delivered.

And if he fall sick the.viiii. day he may escape, if he live till the xv.
day.

And he that takes syckenes the.xv. day except he recover within..xviii days
he shall dye, shortly after.

And if a man fall sick the.xvi. day, he shall be sick till the.xxviii. day
(...) escape.

And if a man take sickness the.xvii. day he shall dye the.x. day.

And if a man take syckenes the.xviii. day he shall be delivered at length,

And if a man take syckenes the.xix. day he shall be delivered at length.

And if a person fall sick the.xx. day the pacient shall dye the next month.

And he that fall sick the.xxi. day, and he dye not the.x. after he shall be i^
great peril, yet he shall be delivered the next month after.

If a body fall sick the.xxii. day all though he be in grievous pain till
the.x. day he shall not dye till the next month.

If a person take syckenes the.xxiii. day, he shall be delivered though it be
with grievous pain the other month.

If a person fall sick the.xxiiii, day, he shall dye the next month.

If a person fall sick the.xxv. day albeit he shall have some pain, yet he
shall well escape that danger.

If a body fall sick the.xxvi. day, yet he shall well escape.

If a person fall sick the.xxvii. though he be at point of death, he shall be
delivered the next month.

If a person fall sick the.xxviii. day he is thretyn to dye, yet he may
escape.

If a body fall sick the.xxix. day, yet he may be delivered the next month
by little and little.

If a person fall sick the.xxx ^ay it is in doubt if the pacient shall dye or
live. And also the.xxxi. day likewise.

Explicit.
Now to know whether a wounded man shall dye or live.
Stamp pympernell, and dystempre it with water, and give it him to drink, and
if it go out at the wound, then he shall dye or else not.

Another for the same.
Give him white Lettuse to drink with water, a if he perbrake it, he shall dye,
if not he shall live.

A pronostycacion set forth, by the said Galien of the danger of
Pestolencial Impostume after the party of the body that it is in, howbeit in
God is all.
Another begins of the spots called gods marks.
When the Impostome is in the pacientes face so paynefull that it may not be
touched, and he leyth his left hand often upon his breast, know that he shall
dye the.xx. day, and spec^allye when he handeleth the nosethrylles in
beginning of his syckenes, when great Impostumes are in any of both his knees,
it is to know he shall not dye till after the.xiii. day, and then he may
escape, and especyallye if he sweat much at the beginning of his knees, when
it chaunseth that little whelkes comes upon the vain which is on the nape
of the neck, and upon as it were a manner of powder know that he shall dye
the.ii. day of his syckenes, and especyall token is if he have great thirst
at the beginning of his syckenes, when whelkes are upon his tongue like dogs
flies, know that he shall dye the same day and the tokens is the beginning
of his syckenes; he desires things which are naturallye hot. When little
black whelkes are upon any of his fyngers, that are soore, know that he shall
the next day after dye of that syckenes, and an especyall token ^s if he be
paynfull and heavy in his body. When little white whelkes are in the thombe of
the pacientes left hand, fy^e brown beans of co^loute or pa^e, w^iche are
not soore. Then know that the paciente shall dye the.iiii. day of his
syckenesse. Another token is that at on the mydled toe of the left foot.

Finis.
Imprynted by me Robert Wyer: dwelling at the sign of saint John^
Euangelyste in saint Martyns Parysshe, in the Duke of Suffolkes rentes beside
Charynge Cross.




printer's or publisher's device ROBERT merchant's mark WIRE.




