THE SAINTS SOLACE: OR, The Condition, And Consolation Of The Saints in the
Earth.

Delivered in certain Sermons at Eatonbridge in Kent.

By the Minister there.

Psalm. 94.19. In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart: thy
comforts have refreshed my soul.

LONDON, Printed by John Hauiland for Robert Bostocke, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Kings head. 1630.

TO The right worshipful, Sir Robert Heath Knight, his Majesty's Attorney
General: Grace and all good blessings from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ.
Right Worshipful:
WHat the Elders of the Jews unto Jesus Christ, (...).
of the Centurious love unto their Nation Luk 7.5.
might be said unto all, of your love and care of our Eatonbridge; where by
Baptism you were initiated, and whereof the spiritual wealth Esth. 10.3
, you have earnestly sought, both by your own bounty, and other annual
pensions procured by you, from your worthy friends *, and worshipful alliance
in the adjacent parts, unto the Minister, which should be there resident, to
edify the people on the most holy faith. It is not to be forgotten of any, how
you began to honor God, whew he began to honor you, and how he has gone on,
in honoring you, as you have him: If any should, I cannot, nor will forget
your great goodness extended toward me (of all the Lords servants the least
and unworthiest) since you first saw me: your counsel, countenance, and
encouragement after my first entrance into that Cure, (now eleven years past:)
and lately your powerful hand stretched out, in the happy strength thereof,
to save me from the reproaches of them that would have Psalm. 57.3.
swallowed me up; are (if I would ingratefully be silent) most evident
testimonies to the understanding world. And yet unto all these (as if all these
were small in your sight) it pleased you afterward to add other favors, when
you took me to your house, and sent me home, not empty, but full of comfort
and courage in the work of the Ministry, for the time to come. As David unto
the Lord, I might say unto you; Is this the manner of man 2 Samuel 7.19.
? What shall I render unto you, for all your benefits toward me? My self I
owe you, and such as I have give I you; These few impolished papers: But what
are these? of which the acceptance will be the augmentation of my debt: or why
these, rather than some other of my labors is that place, which some happily
judge (if I would needs to it) more worthy the press? Nothing but pressure
(God is witness) brought me to the press: and these (being mine immediate
Meditations after the Commencement of my terrible troubles, and the fruits of
those sorrows, or sorrowful thoughts, which were then, in my soul) would (as
I thought) unto the people of God be acceptable; as is, unto God himself; the
broken spirit, the broken and contrite heart Psalm. 51.17
.

Nothing else, Right Worshipful but these rude lines, (which, in the days of
my trouble, I found by enquiring in the Sanctuary of God, or otherwise by
reading, meditation, observation, and experience,) have I (Me penes) to present
unto you: but for you, and your honored family, all prayers and supplications
in the spirit, I will (as my daily sacrifice) offer upon the golden altar Revel
8.3.
, unto him who regards, and despises not the prayer of the destitute Psalm.
109.17
. The Lord blessed you and assist you in your high calling: The Lord give you
the price of that other high calling of God in Christ Jesus Phil. 3.14
, for which with all Saints you press unto the mark: The Lord make you famous
in Bethlehem, and always to do worthily in Ephratah Ruth. 4.11
. The Lord increase you more and more: you and your children. Blessed be ye
of the Lord which made Heaven and earth Psalm. 115.14, 15.
. Thus recommending this little book, with my self the poor Author thereof,
unto your implored Patronage and Pro^ection, I crave pardon for my boldness,
and rest

Your Worships ever, and in all duty bounden, Peter Bostock.
Eatonbridge, June 7th. Anno Salutis, 1630.
THE SAINTS SOLACE: OR Comforts for Afflicted.
PSALM. 119. VER. 50. This is my comfort in my affliction.


THE Book of Psalms a common promptitarie of Medicine; Commune quoddam
Medicina promptua. arium. Ambr.
many authorities out of it in the book of Jesus Christ, a Law in which his
delight was, and his Disciples exercised, what other song in the house of their
Pilgrimage, or rejoicing, the Saints together, what other Odes used? All
admirable, but Ambr. Hic psah^us tribus in rebus on nibus ^ntecellit: 1.
Vtilitate. 2. Longitudine. 3. Elegantia and artificio alphabetico. Bellar in
tit. b^ius psalm.
as the Suns the Moons light, this surpasses all. The song of songs which was
David's; indicted for matter accurately, Muscubus. Wilcos. ibid.
composed for memory exquisitely, many prayers to God, many praises of his
Word, many professions of obedience comprised therein; Octonaries 22. the parts
thereof, every verse of the 8. in every one, beginning in the Hebrew with one
letter, this Section with Zaiin Zaiin quasi Ziu, i. telum, quod claua figura
esse vidcatur.
a club in figure, in signification a weapon, defensive, and offensive for use.
A defense, to them that decline not from the Law of God, H^ius ^ ^^. vid v. 51,
52, 53, 54, 55, 56,
but remember his Name, his Word, his Judgments of old, his Statutes and
Precepts to keep the same. An offense, to the proud that have the humble in
derision, and to the wicked that forsake the Law. What other mystery better in
the letter for the use of edifying? As other have labored with that in Thren,
Hieron. in Thren. Ier.
we might with the Alphabeticall artifice here; but comfort in affliction being
(vnum illud) that one thing which we seek, we will set our heart on that one
thing, and give our selves wholly thereunto.

D. King Episs. Land. lect. in Ion.
The World a Sea in a Similitude, swelling with pride, and vainglorie, the wind
to heave it up, blew, and huid with envy; boiling with wrath, deep with
covetousness, foming with luxuriousnes, swallowing, and drinking in all by
oppressions, dangerfull for the Rocks of presumption and desperation, rising
with, the waves of passions and perturbations, ebbing and flowing with
lightness, and inconstancy, brinish and salt with iniquity, bitter and
unsavory with all kind of misery.

The confession in the Text of an expert Nauigator, as the light in the
Admiral, by which so many as sail after him, through that vast, turbid,
belluous, and circumfluous Ocean: may for the strengthening of their seasicke
Souls, behold

His Condition, Affliction and Consolation, The Word.


1. His Condition or state of life seasoned with Affliction. Afflicted he was
greatly, Psalm. 116.10.
and would be remembered with all his afflictions, Psa. 132.1.
particulars inducted, in Psalm. 22.102. and this 119. Psalm. 119.23.61 69.85 86,
87. Psalm 102.3, 4.8. Verse. 23 Verse. 78. Verse. 61.
the princes, the powers, the proud, the wicked combined against him, yea,
sworn against him, and mad against him; Verse. 6^.
what lies sorged they? what pits dug they? Verse. 84.
persecuted wrongfully, Verse. 36.
consumed on the earth, Verse. 87.
waited for to be destroyed, Verse. 95.
hunted with dogs, Psalm. 22.16.
their feet swift, their mouths deep as wide, and their teeth as sharp,
compassed about with many bulls, Verse. 10.
beset round with strong bulls, enclosed with the assemblies of the wicked;
Verse. 16.
gaped on with their mouths, Verse. 13.
laughed to scorn, Verse. 7
smitten with their tongues, Psalm. 52.2, 3, 4. and 120 3, 4.
their tongues as spears and razors, and words as swords, powered out li^e
water, all his bones sundred, his heart like wax melting in the midst of his
bowels, Psalm. 12.14.
his strength dried up like a potsheard, Verse. 15.
the reproach of men, Verse. 6.
yea, a worm and no man, cast out and brought into the dust of death. Verse. 15.


Prevention.
Marvel not that David the servant of the Lord, sound faithful as Moses in all
his house, a man after his own heart, which fulfilled all his will; Acts 13.22
Beloved as his name sounds, and beloved of the Lord, was exercised with such
anxious and crieuous afflictions, for (...), in the Beloved Ephesians. 1.6.
i. Jesus Christ, the elect of God are all accepted as David was, and called
all Iedid his beloved Psalm. 127.2.
; yet none exempted from the sufferings of the present time, no not one, not
one amongst the excellent from Adam to Christ, and from Christ to this our day,
that has not in some measure tasted of the cup which is full of mixture, Jude
v.3.
common as the salvation, and the grace of God which brings salvation, Tit.
2.11.
tentation, and tribulation. 1 These. 1.6.
The Thessalonians received the word with much affliction. Heb. 10.32
The Hebrews enlightened endured a great fight of afflictions.

A conclusion offered.
The whole household of faith, all the fellow citizens, all that live godly, all
the sons of God, all the children of light, all that hold forth the word of
life, are in this life partakers of afflictions. Thus I might conclude.

Object. But this door opened, some will oppose themselves, speaking on this
wise: Hard is this saying to the Non-afflicted, that enjoy this worlds joy,
prosperity and peace; for being without any manner of affliction, whereof all
are partakers that are Heb. 12 8. (...).
sons, elect, beloved, and accepted, are they not Sp. hated, rejected,
reprobated, as Edom, Mal. 1.2, 3, 4.
and reserved as the wicked to the day of destruction.

Answ. Carnal the peace altogether and without truth, or pride and security
the fruit thereof with hardness of heart, it is (as the prosperity of fools)
a blessing cursed, and the praeludium to destruction. Psalm. 92.6
A brutish man knows not,
neither does a fool understand this; but the spirit speaks expressly, When
the wicked spring as the grass, Psalm. 92 7.
and when all the workers of iniquity flourish, it is, that they shall be
destroyed for ever. Take for example the two notorious fools, 1 Samuel 25
the one, the man of Maon, whose possessions were in Carmel, a very great man,
having three thousand sheep, and one thousand goats, and living in prosperity,
yet smitten in a moment, his heart died within him, and he became as a st^ne;
Luc. 12.19.
the other, the man in the parable, who, when his ground brought forth
plentifully, wanted room where to bestow his fruits, would therefore enlarge
his barnes, and having therein laid up much goods for many years, sing without
grace requiem to his soul; Soul take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry;
but the same night his soul was required of him.

Contra, this I say and testify in the Lord, that outward peace and prosperity
had, with the peace of God, and of conscience, (the Kingdom of God first
sought and found, with his righteousness, its the blessing of the Lord without
affliction or sorrow added with it Pro. 10.22.
. Saint John's prayer for Gaius was, that he might prosper and be in health as
his soul prospered. Io. ep. 3. 2.
A man behauing himself wisely in a perfect way, walking within his house with
a perfect heart, Psalm. 102.2. Genesis 17.2. Micah. 6.7.
uprightly before God, humbly with him, doing justly, loving mercy, casting on
the waters, dispersing, giving to the poor, communicating with the affliction
of others in distress, if peace and truth be with him in his days, its the
face of God shining on him, the light of his countenance, and the evidence of
his providence, how otherwise should the poor afflicted be relieved, and
their souls sustained? 1 Reg. 18.13.
Obadiah not in case to do it, who shall hide the Prophets in a cave, and feed
them with bread and water? Nehemiah not in favor with Artaxerxes, Neh. 4 2, 3,
4, etc.
who shall procure any favor to Jerusalem? Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy 1.16. Philo.
^.7.
Philemon, and others, not enriched and enabled, how shall Paul, or the bowels
of the Saints be refreshed? David poor afflicted, had friends of ability
through the Lord to uphold his soul Psalm 54 4.
, for the Lord (he said) was with them. Psalm. 35.27.
The Lord loves the prosperity of his servants. Therefore blessed with it,
they bless him for it, and Job 31.22.
the loins bless them of all that are refreshed by them, their righteousness
endures for ever, and their borne shall be exalted with honor Psalm. 112. vlt.
. Nevertheless afflicted without controversy, Outwardly. Inwardly.


1. Outwardly: reproached and envied for following and doing the thing that
good is. Eccle. 4.4.
I considered (says the Preacher) all travel, and every right work, and for
this a man is envied of his neighbor. Cain, who was of the wicked one, slew
Abel; wherefore? because his works were evil, and his brothers righteous 1
Io. 3.12
. Joseph was afflicted of his brethren Genesis 37.4.
, Daniel accused of the Presidents Dan. 6.4.
, Jesus Christ rejected of his own, Io. 1.11.
and they that exercise themselves to live godly in him, 2 Timothy 3.12.
persecuted of unreasonable and wicked men 2 These. 3.2.
; wherefore? know ye not that there is enmity put between the seed of the
woman, and the seed of the serpent Genesis 3.15
? Demetrius had a good report of all men, Io ep. 3. 10, 12.
yet Diotrephes prated against him with malicious words; the riotous speak
evil of the frugall and moderate, that will not run with them into the same
excess of riot. 1 Pet 4.4
Thus may the servants of the most high God, living otherwise in as great peace
and prosperity as the Carmelite, Nabal.
be envied of evil men, Ier. 18.18.
and afflicted with the scourge of the tongue, yea, Job cap. 1.
and suffer some loss in some other things, but the LORD, (as the seer to
Amaziah) is able to give them much more than that, 2 Chronicles. 25.9.
and to make all grace to abound toward them, that they always having
sufficiency in all things, (maugre the malicious that envy and reproach them)
may abound unto every good work. 2 Cor. 9.8.


2. Inwardly they are afflicted also, but how who knows? What fear and
trembling in interiori domo, yea, what carfulness, 2 Cor. 7.11
yea, what clearing of themselves from the aspersions of the evil, yea, what
indignation, (...). Io. 17.5.
yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge upon themselves,
overtaken with a f^ult unknown to the world? This so to be who will deny? Not
one. Besides, if not in themselves, for themselves, yet afflicted they are or
may be.

In the afflictions of the Church. of the brethren. of the Lord.


1. Of the Church. Psalm. 137.1.
Rivers of waters ran by the rivers of Babylon, Sion remembered, Neh. 1.3, 4.
the son of Hachaliah, the people of God his countrymen in great affliction
and reproach, the wall of Jerusalem broken down, and the gates burnt with
fire, sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted, and prayed. 2 Samuel 1.
Vriah the arc, and Israel and Judah in their tents, will not go down to eat
and drink, and to sleep with his wife. The Lord says himself, that in all
the afflictions of his people he was afflicted himself. Esai. 63.9
The spirit of God upon him, can any man say less of afflictions of the
Churches? In the afflictions of the Chuches in France and Germany, who is not
afflicted that is of the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of
truth? 1 Timothy 3.15.


2. Of private persons, especially the holy brethren Hob. 3.1.
. Other sick, and though hard friends, yet David would put on sackcloth, and
be afflicted for them. Psalm. 35.13. 2 Samuel 3.32, 33. 2 Samuel 1.26
For Abner how much? and for Jonathan as Jonathan for him. Lazarus dead, Thomas
said to his fellows, Let us go that we may die with him Io. 11.16.
. Epaphroditus full of heaviness for the Philippians, Phil. 2.2^. (...).
because they heard that he had bin sick, they heavy for his sickness, and
he for their heaviness, full of heaviness, feeling members should it not be
so? The members have the same care one for another 1 Cor. 12.25, 26.
, and if one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; members we one of
another, one body in Christ, no sympathy being in a man, how is he in the body?
the rule is, Heb. 13.3
Remember them that are in bonds as bound with them, and them which suffer
adversity; as being your selves also in the body.

3. Of the Lord. Suffers he not when the wicked rise up against him Psalm. 139.21
, make v^id his law Psalm. 119.126
, provoke the eyes of his glory, put down his worship and him to open shame
Heb. 6.6.
? When they press him, and he is pressed under them, as a cart with sheaues
Amos 2.13.
suffers he not? or suffers he and not his servants with him? How did Eliakim,
Shebua and Ioab rent their clothes at the blasphemy of Rabshakeh Isaiah 36.22.
? How did those that were marked at Jerusalem sigh, and cry for all the
abominations that were done in the midst thereof Ezekiel. 9.^.
? How was just Lot vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked 2 Pet. 2.7,
8.
? that righteous man dwelling among the Sodomites, in seeing and hearing vexed
his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds. He that can
hear and see the Lord dishonored, his name blasphemed, his Sabbaths profaned,
his Word despised, his Ministers mocked and basely misused, his worship
polluted, and perfunctorily performed, and is not afflicted. The Lord knows
whose he is, and to whom he belongs, that comes not to his help, nor bears
his reproach, nor grieves for that which is said to grieve the holy spirit of
God. As Haman said, honored of all but of Mordecai. Esther 5.13.
All this avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the
Kings gate, so say those whose hearts are united to the Lord, and that fear
his Name; Although of themselves by place and authority they are mighty in
power, their seed established in their sight, their offspring before their
eyes, their houses safe from fear, their friends as the stars of heaven for
eminence and multitude, their wisdom, and wealth, and worlds delight, as
Salomons; All these avail us nothing, so long as we see our Lord and our God,
set behind, not before the sons of men, forgotten, not remembered, exposed to
shame, and not honored in the world.

Pondered these things: I may (as I was about) conclude under affliction, the
whole household of God, and set down this position to stand fast for ever
without opposition. That the righteous servants of God, his beloved of his
household, have all their times, (in several kinds) as David had in his, of
suffering in this life. Psalm. 34.19
Many the afflictions or evils of the righteous, the cross, on their shoulder,
the yoke on their neck, and on their back the rod of the wicked Esaias 48, 10.
. Israel, which is the Israel of God, is refined and chosen in the furnace of
affliction.

Demanded vnde: From whence afflictions come and from whom the evils, let Job
answer; Job 5.6.
Not forth of the dust, nor out of the ground, but from the Lord. Amos 3.6
Shall there be evil in the City and the Lord has not done it. The Lord
causes grief Lam. 3.32.
, and because he loves them, he scourges his beloved, whom he calls his
called Isai. 48.12, 14.
, whom he loves he chasteneth Heb. 12.6
, yea he has said Revel. 3.19.
As many as I love I rebuke and chasten.

Enquired of Quorsum; to what end he does it? By the sure word of prophecy the
answer is,

1. For the profit of his own.

2. And his own glory.

First, for the profit of his own: his own thereby being, 1. Viuified. 2.
Sanctified. 3. Purged. 4. Prevented.


1. Viuified or quickened. Dead in comparison of the living, or dull of hearing,
sometimes the generation of hs children, and remiss in seeking, in their
prosperity as the inhabitants of Lebanon and Bashan, they will not hear Ier.
22.21.
, nor seek as the rebellious children the face of the Lord, but in their
affliction they will hear him gladly, and seek him early Hos. 5. vlt
; the mountain made strong, and security crying within, I shall never be
moved, decryeth other cries, the people whom the Lord has formed for himself,
will not in such a case show forth his praise. Jacob would not, nor would
Israel call upon him, but was weary of him Isai. 43.21, 22.
, yet the Lord gone his way and returned to his place, or his face hid; trouble
came, and the their cry was heard, Come and let us return Hos. 6.1.
. Correspondent to the Prophets counsel Cap. 14.2.
; Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, and render unto him the Calves of
your lips.

2. Sanctified: partakers of afflictions by the hand of the Lord; partakers
also of his holiness Heb. 12.10.
, made holy thereby Non quod nos proprie sanctificent sed quod adminicula, etc.
Calvin. Hosm.
, yet not properly, for Christ is the sanctification, but exercised to the
moritification of the flesh, consequently prepared (having escaped the
corruption which is in the world through lust) as well to be received of the
Lord, as also to receive the Lord to be sanctified in their heart Isai. 8.^3.
; their fear, their dread, and their sanctuary: yea, Consortes esse, to be
consorts of the divine nature (...), not of the substance, but of the image of
God, after him created in righteousness and true holiness; 2 Pet. 1.^.
or of divine qualities conferred and predicated as the virtues of him, who
calls out of darkness into marvelous light Pet. 2.9.
: the simile is obuious Perkins. aur. armil.
; As the needle to the thread, so the Cross makes way to sanctity, or
amendment of life.

3. Purged; Resty, the Saints grow rusty, turn again unto folly, gather
blackness and filthiness both of the flesh and spirit: foolish let alone, as
Ephraim to his Idols Hos. 4.17
, joined to the froward, froward, as they; to the ignorant, ignorant, as they;
to the brutish, brutish, as they; yea, as beasts before God Psalm. 73.22.
. Behold the man on the mountain in the wilderness of Maon, as a dead dog
in the sight of the adversary that sought his life 1 Samuel 24.14.
, but upon the roof of the Kings house as a pampred horse looking and neighing
after his neighbors wife 2 Samuel 11.2. I^r. 5 8.
not powered out from vessel to vessel; Moah like, men settle on their lees:
Peace abused, defiles, and rest corrupts those who by reason of their rest
have not their senses exercised to discern good and evil. Is the prophecy
hard in Dan 11.35. touching men of understanding: may we not hear it? surely
such men fall sometimes, yet suffer no loss Vt radicula, hoc est herba
lanaria, qua a fullonibus haec and is velibus adhibetur, plurimum confert ad
munditiem and canderem lana seu panni: ita persecutio atque afflictio subigit
ecolesiam, etc. Polan. in Dan. 11.32.
, but are as soyled wool with sopeweed, or fouled cloth with Fullers earth,
purged by means of the later blot from a former spot, a secret fault before
not understood. Who can understand the error of his way without a fall, or will
wash or purge no filth of the flesh seen to put away, nor felt ill humors in
the body to expurge. Remember the Patriarks, Genesis 42.22. and 50.15.

4. Prevented or subtracted from two great evils, which other dimitted, or
left to themselves, precipitate or headlong cast themselves into: namely,
transgression, and condemnation. Obstacles to these, the thorns of
afflictions, in Hosea 2.6. I will hedge up thy way with thorns, says the
Lord, to be understood, Zanch. in loc. Non posse intelligi nisi de electis,
etc. Sape enim etiam electi inducunt in anima^, etc.
not of the children of whoredoms, but of the Elect; for even the Elect,
either of ignorance, or of infirmity, or according to the notions of carnal
wisdom, and motions of the flesh, determine with themselves to follow
oftentimes after strange lovers, lying vanities, forbidden pleasures, things
unseemly and inconvenient, or not acceptable unto the Lord, therefore the Lord
walls up their ways, sets briars in their paths, sends crosses, so thick,
that (as Saul 1. Sam. 23.27, ^8
from pursuing David by the Philistines inuading the land,) they^ are turned
from their intended evil courses: into the way unto excellency: Their first
husband, i. the Lord their maker found to be the best Hos. 2.7.
, consequently kept back from the great transgression Psalm. 19.13.
, likewise from condemnation; for when they are judged, they are chastened of
the Lord, that they should not be condemned with the world 1. Cor. 11.32.
. The whole world lies in wickedness 1 Ioh. 5.19.
, but they that are of God are called, and called out, and commonly come out
through the furnace of Affliction Isai. 48.10.
, Esaias 48.10.

Thus for their own profit: follows for the glory of the Lord, The Lord
glorified, In his Power, and Providence.
By their Faith, and Obedience.


1. In his power: His power made perfect in their weakness ^ Cor. 12.9.
, weak they, they are strong in him; or falling through infirmity, he
vpholdeth them with his hand Psalm. 37.17, 24.
: In his hand they are, and no man shall pluck them out of his hand Ioh. 10.28,
29.
. The mighty man may boast himself in mischief; but the power of the Lord,
as his goodness, endures continually Psalm. 52.1.
; thorns may be in the flesh of the faithful, the messengers of Satan
buffeting them; but the grace of the Lord, which is with them, is proved
sufficient for them 2 Cor. 12.9.
.

2. In his providence: drawn unto him with the cords of a man and bands of
love, he takes by the arms his dear children Hos. 11.3, 4.
and teaches them to go; feeds them, clotheth them, stirs up others to
sustain their souls: As Ravens ministered to Eliah, so supplies are sent by
them, whom he will send. In the days of famine they eat, and have enough
Psalm. 37.19.
; for as Hezekiah and his people, Jerusalem beleaguered Isa. 37.30
, they either eat such as grows of it self, and that which springs of the
same: Or else, as the Captives of Judah Dan. 1.15.
fed with pulse, their countenance appears fairer and fatter than other,
which eat the portion of the Kings meat. Sometimes by small means, sometimes
by no means, sometimes against means, (in sustaining and preserving them 1
Pet 5.7.
that cast their care on him) he beyond expectation, or man's apprehension,
declares his care of them, and demonstrateth his providence so luculently,
that all cry out, as the Magitians in Egypt; This is the finger of God Exodus
8.19.
, Exodus 8.19.

3. By their faith: proved and found unto praise and honor Deuteronomy. 8.2.
, known in the tentation what is in the heart, viz. uprightness and
readiness to draw near unto God Psalm. 73. vlt.
, and to cleave unto the Lord with full purpose of heart Psa. 42.8.
, prayer made to the God of their life, etc. Christ followed, the cross taken
up, themselves denied, yea 2. Cor. 1.8, 9.
pressed out of measure and above strength, the sentence of death received in
themselves, that they might not trust in themselves but in God, which after two
days Hos. 6.2.
(although he kill) raises the dead: magnified and glorified in their body
their Lord and their God; whether by life, as in David Psalm. 18.17, 18.
; or by death, as in Peter Ioh. 21.19.
. In the end of their faith is the end of the Lord; his own glory in their
salvation Psalm. 50.23.
corporal and spiritual, temporal and eternal, according to his word, Psalm.
50.15. Saepe hic and innocintes pereunt, and recti sunditus delentur, sed tamen
ad aeternam glo^iam percundo seruantur. Greg. lib. 5. Mor. cap. 14.
.

4. By their obedience: honored as a father of his sons Mal. 1.6.
submisse in their affliction; and a master of his servants, corrected
obsequious, and not answering again Tit. 2.9.
. Had not Satan considered Job the servant of God Job. 1.8.
in his prosperity? Enough he did to his own shame and the glory of the Lord
in his adversity: for as Jesus Christ (though he were a son) learned
obedience by the things which he suffered Heb. 5.9.
: so Job, and all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus Gal. 3.26.
, learn of him to be lowly in heart Matt. 11.29.
, and by the things which they suffer obedience to their father, which is in
heaven. Better this than sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.22.
Bullocks with horns and hoofes not required, but obedience from the heart to
the form of doctrine which is delivered Gal. 5.17.
: strange flesh not to be offered; but a man's own flesh to be sacrificed,
which in every act of obedience is done; Per victimas aliena caro per
obedientiam jam vero propria caro mactatur, etc. Gr. sup. 1 Reg. c. 15. Obedire
est contra audire, scilicet contra proprium sensum and propriam voluntatem. Vt.
Perald. Sum. Tom. 1. par. 10. c. 2. in fin.
crucified the flesh, which lusts against the Spirit Romans 6.17.
, in which it is performed; obeyed the word, which comes, and the Lord
therein riding prosperously Psalm. 45.4.
. This causes honor to God in his Majesty; yea many, yet without to glorify
him in the day of visitation 1 Pet. 2.12.
.

The causes of afflictions efficient and final thus discovered, I proceed to
the Uses which shall be For 1. Reproof. 2. Correction. 3. Information. 4.
Admonition. 5. Instruction. 6. Instauration.
Unto which shall be added a word of Exhortation.

1. For reproof to the vile Barbarians, which seeing a viper on a Paul's hand,
or a cross laid on a Simons shoulder, cry out they arc murderers or
malefactors, and vengeance will not suffer them to live at ease, or to prosper
as other men; but these the brutish amongst the people; fools alas, when will
ye understand Psalm. 94.8
? The time is come, that judgment must begin at the house of God, and if it
first begin with them that profess and obey, what shall the end be of them
that obey not, nor profess the Gospel of God? 1 Pet. 4.17, 18.
If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner
appear? If this be done unto the green trees, which bring forth fruit
according as God has dealt the measure of the spirit, what shall be done unto
the dry, which digd about and dressed year after year, continue yet
fruitless, as the cursed fig tree? If the way unto Heaven be strewed with
crosses, be full of tentations and tribulations, what shall be found in the
way unto hell, or in the end thereof? Pro. 14.12.
There is a way which seems right unto a man, as the will of the Gentiles
unto themselves, 1 Pet. 4.3.
lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, reuellings, banquettings, and
abominable idolatries, but the end thereof are the ways of death. Remember ye
not the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, Luke 6.25.
Woe unto you that now laugh, for ye shall weep? weep when the righteous, at
whose troubles they laugh, shall be delivered out of all, and they come in
their stead. Do ye think that the Scripture says in vain; The righteous is
delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his stead Pro. 11.8.
? Again, The wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous, Pro. 21.18. Dan.
6.24.
and the transgressor for the upright? Instances, before experience had, the
oracles had of God. Haman and Mordecai Esth. 7.10
Hezekiah and the Aethiopians Isai. 43.3.
, Daniel and his accusers, Peter and his keepers. Act. 12.19.
But Barbarians are blind, and cannot see afar off: The judgments of God
are far above, out of their sight Psalm. 10.5.
, on other seen, not over themselves; themselves in the condemnation, unto
which before they were ordained of old, they find not, not made to suffer
evil with the Saints in the earth, but for the evil day Pro. 16.4.
.

Isa. 1.3, 4.
Such was the sinful nation, the people laden with iniquity, the seed of
evil doers, the children that were corrupters. That had forsaken the Lord, and
provoked the holy one of Israel unto anger, not only by going away backward,
but by refusing to return. The one knows his owner, and what the prick of
the g^ad means, but Israel did not know, neither did they consider: therefore
the Prophet to them Ver. 5.
, Why should ye be stricken any more, ye will revolt more and more. Jeremiah
Ier. 5.3.
has the like complaint, O Lord, thou have smitten them, but they have not
grieved, thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction:
they have made them faces harder than a rock, they have refused to return. It
is so with many: Many there be that being afflicted, know it not: As Ephraim
had gray hairs here and there upon him, yet knew it not, Hos. 7.9.
nor that his strength was devoured of strangers: so wrath is on some from
before the Lord, yet they feel it not, or if they feel it, they are humbled
no more than the King of Israel by the famine in Samaria. Behold, he cried 2
Reg. 6.33.
, This evil of the Lord, wherefore should I wait on the Lord any longer? What
hope is in, or is of such? Not the Anchor which is firm, but the Spiders web
which perishes: Woe unto the people that be in such a case; what is ours now?
The Church in tribulation: S. John subscribed (...), Apoc. 1.9. A brother and
Companion in tribulation. How do we? or what? when? When Hannibal besieged
S^guntum, a confederate City with Rome; the Capitol of Rome, one said, was
assailed: the danger and loss abroad is ours, ours the common calamities of
the days; the days are evil, yea, so evil they are, that a man may say, I
have no pleasure in them Psalm. 60.1, 2, 3.
. Has not the Lord cast us off? Has he not scattered us? Is he not
displeased with v^? Does not the earth tremble? Is it not broken? Does it not
shake? Have we not hard things showed us, and been made to drink the wine of
astonishment? Behold we not the shaking of the hand of the Lord, which he
shakes over us? stretched our still, not turned away his wrath Isa. 9.12.17.21.
, for all that is done: the enemy has done exploits, grows horribly,
boasts himself in mischief, cries there, there, so would we have it,
ensigns set up for signs, the profession in corners, Religion in the straits,
schism and ungracious heresy a float, a flood of many waters roares in our
ears, the first borne of many, the hope of Germany how suddenly surrepted? Ah
alas, The Lord calls us to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to
girding with sachcloth Isa. 22.12, 13.
, yet behold among us joy and gladness, slaying oxen, killing sheep, eating
flesh, and drinking wine; dissolute and resolute we, we refuse to be reformed,
we walk contrary to the Lord, who strikes, and walks therefore contrary
unto us, yea in fury, as he spoke in Leuit. 26. Leuit. 26.28.
. chastizing and punishing us seven times more, rebellious more and more. I
close with one of Ieremies Lamentations, Ier. 8.18.
When I would comfort my self against sorrow, my heart is faint in me.

by three notes, whether or no they are afflicted in love. For first, whom the
Lord loves, he loves unto the end, and will not cease from arguing and
chastening them until they be converted and reclaimed, so much the spirit
expressly Revel. 3.19.
(...): As fathers convince before they chastise their children, make known
their faults and multiply stripes, until they confess the^, and promise
reformation: semblably the Lord; not leave will he them, whom he chooses,
halting between two; but cause them by chastening them to approach unto him
Psalm. 65.4. and 94.12. compared.
. The purifying hand upon them, the dross is purely purged, and the tin
taken away Isa. 1.25.
: every son which is scourged, comes out from among the multitude which
do evil, touches not the unclean thing 2 Cor. 6.17.
, is thoroughly separated, before he be received, or can be. Be it so, that
the wicked (the hook in their nose) return not, are not purged in the furnace
from their filthiness, nor will be; what shall be done? Not purged thereby,
they shall never he purged Ezekiel. 24.13.
. Vessels of wrath to be filled with the fury of the Lord: But correction in
love causes the Beloved to come in, confessing their sins, and their profiting
appears in the amendment of their life. David scourged, was sensible of his
fault, and corrigible; the correction of the Lord he refused not, but received
for his good, confessed the same; Good it is for me, that I have been
afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes Psalm. 119.67.71.
, for before I was afflicted I went astray, Psalm. 119.67.71.
but now have I kept thy word. Manasseh taken among the thorns, and bound with
setters, knew at length that the Lord he was God 2 Chronicles. 33.12.
. Ephraim bowed, yielded Ier. 31.20.
. Israel vexed with all adversity, torn and smitten, approached Hos 6.1, 2.
. When a man chastized approaches unto the Lord, and yields himself,
confesses and forsakes his sin, he may count it all joy; yea, give glory to
the Lord, and make thus confession. Psalm. 119.76.
I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou have in
faithfulness afflicted thy servant.

Consolation, received in the days of evil, and communicated afterward: for
whom the Lord loves, he comfort in every tribulation, and inableth them
thereby to comfort them which are in any trouble. By the comforts wherewith
they were themselves comforted of God. 2 Cor. 1.4, 6, 7.
As sufferings abound, so consolation abounds, and is participated to them
that are partakers of the sufferings. David scourged for his sin was comforted,
humbled for it; afterward what would he? Teach transgressors the ways of
God, and convert sinners unto the Lord Psalm. 51.13.
. Peter having erred, and being converted, what should he? strengthen his
brethren Luke 22.32.
. When a man is refreshed being afflicted, and as he has received any grace,
if he as a good steward minister the same unto other lying in the like
distress, and communicate with their affliction, he has not been afflicted
and refreshed in vain: but to good effect, in love and in mercy, to be a
vessel of mercy, and conduit of love, from the fountain to the cisterne,
from the Lord to his chosen in the great tribulation.

present things, and present state: this the obsignation of the spirit Ephesians.
4.30.
, a certain divine impression of light, a secret manifestation of grace, the
God of all grace to them that open unto him, when he knocks at their door,
with the hammer of the cross, manifesting Io. 14.2^.
himself in an admirable manner; and filling their hearts with inexpressible
gladness Act. 14.17
, giving them Manna, supping with them Reu. 3.20.
, bringing them to the banqueting house Cant. 2.4, 5.
, staying them with flagons, comforting them with apples, girding their hearts
with his peace, which passes understanding Phil. 4 7.
, pouring the spirit of grace and supplications upon them Zach. 12.10.
, giving them an understanding, that they may know him that is true 1 Io 5.20.
, opening the treasures of his all-sufficiencie, fashioning their hearts, and
adapting their minds to the present condition, whatsoever it is: no
sutablenesse nor agreeableness between the mind and the condition. What is
the life but a kind of living death? but suiting and agreeing the condition to
the mind, the appetite accommodated, and thing desired had; had is that one
thing, which is instar omnium, as it were all things. Men of heavy hearts,
mirth and music grieve, when as weeping and complaints may be pleasant:
company offensive, priuacie may please, and poverty be an easement, abundance
being a burden. Every bitter thing is sweet, trouble as peace, sickness as
health, imprisonment as liberty, reproach as good report, pain as pleasure,
death as life. If the heart be suitable, and the spirit made pliable to the
mold into which the Lord has cast a man; the inordinate desires, causes, of
m^estitude, nothing else: The lives not falling in pleasant places, nor the
heritage so goodly as other men's: a living man complains, but every one that
is godly is dumb. Psalm. 39.9.
opens not his mouth, knows how to be abased, and how to abound, is every
where, and in all things instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, Phil.
4.11, 12.
both to abound and to suffer need, made perfect, stablished, strengthened,
settled, Pet. 5.10.
taught of God, and has learned in whatsoever state he is, therewith to be
content; the cross his crown, the shame thereof his glory, his loss his
advantage, his yoke his ease, or not burdenous and grievous, but easy and
light: All his evils good in effect, and working all together for his good
Romans 8.28.
, from whence is patience? from whence experience? from whence hope? Verily
from tribulation, and these three abiding, no man is ashamed in the day of
trouble, because the love of God is shed abroad in his heart by the Comforter,
the Holy Ghost which is given unto him Romans 5.5.
: a loue-ticke the affliction, and godliness with contentment the proof
thereof.



out their crosses, as the spider her web, out of their own bowels, by riot,
of unrighteousness, irregular walking, or inordinate living. Let none of you
suffer as an evil doer, or a busy body 1 Pet. 4.13.
. This not thank worthy, that which is acceptable is the suffering, which is
for well-doing, or otherwise according to God, and the good pleasure of his
will: Therefore take he^d; know and consider what ye do; that ye your selves
do not undo your selves.

2. That none willingly cause other men's griefs; or be hard-hearted to the
poor afflicted in the power of their hand. Magna abominatio eor^m Deo est,
afflicto addere afflictionem; clamatque in coelum vox sanguinis. Oecolampad. in
Esa. 47.6.
In Psalm. 109. from the sixth to the sixteenth verse, is a fearful curse
denounced against a son of perdition, the cause expressed; because he
remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the poor and needy man, that he
might even slay the broken in heart: The Lord will be jealous for his
afflicted, with a great jealousy, yea, very sore displeased with them that
are at ease, and help forward the affliction Zech. 1.13, 14.
. The daughter of the Caldeans, the Lady of Kingdoms that was given to
pleasure, dwelt carelessly: trusted in wickedness, showed no mercy to the
children of the captivity, laid not the wrath to heart, neither remembered the
latter end, perished in her latter end Isa. 47.6, 7 8 9, 10, 11.
Therefore take ye heed how ye oppress, or grieve other men, lest
bitterness be even your own hurt and hearts grief in the end thereof. It
displeases the Lord Pro. 24.17.
, if a man rejoice when his enemy falls; or suffer his heart to be glad when
he stumbleth; much more if he smite with the fist of wickedness Isa. 58.4.
, and put a stumbling block before the innocent, or afflict such as be of
upright conversation Psalm. 37.14.
; yea, it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them 2
Theoss. 1.6.
that trouble them, which would lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty.

Gal. 6.1.
, Ille hod^e, Bern.
and ego cras; He to day, and I to morrow, a Fathers fear, and may be ours:
our looking-glass every man's evil, wherein we may see our own, present, or
else to come. The breaches of Joseph not remembered, made breaches on them that
remembered them not: Gallant-like they lived in pleasure, and were wanton on the
earth, and nourished their hearts, as in a day of slaughter, but were not
grieved for the afflictions of Joseph Amos 6.6, 7.
, until they went captive with the first that went captive, and their banquet
was removed.

Therefore take ye heed, and remember the saying familiar as the English rules,
Felix quem faciunt, etc. Happy is the man whom other men's harms do make to
beware.

1 These. 5.3. Nescimus quid serus vesper vebat.
, for who knows what a day may bring forth 1 Pro. 24.1.
, the destruction may be sudden, and if a blow be given on the blind side,
we shall not know well bow to take it well, troubles are fore-shewed, should
be therefore expected; for as Paul, Act. 20.23.
for the Holy Ghost witnesses, that afflictions abide all them that are
Christ's, and persecutions to suffer; the external peace continued, is for the
men of this present evil world, which have their portion in this life Psalm.
17.14.
whose backs are freed from the rod of God Job 21.
, and bellies filled with hid treasures, their houses also s^fe from fear, and
possessions passing the thoughts of their heart Psalm. 73 7.
, set yet in slipperie places, and brought into desolation, as in a moment
Psalm. 73.19.
; they spend their days in mirth and wealth, but in a moment go down to the
grau^ Job 21.13.
. A kind of pond they have, or a land-floud which abides not, the
well-springs of com^ (...) mourn being affl^cted; Better this so to be
afflicted and to mourn, than gaining the world to lose the soul, or enjoying
the pleasures of sin for a season to be cast out bound into utter darkness.

Therefore in this our day let us hearken unto wisdom, crying without and as
Asah 2 Chronicles. 14.6, 7.
built fenced cities in Judah, when the land had rest; lets edify our selves
on our most holy faith Jude v. 20*
, remember our Creator Eccles. 1.2.1.
, and work out our salvation Phil. 2.12*
, that when the consumption determined Isai ^8.22.
shall come, or the ouerflowing scourge Ver. 15.
, or the hour of temptation upon all the world Revel. 3.10.
, we may, as the just Hab. 2.4^.
live ^y faith, dwell safely, and be quiet from fear of evil, according to
the word Pro. 1.33.
.

the afflicted, to be distributed as the former; divided the whole into five
parts, that the same may partite, peecemeale as it were, and so the more
easily, be taken and laid up.

First, that they remember their misery, the worm wood and the gall, that their
souls have the same still in remembrance, and be humbled thereby, for therein
is the hope Iam. 3.20, 21.
.

Secondly, that suffering according to the will of God, they commit their way,
and the keeping of their souls in well doing unto God, as to a faithful
Creator, 1. Pet. 4, vlt.
1 Pet. 4. vlt. Able he is to keep that which is committed unto him. Faithful
he is, and will not suffer the faithful to be tempted above that they are
able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that they may be
able to bear it ^ Cor. 10.13.
.

Thirdly, that they pray: Let a man afflicted pray Iam. 5.13.
, pray continually Col 4.5.
, continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving, giving thanks
for the grace present, by which Satan is resisted, and the burden sustained,
praying also with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, that the burden
on them may be taken of them, prayer the means to remove it; for he who
hears prayer has given his word, that inuocated in the time of trouble, he
will deliver them that call vp^n his name, Psalm. 50.15. Ideo prenuntur iusti,
vt clame^, clamanies exaud antur, ^^uditi glorificent Deum. Aug. in loc.


F^urthly, that by pa^ience they possess their souls Luke 21.19.
, and as the Thessalonians cause other to glory for their patience and faith in
all their persecutions and tribulations 2 These. 1.4.
. This the victory of the Saints Reu. 13.10.14.12.
, the issue of tribulation Romans 5.3.
, the effect of the word Reu. 3.10.
; this the dawning of light, on the sprenting of that seed which is sown for
the righteous. In Psalm. 97.11. Light, i. peace and prosperity, the fruit of
righteousness, is sown for the righteous in the days of evil sitting in
darkness Micah. 7.8.
. A phrase from the plough; Good seed sown in fallowes broken up, lies for a
time covered in, the ground, and sprouteth not suddenly, but in its season: In
their sufferings it is so with the servants of God; Their hearts furrowed with
the culter of the Cross, the word of patience cast upon it by the hand of
faith, the harrow of godly sorrow drawn over and over it in the conuulsions
thereof; In his time the Lord comes, and raineth on them righteousness, wherein
unto themselves they had sowed Hos. 10.12.
, and tempestiue peace, the peaceable fruit of righteousness Heb. 12.11.
is in full sheaues brought in a time accepted home into their barnes; their
barnes are filled, yea their hearts, with food and gladness, by their hard and
tedious labors endured; therefore counted happy they that endure: Behold,
says the Apostle, we count them happy that endure Iam. 5.11.
Of the patience of Job, that happy man, no man is ignorant, nor so blind,
but may see in him the end of the Lord, that he is very pitiful, and of
tender mercy. They that wait on him renew their strength, mount up with wings
as Eagles, run and are not weary, walk and are nor faint: Esa. 40.31.
for as they on him, so waits he on them, that he may be gracious unto them;
and will be exalted Esa. 30.18.
, that he may have mercy upon them. O how blessed are all they that wait for
him Psalm. 2.12. Psalm. 34.2. P^^. 16.20. I^r. 77.
!

F^fthly, that they s^tisfie themselves as with the likeness of God, when they
awake Psalm. 17.15.
, so with his presence, while they sleep, or walk rather through the valley of
the shadow of death, their eyes withholden with the present pressures that they
cannot sleep; Sufficient to the day is the evil thereof Mat. 6. vlt.
sufficient to the evil days the presence of El Schaddai, God all-sufficient:
who but he in heaven Psalm 73.25.
, and in earth besides him what to be desired? In him all live, and move, and
have their being Act 17.28
, the Author he and finisher of faith Heb. 12.2^.
; All and in all that have faith in him. In Heaven what need shall be of the
Sun, or of the Moon, Isa. 60 11.19.
or of candle, or of victual, or of vesture, or of lands, or of livings? Not
any: for the Lord will be All, All in Heaven, and in earth All things.
Therefore suffering need, what need of any thing more than of God, to sit in
the mind, and to frame the same to the present state, or to dwell in the
heart, and to fill the same with food and gladness? The mind on him, and he in
the mind; the heart on him, and he in the heart, what want of the creatures,
or of other gifts? Is not all want supplied with his fullness? What wanted
Moses? Elocution: What answer from God had he but this, Exodus 4.11, 12.
Who has made man's mouth? I will be with thy mouth. Would God be a mouth unto
him, or a tongue in his mouth? In effect he would, and fully be as good, yea
better for use, and more effectual; of all other things wanting to the
afflicted, the like may be said, Who made them? Orphans want their parents;
who made their parents? He that made their parents will be unto them in stead
of parents: Parents want their children; who made their children? He that made
their children, will be unto them in stead of children: widows want their
husbands; who made their husbands? He that made their husbands, w^ll be with
them in stead of husbands: widdowers want their wives; who made their wives?
He that made their wives will be with them in stead of wives: brethren want
their sisters; who made their sisters? He that made their sisters will be unto
them in stead of sisters: sisters want their brethren; who made their brethren?
He that made their brethren will be with them in stead of brethren: the poor
afflicted, persecuted, want their houses, lands, means, liuelihood; who made
all, and gave all unto all? He that made all, and gave them all, will be unto
them instead of all Varieties of comforts, in the variety of the creatures;
Parents afford one k^nde of solace, children another, husbands another, wives
another, brethren another, sisters another, lands and such like means another;
but the Lord he is God of all consolation, not any without him in any thing,
but with him is comfort in every thing. And he with his affl^cted, what is the
evil on them or against them? He with them in exile, what is their exile? He
with them in prison, what is (...) imprisonment? he with them in disgrace, what is
their disgrace? He with them in poverty, what is their poverty? He with them in
persecution, what is their persecution? much advantage, and every way much: What
protection from the Lord? what propagation of the Gospel? (...).
what recompense of reward without persecution? With persecution in this life
an hundred sold shall be received Mar. 10.30.
: and in what but in the presence of the Lord, and the efficacy of his grace,
which is equivalent, yea an hundred fold more excellent than the loss? I know
not what better sense can be given, or how otherwise that reading is to be
understood: Had he said, that after the cessation of persecution, peace shall
be and wealth, etc. plain it had been, but he says with persecution in the
time thereof a man shall receive an hundred fold, and that is as plain to them
that have the witness in themselves. In few to shut up the whole matter: Mark
the man that shrinketh under the hand of God, and behold him that makes the
Lord his Committee, that prays being afflicted, that waits patiently,
carrying the Lords leisure, and satisfied with the presence of his grace as
sufficient, endures to the end; for the end of that man is peace Psalm. 37.37.


^am. 3 15, 16, 17.
That give willingly their cheeks to him that smites them, that are filled
with bitterness, and made drunken with wormwood, covered with ashes, and
their teeth broken as with gravel stones, their soul removed far off from
peace, and prosperity forgotten: Scriptura v^cat bonos f^umentum, malos
paleam, eritur ventus, etc. Fonsec. Sabb. ante Dom. Quad.
For good men the Scripture calls wheat, the evil chafe, arises a great
wind of persecution, or comes from the wilderness some terrible Blast of
other sore affliction, to dissociate the good and the evil, to segregate the
precious from the vile, and as wheat from the chafe, to separate true
Israelites, in whom no guile is, from potsheards covered with silver dross
Temporizers hypocrites.
. Are the Heavens now black with clouds and winds, do the winds blow, be the
times boisterous, the days evil, the world troublous? The Lord is about to
purge his floor, and will purge it thoroughly (...).
: Mat. 3.12.
the wheat he will gather into his garner, but the chafe he will scatter; yea
burn it with unquenchable fire.

After a fiery trial, professors may be fewer, but shall be better far
Conjectae ecclesia in catinum, and excocta igne afflictionum, minor quidem
euadit sed p^^ior. Amand. polan. in Dan. 11.35.
Necessary therefore as schisms 1 Cor. 11.19.
and spurs, that they which are approved might be made manifest; and the
slothful in business, more fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.

But after Theodoret, Affliction is the Hostorie, or Strickle.
Stichel of God in the hand of his Justice, with which he strikes off, in his
chosen vessels, the sins, that against Justice, his mercy cannot bear. The
gracious Lord (says he) using a balance and a measure, Theod. Eccles. hist.
lib. 5. cap. 1.
composed of Justice and Mercy, strikes off here, by his Justice, the faults
which are above weight and measure. Is any among you afflicted? let the
afflicted among you look unto the Lord, who does it for their good; even to
strike off with the hand of his Justice, or that rod in his hand on them, the
sins, which in them, surpoise the sealed balance, and surpass the marked
measure of his mercy. Moreover, know ye not, that in the lowest condition is
found the best success? Had not Jacob, Joseph, David, in the winter of their
affliction, the spring of the soul? Is not Gaius his prosperity, which is of
the soul, better than that of fools, which is not Pro. 23.5.
or is nothing in Salomons judgment, but extreme vanity and vexation of
spirit, or an evident token of perdition and destruction? As the greatest
tentation is to feel no tentation, so the greatest affliction, not to be
afflicted: An argument of infirmity, not of maturitie; of infancy, not of
manhood. The promises of outward beauties to the Church of the Jews, were
confined to the nonage thereof; grown vpto some height, what promises of great
things? Duo ^d te attrahunt Dei oculos, etc. Fon. sec. vbi sup.
Two things there be that draw the eyes of God unto men, Humble and prompt
obedience; Pressure and persecution: Of that Abraham; of this an instance
Israel in Egypt. An heart trembling at the word of God; a contrite and humble
spirit, does the like: Suffering, does a man tremble at the word? The Lord
looks to him, Isa. 66.3. Is he of a contrite and humble spirit? the high and
lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, dwells with him to revive his spirit,
and to revive his heart, Isa. 57.15. Deadness a sore evil, and dullness the
grave of many graces, after some joys conceived, afflict sometimes the Chosen
generation 1 Pet, 2.3.
. CAUSES; either sorrow, or excessive care, or obliquitie in the use of the
means given of God, to strengthen the soul in the hour of tentation, or
temporary desertion; or else the commission of some sin, or the omission of
some good duty, or else some other subtle device of the Devil; but
CVRATIONS, or Remedies, none better know I, than fear and trembling,
contrition and humility; for from such the Lord is not far, but at hand, to
revive them, and weary with laboring under the heavy cross, to give them
happy rest. For a small moment he forsakes, but with great mercy he
gathers Isa. 54.5, 6, 7, 8.
. In a little wrath he hides his face for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness he has mercy on them, that (^s a wife of yout^) are betrothed unto
him Hos. 2.19, 20.
in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies.
Have I made a step out of the way? Suppose it was to call on a friend.
The external sufferings are not so grievous, as the internal are, and
without the internal the external are not effectual unto sound humiliation.
Therefore expedient both, both also light, and but for a moment: The sufferings
of the present time Romans 8.18. (...).
, styled; and a kind of leuitie 2 Cor. 4.17. (...).
that passes, as it comes, in the twinkling of an eye: or staying all night
the accidental mourning, Rico prateriens leuitas. Bez.
joy comes in the morning Psalm. 30.5.
. A rejoicing is created Isa. 65.18.
yea appointed unto them that mourn in Sion Isa. 61.3.
, beauty given for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise
for the spirit of heaviness, power for faintness, strength for weakness Isa.
40.29.
, the humbled lifted up Iam. 4.10.
, the ruined places builded, ^zek. 36.34, 35, 36, 38.
the desolate planted, the desert villages augmented, and the waste Cities
filled with flocks of men as in the solemn assemblies.

Wherefore, Heb. 3.1. Exhortation.
Holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, I beseech you suffer the
word of exhortation Heb. 13.22.
; for ye see your state, and the condition of this life; how seasoned it is;
or may be to you, in the time and season, which the Lord has put in his own
power Act. 1.7.
. No rod now upon you; yet scourged ye may be, and be called from above to
suffer many things: what ye know not, nor know I when: God knows when and
what. Who makes you to differ from other of the royal priesthood 1 Pet. 2.9.
Other suffer to be viuified thereby, why not ye? Other suffer to be
sanctified thereby, why not ye? Other suffer to be purged thereby, why not
ye? Other suffer to be prevented thereby, why not ye? Other suffer, and the
Lord by their sufferings is glorified in his power and providence, by their
faith and obedience, why not by yours?

I will not reprove you, for do ye that stand safe on the shore, on the dry
banks, on the high rocks, rejoice against other weather-beaten at sea, driven
with fierce winds, and tossed with swelling waves, or cast over board and
swimming for their lives? They do very ill that do thus Pro. 17.5.
He that is glad of calamity shall not be unpunished, nor held innocent.
Better were it for you, to weep with them that weep Romans 12.15.
to suffer with them that suffer, to bear their burden Gal. 6.2
, to communicate with their affliction: To this I will exhort you; for in doing
this ye shall do well. Ye have done well (says Paul) that ye did
communicate Phil. 4.14.
with my affl^ction.

I will not convent, nor summon you to corrections; for do ye despise any
chastisement? do ye kick against pricks? Act 9.5.
and the yoke on your necks, stiff-necked are ye as Ier. 31.18.
Bullocks unaccustomed to the yoke? are your faces harder than a rock? do ye
refuse to return? They do very ill, that do thus: This an aggrauation of
the offense and punishment; yea, two great evils are perpetrated thereby: Better
were it for you to shrink under the mighty hand of God, and to kiss his rod
upon you, to confess your faults, and ask him forgiveness, to convert from
the error of your ways, and to bring forth fruit meet for repentance. To this
I will exhort you, for in doing this, ye shall have mercy Pro. 28.13.
, be saved from the wrath Iam. 4.10. and 5.20.
, received and reconciled, refreshed and certified, that the Lord has
corrected you with judgment, Ier. 10.24.
not in anger, not in fury to kill you 1 Samuel 2.25.
(as Heli's sons;) but (as Ephraim his dear son) Ier. 31.20.
in love to reclaim you.

I will not argue you, that ye suffer as evil doers, or as busybodies, or
slight the surprisall of other men, or secure your selves in the mount of this
worlds good, and the arm of flesh. They do very ill that do thus, as they
in the provocation: who would wilfully provoke the Lord, who does not from his
heart, or not willingly grieve and afflict the children of men Iam. 3.3.
? Besides, the troubles on other men happen unto them for ensamples, and may
serve for your admonition 1 Cor. 10.6.11.
. Yea, they are your examples, to the intent ye should not lust after evil
things, as they peradventure lusted; And will a man neglect so fair examples?
Besides this, the present peace, health, and wealth is but momentanie and
transitory: what man is he that trusts therein? Better were it for you, to
be always cautious Heb. 3.12.
, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of vnebeleefe departing from the
living God, to be warned by the false, or harms of other men, and to cast away
all confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3.3.
leaning to the, Lord, not to your own understanding Pro. 3 5.
. To this I will exhort you, for in doing this, ye may keep your feet, from
every evil way, dwell in safety, lodge in the secret place of the most high,
and abide under the shadow of the Almighty.

Psalm. 91.1.
What shall I more say? but (as yet have been instructed) afflicted or misrable,
rememner your, affliction, and your miscrie: Commit your way, and the keeping
of your souls in well doing unto God: pray always: possess your souls in
patience: continue to the end, and in the end be saved. The present gusts and
tempests purge the floor of God; therefore purged; be perpurged, even thoroughly
purged, and truly separate; not touching the unclean, 2 Cor. 6.17.
nor being (as some be) audacious adherents, and presumptuous partakers in
either men's sins 1 Timothy 5.22.
. 1 Connivendo, 2 Conticendo, 3 Consulendo, 4 Consentiendo, 5 Defendendo. V.
Zanch. in Ephesians. 5.7.11.
The present afflictions are spurre-rowels for use, therefore afflicted sore,
be stirred up easily, to follow more earnestly the thing that good is. Suspect
nothing more than the adversity of the soul, in the prosperity of the body:
and in the spring of the spirit, which is the winter of the flesh, put forth
the expected fruit of the spirit: or if any deadness, if any dullness be in
the winter of the spirit, be not dismayed, neither please your selves therein,
but rouse up your selves, as those, which being drowzie, are willing to shake
off sleep. Call upon God, and to mind his faithfulness. Returned to his
place Hos. 5 vlt.
for some special end; in the end he will return, and ordain peace Isa.
26.12.
, and work all your works in you, for you. Faithful is he that promises,
who will also do it 1 These. 5.24.
. Do it he will for you, inquired of Ezekiel. 36.37.
by you, to do it for you. Therefore, as he at Ziglag greatly distressed:
Encourage your selves in the Lord your God, 1 Samuel 30.6.

Hitherto David's condition has brought us, and forth these things: follows
his consolation, The word of God, This is my comfort.

My comfort: Psalm. 87.^.
As of the City of God, many glorious things are spoken of the word: but ^s
the virtuous, woman all the other daughters Pro. 31.29,
, this excels all. Help in time of need most comfortable, and comfort in
affliction most needful. This by the word: Therefore we conclude:

That the word of God, is the best comfort.

Comfortable at the rain unto the tender Deuteronomy. 32.2.
herbs, and as showers to the grass, sweet as honey Psalm. 119.72.127.103.
and the honey comb; esteemed above the appointed food Job. 13.12
, more desired than gold, yea then much fine gold Psalm 19.10
, and as much as in all riches rejoiced in Psalm. 119.14.
.

Is it not pure, Psalm. 19.7.
is it not perfect, sure and sound, durable and delightful, most holy and most
necessary?

Does it not convert, or return the soul, Psalm. 19.7.
being in a swoune, overcome with the present malady, or misery, and make it
come again?

Does it not quicken Psalm. 19.50.
, is it not the life Deuteronomy. 32.47.
, even The word of life Act. 5.20.
? live we by bread Mat. 4.4.
, or thereby? Is it not the seed and food of life, milk 1 Cor. 3.2
and strong meat?

Does it not vanquish the wicked one 1 Io. 2.14.
, bruize his head and him under foot? Is it not a sword Pro. 30.5.
to wound his scalpe, and a shield Ephesians. 6.16.
to quench all his fiery darts?

Does it not rejoice the heart Psalm. 19.7, 8.
, make wise the simple, enlighten the eyes, enrich the poor Colos 3.16.
, sanctify every creature 1 Timothy 4.5.
, keep from sin Psalm. 119.11.
, heal the diseased Psalm. 107.20.
, and comfort the afflicted?

This the report from Heaven of the Word, which is settled for ever Psalm. 119.
in Heaven.

But a voice is heard in the lower Ramah's, the myrie place, Ezekiel. 47.11.
and marshes given to salt, and not healed by the rivers of waters which flow
from the Sanctuary. Give us, for our comfort, the honors of the world, the
treasures of the earth, the pleasures of this life, potent friends, and lets
continue in our sins: This our comfort and these: Oh, what comfort in these
against the word, or without the word, with All that is in they world?

1. What comfort in the honors of the world? Honores mundi, tumores mundi.
Eucher.
the honors of the world, the tumors thereof, tumors and burdens, not of God;
not of God, the word of God not with them: Consider what is said in Job. 10.35.
Gods they, or Infidels rather, unto whom the word comes not? How can they
believe, which receive honor one of another Io. 5.44.
, and seek not the honor that comes from God only in the coming of the
word? How do they believe, which love the praise of men Io. 12.43.
more than the praise of God? How do they believe that have not, nor hold
forth Phil. 2.16.
the word of life? This the Beraeans had, the Pharisees that: Who best? yet
glorious they are, and honored, we see; but know we not, that their glory
is their shame Phil. 3.19.
, their excellency their ignominy, and their end obscurity? Jerome not
amiss to his rising and aspiring friend, Hier. ep. 14. cap. 14.
Its safer to stand on the firm earth, than to sit high on a rotten scaffold.
Vanity of vanities, vanity of vanities: what else is all the honor of the
world.

2. What comfort, without the Word, in the treasures of the earth? The
treasures of the earth, melting snow-balls Job 38.22. Greg. in loc.
, swift flying Pro. 23.5.
Eagles, uncertain 1 Timothy 6.17.
, deceitful Mat. 13.12.
, strong Cities razed, and high towers demolished in a moment, Idols, scandals,
Ezekiel. 7.19.
stumbling blocks of iniquity, leaders into temptations, foolish and hurtful
lusts. They that will be rich 1 Timothy 6.9.
fall foully. They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the
multitude of their riches Psalm. 49.6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13.
, none of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom
for his soul; neither for their own. Their inward thought is folly, as their
way, and howbeit their posterity may approve their sayings, as their doings,
as men wise according to the flesh; yet brutish they are, and like the beasts
which perish. Their riches shall choke them, for they choke the good seed of
the Word Mat. 13.22.
or swallowed down, they shall vomit them up again, Job. 20.15 18.
God shall cast them out of their bellies: Verily, verily, this egestion will
be woeful, and full of deadly pains. Therefore, Go to now, ye rich men Iam.
5.1, 2, 3.
weep and howl for the miseries which shall come upon you; your riches are
corrupted, your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and eat your flesh as it were fire; ye heap treasure
together for the last days: Romans 2.5.
yea, ye treasure up wrath unto your selves against the day of wrath:
Faithful, but fearful is the saying of Jesus Christ in Matthew. 19.23. A rich
man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of Heaven. A difficulty noted, not an
impossibility; for after the Ordinary Gloss, a Gable, i. untwisted; a Camel
also (Deposito onere and flexis genibus) may go through that strait gate in the
walls of Jerusalem, which for the narrowness thereof was called Foramen acus,
or the Needles eye: But wealth, a strong City in conceit, and an high Tower,
(as it is the rich man's, that is not rich toward God, Prou. 18.11. and Luke
12.21. compared;) the impossibility may be avouched and auerred.

3. What comfort in the pleasures of this life, the pleasures of this life
flashes of lightning: Fulgurations; Plutarch.
Simul orientes and morientes, arising and dying together. As the fashion of
the world, -- ^mpia dolor voluptas.
they pass away, and follows heaviness; Pro. 14.13.
cast out into utter darkness, what weeping, what howling, what gnashing with
the teeth? Dead, while they live, they that live in pleasure 1 Timothy 5.6.
. Ye have lived in pleasure, Iam. 5.5.
and been wanton, an apt reproof. Awake to righteousness 1 Cor. 15.34.
, good counsel. Moses his pattern good Heb. 11.25.
, Barzilla's resolution godly 2 Samuel 19.35.
, the Preachers censure of mirth and laughter just Eccl. 2.2.
, carnal pleasure the high way to Hell, going down to the chambers of death
Pro. 8.27.
. Had here in the depths of hell, what is to be had? Ask Abraham, or think
on his answer Luke 16.25. -- Tr^hit sua quemque voluptas.
, bought with grief, yet how many drawn away thereby and enticed? As he that
loves silver, so is he that loves pleasure, Semper voluptas samem sui habet
and transacta non satial. Hieron.
never satisfied, not ever edified on the most holy faith. The voluptuous of
the word heard, bring no fruit to perfection Luke 8.14
. Was Solomon a Cynicke in his old age? Faithful is his saying, and worthy of
all acceptance, Sorrow is better than laughter Eccles. 7.3, 4.
; for by the sadness of the countenance, the heart is made better: The heart
of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of fools is in the
house of mirth.

4. What comfort in carnal friends? Friends as the reeds of Egypt, or as
reeds in the wind, shaken and unstable as the unrighteous Mammon. No friend
this, for a friend loves at all times Pro. 17.17. and cap. 18.24.
, and in adversity most. A brother, rather a rare friend, one that sticks
fast, as cemented or glued. V. Cartwright in loc.
I have considered that in Prou. 18.24. but all are not viri amicoru^, nor have
vim amicabilem. As friendlinesse is showed, so is it to be showed; but as it is
sound, so lies the opinion: The colors of friendship not laid in the oil of
the word, a false varnish; it vanishes as the tale that is told: Wherefore
what the Holy Ghost has of worldly wealth, might be said of worldly
friendship, He that trusts therein shall fall Pro. 11.28.
. Besides, a curse is denounced, Ier. 17.5, 6.
Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose
heart departs from the Lord; for he shall be like the heath in the desert,
like the parched places in the wilderness, like a salt land, and not
inhabited. Therefore the sweet Psalmist of Israel said Psalm. 146.3, 4.
, Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no
help, his breath goes forth, he returns to his earth, in that very day his
thoughts perish. But Wolsey's confession might Quod Regi potius quam Deo
studuisset placere. Scultet. A^.
be made of many; Many seek the friendship of great men, more than the favor
of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ: 2 Timothy 3.5.15.25.
Istos auersemur: From such turn away.

5. What comfort to be had in sins? Miserable comforters these, and causes of
confusion; Dalilah's in conceit, in effect also, deceiving the heart,
destroying the soul. Bless a man may himself in his own heart, saying, I
shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine own heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst Deuteronomy. 20.19.
. But, There is no peace to the wicked, says my God Isa. 51.^1.
. At the door of the sinner lies his sin Genesis 4.7. Peccatum i. ^ana peccati
quae quasi ca^it aut Cerberus cub^ns, fores peccati obsidet tanquam peccati
vindex. Corn. de lap. in loc.
, as a ban-dog, to pluck out his throat, and to tear him in pieces, none
being to deliver: Who should, the Lord? Nay, he is not chosen, nor has been
served; but sin preferred; let him go that and cry unto that which he has
chosen, and to that which he has served. This was once the answer of the
Lord, and this: I will deliver no more Judge. 10.13, 14.
, who then should? should the Minister of the Lord? By what means, the
Ministry contemned 2 Cor. 5.18.
, which is committed to him? visit he may a man sick with sin unto death, yet
not save him from the death, which reigns by sin in his mortal members;
pray for him he may, but according to that of Ambrose to Theodosius, Si dignus
non sum qui a te audiar, nec etiam dignus qui pro te a Deo ex^udiar.
If he will not hear the Minister speaking from God, how shall God hear the
Minister speaking for him. O consider this, all ye that comfort your selves in
your sins, following inconsiderately the multitude that do evil, after
these of pleasure, days of mourning will come, and evil days, yea years,
wherein we shall say, We have no pleasure in them Eccles. 12.1.
, nor any comfort from the time that is past. What comfort from the time that
is past of this life, the lusts of men followed, and thwarted the will of God 1
Pet. 4.2.
? What comfort in those things, whereof shame is the glory, and destruction
the end Phil. 3.19
? What Is the end of rioting, drunkenness^, covetousness, voluptuousness,
idleness, unruliness, uncleanness, ungodliness? or what is the glory? What
fruit had in these things Romans 6.21.
or what comfort to be had, Isa. 5.3.
Judge I pray you between God, and the vines which bring forth wild grapes.

Art thou, o man, an Ephraimite Isa. 28.1.
, a drunkard, I mean like those of Ephraim, risest thou up early in the
morning, that thou may follow strong drink, and continuest thou until
night, till wine pursue thee? Art thou mighty to drink wine, and a man of
strength to mingle strong drink Isa. 5.11, 22.
? Woe and woe I find, yea woes upon woes in the Scriptures against thee Hab.
2.15
, but except thou repent, no comfort find I for thee in the Oracles of God.

Art thou a covetous person, a lover of earthly things more than of heavenly,
is thy heart set on thy riches increasing, is thy desire enlarged as Hell Hab.
2.5.
, can it not be satisfied? Thou shall never be satisfied with that which thou
couerest; thou consultest, (by coveting an evil covetousness to thy house)
shame to thy house, thou sinnest against thine own soul Hab. 2.9, 10.
: Thou art an Idolater, and abhorred of the Lord: These things I find in the
Scriptures against thee, but except thou repent; No comfort find I in the
Oracles of God.

Art thou a swearer, swearest thou in thine ordinary communication? Thou
take the name of thy God in vain, Leuit. 24.11. Nakab defigens trans.
figens. V. Trem.
thou smitest him on the face: Moses says more, Thou piercest him, thou
strikest him through. He that blasphemeth, traiecteth him whom he blasphemeth;
and as the lying or backe-biting tongue hates those that are afflicted by it
Pro. 26.28.
, so the swearing tongue the Lord. Thou champest the blood of God between thy
teeth, o barbarous Caniball! Thou diggest up his wounds, o damnable
exulteration! Thou exposest him to shame, o impudent Miscreant! Thou art not
guiltless Exodus 20.7.
, but cursing, cursed: The curse is upon thee, and entered into thy house. The
long flying roll Zech. 5.2.5.
houereth over thee, yea, the vengeance of Heaven to cast thee down into the
damnation of Hell. These things I find in the Scriptures against thee, but
except thou repent, No comfort find I for thee in the Oracles of God.

Art thou a Sabbath-breaker? seek thou on the holy day of God, and find
thou thine own pleasure, speak thou thine own words Isa. 58.13.
, and do thou, on that day, thine own works? Thou dishonourest God Romans 2.23
, thou pollutest his worship Ezekiel. 22.8.
, thou prouokest the eyes of his glory Isa. 3.8.
, thou breakest his Law, thou make it void Psalm. 119.126. 2 Chronicles. 19.2. A
minori admaius. Ior. 17.27.
; Therefore wrath is upon thee, from before the Lord: The fuel of judgment
lies in thy gate, and thou put to the fire, which shall (when God will)
kindle where it lies. These things I find in the Scriptures against thee, but
except thou repent; No comfort find I for thee in the Oracles of God.

Art thou a Libertine, using all liberty for an occasion to the flesh Gal.
5.13.
, a contemner of Gods ordinances, his words and Sacraments, his Ministry and
Ministers? Thou art not spiritual Romans 7.14. and cap. 8.14.
, nor led by the Spirit, but carnal altogether, and sold under sin; thou
despisest God 1 These. 4.8.
, thou committest sacrilege Romans 2.22.
, thou iudgest thy self unworthy of everlasting life Act. 13.46.
, thou put from thee the means thereof, and turnest the same into
lasciviousness Jude ve. 4.
no remedy remains, nor healing to thee that mocketh the Messengers of God,
that despisest his words, that misusest his Prophets 2 Chronicles. 36.16.
. These things I find in the Scriptures against thee, but except thou repent,
No comfort find I for thee in the Oracles of God. I personate no man, but if
the witness within, the Conscience, accuse any, testifying and saying, Thou
art the man to whom it is spoken; spoken be to him, and this further in the
Spirit of our God against the works of the flesh, which are manifest, and are
these; Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
enuyings, murders, drunkenness, reuellings, and such like. Qui talia agunt
Gal. 5 21.
, They which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God, Gal. 5.21.

Seeing then that these things are so, that some comfort themselves without the
Word, and that without the Word there is no solid comfort. A necessity is laid
upon us, both for the use of edifying, and the issue of the point, to reason in
plain evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, De Afflicto consolabili. De
Sermon consolabundo. De Ratione consolandi.


Touching The afflicted that are consolable. The word which comfort the
afflicted. The manner of comforting them by the same word.


1. De afflicto consolabili. Of the afflicted that are consolable. All men have
not faith 2 These. 3.2.
, nor the knowledge of God 1 Cor. 15 34.
, nor be in their affliction comforted by the Word, neither indeed can be,
because they are not corrigible, not docile, not humble, nor humbled: The
shaking of the hand of the Lord, which he shakes over them, not feared; nor
had to work any fear in their heart the spirit of bondage. But had once this,
and but once had, Running there is to God, and flying to Jesus Christ, without
backsliding in heart, or any departing from him: Contra: Not hand, nor
received at all, no comfort at all, nor conversion at all, neither any constant
worship. In Romans 8.15. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to
fear. Not to fear again as bondslaues, but first they feared, having the
spirit of bondage, as all have that labor and are heavy laden, the curses of
the Law may be denounced a thousand times, and ten thousand kinds of strong
judgments inflicted in vain, except the spirit of bondage be sent into the
heart, to work fear therein, and in that fear to bring men home unto God in
Christ. Thunder, and rain, and earthquakes have been, and yet men's hearts
have been little moved, but the spirit of bondage, D. Preston of the new
Covenant. page 392, 393.
or of fear on the people, they feared exceedingly, when it thundered and
rained in wheat harvest 1 Samuel 12 18.
, likewise at the great showers of rain in Ezra's time Ezra. 10.9.
, likewise the Iaylor, although all was safe Act. 16.29
. This spirit, the plough of God, with which he ploweth up the heart, before
he sows therein the word of his grace which brings salvation: This spirit
obliterates the image of the old man, and prepares a place for the impresse of
the new, whose motto is, Pro. 28.14
Blessed is the man that fears always, i. in a filial manner, for the
servile is the Devils.

Ye see the reason, (brethren) why some afflicted are not consolable; not
consolable, Actus acti^o^um est in patiente pradisposito.
not corrigible; not corrigible, not fearing; not fearing, not having to fear,
the sprit of bondage. Therefore if ye fear not, nor have had to fear, the
spirit of bondage. Ye have cause to fear, because ye have not Christ, Romans 8.
ye know him not, nor what he has suffered for you, ye have no fellowship
in his sufferings, not being made conformable to his death: But afflicted, if
ye fear as sons in bondage, if feeling the weight of the judgment
inflicted, and seeing your sins, ye fly from them (as from the face of a
serpent) unto the Propitiatory, (...). Romans 3.25. (...). Io. 16. vlt.
which is Jesus Christ: Be of good cheer, the good spirit of God is upon you
for good, and truly and thoroughly humbled thereby, ye shall be delivered from
the temporal bondage, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. As the
Law is good, Romans 7.12. so the spirit of bondage: As the Law but a temporary
Schoolmasters, until faith be informed; so the spirit of bondage, until the
spirit of Adoption be infused: and as the Sun of righteousness arises with
healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2. So the Spirit of adoption comes with liberty
in his arms. God having sent the spirit of his son into the hearts of his
sons, they cry Abba, father Gal. 4.6.
: the love of an indulgent father apprehended, not the severity of an austere
Judge; and God beheld not as a consuming fire Deuteronomy. 4.24.
, that will devour them, but as a faithful Creator, that will have a desire
to the works of his hands Job 14.15
. Afterward there is no servile, but a filial fear, i. a mixture of fear and
love: the spirit of love leading in the way everlasting; the spirit of fear
preventing Reconciliation, and fetching home again them, that being brought
home, turn again unto folly, lose themselves, and run as sheep astray.
Love having respect unto all the Commandments, to keep the same: fear
preserving the heart from the deceitfulness of sin: for as feething liquor,
filthy f^um; so the heart boiling with fear, casts out sin, suffers it not
to oestuate it self into the inward parts; adhere it may, but enters not into
the frame, fabric, or constitution of the heart, to be mingled and
confounded: The fear of the Lord is clean Psalm. 19.9.
, they also pure in heart, that have it in their heart, having such an heart,
that admits not the mixture of any sin, but as base and reprobate stuff,
resists and reiects it. So then we say for the verdict of the Inquest; That
without the humbling and cleansing fear, there is no token for good in or out
of affliction, nor comfort by the Word.

2. De Sermon consolatorio: Of the word which is the comfort in Affliction.
The substantial Word there is, that (...) which was made flesh Io. 1.14.
, and he the God Romans 15.5.
of all consolation: but of him the Prophet speaks not here, the sure word of
prophecy there is also, which was unto Jeremy, having found and eaten it, the
very joy and rejoicing of his heart Ier. 15.16.
, David made his heart an hiding place for it Psalm. 119, 11.
so became it a Sanctuary for him, yea, a fortress against the assaults of
Satan, and during the obsession, Ammunition for his soul. Coloss. 3.11.
(...), (as the Apostle of Christ) All and in all: Therefore styled, Sermo
Inscriptus, and Insititius.


Many good words and comfortable words in the little Book which we hold in our
hand, but the word which comfort is, The Inscribed Word. The Ingrafted Word.


1. Sermo inscriptus: Sermo consolatorius inscriptus sermo.
The word inscribed and written, not with ink, but with the spirit of the the
living God 2 Cor. 3.3
, not in Tables of stone, or books like this, but in the fleshie Tables of the
heart; the heart mollified the spirit sent into it, which writes therein the
comforting word, even the word of grace in the New Covenant, i. works within
the heart a disposition correspondent to the word which comes Io. 10.35.
, and the grace which appears Tit. 2.11.
. As face to face in a glass, or in the waters, as Tally to Tally, as
Indenture to Indenture, as the Impression in the Wax to the Seal that made the
same, so the holy disposition (which is, The Consolation) answers to the
word, which is in the heart written, yea graven by the spirit of God, as
letters in marble, never wearing out. Let a man therefore examine himself, and
brethren, prove your own selves, whether such a disposition and correspondence
to the Word be in you, yea or no? If your heart and the word meet as friends,
even as mercy and truth, and kiss each other as righteousness and peace
Psalm. 85.10.
. If your heart close with the word, as the clay with the mold, and the ink to
the paper, fixed and fair, without any blurre or foul fault, quarrel or
difference: It is inscribed, it is the word which comfort in affliction; but
if enmity be put between, or if your heart and the word look as enemies the
one upon the other, no comfort is therein, nor in the affliction.

2. Sermo insititius, Sermo consolatorius: The word of consolation, S. James
calls the ingrafted word Iam. 1.21. (...).
, which when Paul planteth 1 Cor. 3.6
, he cleanses, 1. the stock, 2. makes insition, 3. inserteth the impe, 4.
closes it about, 5. fenceth it, finally expects fruit. Suffer me to reuiew
and open these unto you, that your eyes opened by the evidence produced, ye
may see the things, that pertain to your peace, in your warfare on the earth.

1. The stock, which is the heart, is to be cleansed, foul it is in all, all
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness about it, which is to be laid
aside Iam. 1.21.
, with all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and enuies, and evil
speakings 1 Pet. 2.2
, or else the sincere word will be turned aside. If the stomach rise, and the
soul be lifted up Hab. 2.4.
, when the heavenly husbandman, about to plant the word, is about to purge the
stock. If any rancor or excrescencie of malice, bitterness, and wrath, and
anger, and clamor be; Ephesians. 4.31.
Now he strikes me, he intends me, he cutteth me, who can hear him,
who can endure him? Aerem coedit, He beats the air, he washes the
Ethiopian, his labor is in vain. Cut to the heart ye know, who were with the
words of Stephen, and to what effect; Act. 7.54.
who were pricked and healed by the same Word received with meekness, ye also
know Act. 2 37.
verily, as the Apostle of him that praying wauereth like a wave of the sea,
driven with the wind and tossed: Iam. 1.6, 7.
(...). Let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord:
So may we of the man, that hearing the word, and having it nigh him, paring, or
pricking, or cutting, or cleaving him, to be ingrafted in him, is like the
troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt, Isa.
57.20.
is moved, wexeth angry, flingeth it off in fury, and kicketh against pricks,
Non existimet homo ille, Let not that man think that the word shall be, or
possibly can be in him, doing thus, effectually ingrafted: Qui aurem audiendi
habet, He that has an ear to hear let him hear, and hear ye it my beloved
brethren, if ye would receive the ingrafted word for your comfort in that day,
sanctify your selves, and cleanse your selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit 2 Cor. 7.1.
, prepare your heart, or (as Jeremy phraseth it) Ier. 4.14.
wash your heart, from the desperate wickedness and deceitfulness thereof:
or, keep your feet Eccles. 5.1.
when ye enter into the house of God, and be more ready to hear the hardest
word, than to cast it off as a burden too heavy for you to bear. Hard as
iron is the heart of man; therefore is the word first as fire, and an hammer
for it Ier. 23.29.
; full of knots and wild stems, which must be cut off; therefore is the word
sharper at the first, than any two-edged sword Heb. 4.12.
, yet to be suffered without any preiudicate or preuaricate opinion of
malicious personating, or envious particularizing; your souls (dear Brethren)
must (if ye would be numbered with the elect of God, and reckoned of his
peculiar people) be dealt with in particular, and your particular sins
reproved, yea hewed and hewed, as Agag by Samuel, in pieces, before ye can
feel any comfort by the word: Many things we speak in love, to warn you 1
Cor. 4.14.
, not in malice to shame you, but the more we love you thus 2 Cor. 12.15.
, the less we are loved of you: we love your persons, we tender your souls;
but (as our own) we hate your sins, and would (if we could) strike them
dead, because they work by their passions Romans 7.^.
and motions in your members (as in ours) to bring forth fruit to death unto
death.

But how can a Preacher smite a man's sin really, and not touch his person
intentionally? Our controversy writers in that great dispute about justifying
faith; D. Abbot against Bishop. page 481.
Whether faith justifies alone without charity and good works, distinguish
thus:

Separation of things, one from another, is either real in the subject, or
mental in the understanding, that denied, this subdistinguished, negative or
privative; that, when in the understanding there is an affirming of one thing,
and denying of another; this, when of things that cannot indeed be separated,
the one is understood and omitted: the other, ver. great. light and heat cannot
be separated in the fire, yet the light may he considered, and not the heat,
or the heat and not the light: So charity and good works are not negatiuely
separated, but priuatiuely made as effects and consequents, not concurring
causes of justification.

Sembably (my Beloved) although we cannot really separate between your sins
and your persons, yet negatiuely we say, that we intend not your persons, but
priuatiuely in our minds we consider your sins, bearing the image of Satan,
at which we strike, I say at the image of the Devil and Satan, not at your
persons, made as we our selves, after the similitude of God.

O that ye would believe this, and when your sins are smitten on the face
with the rod of the mouth Isa. 11.4.
, or with that sharp two edged sword which goes out of the mouth of the Lord
Reu. 1.16.
, ye would reason with your selves, or commune with your own heart, and be
still or speak on this wise one unto another in the faithful assemblies: This
Preacher speaks with authority above himself, its the very word of God which
he preaches, the word which he preaches is quick and powerful Heb. 4.12.
, pierces and divides things asunder in us, discerns the thoughts and
intents of our hearts, pulls down strong holds 2 Cor. 1^*4, 5.
casts down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God; apprehends our sins, grappleth with them,
euinceth them, conuinceth us, 2 Timothy 2.15
deals as a workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word
of truth, and applying it according to the rule thereof. Are we not our selves
or many of us husbandmen, what do we our selves in our profession? do we
cast our seed into unclean places, or amongst briars, and thorns, and stones,
and rubbish no, we first cleanse and manure our ground, sow afterward our
seed, and have long patience for the precious fruit: besides, in our orchards,
when we plant or graffe, do we suffer to grow the fiens of the crab-tree? No,
we cut them off, and cleanse the stock: What then does the spiritual
husbandman more in his sphere, than we in ours; before he will sow the holy
seed, or let in the heavenly plant, he labors with great difficulty to
prepare the ground where he would sow, and purge the stock on which he would
ingraffe the word. Must he therefore be blamed, or slouenly would we have him
to do his work, or negligently, or unfaithfully? Absit, God for^id: This in
our own servants is not tolerated, much less it to be in the servants of the
Lord Ier. 8.11.
To cry peace, peace, when there is no peace, is to heal hurts slightly *;
false Prophets will do it, but otherwise, the man that is sent from God.
Consider what I say, and God give you understanding. The word to be ingraffed,
the stock is to be cleansed: The stock cleansed, incision for insition is
made; a division made between the soul and the spirit Heb. 4.12 Nomen a^timae
saepe idem valet quod spiritus; sed cum simul iunguntur, prius comprehendit sub
se affectus omnes, etc. Calvin. in lic. Allegoria quadam and hyperocha
^dumbrare v^luit Apostolus diuinisermonis vim and efficaci^m, etc. B^llinger.
, natural things, and spiritual things, reason and the light, which is the
life of men, the affections and the intellectual faculty: This division
Experience reaches tacit, and conuerts best know how it is. How were the
first pricked in their hearts, and divided in themselves, not knowing what to
do Act. 2.37.
, after the incision made, before, before the immission of the heavenly plant?
nor does any man: The word which saves the soul, of whom received without
much affliction by the internal division, after the infition? Such it is, I
think, as the groanings of the Spirit, making intercession according to the
will of God, it cannot be uttered: the Thessalonians received the word with
much affliction, but what kind of affl^ction, or how grievous it was, he says
not.

Therefore, whenever incision is made, your heart smitten, and smiting you
being smitten by the word, attend still; or divided in you selves, all the
faculties slit, and cloven the affections, your reason visited with the
dayspring from on high, your understanding illightened, your soul fainting,
your spirit panting, a confl^ct begun, and a striving within you, as in
Rebeccahs womb, between Esau and Jacob, Nature and Grace. Be not dismayed,
for this must be, and is, where the word is about to be ingraffed to the
saving of the soul.

3. Inc^sion for insition made; the sien of holy science is infited and set in,
the word let in (that heavenly plant by heavenly Art) into the understanding:
The sense given thereof, and the reading understood.

Therefore hearing the word of the kingdom, apply your heart to wisdom, and
your mind to understand the wondrous things Psalm. 119.18.
the mysteries which were kept secret since the world began Romans 16.15.
yea, pray always with all manner of prayer and supplication, in the spirit,
that it may be given unto you, to know the mystery of God Coloss. 2 2. 1 Timothy
3.16.
, and of godliness, that seeing ye may see, that hearing ye may hear and
understand Mat. 13.16.
; David prayed how often? G^ue me understanding, make me to understand; An
understanding heart, Salomons hearts desire Reg. 3.9.
; and Paul's, that the Churches might abound more and more Phil. 1.8, 9.
in all knowledge, and in all judgment, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding: This by the Word. The word read or heard, and not understood,
profits not; but by reading, and hearing, and prayer made to God, entrance is
made into the understanding, heavenly light let in, and worldly darkness out:
Psalm. 119, 130,
The entrance of the word gives light, it gives understanding to the simple.

4. The sien insited, is bound fast, and closed about with all loving
affections stirred up unto it; yea, shut up and riuetted in the heart, to dwell
richly therein in all wisdom, not left loose; for graffes so let, fall out
anon, or be blown out.

Therefore love ye the incitiue word, lest ye lose it unawares, embrace it
with all complacencie of affection, so shall no storm stir it, nor force
amoue it; it is not enough to receive the word, except ye receive the love of
the word; Shall not some be damned because they received not the love of the
truth 2 These. 2.10.
? O how I love thy laws Psalm. 119.97.
says David, it is my meditation all the day, yea, day and night the exercise
of the blessed man; it is enclosed within him, it is in his heart, and loved
with his heart, the heart as soon to be lost as the word ingraffed therein,
and incorporated; Psalm. 40.8. Psalm. 51.6.
desired in the inward parts, and hidden in the hidden part.

5. Bound fast and closed about the impe of the word inserted; it is consepted
and strengthened, yea, (as an orchard or vineyard with walls and hedges) fenced
and fortified with holy cares, and godly iealousies, lest wild and harmefull
beasts break it off, or bite it off, or come nigh it to hurt it. How many
caueats has the Apostle in his Epistles to this purpose; Deceive not your
selves; Be not deceived 1 Cor. 6.9 Gal. 6.7.
; Let no man deceive you with vain words, Ephesians. 5.6.
; Let no man beguile you with enticing words; Let no man spoil you through
Philosophy and vain deceit after the tradition of men, or after the rudiments
of the world 2 Coloss. 2.^.
. Besides, the beasts of Ephesus 1 Cor. 15.32.
, and the grievous wolves Act. 20.29.
, what care took he to detect and defeat, to prevent and preuince Prauincire
Gal. 2.5.
, propugning the truth, oppugning the adversaries, not giving to them place by
subjection, no not for an hour, that the Gospel stablished might continue for
ever. Let the same mind be in you which was also in him. The word ingraffed
hedge ye about, fence and keep safe from malignant persons, evil
cogitations, cares, riches, the pleasures of this life, unbelief, Apostasy,
and such like. The envious man will (if he can) make a breach upon it, and
bring in these destroyers; Therefore take ye heed, yea, let him that thinks
he stands 1 Cor. 1^*11, 12,
take heed lest he fall, or be surprised in an hour that he knows not.

Finally, fruit is expected to be had unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life Romans 6.22.
. Summer and winter the plant the same, fat in old age, and flourishing as the
Palm tree, not blasted with the winds of other vain doctrines, not nipped
with the frosts of hearts hardness, or natures remissness; not beaten down
by the messengers of Satan, buffeting the branches, nor withered so much as in
one leaf, with the extremities of the times, but as those that be planted
Psalm. 92.13.
in the house of the Lord, (the 1 Cor. 3.^.
increase given of God) fruitful in old age, and comfortfull in affliction.

Let a man therefore examine himself, and brethren prove your selves, whether
ye have or no the comforting word, which is the ingraffed word. The heart
unclean, incision not made for insition, no si^ns immitted nor closed about
with loving affection, no sensure about it, nor any fruit appearing, it is not
ingraffed, nor affords it refreshment to the soul that is weary: But the
heart clean through the word which is spoken, incision made, the impe settled
and closed on every side with embracements of love, fenced and fruitful, it is
ingraffed, and THE WORD, which is comfort in affliction.

Remains what is expected, De ratione consolandi, how and in what manner the
poor afflicted are comforted by the word. In Isay 30.21. it is said; Thine
ear shall hear a word behind thee saying, This is the way, etc. Emphatice
verbum audiendi ponitur: Deum hic padagoge comparat, qu^ pueret sibi ante
occulas statuit, etc. Marlo^^t. in loc.
As pupils from behind them hear the voice of their Schoolmaster or Tutor
teaching and admonishing them, so the servants of the Lord his heauenly-voice,
and in their affliction they are (by the word mixed with faith incordiated, hid
in the heart, inscribed and ingraffed) informed and comforted as here follows.

1 By the word through faith, they understand, That afflictions are effects of
Gods decree, which is sealed, and remains sure as Psalm. 125.1.
Mount Sion, not to be removed; falls a sparrow to the ground Mat. 10.29.
, or an hair from the head without him? The sufferings of the Saints are
foreordained, as themselves foreknowne Romans 8.29.
. Thus when I remember, I power out in me my soul thus Psalm 42.4.
: Has God decreed to me, and appointed me to bear the evil upon me? I will
without any reluctation bear it, the stiff-necked strive with the yoke to
their hurt; it is good to yield in youth Lam. 3.27.
, in the first hour, in the last all must. Does Shimei curse me? The Lord
has bidden him 2 Samuel 16.10.
: Does Saul persecute me? Vexed he is with an evil spirit sent from the Lord 1 Samuel 19* 9.
: Do other men, unreasonable and wicked, insedable and absurd, insest, oppose,
plot against me, thrust sore at me, that I might fall, and fall into the pit
which they have dug for me Gal. 3.1.
? (...), they are (as Paul of the Galatians) mad men, distracted in their
minds, they know not what they do; what Io. 8.44.
do they but the lusts of the devil? What are they but his agents and
instruments? yet permitted all of my Lord and my God to humble me, and to prove
me Deuteronomy. 8.2.
, and to know what is in me; whether I will trust in him, and cleave to him; or
Tentatio probatio in, non perditionis.
, it is a tentation of probation, not of destruction. Does sickness afflict
me? it is the servant of the Lord coming and going as the Centurions Mat. 8.8,
9.
according to his word. Does any pressure or other disaster ingrauate or grieve
me? nothing happens or is done, nor shall happen or be done unto me, but
what the hand of God and his counsel has before determined to be done Act.
4.^^.
. Therefore being vile in mine own eyes, and base in mine own sight 2 Samuel
^.22.
; I say as he that went up barefoot by the ascent of Mount Oliuert 2 Samuel 15 2^,
; Behold, here I am, let the Lord do to me as seems good unto him. Surely
he will not cast off for ever, but though he cause grief Lam. 3, 32,
, yet will he have compassion; and This is my comfort in my affliction.

2 By the word through faith they understand, That afflictions are arguments of
the adoption of sons unto God Heb. 12.6.
, every son whom he receives, flagellat, he scourges, yet not in his
anger, but with judgment, to teach them his judgments. Impunity a note of
bastardy, yea, says the spirit Verse 8. (...).
, if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye
bastards and not sons. Bastards may escape that increpation, correction,
discipline, and nurture, which sons must suffer: many vile servants have much
more liberty and money in their purse, than many dears children.

The natural son, a bod^e prepared him, had his ears bored and opened as
other men's, Isay 50.6. Isa. 50.6.
. A man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs Isa. 53.3.
, tempted himself Heb. 2. vlt.
, buffeted and smitten, yet not rebellious, neither turned he away his, back
from the smiters, nor his face from shame and spitting. The adoptiue sons
(when they are chastened with pain upon their bed, Job 33.19, 20, 21, 22.
and the multitude of their bones with strong pain, when their life abhors
bread, and their soul dainty meat, when their flesh is consumed away, and
their bones stick out, when their soul draws near to the grave, and their
life to the destroyer) have also their instructions sealed.

This when I remember I power out in me my soul thus; Wherefore should I fear
in the days of evil Psalm. 49.5.
, when punishment or death, the iniquity of my heels compass me about, it is
at the worst but a bruise in the heel. The serpents head is broken, and the
hunters snare: I see my self now saved from wrath, of which I was by nature
the child Ephesians. 2.3.
. The child of God I am adopted, I know it, because chastened, I endure the
chastisement. A son without controversy, of a truth I perceive it: because I
forget not the exhoration which speaks unto me, as unto a son.

My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, neither be weary of
his correction, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord
loves, he corrects and rebukes, even as a father the son in whom he
delights. Pro. 3.11. and Heb. 12.5, 6. compared.
A dear son I am Ier. 31.19, 10.
, I am a pleasant child, my father which is in heaven takes pleasure in nice;
his bowels found and are troubled for me; surely he will have mercy on me
ashamed of my self; surely, he will delight himself in me: confounded in my
self, for that I bear the reproach of my youth. Therefore I will, whatsoever
things I suffer, delight my self in him. This shall swallow up my griefs,
this shall give, or cause to be given unto me the desires of my heart Psalm.
^7.4.
, this the strength of my life. This the strong consolation; and this is my
comfort in my affliction.

3. By the word through faith they understand: That afflictions are evidences
of the brotherhood in Christ, of conformity to him, of communion with him, the
luster of his image, and the marks thereof, the marks of the Lord Jesus in his
members, yea the sufferings of Christ Phil. 3.10
, and on the whole body, which is called Christ 1 Cor. 12.12.
, accomplished in the brethren which are in the world 1 Pet. 4.13.
, and reflected on him, who is not ashamed to call them, that suffering are
sanctified, brethren Heb. 2.11.
: Is not his care and sympathy expressed? Act. 9.4.
persecuted he is in them that bear his name, and his is their reproach: Heb.
11.26.13.13.
The reproach of Christ called.

This when I remember, I power out in me my soul thus. Why art thou cast
down, o my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me Psalm. 42.5
. No burden now on thee, that is not now on the brethren abroad. The same
afflictions 1 Pet. 5.9.
, the same also the sufferings of Christ; not a tear sheddest thou, which he
puts not into a bottle, not one sigh from thy broken heart, which enters not
into his open ears; not one gash on thee, of which his soul is not sensible;
not one scratch or scarre in thy face, which appears not in his; not one
furrow on thy back, which turns not upon his. A brother of low degree, yet
brother to Jesus Christ in the highest.

Iam. 1.9.
Rejoice therefore in that thou art exalted, and run with patience to the race
which is set before thee, looking as well unto Jesus Christ the Author and
finisher of thy faith, thy faithful brother and bearer of thy griefs, Isa.
53.4.
as also to the brethren enduring the same cross, and despising the shame
thereof in the world: If any draw back Heb. 10.38.
whose soul shall have any pleasure in such? Nothing has taken thee, but that
which is common, 1 Cor. 10.13.
common the exinanition to them in the body, before the exaltation: and this
is my comfort in my affliction.

4. By the word through faith they understand: That afflictions are tokens of
the presence of God, going before his Israel out of Egypt into Canaan Deuteronomy
8.2, 3.
. Know ye not what he did to humble them, as they went? Who knows not what
the presence of a father amongst children does? even keep them in awe, or not
awefull rebukes are heard, and had stripes. The righteous are recompensed on
the earth Pro. 11.31
, sometimes by the wicked and sinner, The hand of the Lord, and the sword in
his hand Psalm. 17.4.
, turning every way (as the Genesis 3. vlt.
Cherubims flaming sword) to keep them whom he keeps in the way everlasting.
These recompensed also as they behave themselves ill in their doings.
Amalekites their end to be destroyed for ever Number. 24.20.
. But Jacob not smitten Isa. 27.7.
as the smiters of Jacob, nor slain according to the slaughter of his
adversaries ouerturned, ouerturned, ouerturned with an ah Isa. 1.24.
, and damned as Sodom 2 Pet. 2.6.
with an overthrow. The Lords portion Deuteronomy. 32.9.
is his people, and theirs his adversaries. Exodus 33.14.
His presence is always with them, and shall be to day as yesterday, and so
for ever. Might I, with your favor, change my voice, I might show you a
mystery to be admired of you.

As the Lord is, so is his Israel, and as they are, so is he in the world 1 Io.
4.17. Nulla est in mundo miseria aut afflictio in quam Deus non respiciat, etc.
Fonsec. Sab* ante Dom. Quadra.
Hearing their cries, and seeing their injuries, he manifested himself not as
a consuming fire, but as a burning bush, as confined himself within a bush,
his people straitened in the confines of Egypt; and they offended as burning
himself, grieved his soul for their misery, Judge. 10.16. and afflicted
himself in all their afflictions, Isa. 63.9. Although he speak sharply, and
deal roughly with them, yet he earnestly remembers them, Ier. 31.19. and will
save them from their enemies, from the hands of them that hate them, from
making of pots, from the iron yoke, from the heat of the furnace.

This when I remember, I power out in me my soul thus: Does the Lord beat me
with his rod, and strike me with his fl^ffe, his rod and his staff both
comfort me Psalm. 23.4
; His hand not far off, nor his presence from me, but at hand, and with me,
to deliver me: Infirmities, reproaches, necessities, distresses enuiron me, yet
trembling, and not sinning, not resisting, nor rebelling against him that is
with me; as he in me, I may take pleasure in them Isa. 25.4.
; Ths Lord is with me, a mighty terrible one, a strength to me poor, a
strength to me needy in my distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from
the heat, when the blast of the horrible ones is as a storm against the wall 2
Cor. 4.8, 9.
troubled I am on every side, yet not distressed; perplexed, yet not in
despair, or not altogether destitute of means; persecuted, yet not forsaken;
cast down, yet not destroyed; when I fall, I shall arise, when I sit in
darkness, the Lord is a light unto me Micah* 7.8.
; when I am impleaded, he shall plead my cause, when I am judged, and in the
hands of the wicked, he will not leave me Psalm. 37.33.
but execute judgment for me: when I am sifted of Satan as wheat, he will
confirm my faith 1 Cor. 1.8.
: when I am cast down he will comfort me. 2 Cor. 7.6.
Gracious he is, I know, and am persuaded, that he will perform all things
for me Psalm. 57.2, 3.
, yea send from Heaven, all helps on earth failing, and save me from them that
would swallow me up. Therefore I cast my self on him, I roll, I commit my way
unto him Psalm. 37.5, etc.
He shall bring it to pass, my righteousness as the light, and my judgment
as the nooneday, my refuge is under the shadow of his wings, until these
calamities shall be ouerpast Psalm. 57.1
, my rock he is, my fortress, my deliver Psalm. 18.1
, my buckler, my high Tower, my God, and his presence the horn of my
salvation: And this is my comfort in my affliction.

5. By the word through faith they understand: That afflictions are the high
way unto heaven Act. 14.12.
, no walking on pillowes thither, but on thorns and stones, the strait gate
not easily entered at, pressing there is and must be violence, Mat. 11, 12.
or else no entrance there. In the broad way is elbow-roome, but through the
straits, as the blessed go to the everlasting gates, are strong oppositions by
the principalities and powers, by the rulers of the darkness of this world,
and the wickednesses in the high places Ephesians. 6.12
.

This when I remember, I power out in me my soul thus: The world which now
laugheth and rejoices, maketha me, wretched man, to weep and lament; yet is
my sorrow turned into joy, yea I count it all joy, when I fall into temptations
Iam. 1.2.
, I am exceeding joyful in all my tribulations 2 Cor. 12.10.
; Are they not portalls before the house of God, and the gates of Heaven?
Guides and marks they are in the straight street, in the old way to the souls
rest, of the new and living way to perfection, the footsteps of Jesus Christ,
made perfect he through sufferings Heb. 2.10
, and endured for the joy that was set before him Heb. 12.3
, such oppositions and contradictions of sinners against himself, as are
written in the volume of the book, so will I being confident of this very
thing, That the present pressure is the way unto peace in the after ends Psalm.
37.37.
, the pains of Hell unto the joys of Heaven, the reproaches of Christ to the
everlasting pleasures, the valley of the shadow of death, the path of
righteousness unto perfection: And this is my comfort in my affliction.

6. By the word through faith they understand: That afflictions are the
Porters, which open the doors of distressed souls, that the gracious promises
may come in; what are the gracious promises of our God? Verily, to have mercy
on his afflicted, Isay 49.13. according to the multitude of his tender mercies,
Lam. 3.32. to gather them with great mercies, and to have mercy on them with
everlasting kindness, Isay 54.7, 8. to be with them in trouble, to deliver
them, and honor them, Psalm. 91.15. yea, to be with them for ever, even unto
the end of the world, Matthew. vlt. vlt. never to leave them, never to forsake
them, Ios. 1.5. spoken first to that great Duke, but applied by the spirit unto
the little flock of the little ones, Hebr. 13.5. unto the least of the little
ones that believes on Jesus Christ, The Lord has said, I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee.

This when I rememher, I power out in me my soul thus: Pro. 3.10.
By sight I see how many live not by faith, their barnes filled with plenty,
Luk, 12.19
and their presses bursting out with new wine, they sing hearts case, and soul
take thine case, but the bread of adversity, and water of affliction or of
oppression given. Heb. 11.13
The just live by faith, seeing the promise (as the fathers) afar off, yet
saluting them as present, and embracing the same, as the very joy and
rejoicing of their heart. Therefore it is good for me to rest my self on, and
in the promises of God; Ier. 1.12.
for he will hasten his word to perform it: his word he will remember unto
me his servant, Psalm. 119.149.
upon which he has caused me to hope: Heb. 10.35.
I will not cast away my confidence, which has great recompense of reward,
patience in me shall have her perfect work, Iam. 1.4.
that I may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. I will do the will of
God, that I may receive the promise, yet a little while and he that shall
come, Heb. 10.37.
will come, and will not tarry, even the God of all grace in a time accepted,
then shall my light break forth as the morning, and mine health shall spring
forth speedily; Isa. 58.8.10.
the dayspring from on high shall visit me: I shall see in that day, Hab. 2.3.
the word in the work. The vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end
it shall speak, and not lie, though it tarry, I will wait for it, because it
will surely come with refection: And this is my comfort in my affliction.

(...).
7. By the word through faith they understand: That affliction have with them
power from bone, preservative and sanatiue, had not Jonah been swallowed of
the Whale, he had been of the sea; and Bethesda's poole healed, when troubled:
Happ^e i^ the man whom God errecteth, Job 5.17. This happiness who can
declare? not one, not known, overwhelmed with a flood, what gulf is escaped,
who knows? or what malady cured, some misery endured.

This when I remember, I power cut in me my soul thus: The smarting rod upon
me, may be a supporting staff unto me, without it I might fall into a
fouler ditch. Had not it, a worse thing might have happened unto me: Physic
makes sick before whole, a time of health for this trouble will come, and I
will expect it. Behold, my Physician stands before the door, he looks
upon me, and me he looks Isa. 66.3. Vt curent spasmum medici procurent
febrim.
. This ague to shake me, he does procure me to cure a more dangerous
conuulsion in me: or as Lot was in Sodom, I may be in this world, Genesis 19.6.
and these troubles (as the Angels on him) lay hold on me, the Lord being
merciful unto me to bring me forth, and to set me without the bounds of
destruction: I will therefore take in all that come, for in doing this (as
other in their tents) I may entertain, in this earthly tabernacle, Angels
unawares. Heb. 14.^^
An Angel sent from God, for some special good to me, is my tribulation, and
this is my comfort in my affliction.

8. By the word through faith they understand: That afflictions demonstrate
faithful and fruitful branches. Every branch of the vine that bears fruit
is purged, that it may bring forth more fruit. Io. 15.2. (...), defractionem
partium luxuriantium. Aret. in loc. Fert vberiorem fructum post refectionem.
Aret. vbi sup. Vitis foditur circu^ciditur, sterceratur, putatur aliisque
multis exercetur laboribus, etc. Aret. vbi sup.
For as after the refection and defraction of the parts luxuriant, the branches
of the vine yield more fruit, so the faithful in their afflictions, (which are
as (...), or rusticke purgations) are the more fruitful, not pruned at ease,
and grow wild apace, or their grapes wild, but purged afflicted, wounded
within and bruised without, every gift is stirred up, and set to work every
grace that is in them; the lights put under a bushel before, shine afterward
as in candlestickes set upon hills. What use before of faith, or of patience?
before, what hope or joy in the holy Ghost? As the wine forced runs out of the
press, and as the weights of a clock turn all the wheels about, so the
loads of afflictions press out of them that are Christ's, the praises of Christ
1 Pet. 2.9.
, and show forth the hidden virtues of them that are the hidden ones of God
Psalm. 83.4.
.

This when I remember I power out in me my soul thus: Pinched I am, pruned and
pared nigh, yea, cut to the quick, that I bleed in spirit; but needful the
compunction, it is the first degree of inward humiliation; if a wound be, it
is the second, and not hurtful; nor the third, which is the contrition it
self. Better is a conscience wounded, D. Slater: Salve for a wounded spirit.
than a conscience seared; better a heart grownd to powder with the millstone
of wrath turning about upon it, than one dedolent, and past feeling of sin and
wrath; better a soul to be lopped in the passions of sins, than to be
obducted with rank lusts, or neglected and rejected. Not merely poenall the
wounded spirit in the children of God, as in Cain and Judas, the beginning of
their hell, but either castigatory for the chastisement of some particular
disobedience, as David's, or probatory for trial, as Jobs, or percursory for
prevention, as Paul's thorn in his flesh, lest through the abundance of
revelations he should be exalted above measure, 2 Cor. 12.
or purgatory, for the cleansing of unclean and evil thoughts, imaginations,
and reasonings, touching Gods providence, the word, the profession, the power
of nature, selfe-abilitie to convert, inherent righteousness, good works,
freewill, and security in the arm of flesh. How such sparkles rise in unswept
chimneyes, the fire blown with the bellows of hell, who knows not, that
knows the devices of Satan? Phil. 2.
Therefore I will through him that works the will and the good deed, give all
diligence to search and try mine own ways. In every crooked way I may find a
cross, (...).
my crosses indigitate mine exorbitancies: As I deprehend them, I will amend
them, and bring forth fruit meet for repentance, new obedience in all things,
the old things in me shall become all new. When I shoot forth, Isai. 27.8.
the Lord will in measure debate with me, and stay the rough wind, in the day
of the East wind, when I blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with
fruit in its season: for I will approve my self as the servant of Christ, 2
Cor. 6.5, 6.
in much patience in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in tumults, in
labors by the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armor of
righteousness on the right hand, and on the left; by honor and dishonor, by
good report and evil report, as persecuted, yet not profligated, as chastened,
and yet not killed, as sorrowful, and yet rejoicing, as pruned being
pampinous, too full of needless sprigges, and superfluous twigges, yet not
taken away as the fruitless branch, nor cast forth, nor withered, nor gathered
of men, nor cast into the fire, but purged for fructification: Io. 15.6.
and this is my comfort in my affliction.

9. By the word of God through faith, they understand, that afflictions are
necessary exercises, Heb. 12.13. a kind of wrestling between the Lord and his
servants. Troubles on them, his hands on them, and theirs on him, the right
hand of faith. 2 Timothy 2.5.
Thus it is wrested, and who prevails? Always the afflicted, striving
lawfully. The lawful striving learned of Jacob, Hoseah his interpreter, he
had power with God, and prevailed, for he wept, and made supplication unto
him, Hos. 11. so may all overcome, if the Lord may overcome; the heart yielded
up, the strife is ended, humbled in the sight of God, immediately lifted up,
Iam. 5.10. tears seen, he yields, supplications made, he takes away his
hand; the victory with facility had; grievous the conflict for the present
time, yet joyous afterward; Heb. 12.11.
the Lord not let go, the blessing not obtained.

This when I remember I power out in me my soul thus: Is the evil upon me,
the hand of the Lord, Does he thereby wrestle with me, wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me? Romans 7.24.
He will himself hold me down with his left, and uphold me with his own
right hand; my faith his gift; Io. ^.2^.
his work that I believe in him, believing in him I cannot, nor shall be cast
down of him, or out of his sight, Genesis 35.25
touched happily the hollow of my thigh, as he wrestleth with me, it may slip
out of joint, or the sinew may shrink, and I may halt upon it, but my faith
shall not fail. Therefore will I, while the Lord with me, strive lawfully
with him, holding my self fast by him, weeping before him, and making
incessant supplications unto him: exercised this shall be my exercise until I
prevail, and through him, I shall prevail with him, he will hold me fast, see
my tears, Psalm. 6.8.
hear the voice of my weeping; Isai. 38.5.
give me the petitions that I desire of him, bless me with the new name,
Revel. 2.17.
in the white stone given to him that overcomes, I shall have princely power
with God and men. Psalm. 118.6.
I will not fear what men can do unto me, aduantagious the disadvantage, the
agitation requisite, lucratiue the luctuation: And this is my comfort in my
affliction.

Lastly, By the word through faith they understand: That afflictions precede
the joy of the Lord, and glory to come, as the pleasures of sin, destruction
and damnation. To them that make their bellies their Gods, Phil. 3.18.
and that mind earthly things, as the enemies of the cross of Christ, Romans
29, 10.
Tribulation and anguish, indignation and wrath; but to them that lie amongst
the pots, in stocks, in the dungeon, in the briars and in the burning bushes,
enduring the fiery trial of their faith, fullness of joy and brightness of
glory, the trial of their faith being much more precious than of gold which
perishes, though it be tried in the fire, shall be found unto praise, and
honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. The Passover of the great
Revel. 5.14.
tribulation celebrated, or the same passed over, they shall wash their robes,
Phil. 3.21.
and make them white in the blood of the Lamb, their vile bodies also be
fashioned like unto the glorious body of Jesus Christ, shall shine as the
firmament, yea as the Sun in the height of his glory.

This when I remember, I power out in me my soul thus: Of a truth I perceive,
Romans 8.18.
that the sufferings of the present time are not worthy to be compared to the
glory which shall be revealed in me, I reckon not the temporal evil, but
have respect to the eternal good: I faint not, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17.
for though mine outward man perish, mine inward is renewed day by day, my
light affliction which is but for a moment, works for me a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Therefore under my pressures, Romans
2.10.
I will by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality, and eternal life; for I am persuaded, that neither tribulation,
nor distress, nor persecution; nor famine, Romans 8.3^
nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword, nor death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to prevent the joy, or to
separate me from the glory to come, the spirit of glory rests already on
me, and full is my heart of joy in the Holy Ghost. The God of all grace has by
Christ Jesus called me into his eternal glory, and after that I have suffered
a while, 1 Pet. 5.10.
will cause me to enter into his joy, which is fullness of joy, and crown me
with his glory, which is eternal glory. To him be glory and dominion, for
ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

