Works of Armorie, divided into three books, entitled, the Concordes of
Armorie, the Armorie of Honor, and of Coats and Creastes, collected and
gathered by John Bossewell Gentleman.

In aedibus Richardi Totelli.

Anno domini. 1572.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum

To the right honorable and his singular good lord, Sir William Cecil Baron of
Burghleigh, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, Lord high
Treasorer of England, master of the courts of wards and Liueries,
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, and one of the Queens Majesty's
privy Counsel, John Bossewel wishes long health with increase of honor.
RIght honorable, and my singular good Lord, I have marueled upon occasion, of
late, that among the numbers of books, in their several kinds, not only by
their auctors diligently devised, but surely by the printers of these dais, for
the most part procured, and to their exceeding great charges, faythfullye and
exactlye published: I find so few, that I could almost have said none, to
have written in our native tongue, of the science and skill of Armory. Truly
in my oppinion, a very fruitful necessary, and honorable argument, but might
I deem, or were it rashness, as Tullye in his Tusculans, in the comparison
between the Romans and Grecians, which might excede other, or be more
ancient in knowledge, says of such, as of the^ lay neglecte, Honos alit arts
omnesque incendunt' ad studia gloria, Surely not unlike, but as in all other
things, so in science, what avails service, where sovereignty is neglected,
what actiuitie where men lie down to sleep, with sloth: what love, what
friendship, where no man buildes on faith or credyt, so take honor from law,
reward from Phificke, admiration from Mathematicalls, humility and zeal,
from heavenly science, and who sets his son to school for them: no doubt
Tully said full wisely, keep back reward, and learning adieu. Yet sum there
are, that feed not altogether of this humor, and they rake together the few
sparcles of knowledge hyd, and almost dead in the ashes of oblivion, and
either them selfs build a fire thereof, or geeue occasion to others, such one
was of late specially in this kind of Herehaultry, a very fruteful and worthy
writer master Gerard Leigh, and such do I offer my self at this present
meaning to add somewhat farther, or geeue occasion to others, not drawn by
hope of reward, which rather would have kept me back, but honor of the science,
love of my country, and especially my bounden and duitifull estimacion of your
honorable favor: whereunto as I do with reverence offer and dedicate this simple
thing (scarce worth the reading in respect of the handeling, yet for the
substance, not to be altogether neglected) so I most humbly beseech your honor
to accept the same, and be Patron thereof: whereby you shall not only stay,
and rere up this declining knowledge, to your great renown, but bind me for
ever, by all manner of duities, and specially to pray for your honorable estate,
long to continue in favor with God, credyt with your sovereign, honor with
your country, fidelitye with your Peers, and love toward Armorye.

Cilenus censure of the aucthor, in his high court of Herehaultry.
A Court there sta^ds twixt heaven and earth, al gorgeous to behold
of royal state, in second sphere, a hugie building old,
Portcolized and bard with bolts, of gold resplendant bright,
of glistering ge^mes, through Pallas power, bedazeling each
yt no man may com in except he have ye perfect skill, (ma^s sight
of Herehauts art, and climbed has, Parnassus sacred hill.
Within this stately court, like number rooms are found,
like number flags, like number arms, as realms upon ye ground.
About ye walls more wo^derous work, then framd by mortal hand,
each Herehauts lively counterfeit, in seemly sort does stand.
within these seuerd romes, through walls, ibuilt of Crystal clear
Each thing that longs to Herehauts art, does perfectly appear.
There ledger books, of ancient gestes, ywrit by Pallas hand,
there campinges, mornings, musterings, there pedegrees do stand.
There cu^bats fierce, there su^mo^s bold, there triu^phs passing brave
of trowning kings, of dubbing knights, the orders there they have.
Both single coats, and martialed of each renowned wight,
with visitacions, which allottes to each desert his right.
Reuersed coats (not hidden there) bewray disloyal deeds,
Caparisons there fixed hang, and bardings strong of steedes.
With armors fully furnished, and gauntlets vnredemd,
such uncouth sights, each office holds, as cannot be estemde.
At upper end of all this court, as seuerd from the rest.
with flaunting Penon stands a house, as famous as the best.
Where portraied are ye English arms, from which depends brave.
a golden garter in the which, a golden George they have.
Unto this place assembled was, each wight within this hall,
and did admire a golden book, which fell amongst them all.
Blown up by blast of flying fame, which took her tromp in hand,
of burnisht gold, whereto she plyde, her lips as she did stand
in Brutus realm, whereon when they a little space had pride,
abashed at the hidden skill, which in that work they spide
They sta^pt, they starde, they fret, they fumde, and al in one they ioi^d
upon the aucthor to complain, because he had purloind
Their secresies: when suddenly from highest regal throne
was drawn a trauerse ritche, wherewith they whusted every one.
Within this, far more stately court, are rich acheueme^ts brave
and none but Gods, or fellow mates to gods as there may have
there armes^there both Alcides spoils and Iason^ fleese remaynde,
with Gorgons hedd and Perseus praise, and who so erst had gaynd
A noble name eternizd was, for there did splendant shine
the ancient Pegasus, which erst Minerua dame divine
To inner Temples martyall gave, to whose redoubted grace,
in honor Jove, in prowes Mars, in wit her self geues place*
No god ne wight, of worthy fame, but has purtraied there,
the field, the shield, the coat, ye crest, which he of right should bear.
Their shiuered shafts, and broken bow, beres Jove subdued in field,
and Mars that sind with Venus once, his dreadful geuly shield.
has chargde with furs, a note whereby to know a lechers life,
Thiestes there a difference has, which lay with brothers wife.
Each vice detected there, by blazons art, at point devise,
and all the walls with imagery, were graven story wise.
The siege of Thebes, the fall of Troy, in beaten massy gold,
dan Vulcane has set out at large, full geazon to behold.
Each thing that hapt until this day, did plainly there appear,
Thenthronizing of Jove, and eake Saturnus mornful cheer
that was exilde, and how the gods bewailde that dismoale day,
when Mars and Venus wounded were, by Diomede in fraye.
And Phoebus wayling (...), and pomp of triumphs proud,
for daunt of Giatm^s stern, which fall of mighty Jove had vowde.
All this engraven was, in precious stones of proudest price,
Each thing set out in colors due, to think a quaint device.
In midst whereof, Cilenus sits, instalde in grauest sort,
In stately chair of A^athist which virtues four support.
U^cegerent god, in Palla^e place, which moude with tumult rare,
the cause of stir in English house bad Gerard Leygh declare.
O god (quod he) in humblest wise, right now blown up by Fame,
behold a book which breeds these broiles, pervse I pray ye same.
He takes the book, and as about he cast his glauncing eye,
beholding winged Pegasus, by chance he does epsy
A wight in snow white gown, and crowned with branch of laurel tree,
that Allen Sutton had to name, come Sutton come says he
Which were not in thy country known, as thou deseruedst of late,
whose snow bright skill, by snow procurde: the Fates to have thy fate
Yet mauger Death thou here shall live, eternized for aye,
do read this work that seems so strange, this novelty display.
And as he reads, they all admire, but most admireth he,
here Ferond* says, he hittes my grace, lo here he steals from me.
Then A^ciate lyketh Bosvvels vain, but last he does deface,
his work, for why, lo here says he, he takes from me my grace.
Then Vpton blames him for the like, then Plin^e ginns to speak,
and every one in fine on him, does thus his anger wreake.
When Majesty cries whus^e: and sad Cilenus thus does say,
tush hold your peace, content your selves, if well the case you way,
just cause have you to praise the man, that aids your art so well,
in blazon, and in natures skill, who does so much excel.
By whom you live, more cause have I, and Pallas to complain,
which fear least Jove, some other impe, has fostred in his brain.
Or that some other Maia has brought forth some other son,
Surpassing Pallas and my self, and then we are undone.
Which has conspirde in spite of us, and flowring Greece to frame,
In Brytayne soil a Helicon from whence this Aucthor came.
Which said: he flies to skies, hereof to take advice,
The court brake up, they claude their ears, and parted with a trice.
Nicolas Roscarrocke.

The names of the aucthors as well Latins as others, out of the which these
works are chiefelye collected and amplified.
Latin aucthors.
Alciatus Emblem. Aristoteles de animalibus Aulus Gellius Noc. Attic. Bartho.
de propri. rerum Bartholus de insigniis Boccatius Carrion Caelius antia.
lectionum. Cicero Diescorides Diodorus Siculus. Erasmus. Epius de To. gestis.
Franciscus Patritius. Gaguinus super Franc. ges. Herodot. Horatius. Isidorus
Etymolog. Justinius Leonicus de varia histor. Lucan. Mantuan. Buco. Nauclerus
Ouidius. Plinius natural. hist. Pollidorus Angl. hist. Plutarch. vitis. Quintus
Curtius. Rauisius tex. Natu. his. Sebast. Munsterus. Theophrastus de plantis.
Vegeseus de re militari.
French aucthors.
Frossard. Gabriell Simeon Iehan le Fe^on. Paradin.
English writers.
G. Chaucer. Io. Gower. S. Tho. Eliot. Io. Lidgate. D. Wilson Gerard Leigh.
Rychard Grafton. Io. Maplet.
And out of diverse other ancient writers, whose names are not certainly known.

Facessat Calumnia.

The Concordes of Armorie, with the description of the four Cardinal virtues,
and other precepts and rules, necessary to be known of all those, which would
account them selves to come of gentle blood.
BEfore I will begin to blaze or descriue any part of Arms, or the terms
thereunto appertaynynge, it shall be showed, what these words, Arma, or
Insignia (being latyne words) do signify. Arma. Insignia.
Arma, (as Isidore says) generaliter omniu^ rerum instrumenta sunt. And Arma,
be not taken only for the instruments of all manner of crafts, but also for
harneys, and weapon, also Standerdes and Banners, some time Battles. Heraulte.
In all which things the Heraultes, especially before others, have the
secrette intelligence, and understanding thereof: as also of several
languages, most meet for their calling, in such high service. Insignia,
are signs, and tokens of honor, which commonly of Heraultes be called Arms,
Bage.
or Badges of gentlemen. They be also called Symbola heroica.i. signs,
Symbola Heroica.
prices, or marks appertainyng to nobleness: and whereby every estate, or man
of great authority is known: the noble, from the ignoble, the gentle from
the ungentle: and the free man, from the bond. And these Arms or Ensigns (as
diverse aucthours do affirm) do occupy 9. 9. sondrie ^ieldes.
sundry feldes, of the which 7. of them be termed colors, and two Mettalles,
as ensue.

Mettalles. 2.
Gold, and term them Or and Silver. term them Argent.
Colors. 7.
Red. term Gules. Blue. term Azure. Black. term Sable. Green. term Vert.
Uiolet. term Purpure. Orange Tawney and term Ten and Murrey. term
Sanguine.
9 Planettes, and Stars, which are compared or lykened unto the said
Metalles and Colors, and are used in Blazon.

Planettes.
The Sun is compared to Gold. The Moon. is compared to Silver. Mars is
compared to Gules. Jupiter is compared to Azure. Saturn is compared to Sable.
Venus is compared to Verte. Mercury is compared to Purpure.
Stars.
ye Dragons head, is compared to Ten. ye Dragons tail. is compared to
Sanguine
Precious stones. 9.
9 Precious stones, of diverse colors and virtues which the Herehautes do use in
Blazon, for and in the name of the 9. colors in Arms, and are thus likened.
videlicet.

Precious stones 9.
The Topace. 1 to Gold. 1. The Pearl. 2 to Silver. 2. The Rubye. 3 to Gules.
3. The Sapphire. 4 to Azure. 4. The Diamonde. 5 to Sable. 5. The Emeraude. 6 to
Verte. 6. The Amatiste. 7 to Purpure. 7. The Iacinthe. 8 to Ten. 8. The
Sardonix. 9 to Sanguine. 9.
THE natures, operations, and virtues of the said Planettes, Stars, and
precious Stones, may partlye be seen and redd in the book of late made by
Master Gerarde Legh, entytuled, The Accidence of Armorye. Yet I wish the
reader hereof, diligently to note and understand, what is written of the said
9. precious Stones, by Isidore, Isidore.
in his 16. book Ethimologiarum. Cap. 7.8.9.10. and 13. which I have drawn out
of the same Author, as he writ them in Latin, for that no person which would
covet to have the name of a gentleman, ought to be altogether ignorant in the
same tongue.

De praedictis 9. gemmis.
TOpazion, The Topace.
ex virenti genere est omnique color resplendens, in uenta primum in Arabiae
insula, in qua Trogloditae praedones fame et tempestate fessi, cum herbarum
radices effoderent, eruerunt. Quae insula postea quaesita, nebulis cooperta,
tandem a nauigantibus inuenta est. Sed ob hoc locus and gemma nomen ex causa
accepit. Nam Topazin Trogloditarum lingua, significationem habet quaerendi. Est
autem amplissima gemmarum: eadem sola nobiliu^ limam sentit. Pliny says,
that this Gemme is of grassie color, although that in Germany, it is found
like to Gold: and otherwhere, of that bygnes and quantity, that Philadelphus
is said to have framed thereof and made an Image in length of four Cubits.

MArgarita prima candidarum gemmarum, quam inde Margaritam aiunt vocatam, quod
in conculis marinis hoc genus lapidum inueniatur. Inest enim in carne Cochleae
calculus natus, sicut in carne Ostrcae praeciosissima Margarita reperiri
dicatur: vel sicut in cerebro piscis lapillus. Gignitur autem de celesti rore,
quem certo anni tempore concule hauriunt. Ex quibus Margaritis quaedam Unions
voca^tur, The Pearl Unions.
aptum nomen habentes, quod tantum vnus, nunquam duo vel plures simul
reperiantur. Meliores autem candidae Margaritae, quam que flauescunt. Illas
enim aut iu^entus, aut matutini roris conceptio reddit candidas: has senectus,
vel vespertinus aer gignit obscuras. Pearls, were the only meat, wherewith
the Jews lived long, having nothing else to eat, when the City of Jerusalem
was besieged by Tytus, as witnesses Josephus.

OMnium ardentium gemmarum principatum Carbunculus habet. Carbunculus autem
dictus quod sit ignitus vt carbo, cuius fulgor nec nocte vincitur. The
Carbun^le, or Rubye.
Lucet enim in tenebris adeo vt flammas ad oculos vibret. Genera eius duodecim,
sed prestantiores qui videntur fulgere, and velut ignem effundere. Carbunculus
autem Greece Anthrax dicitur. The Carbuncle, so warreth with the eye sight, that
it shows manyfolde reflections. It is found in Libia.

The Saphyre.
THe Sapphire, is a Gemme sky colored or Blewe, like to the Sky in the most
fair wether. Amongst all the kinds of Gemmes, it is one of the noblest and
most royal, and therefore mete to be worn only upon Kings and Princes
fyngers. Nothing in the world does more recreate or delight the eyes then the
Smaradge, and Sapphire do. It is marvelous effectuous against all venyme.
Wherefore, if thou put a Spider into a Box, it being shutt, and upon the mouth
thereof thou layest the true Sapphire, and do keep the Spider within the same but
a very short time, the Spider being vanquished and overcome by the virtue
thereof, dies suddenly. Isidore says, quod Saphirus caeruleus est cum
purpura, habens pulueres aureos sparsos: optimus apud Medos, nusquam tamen
perlucidus. It is also rekned by Isidore, to be one of the kinds of the
Amathistes. Albertus Magnus says, that he proved it twice, that with the
only touching of this precious Stone, the party so diseased, has been rid
of the grievous sore the Carboncle. The Sapphire for his soueraignetie, is called
of the Lapidarie, the Gemme of Gemmes. In old time it was consecrated only to
Apollo.

ADamus Indicus, The Diamo^d.
lapis paruus and indecorus, ferrugineum habens colorem and splendorem
Crystalli. Nunquam autem vltra magnitudinem nuclei avellanae repertus. Hic
nulli cedit materie: nec ferro quidem nec igni, nec vnquam incalescit: vnde et
nomen Greca interpretatione, ind^mita vis accepit. Sed dum sit inuictus ferri,
ignisque centemptor, Hircino rumpitur sanguine, recenti and calido maceratur,
sicque multis ictibus ferri perfringitur. Cuius fragmentis, sculptores, pro
gemmis insigniendis perforandisque vtuntur. Hic autem dissidet cum Magnete
lapide, intantum vt iuxta positus ferrum, non patiatur abstrahi Magneti: aut si
admotus Magnes comprehenderit, rapiat atque auferat: fertur quoque in Electri
similitudine venena deprehendere, metus vanos depellere, maleficis resistere
artibus. Diascorides says, that it is called the Stone of reconciliacion and
love: for (says he) That woman that has withdrawn her love from her
husband, by this, is brought to love him anewe: yea it goes further: for it
is said to give proof, whether she be chaste or no. For if she be say they,
she shall whilst she is in sleep embrace her husband, through the workyng of
this Stone, if not, she shall fly, and go back from him. Sir Thomas Eliot in
his Dictionarie, says, that Adamas is the Diomonde, and that Magnes the lode
Stone, that has virtue to draw Iron unto him, is of some vnproperlye called
the Adamant.

OMnium gemmarum virentium Smaragdus principatum habet. The Smaragde, or
Emeraude.
Cui veteres tertiam post Margaritas and Unions tribuunt dignitatem. Smaragdus
a nimia viriditate dicitur. Omne enim satis viride Smaragdum dicitur. Nullis
enim gemmis vel herbis mayor quam huic austeritas est. Nam herbas virentes
frondesque exuperat, inficiens circa se viriditate repercussum aerem.
Sculpentibns quoque gemmas nulla gratior oculorum refectio est. Cuius corpus si
extentum fuerit sicut speculum, it a imagines reddit. Quippe Nero Caesar
gladiatorum pugnas in Sma^ragdo spectabat. The Smaradge passes both the leaf
and boughe of any tree or plant, his color is so fresh and green, and in
this poyncte triumphs alone, neither is the Sun by his sun Beams any
let or hynderance to this his show. There is no greater refection to the
eyes, than the sight of this excellent Gemme.

the Amatiste
INter purpureas gemmas principatum Amathistus Indicus tenet. Amathistus
purpureus est: permixto violaceo color: and quasi rosae nitor, and leniter
quasdam stammulas fundens. The Amathiste his force or virtue avails against
drunkenness, it keeps a man wakyng, and dryueth away ill thoughts, and
sharpeneth the understanding also.

the Iacynthe.
HIacynthus, ex nominis sui flore vocatur. Hic in Ethiopia inuenitur: ceruleum
colorem habens: optimus qui nec rarus est, nec de^sitate obtusus, sed ex
vtroque temperamento lucens purpuraque refulgens: hic autem non rutilat
aequaliter, sed cum facie caeli mutatur. Sereno enim perspicuus est atque
gratus: nubilo coram oculis euanescit atque marcescit. In os missus frigidus
est: in sculpturis durissimus, nec tamen inuictus. Nam Adamante scribitur and
signatur. The Iacinth is taken to be medecinable, and to give vigor or strength
to the Lyms, to increase the Synewes, and to provoke quiet and sound sleep.

the Sardonix
SArdonix appellata quod habeat in se permixtum candorem in similitudinem
vnguis humanae. Graeci enim vnguem Onycem dicunt. Hanc India vel Arabia gignit.
The Sardonix says Isidore also is three colored, black about the botom,
white in the midst, and redd at the top. Hec sola in signando nihil cerae
avellit. The Lapidarie says, it is bredd and borne of the Sardye, which is
the father to him, and Onyx. Sardonyx ex duum nominum societate vocata est. Est
enim ex Onycis candore and Sardo. In workyng it makes a man lowlye, and
shamefaste in his doings.

Of the 9. diverse colors, planettes, and precious stones before rehearced,
which be assigned for the field of Cote armoure. There be most usually used
in the blazon of our English ensigns, but 6. videlicet.

Or, and for mettalles. Argent. for mettalles. Gules. for Colors. Azure. for
Colors. Sable. for Colors. Verte. for Colors.
Purpure, may be added to make the 5. color, but it is rare in use with us.
Of the 9. precious stones aforesaid, these are frequented, and most ennoblish
blazon.

The Topaze. Pearl. Rubye. Sapphire. vj. Diamonde. vj. Emeraude. vj.
And for Purpure, the Amatiste obteineth of stones, his place also to make the
seventh.

These Planettes likewise may compare with the others for their right, in
the order of Blazon. videlicet.

the Sun. the Moon. Mars. Jupiter. Saturn. vij. Uenus. vij. Mercury. vij.
Degrees of Rulers.
Gentleman. Esquyre. Knight. Baron. Lord. Earl. Marquis. Duke, and Prince.

To these degrees aforesaid, Cardinal Virtues.
no man can worthily atteine, but by the four Cardinal virtues, which are,
Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance. For the knowledge whereof, and
what they be, let every gentleman diligently read over, the three books of
Tully his offices: and in especially the first book, wherein he most
excellently (as the father of all eloquence) describes the said four
virtues, and the branches that spryng out of the same. Notwithstanding I shall
briefly declare the definition and efficacy thereof, as the gentle reader
may partly be satisfied, at the first sight.

The first therefore of the said four virtues called Prudence, Prudence.
Tully defines to be, rerum expetendarum fugiendarumque scientia, that is to
say, the knowledge of things, which ought to be desired and followed: and
also of them, which ought to be fled from, or eschewed: and it is called of
the Greeks, Sophia. Also it is named of Aristotle, the mother of virtues, of
other Philosophers, it is called the captain or mastresse of virtues, of some
the huswyfe, for so much as by her diligence she does inuestigate and prepare
places apt and convenient, where other virtues shall execute their powers or
offices. Wherefore as Solomon says, Proverb. 27.
Sicut in aquis resplendent vultus prospicientium, sic corda hominum manifesta
sunt prudentibus. Like as in water be showed the visages of them that behold
it, so unto men that be prudent, the secrets of men's hearts be openly
discovered. This virtue then is so commodious to man, that it is as it were the
porche of the noble palace of man's reason, whereby all other virtues shall
enter, and have their being. Prudence also (as says Byon the philosopher) so
much excels other virtues, as the sight excels the other senses, for
the eyes bear light to all the body, neither is there any virtue without
wisdom. Nam quomodo iustus reddet cuique suum, Apath. Eras. li. 7. apo. 23.
nisi prudentia commonstret cui debeatur? Thus ye may see the force of
Prudence, in qua in est indagatio atque inuentio very, eiusque virtutis hoc
munus est proprium, Vt enim quisque maxim perspicit quid in re quaque
verissimum sit, Cice. Offic. lib..1.
quique and acutissime and celerrime potest videre and explicare rationem, is
prudentissimus and sapientissimus rit^ haeberi solet. Prudence, is a virtue,
that is occupied evermore in searching out the truth. Therefore, (O ye
gentlemen) which be desirous to bear the noble ensigns of your
ancestors, study with toothe and nail to be prudente: and when ye think
ye have attained the same, let it be joined with Justice, for of them two (as
Tully says, Offic. lib. 2.
Justice is of more power, ad fidem saciendam. Because it, without Prudence,
haith sufficient authority, Prudence without Justice is nothing worth to
get credit. For the subtiller, and the craftier a man is, so much the more is
he hated, and suspected, when the opinion of his honesty is pulled away.
Justice.
Wherefore Justice joined with understanding, shall have asmoche power as it
list, to purchase credit: Justice without Prudence shall be of much power,
Prudence without Justice, shall be nothing worth.

Thus it appears, that the most excellent and incomparable virtue, called
Justice, is so necessary and expedient, for the gouernoure of a public
weal, that without it, none other virtue may be commendable, ne wit or any
manner of doctrine profitable. Tully says. At the beginning when the multitude
of people were oppressed by the^ that abounded in possessions and substance,
for refuge they fledd to some one, which excelled in virtue and strength: who
when he had defended the poor men from injury, Offic. lib. 2. From whence
the name of a king first proceeded.
by ministering equity, retained together, and governed the greater persons
with the less, in an equal and indifferent order of Law. Wherefore they
called that man a King, which is as much to say as a Ruler. And as Aristotle
says, Justice is not only a portion or spice of virtue, but it is entierly
the same virtue. And thereof only says Tully, boni viri nominantur, men be
called good men: Justice.
as who says, without Justice, all other qualities and virtues, can not make
a good man.

Justice what it is.
Justice is a virtue, gathered by long space, giving every one his own,
mindyng in all things, the common profit of our Country, whereunto man is
most bound, and owes his full obedience. The ancient Ciuilians say,
Justice is a will perpetual and constante, which geeueth to every man his
right. In that it is named constante, it imports Fortitude: In discerning
what is right or wrong, Prudence is required. And to proporcion the sentence
or judgment in an equality, belongs to Temperance. All these together
conglutinate and effectually executed, makes a perfect definition of Justice.
Offic. lib. 1.
And Tully differethe not much from the same definition of Justice, where he
saiethe, it is always occupied, either in preseruinge the fellowship of men,
geeuing unto every body that which is his own, The excellency of Justice.
or keeping a faythfulnes in contractes. He says also, that the foundation of
perpetual praise and renome, is Justice, without the which nothing may be
commendable: which sentence is verefied by daily experience. For be a man
never so gentle, bounteous, valiante, or liberal, be he never so wise,
familiar, or courtaise, if he be once seen to exercise Injustice, or to do
wrong, it is then well noted, and often remembered: yea, all virtues (where
Justice fails) lack their commendation. I hard of late, as I traueled by
the way, a gentelman praised for sundry virtues which were in him, as that he
was gentle and meke, pleasant and fair in words, wise, well learned, modeste,
and sobre: but I hard no remembrance made of his Justice, For immediately one
present in the company reported him to be an usurer, a person deceiptfull,
covetous, an oppressor of the poor, and no keeper of hospitalitye, yet having
four or five fermes in his hands and more, yt he was a decayer of houses of
husba^derie, a rerer of retes, and a cruel taker of fynes. These vices did
deface all his other virtues: Offic. 2.
for as Tullye says, it is the part of Justice to offer men no violence, to
use them sobrely and skilfully with whom we be conuersante, not to be tempted
with money, but to study by all means to profit every man. Justice despises,
and naught regards those things, whereunto most men enkendeled with
gredynes be hated. Iustitia, est iniustitie prinatio.
It is just also in every matter of berganyng, biyng, selling, hyring, or
lettyng: true in every couenante, bergayne or promise, plain and simple in all
dealing: And that simplicitye is proprely Justice. And where any man of a
covetous or malicious mind, will digress purposely from that simplicity,
taking advantage of a sentence or word, which might be ambiguous or
doubtefull, or in some thing either superfluous or lacking in the bergayne or
promise, where he certainly knows the truth to be otherwise, this in my
opinion is damnable fraud, being as plain against justice, as it were
enforced by violence: for Justice will help all men, Offic. lib. 3.
and wittingly offend none. She is of all virtues the Lady and Queen: keeping
the sound and express form of the law: hating and abhorring all stealinge,
auoutrie, poysonyng, falsheade, disceyt, briberye, gifts, rewards,
covetousness, false witness, oppression, murder, extorcion, and perjury. The
which vices and crimes, by no means may be joined to the perfect virtue
named Justice, which is the chief of all virtues more wondreful than the
bright star Hesperus and Lucifer. And here at this time I leave to speak any
more of that most Royal and necessary virtue, called Justice.

Fortitude.
The most propre virtue belonging to a man, is Fortitude, called Manlynesse,
which is well defined of the Stoikes, where they say, it is a virtue,
propugnantem pro aequitate, that fights in defense of equity. Offic. 1.
Wherefore no man sayethe Tully, that has obtained the glory of Manlynes,
ever got praise by wily trains and craftynes, for nothing may be honest
that is void of Justice. A valiante man (says Aristotle) susteaneth,
Aristotle.
and does that, which belongs to fortitude, for cause of honesty. And a
little before he says: a man that is valiaunte, as well suffers, as does
that, which agrees with his worship, and as reason commands: So no violence
or sturdie mind, lackyng reason and honesty, is any part of fortitude.
Wherefore he may be called a valiant man, that does tolerate or suffer
that, Who may be called a valiant man.
which is needful, and in such wise as is nedeful, and for that which is
needeful, and also when it is needful. And he that lacks any of this, may
be called hardy, but not valiant* It is the propretie of manhood, to fight
for the common safety of his country, and not for his own private profit.
And whosoever is forward to put himself in danger, rather for his own
gredynes, to opteyne spoil, than for the safegarde of his own person, what
he then does, may rather bear the name of lewd and folish hardynes, than
of Manlynes. For (as Tully says) to enter into battle, and to fight
unadvisedly, immane quidam and beluarum simile est, is a thing wild, and a
manner of beasts: but thou shall fight valiantly, when time requires and also
necessity. And always death is to be preferred before servitude, or any
dishonestie. Wherefore, who would be accounted manly men and stout hearted,
those same should have the praise to be good and plain men, lovers of truth,
and nothing at all deceiptefull: for be a man never so mighty, haute, and of
unconquerable courage, yet what he does without discrecion or forecaste,
defaceth al his manhood and stoutnes. A manly courage and a great, contemns
outward things, desires nothing but that is honest, and will not unseemly
yield to none, neither man, nor affection, nor change of fortune but sets
light by those things which do seem precious and gorgeous to the greater
no^bre, and also despises the same, with a steadfast and grounded judgment.
And likewise it is a sign of a mighty courage, and great stedfastnes, so to
bear those things, quae videntur acerba, Offic. 1.
quorum multa and varia in hominum vita fortunaque versantur, as nothing he
swerve from the order of nature, nor the worthynes of a wise man.

Finally to be short, that Manlynes is worthy to be praised, which woorketh
by the strength of the mind, and not of the body: and yet not to faynte in
courage, but to be constante, not fearing the roughe storms of any adversity,
neither the sharp brontes of the wars, or the cruelty of bitter death.

And like as an excellent Physician, cures most dangerous diseases, and
deadely wounds: so does a man that is valiant, advance himself as
invincible, in things that do seem most terrible, not unadvisedly, and as it
were in a beastely rage, but of a gentle courage, and with premeditacion,
either by victory, or by death wynning honor and perpetual memory, the just
reward of their virtue. For as Curtius says: Effugit mortem, quisquis
contempserit, timidissimum quenque consequitur. Q. Curtius* lib. 4.
Whosoever contempneth death, escapes death, and death ouertaketh such, as do
fly from death. Vir.
A man is called in Latyne Vir, whereof says Tully, virtue is named. And the
most propre virtue belongyng to a man, is Fortitude, whereof be two excellent
propreties, that is to say, the contempt of death, and of grefe. Therefore he
plainly declares afterward, that very fortitude is, little to esteem all
humayne things, not to regard death, and to think all labors and pains
tolerable.

Temperance.
Now remains to speak of the fourth virtue called Temperance, which is a
firm and moderat governance of reason against sensuality and other vicious
affections of the mind. Offic. 1.
Tully commends Temperance and says that it is ornatus vitae, an ornament of
man's life, omnisque saedatio perturbationum animi, and all mittigacion of
passions of the mind. Aristotle defines this virtue, Aris. Ethi.
to be a mediocritie in the pleasures of ye body, specially in taste and
touching. Therefore he that is temperate flies voluptuous pleasures, and with
the absence of them is not discontented, and from the presence of them he
willingly absteyneth.

Plotinus.
Plotinus the Philosopher says, that the property and office of Temperance,
is to covet nothing, which may be repented, also not to excede the bounds of
Mediocritie, and to keep desire under the yoke of reason.

He that practices this virtue is called a temperat man, and he that does the
contrary thereto, is named intemperate: between whom and a person incontinent,
Aristotle makes this diversity, that he is intemperate, which by his own
election is led, supposing the pleasure that is present, should always be
followed: But the person incontinent supposes not so, and yet he
notwythstandynge, does follow it.

The temperate man delyteth in nothing contrary to reason, and will do
nothing for bodily pleasure, which shall stand against reason. Temperance, as
a sad and discrete matrone and reverent gouernesse, awayteth diligently, that
in no wise incontinencie or co^cupisence have any pre-eminence in the soul of
man. Therefore as intemperance (being a vice most vnpure, stynkynge and
filthy) is of all estates and degrees, and in all ages, to be eschued,
avoided, and abhorred: So Temperance, at all times and in all things, is to be
followed, embraced, and loved, which will cause us to do nothing for bodily
pleasure, that shall be hurtful or contrary to the health. It will rule all our
appetites, and corrupt desires, causinge us to desire the things which we
ought to desire, and as we ought to desire, and when we ought to desire.
Temperance (as Patricius says) helps much, Patricius. li. 3 de Iusti. re.
pub.
and so much shyneth in all our doings, Vt earum rerum moderatrix atque auriga
esse videatur. Hec est quae tam diuturna laud extulit sententiam illam
Solonis, quae praecipit. Ne quid nimis.

Thus I have briefly spoken of the said four Cardinal virtues, Prudence,
Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance, (which as the same Patricius affirms in
his 5 Book de Institutione reipub.) are as four sisters, Mutuis nexibus
colligatae. They are never separated: One of them without another cannot be
perfect: sed manta omnino and inchoata esse videtur. Nam Fortitudo sine
Prudentia temeritas est. Prudentia sine Iustitia calliditas est, and mala
quaedam malitia. Temperantia sine Fortitudine ignauia est. Iustitia autem sine
Temperantia crudelitas est. Vnde illud Ennij poetae, Summum ius summa iniuria
est. Therefore these four virtues do agree together, as it were in a sweet
song, and consonant armonye, and are principally and especially to be
delyted, and inwardely embraced of all noble gentlemen, since that without
them, they can not be worthy to have the title, or name of ge^telmen, neither
can they worthily bear the ensigns, or arms of their ancient progenitors,
without they specially be endowed and adorned with these foresaid virtues,
called Cardinales: which are so named, for that they be chief or principal
of all other virtues: for out of them as out of a founteine, all other virtues
have their springing, flowing, and proceeding.

Of Cheualrye, the virtuous precepts.
First, give due reverence and service unto almighty god, with all
faythfulnes. Have pity on the poor. Be just in all thy promises. Be
gracious and favorable to them which are captive. Keep clennes of thy body
and person. Keep moderate dyete. Be not slothful in the wars, but strong
and valiant, with desire to avenge thy princes quarrel, giving always
thanks to god for the victory. Be wise in leading the battle, and prudent
in thy fighting. Know the order of the field, and be perfect therein.
Study well also to rule and govern the charge committed unto the. Avoid not
from the field, ne do thou any thing to shame thy cote armoure. Boste not of
thy manhood. Be courteous, lowly, and gentle, and also without rebaudrie in
thy language. Have audacitie, but not excessiuely to do such acts, as are not
to be ieoperded. Dread infamy and reproach. Be valiaunte, so shall no
terrible adventures resolve the into waylinges or desperations. Win honor by
death for thy country, the just reward of thy virtue. Use reason and
honesty, and be not violente or sturdie minded.

Precepts of gentleness.
Be not over Lordely in thy countenance. Be treatable in language, wise in
answer geuinge, perfect in governance, and also cherefull to perform thy
faith and promise. Fear God, and obey his Laws. Dread to offend thy
Sovereign. Use few oaths in all thy communication. Know thine own birth, and
bear not thy self above thine estate. Show thy countenance gentle, so shall
thou be beloved: for hautie countenance procures hatred.

Vices, which are repugnant to Generositie, and not to be frequented, and used
of any, which would have the name of a Gentleman. Videlicet.
Sluggishnesse, boastinge, cowardnesse, swearinge, lechery, and drunkenness.
Also to revoke thine own challenge. To slay thy prisoner. To flee from thy
Sovereigns banner in the field, and to tell thy Sovereign false tales. To be
vengeable, and not to be entreated, etc.

Heavenly Precepts. Videlicet^
To do right. To have pleasure in loving kindness. To be lowly. Mich. cap. 6.
And to walk with God.

Precepts Heroical.
Above, Precepts.
and before all things worship God. Honor thy king. Obey the laws. Be
merciful. Desire honor and glory for virtue. Be not high minded. Refrain
from foul language. Perform what so ever thou promisest. Ensue the virtues
of thy good auncetors

Graces worthy.
To be meek in countenance. To have manly heart in deeds, and therein long
continuance. Not to ween own wit more excellent then others. Not to scorn,
or scoff at others devises. That worship is in mercy, pity, and humility.
To be lions in the field, and lambs in chamber. Boethius.
Eagles at assaults, and maidens in bower. Foxes in counsel, and still in
their games. To follow peace, and love, where is hate.

Gifts heavenly.
To know thy self. To abstain from couetise. Having no wrong, to care for
those that are wronged. To keep close secret counsel. To do nothing
contrary to the Law. To take in good worth, adversity after prosperity.
Regard heavenly things, for this our Country abides but a while. Continue
in patience. Do nothing in anger.

Precepts iusticiarie.
Remember, that God does look alwaie upon thee. Study to be learned. Receive
no bribes. Let thy manners agree with thy calling. Fear to do evil. Avoid
idleness. Do that is just. Be no liar. Myxe not thy power with thy will. Be
discrete without spotte of vice, constante, and incorrupt. Aul. Gell. Nor.
Atti. lib. 14. cap. 4.
Be not flattered by any means Be not entreated against the obstinate. Auance
the truth through the power of Justice.

Reioisings in Arms.
A Gentleman to be made knighte in the field at battle. For his manhood to
receive a great reward at his Princes hands. To do valiantly in Chivalry
before his Sovereign. To be an Ambassador for his wisdom. To show prowes,
and to do knightly before Alyantes, in the honor of his Prince. A poor
Gentleman to be married to one of high parentage. To have thanks for good
services done to his Sovereign. To keep his Cote armor vnshamed in trial
thereof. To keep all points of knighthoode, as Gesta Troianorum, do declare.

Law of Arms, whereof it is grounded.
It is to be known, that almighty God is the original author of honouringe
Nobility, who, even in the heavens has made a discrepance of his heavenly
Spirits, giuinge them several names, as Ensigns of honor. And these
heavenly Spirits, when they are sent of God, are called, Angeli, Angels:
which in the Greek tongue signifies, sent. Propterea, quod de coelis ad
annuntiandum hominibus mittuntur. And in the Latin tongue, they be
interpreted, Nuntij, Messengers, Ab eo quod Domini voluntatem populis nuntiant.
Angelorum autem vocabulum, officij no men est, non naturae: semper enim
Spiritus sunt: sed cum mittuntur, vocantur Angeli. Angeli. Nuntij. Isidorus.
And how many orders be of them, the holy Scriptures do witness. Id est,
Angeli, Archangeli, Throni, Dominationes, Principatus, Potestates, virtutes,
Cherubin, and Seraphin. And wherefore they be thus called, and distinct, as it
were into sundry orders, and dignities, it may be fully readde in the seventh
Book of Isidore, which he entituleth, Ethimologiarum, cap. 5. which for
brevity I omit here, for that it does not appertain to the matter, whereof
in this place I do entreat. But this is to be noted (as I find in aunciente
writers) that the Law of Arms was by the ancient Heraultes grounded upon
these orders of Angels in heaven, encrowned with the precious stones, of
colors, and virtues diverse, as in the first part of this Book has been
declared, with the colors compared unto them. For as the Angels, precious
stones, colors, and Planettes aforesaid are distinct in dignity, virtue,
power, pre-eminence, and working: So here in earth men are also distinct, in
degrees, offices, governance, and power, every one serving their head in their
vocation, and calling.

Six sundry differences in Arms for brethren.
Files with Lambeauxes. A Cressante. A Mollet of 5. points. A Martelet.
Differences.
An Anulet, A Flower de Luce.
Note, that if there be any more then six brethren, the devise, or assignment
of further difference, only appertains to ye kings at Arms, especially when
they visit their several Provinces: and not to the father of ye children, to
give them what difference he list, as some without authority do allege.

Every difference ought to be placed in the most euidente part of the Cote
armor: Videlicet, in that place, where the same may soonest be seen, or
perceived.

Seven signs, or tokens which are figured in Arms round, and are blazed
properly with several terms.
1. Is of gold, and is called a Beausante. 2. Is of silver, and is called a
Plate. 3. Is of Sable, and is termed a Pellet, or an Ogresse. 4. Is of Azure,
and is termed an Hurt. 5. Is of Gules, and is called a Torteauxe. 6. Is of
Uerte, and is called a Pomeis. 7. Is of Purpre, and is to be termed a Wound.
These most usually are found borne in Cotes Armours.

Proper terms for diverse tokens borne in Arms.
The tokens which of many are called Millers pikes, some term them Shettles,
which is the chiefest instrument of the weauer: And the French Heraultes term
them fusilles, Fusilles. Manche. Pheons.
videlicet, Spindles: for fusus, or fusum, in Latin is a Spyndle, and so I take
them to be termed most properly. Manche maltale, is taken in Arms, to be a
sleue, vnshaped, and unsown. Pheons, be commonly called, broad arrowe heads,
or darte heads.

When the head of any beast, or bird, is, as it were torn of, term the
same to be rassed, or erased: and if it be, as it were, cut of plain, call it
then, Coped.

Dimie, is but when half of any beast is seen in the field.

A Cressante in arms, Cressante.
is commonly called the half moon. But it is the moon in her pryme, or else
as we call it the new moon.

An Incressante, Incressante.
is the moon from the pryme, till after the first quarter, and yet lacks of
the full.

A Decressante, Decressante.
is the moon from the last quarter.

A Pile in arms, Pile.
is a thing that makes all foundacions upon unsure ground, to be very firm
and sure. Leighe.

And here learn a Rule. Words in Blazon to be noted.
There are four words, whereof you may not name any of them twice in the
blazon of one cote armoure, and these be they.

Nota of, These may not be reherced more then once, in descriuing of any one
cote armoure. If they be, it is of the Heraultes accounted a great fault. And
if one might forbear, to name none of them it were better, as I have read in
diverse Aucthours. Nota on, These may not be reherced more then once, in
descriuing of any one cote armoure. If they be, it is of the Heraultes
accounted a great fault. And if one might forbear, to name none of them it
were better, as I have read in diverse Aucthours. Nota and, These may not be
reherced more then once, in descriuing of any one cote armoure. If they be,
it is of the Heraultes accounted a great fault. And if one might forbear, to
name none of them it were better, as I have read in diverse Aucthours. Nota
with These may not be reherced more then once, in descriuing of any one cote
armoure. If they be, it is of the Heraultes accounted a great fault. And if
one might forbear, to name none of them it were better, as I have read in
diverse Aucthours.
Descriue, Displaye, Or blaze, Arms, Terms of Blazon.
Ensigns, of honor, worship, and ge^tree. and Tokens,
Sundry ways to blaze Arms.
By metal and colors, By planettes, and sterres, By precious stones.
The use of these three in blazon of arms, are as ancient as from the first
beginning of arms bearing.

Three superlatiues, or degrees in Arms.
Most rich, is when the field is Or, and the thing that occupies the field,
Sable.

Most fair, is when the field is Argent, and that which occupies the
field is Sable.

Most glitteringe, is when the field is Or, and that which is contained in
the same, is Verte.

Poynctes in escocheons.
Dextre poyncte, Sinistre poyncte, Base poyncte, Chief poynct, Dextre base
poyncte, Sinistre base poynct, The honor poyncte, Fesse poyncte, and the
nombrill.

These poynctes may be learned by experience, if ye diligently note the
sondrie particions used in escocheons.

Particions in Escocheons.
Party per pale, Party quarterly, Party per fesse, Party per bend dextre,
Party per bend sinistre, Party per Cheuron, Party per Saltier, Party per
Pyle in poyncte, and party per Gyron.

Experience shall teach you these particions, taking head to the examples
thereof, set forth in the second book of Armorye next following.

Honorable Ordinaries
Cross.
The first, especially is the Cross. The content thereof is the fifte part
of the field, except it be charged, then it must conteyne the third part.

Chief.
The second, is a Chief, and conteyneth the third part of the field. The
Chief may be diminyshed, and then it must be termed otherwise, Fillet.
as a Fillet, the which conteyneth the four part of the chief, and stands
no where, but only upon the Chief poyncte. The chief aforesaid may not be
emeaded or halfed.

Pale.
The third honorable Ordinary, is a Pale, and conteyneth the third part of
the field, and may not be enlarged, though it be charged. But it may be
diminished, as from a Paile, Pallet.
to a Pallet, which is ye half of the Paile, and may not be charged with any
thing quick or dead, neither may it be parted, An Endorce.
but it may be diminished, and the^ it is called an Endorce, which is the
fourth part of the Pallet, and is not used but when a Pale is between two of
them.

The fowerth of the nine honorable Ordinaries aforesaid, is a Bend, Bend.
which contains in bredthe the fifthe part of the field, and when it is
divided, it is called in sondrie wise, Bendelet.
as a Bendelet, which at the most conteyneth but the sixth part of the field.
A Gartiere, Gartier.
conteyneth half the bend aforesaid, and may not be charged, but with
flowers or leaves. Cost.
A Cost, is the fourth part of the bend, and half of the Gartier, Cotise.
and is called at sometime a Cotys, sometime a Batune, Batune.
as by practice may rather be learned, when it is to be called the one,
Rybande.
and when the other. A Ribande, conteyneth in breadth the eighte part of the
bend, and is also called a Fissure, Fissure.
and then it parts the field into two colors, and is of it self metal,
and so being it is a secret.

The fith honorable Ordinary, Fesse
is a Fesse, containing in breadth the third part of the field, and may not
be diminished. The Fesse has been taken of old, for a girdle of honor, which
stands with good reason. For in the cote armoure, it is in the myddest
between two equal parts.

The sixth, Escocheon,
is when in ye field is an Escocheon. The same must co^teyne ye fifth part of
the field, and may not be diminished.

The seventh is a Cheuron, Cheuron.
which must contain the first part of the field. Cheuernell.
A Cheuernel contains half the Cheuron, and there may be no more, but three
in one field, except partition. Copleclose.
A Copleclose must contain the fourth part of the Cheuron, and is not borne
but by payres, except there be a Cheuron between two of them.

The.8. honorable ordinary, Salterye.
is a Salterye, which must co^taine ye first part of the field, except it
be charged with any thing, the^ it shall co^taine ye third part of the Escocheon.

The ninth honorable ordinary, is a Bar, and contains the first part of
the field. Bar. Closset. Barrulet. Bars Genewes.
A Closset is the half of the Bar, and ten of them may be borne in one
field, and are very good Armorie. A Barrulet is the fourth part of the Bar
aforesaid. And Barrulettes (except they be parted with a Bar, or Fesse)
must stand always by couples, and then they must be called Bars gemewes.

Touching the honorable ordinaries general, the rebatinge of Arms for
diverse ungentle deeds vngentlemanly done, the sundry furs and doublinges,
the diverse mes^es, and other worthy partitions used in Arms, etc ye shall
have examples sufficient in M. G. Leighe his Book, entitled, The Accidence
of Armore.

Of the five Greek letters Mystical.
The first of the said Greek letters is Y. Ypsilon, which betokens man's
life, and is called Pythagoras Sameus letter. For he first fourmed the same,
Ad exemplum vitae humanae. And the said letter has three points, two
above, and one beneath, Isidorus. li. 1. cap. 3.
signifyinge sundry ages. That which is under, shows the first age, which
age is uncertain, whether it will give and apply it self to virtue, or vice.
And the two above, begin from the youth: the right part whereof is hard,
but yet tending to a blessed life. Pithagoras Sameus letter
And the lift more easy, but leadinge to destruction. Of the which letter
Perseus thus says: Et tibi quae Sameos deduxit litera ramos:
Surgentem dextro monstrauit limite callem.
The which verses I have thus metrized in English.

The branches of the letter first in Samea found, of man's life does show the
high way and ground.

Thetae.
The second letter is called Theta, TH. which signifies death. For Judges in
old time did note, or set the same letter on their names, or, as we now call
it, heads, who were condemned to die. Capitaines.
Likewise did Capitaines in their Briefes, wherein were contained the names of
their Soldiers. Heraultes.
By which note or mark, they, and the Heraultes, when they did look on their
said Briefes, could certainly know, and make true report unto their
Sovereign, how many were slain in the battle. And therefore it is called
Theta, a morte: that is so say, of death. For it has in the midst thereof
a darte (as is before figured) in token of death. And it is thus written of
the same letter: O multum ante alias infoelix litera Theta. 1.
O much before others, I say,
Thou unhappy letter, Theta.


Perseus of the same thus says: Et potis est nigrum vitio praefigere Theta. 1.
To write eftsoons power did not lack,
For his offense, Theta, all in black.


The third letter is Tau, Tau.
a figure of the Cross of Christ, and in Hebrewe it is interpreted, a sign,
or mark. Of the which it was spoken to the Angel which Ezechiel saw in
spirit. Go thy way through the City of Jerusalem, Ezech. 9.
and set a mark upon the foreheades of them that mourn, and are sorry for all
the abominations that be done therein. By which mark, or token, they were
preserved, and not touched in the midst of them which were slain and
destroyed for their Idolatre, in the wratheful displeasure of the Lord. And
this letter also, Apud veteres, was used of the Heraultes and Capitaines, and
signed on their names, who remained alive after the battle. So that the
letter TH, was used as the mark of death, or of them that were judged to die,
and T, of life, or of them that were by the Judges quitte from death. This
letter T, as well the Greeks, as the Latins, unto our time, have pictured,
and set forth, as the true mark, or sign of the Cross of Christ. C.
Paradi^us Symbol heroic
Hoc igitur verum, ac proprium sub Christi ecclesia eouscriptorum, ac
militantium, Symbolum, signumue est.

The other two of the Mystical letters, being the first and last of the
Greek Alphabet, only Christ does challenge to him self: for he is the
beginning, and the endinge, where he says, Alpha. Omega. Apoc. 1. cap.
Ego sum Alpha, and o. Principium, and finis, qui est, and qui erat, and qui
venturus est omnipotens. No letter goes before Alpha, for it is the first of
all letters. And so is the son of God: Ipse enim se principium Iudaeis
interrogantibus esse respondet. And therefore S. John in his Apocalypse most
properly puts the same letters, John. 22. cap.
the Son of God to be Alpha, Nido. li. 7. ca. 2
and Omega, the first, and the last. Primus, quia ante eum nihil est.
Nouissimus, quia nouiso simum iudicium ipse suscipiet.

Sentences concerning generositie, collected out of sundry Aucthors, and
first certain verses, made by G. Chaucer, teaching what is gentleness, or who
is worthy to be called gentle.
The first stock father of gentleness,
What man desires gentle for to be
Must follow his trace, and all his wits dres
Virtue to love, and vices for to flee:
For unto virtue belongs dignity,
And not the reuers safely daire I deem,
All wear he mytre, crown, or diadem.
This first stock was full of righteousness.
True of his word, sobre, piteous, and free,
Clean of his ghost, and loved business
Against the vice of slouthe in honesty:
And but his heir love virtue as did he,
He is not gentle though he rich seem,
All wear he mytre, crown, or diadem.
Vices may well be heir to old riches,
But there may no man, as men may well see
Bequethe his heir his virtues nobles
That is appropried unto no degree
But to the first father in majesty
That makes his heirs them that is Queme
All wear he mitre, crown, or diadem.
Non census, nec clarum nomen auorum,
Sed probitas magnos, Ovid. 1. de Ponto.
ingeniumque facit.
Scogan in his work which he writ unto the Lords and gentelmen of the
kings house.
Take heed (he says) how men of poor degree
Through virtue have been set in great honor,
And ever have lived in great prosperity
Through cherishing of virtuous labor.
Thyncketh also, how many a gouernoure
Called to estate has be set full low,
Through misusing of right and of error
And therefore I counsel you virtue to know.
Virtus omnia in se habet, Plaut. in. 7. Amphi.
omnia adsunt bona,
Quem paenes est virtus.
Nobility is from God.
Omne hominum genus in terris Boethius lib. 3. de co^so. philo.

Simile surgit ab ortu:
Vnus enim rerum pater est
Vnus cuncta ministrat.
Ille dedit Phaebo radios
Dedit and cornua Lunae.
Ille homines etiam terris
Dedit and Sidera caelo.
Hic clausit membris animos
Celsa sede petitos.
Mortales igitur cunctos
Edit nobile germen.
Quid gen' and proauos strepitis,
Si primordia vestra
Auctoremque deum spectes
Nullus degener extat
Ni vitijs peiora fouens,
Proprium deserat ortum.
Birthe of all men, one.
ALl the lynage of men that been in earth been semblable of birth: for certes
one aloue is the father of things: and there is one alone that ministers all
things: he gave to the Sun his beams, he gave to the Moon her horns, he
gave to men the earth, and the sterres unto the firmament, he enclosed the
soul of man with members of the body, which soul came from the high seat
of heaven, Than issue all mortal men of noble seed or beginning.i. from God.
Why babble ye then, or boste your self of your elders birth? For, if ye behold
God, your beginning and maker, than is there no living creature of mankind
ungentle, but if he norishe his courage or senses unto vices, and so declyne
from his propre birth. These do Boethius write, and much more touching the name
of gentleness, and what it is, to whom the renown and clerenes thereof is to
be referred, and what praising come to gentlemen by the deserts of their
ancestors etc: Which I would wish all gentlemen to read, as they are
written in his third book, De consolatione philosophiae. But now yet hear
what M. G. Chaucer, Chaucer.
our noble poet of this Realm does write touching gentleness of birthe, in
his tail of the wife of Bathe. These are his words.

But for ye speak of such gentleness
As is descended out of old richesse
That therefore shullen ye be gentlemen,
Such arrogance is not worth an hen.
Greatest gentleman, who.
Lo, who that is most virtuous always
Preuie and aperte, and most entendeth aye
To do the gentle deeds, that he can.
Take him for the greatest gentelman.
Christ would we claymed of him our gentleness
Not of our elders, Heritage.
for their great richesses
For though they give us all their heritage
For which we claymen to be of hye parage,
Yet may they not bequeth, Virtuous living may not be bequethed.
for nothing
To none of us, their virtuous living,
That made them gentlemen I called be
And baddevs follow them in such degree. Daunte the Poet.

Well can the wise Poet of Florence
That hyghte Daunte, speak in this sentence
Lo, in such manner Ryme, is Dauntes tale.
Full sele vpriseth by his branches small
Prouesse of man, Prowes.
for God of his goodness
Will that we claim of him our gentelnes:
For of our elders may we nothing claim
But temporal things, that men may hurt and maime.
Eke every wighte wot this as well as I
If gentleness were planted naturally,
Unto a certain lineage down the line
Preuie and aperte, than would they never fine
To done of gentleness the fair office,
They might done no vilanye ne vice.
Take fire and bear it into the darkest house, Fire.

Betwixt this and the Mount Caucasus
And let men shut the doors, and go then
Yet will the fire as fair lie and brenne
As twenty thousand men might it behold
His office natural aye will it hold
Upon peril of my life, till that it dye,
Gentry not annexed to possession.
Here may ye see well how that gentree
Is not annexed to possession
Sithen folk do not their operacion
Always as does the fire, lo in his kind
For God it wot, men may full often find
A Lords son done shame and vilanye.
And he that will have praise of his gentree
Elders noble.
For that he was borne of a gentle house,
And had his elders noble and virtuous,
And will himself done no gentell deeds
Ne follow his gentell auncetrie that dead is,
He is not gentle be he Duke or Earl
Fie villanes, sinful deeds makes a cherle:
Gentleness.
For gentleness is but the renomye
Of thine aunceters, for their high bounty
Which is a strong thing to thy person
Thy gentleness comes from God alone
Than comes our very gentleness of grace
It was nothing bequeth us with our place.
M. G. Chaucer, lamenteth in his second Book (which he entituleth the
testament of love) that Iaphetes children for poverty in no lynage be
reckened, Cayn. Iaphet. Noes children.
and Caines children for richesse be maked Iaphetes heirs. Alas (says he)
this is a wonderful change between these two Noes children, sithen that of
Iaphetes ofspryng comen knights, and of Cayne descended the line of seruage to
his brothers children. Seruage.
Lo how gentleness, and seruage as Cousens, both descended out of two brethern
of one body. Wherefore I say soothenes, that gentleness in kynred maken not
gentle lynage in succession, without deserte of a man's own self. Of what
kindred been the gentles in our days, Kynrede.
I trow therefore if any good be in gentleness, it is only that it seems
a manner of necessity to be put into Gentlemen, that they should not varye
from the virtue of their Auncetours. Gentle.
And therefore that he will be accounted gentle, he must dawneten his flesh
from vices that cause ungentleness, and leave also reigns of wicked lusts,
and draw to him virtue, Virtue. Auncetours. Gentleness.
that in all places gentleness Gentlemen makes. Then gentleness of thine
Auncetours, that foraine is to thee, makes thee not gentle, but ungentle, and
reproved, if thou continuest not their gentleness. And therefore a wise man
once said: Kynnes gentleness.
Better it is, thy kindred to be by thee genteled, then thou to glory of thy
kinnes gentleness, and haste no desert thereof thy self. Haec Chaucerus.

A Prince that couetethe perpetual memory, De principe.
must note five things, which he must have in his life: that is to say, to be
pure in his conversation, upright in justice, aduenterous in feats of Arms,
excellent in knowledge, and well-beloved in his Provinces.

Of five kinds of Nobility, whereof the last was added by Aristotle.
The most noble and wise Philosopher Plato, Kinds of nobility.
and they that followed him, (of whom Aristotle seems not to be the least) did
set forth unto us, four kinds of Nobility.

The first is of them, which of long continuance are spronge, and borne of
Noble, and righteous Auncetours.

The second is of them, whose Parents were Princes, or men of great power,
and authority.

The third is of them, whose Progenitors did flourish, and excel in
Chivalry, and prowess, prowess consistinge of valiante courage, and Martial
policy, worthy of glory and praise, either in their own country, or
abroad.

The fourth kind of Nobility, is said to be that, which of all others is
most excellent: as when any man does exceed, or far pass others in
honesty, gentleness, or nobleness of heart: and does travail by the
puissance of his own renoume. And he truly is to be called Noble, Noble who
whom, not other men's, but his own virtue has advanced unto glory.

To these four kinds, Aristotle adds the fifth, that is to say, of them
which did florishe in high learning, and knowledge of things wonderful:
Learning.
and such by right ought to be called Noble men, Noble men.
because they do not only ennoblish their own Houses, whereof they descended,
but also make honorable the Cities, Iuba.
and Countries wherein they were borne, as for example. Iuba the son of Iube
king of Numidia, being a child, and also a captive, Iulij Caesaris triumphum
Africannm secutus est. And although he thus had lost his Kingedome, and
liberty, and was spoiled of all his honor, and glory, yet he thought not
utterly to lose all his estimation. Study of good learning.
Wherefore he earnestly applied him self to the study of good learning,
wherein he so much profited, that in few years he attained to such
knowledge, as thereby he was accoumpted amongst the most learned Writers of
all Greece. So that what so ever fortune had abated of his Nobility, the same
did the learning of good arts more abundantly restore, to the great
augmentation of his honor. Semblably, Hannibal of Carthage, Hanniball.
in his great misery, adversity, and old age, learned the Greek tongue,
and became so eloquent, that he most wisely did both write the acts, and
deeds of certain Emperors, and also noble Books of Martial policy:
whereby he deserved right high commendation, and aduancemente to his former
Nobility, which consisted not in the ancient Lineage, or dignity of his
Auncetours, but in the great learning, wisdom, and virtue, which in him was
very Nobility: and that Nobility brought him to dignity. Virtute decet, non
sanguine niti.

Nam genus, and proauos, and quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco.
The words of that prince of Orators, Cicero, in his second Book of
Offices, which he writ unto his son Cicero, does admonish us, not only to
consider the name, or fame of our parents, or Auncetours, but that we must
diligently take heed, that we commit nothing, whereby we may be thought
unworthy to bear the Ensigns of our Progenitors. These are his words unto
his son. If any from the beginning of his youth, has the title of
honorable name, either received of his Father (which to thee my Cicero I think
to have happened) or by any chance, or fortune, on him all men cast their
eyes^ and of him there is seachinge what he doothe, and how he lives. And so,
as though he should lead his life in most open light, neither word nor
deed of his can be unknown. Thus it is proved, that Noble men must have
especial regard, that they may be thought worthy to bear that, which they
received of their Grandsiers. For their faults, or vices, are of all men,
even of the basest sort, both noted, and reported: and for their honorable
doings and deseruinges, are likewise of them commended and praised. Wherefore
it is expediente for all those of the Nobility, and such as desire to bear
the names of Gentlemen, especially above all others, to be circumspecte in
their living and manners, and to walk as in the day light.

Nobilitas sola est, atque vnicae virtus.
Finis Libri primi.
NVMER. 2. Every man of the children of Israel shall pitche under his own
Standerde, and under the Arms of their Father Houses.


The second book entitled, The Armorie of Honor.
What they were, who in old time did bear tokens, or signs of Arms.
Nobility, as Boethius in his third Book De Consolatione Philosophiae,
defines it, Est laus quaedam, proueniens ex meritis Parentum. Definitions of
Nobility.
It is also a dignity of Birth and Lineage. Aristotle says in his fourth
Book Politicorum, that is, Virtus, and diuitae antiquae. The which
definitions teach unto us the true knowledge of very Nobility, which diverse
and sundry persons have, and do yet attain unto by the name and good fame of
their parents, other by chance or fortune, some for their studies, some by
feats of arms, Nobility for Virtue.
some for their great possessions, or long continuance of their blood, and
aunciente house in one name and lynage, and also many for their virtues only,
which above al other ought ever to have pre-eminence in praise and
commendation. And therefore to yt kind or lynage of those men, were arms first
given, as to them which excelled al others in virtue, prowes, and goodness of
kind: and such were called noble persons or gentle: Noble persons.
and they did bear in their shields, and on their helmetes, or other armor,
certain signs or tokens to be known by, Vt passim videre licet apud Poetas.

Pallas, that mighty Goddess of Battle and wisdom, for because she
would seem more terrible in battle, Nobilium insignia.
did bear for her Ensign, the monstrous, and Serpentines head of Gorgon.

Bacchus, the son of Jupiter, by Semeles daughter of Cadmus, (who went a
great part of the world, destroyinge Tyrants, and Monsters, and conquered
the Country of India) did bear upon his Helmet, the horns of an Ox, Creaste.
which was his Creaste, as it is now termed of the Heraultes.

Lions skins.
Mars and Hercules, for that their strength, power, and force should be well
known, did bear on their Armor the skins of Lions, in Latin called,
Leonum exuuiae.

Jupiter also, the son of Saturnus, who for his prowes, and wisdom, after
his death, was of all the Greeks honored as a God, and called Father, and
king of Gods, did bear for his Ensign a Swanne his head with the neck. All
which Ensigns, Swanne his head.
and tokens by them delivered to their successors, Nobilitatis, and quod ab
heroibus nati essent, specimen dabant.

Porus, the king of the Indians, when he ordered his battle against ye great
Alexander, did bear in his standerd the Image of Hercules, Hercules his Image.
for an encouragement of his soldiers to fight well, and for a note of
reproufe, and infamy to them that should fly from the same: and loss of
life to them, that left it in the field. Such veneration, and Religion the
Indians conceived of Hercules, Q. Curt. li. 8
that sommetime had been their enemy. Thus by whom tokens of Arms in old time
were borne, may partly be perceived. But yet the goodly order, and trade in
bearing, and ordering of them, was not then such, as it is now. For of these
before recited, I find no mention made of metal, color, term, or any other
rule, in what form they did bear them.

Of the form of Scutcheons.
To set forth here the form of Scutcheons it needs not. For of sundry
fashions thereof, and in especially mean, may plainly be seen in the book
entitled, The Accidence of Armorie. And therefore first I will declare in
how sundry wise Escocheon, Shieldes, etc. are termed in the Latin tongue,
they be so necessary to be known of all Gentlemen.

Albosia, Shieldes, or Tergates.

Clypeus, a shield, Tergate, or buckler for a footman. Et dictus est clypeus,
ab eo quod clepet.i. celet corpus, periculisque subducat.

Scutum is also a Tergate, or shield, in especially for an horseman. Isidor.
Lib. 18 Ethimo.
Isidore says, that it is called Scutum, Eo quod a se excuti at telorum
ictum. Scutum autem equitum est: Clypeus peditum.

Ancile, a Shield without corners, such an one in the time of Numa, second
king of Rome, was seen fall out of the sky: and was kept by the Priests of
Mars, called Salij. Vide Vitas Plutarchi.

Pelta, is a Tergate, or Buckler like an half Moon, of the which, the book
of the kings makes mention, that Solomon caused to be made, Ducenta Scuta de
auro puro: and trecentas Peltas ex auro probato.

Cetra, is a light Tergate, whereof the Poet makethe mention: Leuam Cetra
tegit.

Parma, is also a Tergate which footmen did use.

Next unto this, it is expedient for gentlemen to know the Latin for
Standerdes, Banners, Auncientes, etc.

Signifer, is he that bears standerd, or Banner in ye field.

Signa infesta, Standerdes, or Banners advanced in battle, in marchinge
against enemies.

Signa, be also Standerdes in war, or Auncientes.

Vexillum, Romulus his Standerds.
is likewise a Banner.

I read, that Romulus, first king of the Romans, used Fasciculos faeni,
that is to say, a grippe, or knitche of hay bound together at the end of a
long staff, and so the same was borne in the field, in the stead of a
Standerd.

The principal tokens, or signs which were used of old time in the
Standerdes, or Ancientes of Emperors, and Kings, were three.

The first, and chief was the Eagle, which has to diverse Emperors
appeared, Eagle.
as a sign or token of victory, that should fortune to them in their
wars. The which the Emperors of Rome do yet advance in their Standerdes.
And who so ever bears the same, is called Aquile fer, id est, the Standerd
bearer of the Romans.

The second principal token, which both the Grecians, and Romans used in
their Standers, was the Dragon.

Dragon.
The third, and principal token that the Emperors of Rome used, was that
which in Latin is called Pila, a round Ball, Pila.
or Globe, as a figure to declare the Nations that were subject unto them in
the whole world.

Now shall ensue according to my intended purpose, diverse, and many Cote
armours, which I have collected, and gathered out of sundry Authors, as well
Latins, as French, and English.

Therefore, first and above al others, the Arms of our most dread sovereign
Lady, Queen Elizabeth, that now is our chief Governor under Christ, ought
of al estates to be known, and known to be reverenced, and honored, as
thereby we may woorthily confess, and acknowledge ye Sovereignty, Royalty,
Pre-eminence, and Dignity of her, and her Auncetours magnificence, in
vnitinge, and knittinge together the whole Jurisdiction, Right, and Title of
the most noble Realms of England, and France into one: and so united, are
quarterly borne in one field.



First on the right quarter is seen ye arms of France, the field whereof is
Azure, three Flowers de Luce, d'Or. And in the second England, the field
whereof is Gules, three Lions Passant, Gardant, d'Or. The third as the second,
and the fourth as the first. All within her Garter of heavenly hew, adorned
with the golden Poem: Honi soit qui maly pense, ensigned with the Imperial
Crown of her Noble Majesty.

Thus, who readinge, and marking the order of the blazon of the said most
noble Arms, and saying the same afterward in any Church, Castle, or other
place, but by and by he will know the same, and remember the reverence thereunto
due: and not that only, but will break out, and say, God save the Queen, God
save her Grace. Which words so said, and heard of others, brings all the
hearers in remembrance of their obedience, and duty to her, being our most
lawful Prince, and Governor. And these Arms are of all men, living under
her, and her Laws, and within all her Dominions, to be extolled, and set up in
the highest place of our Churches, houses, and mansions, above all other
estates and degrees, who so ever they be. And this example of our Sovereigns
Arms, I first put forth, as principally above all others to be known, for
the causes aforesaid.

Of Signs borne in Arms.
Beasts.
There be diverse, and sundry signs borne in Arms, as of beasts, the Lion,
Tiger, Panther, Parde, Leoparde, Rhynoceron, Eliphante, Gryphen, Cameleon,
Cameleoparde, Linx, Beuer, Bear, Wolf, Greyhounde, Hound, Fox, Ape, Satyr,
Histrix, Euydros, Leontophon, Musion, etc. These properly be called beasts,
and no other. For (as Isidore says) Bestiarum vocabulum proprie conuenit
Leonibus, Isidor. Li. 1^. Cap. 2. Etym.
Pardis, Tygribus, Lupis, and Vulpibus, and caeteris, quae vel ore, vel
vnguibus saeuiunt: exceptis Serpentibus. Bestiae autem dictae, a vi quae
sauiunt.

Also every other beast, the^ these especially before named, ought not to be
termed in Arms, Beasts, but by their proper names, as a Bull, a Busse, in
Latin called Tarandulus, an Horse, Mule, Ass, Ram, Goat, Heart, Hynd, Bucke,
Bore, Hare, Conye, etc. These in Latin are called Pecora, aut Pecudes, Iumenta,
and Quadrupedia. Armenta equorum, and boum sunt, quod his in arm^s vtimur. And
how they differ in, or touching their names, may easily be understand by
Isidore, who so will read him, Libro 12. Cap. 1. Etymo. titul. De Pecoribus,
and Iumentis.

There are seen also in Arms, the signs of Serpents, as the Dragon,
Coluber, Basiliske, of sum called the Cockatrice, Salamander, Amphibene,
Stellion, Prester, Ceraste, Hyder, Aspe, Adder, Snake, Iacule, the Chelyder,
etc. Quae quatuor pedibus nituntur, sicut Stelliones, etc. non Serpents, sed
Reptilia nominantur.

Of Fisshes, Fishes.
these are especially borne, the Delphine, Luce, Whale, Bocas, Pearche, Roche,
Glade, Mullet, Amyon, Melanure, Balene, Mugill, Crabbe, etc. And of Shell
fish, the Escalop is chiefly borne in Arms.

Of Fowls, Fowls.
or Birds these are principally borne: the Eagle, Gossehauke, Fawcon, Marlet,
Swanne, Crane, Storke, in Latin called Ciconia, Curlewe, Ostriche, Phoenix,
Pellicane, Peacock, Hernesewe, in Latin called Ardea. The Raven, Crow, Pie,
Back, otherwise called Uespertilion, or Reymouse. The Nightingale, Turtle,
Kaladre, Owl, Kite, Swalowe, Onacracle, Martyn, Myredromble, Lare, Phesante,
Partriche, etc. These birds, and many more are borne in Arms. Yea the Be,
Butterfly, Grasshopper, and Waspe are borne of diverse: as also ye Scarabie,
Trees.
which is a fly having horns like to an heart.

Of trees are borne in Arms, the Palm, Olive, Oak, the Laurel or Bay tree,
Seen, in Latin called Collutea, Ceder, Cypres, Beech, Walnut, Mulbery, Sicamor,
Figtre, Iuye, etc. And yet these trees are not so often borne, as their
branches, fruit, and leaves be: as by examples hereafter shall follow.

Of Flowers, Flowers.
Herbs, and their Leaves, an infinite number are borne: as ye Rose doble and
single, Alleluya, Marigold the Lily, ye Safron flower, Celido^, Amomu^, Merche,
in Latin called Apiu^, Artemesia, Agnus castus, ye herb called Diptanu^, or
Diptanus in latin, in english Diptanee, or Detanee: Milfoile ye great, Lupoine,
ye flower de Luce, Cinquefoile, Quaterfoile, Trifoile, Daisy, Iacinth, Senuy,
Uiolet, etc.

Fruits.
Of fruits especially are borne the Pomgranade, in latin called Malu^ granatu^,
the Oreng, Pear, Apple, the bery of the tree called Morus, and the leaf also
is borne in arms, etc.

Of dead things are borne an infinite number in arms, as Crowns, Coronetes,
Maces, Pillars, piles, globes, Cheurons, Bars, Bendes, Helmets, Gauntlets,
swords, daggers or pugio^s, Lances, Fauchons, Sithes, Bills, crosses, Books,
Letters, Beasantes, Plates, Torteauxes, Pellets, Saltries, Chequers, Castles,
Toures, Rocks, ships Galthropes, Scocheons, Formales, Mollets pierced and
whole, Sufflues, Harpes, Bells, Lamps, plomets, Ropes or funes, Bows, Arowes,
Darts, water Bowges, Losenges, Mascles, Buckles, Fusils, Frets, Billets,
wheles Oges, Cups, Ewers, Combs, Saltes, Phiols, Garbages, Pheons,
Balances, Maunches, Gorges, Bugles, Trompets, Lures, Bernacles, Harrowes,
Rowels, trewels, in latin called Trullae, Annulets, Ankers, Portculesses Keys,
Boltes, etc. And here is to be noted, that al things bearinge life, of what
nature so ever they be of, except Crowns Imperial, are to be preferred for
their estimation, and dignity in signs of Arms, before al those which have
no life. As of beasts, the Lion is to be commended and preferred before all
others, who so ever bears him, for that he is king of all beasts: but
whether when he is borne passant, gardant, or regardant, rampant, saliant,
seiante, couchant, or dormant, be most worthiest, or ancient in Arms, I
refer that to the Heraultes: yet not altogether, for I dare boldly affirm the
bearing of him one way to be most of honor and souerainty: as when he is
passant, gardant. And now the rest I commit to their judgment, who are mine
elders. Of Birds or Fowls, the Egle, Pellicane, Phoenix, and Swanne have
chief dignity.

Of Serpents, the Basiliske and Dragon.
Of Fisshes, the Delphine, Luce, and Glade.
Of Trees, the Palm, and Olive. Of some the Laurel is preferred.
Of Flowers, the Rose, Lilye, or Flower de Luce.
Of Dead things, Crowns, and Beasantes.
Of Fruits, the Pomgranade bears the pre-eminence.
Thus I have showed unto you of diverse and sundry signs borne in arms, and
the right opinion of ye worthiness thereof. So that now is to be showed the
blazon of al those signs in arms, with many other mo, not before remembered.
Whereunto I would wish al and singular estates, who would have the name of
gentlemen, endeavor the^ selves Manibus, pedibusque (vt aiunt) to the knowledge
of these which ensue. And because the Cross is ye most triumphant sign and
worthiest, the same shall first have place.

King Arthur, that mighty conqueror, and worthy, had so great affection and
love to this sign, King Arthure his Arms.
that he left his Arms which he bare before, wherein was figured 3. dragons,
an other of 3. Crowns, and assumpted, or took to his arms, as proper to his
desire, a Cross Silver, in a field vert: and on the first quarter thereof, was
figured an Image of our Lady, with her son in her arms. And bearinge that
sign, he did many marueiles in Arms, as in his Books of Acts, and valiant
Conquestes are remembered.

Thus in old time it may be perceived, what Princes thought of the Cross.
So has it been thought good to the wisdom of God, that Christ should
subdewe the universal world through the Horns of the Cross. Eras. in Luc.
24. c.


Many of the Jews, which crucified that innocente Lamb, and our Savior
Jesus Christ on the Cross, when he was delivered unto them, Idem in Matthew.
27. c.
wisshing his blood to light upon them, and their children, to ye destruction
of themselves, and their successors, did afterward worship the Cross, which
before cried in the multitude, Up with him, up with him, crucify him. The
Cross being before odious and a thing of reproach, Idem Johan. 19. ca.
was made by Christ, a triumphant sign, whereunto the world boweth down the
head, which Angels do worship, and Devils do fear. Hereon he vanquished the
power of the tyran Satan, and all the puissance of this world. In this sign
it behooves us therefore to get the victory, and not otherwise to triumph,
then under this standerde of our Heavenly Prince, which is Christ.

It is also to be read, that this sign of the Cross was sent from God to
that blessed man Mercury, Crucis sign^^.
as Vincentius in Speculo historiali, Beati Mercurij insignia
of the marvelous death of Julian the Apostata, Libro. 15. says, that an
Angel brought unto the said Mercury, all armoure necessary for him, with a
Shield of Azure, and thereon figured a Cross flowrie, between four Roses,
Gold. As it is written, that this Shield, with the sign of the Cross
therein, was sent from Heaven: so I read in the Chronicle of Gawyne, which
he writes Super Francorum gestis, that in the time of the French King
Charles, the seventh of that name, the Sun shininge, and the Elemente being
fair and clear, there appeared, and was seen both of the English men, and
French, a white Cross in the clear firmamente. Which heavenly sign so
seen on both Nations, they of the French, which as then moved Rebellion
against their Prince, did take as an admonishemente from Heaven, of their
duty and obedience due unto him. Such veneration by them was given unto the
sign of the Cross, fearinge the persecution, and pounishemente that would
fall upon them, for such their Rebellion, as they had then already committed.

Thus it may be seen, Religion conceived of the sign of the Cross.
that the Religion which they conceived at the sight of the sign of the
Cross, did so alter their minds, and mollify their hearts, that they did
return from their wicked practices of Rebellion, unto their obedience, with
crauinge pardon.

As this sign of the Cross was then seen of the French in the Elemente,
which was (as I collecte) in the time of the noble and puissant Prince, king
Edward the third. So the said Gaguine recites in his Chronicles, that the
Arms which the French kings now bear, were sent from Heaven to Clodoueus
then king of France, Lilia coelo demissa. The Arms of the French king.
when he was baptized, and became a Christian. id est, 3. Lilia aurea quibus
subest caeli sereni color, quem Azurum Franci dicunt. That is to say, three
Lilies Gold, in the color of the fair, and clear Frmamente, which in
French is called Azure.

And of the said miraculous Ensigns Gaguine writes these two verses, as
ensue.

Haec sunt Francorum celebranda insignia Regum,
Quae demissa Polo, sustinet alma fides.
It were too long to write, or place here all the verses, which Iodocus
Badius Ascensius does rehearse in the end of the said Gaguine his Chronicle,
De Insignibus Franciae. Wherefore, omitting the greatest part thereof, take
these few folowinge.

At nobis caelica dona,
Et pia Francorum placeant insignia Regum.
Aurea caelesti primum suffulta color
Lilia, Caesareis olim iam credita ceruis.
Auri flamma dehinc, veterum victoria Regum.
These yet remain to the French kings for their Ensigns: where before
Clodoueus time, Buffones. 3.
they did bear three Todes, as witnesses the said Gaguine in the first book
of his Chronicles. Fol. 5. page 2.

And of their Auriflambe ye same Gaguine writes thus. Traditum quoque est
pannum sericeum rubrum, Auriflamma.
instar signi militaris quadratu^, miro fulgore splendentem diuinitus esse
exceptu^. Quo in expeditionibus contra fidei christian hosts pro signo Franci
Reges vterentur, buicque vexillo nomen Auriflamma^ hactenus perma^sisse.
Denique a Dionisianis caenobitis asseruata^ esse. Sed abutentibus signo
aduersus Christicolas Regibus illud euanuisse. Thus of their Arms and
Auriflambe, how they had the same, appears. Yet here is to be noted, that
when they advanced their Auriflambe, which was their standerd, in battle
against the Christians, it vanished away (as Gaguine declares) and they had
the same no more again. For what comes, or is sent from Heaven (as they
allege the same was) must be godly, rightuously, and virtuously borne, used,
and ordered. Yet notwithstanding when that was gone, they did new make an
other (as he reports) Non dissimili forma: Not unlike unto the first, which
was hallowed by their Bishops, and kept, Inter sacra.

Thus their own Chronicler does declare, how their Auriflambe did vanishe
away, Almighty God being displeased with them, when they advanced the same
against their Christian neighbors, and were glad to counterfeite an other.
Even so likewise for their untruth, infidelity, and treachery, he has
taken from them their Arms, (which also they say were sent them from
Heaven) and has justly, as a rightuous Judge, given them to our kings of
this Realm of England, to enoblishe them withal, and as their own right,
and Enheritaunce, which most puissantly, and valiauntely they have borne, and
do bear, he therefore be praised, Qui est Rex Regum, and Dominus dominantium.

Now to return to the sign of the Cross, from the which I have so much
digressed. The Arms which of old Heraultes are called Saint George his
Arms, Crux Sancti Georgij.
are thus to be blazed, Latin, Portat vnum Scutum de Argento cum quadam Cruce
plana de Rubio. Anglice: He bears a Shield Argente, thereon a plain Cross
Gules.

The Ensign of the noble City of London has the like field and Cross,
Insignia Ciuitatis London.
saving that on the dexter part thereof is seen a Daggare, color of the
Cross.

Semblablye the Cittye of York has the same field, Insignia Ciuitatis
Eboraci.
and Cross, both in metal, and color, but the Cross is charged with five
Lions Passante, Gardante d'Or, as here appears.

This noble Baron bears Arge^t, a Cross ragueled Sable. I find it blazed in
French thus: Le Sire Sands, port d'Argent, vne croix recopee Sable. This
Cross is two trees, L. Sands.
the boughs being cut of.

Of other Crosses there be borne a great number, both charged, and not
charged: and of some of them I will make description. Wherefore next to the
plain Cross before spoken of, take these ensuinge for example.

Cross Molyne.
A Cross Molyne, is called ye Cross of a Myll: for it is made to ye
similitude of a certain instrument of iron in the nether stone of the Myll.
The which instrumente bears, and guides the over Myll stone equally, and
directely in his course, that he decline not over much on the right part, nor
on the left part, but ministringe to every part that, that is equal, and
without fraud. And this Cross might conveniently be assigned, and given to
Judges, Justices, and to such others, who have jurisdiction of the Law, as a
sign, or token for them to bear in their Arms. That is to say, as the
foresaid instrument is there placed, to direct the Myll stone equally, and
without guile, so all Judges are bounden, and tied in conscience, to give
equally to every man, that which is his right. And it is to be said, that
the possessour of these Arms bears Azure, a Cross Molyne d'Or.

It is to be known, also, that the said cross, (as many other signs in
arms) may be shadowed. That is to say. That of whatsoever color the field
is of, the vmbre or shadow of the token or sign borne in the field, is
traced of a contrary color, Cross vmbre
and the body of the thing shadowed, is of the color with the field. And
this cross so vmbrated, is thus to be blazed. A. bears Or, a cross Moloyne
Umbre.

Yet here is to be noted, that if any such cote armoure be honored with a
chief, the thing so borne in chief shall not be vmbrated, but abide perfect
in metal and color as it was before, lest such a cote should lose all
together his dignity, or worthynes. Therefore Blazors of arms must bewaire of
these ensigns which are borne vmbrated, Chief.
and not to think of them, as of colors transmuted: For as I find written
in an ancient aucthor, there have been certain nobles, and gentlemen in this
realm, the which did bear diverse shadows in their arms, as of the Lyo^,
Antelope, Greyhounde, etc. And of him that bears such a Lion, this is the
blazon. M. bears Sable, a Lion rampant, Umbre.

And it is to be considered, that such gentlemen, as did bear their arms
shadowed, had their progenitors, bearinge the same not shadowed, but whole
and perfect. And because their possessions and patrimonyes descended to other
men, then the neuewes or kynsmen of such gentlemen, living in good hope, and
trustinge to have the possessions and patrimonies so descended to other men
again, did in the mean while bear their progenitors arms vmbrated, leaving
all other differences. For when at any time such their inheritance, to them
reuerted, then might they bear that Lion, or other beast, in such form,
field and color, as their progenitors did first bear the same. And note,
it is more worship and much better for them, to bear their arms so vmbrated
or shadowed, then wholly to leave th'ensignes of their progenitors. But yet in
my judgment, they might always (with convenient differences) have borne the
same whole, and not vmbrate: and inespecially they must be so ordered at their
funerals, notwithstanding the bearinge of them otherwise in their life time.
And herein the judgment and sentence of the kings at arms, Kings at Arms.
must chefely take place, and have vigor and force: for the distribucion of
this difference before spoken of, only belongs and apperteineth unto them.

Yet there remaynethe one cross to be descriued, which I did se on a grave
stone in the North end of the Mynstre of York, the name of the bearer I have
forgotten, but the field of his cote armoure was Gules, on a Cross Sarcele
D'or, five mollettes of the first, persed. But this Cross, and others, I find
so often not well figured, that it makes me doubteful of the certain names
thereof. Wherefore, it is very needful for all payntors, cutters, grauers,
glasiers, and embrodurers diligently to see, and weightely to consider the cote
Armors, which are put to them to be painted, cut, graued, englassed, or
embordured, that they commit no offense therein, contrary to the form and
order prescribed to them by th'officers at arms, who have by most ancient
law the correction, yea and the direction thereof, when they can justly find
any fault in things apperteynyng to Armorie.

And thus I will pass over Crosses, there been so many of them, and those of
diverse other forms, degrees and charges, then before are blazed: as Crosses,
enuecked. entrayled, forked, paled, and trunked Crosses, Potonce, Mascule,
Besa^te, vairee, vndee, nebulee, cordee, botonye, Batune, formye, vrdee,
pomelle, furshe, nowye. Cross taue, checkey, wave, Frette, humette, and
fitche. There are also to be found and seen in arms Crosses doble partited,
semyed, quartered of the field wherein they stand, contrecomponed, persed,
graded, and voyded etc. These may the better be throwly perceived, if the
reader hereof will diligently note, and bear away, what is said of them by
master Leighe, in his Accedence of Armorye, where he largely entreats of
sondrie and diverse sorts of Crosses, borne in sondrie wise, as may appear,
fol. 29.30.31. etc.

Of Arms quartered.


1. Bears quarterly Gules, and Or, one Mollet d'argent, on the first
quarter. These appertain to the right honorable, the Earl of Oxeforde, by
the name of the L. Ueer. L. Veer.


2. Bears quarterly Gold, and Gules, an Escarboncle, Pomette, Fleurettie,
Sable, Brochant sur le tout. This is the sixte Cote, borne, and marshalled in
the Cote Armor of the right honorable, Sir Henrye Sidney, knight of the most
honorable Order of the Garter, and Lord Presidente of the Queens majesty's
honorable Council in Wales.

3. Bears Or, and Gules, a Bend vary argent, and Azure, Sackuile.
by the name of Sackeuile, Baron of Buckehurste.

4. Bears Or, and Gules quarterly, on a Bend Sable, Euers.
3. Escaloppes d'argent, by the name of Euers.

Arms also which are quartered as aforesaid, for their diversity, may in
some respect seem to be two Cotes, borne quarterly: where, Secundum
veritatem, they are but one. As in example.

He bears quarterly, Sable, and Argent engrayled, Billettie. Here needs no
further Blazon, to say, that the Billettes be contercha^ged, or transmuted of
the field, or as of the one quarter, or ye other, since there is descried
Bilettie over all. Touching that the quarters in the division of the
Escocheon, be engrayled, that term is so frequented, because two colors, or
any metal, or color be gradately inferred one into the other, that no
partition, but only the Purflue, may be seen between them.

He bears Argent, and Sable quarterly, Rasie. These be called quartered
Arms, rassed, for ye two colors be rassed, as though the one were rent
from the other. And as these are borne rassed, so likewise are borne in Arms
quarters, borders, etc. Enueckeckie, or dentillie. Whereof ye may find
examples in the Accidence of Armorie.

The most ancient bearing of two Colors, or Metal, and Color, quarterly
in one Cote Armor, is to bear the same plain, and neither engralee, rasie,
enueckie, or dentillie. As for example: The L. Say bears quarterlye, L. Say.
Or, and Gules.

And these suffice for Arms quartered, which are always to be taken for
single Cotes, yet of great antiquity, as to the Heraultes are best known.

Of Arms parted per Pale.
Arms parted the long way, or on length, being of two colors in one Escocheon,
equally parted from the midst of ye highest part thereof unto the lowest
point, are in Blazo^ termed Party per Pale. And of the old Heraultes, Latin,
Partita plane secundum longum. Gallice, Partee du long. And thereof shall be
showed 7. sundry partitions most used in Arms Paled: videlicet.

First, when any Gentleman bears two colors, equally parted plain way,
ye shall blaze his Arms thus. A. bears Argent, and Sable parted per Pale.

B. bears Argent and Sable, parted per Pale, engrale.

C. bears Or and Gules parted per Pale, rasee.

D. bears Argent and Azure, parted per Pale, enueckee.

E. bears Sable and Or, parted per Pale, dentee.

F. bears Argent and Uerte, parted per Pale, nebule. It is called Nebule, for
that two colors are put together by the manner of Clouds.

G. bears Or and Gules, parted per Pale, vndee. It is termed Undee, because
two colors are carried one into an other, by the manner of water troubled with ye
wind.

A Cote Armor parted per Pale Dente, or otherwise, is often found charged with
one token or twain. But of antiquity one is most received, as one of the
Hungerfordes has, Hungerforde his Cote.
who bears Gules, and Uerte, parted per Paile Dentille, a Cheuron, Or. This
Cote is of dignity much the more, because, besides ye Cheuron, the field is
occupied with no other sign.

Of Arms parted per Fesse.
Even (as next before) ye may read of ye Arms parted on the length of the
Escocheon: So may ye understand, that there be partitions also made
ouerthwarte the Escocheon, even in the midst of the same, equal, of two
colors from the right side, to the left: and is termed in Blazon, Party per
Fesse. Gallice, Party transuersee. As in example: H. bears Argent and Azure,
Party per Fesse. And so descriuinge the colors of any Escocheon, ye may say,
as before, of the Arms parted per Pale.

videlicet. Party per fesse engrale, videlicet. Party per fesse rasie,
videlicet. Party per fesse enueckye, videlicet. Party per fesse dentie
videlicet. Party per fesse nebule, videlicet. Party per fesse vndee etc.
Note also that these particio^s per fesse, are to be seen often charged with
one toke^ of arms, or with two, as the diligent searcher shall find, if he
take heed thereunto, in this book.



How these particions may be in sondrye wise charged, take these few
following for examples.

1. bears Or, and Sable, parted per fesse, vndee ij. Lyo^s Drago^s,
tra^smuted of ye field. I term these lyo^s transmuted because ye Lyo^ first
placed in ye field, is Sable, in Or, and the other is Or, in Sable. This may
be taken for ij. cote armoures, without breathe of any Rule in Armorye. And is
called of old heraultes lentallye: which wherefore it is so called, Lentally.
ye may read in M.G. Leyghe his Accidence of Armorye, where he treats of
sondrye particions mesles.

2 bears Gules, and Sables parted per Fesse enuecked, three lions nayssant
argente, crowned.

3 Yet I find an other particion, as this example teaches, videlicet. S.
bears Sables, and Gules embatyled per Fesse three Fer de molyns d'Argente.

4 The said particions also may be charged conveniently with two tokens,
and the same of two natures and kinds, as thus it may be devised.R. bears.
Sable, and Argente parted per Fesse nebule, two Faucons volante, and a
Greyhounde cursante, contrechanged of the field. Here the Fancons are argente
volante in Sable, and the Greyhounde is Sable cursante in Argente, and this is
good armorye. These examples may suffice for arms parted per Fesse, although
there be seen diverse other particions, as party par Cheuron, par Pile, par
Be^de etc. which are both ancient, Particions.
and right commendably borne of diverse in sondrie manners, forms, and ordres.
Therefore here I cease to write any further of them, until I shall speak
generally of signs borne in arms.

Of a chief in Arms.
Whosoever bears a Chief in his Arms, it is placed in the highest place of
the Escocheon, as a thing honorable to be borne, and the field beneth is twice
so much as the chief, and most commonly is seen of an other color. Therefore
certaynely they do greatly err, which call such Arms parted, although they
be of two colors: for in parted arms it is required that the colors be
equal, and so it is not in any Arms that is honored with a Chief, or a
cheifetaine. And of the same, how in sundry wise they are borne in Arms, take
these few ensuyng for examples.



1 The Lord S. John bears Argente, L. S. John.
on a chief Gules, two mollets d'Or persed verte.

2. Uerrey, Titcheborne.
a Chief, d'Or. This is borne by ye name of Tytcheburne, of Titcheburne. Note
that this chief is not charged with any thing, and therefore is of great
antiquity. And of the field of this cote I will speak hereafter, where it
shall be entreated of sondrye furs.

3. Barrie vndee, of vi. dargent, and Sable, on a chief gules, a Lion passant
garda^t d'Or. Here the chief is charged noblye which a quick beast of honor.

4. Ermyne, on a chief de^ted, Gules, three Crosses taued, Or. The trick of
this cote I took, as I found it painted on a Table, Thurlande.
in a parish church of Nottingham, and as it is there mentioned, is borne by
the name of Thurlande.

Ermyne, a chief dented, ermynes. Of these things borne in this cote, it shall be
spoken hereafter.

Ermyne, on a chief indented, Gules, three crowns Imperial, d'Or. Here I neded
not to have spoken of the metal of the crowns, for all such are of gold. The
note of this cote armor I took in the parish church of Tyckehill in
Yorkshire.

There may be also borne in chief, diverse tokens of arms, and yet the chief
not altered in color from the field, as the cotes before blazed are, as for
example.

D. bears Or, three water bowges Sable in chief. Here the field remaynethe
perfect without alteracion of color, and abides only as charged in the
chefetaine, which is very ancient Armorie.

Of Arms Palee.
AS I have said before, no Arms ought to be called parted, but if they be
made of two colors, once parted and no more. Arms paled, (whereof now is to
be showed, are not, nor ought to be called partite Arms, although they be
divided in two colors. For the colors in arms palee, are diuersely parted
of two colors to the nombre of 6. payles: and such Arms, be called Arms
pailed, for they be made after the manner of payles, yet in sondrye wise, as
plain, vndee, daunsete etc. whereof take these few for examples.



1. A. Bears palee, of 6. pieces, Or, and Sable.

2. C. Bears Palee dansetee of four Sable and Argente, or thus, his field
is of Payles dauncie Sable, and Argente. These Payles be called dansetee,
because they be crooked and sharp, and so put together one into an other. And
note, that these cotes Armoures be termed Paled, because therein are found so
many Pales of one color, as is of the other.

3 In diverse arms of gentlemen be found, one, or two Payles of one color,
and what color is found more, is the field, and of one Payle, take this for
example.

G. Bears Argente a Pale, bendee d'Or and Sable, And of him that bears two
Pales, it must be said thus.

4 Bears Gules.ij. Pales d'Argent. These pales may be borne vndated, which
is as much to say, as watered with a floode, and also engraled, dented, vaire
etc. Whos^ marketh well these two last sheildes, shall plainly perceive, that
both the dextre part, and sinistre of the escocheon, abide perfect of one
metal or color, and so shall he not find of arms Palee, for what color
thereof is found of the right part of the sheilde, the contrary is found on
the left.

Arms Barrie.
As arms Palee are borne, so may they be borne barrye, and of him that
bears such Arms, it is thus to be said. He bears barrie of vi. pieces
d'Argent and Azure.

William the co^querour, William Conqueror.
what time he entered this Realm, he did bear this Coat Armoure, but after
his conquest, he took to him other Arms, videlicet two Leopards of gold in a
field Gules. For as I read, Henry the second was the first king that did
bear three Lions.

Also, it is to be known, that arms may in diverse wise be Barred, and the
first manner is plain and streyghte, as is next before exemplefied. Yet in the
blazon of them, ye shall not say, he bears plain arms barred, But if they
be otherwise borne, ye than must needs declare the blazon of them, how they
differ from plain arms barrie, for some are borne Barrie vndee, barrye
verrye, or enuecked, barrye dauncye, or Bendye etc. Others also be barred with
a Lion rampaunte, a greyhounde, or other Beast. And some be barred otherwise,
as hereafter partly shall be showed by sondrye examples following, videlicet.



1. D. Bears barrie vndee, of 4. sable and Or.

2. E. Bears Ermyne iij. bar ways verrye d'Or and Guyles.

3. F. Bears Sable, two bars Daunsetye, d'Argente: And of a cote Armoure
barry bendee. Read in M. Gerarde Leighe his Accidence, where he entreats of
cotes commixt with two of the honorable Ordinaries.

4. Bears barree of viij. pecis, argente, and verte, an Orle of Marlettes,
Sable.

And note that these cotes barriez, are most commonly borne of 6. and 8.
pieces, but never above, as Upton witnesses: Yet when you se any arms,
having mo pieces, blaze them on this wise.

He bears on x. barrulettes, Argent, and Gules^, a Lion rampant, Sable,
armed, langued, and accolle d'Or, brise d'vne Croix de mesme en l'espaule.

The French Heraultes blaze this cote, Face de dix pieces, and whether there
be two Bars, three or mo, they term them all, Facee.

Moreover our Bar is very often placed in Arms, even from the midst of
the Dexter part, to the Sinister of the Escocheon, so that the field must
contain twice so much above the Bar, and as much beneath, as ye Bar is
of it self. And therefore it contains but the fifth part of the field. As
in example: B. bears Argente, a Bar Gules.

Here note, that a Bar may be borne with two Barrulettes, one above, and
the other beneath the Bar. And Bar, as I said before, contains but the
first part of the field: and the Barrulet is a Diminutiue thereof, and is but
the fourth part of the Bar. And these Barrulettes are often found Florie,
or Flored, for that they be made after the manner of Flower de Luces, issuinge
out of them as diverse otherwise, whereof take these next for examples.



The first bears Uert, a Bar and two Barrulettes, Or.

The second bears Argent, a Bar, with two Barrulettes Floritie, Sable.

The third bears Gules, a Bar between two Clossettes, d'Or. The Closset is
the half of the Bar. And these two halfes thus divided, have ye force of two
Bars in the field, for more, by the name of Bars, it may not contain, and
keep equal divisions.

The fourth bears Argent, three Bars Gemewes, Sable.

He bears Gules two Bars D'or, over all a Cheuron, Sable. Gallice sic:
Portoit de Gueulles a deux faces D'or, au Cheuron de Sable sur le tout. I place
this Cote here in the end thus charged, that the gentle Reader may more
plainelye understand the same to be equally divided into five parts,
according to the Rule aforesaid.

Of Bendes.
There is oftentimes found in Arms, one Bend, and the same is borne of
diverse noble Gentlemen, both charged, and otherwise. And they are called
Bendes, because they begin above an high, at the Dexter angle of the
Shield, and descend to the Sinister part of the same, and must contain of
the field, as before is showed in the Concordes of Armorie.

And of him that bears such a Bend, ye shall say thus. Uidelicet: L. Scroupe.
The L. Scroupe of Bolton bears a Bend, Or, in a field, Azure. I here
first blaze the Bend, for the honor of the metal that he is of, and yet
the field is of the color of the most fair and clear Firmament.

These Bendes may be borne with Bendelettes of diverse fourmes, some plain,
some fair, some with Cotizes both plain, or dance, etc. As in example.



First bears Argent, a Bend Wauie Sable, these appertain to the right
worshipful Sir H. Wallop of Wallop in the County of South K. Wallop.


The second bears Uert, a Bend Uiurie Dargent.

The third bears Or, a Bend sinister, engraled Gules.

The fourth bears Azure, on a Bend Argent, cotized with two Cotizes d'Or, a
Lion Sable, armed and langued Gules.

Moreover, there be found in Arms, certain other Bendes, to some strange,
from these aforesaid, as these two which ensue.



First bearethe Fusilles, which are so termed, for that they be made like
Spindles. As in example: Sidenham bears Argent, a Bend Fusillie Sable, or
five Fusilles in Bend Sable. Sidenham.


The other bears Sable, a Bend Brettesse de Or.

Fusilles in Bendes, are commonly borne of Gentlemen in Burgondie, and as they
be borne in Bend, so may they be borne in Fesse, etc.

Four Cotes of sundry devises.


1. Bears Sable, a Bend Argent, with two double Cotizes, Potences, and
Conterpotences of three pieces d'Or. 2. Bears Bendie of six pieces d'Or, and
Uert, on a Fesse Argent, three Flowers de Luce Azure. 3. Bears Sable, six
Battunes d'Argent. 4. Bears Azure, a Cross Sarcele d'Or, with a Batune,
componie d'Argent, and Gules.
Differences between Fusilles, Lozenges, and Mascles.


1. Bears Gules, Denham.
four Fusilles in Fesse Ermyne, by the name of Denham. 2. Bears Sable, three
Lozenges Argent. 3. Bears Or, and Ermynes Lozengie. 4. Bears Sable, 7.
Mascles D'argent voided. 3.5. and ^.
Cheurons.


1. Bears Ermynes, a Cheuron D'argent. 2. Beaerth Sable, a Cheuron between
three Huchettes D'argent, lie de Uert. 3. Bears Ermyne, two Cheurons Azure,
charged with six Estoiles of eight points D'or. 4. Bears Cheuronie of six
D'argent, and Sable.
He bears d'Or, a Cheuron Uersie d'Azure, in Chief, an Eagle displayed with
two heads of the second, membred, and beaked Gules. This Cheuron may be
borne frettie with an other, and the same contercoloured, as I have seen in
diverse Books of Armorie.

Of Arms enbordured, or with bordurs.
Bordures, many and diverse are to be seen in Arms, whereof, those which be
plain, are most usually borne, and of the same, and others diverse, take these
ensuing, for example.



1. Bears Fusillie, Bendie, D'or and Gules, a border Azure.

2. Bears Argent, one Lion saliant d'Azure, armed, langued, and crowned
Gules, a Border dentelle Sable. As this Border is dented, so it may be borne,
engraled, enuecked, goboned, vaire, etc.

3. Bears Gules, one Cross Patie D'or, between four Beasantes, with a
Border D'argent, semie trefolie propre.

4. Bendie of six, Azure and Argent, on a Scocheon Sable, an Hearts head
cabazed D'or, with a Plate in Chief. Here the Cutter was negligent, in
omitting a Bordure d'Ermyne, contrary to his instructions.

These Bordurs also are borne, charged with diverse and sundry signs or
tokens, as ye may perceive by these ensuinge.



1. Bears Uerte, five Fermaulxz in Cross D'or, a Border d'Argent, charged
with eight Ogresses: or after the French blazon, Ogressee de huit pieces.

2. Bears Argent, five Torteuxes in Saltier, a border de Gules, Fermaille
D'or, de S. pieces.

3. Bears Or, one Cross botonye d'Hermines, between four hurtes, with a
Bordure Sable, semie billetti d'Argent.

4. Bears d'Argent, one Saltier engrayled Sable, between four pomeis, on a
bordure Azure, viij. Escocheo^s d'Or, charged with as many Crosses, crossettie
fitche Gules.

He bears Sable, a Lion rampant d'Argent, with a bordure gobonie de l'vne
and l'autre.

Many other Bordures are to be seen, charged with infinite tokens, both quick
and dead. And these Furs, Krouine, Ermines, and Verrey, do most nobly set
forth these Bordures, to the great beautefiyng of the same. And of Arms borne
with Bordures, these few aforesaid may suffice for examples.

Of quarters and cantons.
There be borne in Arms sondrye Quarters or Cantons both charged and not
charged, which are of most ancient bearing, and therefore worthy to be
noted.



1. Bears Geronnie of vi. pieces Or and Sable, on a quarter Gules, one mollet
d'Argent. I took the trick of this cote as I found it in a glass wyndowe,
within the Parish church of Lileburne in Leycester shire, but by what name it
is borne, I there could not get knowledge.

2. Bears sable semye florye d'Argent, and a quarter d'Or.

3. Bears d'Or, two bars Sable, a quarter sinistre d'Ermyne.

4. bears Gules, two pales de vaire, on a quarter sinistre d'Or, one fermaulx
lozengie, Gules.

Kyrrell bears d'Or, ij. Cheuro^s gules, a quarter de mesme. They must be
here blazed two Cheurons, although the quarter abateth one half of the
Cheuron mountant, that is, the ouermoste Cheuron, and this is a true Rule, when
ye shall see any token abated, by the dignity of the Canton: for the token or
sign, although it should seem abated yet it abides perfect in blazon.



1. The field is of the Perle, a plain Cross Diamonde, Canton d'ermyne. For
difference one mollet Topazie, signifiyng the third brother of that house from
whence in blood he is lineally descended. This ensign apperteyneth to M.
Laurence Holenshed, Holenshed.
a gentleman endowed with diverse noble virtues and excellent qualities, very
expert also in blazon devises heroyques, and a fervent lover of all them,
which embrace the study thereof, wherefore worthy he is of such
rememberance, and commendacion more ample.

2. Bears Argente, one Cheuron Gules, and on a Canton Sable a cinquefoyle
d'Ermyne persed. This Cote I have seen borne also without a Canton, by the
name of Tyas. Tya^.


3. Bears Gules two estoyles of eyghte poynctes d'Or, a canton Ermine,
Leuerton.
by the name of Leuerton.

4. Bears d'Or, ix. Muscles vert, voyded two three, three, one, on a Canton
sinistre, Sable. one Cressante with a Mollet d'Argent persed.

Basset.
His field of the Topaze, three pyles in poyncte Rubie a Canton d'Hermine.

Sou^he.
He bears Mars, 8. Beasantes, Solis, 2.2.3. i. a Canton d'Hermyne.

Of Arms Checkey.
Moreover diverse signs and tokens in arms are found to be compounded of
sondrye metalles and colors, as also Checkey, and thereof whole fields are
nobly borne: all which, these few examples following shall plainly teach you.



1. Bears Argent, a demi Lion verte, in chief d'Or, and Sable
contrecomponed. Contrecomponed.
This chief is so termed, because it abides of one metal and one color:
and but of two Tractes only, therefore in no wise may be called Checkey,
although it appear like thereunto.

2. Bears Or, Checkey.
a Fesse Checkey d'Argent and Sable, between three escocheons d'Ermynes. This
Fesse as it is here of three Tractes, is right Checkey. And an hole field, may
be Checkey, saens nombre.

3. Bears Checkey d'Ermine and Gules, on a Fesse Sable. Incressa^t^.
3. Incressants d'Argent. The French Heraultes blaze this, troys Croissans
tournez.

Chief.
4. Bears Checkey d'Argent and vert, in Chief Gules, one Lion naissant d'Or.
Blaze this by the Planettes thus. The field is checkye, Lunae, and Veneris, a
Lion naissant Solis a chief Martis. This might be the cote of some
aduenturous knight and a lover, for here he has the Sun and Moon, that
god and goddess Mars, and Venus, for patrons in his ensign.

Warren.
His field is Checkey, Saphier, and Topaze. And note, as there is whole fields
Checkey of metal and color, so are to be seen, Bendes, Bars, Bordures,
Cheurons, Saltiers, etc. Checquey. Also the two furs Ermyne, and Ermynes with
any color, do ennoblyshe all Coats Checked.

Chesse Board
C. Bears Sable, a quadrate Checkye d'Argent and Gules. This is taken for a
Chesse board, or a Table made for the play of the Chesse.

This game was first invented by Athalus, as Master. G. Chaucer reports in
his dream, saying.

At the Chesse with me she began to play
With her false draughtes full diverse
She stale on me, and took my feirse
And when I saw my feirse away
Alas I couthe no longer play
But said, Farewell sweet Ywis
And farewell all that ever there is
Therewith fortune said, Check here
And Mate in the midde point of the Chekere
With a Paune errante, alas,
Full craftier to play she was,
Then Athalus that made the game
First of the Chesse: so was his name.
The play at the Chesse, Chesse. Go. Li. 1 ca. 26 Fol. 81.
of all games most proves man's wit. And Sir Thomas Eliot in his Book,
entitled the Governor, says, That the Chesse, of all games, wherein is no
bodily exercise, is most to be commended: for therein is right subtle engyne,
whereby the wit is made more sharp, and remembrance quickened. And it is the
more commendable, and also commodious, if the players have readde the
Moralization of the Chesse, and when they play, do think upon it. Which
books be in English: but they be very scarce, because few men do seek in
plays for virtue or wisdom. In the old time, it was the play of Noble men:
and therefore the Table thereof is not unworthy to be borne in arms. Et sic
deinsignijs Scaccatis ad presens satis dictum est.

Before in this book I have partly touched signs, or tokens borne in arms
by diverse Nobles, and other Gentletlemen, which I could not omit, by reason of
the vsinge of so many examples. Therefore now hereafter shall follow generally
the blazon of beasts, fowls, fishes, and other things quick and dead,
borne in Cote armor, and of the^ ye shall see a great number of examples: as of
sundry divisions of Cote armours, charged with any of the honorable
Ordinaries, especial or general, of Quadrates Royal, and other things
Armoriall, not unworthy to be read, and borne in memory.

There are seen and found oftentimes in ye arms of diverse excellent and noble
persons, Tractes, or Traces.
Tractes, simple, or plain, and the same otherwhile engrailed on both parts,
and enuecked, sometime double traced, and floried, and is then called a double
Treasure, or Tressure. As in example.

He bears D'or, a Lion rampant, within a double tressure cuonterflorie,
Gules. This is the Cote armoure of the Scottishe king.

I find the said arms otherwise descriued in Latin, Scottish king his Arms.
without mention made of any tracte, or Tressour Conterflorie: (as in an
Epistle which a certain knight named Darius Tibertus, wrote to a Prelate
called Julius Caesar Cantelinus, may appear in these words.) Tuos Natales
Regios non ignorantus ex vtroque Parente. Matter enim ex Banciorum prosapia,
Regia est, cum qua affinitatem contrahere Aragonius Ferdinandus non est
dedignatus. Ca^tellinorum vero familiam a Rege ipso Albionis Insulae (quam
Scotiam vocant) procedere, tum anuales edocent, tum commune etiam insigne
declarat. Ruber nempe in auro erectus Leo patenti ore, cauda ad caput reflexa,
coloris Cyanei. The Tressure here omitted in the Latin blazon, I yet find an
other diversity of a part of the Lion, from that which is borne of the
Scottishe. Difference in the tail ^f a Lion.
For the Caude, or Tail of this Prelate his Lion, is coloris Cyanei, of a
bright blewe color. This I thought good not to omit, for the rareness of
the diversity. Also because this Lion here descriued, is a beast of most
honor, and also is called king of beasts. Leo autem Greece, Latin Rex
interpretatur: eo quod sit Princeps omnium bestiarum.

Lion.
I mean somewhat to treat of him, and his excellency far passinge other
beasts. I read, that at his voice all other beasts dread, and stinte
suddenly. And in his Regalitie he makes a circle about them with his tail,
so that all the beasts stand in great fear to pass out over the line of his
circle. And thus they stand astonished, and afraid, as it were, abidinge the
Heste, and commandment of their king. Pliny says, that the Lion is in
most gentleness and Nobility, when his neck and shoulders be healed with
hear and main. This his Nobility, especially is espied when he rampeth. And
the Lions that be short, with crispe hear or main, Etymo. Lib. 12 ca. 2.
Imbelles sunt: as Isidore says. And such Lions fight not.

Now I will declare how many, and sundry ways they are borne in arms, as
Passante, Rampant, Saliant, Seiante, Couchante, Darmante, etc. And also of
sundry fourmes and fashions, Diversity of bearing Lyo^s
as Gardante, Regardante, Dors an Dors. i. Back to back, or endorsed,
Combattante, Dimidiated, Parted, Couped, Dismembered, Uulned, Bicapited,
Bicorporated, Tricorporated, Umbrated, or Shadowed. Their tails forked, nowed,
resignante, reuerberante, descendante, percussed, and contercoloured. In all
these fourmes, or likenesses they are descriued, and pictured: as also
otherwise ensigned or marked, then here is remembered. Wherefore I will
presently write more, both of his bearinge diversely, and of his sundry
natures and properties.



1. Bears Sable, Segraue.
a Lion rampante d'Argent, crowned, by the name of Segraue.

2. Bears Uert, Lion Salian^e
a Lion Saliante d'Or. The difference, between these Lions, the one Rampante,
and the other Saliante, is plainly in the said Escocheons figured, according
to M. G. Leigh his description, in the Accidence of Armorie.

The Lion when he pursues man, or beast, uses to leap, and so he does not
when he voideth, or flees. If a man shoot at him, the Lion chasteth him, and
throws him down, but neither wounds him, ne hurts him.

Isidore says, that there is one kind of Lion, which has ragged hear and
main. And such a Lion is sharp, Isidor. Lib. 12 Cap. 2.
and fierce of heart. Animos eorum frons and cauda indicat. Virtus eorum in
pectore, firmitas in capite. Thus it appears, that their courage, virtue,
and steadfastness is known by their heads, breasts, and tails.

The field is Gules, a Lion Rampante, his Queen forked, d'Ermyne. This is
borne (as I late saw it in a Manor, called Chamber house in Berk) by the name
of Stokes. Stokes his Cote.
Here the Lion his tail is forked. For by ye tail his boldness, and heart
is known, as the horse is known by the ears. For when the Lion is wroth,
first he beats the earth with his tail, and afterward as the wrath
increases, he smites, and beats his own back.

K. Bears Or, Lion Seiante
a Lion Seiante Sable, within an Orle d'Ogresses. Here he is figured sittinge.
In peril the Lion is most gentle and noble. For when he is pursued with
hounds, and with hunters, he then desires not to lurk, nor hides him self,
but sits in the fields, where he may be seen, and araieth him self to
defense.

L. Bears Sable, a Lion Couchante, Lyo^ Coucha^t.
and three Lyams in chief d'arge^t. Solinus says, that ye Lion dreadeth, when
he sees or hears a whelpe beaten: and by none other means, ways or
dealinges, he is chastized, corrected, or made to couche. Circa hominem Leonum
natura est benigna, vt nisi laesi, nequeant irasci. Isidor. Ety. Li. 12. Capite
2. de Bestijs.

M. Bears Uertte, a Lion Dormant, Lion Dorma^t
between six wheles d'Or. 3.2. and 1.

Isidore says, that the Lions eyes are as though he were awake, when he
sleapeth. Cum a^rmierint, vigilant oculi. They dread noise, and russhing of
wheles, but fire much more. Rotarum time^t strepitus, sed ignes magis. Modice
dormiunt. Haec ille.

Lion Ranpant vulned.
N. Bears Gules, a Lion Rampant, d'Or, vulned with a darte d'Argent. This Lion
is wounded, and when he is so, he takethe woonderfully heed, and knows him
that first smote him, and reysethe on the smiter, though he be in never so
great a multitude. Vulneratus, percussorem obseruat acutissime, and in
quantalibet appetit multitudine. Isidorus.

O. Bears Azure, Lion Passant
a Lion Passante, d'Argente. This Lion is in the plain field, according to
the highenesse of of his stomach: which is such, that if he happen to come into
any Wood, or Couerte, he ronneth out of the same with swifte course,
accoumptinge it vile shame, to lurk, or hide him self.

P. Bears Ermine, a Lion Passante, Lion Passant^
Gules, armed, and langued d'Azure. This Lion is now goinge to show him self
in his Regalitie, keeping as it were, a moderate pase in vieweing of his
vassalles that be under his obeisance. And in this his kind, he shows as it
were, his mercy toward them, in sufferinge them to live under his government
quietly. Ety. Isidrr. Lib. 12. cap. 2.
Isidore says, that their nature is also benign, or gentle toward mankind.
Vt nisi laesi, nequeant irasci. Their mercy is known by many, and often
examples. Prostratis enim parcunt. Captiuos obuios repatriare permittunt. They
never slay a man, but in great hunger. Drew.
The said Cote armoure is borne by the name of Drew.

Passant, Gradante.
Q. Bears Sable, a Lion Passante, Gardante, between three keys d'Or. This
Lion here noted, is as it were consideringe his estate, being fourmed in his
kindness. For he is a right kind beast, and knows, and loves him that
does him good. The Lion (whereof Appian the Grammarian does speak) is also
strange for his kindness, Plinius Li. 8. cap. 12.
and almost incredible. A servant that had run away from his Master, and
hid him self for fear in a Cave within a great Wood, took a thorn out
of a Lions foot, which then came to him for succoure, as he lay there. Now,
when he had done, the Lion to requite his good turn, brought such meat to
the Cave, as he could kill in the wood. The which meat the servant
rostinge in the Sun, being in the most hot Country of all Africa, did
eat from time to time.

At length yet being weary of such a lothesome life, he left the Cave, and
came abroad, by means whereof he was taken again. And being a slave to his
Master, (who had power of life and death over him) he was condemned to be
cast to the wild beasts at Rome, there to be devoured of a Lion.

The poor caitife stood pitiefully in the sight of thousands, ever lookinge
when he should be devoured. It happened at the same time, when this fellow was
thus adjudged to die, that the same Lion was taken, whose foot he healed in
the wood. When the Lion was put to him, he came first very terribly toward
this fellow, and immediately knowinge what he was, stood still, and at length
fawned gently upon him. The fellow, at first being amazed, began to take heart
unto him afterward, as half knowing him likewise, and thus they began both
to take acquaintance the one of the other, Tha^kefulnes of a Lion.
and plaide together a good space without all danger. Whereupon the people
being amazed, much woondered at the strangeness of this thing. And
standinge thus astonyed, they sent to know of the slave, what this matter
should mean. Vidd Aul. Gel. Noc. Atti. Lib. 5. Cap. 14.
Unto whom this poor wretch opened the whole thing altogether, even as it
happened. When the people heard this, they not only rejoiced much at the
sight thereof, but also they made earnest request to his master for his life.
His master marueilinge as much as any of them at such an unwonted
kindness: gave him, not only his life, but also his freedom.

And now, to the end he might have somewhat whereupon to live, the people
gave him a Fee for term of his life. The fellow by and by got him a Line,
and a Collar, and carried the Lion up and down the City, in such sort, as
Huntesmen carry a Greyhound, or a Spaniell, the people still woondringe, Leo
hospes hominis: homo medicus Leonis.
and saying ever as he came by: Behold a man that has cured a Lion: behold a
Lion that has saved a man.

Hereby the thankfulness of the Lion is to be noted, and the example to be
marked of all such, as would accoumpte them selves, either more natural, or
kind, then the Lion. And let us not do that, which brute beasts have not
seemed to do, but learn to be kind one to an other, and thankful.

Of the properties, or nature of the Lion, I need write no more, but I will
you to read Aristotle, Pliny, Isidore, Solinus, and Bartho. De proprietatibus
rerum. And there you shall find a large field of them.

And who so desires to know the difference between Lions Gardante, and
Regardante, etc. then let him peruse M. G. Leighe his Accidence of Armorie, and
there he shall be resolved in the most of them. Yet hereafter shall be descriued
the sundry bearinge of diverse Lions in several fields, and amongst other
tokens of Arms.

The field is Sable, two Cranes Addorsez proper. In Chief, a Cressante
d'Ermyne.

I read, that there be certain people between Indie, and Cathaye, Pigmei.
Cubite.
called Pigmei, of stature but one Cubite long, which contains one foot
and an half. And Plini says, that they be armed in iron, and fight with
Cranes, and do ride on goat buckes, and have arrows, and darts, to shoot
and cast at Cranes, that pursue them. In the spring time they gather an
Host, and comme to the Sea, and destroy both their eggs, and birds, with
all their might, and strength. They make many such voyages, which if they
left undone, Cranes would so much there increase, and be so many, that the
Pigmei could not withstand them. And sum write, that they arraye them so
with feathers, as though they had wings. And of their battle with Cranes,
and of their stature, I find it thus written: Vide Plin. li. 7. Cap. 2.
Pigmei homuntiones sunt paruuli in India, vnius tantum cubiti statura, vel
etiam breuiores, qui cum gruibus auibus assidue certant, ab eisque vincuntur
saepissime. Isidore (because of their small stature) calls them, Nani,
Dwarfes. And the Grecians call them Pigmeos: Isidor. Ety. li. 11. Cap. 3.
Eo quod sint statura cubitales..But who so ever will read a proper Emblem of
them, see Alciate Lib. 1. Emblem. 20.

Of the nature of the Crane, ye may read hereafter, in this Book, where
specially I entreat thereof.

The field of Cupid, that God of love, is Sable, a Pomegranade proper. Alciate
thus describes Love, and his Ensign, in these words: Cupid his Ensign.
Amor est iucundus labor in lasciuo otio, cuius Signum est Punicum mallum in
Clypeo nigro. The interpretation hereof, (the Author next before mentioned)
leauethe to every one, after his judgment, or to judge of the said
description of Love, or his Ensign, as they please. But if ye will have Love,
or Cupide excellently set forth, even in his colors, as he is feigned of
the Poets, then read the said Alciate his Emblemes, Lib. 1. Commemtar.XCVII.
in statuam Amoris, and M. G. Chaucer, especially his book entitled, The
Romante of the Rose.

The field is Gules, a Mermaid, or Siren proper, Syrenes, or Mermaidens
playing on a Harp, d'Or. The Mermaide is a sea beast, woonderfully shapen.
Isidore says, Li. 11. ca. 3. where he treats De Portentis,, that there be
three Syrenes, somedeale Maidens, and somedeale fowls, with wings and clees.
One of them sings with voice, an other with shamble, and the third with Harp.
They please shipmen so greatly with their song, that they draw them to peril,
and to shipwreck. The cause why they have wings and clees, Quia Amor and
volat, and vulnerat. Secundum verttatem autem meretrices fueru^t, quae
transeuntes, quonia^ ad aegestate^ deducehant, his fictae sunt infer
naufragia. In fluctibus commorasse dicuntur, quia fluctus Venerem creauerunt,

Phisiologus speaks of Syrena, and says, it is a beast of the sea, in shape
wonderful, as a maid from the Navel upward, and a fish from ye nauel
downewarde. This beast is glad, and merry in tempest, and heavy and sad in
fair weather. She causes shipmen to sleep with the sweetness of her song:
and when she perceives them to be on sleep, she enters the ship, and so
uses one of them, whom she best likes, as here is not to be spoken, or
believed.

Sphinx.
S. bears Sable, a Sphinx, d'argent, crined, and pe^ned d'or. Diodo. Sicul.
says, that this was a monster which did propound a certain Problem to them
yt passed by her to ye city of Thebes: and by her they were out of hand
destroyed, onles they could expound ye same Problem, which at last, Oedipus
filius Regis Thebanoru^ (passing by ye mountain, where the said monster was)
did expound. And therefore (as the said Diodore reports) Semet ex monte
praecipetauit: She cast her self headlonge down the hill, where she did
always abide to stop ye passage to those that went to the said City. The
which Problem I have taken forth, as it metrized by John Lydgate, in his
work which he wrote of ye destruction of Thebes that City: In haec verba.

Problem.
There is a beast marvelous to see,
The which in sooth, at his nativity
Is of his might, so tender, and so green,
That he may him self not sustain
Upon his feet, though he had it sworn.
But if that he be of his Mother borne,
And afterward, by process of age,
On four feet he makes his passage.
And then upon three, if I shall not feign,
And alderlaste, he goes upright on twain:
Diverse of port, and wonderful of cheeres,
Till by length of many sundry years
Naturally, he goes again on three,
And sithen on four, it may none other be.
And finally, this is the trothe plain,
He recouereth kindly again
To the matter, which that he came fro.
Lo here my Problem is all idoo.
Muse thereupon without war or strife,
It to declare, or else leese thy life.
Thilke beast (quod Oedipus) thou spoke of heretofore, Oedipus expounds the
Problem, or Riddle.

Is every man into this world ibore,
Which may not go his limbs be so soft,
But as his Mother bears him alofte
In her arms, when he does cry, or weep.
And after that he ginneth for to creep
On four feet in his tender youth
By experience, as it is often couthe
Aforne reckened, his hands both two.
And by process, thou may consider also,
With his two feet, for all thy fell tene,
He has a staff, him self to sustene.
And then he goes shortly upon three,
And alderlaste, as it must needs be.
Voiding his staff, he walks upon twain,
Till it so be, through age he attain
That lust of youth wasted be and spente.
Then in his hand he takes a potente,
And on three feet thus he goes again,
I dare affirm, thou may it not with saine.
And soon after, through his vnweeledy might,
by influence of natures right,
And by experience, as every man may know,
Like a child, on four he creeps low.
And for that he may here no while soiourne,
To earth again, he must in haste return,
Which he came fro, he may it not remeue.
For in this world, no man may eschew
This very sothe, shortly and no doubt,
When the wheel of kind comes about,
And naturally has his course ironne,
By circuit, as does the sheere sun.
That man, and child, of high, and low estate,
It gayneth not, to make more debate.
His time is isette, that he must fine,
When Atropos, of malice does untwine
His lives threede, by Clotho first compouned.
Lo here thy problem, fully is expouned.
The description of Sphinx by Io. Lydgat
This Monster had also by description,
Body, and feet of a fierce Lion.
And like a maid, in soth was head and face,
Fell of his look, and cruel to menace.
The description of this Monster is more aptly declared in Latin by Alciate,
Embl. 46.

Although this be a Monster horrible, yet Augustus Caesar, at the first entry
into his Empire, used the same for his singular, or most secret Ensign: as ye
may read in ye book entitled, Heroica M. Claudij Paradini. Fol. 21.

The field is Uerte, Apes called Circopetici.
two Apes Circopetikes combattante, with tails reflexed, Gold. Isidore
says, that there ben five kinds of Apes. Of the which the Sphing before
mentioned is one. And these here next described, are others, and are called
Circopetici, which are a kind of Apes having tails.

The third kind of Simies, or Apes, Ape Cenophe
are called Cenocephali, which are in all proportions of the body, like to
the common sort of Apes: but in the face most like unto an hounde. Vnde and
nuucupati.

The Apes, Ape Satyr.
called Satyri, are pleasante in face, and of a merye countenance, and often
mouinge, and playinge. And these be the fourth kind of Apes.

The fifte kind of Apes are called Callitrices. These in the face have a long
bearde, Ape Callitrice.
and a broad tail. Apes are wise, or skillful of the Elements. They are
merye, and rejoice at the new of the Moon, but at the full, and waning, they
are triste, and sad. Their young ones, whom they love best, Foetus suos
impatienter diligit Simius.
they carry before them, and are so impatiently in love with them, that with
much embracinge, they do often styfle, and kill the same, as Pliny says.



The field is Sable, two Hero^sewes d'Arge^t. And to this Crest upon ye helm
on a wreath d'or, Satyr.
and Azure, a Satyr proper, manteled Gules, dobled d'argent. These Satyrs (as
Isidore says) ben somewhat like men, having crooked noses, and horns in ye
foreheade, and feet like unto goats feet. Such an one saw S. Anthony in the
wilderness. Qui interrogatus a Dei seruo, respondisse, fertur, dicens: Mortalis
ego sum vnus ex accolis Heremi, quos vario deluso errore, ge^tilitas Faunos,
Satyrosque colit. This Satyr is also called Faunus, alias Pan, Deus
Rusticorum, et Pastorum a Poetis fingitur.

He deliteth to be in woods, Leonic. lib. ^. ca. 24. de var. Histor.
and on high hills. He was worshipped as a God of the husbandmen, and herd
kepers in Arcadie, which country is full of hills, and aboundante of flocks
of sheep. Leonicus says, that Fauni, be the same, which are called Satyri,
and Syluani, and are monstres in Ethiope, of the shape of man, yet having
horns, berdes, and feet like to goats, being also very swift and lecherous.
Of this, and many others, that have the shape of men and of beasts, ye may
read in Plynie, Solinus, Paschasius, Isidore, etc. yet of some of them more
hereafter shall be spoken in their places.

R. Bears Azure, Minotaure.
a Minotaure, d'Argente, on a bendlet sinistre sable, these lettres S.P.Q.R.
d'Or. This is also an horrible monstre, having part of the shape of man, and
part of a Bull: whereof he is called Minotau^us: which monstre, how he was
conceived and begotten, and of the Labyrynthe, or of th'obscure and
inextricable buyldinge, which Minos king of Crete, caused Dedalus, that
cunnyng workman to make, wherein the said Monstre was hid, ye may at full
read and understand of them, in Ouide. lib. 2. de Art amandi* Idem lib. 8.
Metamor. Virgil. lib. 6. Aeneid. This picture of the Minotaure, the Romans of
old time, did bear in their auncientes of war: as may appear by ye four
lettres tra^suersed on the bend most manifest: Senatus Populus Que Romanus,
declaringe hereby, that the same Minotaure, was the noble token or ensign of
the Senate and people of Rome: as is affirmed by Cicero, and many other learned
writers. And what is signified by the bearing thereof, look Alciate, lib. 1.
Embl. 8.

Centaure.
The Centaure is an other mo^stre, and takes his name (as Isidore says) for
that he is of a mixte kind, the one half of man, the other half like an
horse. These were supposed to be horssemen of the country of Thessalia,
which pricked up and down of horses, and therefore some of them seemed that
Horse and man were one body: Inde Centauros fictos asseruerunt.

B. Bears Argente, an Hien saliant Sable, and one Escaloppe sinistre d'Azure.

Hyen.
This is a cruel beast, in quantity like unto the wolf: and he is called
Hyena of Hyando, for yt he reyseth to his pray with open mouth and voice, and
in his neck is hear, as in the neck of an horse, and upon all the length of
his ridge also. He comes to houses by night, and feyne^h speech of
mankind, and calls some man by his name, and when he has him without the
doors, he deuoureth him: Likewise, does he hounds, as gladly as men, by such
his feyned speech. It is wondrefull what Plinye, Aristotle, Solinus, etc.
writ of this Beast.

C. Bears Azure, a Bar engraled d'Or, between two Tygres passante d'Argent.

Tigre.
The Tygre is abeaste wondrefull in strength, and most swifte in flighte, as it
were an arrowe. For the Persians call an arrowe Tigris. He is distingued with
diverse speckes: and of him the floode Tigris took the name: quod is
rapidissimus si^ omnium fluuiorum. This flode is in Armenye, and the Tygre is
bredde there also. It is said, that Bacchus used these beasts in his chariot,
for their marvelous swiftenes in conueyng of the same.

D. Bears Or, Panther.
a Panther, regardant, propre in Fesse, between three Dolfes verte.

The Panther, is friend to all Beasts, save the Dragon, for him he hates
full sore. This beast has on his skin little round spots, some black,
and some white: and all four foted beasts have likynge to behold his
colors: And therefore, where he is, thither will they resort, because of ye
sweet savor that comes from him, which the Dragon only can not abide. And
though the Panthere be a right cruel beast, yet he is not unkind, to them
that help or succourre him: as Plinye puts an example of one, that
delivered and helped up a Panther his whelps, that were fallen into a ditche,
and the Panther lad him out of the wilderness with glad sembla^ce, and fawned on
him, and as it seemed in a manner thancked him right heartily.

The Parde, Parde.
next to the Panther, (as Isidore says) is the most swifte Beast, and
preceps ad sanguinem. Saltu enim ad mortem ruit. He has diverse round
speckes in his skin, as the Panther. And varieth not from him in color, but
only that the Panther, (as Pliny witnesses) is more full of white speckes.

The Leoparde also is a Beast most cruel, Leoparde.
and is gendred in spouse breach of a Parde, and a Lioness, and tertiam
originem efficit, vt dicit Isidorus. Plinye, in his natural history, says:
that the Lion gendreth with the Parde, or the Parde with the Lioness, and ex
vtroque coitu degeneres partus creari: and of such gendring comes unkind
pardes, as of an horse, and of a she Ass, or of mare, and a male Ass, is
gendred a Mule The Leoparde has diverse colors, as the Parde has: and
pursues his pray stertelynge and leaping, and not runnyng. But if he take
not his pray in the third leap, or in the fowerth: then he stinteth for
indignacion, and goes backewarde, as though he were overcome, and is like to a
Lion in body, tail, and fete: but in the shape of the head he is like to
the Parde. He is much less in body then the Lion, and therefore he
dreadeth the Lion.

G. Bears Sable, an Unicorne trippynge d'Argent, Unicorn.
in chyefe a maidens head, crowned verte.

This Beast of the Greeks is called Monoceron: id est Vnicornis: for that he
has in the myddle of his foreheade an Horn of four foot long: and that
horn is so sharp, and so strong, that he throws down or thirleth all that
he reyseth on. He fights often with th'Elephante, and wounds him in the
womb, and so throws him down to the ground. Also his strength is such,
that he is not taken with any power or might of hunters, sed sicut asserunt
qui naturas animalium scripserunt, A Maid is set there as he shall come, who
opens her lap, and the Unicorn leaving all his fiercenes, lays thereon
his head, and then falls on sleep, and so is taken or slain with darts of
hunters, asthoughe nature had given him no armoure, to defend him withal.

H. Bears Sable and Gules, parted with a Cheuron between three heddes
Rhinocerontez coped d'Argent.

This Beast of the Greeks is called Rhynoceron, Rhynoceron.
for that he has an horn in his nosethrille: and differs but in that one
part from the Unicorn. Horns.
Horns be geeuen to beasts by nature, to defend them with, in stead of
armoure and weapon, and been therefore set in the ouermost part of the head,
that they may always be ready, to withstand their enemies, and to defend
the wrongs offered unto them: But to these two beasts next before descriued,
nature has otherwise placed their horns, might, and power, as in the midst
of their foreheade, and nosethrylles.

I. Bears Azure, Elephante.
an Elephante d'Argente, portant a turret d'Or. This Beast passes all other
four foted Beasts in quantity of body. Porus king of the Indians, lying in
ca^pe, on the further side of the River of Hidaspis, had 85. Elephantes of huge
body and strength, to let the passage of the great Alexander, with his army,
as in the history of Q. Curtius is declared. Q. Curt. li. ^.
These Beasts therefore, when they be tamed are best in chivalry, for they
without all fear overthrow men of arms, be they never so strongely ranged
in battle, yet they flee a mouse, and dread the least grunte of a swyne.
Also when the Elephantes of the said king Porus, were by the souldious of the
great Alexander, Copidae.
with a certain kind of weapons called Copidae, sore wounded, and put in
great fear, then wear they more hurtefull to their own gouernoures, castyng
them down to the earth, and tearing them in pieces, then terrible or fearful
to their enemies, runnyng out of the battle like sheep. But their unwonted
cry, brings a great terroure to their enemies, and especially to horse,
that naturally do fear them. Plinye says, that among beasts, the Elephante
is most of virtue: so that uneath among men is so great redynes found, they
learn so well, and are so easy to be taught. In so much, that they be
taught to know the king, and to worship him, yea, to do unto him
reverence, Elephante his wit and puis saunce.
with bowing of their knees. The Elephante which king Porus (before named) did
ride upon, was taught to bend toward the Earth, as it were submitting
himself: which when other of the Elephantes saw, they likewise bowed down
their bodies. This Elephante also, seeing the body of his ruler and king upon
the ground, ready to be spoiled, and his harness and vesture about to be
pulled of, He than began to defend his master, runnyng upon his spoylers, and
went about, to lift him again upon his back. For (as the said Q. Curtius
reports in his hystorye, which he writ of the acts of the great
Alexander). The Elephantes of king Porus in the conflict betwixt him and the
same great Alexander, were seen with their long Tronckes, Tronckes.
(which they call Probostides) to take men in their armoure from the ground,
Probostides.
and to deliver them up to their governors: and whom they could not hold,
those they trampled to death with their fete. These beasts are slow, and not
apt sodeinly to move, Aiunt Plutoni sacrum hoc animal esse.

Upon these beasts the Persians and Medes used to fight in towers of tree,
and out thereof threw and cast darts, as it were out of towers or castles.
And as it is read of yt Elephante, he is more easy to be tamed, and more
obedient to man, than any other wild beast.

Elephante.
The Elephant his nose is long and great, and hard as an horn: and he uses
his nose, in stead of an hand, taking thereby meat and drink, and puts
it in his mouth: and est angui similis, vallo munitus eburneo.

The Elephante when he sits bends his feet, and may not bend all four
at once, for heaviness and weighte of his body: but bends the hinder legs
right as a man. He lies never down to sleep, hy reason of the hugenes of his
body: wherefore when he is weary, he leans to a tree, and so rests him
some what. He lives three hundredth year as Isidore says. Also it is
written of them, that if they see a man coming against them in the wilderness,
if he be out of his way, for that they would not affraye him, they will
draw themselfes some what out of the way, and so passing softely by little
and little before him, they (as it were) teach him the way. And if the Dragon
(between whom and him, is perpetual wrath and strife) come against the man,
then they defend him, and fight with the Dragon. This they do especially
when they have young foles, for they dread the man seeks their foles: And
therefore they first deliver them of the man, that they may the more surely
keep and feed their young ones. Apud solam Africam and Indiam Elephanti prius
nascebantur: nunc sola eos India gignit.



He bears verte, Griffon.
a Griffo^ sergrea^t silver; winged d'Or.

ij. Bears Argente a fesse, between three Gryphons heads rassed sable. This
coat appertains to Hals of Kenedon^ in Devonshire.

The Griffon is a beast with wings, and is four foted, and also like unto
the Lion in all parts of the body, and to the Egle only in the head and
wings. He is strong enemy to the horse, and is of such might as he is able
to take up an horse and a man armed upon him. His Clees or talentes are so
great and large, that of them be made Cups, to set upon bordes or tables of
kings and princes. Hoc genus ferarum in Hiperboreis montibus nascitur: In
these mounteynes, is plentye of Gold and precious stones, as Smaragdus,
Iaspis, and Crystal, which the Gryffons keep, and suffer them not to be taken
from thence, as diverse writers affirm the same. And of an other manner bearyng
this beast, take here an other example.

The field is d'Or, a Gryffon sergreant Sable, on a mountain verte. Here he
is displayde in his propriety and dominion.

O. bears Argente, a Cameleon, propre, Cameleon.
between five Pheons Sable.ij.ij. and one.

This is a little beast, and has not one color of his body, but changes
full soon and often into diverse colors, except read and white, his face
is, as it were a beast compouned of a swyne and of an Ape, being like to ye
Ewte in the body. His sides be even long to the nether part of his womb,
as it were a fish: and his ridge bones bou^che upward, his tail is full
long, and small at the end, his feet been short, and has clees, like to ye
clees of a Bird, and all his body is roughe and sharp, as the body of a
Bardan. His most might and strength is against the kind of Gossehawkes: for
he draws unto them, and they flee unto him, and so he takes them wilfully
to other beasts to be devoured. But what beast soever it be, he is accounted
among clean beasts.

He lives by the air: Semper hyans, and aperto ore, quo solo viuit, and
nutritur, attrahens, and respirans. Oculos habet semper corpori concolores, eos
nunquam claudit, nec pupillam mouet.

P. bears Or, Cameleopard
a Cameleoparde, Sable, Macule dargent. This beast is so named, for that he is
poudered with white spots, as the Parde, having an head like to the Camel,
the neck of an horse, and feet like a Bugle: Hunc Aethiopia gignit. This
beast (as Pliny says) is more worth in sight, then in fierceness, and is
so mylde, and soft, as a sheep. He was judged clean to meat by Moses Law,
but not to sacrifice, Deutero. 14.
for he is cloue footed like a Bugle, and cheweth his cudde, as a Camel, and
therefore it was lawful to eat thereof.

Q. bears d'Argent, Linx.
a Linx proper, regardant. This beast is like the Wolf, and has the face of a
Lion, the body spotted like a Panther, and is of the greatenesse of a Do. His
Urine (as it is said) turnethe into a Precious stone, that is called Ligurius.
And this beast does perceive the same, and naturally has envy, that it
should turn to the use of man kind: and therefore he hides it with sand or
earth, when he has pissed, which causes it to be sooner hard, and to turn
into a stone. Linces (dicit Plinius) extra foetum vnum non admittere secundum.

R. bears Uerte, a Fiber, Argent. This beast, Animal est amphibion, because
he can live both on the land, and in the water, Fiber.
and makes houses or dens, arraied with wonderful craft, in the brinckes
of Rivers, and waters, as Pliny says. He is also named Castor, a castrando.
For he geldeth him self, when he perceives that he is pursued of the hunter,
and bitinge of his stones, which are marueilously good in medicines, lays
them in the sight of the hunter, knowinge by nature, that he is hunted for the
same, and so he escapes death. The which Cicero in Scauriana affirms:
saying, that he ransometh him with that part of his body, for the which he
is most pursued. Iuuenall also says, that he geldeth him self, for the
desire he has to escape. This beast in shape is wonderful, for his tail
only is fish, and all the other deal of his body has the form of a little
hounde. His hinder feet be as it were feet of an hounde, wherewith especially
he goes on the land: and his two forefeete been as it were the feet of a
Goose, and therewith he chiefly swimmeth in the water. In runninge he is very
slow, Ob ventrem tumidum, and ad terram pendentem. His skin is full
precious, and properly white.

He bears d'Argente, five Fusilles in Fesse Gules, in Chief three Bears
heads, Sable. The Bear (as Isidore says) is a beast right strong in the
arms, Bear.
and loins. Vnde interdum erecti insistunt. The Bear fights with Hearts,
wild Bores, and with hounds, throwing them down to the ground, and biting
them very soar. He is enemy to ye Bull, and therefore goes vprighte against
him, and often holds his horns with marvelous strength in his forefete, and
so overcomes him. He is an vnpatiente beast in his fight, and will be
avenged on all those, that hurt him. Vrsus fertur dictus, quod ore suo formet
foetus, quasi Orsus. Nam aiunt, eos informs generare partus, and carnem
quandam nasci, quam matter lambendo in membra componit. Vnde est illud: Sic
format lingua foetum quum protulit vrsa. Sed hoc immaturitas partus facit.

The field is Azure, a wolf Saliante, d'Argent, langued Gules. Aristotle
says, that the Wolf openethe his mouth most wide, Wolf.
and that he has most strength in his mouth. And Phisiologus says, that
the virtue, and strength of ye Wolf is in the breast, the claws, and ye
mouth, and least in the hinder parts. By kind he desires to eat fish. Some
say, they are called Lupos, quasi Leopos, because they have much strength in
their feet, as ye Lion, that what so ever he treads on, it lives not. And
if it happens in any wise, that in treadinge upon stones, he makes any noise
with his feet, then he forthewith chastises that foot with hard bytinge.
His eyes shine by night, as Lanternes. Rapax autem bestia est, cruoris
appetens. De quo rustici aiunt, Vocem hominem perdere, si eum prior Lupus
viderit. Vnde and subito tacenti dicitur: Lupus est in fabula. Certe si se
praeuisum senserit, deponit feritatis audaciam. Famem diu portant, and post
longa ieiunia multum deuorant.

Phisiologus writethe, that the Wolf cannot bend his neck backewarde in no
month of the year, but in May only, when it thundreth. Solinus says, that
in his tail he bears a lock of hear, which exciteth love: and does it
away with his teethe, when he dreadeth to be taken.

Wolf Ethiope.
Isidore says, that in Aethiopia been Wolfes with heary maynes in their neck,
and on their body so spotted with variable colors, that they lack no manner
of color.

Wolf Indie.
Aristotle says, that in Indie is a Wolf right cruel, that has the face,
or countenance of a man, feet like unto the Lion, and tail as a Scorpion.
His voice much sounds as it were a man's voice. He is as swifte as an Heart,
and also full hardy, and fierce.

He bears Gules, a Cheuron engrailed, between three hounds Seiante,
Houndegate.
d'Argente. An Hounde, as some judge, is thought to take his name of loud
barkinge, or openinge: Eo quod insonet: Vnde and canere. Nihil autem sagacius
canibus. Isidore says, that he has more wit, then any other beast. For
they know their own names, love their masters, defend their masters
houses, put them selves wilfully in peril of death for their masters:
taking also prays for them, yea, forsake not their masters, even when they
be dead: as by the dog, or hounde of the Roman Fuluius appeared, which is
wonderful. This Fuluius traueiling by the way, was slain with slaves, that
lay in wait for him. His hounde (for so I think best to term him) seeinge
his master dead, lay by him two days. Whereupon, when the man was missinge,
and search made for him, they found him dead, with his hounde lyinge by him.
Some marueilinge to see the hounde lie there by his dead master, stroke him,
and would have driven him from the dead corpse, and could not. Other some
seeing such kindness in the hounde, and pityinge him, that he should lie
there without meat, two, or three days before, cast him a piece of fleashe:
which the hounde taking up, did carry the same, puttinge it to his masters
mouth, and would eat no whitte thereof him self, though he had forborne
meat so long before. And at last, when this dead body should be cast into
the River (according to the manner of the Romans) the hounde leapte in after,
and holdinge up his master so long as he could, did chose rather to die with
him, then to live without him. For certainly hounds love the company of men
most entierely, and may not be without men (as Isidore says.)

The Hounde is a beast full ingenious, and has mind of diffuse, and long
ways: so that if they loose their masters, they go by furre space of Lands,
and Countries to their masters houses again. If an hound by evil bringynge
up, be made to be cruel, yet such his cruelnesse abateth to a meek man. For
Pliny says, that among beasts, that dwell with us, hounds, and horses be
most gracious, and louinge. The said Cote appertains to M. Hundegate in
Yorkshire.

Greyhounde.
1. The field is Saturn, three Greyhoundes cursante, of the Moon, with
colors Rubie, studded, and tereted Solis.

This is the aunciente Cote armor of the Mallyuerey of Wodersom in Yorkshire.
Mallyuery.


2. The field is parted per Pale Nebule, Carboncle, and Diamonde, two
Greyhoundes Saliante Regardante of the Perle. The Greyhounde is right cruel,
and fierce in pursuinge, and taking of wild beasts, and is full mild, and
gentle to men, and to tame beasts. His Nobility, and gentleness is known by
the length of his face, and snowte, as also by the breadthe of his cheaste, and
smalnesse of the womb, and slanke. He is best to be liked, when he has
long ears and plyante, long legs and small, for they be needful to cause
him to be the more swifte in course and runninge. His tail is more long and
crooked, then the tails of other hounds: and has less flesh, and shorter
hear, and more thin and smothe. For if he be too roughe, or hearye, he
should then be too hot in his game. And if he be flesshie, he then will run
the worse.

The field is parted per fesse embattyled, Topaze, and Emeraude, two Lyciskes
Passant conterchaunged of the field. Lyciskes are called (as Pliny says)
dogs, Lycisk^
gendered of wolfes, and of such gendering comes cruel dogs, thus called.
Also Dogs gender with Tigers, of which engendringe is brought forth dogs
so egre, and strong, Vt complexu Leones prosternant.

Such dogs were presented to the great Alexander by the king of the Sophites
in India, who, to show their force and property, put four of them unto a
great Lion, which strait ways caughte him fast. And when the keeper of the
dogs would have taken one of them by the leg to pluck him from the Lion,
he would not loose his hold, no not when his leg was cut of with a
sword: but sticked nevertheless unto his game, and so was cut asunder in
piece meal, till such time as he died: having yet his teethe still fastened
in the Lions flesh. Such a feruentnes nature had wrought in those beasts.

The field is of the Sapphire, Musion, or Catte.
on a chief Pearl, a Musion, or Catte, Gardant, Ermines. This beast is
called a Musion, for that he is enemy to Myse, and Rattes. And he is called a
Catte of the Greeks, because he is slye, and witty: and for that he sees so
sharply, that he overcomes darkness of the night, by the shyninge light of
his eyne. In shape of body he is like unto a Leoparde, and has a great mouth.
He does delighte that he enjoys his liberty: and in his youth he is
swifte, plyante, and merye. He makes a rufull noise, Catte.
and a gastefull, when one profereth to fight with an other. He is a cruel
beast, when he is wild, and falls on his own feet from most high
places: and uneath is hurt therewith. When he has a fair skin, (he is, as
it were, proud thereof) and then he goes fast about to be seen. This
beast in Latin is called Felis. Priscis Alanis, Method.
and Burgundionibus, necnon Su^uis (test Methodio) mos fuit signis militaribus
praeferre Felem animal carceris impatientissimum. Quo Symbolo, arbitrij ac
libertatis appetentiam suam insimulabant.

Pygarge.
The field is Veneris, a Pygage of the Sun. This is an horned beast, like a
Goat bucke, but yet greater, and less then the Heart. He is a wild beast,
clouefooted, and of great swiftenesse. He is a clean beast to meat, and
abides in Woods, and Deserts.

The field is of ye Diamond a Bonaze Perle, Bonaze.
Unguled topaze. Bonasius is a Beast in form like a Bull, but broader, and
shorter: and has a main like an horse down to the shoulders, but the hear
is softer, and comes down to his eyes. The hear of his body is like a
bright sorrel, his main is darker colored. The flesh of him is pleasant in
eating, and therefore he is much hunted.

The field is Mercury, an Equicerue, Equicerue.
of the Moon. Equiceruus, is a beast in the Orient having horns, and alo^g
maine to the shoulders, and a berde under his chynne: and fete round like an
horse, and is as great as an heart.

The field is of the Topaze, a Tara^dre tripping, Tarandre.
Rubye, vnguled Diamonde. Tarandrus, is a beast in body like a great Ox,
having an head like to an heart, and horns full of branches. Of some he is
taken to be a rain dear.

A Buffe in Latyne is called Tarandulus^, Buffe.
which is a beast like an Ox also, but he has a bearde like a Goat.

C. Bears Gules, Bull.
a Bull passante, d'Or. Bulls of Inde been yealowe, very swifte and cruel,
and can turn about their necks, which way they will, in wondrefull manner.
They be rugged of hear, and also so hard in the back as flynte: so that the
shot of darts can not hurt them, and therefore are not overcome: But when
any one of them is tied under a fig tree, he leeseth all his fiersenes, and
becomes sodeinly sobre and mylde.

The Bull savage is always fierce when he is taken, and therefore destroys
himself, and dies for indignation.

D. Bearethe Argente, a Bugle, Sable. The Bugle is called in Latyne Bubalus,
Bugle.
for that he is so like to an Ox, and is a beast of great strength, fierce,
and can not well be tamed: but with an Iron ring put thorough his nosethrille,
by the which ryng he is ladde about, and therewith compelled to take gladly the
yoke upon him. His color is black or read, and having horns, yet he is but
thin heared: and his flesh is good, not only to meat, but also to medecin.

E. Bears Azure, a Gazel, propre. This Beast in figure is like a Roo,
having short horns, Gazell.
also long teeth and whyt, about nine inches of length, standing out of his
mouth like a Bore. Of this beast comes Musk. Cammell.


F. Bears verte, a Cammell passante, d'Or. The Camel is full swifte, as
Plinye says: and is therefore good in battle, also in war, and to bear
charge and carriage. Aristotle says, the Camel moves first the right foot as
ye Lion does, cum pes sinister non transit dextrum, sed subsequitur. He is
Cloue footed, and has only a bonche on his back, and some have twain.
Camelus proprium inter caeteras quadrupedes habet in dorso, quod tuber
appellant: sed ita, vt Bactrianae ab Arabijs differa^t. Alteris enim hiua,
alteris singula tubera habentur. He lives more than 50. years, and equis
odio naturali aduersatur. His flesh is wo^dreful sweet, and so is the milk.
Cameli feminae. Nonnulli superioris Asia incolae camelos, vel ad tria millia
possident.

G. Bears Sable, Dromede.
a Dromede passante d'or, gesante a branche of the Date tree propre. This is
after a manner of the kind of Camelles, but less in stature, yet much swifter
in course and rennynge: and has therefore that name Dromeda, for swifte
rennyng, for he goes an hundredth miles and more of one day. They be so swifte
by reason of their long pace and large, for they have most large pace, and is
not ouercharged with much flesh or fatnes, yet he is right able of members,
having legs long and small, and full of synewes: and is therefore light to
move, and strong to continue course and runnynge, and eats not much: but is
suffised with little meat, loving well the Date tree, and the stones of the
fruit thereof: and is content with the^, after right long iourneyes.

He bears Gules, an horse passante, Horse.
between two Lances d'Or. The liuelynes of the Horse is much and great. They
be joyful in the fields, and smell battayles, and with the noise of
Trompettes are comforted thereunto, and such noise also exciteth the^ to run
and to fight. They be sorry when they are overcome, and glad when they have
the victory. Some also perceive and know their enemies in battle, so
farfurthe that they areyse, and set on them, with bityng, and smyting. Some
know their own Lords, and forgets myldenes, if they be hurt and
overcome. And other some suffers no man to ride on his back, but only his
own Lord: as may be read of Bucephalus the Horse of the great king
Alexandre, Bucephalus.
who would not suffer any other man to come on his back, but the king
himself, and when he did but prof^re to get up upon him, the Horse then
would knele down upon his knees to receive him: so that he seemed to have
sense t'vnderstande whom he carried. It is also written that Horses shede
tears, and as it were weep, when their masters be slain or dead. Solius
equi est propter hominem lachrimari and doloris affectum sentire. Solent etiam
ex equorum maestitia vel alacritate euentum futurum diminicaturi colligere.
Plinye says, that the Scithian horse fights for his Lord and master, and
knows the horse that will fight with him by his neyng.

Their chief office is to travel, and to bear men in chivalry. His mortal
enemy is the Bear, and contrary wise, the Greyhounde is his friend.

The field is parted per paile, Rubye and Emeraude, an Ass savage passante of
the Perle, Ass savage.
vnguled Diamonde. This beast of the Greeks is called Onager, which by
interpretacion is a wild Ass, and is a free beast, large of body, and not
tamed. He haunteth in mountains and woddes, and by the lyghtenes of his
body, in rennyng, he ouercometh both the Lion and the wolf. He may well
away with thriste, and suffers it long. It is written in the Psalms.
Potabunt onagri inisiti sua. Psall. 104.
This Beast is wise and witty, and fervently loves his female, he hates
greatly the company of men, and loves well deserte places.

The field is parted per Fesse, Jupiter and Saturn, a goat saliant of the
moon. Goat.
The Goat is a beast, lasciuum and petulcum, and feruens semper ad coitum,
cuius oculi ad libidinem in transuersum aspiciunt. Vnde and nomen traxit. Nam
hirci, sunt oculorum angul^ secundum Suetonium: cuius natura adeo calidissima
est vt Adamantem lapidem, quem nec ig^is nec ferri domare valet materia, solus
huius cruor dissoluat. The goat has under the chinne a berde called Armitum.
Armitum.
The use of goats and sheep is nedeful to mankind: for they feed ye ho^grye
with milk and with flesh, and clothe the naked with fell and with woll, and
amend the land with their urine and donge. Also nothing is in the goats
body, but it is good and profitable, either to the use of meat, and clothing,
either else to the needful use of medicine.

H. Bears verte, Have.
on a chief de^ted Argente, an Hare propre. The Hare excels in lightness of
members and limbs, and therefore is very swifte in course and running, to keep
him from hounds and other beasts that pursue him. Kind gives unto him much
hear under his fete, that thereby his flesh is not hurt in renning. His
hinder legs be longer than the farther, which is needful, to rere the body
when he flees, and that causes him to be harder to take when he runs
against the hill, than when he runs downewarde to the valey. The Hare
(says Aristotle) is witty and fearful, as hearts and conyes are. retro
vrinam mittunt, auersa coeunt, vt Leones, Lynces, Leporum etiam faemina
saepenumero marem prior superuenit. Leporum genus quodda^ videtur habere bina
iecora.

The field is Sable, an hearts head cabazed d'Or, attyred verte, between two
flasques d'Argente billetie of the first, and to the creaste on a torce d'or
and Gules an Heart regardante d'Argente, Heart.
iczante a branche of Dictamie propre, and vulned with a darte verte.

Hearts been enemies to serpents, and when they f^le them selfs grieved with
sickness* they go to the serpents de^nes, and draw them out with the breathe
of their nosthrilles: and overcome the malice of their venyme, so as they
recover their sickness with feadyng of them. Mirantur autem sibilum
fistularum: erectis auribus acute audiunt: submissis nihil. Plinye sayethe,
that the heart is a most pleasing beast, and renneth wilfully, so that when
he is ouerset with hounds, he than flees to man, as for help. Aristotle
sayethe, that he casts his horns every year, in the month of Aprile, quae
cum amiserit occultat. Cornu cerui sinistrum non inuenitur.
It is written that his lift horn was never found: occulit enim id tanquam
quodam medicamento preditum. Serpents void and flee th'odoure or smell of the
brenynge of an hearts horn. And although the heart is armed with horns, the
Hynde thereof, inops mutilaque est. They dread most the voice of a Fox, and
of an hounde.

Gabriel Symeon Symbolis heroycis.
The Heart taught first the virtue of the herb Dictamum for when they are
wounded with arowes or darts, they seek and find out the said herb, and eat
thereof: whereby their wounds are healed, and cast the arowes with the arowe
heads out of their bodies. This herb grows plenteously in Candie, or in
the Isle of Crete. The Heart is a wise dear, for when he is fat, quod valde
temporis fructuum sit, he departs into strange places far of, as knowing
that by reason of his corpulencie and fatnes, he may the rather be taken and
killed. He flees into ryuers and waters, Propter aestum atque anhelitum. Caro
eorum libidinis tempore vitiatur and faetet, perinde quasi hircoru^, Hyeme
itaque extenuantur, debilitanturque. Vere autem vigent maxim ad cursum. He
lives above an hundredth years, as is to be read of the hearts that lived in
Alexandre the great his time, that were taken an hundredth years after his
death, the which in his life time, he had ensigned with cheines of gold
about their necks. And of the life of the Heart, Aristotle thus says. Vita
esse perquam* longa hoc animal fertur, sed nihil certi ex hijs quae
narraentur^, videmus: nec gestatio, aut incrementum hinnuli ita euenit, quasi
vita esset prelonga.

I. Bears Or, on a bend, cotized with two cotizes, Sable, Firrets.
three Firrrets d'Argente. The Firret is a little beast, as it were a wesil,
full subtle and ravenous. Aristotle says that he hates horse and mules, and
greueth them much. But he fights against serpents, and for that purpose
armeth him with Rue, as does the wesill, when he prepares himself to fight
with the Basiliske.

The field is verte, three Rooes or Capres savage, in paile between two
flasques d'Argente. Rooes.
The Capre, or Roo is like unto an hynde calffe, but changes not the teth, as
the other does: and has right fair and pleasant eyne, and also sharp: and
is called in Latyne Capra syluestris, because she is most conuersante in woddes
and deserte places. Aristotle says, that these Capres, or Roes (as we
Englishmen call them) help them selfs wisely when they be wounded, and seek
the herb, Dictamum tale est, viresque ciusmodi possidet.
Pulegium ceruinum, and eat thereof to draw th'arowes out of their bodies,
if they be stricken therewith. They are most swifte of mouyng and runnynge,
and so much more is their flesh sweter, and tender. They defend them selfs
in woddes and lau^des, from hunters and there hounds, not with their feet,
horns and teeth, but only by swiftnes of flight.

K. His field is d'Ermine, on two Flaunches Gules, two Goats savage d'Argent.

Goats are called in Latyne Capri, Goat sauag^
and Caprae, a carpendis virgultis. And many men say, they are so called, a
crepitu crurum: vnde eas creas vocitatas: quae sunt caprae agrestes. And some
say, they have that name, for that they clymbe on hard cragges, and so high,
that uneath they may be seen with man's eyes. The wild Goat is very swifte
in runnyng, most light in leapyng, most sharp in sight, most sweet in taste,
most tender and wholesome to meat, and most busye to gather his own meat.
For the Goat knows the diversity of herbs, of trees, of twigges, of
branches, and of sprays, which they eat of, and feed themselfes, by sight,
taste, and smell. Haec itaque animalia vt diximus in petris altissimis
commorantur: vt si quando ferarum vel hominum aduersitatem persenserint, de
altissimis saxorum cacuminibus sese praecipitantes, in suis se cornibus
illaesas suscipiunt.



The field is of the Topaze, a Basiliske displayed, Emeraude, cristed,
Sapphire. And for the Creaste upon the helm an Hiricion passante, of the
Diamonde, charged with Grapes propre, set on a torce, Pearl, and Emeraude,
manteled Rubie, doubled Pearl. The sign displaide in the said Cote armor,
is of sum called a Cocatrice, but of the Greeks he is called Basiliscus.
Cockatrice.
And the Latins call him Regulus, for that he is king of Serpents, and
Sovereign over them all: Adeo vt cum videntes, fugiant. For with his breathe,
and smell he kills them. Yea, man him self, Si aspiciat, interimit. And at
his sight, no bird that flees, escapes unhurt. But although they be a
far of, yet are they devoured with his burninge breathe. Notwithstanding, he
is overcome of the Weasil, Weasill.
Quae quoties dimicatura cum eo est, Rutam comedit: odor etenim eius herbae
infestus serpentibus est. The Basiliske, when he sees the weasil so armed,
flees: whom she follows, and kills. Nihil enim parens ille rerum sine
remedio constituit. This Serpente is but half a foot of length, and
enterlined with white spots. Sibilus.
Isidore says, that Sibilus idem est, qui and Regulus. Sibilo enim occidit,
antequam mordeat, vel exurat.

And as the Basiliske above descried, with his Diadem, called in Latin,
Cristia, is almost the least among other Serpents, so is the little
Hiricion with his sharp pykes, almost the least of all other beasts. And of
us English men he is termed an Irchin, Irchin, or Vrcheon.
or Vrcheon. Latin, Hericius. A beast so called for the roughness, and
sharpness of his pricks, which nature has given him in stead of hear.
And such his pykes heals, or covers his skin, as the hear does the
other beasts: and been his weapon, and armoure, wherewith he pricketh, and
greeuethe them, that take, or touch him. Nam statim vt aliquid presenserit,
primum se subrigit: atque in globum conuersus, in sua se arma recollit. He is a
beast of wit, and good purueiance: for he clymeth upon a Uine, or an Apple
tree, and biteth of their branches, and twigges: and when they be fallen
down, he waloweth on them, and so they stick on his pricks: and he bears
them into a hollow tree, or sum other hole, and keeps them for meat for
him self, and his young ones.

Herinaceus, says Bartholomeus in his Book De proprietatibus rerum,
Herinaceus.
is the same, that Hericius, but he is accoumpted more then he, and is like the
Urcheon in all properties, saving that when he is sufficiently laden with
apples on his back, he will bear one alwaie in his mouth. And if, after he is
so charged, there happen any to fall from his pricks, then for indignation he
throws from his back all the other deal, and eftsoons returns to the
tree to charge him again of new. The Urcheon is witty, and wise in the
knowledge of coming of winds, North, and Southe: for he changes his Den,
or hole (as Aristotle says) when he is ware that such winds comme.

There was one sometime in Constantinople, that had an Urcheon, who knew, and
warned others thereby, that wyndes should come, and on what part: and thereby
got great estimation among his neighbors, and was accoumpted as one that
could tell of things to come.

White Vrcheon.
There is also an other Urcheon, that has a white shel, and white pricks, as
Bartlemewe says: Sane suo exemplo, and sedulitate animal nos admonet, haud
quaquam satis esse, si agros ampliores possideamus, nisi diligentia, and
parsimonia vtamur.

Dragon.
L. bears Gold, a Dragon Uerte. Isidore says, that the Dragon is the
greatest of all Serpents, or of all lyuinge things upon the earth. Est autem
cristatus, ore paruo, and arctis fistulis, per quas trahit spiritum, et linguam
exerat. His greatest strength is not in his teethe, but in his tail: Et
verbere potius, quam rictu nocet.

He has not so much venime, as other Serpents. Between him, and the
Elephante is perpetual enimitie, for the Dragon desirous of his blood, for the
temperate coldness thereof, to assuage his extreme heat, spaunethe, or
wrappeth so his tail about the Elephantes legs, that he cannot escape the
death. But the Dragon byteth it full soar: for while he is thus enwrapped with
the Dragons tail, he falls upon him with his huge body, and so they are
both slain. Draco dissidet cum Aquila.
Gignitur autem in Hispania, and in India, in ipso incendio iugis estus.
Dissidet Aquila cum Dracone: vescitur enim Aquila anguibus.

M. bears Argent, a Salamander proper. Salamandra
The Salamander has that name, for that he is strong and mighty against
burninge: for he burns not in fire, but abateth, and swageth the burning
thereof. And among all venomous beasts, he is the mightieste of poison, and
venyme. Caetera enim singulos feriunt, haec plurimos pariter interemit. For if
he crepe upon a tree, he infecteth all the apples, or other fruit, that
grows thereon, with his poison: and kills them which eat thereof. Which
apples also, if they happen to fall into any pit of water, the strength of
the poison kills them that drink thereof. Ita contra^ incendia repugnans,
ignes sola animalium extinguit. For he lives in the midst of the flames of
fire, without grief, or wastinge, and not only because he is not burned
therein, but that he quenches the fire. And Pliny says, that of all
beasts, only the Salamander lives in fire, and quenches it. Likewise
Aristotle says, Paradinus Symbolis heroicis.
that there be many beasts, Quae igne non absumantur, Salamandra claro
documento est: quae, vt aiunt, ignem inambulans per eum, extinguit.

This Salamander did the French king Fraunces cause to be graven on the one
part of his coin, addinge this inscription in the Italian tongue: Nudrisco il
bono, and spengo ilreo. Id est, Alor meliore, ac deterius perimo. And the token
of the Salamander, he caused also to be pictured in many his Palaices, and
places, very pretiously, with this Distiche in the Latin tongue: Vrsus atrox,
Aquilaeque leaves, and tortilis Anguis,
Anagoge.
Cesserunt flammae iam Salamandra tuae.


Thus the nature of the Salamander is described, which manifestly appears,
Plinius.
Tanto frigore praeditam, vt ignem, velut glacies extinguat.

Iacule.
N. bears Azure, a Iacule d'Argent. This Serpente flees as a Darte, and
leapeth into trees, and what beast so ever he meets with, he throws him
self thereupon, and sleaeth it: Iaculus Serpens volans: vnde and Iaculi dicti
sunt. De quo Lucanus: Iaculique volucres.

Stellion.
The field is Argente, a Stellion proper. Stellio is a beast like a Lysarde,
having on his back, spots like stars. And though he be a fair beast,
yet is he right venomous, as Pliny says: Hic autem Scorpionibus adeo
contrarius traditur, vt viso eo, pauorem his afferat, and torporem. Inter
stellionem, and araneum bellum est. Deuorantur enim aranei a Stellione.

Ceraste.
O. bears Sable, a Ceraste nowey d'Argent. This is an horned Serpente, as
Isidore says, and has horns in either side of his head, crooked and
wrinkeled, as the horns of a Ram. This Serpente sleaethe all beasts, that
pass unawarely by the paths, where he lies with privy bytinge. And therefore
we read, Fiat Dan sicut Coluber in via, Cerastes in semita.

Aspe.
The field is Gules, an Aspe obturant her ears d'Or. Aspis vocata, quod morsu
venena immittat, and aspergat. The Aspe, when she is charmed by the
Enchaunter, to come out of her den by Charms, or Coniurations: she not
willinge to come forth, lays her own ear close to the ground, the other
she stops, and covers fast with her tail: and so she hears not the
voice of the Charmer, neither comes out to him, nor is obediente to his
saying. And we read in the Psalms: Furor illis secundum similitudinem
Serpentis: Psalm. 58.
sicut Aspidis surdae, and obturantis aures suas. Quae non exaudiet vocem
Incantantium: and venefici Incantantis sapienter.

P. bears Gold, a Boath, Sable, between two bars Gemewes Azure. Boas.
Boas is a Snake in Italy, great of body, and follows Greges armentorum, and
bubalos: and guilefully sets him self to the vdders of them, and so
suckinge, sleaeth them. Whereof also he takes his name.

Q. bears Argente, Scitale.
on a Pale Uerte, a Scitale, proper.

This Serpente is so called, because he shinethe with such diversity of
speckles upon his back, that all that look thereon, have wonder, and likinge
to see him. Et quia reptando pigrior est, quos assequi non valet, miraculo sui
stupentes capit.

The field is Sable, Amphybene
an Amphibene, head to head reflexed, d'Argent.

This is a prodigious Serpente, and is called Amphybena, for that he has two
heads, Vt initio, sic and cauda caput: currens ex vtroque capite tractu
corporis circulato. This alone of all Serpents puts him self to the cold,
and goes before all other. He has a double head, as though one mouth were
too little to cast his venyme. Cuius oculi lucent veluti lucernae.

Sum Serpents have many heads, some doubled, as this next before
described, sum trebled, etc. as Isidore says.

R. bears Geronnie, of six pieces, Or, and Azure, a Dipsez Uerte, Dipse.
charged on the first quarter. Dipsas genus Aspidus, quae Latin Situla
dicitur: quia quem momor derit, siti perit. This is the least of all
Serpents, and is so little, that uneath he is seen when men tread on him: and
his venyme sleaeth ere it be felt: and he that dyethe by that venyme, fealeth
no soar. And so Lucane writes.

Signiferum iuuenem Tureni sanguinis album
Torta caput retro Dipsas calcata remordet, Lucanus.

Vix dolor aut sensus dentis fuit.
The field is Gold, an Hyder proper. This Serpent has many heads, Hydre.
and such an one was seen in a Marreis called Lerna, in the Province of
Archadia. Haec Latin excedra dicitur: because that if one head be cut of,
three other grow out of the place thereof. Sed hoc fabulosum est. For it is
perfectly to be readde, that Hydra was a place castinge forth waters, which
wasted, and destroyed a City nighe thereunto. And in this Hydra, if one head
of the stream were stopped, by and by many other streams did break forth.
Which when Hercules perceived, he burned the place, and so stopped the courses
of the water. And therefore it is said, that Hercules did kill Hydra the
Serpente with five heads. Nam Hydra ab aqua dicta est.

Hydros.
Hydros aquatilus Serpens a quo icti obturgescunt, cuius quidem morbum Boam
dicunt: eo quod fimo bouis remedietur.

The field is of the Saphyre, a Serpente torqued, Topace.

Serpente.
This Serpente I have descried, as wringled into a wreathe. Which he uses so
to do in the winter season, by reason of his natural coldness. And in the
summer, or heat, he loses him self, and then his bitte, or stinge is
deadely. Nam quando sunt frigidi, nullum tangunt. And their venyme, or poison
hurts more in the day time, then in the night. Torpent enim noctis Algore
and merito: quia frigidi sunt nocturno rore. The Serpent is a beast of great
quantity. For as Magestenes writes, there be so huge Serpents in Indie, that
they swalow, and devour al whole, both Hearts, and Bulls. In Italy, in the
time of Claudius Caesar, was a Serpent slain, and in his womb was found a
whole child. Alexander the Great, in his Epistle, which he wrote to Aristotle
his master, Serpents cristati.
De Situ Indiae, reports, that he saw there cristed Serpents, sum having
two heads, sum three. Columnarum grossitudine aliquando proceriores,
oribus, squamisque suis humum atterentes. Quorum pectora cum trisulcis linguis
fauces exertabant, scintillantibus veneno oculis, quorum halitus quoque erat
pestifer. Isidore says, that there be many kinds of Serpents, as,
Admodicae, Elephantiae, Chamedrachontes, etc.

The Serpente, for that he deceived our first mother Eve, was cursed of God,
above all cattle, and above every beast of the field. Gene. 3.
And therefore upon his belly shall he go, and duste shall he eat all the
days of his life. In naturalibus bonis, Ibidem.
quae nobis, et irrationabilibus videmus esse communia, viuacitate quadam
sensus Serpens excellit. Vnde and legitur. Serpens autem erat sapientior
omnibus pecoribus terrae. The Serpents head being stricken of, yet if it
escape with the length of two fingers, it nevertheless lives. Vnde and
totum corpus obijcit pro capite ferientibus. No beast moves the tongue so
quickly, as the Serpent does, so that thereby he seemethe to have two, or
three tongues, when it is but one.

Serpents autem diu viuere dicuntur: adeo vt deposita vetere tunica,
senectutem deponere, atque in iuuentutem redire perhibeantur. It is said, that
a Serpente dare not touch a naked man. Plurimis vero eorum aduersatur saliua
hominis.

There is a little Serpente, Serpens Sacer.
which of sum is called a Sacer, which great Serpents, and mighty, flee,
and avoid. He is but one cubite long, Species hirsuta. Quicquid momorderit,
continuo circiter putrescit.

5. S. bears Sable, two Delphines d'Argent, Delphine.
addorsez hariant, between six Crosses Botony Fitche. 3.2. and 1.

The Delphine has ye name, because he follows man's voice, or for yt he will
harken, and delight to hearethe tune of the Simphoni: and therefore he is called
a Symphone, because he has great liking in harmony. No fish in ye sea is more
swift then the Delphin. For oftentimes they are seen to leap over ships: whose
leaping so, and playing in the sea, betokens that some tempest is at hand. Hi
proprie Simonides nominantur. Isidorus, li. 12 ca. 6. Etymo.
Est and Delphinum genus in Nilo dorso serrato, qui Crocodylos tenera ventrium
seca^tes interimunt.

The Delphine is most meke, loving, and gentle, not only toward his own kind,
but also toward men, and children. When as Arion that excellent Musition and
plaier of ye Lute should have been drowned for his money, Arion.
which he had gotten by his art, of the shipmen which should have carried him
into his country: The Delphins, which a little before he was cast into ye sea,
had heard him so swetely play upon his Lute, received him, and one of them
taking him upon his back, Herodot. li. 1. Histor.
brought him safe unto the shore. Leonicus de var. Histor. Li. 1. ca. 53.
does report, that he saw a Delphine quickly to come at the accustomed call
of a child, and to take him on his back, and oftentimes so to carry him
through the sea, Collati in se beneficij memor.

Alciat. lib. 1. Emble. 11.
This noble fish knows by ye smell, if a man drowned in the sea, did eat of
his kind. And if the dead man has eaten thereof, he then eats him anon.
But if he did not eat, he mightily defends, and keeps his body from
devouring of other fish: and shewinge it, he brings the corpse to some
cliffe or dry land with all his power. Arist. de animal. cap. 48.
Their love also toward their own kind manifestly appears, in that one
of them being taken at Caria, a great multitude of other Delphynes came
together unto the haven, and tarried there unto the fisherman which did take
the Delphyne let him loose again, whom they all received joyfully, and so
returned with him into the Sea. Paruos item Delphinos magnus aliquis semper
comitatur custodiae causa.

The field is verte, Whale.
a whale nayante Argente, pellette Sable. This fish is called a whale for his
hugenes or greatness of body: which is, as it were a mountain or hill. Such
was the whale that swalowed Jonas the Prophet, his womb or belly was so
great, that it might be called hell: For the Prophet says. Clamaui de
tribulatione mea ad Dominum: and exaudiuit me de ventre inferi.

U. Bears Gold, Balene.
a Balene hariante, Azure. The Balene is a fish great and huge, much like to
the whale, and is so called, because of his outcasting and shedinge of water,
for they throw water hyer than other great fishes of the Sea. Such a like
fish or rather a monstre called Balaena, appeared as well in the sight of the
Tyrians as the Macedons, at the siege of Tire, which liynge upon his back
above the water, came toward the mole or pere which Alexander the great had
caused to be made against the city of Tire: Q. Curtius. lib. 4.
and beatyng the water, he lifted up himself at the head of the Mole, and
immediately diued under the water again, some time appearyng above, and
sometime underneath, and when he came nere the walls of the city vanished out
of sight.

The field is of the Dragons head, Belue.
a Belue, Lune. This is a great fish in the Sea, and is called Belua. He
casts out water at his iowes, with vapoure of good smell, and other fish
when they feel the same, pursue him whotely, and delityng after the smell, they
enter and come in at his iowes: whom he deuoureth, and so fedeth himself with
the^.

Hippotame.
The field is of the Drago^s tail, an Hippotame, Sol.

The water Horse of the Sea, is called an Hyppotame, for that he is like an
Horse in back, main, and neaynge: rostro resupinato a primis dentibus: cauda
tortuosa: vngulis binis. He abides in the waters on the day, and eats corn
by night: and hunc Nilus gignit.

Crocodile.
W. His field is Mercury a Crocodyle d'Ermyne.

The Crocodile is so called, because he is of the color of Safron. He lives
partly on water, partly on land, and is in fashion like a Dragon, but he
has small eyes, very long teeth like to a saw, and lacks a tongue, and
moves only th'ouermost iawe, and not the nether, and has great nails and
strong on his fete: there has been seen of the^ twenty foot long, and the
skin of his back is vnpenetrable. He deuoureth not only men, but also
beasts. Hunc pisces quidam serratam habentes cristam tenera ventrium
desecantes interimunt.

Euydros.
Enydros, a little beast so named, for that he frequenteth the waters, is
enemy to the Crocodile, whom if he find slepyng, he first tombleth and
waloweth him self in dirte and myer, and so enters through his mouth into his
belie, and fretynge or persinge all his inward parts, he comes forth on
live out of his bowels leauinge him dead. Crocodilum augeri quandiu viuat.
He lives long, and grows bigger and bigger, as long as he lives.

The field is verte, on a scocheon gold, a Phagio^ nayante, gules.

Phagion, or Pagre.
This fish the Grecians call fagrum, because he has so hard teth, that he
eats oysters in the Sea. And therefore he is also called Dentrix, for the
multitude and greatenes of his teeth, and as it were a fish strongely toothed.

He bears Argente, Mullet.
three Mullettes nayante, propre.

A Mullet is a fish of mean quantity, having two barbes or wartes on the
nether lyppe, the color toward grene, with some yealowe lines.

The field is of the Sun, Vermante.
a Uermante, Iouis.

A Uermante is a fish of color blue, and is in length lx. cubits, which has
such strength, that when Elephantes do come into the water and do drink,
he will take one of them by the nose, and pluck him into him.

Y. Bears verte, Muscule.
a Muscule nayante, between two bars gemewes d'Argente.

This is a little fish, which guydeth the whale, that he do not run on the
rocks.

The field is of the Iacinthe, a pyle in point d'Ermyne, between two Zyphes
hariante, Ziphe.
Lunae.

This is a fish which is named a sword fish, and has in his nose a bone,
like to the scaberde of a Sword* There is an other fish, named in Latyne
Gladius, and he is so called, eo quod rostro maiori nato sit, and ob hoc naues
perfossas mergit.

The field is party per bend sinistre, gules and Sable, a Chymere, silver.

This Chymere is a Beast or monstre having three heads, Chimere.
one lik a Lion, an other like a Goat, the third like a Dragon, fingunt and
Chymeram triformem bestiam: ore Leo, postremis partibus Draeco, media Caprea.
Quam quidam Philosophi non animal, sed Cilitiae monte^ esse aiu^t, quibusdam
locis Leones and Capreas nutrientem, quibusdam ardentem, quibusdam plenam
serpentibus. Hunc Bellerepho^tes habitabilem fecit, Isidorus. li. 11. cap. 3.
Etym.
vnde Chymeram dicitur occidisse.

This Bellerophontes, or Bellerophon the son of Glaucus, king of Ephyra, a
man of much beauty and prouesse, was ardently beloved of Stenobea, the wife
of Pretus king of Ephyra, S. Tho. Elirt.
next after Glaucus, when she desired him to commit auoutrie with her, he
fearinge the vengeance of Jupiter, god of hospitality, and remembering the
frendshipe her husband had showed him, refused, and put her away from him:
which she disdeigning, and being in a wood rage, accused him to her husband,
that he had ravished her: but he like a sobre man, would not slay him in his
own house, but delivering him letters to his wives father, sent him into
Licya, who perceauing the mind of Pretus, encouraged, and sent Bellerophon to
destroy the two monsters, Solymos, and Chimaera, that he might be slain
under the color of a valiant enterprise. But he atchieuing it nobly,
returned with honor. This hystorye follows more largely set forth in the
Latyne tongue by Stockhamere, in his Commentaries upon the Emblemes of Alciate.
Embl. cxj. in these words.

Bellerophon filius Regis Glauci, adolescens insignis pulchritudinis and sum
virtutis, quem Praetus regno priuatum, sibi seruire iussit. Staenobea vero vxor
Praeti eum adamauit, and vt secum stuprum committeret, solicitauit: ille vero
lasciuam foeminam repulit, vnde spreta mulier exardens, and dolor repulso
indignata, coram Rege, falso illum accusauit, quasi eam fuisset oppressurus:
Rex autem hoc audito, and inique ferens, nolens tamen de illo domi paenas
sumere, misit eum ad socerum suum Regem Licyae, addita epistola qua crimen
continebatur. Rex ille, lectis litteris indignatus, varijs hostibus and
periculis Bellerophontem, vt periret, obiecit. Ille vero semper victor euasit,
tandem etiam in vltionem criminis missus, vt Chymeram monstrum maximo sub
periculo interficeret. Ascendit igitur ille astute admodum Pegasum aequum
alatum celerrimum, Strab. lib. 8.
quem ex interfectae Medusae sanguine natum fingu^t: atque de eo expeditionem
sumpsit contra Chimeram, quam deuicit ac interemit, ob hoc laudem nanciscebatur
maximam, adeoque vt Rex ille Lyciae alteram suam filiam ei in vxore^ dederit,
quod audiens vxor Praeti seipsam occidit. Monemur cuncta mala, iniquos etiam
and peruersos superandos esse, and supprimendos animi virtutibus,
magnanimitate, consilio, and prudentia.

The field is party per Fesse Saturn, Eagle.
and Mars, an Eagle displayed with two heads d'Argente, an orle of Beasantes.

The Eagle has principality over al fowls, and is most liberal and free of
heart. For the pray that he takes, oneles it be for hongre, he eats not
alone, but sets it forth in common to all the fowls that follow him: and
therefore ofte^tymes other fowls frequente his company, for hope and trust to
have some part of his pray. But when the pray that is take is not sufficient
for himself, than as a king, that takes head of a comminaltie, he takes
the bird that is next unto him, and gives it among the other, and serves them
therewith. The Eagle has that name Aquila, of sharpenes of eyne. He is right
strong, bold, and hardy, far passinge the strength and boldenes of other
birds: and his strength is most in wings, tallance, and beak. Also he has
many feathers, and therefore he conteaneth much lyghtenes. The sign of
The Eagle displayde thus with two heads, after the common opinion, begone to
be borne in standerdes, auncientes, and Banners, in Charles the great his
time, Wolfangus Lazius Romanor. Regis Historiographus.
to declare his empire both in the Orient and Occident. Or rather as Wolfangus
Lazius reports, in the time of Constantyne the great, which of one public
weal of the Romans, obtained and made two the one at Rome, and the other at
Constantinople.

The field is the Rubie, a Cheuron topaze, between iij. Eaglettes displaide
with two heads, Dyster.
of the Pearl.

The Eagle is a bird, very great, regal, and noble, quae volucrum Regina
dicitur, quia altissime volat: and Iouis ales, vel quia sola contra Solis
radios apertis atque immotis oculis vola^do obtuitum non flectit: vel quia
solam nunquam fulmine tactam fertur: ideoque etiam Iouis Armiger a Poetis
appellatur, vt Higin. lib. 2. The Eagle is of such sharp sight, that fliynge
above the Sea so high, as with man's eyes, she can scarcely be seen, yet she
sees the fish swim in the Sea, and descending tormenti instar, she takes
her pray, and flyethe therewith to the shore. She is right cruel against
her own birds, when as lokyng against the sun, they close their eyes, for
then she supposes they be not her own birds, and so vt degeneres excludit.
The said coat apperte yneth to master John Dister.

The field is sable, an Eagle displaide with two heads d'Or. debrused with a
bar d'Ermyne.

The Eagle in age has darkness, and dymnes of eyne, Plinye.
with heauynes of wings. And against these evils, she is taught by kind, to
seek a well of springing water: the same found, she then flies up into the
air, as far as she may till she be full hot by heat of the Sun, and by
travel of flight, so that through such heat, the pores of her body been
opened, and the feathers chafed: and she then falls suddenly into the well, and
there the feathers been changed, and the dymmes of her eyne is thereby wyped
away and purged: and thus she recouereth her pristinate vigor and strength.
There be also diverse other kinds of Eagles, and of sundry names, as shall be
declared hereafter.

The Eagle called Almachor, Egle Almacher.
is full quick and sharp of sight, who taking her birds directs their
sight even against the Sun, which if they do not steadfastly behold, she
forthwith beats the^. And if any of their eyes do chance to water in lokyng
against the Sun, that bird she sleaeth, a^though he went out of kind: and
the bird that steadfastly beholds the sun, and whose eyes does not watre,
him she loves, likes and fedeth.

The Eagle Amachell takes her pray on the water, Eagle Amachel.
and is dredde of no fowls, saving such as have their living and
conversation in the waters only: and is much degenerate from the nobility
and kind of those Eagles which take their pray in the air and on the
earth. Also this Egle has one foot closse and whole, as the foot of a Gandre:
and therewith she rules her self in the water, when she descends from an
high for her pray: and her other foot is a cloue foot, with full sharp
clees, with the which she takes and holds her pray.

The Egle Athat, Eagle Athat.
is a gentle Eagle, and thincketh long time of her birds, for when they fly,
she flies with and about them, taking head of them: and is ready to
withstand other fowls, if so be they come to grieve or anoye her birds: and
therefore is more kind than other Eagles be to their Birds.

A. Bears Sable, an Ossifrage d'Argent, Ossifraga.
bearing a bone d'Or. The Eagle having three birds throws out one of her
nest, lest she should be unable to feed and norishe them. And this bird
Ossifraga, which in the Arabie language is called Cebar, receaueth, feadeth and
brings up the Eaglet so cast out, and so the bird loses the name of her
parents, and is now by reason of her educatio^ in this wise called Ossifrage,
or Cebar. Isidore says, that there is a foul called Ossifrangus, and has
that name, quia ossa ab alto dimittit and frangit. This kind of Ossifrage has
no quick sight. But an other kind, which loves the Sea. Ossifraga marina.
Clarissima oculorum acie est, ac pullos adhuc implumes cogit aduersos intueri
solemn, percutit eum qui recuset, and vertit ad solemn. Tum cuius oculi prius
lachrimarint, hunc occidit, reliquu^ educat. Arist. de Animal. lib. 8. cap. 3.
Vagatur haec per mare and littora, vnde nomen accepit: viuitque auium
marinarum venatu, vt dictum est. The Ossifrage is greater in body than the
Eagle, color ex cinere albicans.

Gossebawke.
B. Bears barrye of eight pieces Gules and Ermyne, a Gossehauke d'Or. This is
a ryal foul, and is armed more wc boldenes, tha^ wc clees: and asmoche as
kind takes from her in quantity of body, he rewards her wc boldenes of
heart. This foul above the rest of ye kind, is most desirous to take other
fowls, and therefore she is called Accipiter: hoc est, raptor. Also she being
takes birds that be wild, and as it were, delivers, or reserueth them for
her own Lord: and therefore they be beloved of Noble gentlemen, and borne on
fiste, and also dieted, and fed with great attendaunce and diligence. Fertur
autem Accipitres circa pullos suos impios esse. Accipitres
Nam dum viderint eos posse tentare volatus, nullas eis praebent escas, sed
verberant pennis, and a nido praecipitant: atque a tenero compellunt ad
praedam, ne forte adulti pigrescant.

The field is Saturn, three Faucons volante Lunae, Faucon.
membred, or beaked Solis. Or thus: He bears Sable, three Faucons volante
Argente, membred, and beaked d'Or.

The Faucon, says Isidore, is called Capus, a capiendo. Hu^c nostri Falconem
vocant: eo quod incuruis digitis sit. He is a Royal foul, and desires pray,
and uses to sit on his sinister fiste, that bears him. He is a gentle
bird, bold, and hardy: and has little flesh in comparison of his body,
but greatly arraide with feathers. For Aristotle says, Falcula auis pennis
plurimum valet. And therefore she is more light to flee. The Faucon, if he
fail of his pray at the first sight, as it were for shame, he flees about
in the air, and then uneath he comes to his Lords hand. For he holds him
self ouercomme, and not kindly borne, if he take not the foul that he flees
unto. This said Cote is borne by the name of Faukener.

C. bears Azure, a Pellicane vola^td' Or, guttee Gules.

This is a bird of Egypt, Habitans in solitudine Nili fluminis. Vnde and
nomen sumpsit. The Pellicane feruentlye loves her birds. Pellicane.
Yet when they been haughty, and begin to wax hoar, they smite her in the
face, and wound her, and she smites them again, and sleaeth them. And after
three days she mourns for them, and then strikinge her self in the side
till the blood run out, she sparpleth it upon their bodies, and by virtue
thereof they quicken again. Hieronymus. Pelicani (inquit) quum suos a Serpente
filios occisos inueniunt, lugent, seque et sua latera percutiunt, and sanguine
excusso, corpora mortuorum sic reuiuiscunt. Volaterranus says, the Pellicane
to be the same, which Pliny calls Platea.

The field is Sable, in the beams of the Sun, a Phoenix Uerte.

This is a bird of Arabie, and so called, Phoenix.
Quod colore^ Phoeniceum habeat: vel quod sit in toto orb singularis, and
vnica. Nam Arabes singularem, and vnicam Phaenicem vocant. This bird (as
Isidore says) lives above five hundred years, and when she perceiuethe her
self so aged, gatheringe the twigges, and dry branches of sundry sweet
smellinge trees, she makes thereof, as it were a Beakon: and turninge her
self thereupon toward the whote beams of the Sun, she clappeth her wings
in such wise, that she kindeleth fire about her, burning her self, and so
she rysethe again of her own ashes.

Alanus speaks of this bird, Alanus.
and says, that when the higheste Priest Onyas had builded a Temple in the
great City of Heliopolis in Egypt, to the form and likeness of the
Temple in Jerusalem, and the first day of Easter, Vnicae semper auis.
when he had gathered much sweet smellinge wood, and set it on fire upon the
Aultare to offer Sacrifice: even then to all men's sight, came suddenly
such a bird, and fell into the middle of the fire, and was there burnte anon
to ashes, and the ashes remained still, and were diligently kept, and
preserved by the commandment of the Priest. And within three days, of
these ashes was bredde a little worm, which took the shape of a bird at
last, and did fly into the wilderness.

D. bears Uerte, Kalader.
a Kaladre gardante, Argente.

This bird is white of color, and has no part of blackness. His kind is
marvelous. For if a man which has been long holden with great sickness,
be like to die, this bird then turns away his countenance from him. But if
the sick man shall escape the death, this bird then fixes his sight
earnestly on him, and beholds him cheerfully.

E. bears party per Cheuron enbattailed, Uert and Gules, three Cranes
Argente. Crane.
The Crane is a bird great of wings and strong of flighte, and flees high
into the air, to see the Countries, toward the which he will draw. He is a
bird very louinge over his own kind, and they living in company together,
have a king among them: and flee in order. And when they sit on the
ground, for their safegarde, they ordain watches by course among them
selves, that they may rest the more surely: and those which keep the
watch, stand upon one foot, holdinge each of them a little stone in the
other, high from the earth, that by fallinge thereof, they may be awaked, if
it hap any of them to fall a sleep. Their age is known by their color.
Nam senectute nigrescunt.

Aristotle says, that the Crane is a civil bird, Quia sub Duce degit. Crues
vbi pugnent cum Pigmeis.

Arist. de animal. li. 8. ca. 12


Cranes flee into very far Countries, Quae ex Scithicis campis ad paludes
Aegypto superiores, vnde Nilus profluit, veniunt, quo in loco pugnare cum
Pygmeis dicuntur: Non enim id fabula est, sed certe genus tum hominum, tum
etiam equorum pusillum (vt dicitur) est, deguntque in cauernis, vnde nomen
Trogloditae a subeundis cauernis accepere. Cranes do many things wisely, as
Aristotle says, Libro de Animalib. 9. Cap 10.

The field is quartered d'Or and Sable, a Cross engraled Ermyne, Cock.
between four Cocks, conterchanged of the one, and the other, membred and
cristed Gules.

Gallus a castratione vocatus. Inter caeteras enim aues huic soli testiculi
adimuntur. Veteres enim abscisos gallos vocabant. The Cock breedethe a
Precious stone called Allectricium, like to that stone that highte Calcedonius.
And because of the same stone, the Lion dreadeth, and abhors him, and
especially if the Cock be white. For the Lion dreadeth a white Cock, as
Pliny says. The Cock above other birds, is ensigned with a peculiare
Creste: Sic enim instituta^, vt nec caro sit, Galli post victoriam canunt.
nec a natura carnis omnino aliena. The Cock greatly reioiceth, when he
gets the victory over an other, and after the clappinge of his wings, he
sings for joy thereof. Gloriam sentit, noscit sydera, it cubitum cum Sole,
imperitat suo generi, and Regnum, in quacunque domo fuerit, exercet. The Cock
is consecrate to the Sun.

F. bears Sable and Or, parted per Cheuron embatailed, in Chief, two Pigeons
volante d'Argente. Dove, or Culuer.
This bird is the messenger of peace, ensample of simpleness, clean of
kind, plenteous in procreation, flower of meekness, lover of company, and
forgetter of wrongs. Antiqui eas venereas nuncupabant: eo quod nidos
frequentent, and osculo amorem concipiant. Culuers (as S. Ambrose says) in
Egypt and Siria are taught to bear Letters, and to be as it were messengers
out of one Province into an other.

The field is d'Or, and Sable, trauersed in four, per Pale and Cheuron, Owl.
an Owl sinister d'Argente. Or thus: He bearethe quarterly d'Or, and Sable
Cheurone, an owl sinister d'Argente.

This bird in Latin is called Bubo, and has that name of the sound of her
voice: and is a wild bird charged with feathers, and seethe more clearly by
night, then by day, and then she is most strong, and able to resist her
enimyes, who can not abide her for her shape, song, and countenance. When
she is assailed of other birds, she lyinge vprighte, defends her self
with biting, and scratchinge.

She is friend to the husbandeman in killinge mise, which otherwise would
consume his corn in the barn. Apud Augures malum portendere fertur. Nam cum
in vrbe visa fuerit, solitudinem significare dicunt. De qua Ouidius: Faedaque
sic volucris venturi nuntia luctus
Ignauus Bubo dirum mortalibus omen.


G. bears Gold, on a fesse between two Swallows Sable, Swalowe.
three fountains proper.

This kind of Swallows is al black, and is greatly dread of other fowls.
Yea, the Eagle, and Gossehauke fly from this Swalowe, as it were their
enimye: and dare not fall on their pray while she is fleeinge abroad,
dreading the bytinge of her. For it is thought to be venomous, as Plini says.
And this I take to be the Swalowe, Quae carne vescitur.

There ben other two kinds of Swalowes, ye one called the house Swalowe, which
loves man's company: and the other which is less, louethe the sea, and
makes her neaste in the holes, and chynnes of Rocks. But both of them make
their neaste in like, and have their tails forked as a pair of sheeres, and
differ nothing in color, but that the house Swalowe is seen to have,
Sanguinis maculum in pectore.

And in that I have descriued three Fountains on the Fesse in the said Cote
armor, Fountain.
I think it therefore mete to declare what a Fountain is. A Fountain is the
head and spring of living water, which springs, and runs continually
out of the privy veins of the earth, to the great nourishinge thereof, and
of all mankind. And therefore it is called Fons, as it were Fouens,
nourishinge: or Fundens, pouringe, or shedinge out.

The Fountain multipliethe all Rivers, Brooks, and streams with waters, and
communicates him self to many, hidinge it from nothing: but parts, and
distributeth of his abundance, as well to Pylgrimes and strangers, as to all
other living creatures.

G. bears Argente, and Sable, parted per Pile, a Swalowe volante of the
second, bearinge the Celidon flower, Hirundo domestica.
proper.

The Swalowe takes not his meat sitting, but fleing in the air, and in
making of neastes is most expert and cunning: educa^disque faetibus
solertissima. She is full of feathers, and therefore is the most lightest, and
swift in flight of all fowls. Other birds disturb her not, neither is she
pray to any of them. Maria transuolat, ibique hyeme commoratur. Ovid calls
this bird, Veris praenuntia. For she is the first messenger, that shewethe
us the spring of the year. It is readde, that in the young Swalowes womb
been found two stones very precious. The one white, which is the Female, and
the other read, which is the Male, and is more virtuous. Precious stones
called Celidonij.
These two precious stones, are called Celedonij: and they must be taken out of
the Swalowes womb, ere they touch the ground.

The field is of the Pearl, a Palm tree proper. Palm.


This is a tree of victory: Proceroque ac decoro virgultu: diuturnisque
vestita frondibus: and folia sine vlla successione conseruans. It is a tree
noble and famous, always fair and green: and long time beautified with
branches and leaves, both in winter and summer. The Prophet says, Iustus vt
Palma florebit. This noble tree abounds, and is most fruitful in India.
And therefore Uespasiane the Emperor, caused to be imprinted on the one part
of his coygne the figure of the Palm tree, to declare thereby his tryumphant
victory, in subduing and conquering the whole region of Iewrie.

H. Bears gold, Laurel.
a Laurel tree verte. This is also a tree of victory, and is of singular
excellency, grace, and virtue. In ye old time, all victorious emperors,
kings, princes and capteines, were crowned with garlandes of Laurel tree,
when they had gotten the victory over their enemies. And to the knights,
soldiers, and standerde bearers, which had behaved and borne themselves
valia^tly and stoutely in the wars, were given garla^des also made of Laurel
to adorn their heads, which were called Coronae militares, Coronae
militares.
and were testimonies of their prowes, noble acts, and haute courages, for
ever to be remembered. The Greeks call this tree Daphnis^, Daphnis.
because it never leaves his grenesse. It was consecrate to the great Jupiter,
and to Apollo Delphicus. It is thought that this tree is never touched with
lightening. And therefore the Emperor Tiberius Caesar, in thondryng and
lyghtenyng, used to wear a garlande of Laurel tree against the smytyng of
the lyghtenyng. Also Plinye reports that as the same Emperor did sit by
Drusilla the Empress in a certain garden, an Eagle threw from a right high
place, a fair white hen, whole and sound into the Empress lap: and the
hen did hold in her beak a bow of Laurel tree, full of bays. And diuinors
took head to the he^ne, and did sow the bays, keeping them wisely, and of them
came a wood, that was called Sylua triumphans, Sylua triumphans.
as it were the wodd of worship for victory and mastrie^, for afterward the
Emperor did bear of the Laurel tree in his hand, and did wear a garlande
thereof on his head. And after him many others emperors in the same wise
should be crowned with Laurel tree of the same wodd, when they had the
victory, and these their garlandes were called. Coronae triumphales.
(...)triumphales.
Hae antiquitus e lauro erant, post fieri ex auro ceptae. Collisa in se durius
duo Laurea, ignem concussu reddunt, si Plinio creditur. Idem facere Leonis
ossa, plerique autumant. Sic and concursu potentiorum certum est oriri grauius
periculum.

Olyue.
The field is of the Sun, an Olyue tree, Veneris.

This is a Royal tree, and in the Latyne tongue is called Olea, the fruit
Oliua, succus oleum. It is a tree of peace: for no messengers were sent to
Rome, to get or obtain peace, without bearing in their hands the branches
of Olyue tree: neither yet to profre peace to other men. Remigius says, that
the dignity of this tree is known: for that in token of reconciliation
between god and man, and of the peace made between them, the Dove which was
sent forth by Noe out of the arc, returned again to him with a token in her
mouth, Genes. 8.
which was an Olive leaf that she had plucked, and of none other tree. Plynie
sayethe that among the Athenians, victors were crowned with Olive.

I. Bears Argente, an hand Gules, holdyng a branche of Olive propre. Diodore
says, that the tree which bears the Olyue, is a sign of peace and
tra^quilitie: gestantibus iudicium erat pacis. The praise of peace is
eloquentely set forth by Ihon Gower, in a treatise which he writ unto the
noble king Henry the fowerth: in these words.

Peace is the chief of all the worlds wealth.
And to the heaven it leads eke the way.
Peace is of soul and life the man's health.
Of pestilence it does the war away.
My liege Lord take heed of that I say,
If war may be left, take peace on hand.
Which may not be without gods sand.
With peace stands every creature in rest.
Without peace, there may no life be glad
Above all other good peace is the best,
Peace has himself, when war is all bestadde,
The peace is safe, the war is ever dread.
Peace is of all charity the kaye,
Which has the life and soul for to way.
My liege Lord if that the list to seche
The soth ensa^ples, what the war has wrought
Thou shall well hear of wise men's speech,
That deadely war turns into naught.
For if these old books be well I sought,
There might thouse what thing the war has do
Both of conqueste, and conqueror also.
For vain honor, or for the worlds good
They that whylom the strong wars made
Where be they now, bethincke well in thy mood
The day is gone, the night is dark and fade
Their crueltye which made them then glade
They sorowe^ now, and yet have naught the more
The blodde is shed, which no man may restore.
K. Bearethe Or, Oak.
an Oak tree, verte.

Th'Oke tree was hallowed to Jupiter. Sacra Ioui quercus. And it is called
Quercus sieve quernei quod ea soliti erant dij gentium querentibus responsa
dare: This tree endurethe many years: sicut legitur de quercu Mambre sub qua
habitauit Abraham: quae fertur vsque ad Consta^tini Regis imperium per multae
secula perdurasse. The Oak in the old time was accounted chefest inter
faelices arbores. It is a tree very high, full of boughs and branches,
having a root most perfect and sure, and therefore it best abides the
blastes and shakynges of all tempesteous winds: and for his myghtynes and
strength, is most meet for great and large buyldinges. The leaf of this tree
in some countries never falls away. Theophraste says, that there is a
kind of Oak, in agro Thurio, vbi Sybaris perspicua, quae nunquam folia
dimittit. The fruit of this tree is called. Akecorne.
Glandula, or glans quernea, an Akre, or maste of the Oak tree: wherewith men
in the old time were norished and fed, wherefore the Poet says.

Mortales primi ructabant gutture glandem.
Our fathers of old thought it good,
To use Akecornes for their food.
Prius enim quam frumenti vsus esset, antiqui homines glande vixerunt. Boethius
remembers the same, saying, faelix nimium prior aetas. etc.

Wondrefull happy was the first age of men, which did hold them contented
with the fruits which the very fields brought forth, and therefore were not
distroyde with filthye glotonye: but were wont easily to'assuage their ho^gre
at even with the Akecornes of Oaks, not knowing what wine mente, yet using the
moiste honey, and the clear running waters of the stream, which caused the^ to
sleep wholesome slepes upon the grass liyng under the shadows of the hye pyne
trees.

L. Bearethe Gules, Pear.
and verte, parted with a cheuron between three pears d Or.

The Pear has his name, because it is shaped as ye flambe of the fire, for a
Pear is great, hard, and broad at the one end, and narowe and strayghte at
the other, as ye flame of fire. Pyrus autem arbor: fructus eius pyra est. Poma
pyri iumentis imposita vel si pauca, vehementer onerosa esse dicuntur. I
think no more to speak of the Pear at this time, nor of the tree, but of
the cheuron descriued in the said field, which is a worthy particion, and
holds in it self a great soueraignetie.

The French call this sign a Cheueron. Cheuron.
In Latyne it is called Signum capitale, and Tignus, or Tignum, in English it
is a rafter of an house, which bears the roof: and of us Northern men, it
is called a Sparre, or Sparres, of others the barge coples. The which signs
by all likelyhode were first borne of carpenters, and makers of houses: for an
house is never made perfect, till these coples be put upon it, by the manner of
an head: and two such joined together, make a capital sign: that is to say
in ye northern tongue a cople of sparres.

M. Bears Argente, two Cheuro^s Sable, between three fig slippes propre.
Fig.


The fig tree is so called, a faecunditate, because it excels others in
fruitefulnes. Nam terque quaterque per singulos annos generat fructum: atque
altero maturascente: alter oboritur.

Thus it is manifest that this tree bears fruit three or four times in one
year, and while one rypeth, an other spryngeth anon. Let ye bearer hereof in
cote armoure, consider what he bears. The learned can judge what his
conditions should be.

And touching the two Cheurons blazed, there can be no mo so termed in one
coat armoure: for they conteyne the just quantity of their order in the
field, for with them the field is five in all his content.

Rose.
O. Bears gules, and sable, parted per cheuron, nebulee, three roses d'Argent.

Among all flours of ye world, the Rose is the chief, and bears the price.
And therefore ye chief part of man, which is the head is often crowned
therewith, because of his virtues, sweet smell and sauoure, for by fayrenes they
feed ye sight, and please the smell by odor: and accord to medecin, both
grene and dry. Rosa a specie floris nuncupata: quod rutilanti color rubeat.
Therefore our noble and most gracious Queen does, and for ever shall use this
delectable Poesy or word. Rutilans Rosa sine spina. If I were learned
thereunto, I would speak more of this flower. But being bold of Plinye, the
Rose shall have pre-eminence above all flowers, and next to it, the flower de
luce, and the third shall be the violet. These are the flowers wherewith the
crowns of noble men ought to be adorned.

Party per Cheuron.
And whereas the field of the said cote armoure is parted per Cheuron, you must
take the same, as one of the particions messes, because one color, after the
manner of a Cheuro^, entremedleth with an other, otherwise than is used in
simple particions. And my aucthor says, that many have doubted about the
Blazon of Cotes Armoures, when they be thus parted per Cheuron of two
colors: and such as have made themselfes very connyng, in descriuing of
arms, have failed thereof: some holdinge one opinion, and same an other. And
therefore to dissolve the doubt herein, take these next ensuyng for example.

P. Bears Argent and gules, party per Cheuron engrailed, three Lyllies,
Lillye.
deux, vne, contrechanged of the field.

This is as fair a cote, as may be devised of that particion: and the toke^
borne in the field, is of his propre color. For the Lyllye is of treble
color, whit, read, and purple, or yealowe. I thought it good to add these
words deux vne in the blazon of this cote Armoure, for that the Lillyes are
transmuted of the same colors that the field is of, for if the field were
not so parted, it neded not to have said deux vne. And touching the flower,
Plinye says, that the Lillye is next to the Rose in worthynes and noblenes.
Nothing is more gracious than the Lillye in fayrenes of color, in swetenes of
smell, and in effect of workynge and virtue. Lilya.
Lillya lactei floris herba: vnde and nuncupata quasi Liolya cuius dum candor
sit in folijs: auri tamen species intus effulget.

The field is Sable, three piles in poyncte, d'Or, charged with nine violettes,
Violet.
propre.

This flower has his name of the strongest smell that he has, as Isidore
says, and the smell thereof abateth the heat of the brain, and refressheth
and comfort the spirittes. The littlenes thereof is nobly rewarded in
greatenes of sauoure and of virtue. Amongst flowers, Plinye sets the violet,
next the Rose, and the Lyllye: for that they be the chief flowers (he says)
to beutefie the crowns of noble men. Huius genera sunt tria: purpureum, album,
melliuum. The three piles descried in this cote armoure, which mete together in
one coone of the shield, as in the poyncte thereof, are called in Latin
Pilae, which is as much to say as Pillars, that sustain and uphold the work
which is laid upon them. Pyles.
And of the sondrye bearing of such in cote armor, hereafter shall ensue
diverse examples.

Q. Bears Arge^t and verte, parted per pile enuecked, 6. Senuye.
leafes de Senuye d'Or* 3.2.1. The flower of this herb is full yealowe, and
has a good smell. And though all the herb in substance be kene and feruente,
yet Bees love best the flowers of it, and haunte them.

The field is gold, a Pyle in poyncte between two slippes of Merche, Merche.
verte. This herb in latin is called Apium, and it is so called, quod ex eo
apes.i. caput antiquorum triumphantium coronabatur. Hercules made him first
garlandes of this herb. Cuius radices efficaciter pugnant contra insidias ve
nenorum. This herb is always grene, as Theophraste sayethe.

R. Bears Sable, a Pile engraled, in bend between four flours of Agnus
castus, Agnus caest'.
d'Or. This herb is always grene: and the flower thereof is namely called
Agnus castus, for whosoever uses much to smell thereunto, either man or woman, it
has virtue to keep them chaste as a Lamb. Therefore the women of Rome, used
to bear with them the flower of this herb, at funeralles, and in service of
dead men, when they must needs live chaste, for common honesty.

S. bears Ermyne, two Gyrons Sable, charged with Cilidon flowers proper,
Celydon.
a Batune Gules.

This herb Celidon has a yealowe flower, and the stalk thereof broken,
smorcheth them that touch it all with yealow. And it highte Celidonia, for it
springs and bloometh in the coming of Swalowes. For a Swalowe in the Greek
tongue is called Celidon. Or else, as Isidore says, it is so called, because
it helps Swalowes birds, if their eyne be hurt, or blind. And likewise
Pliny says, that by the juice of Celidon, Swalowes eyes turn again to
their first state, if they been hurt, or put out.

This herb has virtues that been noble and good, whereof ye may read in
Pliny, Dioscor. and Platearius also.

The field is Lunae, on a Cross Saturn, Crowns.
five Crowns Imperial. The Cross thus charged, is called of old Heraultes,
the first quadrate royal, because thereon is seen a noble token to the number
of five. Vide in the Concordes of Armorie. It is to be seen in diverse Cote
armours, that Crowns been borne in sundry otherwise, as in Pale, in Fesse,
and in the Angles of the Shield, as it were in triangle, which is the most
aunciente, and as mine Author says, the most famous manner of bearing of them,
or any other signs. And they are very rare seen borne in Bend, but in chief
they may be excellently borne, as before in this book is remembered.

The field is of the Rubye, a Cross between four crowns murall, Crown
murall.
Topaze.

Of the sondrie fashions of Crowns, geeuen by Emperors, kings, and Princes,
to their soldiers, for their good service and valiaunte feats done in the
wars, one is named a Crown murall, which was given to him, which in the
siege of a City first scaled the walls, and entered maugre the enemies, and
therefore it was made like ^nbatlementes of a wall. Muralis corona ex auro
conflata in sormam muralium pinnarum illi dabatur ab Imperatore exerci^us, qui
prius vi and armis hostium mania transcendisset in vrbe^.

This coat armor is to be nombred, among the worthy particions, for the
soueraygnetie of the same.

The field is of the Topaze, on a Cross parted per Paile, Saphyre and
Diamonde, a Crown nauale, as the first.

This Crown was first put on his head, which in battle on the Sea, first
borded the ship that was assailed, Crown nauall.
and therefore it was made like to the foreparte of a ship. Nauali praelio
qui in classem hostiu^ armatus, primusque irruens ingressus esset, Corona aurea
Nauali cohonest abatur, rostro rum, aut naualium prorarum adinstar confecta.
And an other Crown called in Latyne Corona Castrensis, was given to him,
which first entered by force into the trenche of the enemies camp, and
therefore it was made, as it were set about with payles. Corona Castrensis.
And Paradyne says, that Corona Castrensis vallaris, seu palata, ex auro
confecta, donabatur ab Imperatore, seu exercitus praefecto illi, qui primus
oppugnando vallum hostile occupasset. These Crowns always were of Gold. Yet
note, that these and many other such like, ought not directely to be called
Crowns: for although Corona in Latyne, is called a Crown, so is it a
Garlande, a Chaplet, a company of people standing round about like a Circle,
also the circle about the moon:

He bears Sable, this lettre Ypsilon Argente, Ypsilon.
ensigned with a Crown Imperial on chief.

Haec littera Pythagorica vocatur. Se in the first book, entitled the
Concordes of Armorye almost in the end.

The bearer of this sign or token in arms, I mean of the crown Imperial,
ought always to be doing good, and to se that no harm be done to none, to
be merciful, and continually exercised in the service of almyghtie God. For
those, in whose power it is to do good, and does it not, the Crown of honor
and worship shall be taken from them, and (as Chaucer sayethe) with shame they
shall be anulled, and from all dignity deposed. 2. Reg. 12. cap.
When king David had gotten the city of Raba, and had put out the people that
was therein, tormentyng them upon sawes, iron harrowes, and upon ares of iron,
and thrust them into the tyle kill, he took their kings crown from of his
head, which wayde an hundred waighte of gold, and in it were precious
stones: and it was set on David's head. Hereby is the power of God declared,
how he deals even with kings, taking the crown and dignity from one, and
giving the same to an other. He exalts, and it is he, that deiecteth, he is
the aue^ger, he is also the sparer, he can wound, and he can make whole:
neither is there any that can deliver him out of his hand.

The field of this cote Armoure is Claurie, because it is of one propre
color, without any particion or change, and it is also the second quadrate
Royal, for that the field is charged, but with no mo tokens.

The field is parted per Fesse Dented, Venus, and Saturn, five beasauntes.
Beasante.
3.2. A beasaunte is also called a Talente: The sondrie contents whereof, the
Reader may best understand in Sir Thomas Elyote his dictionarie, to the
which I refer him, and to master Gerard Leyghe, in his accedence of Armorie.

The field is sable a fesse Cantone d'Ermyne, between two plates.

Plates are of dignity next unto the beasauntes, Plates.
and are round in shape as beasauntes are, which are always of golden
color, as ye may read before. And plates are of silver, and have no
similitude on them, but are formed ready to coigne. These of them that know
not the right terms of them are called Balls: and they offend not much some
time so to name the^, for Pila in Latyne, is not only a Pillar, or frame to
be put under any work to bear the same, but it is also a Ball, or any thing
round as a Ball: the which is an instrumente seruinge otherwhyle to the
hand, and then it is called in Latin Pila palmaria, or Pila manualis,
otherwise it serves for the foot, and then it is called Pila pedalis, a foot
ball, yet are there other things round, which are neither beasauntes,
plates, or balls. A boule is a very round thing, Boule.
and in Latyne is called Globus, and Globum, and is also a token in arms, but
not of such estimacion. There is also an other figure, in all parts equally
round, Sphere or Globe.
and in Latyne is called Sphaera, and is also an honorable devise in arms. And
now shall ensue sundry examples to displaye such signs or tokens, as are
round in shape and form.

The field is Gules. Ermyne.
10. beasauntes a canton d'Ermyne. Of the Beasaunte I have spoken sufficiently
before. But the canton being d'Ermyne, understand what the same is. It is one
of the noble and honorable furs, used to be worn of Kings and Princes in
their robes and mantles, and is the chefest furre. In arms it is called
Ermine, proprely, and not silver or white, poudered with Sable, to the which
term there must be had great respect, it is so freque^te in armorye. In
ma^tles, (as M. G. Leyghe says) they are called doblinges. It is the skin
of a little beast of the land of Armenye, whereof he takes his name. The
trick of this cote armoure, I did take (as I found it) in the parish Church
of Lutterworth.

Here in the field Azure, is to be seen the image of the virgin Marie, with
her child in her arms, standing in the son. For the bearinge of these
Arms, great dissension did arise, between Sir Ihon Shandos, an English man,
and the lord del Claremounte, a French man, they both bearing the said Arms
alike: after a challenge thereof made by the one, to the other, it was tried by
them, at the end of ye battle of Poytiers, where the lord del Claremounte was
slain, and lost his Banner, by right of arms.

Such like controversy did chance, between two valiant, knights, Sir John
of Sitsilt, and Sir Willyam of Facknaham, for raysinge in field the cote
Armoure, here, after the antique manner displayed. But the right of the bearing
thereof (which they were ready to try by force of Arms) was adjudged, to Sir
John Sitsilt, as to him most ryghtefully and lyneally descended, by good and
lawful birth: as heir of blood and of body, of James Sitsilt, Lord of
Beauporte. For the truth whereof (gentle reader) here ensues Verbatim, the
copye of the very original wrytinges, in haec verba.

James Sitsilt Lord of Beauporte, had to his ensign in the field of ten
Bars silver and Azure, six excocheons sable, with as many Lions ramping, of
the first incensed Gules.

Gentle Reader, note well this Blazon, and you shall plainly perceive the
great knowledge of th'officers at arms in the old time.

C'est a tesmoigner a vous mes Seigniours, pur le determination final, del
discention pur vng Ensign d'Armes perenter Monsieur Iean de Sitsilt, and
Willyam de Faknaham Cheualiers, que l'an depuis le nestre de Dieu, mil cent
quarante deux, Jacques Sitsilt and ses ancesters seigneurs de Beauport, a le
siege de le Chasteau de Wallingford and viues and mortzillonques, and la
leueront vng Ensign, tiel comme l'ensigne de lour sang genereux. C'est a dire,
en la champe de dize barretz d'Argent and azure, Pedegre ascendinge.
six escochcons Sabels, auec tantes de Lions rampand, primer incensed Gule,
Pere de Iehan Sitsilt, pere de Eustace, pere de Baldwine, pere de Gerarde, pere
de Robert, pere de Jacques, Pere de George de Euerwike, pere de Iehan, pere de
cestuy Iean Sitsilt Cheualer, heyer de sang and de corpse de dit Jacques Seigneur
de Beauport, linealment descendu par bon and loyal nestre, de que lygne le dit
Willyam n'est my. Et cest pur voier and bon droit tousiours ie seray pressed de
maintener, a que fayer ie moy oblige par mon seau ci affige. Done le quarte
iour d'Auril, l'an del reign du Roy Edward le tiers depuis le conqueste. Le
Siz.

The final determinacion of the controversy aforesaid.
A touts Angloys and Francoys, Nous Edward de Beaulile, and Iean de Mowbray
great. L'ou grande debate and controversy ad este parentre Iean de Sitsilt
Cheualier, and Willyam Faknaham, in le champe de Monte holitone, pur un ensign
d'armes: c'est assauoir tiel, le champe de dize Barretz Argent, and azure,
supportez de cinq escocheons Sables, charges ouesque tant de Lions primers
rampantz incensed Gules, que ambideux clamont come lour droict par long and
ancient descent a eux descendu. Et a mayntener lour quarrel pur droitriel,
ambideux les parties ont eux mettre sur lour force, and vantont de cest
maintener per lour corpse. Ci est que il au please a nostre liege seigneur le
Roy que Justice sera fait a ces homes sans sang espandu, per voyer tesmoignes
and bons semblances. Accordant a que auoins oye and voy moltes ditez and lour
escriptes, and les tesmoygnes du Roy d'Armes and dauter lieges le Roy, que le
droit le dit Iehan Sitsilt et bien forte maintenent le dit ensign estre son
droict, come le droict de son sang genereulx. Pur que fait cest nostre final
dome, q^ Dieu, le Roy nostre liege and nous, and le dit Iehan Sitsilt defend
que james doresenauant le dit William ne soit cy hardy, chalenger, claymer, ou
lever in ascun cha^p le Roye, ou sur ascun corse viue ou morte, in ascun leu
deins les quatre mers le Roye, ou aillours par my tout Christiantye, les dites
arms in ensign, pyghenoute, guydon, banyer, escocheo^, targe, escu, manche,
ou elm, sur pain de forfayture, and perder son espee trenchaut, and ses
piques d'Or a toutes iours. Done le quart iour de June, l'an del Roy Edward
le tierce, depuis le conquest, le Sept.

The which said original writings, being written in parchement, according to
the antiquity of the time, I my self have seen being in the possession of
the right honorable the Lord of Burghley, to whom in blood the same
belongs, whose name being written at this day Cecill is nevertheless in
Wales, both in speech and common writing used to be uttered Sitsilt or Sitsild:
where the original house at this day remains nere Aburgenny.

The field is of ye Diamonde, three plates on chief, and two barres',
Hungreforde.
Pearl. Or else thus. He bears Sable, two bars and three plates, on chief
d'Argente. What these be, and of their metal, ye may read in the page
next before.

The field is of the Son, 10. Torteauxe.
torteauxes, 3.3.3. and 1. or thus. C. bears gold.10. torteauxes, 3.3.3. and
1. gules. It neded not here to have made mention of what planet or color the
torteauxes be: for they are found always of read color, and are called of
old blazors, cakes of bredde, notwithstanding they are contrary in color to
right cakes, or wastelles: yet they must be named by none other name, then
Torteauxes:

Q. Curt. li. 4.
At such time as Alexander the great laid his siege to the city of Tire, a
certain soldier of the Macedo^s, as he was breakyng of his bread, there
appearrd therein drops of blood, which by Arystander the deuiner was thus
interpreted. If the blood had appeared outwardely, then it had signified ill
fortune to the Macedons, but in asmoche as it was found within, it betokened
destruction to the city, they went about to win.

T. Bears Ermynes, on a chief Argente indented, 3. Ogresses.

Ogresse, or Pellet.
Th'Ogresse is the same, that we call a Pellet of a go^ne, and in armorye is no
other color then Sable. Wherefore I do omit the word Sable, because it is the
right and propre color incident to a Pellet. But of the field of this cote
armor (which in my judgment shall have the second dignity of the furs)
this understand, that it is only to be called Ermines, and not Sable
poudered with silver.

And of these two Royal furs, Ermyne, and Ermynes, how they both may be
borne in one cote armoure, take this for example.

U. Bears gules, one pyle in poyncte, Ermyne.
Ermyne and a chief d'Ermynes. Ermynes.
Thus of the difference of these two furs, this, and the last pagen may
perfectely instruct the, gentle reader.

W. Bearethe Gules, Hurtes.
on a Fesse Argente 3. hurtes.

This should always be of Azure color, and are called hurtes, for that
where they appear, violence has been showed to the bearer, and further I
cannot construe of this matter. The Cote armoure is Mars, and the thing
contained in the field is of his power, and charged proprely in a sure Fesse
of the Moon. These tokens (being round in figure) as are next before recited,
ought well to be marked and considered, for as they differ in metal and
color, so are they changed in their names and calling. Neither are they
found at any time perforate, that is to say, persed in the myddest: but they
are seen to be charged sondrye ways, as with Rowelles, Mollettes, Stars.
etc.

The field is Saturn, a bend of the Sun, Wells.
between 6. fountaynes propre. What a fountain is, L. Sturton.
ye may read before. And notwithstanding, it is so called, a Fountain, or
well, yet be they ensigned in cote armoure, round in figure: and be always
of white color and waterie, for the thing which they represente: that is to
say, the water of a well, which is white. This cote armoure, as it is charged
with an honorable bend ordinary, so the particion which the same makes,
causes ye cote armoure to be more worthy. What commodities come by founteynes
or wells, there is no reasonable creature, but he knows. Yet the use of them
may best be known, whosoever shall read the historye of the great worthy, and
puissante prince, king Arthur, king some time of this most noble Realm of
England. But whosoever deliteth to read of the diversity of fountains, and
their waters, let them read Isidore, lib. 13. etymologiar. cap. 13.

The field is Uerrey, Perle, and Saphyre, on a bend Rubie, three annullettes
of the Topaze. Annulet. Ringe.
These annullettes, or as commonly they be called rings, are also certain
round signs or tokens borne in arms, to the great estimacio^ of the bearer:
for rings are tokens of fidelity and trust, of the sure keeping of promise,
and oath, and also the remembrance of keeping our allegiance and duty. They
are also tokens of victory and tryumphe. The first that ever did were ring,
(as is read in profane hystories) was Prometheus, the son of Iapetus: and
he first invented the making of Images also, wherefore the Paynyms supposed,
that he made men: and feigned that he went up into heaven, and there did steal
fire to make his Images have life, wherewith Jupiter being wroth, caused him
to be bounden on the hill called Caucasus, and an Eagle standing by him,
eating his heart, by the which is signified, that he was studious, and a
great Astronomer. But of him Isidore thus says. Primus Prometheus fertur
circulum ferorum incluso lapide digito circundedisse. Note here, that the
first ring was made of iron. Gold I think was then scarcely known: yet
precious stones, and stones, wherein were graven signs, of beasts, fowls,
serpents, etc. were then enclosed in rings, not of gold, but in rings of
iron. Qua consuetudine homines vsi annulos habere caeperunt. Isidore also
declares the manner how men at the first did wear rings. Annulos homines
primu^ gestare caeperunt quarto a pollice digito: quod ea vena quaedam ad cor
vsque pertingat: quam ornandam notandamque aliquo insigni veteres putauerunt.
Apud Romanos anuli de publico dabantur: and non sine discrimine. Nam dignitate
praecipuis viris gemmati dabantur: ceteris solidi. And this also was used among
the Romans, that none but the frema^ should openly were a ring of Gold,
he that was franchysed, a silver ring, and the bondeman an Iron ring. But
now if a Prentice, or base crafts men have not a ring of Gold, he thincketh
it not well with him, if he see a gentleman have one, and he have not the
like, or such an other: so that every tyncker now a days will be ge^tleman
like. It was accounted apud veteres, an infamye to have or wear any mo
rings, then one: but now that order is worn out of use, and not observed or
kept, and in especially among weomen: Nam illis nunc prae auro nullu^ leave est
atque immune membrum. Thus there is sufficiently spoken of the bearyng and
wearyng of rings, but of the field of the said cote armoure this rests
unspoken. It is one also of the honorable furs, Verrey.
and is proprely called Uerrey, and commonly is seen, of the metal, Argente,
and the color, azure, vel econtra etc.

The field is Nebule, Luna and Saturn. Nebule. Clouds.
The hole conte^te of this field is cloudie of two colors, gules and argent,
or Argente, and gules, geuyng the soueraingtie to the metal. Almyghtie god
went before his chosen people the children of Israel through the wilderness by
day in a pillar of a cloud, and in a Pillar of fire by night. They be called
Clouds, ab obnubendo.i. operiendo caelum. Nubes autem aeris densitas facit.
Venti enim aerem conglobant, nubemque faciunt: vnde est illud: Atque in nubem
cogitur aer. Clouds in Armorie, are signs of great dignity, and declare the
bearer of them in cote armoure, to have a certain excellency in him self.
Fabius, Fabius.
a noble Romayne, being made Dictator against Anniball, so tempered Prudence
with manhood or prowess, that by detracting of battle, and trayning Anniball
from place to place, and at sondrye adua^tages skirmishing with him, he
minished his puissaunce, and preserved the public weal of his co^trye, and
caused Anniball to retire, who said than to his host, did not I tell you
before, that this Cloud would at the last bring us a storm, calling Fabius
a Cloud, because of his houerynge.

Y. Bears Ermynes, a twynne araide, Silver, crowned with a garlande of
violettes, Twynne.
propre, having his hands displayde Geminus is a twynne, where many children
are borne at one burdeyne, Geminus.
although they be three or mo. And how they may be borne in cote armoure, take
here an other example.

F. Bears Mars. 3. twynnes with arms displayed, of the moon. Study not
(gentle reader) wherefore I have blazed the twinne and twins with their
arms extended. Of truth it is their proprety even from the womb so to do,
desiringe the liberty of their branches. I could speak here of swadelynge
of children, but it belongethe not to my purpose. Wherefore I refer it to
weomen and Phisicions.

A. Bears Azure, a maste of a ship d'Argent, and on the chief thereof,
Gemini.
the Sterres Gemini. These the gentyles called Castor, Castor and Pollux.
and Pollux: whom the Grecians do call Dioscuros, and suppose that they
prosper those that sail on the Sea, when they appear sittyng ioyntely
together, the one by the other on the cross piece, whereunto the sail is
fastened. Paradinus. Simbol. Her^.
Si vero little alter duntaxat eminet, malum praesagire creditur, Preterea
potest sub alterius Geminorum solitudi ne intelligi, periculosam esse potentiam
absque prudentia. Saynct Paul departed from Melite in a ship, whose badge
was Castor and Pollux. Act. cap. 28.

The field is Azure, a Garb d'Or, Garb, or wheat shafe.
with a bend Gules.

Thus is asmoche to say, in this field, as a sheafe of wheat. Ceres wife of
Osiris king of Egipte, did first inuente sowynge of wheat, and Barlye, which
before did grow wild among other herbs. Prima Ceres cepit vti frugibus in
Grecia, Ceres.
and habere segetes translatis aliunde seminibus.

Of her, Ouide makes mention, saying.

Prima Ceres vnco glebam dimouit aratro.
Prima dedit fruges: alimentaque initia terris.
Which verses is thus metrized.
First Ceres with ploughe did inuente,
th'earthe in clottes all to rent:
And first of grain the trade she found,
how to sow it in the ground.
The field is of the Diamonde, a Fusil in pale, Fusill, or Spindle.
perle. The Fusill is the same, that we commonly call a Spyndle. Arachus, was
the name of the woman, which first invented spinning of Lynnen, and making of
nets. There be certain noble men, and other gentles, the which bear in
their arms fusilles, which signs so borne, (as some affirm) began of
weuers: forasmuch as weuers use such fusilles made of sponnen wolle. Certes
term them whether ye will, fusilles, or spindles, it is no great matter, since
in effect they are both one: and the token of them I dare auowe, are of more
antiquity and ancient bearyng, than some report they be of. Whereof I will
now put 6. examples of ye bearing of the^ sondrie wise, and after diverse ordres.

The field is Argent, three fusilles in Fesse Gules.

The Fusill in Latyne is called fusum, L. Mo^teacute.
quod per cum fundatur quod netuni est. What if ye first bearer of such
ensigns, did cause his wolle to be sponne by the folks of his household
whether they were his children or servants, is this therefore any reproach to
ye master, since his children and householde servants, yea, and he himself,
is thereby cladde and appareled much the better? No certaynely, reproach
therein can be none, but rather an high commendacion of virtuous exercise, and
godly labor.

It appears in ye history of the acts of great Alexa^dre, that while he was
abroad in the wars, his sisters did spinne, and make for him garments of
woollen clothe, which they sent him as a great gift: and was worn of him at
that time, and more esteemed, then all the silks, and precious vestures of the
Persians. Persian weomen handle no wolle.
And although the noble women in that country take nothing in more despite,
then to put their hands to woll, yet the sisters of the same Alexander the
Great, and the noble women of Macedonia, disdeigned not to spinne, and make
garments thereof, not thinkinge the same to be any blemishe at all to their
Nobilite, or blood.

He bears Azure, Saltier.
a Saltier d'Or. Huius Symboli descriptio ad Sancti Andreae quam dicunt Crucem,
Paradinus.
pertinet, qua and Domus Burgundica signis militaribus prodiens solebat in
aciem venire. Tametsi interpretatione^ non per omnia similem recipiant. This
Saltier is made by the manner of a Cross, called S. Andrewe his Cross, and
commonly of us English men, is thereunto compared. It is also taken for a
certain Instrumente, which has heretofore benne made in diverse Parkes, and
is of a great magnitude or largeness: and has been well known of Noble
gentlemen, and hunters. For they were ordained, and used in Parkes and
Forestes, as Engynes to take wild beasts, which once entringe by that
instrument, could not escape away in any wise. Wherefore in the old time,
these signs of Saltiers were given to rich and covetous persons, or niggardes,
such as would not gently, or liberally depart from any of their goods or
substance: and yet now in these our days are borne of right Honorable
gentlemen, who are both free, liberal, and bounteous, and which abhor all
such avarice, churlishness, and niggardshippe.

Of the bearinge also of such a token in Arms, take these further for
examples.

The field is Gules, Mollette.
on a Saltier Argente, five Mollettes Sable.

This is to be taken as a spotte descended from on high, and disperpled into
five points, out of one Still. This cote Armoure is one of the honorable
Ordinaries charged.

D. bears Argente, a Saltier Azure, between four Ravens wings proper.
Raven.
the Raven in Latin is called Coruus, sieve Corax, and she has that name, a
sono gutturis, quod voce coracinet. Fertur haec auis, quod editis pullis, escam
plene non praebeat, priusquam in eis per pennarum nigredinem similitudinem
proprij coloris agnoscat. Postquam vero eos tetros plumis aspexerit in toto
agnitos abundantius pascit. The Raven is enemy to the Bull, and assaileth him
on all parts, but his eyes especially.

Frette.
E. bears Uerte, a Frette d'Argente. And to his Creaste upon the Helm, on a
wreathe Or, and Sable, a Popyniaye Purpre, bearinge a twigge of the Almonde
tree proper, manteled Azure, dobled Or. The Fret borne in this Cote armor, is
found borne also of diverse noble Gentlemen, of several metal and colors. And
the same is sometime seen in Cote armor simple, otherwhile doble, also
triple, and of eighte pieces: and oftentimes they are multiplied over all the
Shield.

And ye must understand one great difference between Arms Bended, and these
Arms, the which be made with the foresaid Frettes. For in Arms Bendee, the
colors contained in the shield, are equally divided: and where these Frettes
be, the field always abide the whole.

Popiniaye.
And touching the Popyniaye, which is before descriued for the Creast of the
said Cote armor, he is in one of his proper colors, and bearethe a spraye of
his delighte. He is called in Latin Psitacus. Munsterus in his book of
Cosmographie says, Psitacorum Regio.
that in Psitacorum regione, there be found Popiniayes of incredible bigness,
as exceedinge in length, an arm and an half, and are of manifold colors.

He says also, that in the Land of Chalechute, there be Popiniayes of green
color, Calechute.
even as green as Leekes, Alij scutulati, alij coloris purpurij. There is also
such plenty of them in that country, that they appointe keepers to keep
their Rice which they sow in their fields, least they do eat it up.
Munsterus reports also, that the Popiniayes of Indie, Indiani Psitaci.
are for the most part of grene but that their head is read, or as the
color of woade, and shinethe like gold. Their tongue is great and broad,
Atque ideo vocaliores sunt, and utter words which may be understand.

They learn in the first and second year, such words as are taught them,
and retain them long. They drink Wine, and use their feet in stead of
hands, when they take meat.

This bird, says Isidore, of nature uses as it were a certain salutation,
Dicens: Aue, vel chere. Caetera nomina institutione discit. Hinc est illud:
Psitacus a vobis aliorum nomina discam.
Hoc didici per me, dicere, Caesar aue.


The Popiniaye is in no country so great or big, as he is In Psitacorum
regione. But those in the Land of Chalechute, are of greater praise, and
estimation, although they most abound there.

F. bears Argent, a Bend Azure, cotized with two cotizes Sable, Allaundes.
on the Bend, three Allaundes heads rassed Gold, Mosseled Gules.

And to his Creaste upon the Helm, on a wreathe Argent, and Sable, a Bears
head rassed Gold, between two wings Gules, manteled Azure, doubled
Argente. The signs borne in the said Cote armor, are the heads of three
Allaundes, which be a certain kind of dogs of great stature passinge all
others, which are used to hunte the Lion, Tiger, Panther, wild Bear, and
other such beasts of ravening kind. And of the same tokens borne in this
Cote armoure, and Creaste, I have sufficiently spoken, where I entreated of
Beasts: and where I have here descriued the heads of two sundry kinds of
beasts, note always, that next the bearing of the whole beast, the bearinge
of the head in Arms, is taken to be the most worthiest part, and most
esteemed in Cote armor, as honorable.

The field is Martis, a Pegasus Lunae, wynged Solis. The Creaste a dimie
Chymer, Rampante Saturn, set on a Torce, Luna and Jove, manteled of the
Rubie, doubled Pearl. There may be readde of diverse Horses in Poetry,
Pegasus.
as of this Horse Pegasus before blazed, that had wings for to fly, and of
Sinon the Greek his Horse, that brought Troy to destruction. But this
Pegasus exceeded Bucephale, and all other horses in swiftness, and celeritie,
because he had wings: Quem ex interfectae Medusae sanguine natum fingunt. De
quo Ouidius. 4. Metam. Upon this horse did Bellerophon ascend, Bellerophon.
when he slew Chimeram that horrible monster in Lycia, which having the
head, and face of a Lion, the middle part of a Goat, and the hinder part of
a Dragon, breathed, and cast forth great sparkles of fire. And therefore I
have set this monster, as a Creaste to the said Cote armoure: and as I
think, not incongruently, if the circumstances of the History, of whom the
same depends, be rightly considered.

Also Munsterus the Cosmographer reports, (but supposinge the same not to be
true) that Pegasus is a bird in Africa, which is said to have the body, and
ears of an Horse, and the wings like a Bird. Haec ille Lib. 6. Page 1151.

The field is Uerte, an heart of a man d'Argente, Heart of man,
pierced with two Darts in Saltier d'Or. In chief an Harp d'Ermyne stringed
proper.

The especial token borne in this Cote armoure, is the Heart of a man, which
in Latin is called Cor, derived a Graeca appellatione, which they name
Cardian. Or else it has that name of Cura, because that in it abides all
carfulness, all regard of God, and godliness, and also the cause of all
knowledge and wisdom.

The heart of man declinethe more toward the left side, then of any other
living creature, for to them it is set in the middle of the body. The
causes of the one, or of the other, it appertains not here to recite. And as
the same is of no very great quantity, so is it in form more round, then
long. Yet in the lower part thereof it gathers sharp, Exitque pene in
mucronem.

It is the well of life, and all fealinge, and mouinge is therein. Amongst al
members, the heart of man is most noble, and therefore it is set in the most
excellent place of the body, as it is most needful. For no member is so
needful to the life of man, as is the heart.

I have displayed the said Heart peirced with Darts, to declare thereby our
mortality, in that we see, if the same be stricken, wounded, or grieved with
sorrow, we then can have no longer pleasure, or delighte to live.

I read also, Aristomenes
that Aristomenes, a man of Messene, which was called Iustissimus, Most
just, when he was dead, was found to have his Heart all hearye. Harp.
The Harp is a token not unmeet to be borne in chief of the said Cote
armoure, being an instrumente like to a man's breaste. For likewise as the
voice comes of the breast, so the notes comme of the Harp, and has
therefore in Latin that name Cythara, for the breaste is called Cythara in
Dorica lingua. This instrumente is seen sometime to have four corners, but
most commonly three.

In old times Harpes had but seven stringes, and so Virgili says: Stringes.
Septem sunt soni, septem discrimina vocum.


A Stringe in Latin is called Corda, of Cord, the heart. For as the pulse of
the Heart is in the breaste, so the pulse of the stringes is in the Harp.

Cordas autem primus Mercurius excogitauit: Isidor. Etym. Lib. 3. cap. 21.
idemque prior in neruos sonum strinxit.

His field is of the Saphyre, a Psalterie in Bend sinister, Sawtrie, or
Psaltrie.
Topaze. His crest a wrest in Cross, Sol, set on a chap^au Mars, turned up
Ermynes, manteled Rubie, doubled Ermynes. Isidore says, that Psalterium, quod
vulgo Canticum dicitur, a psallendo nominatum, has his name of singynge, Quod
ad eius vocem Chorus consonando respondeat. The Harp is like to the Psaltrie
in sound, but between them this is the difference. In the Psaltrie is an
holowe tree, and of that same tree the sound comes upward, and the stringes
being smitten downewarde, Desuper: sonant. And in the Harp the holownesse of
the tree is beneathe.

The Hebrews used to call the Psaltrie, Decacordon propter numerum decalogum
Legis. And this Instrumente has but ten stringes. The best stringes for the
Psaltrie are made of Silver, yet those been good, which been made of Laton.

The Wreste in Latin highte Plectrum. And whereas I descriued the said Wreaste
in Cross, Wreste.
yet take the same not to be two, but one Wreste, because a certain
holownesse must be seen at every point of the Cross, wherewith the pinnes
of ye Psaltrie must be wrested diversely, as they are of bigness. Mercurius
invented the sundry kinds of stringes, and he first streined them, and made
them to sound.

P. I. bears Gules, on a Cross d'Or, Guttie, Guttie.
this name Christus within a crown of thorns, Uerte. This is the Cote armoure
of Preto Johan, quem alij vocant Presto Ioannem, Preto Johan.
alij praetiosum Iohannem, and vulgares Presbyterum Iohannem, non quod sit
Presbyter aut Sacerdos, cum sit Rex, sed quia error est in nomine.

This Cote armoure of the said Christian king, I noted as I found the same
painted among the rest of the Cotes of all Christian Princes, upon the cover
of the Font in the Cathedral church of York.

Yet Munsterus in his book of Cosmographie, figurethe unto the same Prince an
other Cote armor: Videlicet, a Lion Rampante upon a Cross, the metal, or
colors of the field, or tokens borne in the same, he describes not. The
other, as I have seen the same, is rightly displayed both of the field, and
the signs borne therein. Wherefore, I mind here to speak but of the drops
upon the said Cross, being blazed Guttie, and no mention made of color:
which I think needs not to be rehearsed, for that these drops are of
their proper color, and are to be taken for drops of blood.

And therefore in an other manner take the blazon of the same noble king his
arms, who bears Mars, on a Cross, Solis guttie. This name Christus, of the
field, within a Crown d'Espines proper. The drops also here descriued have
a spiritual interpretation, which every true, and christian heart may
rightly understand, what they signify.

Drops.
Other drops there be, as drops of rain and dew. Such drops feed, and
nourishe fish in the sea, make Oysters fat, and breed in them Pearls, and
Precious stones, as Isidore says, and namely the drops of the morninge
dew. And although a drop be most neshe, yet by often fallinge it pierces
that thing, that is right hard, as this verse says: Gutta cauat lapidem,
non vi, sed saepe cadendo.
The hard stone is pierced with droppinge,
Not by strength, but by often fallinge.


Stilly.
The field is Uerte, Stilly, d'Argente. This is a right little part of
water, or rain, departed by sum violence from the whole, and is called
Gutta, when it stands, or hangs on eauesinges, or of trees: and when it
falls, it is called Stilla: and thereof comes Stillicidium, as it were a
fallinge drop.

A drop hanginge, fallinge, or standinge, is in substance most clear,
round in form, small, and strayte in the over part, little in quantity,
and great in virtue. For it moysteth the earth that it falls upon, and
makes it plenteous, and fruitful, feeds, and nourishes roots and seeds,
and makes them grow: and quickens, and preserves greenesse in trees,
herbs, and grass. Therefore I have descriued these styles in their proper
field.

G. bears Azure, a Bar Gemewe, Or, between three hands sinister, Sinister
hand Palm.
d'Argente. The Tymbre, a palm of an hand dexter, d'Ermyne, set on a Wreath
Or, and Sable, manteled Azure, doubled Argente.

The token borne in this Cote armor, is a left hand. For it suffers the
right hands work, and has that name Sinistra, of Sinere. to suffer..

And the hand highte Palma, when the fingers benne streithte forth, as it
were boughs, or branches sprayed.

The field is Sable, two arming Swords transuers in bar, poyncte in poyncte
at the hilts, between three Trewels d'Argente. Trewell.
The people of Israel, when they were come out of their captivity at
Babylon, began to build again the walls of Jerusalem: 2. Esdr. ^*
and being continually hyndered of their enemies, they were constreyned, as
every one of them did hold his trewell with one hand to work, so with the
other he hold his weapon to defend him. And every one that builded, had his
Sword girde by his thighe, and so builded they.

The Trewell is an ancient addition of Armorie.

The field is d'Or a manche maltale Sable, Manche.
semie margarite propre.

What a Manche is taken to be, I have showed in the first book entitled the
Concordes of Armorie. And touching the Margarites wherewith ye said Manche is
poudered. Chaucer, in his second and third books, entitled, the Testament of
love, makes a great process of them, as gemmes very precious, clear, and
little: And thus descriueth them, (as he reads in the works of great
clerks, which entreat of the kinds and propreties of things) sayng,
Margarite, or Margrit.
that the Margarite is a little white pearl, throughout holowe and round, and
verteous. And on the Sea sides in great Britayne in Muscle shelles, of the
heavenly dew, the best been engendered: in which by experience been found
three fair virtues. Chaucer.
One is, it geeueth comfort to the feeling spirits in bodily persons of
reason.2. It is profitable to health, against ye passions of sorry men's
hearts.3. It is needful and noble in staunchyng of blood, there else to much
would out run.

The bearer thereof should be steadfast, amiable, and in peace, virtuous also,
with long continuance in mekenes, that mother is of all virtues: showing mercy
and pitye with the heart toward all men, embracing also peace, and following
it. Therefore let all gentlemen suffer in no wise this jewel the Margarite to
be blemished, as nighe as they may, but with heart and mind study to
obtain the virtues that thereby are signified, and so through grace, for
their service, they shall be hyghely advanced.

Daisie.
H. Bears Ermyne, a Pale verte, semie de daysie, propre. Chaucer writes much
of this flower in many places of his works: and in especially in his preface
to the legend of good weomen, where he says of him self being in love with
this flower in the month of May.

Leaning on my elbowe and my side.
The long day I shope me for to abide
For nothing else, and I shall not lie,
But for to look upon the Deysie
That well by reason men it call may
The days eye, or else the eye of the day
The empress, and flower of flowers all
I pray to God that fair might she fall
And all that love flowers, for her sake
But natheles, ne wene not that I
Make, In praysinge of the flower again the lefe,
No more than of the corn again the shefe.
And the said Chaucer writes in a goodly Balade of his also of the Daysie,
where he calls it, Daysie of light, very ground of comfort
The sons daughter (ye hyghte) as I read
For when he westreth, Sons Daughter.
farewell your disporte
By your nature anon right for pure dread
Of the rude night, that with his boistous wede
Of darkness, shadoweth our emispere
Then closen ye, my lives Lady dear.


Flowers do well become lovers, for that they take therein delight, and therefore
are of great dignity in signs Armoriall.

His field is of the Sapphire, the Sun propre, Sun.
or thus. He bears Azure, a Sun d'Or.

The certain quantity of this Planet is unknown to earthely dwellers. The
Son, but he shine (says Chaucer) for son is not accounted: so virtue, but
it stretches in goodness or profit to an other, is no virtue, but into his
contrary, the name shall be reuersed.

The field is of the Perle, Spur.
two Spurs in Pale, Rubye. His creste a mollet blemished Topaze, set on a
wreath Perle, and Diamonde, manteled Saphyre, dobled Topaze. Chaucer says
that habit, makes no mo^cke, ne wearing of gyite Spurs, makes no knight.

F. Bears Azure, a wheel and an Orle of eight Pheons d'Or. This is taken for
the whele of that marvelous monstre Fortune, Fortune.
as Boethius calls her. lib. 2. de consolatione Philo. The blind goddess
Fortune, with her doble visage, and whirlynge whele, cruelly casts down
kings, and changes the lowest to the highest, and the highest, to the lowest. She
made Cresus king of the Lydians to be caught by Cyrus, Cresus.
who would have burnte him, but that a rain descended from heaven, that
rescowed him. Thus Fortune deceyuable enhaunceth up the humble cheer of him
that is discomfited, and neither hears ne recketh of wretched wepynges. She
is so wretched and hard, that she laugheth and scorneth at the tears of them,
whom with her fre will she has made to weep. Her turning whele declares her
unstableness, for if she were accounted stable, she then no longer could be
called Fortune. She will be holden of no man, and when she departs, she
brings him to sorrow. For what other thing is flattryng Fortune, but a manner
showing of wretchedness that is to come. To some she is perverse and froward,
to some again she is as good and favorable: as to Tymotheus, Tymotheus.
a noble capteyne of the Athenienses, who for the good Fortune he had in
battle, was painted liyng a sleep, and having by him a net pitched, wherein
Fortune was taken.

The field is Saturn, Bore.
a Bore savage passant Lunae, armed Mars.

These were the arms of Tydeus, Tydeus his Arms.
the kings son of Calcedonye, which he did bear in his shield, at the
destruction of the City Thebes. The Bore is called Aper, a feritate, ablata F.
littera and subrogata P. Vnde and apud Graecos Syagros id est ferus dicitur.
This Beast is armed in his mouth with two crooked tuskes, which are right
strong and sharp, and the same he uses in stead of a sword, and his right
shulder is hard, broad and thick, which he occupies as a shield to defend
him withal, putting that brawne for his chief armoure against his weapon that
pursues him.

The Bore fights with the Wolffe, and hates him by kind. For the wolffe
lies in awayte for his children, and steals them full often.

The field is of the Topaze, Dragon.
a Dragon, Emeraude.

This was The Arms of Ethyocles king of Thebes, Ethyocles.
which he did bear in his shield, when he fought with his brother Polymyte
for the kingdom, wherefore the one of the^ slew the other.

K. Bears Azure, Cathedre.
a Cathedre, or chair Royal d'Or, adourned with Rubies propre. Such a chair
is descryued by Chaucer in the third book of Fame, where he says.

Fame satte in a seat Imperial
That made was of Rubye royal,
Which that a Carboncle is I called.
And there she was perpetually istalled. Carboncle.

Bores beade.
The field is Sol, a Bores head coped Saturn.

These were The Arms of Sir Thopas, as in the meter made of him may appear at
large, in the works of Chaucer.

Creaste.
And for his creste he bare a Tower
Wherein sticked a Lillye flower
Of colors all most propre.
Here note th'antiquitie of Creastes.

Annulet.
L. bears Sable and gules parted per Fesse, an Annu^ let d'Or, Asterites.
having the gemme Asterites, propre.

This is a precious stone, and is white, and conteanethe as it were light
therein enclosed, or like a Sterre going within it, and makes the Sun beams
white, whereof also it takes his name. Of his virtues I neade not to speak,
his beauty and fayrenes brings him commendacion sufficient. And of the
giving of Annullettes or rings, there may be found diverse hystories,
amongst who^ I have noted this one. Lucius Silla.
Lucius Sylla, being dictator of the Romans, gave unto Roscius a player in
Comedyes a ryng of gold, which was the token of a knight at that time, as a
coler or cheyne of gold is at this time. This Roscius, for his excellency in
pronunciation and gesture, Roscius.
the noble Cicero called his Jewel, and so much delited in him, that he
contended with him, whether Roscius could set forth one sentence in more
fashions of gesture and contenance, or he express the same sentence in a more
diversity of eloquente words.

And touching the token borne in the said cote armor, if a Cross, Sterre,
Cressante, or any flower were figured on the same Annulet, it were a great
beautefiynge of the said Arms, and no little commendacion to the bearer.

He bears Argente, Pursse.
a pursse gules, doble tasseled d'azure.

This may be taken for a good token in arms, as of liberality, wha^ the
same is not shut. But being knitte, and so borne, it is a token of avarice:
for so Chaucer writes in the book entitled the Romante of the Rose, where he
says.

Avarice held in her hand.
A pursse that hounge by a band,
And that she hid, and bound so strong
Men must abide wondre long
Out of the pursse ere there came ought
For that ne comes in her thought
It was not certain her entente
That from that pursse a penny went.
And further the same Chaucer, says in the said book.

That a full great fool is he ywis
That both rich and poor and nigarde is
A Lord may have no manner of vice
That greueth more than avarice.
For nigarde never with strength of hand
May win him great Lordshippe or land.
And whosoever will have friends here
He may not hold his treasure dear.
For by ensample tell I this
Right as an Adamante Ywis Adamante.

Can draw to him full subtillye
The iron, that is laid therebye,
So draws folks hertes ywys
Silver and gold that yeuen is.
M. Bears verte, a king armed at all poynctes d'Argent, King.
bearing a scepter and crown, Or, wynged d'Ermyne.

Mercury.
This may be taken for the God Mercury, God of eloquence, for to diverse he
has appeared, as having wings, so in hystories of him may be read.

Mars.
The field is of the pearl, Mars all armed on horsseback with spear and
shield, Rubye.

This was the Banner of Theseus, Theseus.
when he came to the destruction of Thebes City, and slew Creon king thereof.
And thus Chaucer writes of the said Theseus his banner, and penon in these
words. Penon.


The red statue of Mars with spear and targe
So shyneth in his white Banner large
That all the fields glitteren up and down:
And by his Banner, borne is his penon
Of gold full rich, in which there was ybete
Minotaure.
The Minotaure that he wan in Crete.
Th'antiquitie of bearing arms.
Thus it may appear, that arms were long borne in good order, before the siege
of Troy: for the destruction of the city Thebes, was before that siege, as
Ihon Lydegate does affirm. Chaucer also, in the tale of the knight,
describes what token Lycurge the great king of Thrace did bear in the field.
Lycurge king of Thrace.
These be his words.

In stead of a Cote armor over his harneys
With nails yealowe, Bears skin.
and bright as any gold,
He has a Bears skinnne, cole black for old.
P. W. bears Sable, three Roches nayantes, Roches.
d'Argente. These were sometime the arms of an honorable Prelate that had to
name Petrus de Rupibus, Petrus de Rupibus.
who was many years Bishop of Winchester, in the time of King John, and Henry
the third his son. And the said Roches, mine Author says, he did bear
after his own name, which me thinks, was evil applied thereunto, to give
him Fisshes in stead of Rocks. For Rupes in Latin be called Hills, Banks,
or Rocks, so steep down, as no man may clime them. But I take the said
Bishop his name, as then was the use, Rock is called Roche in the Northren
tongue.
to be written, Peter at Roche, or Peter de la Roche. These seem to draw
most nigh his name in English, but the Latin name does nothing agree
thereto, which I refer to their judgment, that have readde of him, or of
his name. Polydore Virgill calls him, Vir integerrimus, and no less is to be
thought, because the charge of the education of the said King Henry the
third was committed to him, as to a Father prudente, and sage in the
institution of such a noble Prince.

The field is Saturn, a kings Head Lunae, crowned Solis. This might be taken
for the Arms of sum high Prince, or other Chiefetaine, which had taken
some king in fight, and held him as prisoner. Diverse histories make mention,
that when mighty Princes, and valiante Kings be given to sensuality and
pride, not weighinge the good sayings of the wise, nor harkening to the
wholesome counsel of their friends, they oftentimes fall into the hands of
their enemies, and then are eftsoons deprived of their Kingedomes, and
Regaleties, either else suffer imprisonmente, famine, distress, and other
pains and torments, endinge so their lives in great calamity and misery:
Pausanias.
as is readde in one Pausanias, King of the Lacedaemonians, who at a banquet
desired instantly of Simonides, a Poet in Greece, that he would then speak
some thing notable, and that sauoured of wisdom. Simonides thereat smilinge,
Remember, said he, that thou art a man. Pausanias took that scornefully, and
esteemed it nothing. Afterward Pausanias being put in prison in Chalcaeco,
and there being famished ere he died, remembered the saying of Simonides, and
with a loud, and lamentable voice said: O my friend of Coeus, (for there was
the Poet borne) thy words were of great importance, but I, for mad pride,
esteemed them nothing.

This little History is not unworthy to be had in remembrance.

N. bears Sable, Ousle, or Blackebirde.
three Owsles d'Argente, beaked, and legged, Or. The tymbre, a Bull gardant,
Argente, armed, and vnguled Gules, set on a Wreathe Sable, manteled Azure,
doubled Argente.

The Owsle, or Black bird sings pleasantly, and therefore is often taken,
and kept in cage. This bird, although she be in all Countries black, yet
in Achaiae she is white, Bull.
as Isidore says. This Creaste for the said Cote armor, Isis.
is a white Bull. Jupiter turned him into the similitude thereof, when louinge
the fair maid Isis, he could not otherwise have his will of her. This
signifies, that beauty may overcome the best.

The field is Mars, Lion.
a Lion Rampaunte, with a double Quewe d'Argente. In chief d'Ermyne, an Eagle
displaid with two heads Saturn, membred, and crowned d'Or. Alexander the
great, when as he hunted in a great Park in the country Basaria, that had
remained vnhunted, duringe the time of four men's ages, he killed four
thousand wild beasts therein, among the which there was a Lion of a rare
bigness, that came running toward him, whom he did not only receive, but
killed him with one stroke. Such was the prowes, and strength of so mighty
and puissante a Conqueroure. Over whose head also at the battle he fought
with Darius at Arbella, Eagle.
there was seen an Eagle, which neither fearinge the classhinge of the
harneys, nor the cryinge of them that were dying, did still fly in the air
directly above him, which did show a certain token of victory, and even so
it came to pass. And therefore the same Alexander might rightely assumpte to
him self the bearinge of the foresaid Lion, and Eagle, in the best order
that could be divised, or set forth agreeable to his worthiness.

Cross Clauie
The field is Gules, a Cross doble clauie d'Argent. This Cross ought to be
figured as a double warded key, at every of the three ends ascendinge to the
chief of the Escocheon. Key.
The key whereof the Prophet Esaye makes mention in these words. And the key
of the house of David, will I lay upon his shoulder, Parad. Symbo. Heroi.
so that he shall open, and no man shall shut, he shall shut, and no man
shall open. Itidem Jesus Christi Crucem figurabat.

The field is of the Emeraude, an Hand armed, holding a Sword of the Pearl
crowned within the point Topaze. Sword.


The wholesome doctrine of S. Paul, is of all faithful, and obediente
subjects to be received and embraced: where he says, Will thou be without
fear of the power? Do well then, and thou shalt have praise of the same: for
he is the minister of God for thy wealth. But if thou do evil, then fear,
for he bears not the sword for naught. For he is the minister of God, a
taker of vengeance to ponishe him that does evil, etc.

Pillars.
His field is Iouis, two pillars Lunae.

Diverse Emperors, and puissante Conquerous have erected Pillars in their
Empiers and kingedomes, for sundry, and weighty causes and pourposes: some to
declare the extentes, and lymittes of their Lands, and Kingedomes, sum to
show the expeditions of their iourneyes and voyages, sum to set forth
the places of their burialles, sum to figure therein their Acts, and
valiant deeds, to the encouragemente of those that should succeed them to
do the like. And other sum have written therein the secret knowledge of
certain sciences and letters, as in diverse Histories may be readde. And more
of Pillars ye may read in the next book folowinge.

He bears Ermynes, on a Pale d'Or, Portecullis.
a Portecullis d'Azure.

This in Latin is called Rastrum militare, sieve Politicum, and serves for
defense in the gates of Cities, Castles, Ports, and Towers. For the same
being loosed, or let down, it lets, or rather oppresses them that would
enter thereby.

Eiusmodi ad portas militare obstaculum Romae factum fuisse scribit Appianus,
Appian.
Res Roman. Civilly dissidio vrgente, and Imperium sibi vendicante Sylla.
Sustulit hoc maleficium Carboniana turba, quam (dum conarentur per portam
Collinam irruptionem facere) Sylla repressit: laxatisque insidiarijs Rastris,
intro latebat, quorum iniuria, and lapsu, Senatores ipsi nonnulli, and qui se
in Carbonianam libertatem adseruerant, oppressi sunt.

The field is Saturn, in Saltier two Cypres trees raguled Solis, Cypres tree.
Iuye.
enwrapped with Iuy proper. These trees are truncated, that is to say, ye
boughs cut of from the body, and laid in form of a Saltier. The ends whereof
may not touch the Angles of the shield. The Cypres next unto ye Ceder tree is
most formable, and necessary to the building of Temples, to wres, and for other
great and pompous Edifices. It never fails, nor rotteth, but abides, and
dureth always in his first estate and condition. And for the right good
savor, and sweet smell it has, the Iuy, being of heavy and bitter smell, does
most desire to creep about him. And his greenesse does much beautify the
golden color of the other. And for that the Iuy is always green, Poets were
crowned therewith, in token of noble wit and sharp. It was consecrate to
Bacchus God of wine, and to Mars. Pliny says, that the great Alexander
crowned his knights with Iuy, when they had the victory of Indie.

He bears Sable, a Fesse d'Ermine, between three heads de Capres, coped
arge^t, armed and arnuced d'Or, portant pome aus d'Iuy proper. The leaves of
this tree do make goats fat, and their blood medicinable for diverse
diseases. Villus quem habent pensilem in mento, vocatur aruncus, quo si quis
vnam carum traxerit, aiunt reliquas stupefieri.

The field is Uerte, an Ostriche regardante, Struthion, or Ostriche.
Argente, bearinge a Key d'Or. The Ostrich in Latin is called Struthio, and
Struthio Camelus, qui ex Struthione and Camelo constat: and is found
especially in Africa. This bird has a head covered with small feathers,
gross eyes and black, not unlike in form, and color to a Camel, a long
neck, a short bil and a sharp, soft feathers, two thighs, and fete with
hoofes cloven, Vt terrestre simul volatileque animal videatur. He cannot fly
for the heaviness of his body, nor extol him self higher then the earth: but
he goes swiftly, and in running not much inferior to an horse, his wings
help him so much. He does swalowe, and digest what so ever he deuoureth, yea,
even the hardest things without any choice.

When he is pursued of hunters, and sees he cannot escape, he takes stones
with his hoof, and casts against his enemies, and oftentimes hurts them.
When he is killed, there is found stones, and iron in his stomach, which he
consumes after long digestion.

He hatethe the Horse by kind. I found him figured in the Cosmographie of
Munster, as before is descriued.

Q. bears Geules, on a Bend between two Cotizes, d'Argente, Siphons.
three Siphons, Sable. Isidore says, that the Siphon is a certain vessel,
which men of the East countries use to occupy, and fill with water,
especially when houses been on fire, to quench the same. The form I have
descriued here, as Paradyne figureth it among his diuises Heroiques.

R. bears Saturn and Mars, parted per Pale, two Partizantes Lunae in
Saltier. Partezant.
These weapons are commonly known, and borne about the persons of Princes,
Nobles, and Captains.

The field is of the Diamond an Helmet Pearl, ensigned with a Garlande
gramine. Helmet.
The Ancient bearers, Crown gramine.
Horsemen, Captains, Lieutenantes of Cities, Towns, and Ports, which had
doughtely sustained the siege of their enemies, and were delivered from them,
in old time was given a Garlande of grass: in Latin called Corona graminea,
sieve Obsidionaria: which although it were wrought, or laid about with
grass, (being only the herb, that can, or might be found in a place long
besieged) yet nevertheless the same garlande gramine, Garlande Gramine.
(as Pliny witnesses) is most honorable, and noble, and to be had in price
above all others, Gold, Pearl, Olive, Laurel, Palm, Oak, and Iuye, geuinge
place to common grass, that Royal herb of dignity. Fabius Maximus corona
graminea donatus est ab vniuersa Italia: quandoquidem non pugnando, sed cauendo
rem Romanam restituisset: and exercitum sibi creditum conseruasset.

Lance.
S. bears Silver, a Lance between two Flaunches, Sable: and on the
Flaunches, two Gauntlettes, as the field.

The especial token borne in this Ensign, is taken for a Dimilaunce staff,
which being the chiefeste weapon of the horseman, is therefore congruently
placed between two Gauntlettes, Gauntlet.
the most especial armoure of the hands.

Scocheon.
T. bears Gold, on a Scocheon Gules, a key d'argent, wrapped about with a
Serpent Uert. This Cote armor touching the field, is one of the honorable
ordinaries charged.

The field is d'Ermyne, on a pale Diamonde, Oxes head.
a Bull his head of the pearl, araid with a fagotte, Carboncle.

When as Quintus Fabius, Q. Fabius.
(being Dictator or principal captain of the Romans) had trained and
drawn Anniball and his host into a field, Anniball.
enclosed about with mountains and deep ryuers, where Fabius had so enuiro^ned
him and his army, that they were in ieopardye, either to be famished, for
lack of vitaile, or else in flying, to be slain by the Romans, Anniball
perceauing these dangers, commanded to be brought before him, in the deep of
the night when nothing was stirrynge, about two thousand great oxen and
bulls, which a little before his men had taken in forrageyng, and caused
fagottes made of dry sticks to be fastened unto their horns, Terror and
error.
and set on fire. The beasts troubled with the flambe of fire, ran as they
were wood up toward the mountains, whereas lay the host of the Romans,
Anniball with his whole army following in array. The Romans, which kept the
mountains, being sore afraid of this new and terrible sight, forsook their
places. Fabius.
And Fabius dreading the deceiptfull wit of Anniball, kept his army within
the trenche, and so through policy Anniball with his host escaped without
damage. Thus ye may understand, (as I said before) how greatly histories do
give light to the hid secrettes of Armorie.

Eagle, on an Hearts head
The field is Mars, an Eagle regardant with wings displayde Lunae, insident
on the head of an Heart, Solis.

The Eagle when he has gathered much duste in his feathers, does then
without fear set upon the Heart, and falls even between his branches: and
beatinge with his wings, so stops the Hearts eyes with duste, until at
length he falls hedlonge from some high hill or rock, and so becomes a
pray to the Eagle. Industry, labor, and diligence, is to be used, when
difficulte, weighty, and high matters, are to be overcome.

P. Bears Gules and Sable, parted per bend sinistre, a Lion rampaunt d'Or,
vibrante a sword d'Argente.

Pompeyus magnus.
Pompey the great had such a Lion graven in his signet. vide in vitis
Plutarchi.

The field is party per baste bar vndade, Argente, and Uerte, Ship.
a ship under sail in her ruff, Sable.

The use of ships, and of their ordinance is known to all men.

He bears Or, three Anckers in bend sinistre, between two Gartiers, azure.

Ancker. Admiral.
Th'Ancker is especially ascribed to Admiralles, in signum (vt apparet) officij
sui in expeditionibus, prouincijsque naualibus.

He bears party per pale Nebule, Saturn, and Venus, two maces bellicall
Solis circumliged with branches of Olive, propre. The token borne in this cote
armoure, is called in latin Claua bellica, which being bound about, Oliuae
ramusculo, may exhibit unto them to whom it is offered, a sign as well of
peace, as of war, which to take, is at his pleasure to whom it is offered.

The field is Gules an Harrowe, Harrowe.
d'Or.

The Harrowe is a noble addicion of Armorie, and was borne (as Froyssarde
says) of William, the son of Albert duke of Bauarie in his ancient, about
the year of our Lord God.1390. And the same Harrowe he did advance, in his
voyage with the Cristia^s, aduersus Aphricam Barbariae ciuitatem. The office of
the Harrowe, is to break and resolve the hard lumpes and cloddes of earth.
Quemadmodu^ autem glebas, and grumos agrorum proscindit and resoluit rastrum
aratorium, ita facile est vero principi, legum, and Sanctionum, atque
cautionum, seu Decretorum aequitate ditionis suae improbos, factiosos,
rebels, and tumultuarios, quique contra suam autoritatem, ac dignitatem
inique se opponunt, coercere.

He bears party per Cheuron embatiled, Or, and Azure, three Leures, Lewre.
contrechanged of the field. The toke^ borne in this Scocheon, is well known
to all gentlemen Fawkeners. The word, or Poesy that might ryghtely be
applied to this cote armoure, is this: Spe illect at inani.

The field is verte, an hyndes head cabaged d'Argente persed with two darts
d'Or, a Son in chief.

The dexterity of Domitiane th'Emperoure in casting of the darte, Domitiane.
is worthy of reme^berance: Darte.
who in the huntyng of a certain wild beast, threw two darts at him so
directly, that the beast seemed to stand having horns on his head, whereas
nature had given him none. Paradyne figureth the head of the beast, as having
two darts in place, where horns should grow.

The field is Sable, five darts in fasce d'Or, Darte.
enwrapped with a serpente verte.

Plutarche writes, that when Scylurus Chaeronensis was about to dye, Scilurus
Charonensis.
having four score goodly children, and of great strength, he offered to
every one of them a Bondell of darts or rods to break, which when they
endeavored themselfes to do, they could not:

He than said unto them, that the darts and rods so made fast and knitte
together, could in no manner of wise be broken. Bondle.
But the father vnlosing the Bondle before the^, did take one rod after an
other, and without any great force or busynes, did break the same,
aduertisinge them hereby, that they all should continue and remain for ever
unvanquished, and not able to be overcome, as long as they agreed, and were
surely knitte in brotherly love, and perfect concord. But if they divided
them selves, or parted with sedition and debate, that then they should
perish, and quickly fall into the hands of their enemies. A goodly example
to embrace concord. Serpente.
By the Serpente about the darts, may be signified that which Christ spoke in
the gospel to his disciples, saying. Be ye wise as Serpents etc. Therefore
note, that there be many significatio^s and secret mysteries in bearing signs
and tokens of armorye.

U. bears barrie vndie 6. pieces d'Ermine, and azure, the prore of a ship
d'Or in chief gules, Fore part of a ship.
one hounde passante, Argent. The token in this escocheon is the fore part of
a ship, and is guarded with a dog on chief, as it were to watch the same.
Such a like ensign did Sergius Galba the Emperor use to bear.

W. Bears per pale Rubye, and Diamonde, an Eagle d'Ermine encorporate with a
Dragon, Eagle, with the Dragon.
Solis.

These are enemies always the one to the other. The Dragon greatly desiring
the eggs of the Eagle, deuoureth and eats up the same: wherefore the Eagle,
wheresoever he sees him, fights with him, and in their fight he is often
wrapped with the Drago^s tail, and so falling down, the one is destroyed of
the other. Eadem elatis, ac superbioribus inter se contendentibus ruina solet
vsu venire.

He bears Sable, Cock, on a Trompet.
a cock d'Argente, pearched on a tro^pet d'Or.

The Cock is a Royal foul, and naturally bears on his head a creaste of
Rubye color, instead of a Crown or diadem. He distinguishes times,
seazons, and hours, both of the day and night, crowynge, or rather syngyng
most clearly and strongely. The Lion dreadeth the white Cock, because he
bredeth a precious stone, called Allectricium, like to the stone that highte
Calcedoneus. And for that the Cock bears such a stone, the Lion specially
abhors him. Ab Galli alitis tubaeque horologio non difficile relinquitur
iudicare, quantum intersit inter belli and pacis conditiones. The cock is
messenger of the day light, he sings when he has the victory, being
overcome he hydeth himself. Lucemque and hominum aspectum refugit.

W. bears verte, an arming Sword in pale d'Argent crowned at the poyncte in
^hefe, Sword crowned.
between two flowers de Lucies d'Or. The sword in this cote armoure, is a
protection to the flowers therein borne.

Tergate.
The field is Gules, a Tergate d'Or, transfixed with a Raper Argente.

This may be taken for the ensign of some noble captain, who had
valiauntly behaved and borne himself in the field, with loss also of his
life.

Of this, the field is Azure, a Cross portate in his propre color.

Cross pottate.
Our master Christ, being the son of God, and God, was constreigned to bear
an heavy cross on his shoulder, in such fashion as is before descriued:
wherein afterward both his hands and fete were nailed with long and great
nails of iron: and the cross with his naked and bloody body, being lift
upon height, was let fall with violence into a mortayse, that all his ioynctes
were dissolved. And notwithstanding all this torment, he never grudged, but
liftyng up his eyes unto heaven, he prayed for his enemies, saying: Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do. This was the charity most
incomparable of the son of God employde for the redemption of mankind.

Pillar of Porpherie.
Y. His field is of ye Pearl, two pillars of Porpherie, in Saltier.

I need not here to blaze the color of the Pillars, being Porpherie, which
is a stone always of purple color. Let the bearer thereof see that he be
specially endowed with the virtue, Fortitude.

Z. Annulie.
Bears Sable, Annulie, d'Or. 4.3.2.1. This field is charged with rings.

Hanniball, Rings sent to Carthage.
for a testimony of the victory he had of the Romans in Italye, sent 3.
Bushels of golden rings to Carthage, which he had taken and plucket of the
hands of the Romayne knights, capteynes and senators. Let the bearer of such
a coat (as is before displayde) rejoice in adversity.

The field is Checkey, gules, and ermynes, a book Or, with claspes d'Argente.

A Book is to be borne of him, Book.
which is studious of any the sciences or tongues: and which has a certain
excellency therein above others. Cato Vticensis.
Cato, called Vticensis, was so much enflamed in the desire of learning, that
(as Suetonius writes) he could not tempre him self in readinge Greek books,
whiles the Senate was sitting.

This Cato was named the chief pillar of the public weal of the Romans.

The field is parted per pale vndade, argente and azure, two demye hyppotames,
Hippotame or water horse.
Sable, armed and vnguled, gules.

These be water Horses, called Hippotami, and are chefely seen in the studdes
of Nile, and Gange. Munsterus describes these beasts, and says they have
two hoofes like an Ox, the back, main, and neiyng of an Horse, a wrigled
tail, and crooked tethe like to a Bore. I have charged the same beasts, but on
half wise in the field, as it were passinge from the water: which note well
and mark, and then I doubt not but the devise of the same will content some
man's fantesie.

A. Bears Sable, a Pile in poyncte of the chief, betwe^ two wheels, Wheel.
Pile.
d'or. Th'especial tokens in this cote armoure are known to all men, as
wheels to be the necessariest part of Chariotes, wagons, and carts: and
Piles also most needful to make all foundacions upon imperfect ground, sure
and fyrme.

These are noble ensigns and of great antiquity. Katere^ whele.
Yet of wheels, the Katheren whele, so called of old, is of most honor: and
must be figured after an other form than those I have before blazed Willigise,
archbishop of Mogunce in Germanye, assumpted for his ensign a Cart wheel,
Carte wheel.
with this inscription: Willigise memineris quid sis, and quid olim fueris, and
afterward the same wheel was given and confirmed by the Emperor, to be
th'ensigne of the said Archebishoprike for ever.

B. He bears d'Ermines, and Or, parted per pile in poyncte of the chief,
Pheon.
a Pheon, Sable.

This particio^ as it is rare seen, so can it not lack (being thus charged)
his due commendacion.

1 Bears Argent on.ij. bars Sable, tji. Escalopes de Or, Escallopes
and to his creaste on a wreath Argent and Sable, a dragons head rassed Azure
portant a brau^che of the herb Pulegium propre. The shel of the Scalloppe
excels the shells of al other fish which I can read of, and therefore is
thought not unmeet so adorn ye collers of ye knights even of Saint Nicholas
order, which order when it took his beginning, how many were chosen to be
fellows of the same order, In what manner the same Escalopes were comixed in
the said collar, and what was signified thereby, ye may plainly understand in
Simbolis heroicis paradini fol. 15. I read also that the shelles of certain
fyshes were sent among other rich gifts to the great Alexander by the kings
of the Indians, as a present of great extimacion and valor. Ptolomeus a nigh
kinsman of the said Alexander, when he was grievously wounded by an Indian in
his left shoulder, dreamed that there appeared unto him a dragon that offered
unto him an herb out of his mouth, for the healing of his wound, and taking
away of the venim which he had received of the weapon wherewith the wou^d was
made, of the which herb when he awaked, he showed both the color and the
facion, affirminge that he could know it, if any manne could find yt out,
the same was sought by so many, that at length yt was found, and being put
upon the wound, the pain strait was ceased, and the skarre within short
space was closed. For this cause therefore did I discriue the said dragons
head, Pulegium
having in his mouth the herb Pulegium which herb has a full sweet smell,
and hatht hat name of Pullulando springinge, as Isodore says, and is more
precious then pepper among the Indes, the virtue thereof is to cast out and
distroy venim, and some English writers do judge Pulegium to be that herb,
Peniriall or Organum
which we call Peniriall or Organum

Galthrope
He bears Orc a fesse dancie de Ermynes between iij. Galthropes Sable. And to
his creaste on a Torce de Argent and Azure, a Raven volant propre, holding in
her dexter clawe a clod of earth Purpure, the said Galthrops be called
Murices in latin, and are made of Iron, having.iiij sharp points equally
divided one from another, and those standing in a manner cross ways, so that
wherso ever the same shall be ^ast, the have one poinct standinge up straighte,
and are used as engines in the wars, to gall ye horse that shall pass by them,
Paradine in his book of devices Heroiques, sets forth ye form thereof to be
as I have before discriued. Touching a Raven, Raven
I read that when as Alexander the great, laid siege to the City of Gaza,
minding before he would give an assault thereunto, to make Sacrifice after his
country manner, and to require the aid of the Gods: It chanced as he was so
doing, Q. Curti^s
that a Raven flienge above, let fall a clod which she carried in her claws
upon the kings head, where yt brake and resolved in pieces, which being
consulted upon by the deuinours: They judged that there was some peril
toward the kings person, And such a Raven may be borne in coat armor as
is aforesaid, and that to a good purpose, and without any challenge in
bearinge him after this form, as is above displayed.

The field is of the Rubie a Diadem Topaze, Diadem
having a wrethe about it Pearl and Emeraude, and too his crest an horse
Saturn in the beams of the Son, Such a Diadem as here is spoken of Darius
king of the Percians did were when he marched forwards to the River of
Euphrates, Darius
against the great Alexander, and is called in the Percian tongue Cidaris, and
yt had a roole about yt of white and green. And the same Darius in his
marching had a great horse, Cidaris.
which always followed the chariotes that were consecrate to Jupiter, Horse of
the Son
and this horse the Percia^s call, the horse of the Son. The readinge of
thistorie of thactes of the said great Alexander gave me occasion of the
device hereof. And therefore know this for certeinty, yt the reading of
histories shall most quickly give you help to set forth any device heroique

The field is Barrie Bendie Gules and Or and to his creaste on a wreathe Or and
Sable, Barrie bendy
a Swanes head rassed de Argent, this said coat after thopinion of M.G. Leigh
must always abide of viij. pieces, and properlye may not otherwise be blased
then as aforesaid, Swanne
the Swan, whose head I have discriued for the crest, is a bird dedicated to
Appollo the God of wisdom, Cicero lib. i. Tust. quest,
Ob presagium finis, or as Cicero says Quod ab eo diuinacionem habe re
videantur, quia prouidentes quid in morte boni sit, cum dulcissimo cantu et
voluptate moriantur.

Insignia poetarum
The Swanne is the ensign of the Poets, whose field is Azure a Swanne propre.
Alciate comendeth this ensign lib. i. Embl. Cvtj. wherefore I refer what I
could write more hereof to Stockhamer his comentaries upon the same Emblem^.

He bears Argent, Roscarrock^
a cheuron between twoe Roses Gules, and a sea Tenche nayant d' Azure. Or
thus. His field is of the pearl, a Cheuron with twoe Roses Ruby in chief, and
one Tench marine Saphier nayant en point. The Rose springs out of a thorn,
that is hard and roughe, yet receives no part of the kind of the thorn, but
arayeth it with fair color and pleasant smell. This kind of Rose sayethe
Theophraste, for the most part has but five leaves: some are found that have
xij. other soome xx. other soome have far many mo. There be also says he,
which been called hundredth leaves. those be of most sweet smelles, and grow
especially in Cirena. Rose
The rose comfort and relieueth the sight, through the puretie of the
color, pleases the smell by sweetenes of odor, and both green or dry has
virtue and is medicinable against many grievous sicknesses and euilles, as
Pliny witnesses.

The Tenche in latin is called Tinca a fyshe as Ausonius describes it for the
poor man's dishe, Tenche
for that in ancient time it was a common meat for their diet, and although
in these our days it is well accepted and taken for a good kind of fish,
both necessary for food, and to medicyne, yet in the old time, the richest
men made little estimacion thereof, wherefore the common people were best
acquaynted with the same, as the said author witnesses in this verse or
sentence.

Quis non and videris vulgi solatia,
Tincas norit.
Who does not know in each degree,
a Tenche, the commoners meat to be.
This Tenche before dysplayed is called Tinca marina, a Tenche of the sea, and
lyuethe neither in mudde or myer, but is clean from such infectyons, and
therefore is not hurtful. The foresaid field and the contents in the same,
do signify the bearer to have audacitie, yet in all honestye: and to be
courteous with much discrecion. Then sign appertains to the name of
Roscarech, alias Roscarrocke in Cornewal. His creaste a Lion rampant propre
color, armed and langued Azure, about his neck a Crownall silver, set on a
Torce gold and Azure, as may appears above figured.

Sithes.
He bears vert. iij. Sithes argent points assendant in chief, his creast ye
fish Odimoliont haryaut Sable, on a wrethe Argent and Azure, the tokens borne
in the said coat armoure are of ancient bearinge, and are instruments not
only to cut down corn or grass but have been used in the wars, such
ingines did Alexander the great his soldioures frequent against the force of
the Elephantes. The creast of the said coat armor is a little fish, which
cleaves to a ship, and makes her to abide as though she lay at anchor, be the
ship never so great, the latins call the fish Remora eo quod cogat stare
nauigia, Remora
she is otherwise called ^cheneis piscis quidem paruulus aspectu niger
longitudine que mediocri.



The field is barrye of vitj. pieces Luna and Mars, Ibis
one a canton Iouis the mighty planet Sol, his creaste is Ibis head Saturn
couped, erassing a serpent of the Moon, set on a wrethe Topaze and Sapphire,
ma^teled Diamond, doubled pearl. Ibis is a foul of Egypt, and as Aristotle
says is in that country white and at Pelusum only black, it is an high
bird, having stiff legs, and a long bill, they be carried out of Libia into
Egypt with a sotherne wind, and do much good there to the country in killing
and eating of serpents Semetipsam purgat rostro in ann^ aquam fundens, this
bird is like unto that which is called Ciconia.



He bear the party per pale Saturn and Mars a flower de lize Luna. Alcion^.
And to his creaste upon the helm on a wreathe Topaze and saphiere an Alcian
volant of the Amatist, mixte with Pearl, beaked as the Emeraud, mounted on the
nest texed with the slipps of the vine propre, manteled Ruby, doubled Pearl,
this is a bird of the sea, little more then a Sparow, which in the cold
winter season does lay her eggs on the sands, and when the sea is most
troublous tantam gratiam diuinitus habet that it becomes sodeinly calm, and
the storms and winds do cease until the bird have all hatched, and brought
up her chickens, and made them able to flee, which is in the space of.xiiij.
days, which the shipmen diligently mark, fearinge no tempest all those
days, look sebast. stockhamer his comentaries upon the.xix. Emblem. of
Alciate. The propre colors of the said bird ar as is before discribed. She
lives by fish, Kings fisher.
and is taken for that which we call the kings fisher.

He bears Azure a cheuron on chief between twoe decressa^ts Argent.
Ligurinus.
The timber, a Ligurines head rassed vert, Grene finche.
bearing a thistel Or, set on wrethe Argent and Sable manteled Gules, doubled
Or, The bird Lugurinus feeds much upon thistles, and of nature is enemy to
the Ass, sed valet vocis amenitate, some suppose this bird to be a green
fynche, Nightingale
and as seruius writes is taken to be the Nightingalle. These devises Heroique
before figured, might suffice for the proof how cote armours with their blason
heaume and timbre in sundry wise be borne, to the honor and comendacion of the
bearer: and upon what ground they have their original, the which the officers
at arms do chiefly respect in their assignements to gentlemen, and no sign or
token armoriall is by the^ devised, but the same is congruent and agreeable to
the virtues and qualities wherewith the bearer is pryncypally endowed, and with
which token he also delights, and so he ought to take delight therein, as to
defend the same (even to the death) from all challinge or vituperie, which
rule of all the degrees of nobility ought never to be forgotten. But now what
significacion may be truly collected and gathered of any Simboll armorial,
co^monlye called Arms, and what the colors therein do represent, by the
planets or stones precious, to the renown and fame of the bearer, one plainly
for example now next does ensue, the which of bounden duty I may not omit.



The atcheuement containing the sundry coats as they are marshalled and borne
by the right honorable Lord, Sir William Cecill, Baron of Broughley, and
knight of the most honorable order of the Garter, is thus to be blased.

1 He bears barruley of.x. Argent and Azure, six Escocheons Sable. 3.2.1.
charged with as many Lions rampant of the first, langued Gules, borne by the
name of Cecill.

2 The field is parted per pale, Gules and Azure, a Lion rampant de Argent
sustayning a tree Uert, borne by the name of winstone.

3 Bears Sable, a plate between three towers tryple towred with ports
displayed de Argent, borne by the name of Cairleon.

4 His field is Argent, on a bend between two cotizes Gules three
sinquefoiles de Or, borne by the name of Eckinton.

5 Bears Argent, a churon between three Rocks de Ermines, and is borne by
the name of Walcot.

The sixth as the first, the which, and the second are differenced upon them
both with a cressant, which signifies that he is of a second brother to both
those houses, from whence in blood he is lineally descended. All which
atchieuementes before displayed, is within the Garter cotized of two Lions de
ermine, to his creaste upon an healme on a Torce Or and Azure, a garb de Or,
supported with two Lions, the one Azure and the other Argent, manteled Gules,
doubled Argent. To these before discriued, is added his Apothegme or word. Cor
vuu^ via vna, yt is, one heart, one way. The sincerity and te^pera^ce of this
noble baron as there they be by his propre e^signe openly signified, so his
great wisdom and virtue in preferring justice, and the public weal of his
country before any private affection or singular apetites, are also thereby
certainly declared, the orient Pearl being so often and preciously treasured
in the field and contents of his coat armor. And truly that man is most
mete to be a nighe counsaillour, in whom sincerity and temperance be joined
with wisdom, such one shall bring to the palace of his prince, an honorable
remembrance of his justice and vigilaunce, and as well to noble as to unnoble
shall be an excellent pattern and president.

The shields charged with Lions are of ye Adamant, a stone precious and of such
hardines, vt si super incudem positus acerrimo percutiatur malleo ante malleus
and incus vulneribus acceptis dissiliant quam ipse frangatur comminaturue, nec
fieri solum ictus respuit sed resistit etiam igni cuius ardore adeo non
acquiescit numque incalescat si Plinio credimus adeo non feodatur vt purior
fiat, attamen singularis eximiaque lapidis illius duritia calido hirci Leonisue
cruor ita mollescit vt dissoluatur. Cece. offi. li. ^
In armorie it represents fortitude a virtue that fights in defense of
equity, Adamas venena deprehendit, et irrita facit. The nobility of the Lion
is most above all other beasts to be marueled at, in that he in his great
heat, seeks not the death of any creature that yeldeth it self unto him,
iuxta commune prouerbum* parcere prostratis sic nobilis ira Leoni: The field
wherein he abides is of the Rubie party de Saphiere, two gemes very precious,
and of great dignity. The Rubie does demonstrate charity, the Saphiere
loyalty, the one auayling against the biting of the Scorpion, the other being
maruelously effections against all venime, but of the twain, the Saphiere is
most virtuous, Helinandus in his history this writes of it. Saphirus caelo
sereno similis est, cast portari vult gemmaqz gemmarum et lapis sanctus
dicitur. Io. Ferox,
La color and piere Saphirique, recomforte le sense de le home, and profit
counter les enuies, frauds, and terreurs, incitant and prouoquant le home a
paix et amor victore etc. The ports set open in a field Saturn, geeuethe
liberty both to pass forth at will, and to come in when it pleases, to
carry forth, and also to bring in. Porta dicitur quiae potest importari vel
exportari aliquid, proprie autem porta aut vrbis aut castrorum vocatur. Isidor
Etimo lib. 15. cap. 2.
The cause of their construction, is to propulse the force of the enemy, for
the common safety of the country, and ought always to be in the possession
or kepinge of such persons, that embrace obedience and loyaltye, and detest
treason and treachery, and the bearing of them in coat armoure, does
represent no less.

In the fowerth part is seen on a bend marcial, three Cinquefoiles so called
of the number of their leaves, flowers of great estimacion, and worthy of
bearinge, for their auncientie in Arms, for they having five leaves, do
represent five sundry graces, Isidore
as to be perfect in all senses, which are tasting, hearing, seeing, feelinge
and smelling, and learning must be optayned at gods hand to use these aryght,
for that is most needful in a ruler, who above other ought to excel in
knowledge for the better government of the people. The flowers aforesaid be of
Gold, Bartho, de propri rerum. li. 16.
which resembles the son. Aurum est in corporibus sicut sol inter stellas,
sol autem dicitur rex stellarum and lumen earum sic aurum est quasi rex rerum
corporalium and mensura omniu^, and quanto rubicundius tanto melius est. Or en
armorye represente justice, noblesse, puretie, splendure, droyture, obedience,
le home delectable, tractable, clare, and egal, Now ensues Minerua her poor
placynge of these Rocks, in that most ingenious game of chesse, a game
invented for rulers and magistrates, and not for Momus or his insensate chore,
their office is known to all that can play well at the said game, as to guard
the kings and Queens with all the people on the chesse board, and signify in
armorie, vigilance in defense and suertie of the prince and country. The
field wherein these rocks be placed, being of the pearl, betokens purity
of conscience, and singular good will and love even to mortal enemies.

The Garter is de Azure celeste and Saphirique, adorned with this most noble
title ( Gallicis verbis) Honye soit qui male pense, which Polidore has this in
latin, vituperetur qui male cogitat.

The Garb is of the Son royally supported with two Lions, least the
malignitie and cruel attemptates of the deuelishe rablement, and wicked
sowdanes, might devour and consume the grain of such an orient sheaff, and so
altogether is with the said noble beasts (in form first displayed) right
honorably defended, and valiantly guarded, whereby is uttered, how innocents are
by this chiualler courteous, his travel and diligence as well in common causes
as private, defended and assisted, and their causes also daily most
studiously discussed, Pater est orphanorum et iudex viduanum. Thus for brevity
I cease any further to protracte the description of the foresaid ensigns,
desiringe almighty god to be unto the bearer thereof, a shield and buckler, a
suer castle and strong tower, for his defense against the assaults of all his
enemies, that in long life, health felicity and honor, and also with one
heart, one way, to god, his prince, and her laws, he may continue his estate
and vertuouslye mainta^n the tokens and prises of noblenes, as by me the
collector hereof (rude and void of all eloquence) are as before simply
discryed, and homelye uttered, yet such as they be, I eftsoon commend them,
and those that here ensue to his good lordship as a chosen patron, to whom I
may safely yield and commit these sundry collectyons of signs armoryal,
besechyng him the same in as good part to receive, as I here again, do humbly
offer them under the protection and favor of his name.

Sapiens in populo haereditabit honorem, et nomen illius erit viuens in
eternum. Ecclesiastes. 37.



Storke, Ciconia.
He bears party per fesse Sable and Ermine, in chief a cressant between.ij.
letters of S de Argent, and to his Crest upon the Helm on a wreathe, Or and
Azure, a Storks head rassed Argent Pellete, between.ij. wings Sable, beaked
Gold, mantled Gules, dubled Argent. The Storke is taken to be that bird,
which in Latten is called Ciconia, and is of the figure of an Heron, but is
greater and is all white, saving the tops of his wings, his bill and legs be
red, although I have here discribed them the contrary, which is but my device
for example sake, they us natural enemies to serpents and do ^lea them, when
they be old, their birds feed them, and provide meat for them, and volandi
impotentes humeris gestant, wherefore the Image of them was the token of
justice, and the ancient kings had it in the tops of their septers, whereby
theye were admonished to auance justice and piety, and to oppress injustice
and cruelty, Inter omnes alias aues pietatis simbolum gerit, and de immensa
earum pietate erga suos pullos refert Isidorus in lib. de natura auium Ciconiae
magna cura alunt vicissim parents iam aetate deficientes sola bonitate naturae
ad id agendum impulsae inquit Aelian lib. 15. cap. 4. Of this bird came a
greek word for a proverb Antepelargeni, which signifies to be like a storke,
which proverb is to exort men to be kind to their parents, or to their
masters which teach and bring them up, requiting the benefit which they
received of them.



The Noble City of Excester for thensigne thereof, has in a field parted per
pale Mars and Saturn, a castle triple towred Solis, supported of two Pegasus
lunae, with wings vndie Pearl and Saphiere, Manes and shoes of the Topaze.
The creast upon an healme on a Torce Sol and Saturn, a demie Lion Martis
crowned, holdinge a Mounde, whereupon is set a cross botonie Topace, manteled
Rubie, doubled Pearl.

The true fidelity that this City has always borne to their liege and
sovereign, is most worthily reported in diverse chronicles, to the great and
renowned fame of the Citizens therein inhabitinge, who most faithfully in the
time of diverse ancient princes, have manfully defended their city from the
spoil of the rebellious enemy. And amongst other, under that most prudent
prince king Henry the seventh, when it was environed and like to be enflamed by
that traitorous rebel Perken warbek, ouercomming fire by fire, and fortifiyng
places vnfortefied, at the last, they so courageously like valiant cha^pions,
defended their ports, posternes, and walls, that after many dangerous
assaults, they drove away the said Parken with the rablement of his
rebellious army. How much also and how worthily are they to be commended for
their faithful seruis in the time of king Edward the sixth, who being in the
midst of rebels, vnuitailed, unfurnished, unprepared for so long a siege,
did nobly hold out the continual and dangerous assault of the rebel, for
they sustained the violence of the rebellious rout, not only when they had
plenty enough of victual, but also a leven or twelve days after the extreme
famine came on them, and living without bread, wear in courage so manfull, and
in duetye so constant, that they thought it much better to die the extreme
death of hunger, showing truth to their king, and love to their country, then
to give any place to the rebel and favor him with aid, whose examples god
grant, all cities may follow and learn to be noble by Excester, whose truethe
does not only deserve long praises, but also great reward.



He bears vert, the wings of an Egle de Argent, and to his creast upon the
healme on a wrethe Or and Azure, an head de cheual rassed de Argent, pellitie
between two wings Sable, brydebled gold, set on a wrethe Argent and Uert,
manteled Gules, doubled Argent. It has bin and is to be seen, that Angels are
painted fetherd and winged, declaring unto us thereby (as I read) that they be
alien and clean from al earthly cogitacion, and ben rapt up above to the
inuest contemplacion of the love of god, and they are also figured having
wings, to signify their swift discourse in all things, the winds are said to
have wings, propter velocitatem scilicet, vnde scriptura sacra dicit, qui
ambulat super pennas ventorum. Paradine discribethe lightening to have wings,
that god of eloquence Maercurie appeared to diverse winged, I suppose men in
these our days have wings also, and fly contrary to nature, but I doubt
they be counterfeit wings, as those whom Icarus made to fly with all, which
when he had set them together with wax, Icarus.
and joined to his side fast and suer enough as he thought, he mounted up
into the air, but so sone as ye Son had somewhat heated him, and his wax
began to melt, he fell down into a great river where he was drowned out of
hand, the which water was ever after called by his name, Icaru^ mare, the like
fall had Bellerophon, when he took upon him to ascend upon Pegasus the horse
that had wings, now what other thing does these signify unto us, but that
no man should meddle with things above his compass.



Candlestick. Alce.
He bears Azure and Gules, parted with a Cheuron between three Candlesticks de
Argent. His creast, ye beast Alce propre, leaning to an Oak Uert, set on a
torce de Or and Gules, manteled Sable, doubled Or, supported with a Beuer
argent, colored and vnguled Sable, and an Harpie Uert, Wynged de Or. The Alce
discribed for the creast of the said coat armor, is a wild beast in the
woods of Germany, in facion and skin like to a fallowe Dear, but greater,
and has no iointes in his legs: and therefore he does never lie, but lean
to a tree when he does rest him. The hu^ters knowing this, do saw ye trees that
they use to lean to, Beuer Fiber. Castor* Otter. Harpie.
half a sunder, whereby they fall down and be taken. Of the supporters, the
one is a Beuer, a beast called in latin Fiber, or Castor, whose stones are used
in medicine. He has the tail of a fish, and in the residue is like to an
Otter. The other assistant is an Harpie, a monstrous bird, having the visage
of a maid, and talons of a marvelous capacity. I did omit to speak any thing
of the tokens above blazed in the coat armor next aforesaid, which I
should have first desplayd, but the use of candelstickes is very well known
to all men, and wherefore theye serve. Theye be called Candelabra, a candelis
quasi candelafera, Candelabra. Sir Peter Carew.
quod candelas ferant.

The field is Or, three Lions passant, Sable. These appertain to Sir Peter
Carew knight, whose coat armoure (as before displaied) having the Diamonde set
in the worthiest metal of al other, which is Gold, does demonstrate after
worldly virtues, nobleness, bon vouloir, and recomforte. I. ^eron en le
Simboll armoniall.
Of the spiritual virtues, Foye. Le Or en armories ha plusours bo^s properties
and moult de chooses signify, et represent justice, force, et attemperance en
general. Et ainsi que le Or est viuifie par le home, ainsi li home est viuifie
par le Or qui est viuificatif and restauratif, qui ia^mes ne est macule par
terre, ne dedeins terre, eins de soye clarify la terre qui demonstre, le
primier porters, ou celuy qui le port par son labor, peine and virtue auoir
clarify son estre.

Gold also as it is ye most principal metal of al to worldly men, A vicene.
lib. 33. cap. 4.
so it is the sovereign guide to marcial affairs. For where Mars can not
rule, he takes place.

Thus it is proved that gold is victorious, but assuredly the bearer thereof
in coat armor, ought (if his field be al thereof) to be supplyant and meek.

The Lions in the said field, are in their gentle nature, nor have any
ferocitie in them, being passant and ruled by the Son, who geeueth them light
to their trauail, that they may the sooner overcome the enemy: and theye
considering their estate, are enemies to none, for all their hautye courage.

Holland
He bears Azure, five flower de Lize, a Lion saliant garda^t de argent.
Pliny writethe that the Lions chyefe nobility is, cum iube colla and armos
vestiunt. Id autem aetate contingit, a Leone conceptis. Quos vero pardi
generaueru^t semper hoc insigni carent, sicut and faeminae. Hear note that all
Lions borne in arms, ought to be figured with maynes covering their neck and
shoulders, for so they declare them selves to be of right birthe, for those
which are gotten by Pardes, lack the said ensign, yt is, have no maynes, as
the Leonesse. The Lion alone of al beasts, is borne with open eyes, as
witnesses Democritus, nimimu^que somno deditum, tradunt signum quod dormitanti
cauda iugitur monetur. The said coat appertains to Holland of Devonshire

His field is Sable, Wentworth
a cheuro^ between iij Leopards heads de Or: and borne by the name of
We^tworth, I read in an ancient work of Armory, that a Cheuron or a Bar
does signify the perfection and finishinge of any thing, which before was
not perfect nor finished, wherein consists Prudence, the first sovereign
virtue to attain to honor.

He bearethe Gules, Fitzherbert.
three Lions Saliant de Or.

The Lion lives long, Cleme^tia Leonis in prostratis
because plerique dentibus defecti reperiuntur. The Lion only of all beasts
is gentle, and not lightly angrye, in supplices, nam prostratis parcit, et vbi
saeuit, in viros prius qua^ in faeminas fremit, in infantes non nisi magna fame
adactus grassatur. Leonum animi iudex est canda, sicut and equorum aures. If he
be moved or stirred, Primum cauda verberat terr^m, deinde crescente ira
flagellat tergum. He long reteyneth his wrath, as it were patiently suffering
ye injury done unto him. Mars occupies the field of the said coat armor,
and the content therein is Solis, whereby prowess is signified, with desire of
fame. It is borne by the name of Fitzherbert.

Grafton.
He bears party per Saltier, Sable and Ermine, a Lion rampant de Or, armed
and langued Gules. This coat I find otherwise blazed, videlicet, Gerondie of
four Ermine and Sable, over all, a Lion rampant gold, armed and langued
Gules. Here arises a controversy, whether there is particion per Saltier or not, master Gerarde Leighe says, that it is the seventh particion, and
voucheth Vlpianus to be against those that would term the field of the said
coat armor to be Geronne of ^ower pieces. Of truth I have not read Ulpiane,
but assured I am, that all the writers of armorie the space of fifty years
now paste (which I have seen) consent with master Leighe and affirm
particion per Saltier, as Io. Feron, Nawclere Paradine etc. and yet
notwithstanding the diversity of the writers, these particions being the one
so like the other, for that there is also party per Gyron, it can not be but
that there is found an indifferency of the use in blazon of the one as of the
other, they so nighe approchinge in form, as for example, who knowing a
Cheuron in the field of any coat armor, can otherwise judge, but that there
is particion per Cheuron. So likewise saying a Saltier, will deny but there is
particion by the same. As these be true, so must you consider of the
qualities in all particions, as per ^esse, per bend, and per pile etc. This
coat armoure is borne by the name of Grafton.



1 He bears two demie Lions passant gardant de Or, Hatche
by the name of Hache.

2 His field is de Argent, Dillon
a Lion saliant Gules, debrused with a Bar de Azure, between three cressants
and as many Estoiles montans of the second: borne by the name of Dillon.

He bears Sable, Srangwayes
two Lions passant de Argent, palie of six Gules. Of the three things, Quae
been incedunt yea, of the four which are comely in goinge, Proverb. 30.
Salamon names first ye Lyo^, where he says: Leo fortissimus bestiarum, ad
nullius pauebit occursum. The Lion which is strongest among beasts, gives
place to no man..

The said coat armor is borne by the name of Strangwayes.

Capell
He bears Gules, a Lion Saliant between three crosses botonie fitchie de Or.
The nobility of the Lion is before sufficiently declared, and this coat
armoure is borne by the name of Capell.

He bears Argent, nine Cinquefoiles Gules, Perpoynte.
a Lio^ Saliant Sable, armed and langued of the second, yet here remains one
nature of the Lion untouched: that is when he flies, Non obuertit tergum quasi
pauidus, Munstre Cos. li. 6.
sed pedetentim progrediens and murmurans respicit retro. No^ autem nisi laesus
exagitatur, aut fame incitetur. The said coat appertains to Perpoynte of
Holme.

Leedes
He bears Argent, a fesse Gules, between three Eaglettes Sable, membred and
beaked of the second. There be six kinds of Eagles, as witnesses Pliny: The
first whereof he calls Melenatos because of her black color, whereof she
takes her name, of body she is the least, sed viribus omnium praestantissima.
She frequenteth most the high mountains and woods. This alone of all the
kinds of Eagles, norisheth and bringethe up her young birds Aristottle says,
Hister. animal. li. 9, ca, 32.
that she is Pernix, concinua, polita, apta, intrepida, strenua, liberalis, et
non inuida: modesta etiam, nec petulans, quippe quae non clangit neque lippiat,
aut murmuret. The said arms be borne by the name of Leedes.

At Hall yate of Shirburne


1 He bears Sable, a Cheuron between three Sinistre hands copy de argent.
This was the coat of Gilbert at Hall yate of Shireburne in Elmet, a Gentleman
of ancient name and also coat armor, as is recorded of him in many writings
yet apparent.

2 His field is of Gules, a Fesse between three Cressaunts de Or, borne by the
name of Okeham.

His field is de Argent, Okeham. Sacheuerell.
on a Saltier Azure, five Gorges de Or. Master Gerarde Leighe makethe
difference between water budges, and these. The cause only I judge, because
they receive not one form and figure.

The said coat armoure is borne by the name of Sache uerell.

He bears Argent, a Cheuron de Ermines, Sir William Kingsmill knight.
between three Inkes molyn crusule botonie fitchie Sable, a chief as the
second. Of the token borne in this coat armor I have sufficientlye spoken of
before upon the blason of the (...)molyn. Now is therefore to be declared the
dignytie of the field of the said arms, which is argent, in Greek called
Argurium, not far from the latin name and appelation, Argentu^ post aurum
nobilius metallu^.
it is a royal metal, Habet autem proximum boni^tatis locu^ ab auro, cui
scilicet color est albus and talis natura vt igni liquescere fu^dique possit
Metalla si ad argentum incatinatum coniecta fuerint mutantur nonnihil: argentum
vero ipsum remanet purum, attamen vbi diutius arserit, ei aliquid igni deperit:
ac deinde acria ipsum corrodunt. Ergo vilius est auro sed durius eo: et quo
mollius fuerit, eo est prestantius. Nam minus fragile est, atque ideo laxius
dilatatur malleo ictum, minus tamen auro dilatatur minusque est eo ponderosum.
Et propter eam quam habet duriciam, sieve percutiatur sieve proiiciatur edit
sonitum, efficiunturque ex eo eadem opera quae ex auro, Monster cosino. li. 1.
sed numero plura. Silner also has these qualities peculiarly, it is clerae,
it is shrill of sound, easelye ductile, a marvelous preserver of sweet balmes,
the Iaspers friend, and with whom the Jasper better agrees then with gold. It
is also medicinable, for his offall or dust remedieth wounds, Sed mirum im
modum illud dum candidum sit impressum corpori lineas nigras reddit, The field
of the said coat armor signifies ye bearer to be of conscience upright in
justice, and desirous to appease strife, and is borne by the name of Kingsmill.

He bears Or, two Cheurons between three Trefoyles Sable. Isidor. Etil. li.
17. ca. 9
The Trefoil in latin is called Trifolium, Graeci trifillum vocant, quod sit
solis trinis per singulas annotaciones It betokens the union of three in one
substance, and the token is much augme^ted by the worthiness of ye field, being
gold which is ye head of al other metals. The field is Uert, iij. Piles de
Or, Trefoile
ij. descending, and.i. ascending in point of the fesse, in chief a plate
between.ij. Trefoiles, de Argent. The trefoiles hear in this coat armor, are
in their propre field, which is, of that Lady Vaenus color Green. Vaenus
her* color.
This herb is commonly known by the name of three leaued grass, an herb
excellent, and especial to man and beast

He bears Azure, two Pillars in pile fusile Dargent, Pillars fusile Charles
the great.
in chief a Crown de Or. Such pillars of stone, the great Charles caused to
be set up in ye Palace which he builded at Ingelheim in Germany, whereas he was
borne after ye opinion of most writers, the which pillors were translated
thence (as Mu^ster says in his time) and now erect in the prince Palantine
his castle at Heidelberge, Columnae fusiles.
in perpetuum artis fusoriae memoriam.

Thus those prises in coats armoures, which are of many called Fusils, that
is to say Spyndles, may aptly be taken for pillars.

Fusille in latin, Columnae fuse, aut fusiles, and so to be blazed in arms,
since that such a mighty conqueror, and prince most prudent, as Charles the
great was, thought good to erect Pillors fusible of stone very preprecious, in
perpetual remembrance of spynners craft,

The field is de Argent, and Sable, parted per pale, on a Fesse, de le un, et
le auter two water boudges, transmuted of the field.

This coat being charged on the Fesse, beautifiethe it much, so as the
armorie can not be but perfect and good, if it be well considered of. A water
boudge also parted per Pale, of the metal, and color aforesaid, may
congruently stand for a creast of the said coat armor.

Square.
He bears Sable, a Squire direct from the chief, to the dexter part of the
shield, de Argent. This is a principal instrument of the Carpenter, and is
called Gnomon vel Norma. In english a squier, without the which nothing can be
rightly done, so nedeful it is to the framing of al works. The token hereof
seen in coat armor, may signify good direction, and prudence, used with
great moderacion, before any thing weighty be attempted, and attempted,
brought to a perfect conclusion.

Note also, that there may be used in coat armor, particion per Squere,
although it be rare seen.

The field is Gules, Folfarde.
a Cheuron de Argent, borne by the name of Folfarde. Of the same ordinary are
these ensuinge.

1 Argent a Cheuron Gules, borne by the name of Stoket 2 Arge^t, a Cheuron
Sable, by the name of Mordante. 3 Or, a Cheuron de Azure, by the name of
Clopton. 4 Or, a Cheuron Uerte, by the name of Judge.
He bears Sable, Cotton
a Cheuro^ between iij Griphons heads erased de Argent, by ye name of Cotton.

Of the like particio^ be these which follow, the fields where of occupy sundry
tokens, as the reader may easelye perceive the soueraygntie of the same
particions.

1 Argent, a Cheuro^ between three Martelets Sable, borne by the name of Apton. 2
Argent, a Cheuron Gules, between three Hurtes by the name of Baskeruile. 3
Gules, a Cheuron Argent, between three Escallops, de Or, by the name of
Chamberleyne. Pudsey.
4 Uert a Cheuron between three Mulletes de Or, persed, by the name of Pudsey: 5
Sable, a Cheuron between three Trefoiles de Argent, by the name of Vurgy.
Vurgy Violes.

The field is Azure, a Fesse nebule de Ermine, between three Phyals Dargent,
this vessel, Isidore says, is called a Phiale, because it is made of Glass,
and it is a little vessel with a broad bottom, and a small neck. In such a
vessel wine is especially known by the color, and al sweet waters are
therein put to be preserved. Such tokens may be given to seruitours of kings
and princes, which begin and take assaye of all drinks before their
sovereign. Let all those persons remember the trust put in them, as in no
part they swerve from their duty, but to be without corruption, and void of
al uncleanness, as they may deserve to bear the noble ensigns aforesaid.

Heron.
He bearethe Gules, a Fesse between three Hero^s de Argent. This is a bird of
the water, quippe quae vivit ex aqua, and yet greatly dredeth rain and
tempests, which in flying on high, she assayeth to avoid, after the saying
of Uirgil.

Atque altam supra, volat Ardea nubem.

The Heron above the high clouds does fly, so as one can scarce her decerne
with eye. Vocatur etiam ob id ardea, quoth, ardua suo volatu petat. She makes her
nest on high trees, and has a natural hatred to the Hawk, Sicut vicissim
accipiter exitium illius co^tinuo querit. For they skirmishing on high in the
air, go about this one thing, whether of them in flyinge highest, can exceed
the other. If the the Hawk optaine the higher place, she overthrows the
Heron vehemently, and sleeth her, but if the Heron do get above the Hawk, she
defiles her with her excrement and killethe her, for her dung is poison to the
Hawk, and rotteth her feathers. The said coat is borne by the name of Heron.

His field is de Or, a Gripe Sable. The Gripe in latin is called Vultur, a
foul very ravenous, and a great deuourer of carren, he has an huge body,
which causes him to be slow in flight, whereof also he takes his name, but
he is of a very sharp sight, and therefore sees his pray a far of. He most
desires to feed on man's flesh, before all other birds: and of a singular wit
given him by kind knows ye death of man, pronosticating the same certain
days before. There be that write marueils of him: which is, that in the time
of war, seven days before any fight, he does smell the place where the
battle shall be, and joins him self to that party which he thinks shall die
of the sword. And therefore the kings in old time had their deuinours and
southsayers, which with great diligence did behold the eyes of these Gripes or
Vultures, markinge to what part theye did turn their sight, and which they
did forshew should die in the battle. Saint Ambrose wrytethe, that the Gripe
does conceive without the seed of the male, and is gendred without
conjunction, and that he lives an 100. years, and when he draws to extreme
age, the over part of his bill, grows so close and crooked over the nether,
that he can not open it to take his meat, and so dies at last for hunger. For
he does not make sharp his beak upon a stone, as the Eagle does.

Saw. Compass.
He bears Sable, a Saw in pale, between two Compasses de Argent.

These instruments are best known to such as work in Timber, and are very
ancient addycions in armorye.

Goose arborie
He bears Azure, iij. Gees arborie Dargent, beaked, and me^bred de Or, It is
read, that there be certain trees in Scotland, which growinge nere ye bank of a
great water, bring forth fruit co^glomerate with leaves, and the same fallinge
when it is ripe into the river, quickneth, and is turned into a live bird,
which theye call Anserem arboreum, a Goose of the tree. And this tree (as some
writes) growethe in the Isle Pomonia, not far from Scotland, toward the
North. The old Cosmographiers, especielly Saxo Gra^maticus makes mention of
this famous tree. Anseres arborei
Think it not therefore to be a feigned matter devised or immagined of the new
writers. Also Aeneas Siluius writes of the same thus. Audiueramus nos olim
a^bore^ esse in Scotia, quae supra ripa^ fluminis enata fructus produceret
anatarum forma^ habe^tes et eos quidem cu^ maturitati proximi essent sponte sua
decidere, alios in terram alios in aquam, and in terra^ deiectos putrescere, in
aquam vero demersos, mox animatos enatare sub aquis, and in aere plumis
pennisque euolare. Munsterus, (of whom is made so often mention before) in his
book of Cosmographie, says, that he being in Scotland with king James,
diligently searched where the said miraculous tree should grow, and at the
last learned, that it was not to be found in Scotland, sed remotius apud
Orchades insulas. Wherefore the same Gees may also be termed, Gees orchadie,
because they are so meruelously brought forth in the same isle.

The field is argent.5. Scocheo^s d'azure, passes en saultier. I. Feron.
Munster
Alphonsus first king of Lusitania, now called Portugal, and the first also
which recovered Vlixibonam from the Saracenes, which long had kept the same:
and overcame.5. of their ki^gs in one battaille, assumpted to bear for his
ensign five scocheo^s, which he left to his posterity, as a monumente of
such his famous act.



He bears quarterly d'or and azure 3. flours de luce on a Bye. Chelcelettes.
a bend of the first and second. The said coat armor apperteineth to master
John Bye.

2 He bears a shield quartered of the Topaze and Sapphire, a Chalcelet on the
first quarter Diamonde.

This bird is seldom seen, for she frequenteth the mo^taines, as Aristotle
says) and is long and black, like to a certain Hawke called Palumbarius,
or to the bird called Ptynge, that flies the most part by night, and takes
his pray, more Aquilae, and fights so cruelly with the Eagle, that they
being wounden together, fall down both to the ground, and so are taken of
shepherdes on live. Chalcis non clare videt.

His field is Saturn, an hand dextre in fesse of the moon, and to his
creast a fiste within a garlande of laurel propre.

The sign borne in this cote armor is a right hand, called in latin
Dextera, and has ye name of Dare, to give, for surety of peace is geeuen
therewith: and it is also the witness of faith and trust, and hoc est illud
apud Tullium fide^ publica^ iussu senatus dedi, id est dexteram. And ye apostle
Paul says, James, Cephas, and Ihon, whih seemed to be pillars, gave me and
Barnabas the right hands, (and agreed with us) that we should preach among the
heathen, and they among the Jews etc. The fiste desplaied for the creaste
aforesaid, is called Pugnu* in Latin, because the fingers be clighte in.
Pugnus autem a pugilla dictus: sicut palma ab expausis palmae ramis.

The field is Gules, Barkley.
a Ch^uron between three crosses party dargent.

This coat has been borne by the name of Barkley, and whereas in the said
martiale field, there is displaid three Crosses, the same do put me in
remembrance of a certain miraculous fortune, which happened unto the Roman
Emperor Tiberius, a prince upright in justice, Tiberius. Constantinus
pure in life, and clean in conscience: who governed the whole empire so
prudently and syncerely, that no man was able to reprove him, if the histories
which are written of him do not deceive us. Paulus Diaconus in his xviij.
book, which he writ de Romanorum gestis, does declare that this Emperor
Tiberius spent so great treasours about the repairinge his decayed palaces, to
redeem poor captives, to build hospitals, to erect monasteries, to marie and
provide for the orphans and widows, in all which he was so bountiful, that
uneath he had any thing left to maintain his Royal estate and householde.
Truly this was a blessed necessity, for what can be better bestowed, than
that which is employed in the service of Christ. And of this poverty the
Emperor was not ashamed, but thought it a great glory, yet one thig grieved
him much, which was to see Sophia the empress reioi^e so much at his
misery. For the high and noble hearts, which feel themselves wounded, do not
so much esteem their own pain, as they do to see their enemies rejoice at
their grief. But God never forsook them that for his sake became poor, as it
appears by this: It chanced one day that even as this Emperor Tiberius
walked in the midst of his palace, he espied at his feet a marble stone,
which was in form like unto a Cross: and because he thought it an unmeet
thing to have the same spurned with soul feet, Cross
which was so victorious and triu^phant a sign, he caused the stone to be
taken up (not thinking any thing to be there under) and immediately after, they
found an other, wherein likewise was the form of the Cross, and this being
taken up, they found an other in like manner, and when that was pluck up from
the botome, there was found a treasure, which conteaned the sum of two
millions of duckettes, for the which, the good Emperor Tiberius gave unto
almighty God most high thanks: and whereas before he was liberal, now
afterward he was much more bou^tiful. For all those treasures he virtuously
distributed, amongst the poor and nedie people. Whose treasours they were, of
the^ I find thus written: Thesauros Iustiniani secundi, and Narsetis Eunuchi,
vtcunque congestos miraculose repperit, liberaliterque in pauperis dispensauit.
Let therefore mighty princes and great Lords see, read, and profit by this
example, and let them think them selves assured, that for geuinge alms to the
poor, Vitis Caesaru^ fol. 63.
they need not fear to become poor: for in the end, the vicious man can not
call himself rich, nor the virtuous man, can count himself poor.

Daubryggecourt.
His field is d'ermine.iij. Humettes gules.

The first that ever did were Ermine in his royal robes, was (as I read in
an old work of Armory) Laomedon, king of old Troy. He thaught Priamus his
son to wear the same, who being king in the time of the war, and great
siege of troy, was ever seen when he came into the field, or when he entered
into battaille, to wear the said noble furre of Ermine in his cloak upon his
armoure. Hector.
His eldest son also Hector by name, was always seen in place of his
father, to have upon him that mantle or cloak furred with Ermine, and in that
he killed many noble men of the Greeks. Wherefore the Grecians ever said it
was king Priamus, Priamus.
because he only in the field did first wear the same. Then the nobles of
Troy ordained for Hector, an other apparel differringe much from his
fathers, that the Greeks might plainly perceive, that there was an other
noble and stout warrior in Troy besides king Priamus. They used not this
apparel but in time of war, Coats of Ermine.
because they were as little as coats, and being not long or heavy, did
nothing hindre them in fightinge: therefore they were called coats of arms,
and of nobility, for that they were very pleasant to the sight, and to be
seen far of, being all white and black. And some writers affirm, that the
first arms were of Ermine, and that king Priamus was the first that bare
them: alleging further that after the destruction of Troy, there came a noble
man of the stock of king Priamus into Britain, Arms of Britain.
and there did inhabit: and therefore the duke of Britayne bears Ermine,
because (say they) he comes of that stock that first inhabited that
country, and was the first Lord thereof. And so I gather, that the first
bearinge of Ermine in coat armoure, was invented at the siege of Troy,
although the ordering thereof was not in so goodly a manner then, as is now in
these days.

The Heumettes borne in the arms before des^ried, Heumettes.
do admonish the bearer. Memorare nouissima. They apperteane to Daubrigecourte
of Stratfelde Say.

He bears Or, a Lion rampannt d'Ermine, debrused with two Barruletes, and
fret with the third Sable.

Why so many Lions are borne in Escocheons, Munsterus declares in these
words. Principibus enim Belgarum parantibus nouum expeditionem in Syriam,
assumpserunt variorum colorum Leones, relictis veteribus insignibus. Of the
bearinge of Lions in sondrie wise, I have spoken sufficiently in the beginning
of this book.

The field is very.3. arrows in poincte d'or. The creaste a Pheon d'argent,
on a Scallop gules. This coat might be borne of some one man who far
excelled others in shooti^g, and so might chance to be honored with such a
creaste for a reward, I have omitted to marshal the same, either with helm,
wreathe, or mantle, which I have used in the blazon of a great no^bre of
cotes before, because ye may the better understand what such achementes be.
But it might be asked of me, what this word acheueme^t means. It is (as M.
Gerarde L. defines in his accidence of armorie), the arms of every
gentelman, well marshalled, with the supporters, helm, wreath, and creste,
with mantels, and y^ word, of some termed ye poesy, all which of heraltes is
proprely called blazon, heawme, and timbre. This creste next aforesaid I have
so ordered, because antiquity received the one before the other: and that
creastes may be borne, without any wreath, and right co^me^dable enough,
following the opinion of the before named M. G. Leighe, in his said book.

The Arrows standing pile wais in poincte, is one of ye honorable ordinaries
general: which because they stand in poincte, brings me in remembrance of
ye coat armor of that noble house of the Poulets, Poulet.
who bear Sable, three arminge swords d'argent, pile in poincte, as ye may see
here desplaied. Of ye sword, and why it is so called, look in the next book
entitled, of Cotes and crestes.

He bears azure, two bars embatiled, contrebatiled d'Ermine, by the name
of Burnebye. Burnebye.


Of the like bearing are these which follow.

1 Sable.ij. bars embatiled d'Ermine. 2 Ermines.ij. bars embatiled
contrebatiled d'or. 3 Gules.ij. Bars embatiled d'argent.
Baker.
He bears argent, one a saulter engrailed sab, 5. Escalopes of the field, a
chief of the second, charged with a Lion passant of the first, armed and
langued gule. This cote Armoure is borne by the name of Baker.

He bears sable, 3. broad arrows bar^wais d'argent. The latin for an arrowe
is Sagitta, so called as Isidore says, Broad arrowe
a Sagaci iactu id est veloci ictu. Pennis enim fertur quasi auis: vt celeriter
mors percurrat ad homine^. His primu^ Cretenses vsi sunt. The arrows borne in
the said cote armoure, are to be taken for such as we call broad arrows, yet
y^ bearing of them in form as I before have described, is very rare to be
seen.

Crossebowe. Handego^nes.
The field is vert, a Crossebowe bente d'argente. Isidore says that Balista,
which in English we call a Cross bow, has ye name, ab emito tendo iacula,
for when the same is bent, it casts from it with great force either arrows
or stones. Sir Thomas Eliot ye knight of worthy fame, in his book e^tituled ye
Gouernoure, supposes that Crossebowes and handgonnes where brought into this
realm, by the sleight of our enemies, to the intent to destroy the noble
defense of archerye? Archerie.
But what would he think in these our days, if he were on live, to see the
same almost utterly decayed, Certes he would lament with tears, the negligence
of his countrymen, that so little regard and esteem the feat of Artillerye,
or the due obseruacion of the laws provided for the defense of their country.
The bearer of the said coat armor, may aptlye add thereunto, this poysie or
Apothegme. Ingenium superat vires.

The field is Sable, two bows bente addorsed de Or, Bow.
stringed Uert, these are to be taken for long bows, wherewith this realm of
England, has been not only best defended from outward hostility, but also in
other regio^s have been seen to prevail against people innumerable, and
inespecially in the time of the most puissaunt princes* Edward the third,
and Henry the fifte, against the French. The bow in latin is called Arcus, eo
quod arceat aduersarium. Arcus
Item arcus ob speciem: quod sint curuati arctius.

He bears Uert and Sable, Towers
parted per pale vndade, two Towers embatiled Darge^t. I have used very often
this particion, but hear in this coat it has a great superyoritie, the
Towers divided watried, and in their propre color, beutyfieth much the same.
Towers are especially builded for defense, and are called in latin Arces, Arces.
a quibus arcentur hosts. It is also very necessary to name in the blazon of
the said devise, of how many pieces the said embatlements be made, therefore
say, they be embatiled of three pieces and two halfes. and so they be right.

He bears Sable on a Fesse de Or, between three Anuieldes, Argent, a demie
Lion passaunt Gules, armed and langued Azure. The Anuild is the chiefest
instrument of the Smith, whereon he beats the Iron and steel, and so works
it in length, breadth and form as likes him. It is an ancient addycion of
armory: and is called in ye Northern tongue a Stethye, in latin Incus, Veteres
autem no^ incudem vocabant, sed in tudem, eo quod in ea metallum tundatur id
est, tendatur. A Sledge or an Hammer, of some called a formal, might seem to
be an apt creaste for the said coat armor.

The field is Or, on a pale bretessee Sable, a Crown imperial. This coat is
of great excellency, considering ye field to be of that most worthy metal,
Gold. In latin, Aurum, so called, ab aura. i. a sple^dore, of shining quod
repercusso aere plus fulgeat. This cote armor signifies unto y^ bearer,
co^sta^cie in every thing, also in love. The same is also a Superlatiue of the
highest degree, most rich because the field is of the metal aforesaid, and
the thing contained therein Sable. It is also one of the honorable ordinaries
charged.

He bearethe Gules, one Plough de Argent, a chief de Ermine. This is an
excellent coat, and of bearinge right worthy, the field being of the color,
that best becomes the warrior: Nam ruber armatos equites exo^^^r amictus.
The token borne in the field, is the Ploughe, the chiefest addicion that may
be geeuen to ennoblish the husbandman, and consists of that mighty planet,
Luna, the riper and encreaser of fruits, the beuty of the night, and Lady of
the sea and times: whose capital sign is adorned with ye furre of that little
beast of Armonie, valiante courage and marciall policy might seem to
advance the bearer of this coat armor, rather then the dignitye or ancient
lignage of his stock and progeny, for that perhaps in him might be base, and
of low estate: as one called from the Plough, to be a king: Such was Numa
Pompilius king of Romans. Abdolominus king of Sidon And next to them
although not a king, Quintius, who having but thirty acres of land, and
being plougheman thereof, the Senate and people of Rome sent a messenger to
show him, that they had chose^ him to be Dictator, which was at that time, ye
highest dignity among the Romans, and for three months, had authority
royal, Quintius hearing the message, let his ploughe stand, and went into the
city, and prepared his hoaste against the Samnites, and vanquished them
valiantly, that done, he surrendered his office, and being discharged of the
dignity, repaired again to his plough, and applied it diligently. Thus ye may
see yt the occupiers of the plough, and husbandry have atteyned to great
dignity, and to be princes of people and countries. Then I say it can not be
otherwise taken, but that the Plough is a token both noble and excellent, well
becoming coat armor.

Greneuile.
He bearethe Gules, three Sufflues de Or, by the name of Greneuile, a coat of
great antiquity, as I have found in diverse ancient Monumentes: for at the
first time that ever I saw them, which was in the parish churhe of Mycham,
within six miles of London, in the lower part of the church there, toward the
west, I marueiled of the sign, what it should be contained in the field of
the said coat armor, but of long time I could not comprehend the same, yet,
since I have hard some boldly affirm it, to be called a Rest, an instrument
to guide the horsmans staff, where in deed it serves to an other purpose, as
to convey the wind from the Bellows to all the Pipes of the Organes: and by
propre name is called a Sufflue.

His field is Sable, iij. pickaxes de Argent, borne by the name of Pigot.

This token borne in the said ensign, may also be diversely named, wherefore I
read that an Herault, shall bear no blame, though he see a thing in arms,
and can not well declare what it should be: being perhaps such a thing as
is out of use, and not often seen or known, as an instrument, or other thing
frequented in a strange land, or a tool of an handye crafts man, (as this
next before descried is) or some strange tree, leaf, herb, flower, and such
other: if he fail to name the same right, it is no error, so he fail not of
the colors and nombre thereof, according to the rules of armorye. For by
reason (says mine aucthor) there is noe man may know all things, since so
diversely they be called, and in sundry wise described or figured.

He bears party per f^sse Or, and Uert, one fusill in pale, transmuted of
the field, in chief ij. clusters of grapes propre. Let the bearer hereof be
especially endowed with the virtue Temperance, because his chief is of the
vine tree, then the which nothing is more profitable to the strength of man's
body, ne more pernicious to voluptuous appetites, if measure should lack in
drinkinge the fruit thereof, Androcides (a man of excellent wisdom) wrote
unto the great king Alexander an Epistle, desiring him to refrain his
intemperance, wherein he said. Noble prince, when thou will drink wine,
remember then, that thou drinkest the blood of the earth, signifyinge thereby
(after the oppinion of Sir Thomas Eliot) the might and power of wine, as also
warning Alexander of the thirste or appetite of blood, which would ensue by
his imtemperate drinkinge. For Pliny (that wrytethe this history) says
immediately. If Alexander had obeyed the precepts of Androcides, he had never
slain his frindes in his drunkenness for he slew his dear frinde Clytus)
(who apud granicum amnem nudo capite Alexandrum dimicantem clypeo suo texit:
et Rhosaceris manum capiti regis imminentem gladio amputauit) as Curtius in his
history makes mention. Here also is to be noted, that tokens or signs borne
in arms, may admonish the bearers there of to avoid diverse vices, and to
embrace the contrary, which is virtue, as in example, the bearer of the Wolf,
let him beware of rapacitie, for the beast is, cruoris appetens etc.

He bears Saturn, three Belles Luna, a canton de Ermyne, Touching the
colors before depicted in this coat Armoure, Alciate makes this
significacion thereof Embl. li. 2. cap, 56.

Index Maestitiae est pullus color, vtimur omnes,
Hoc habitu tumulis cum damus inferias,
At sinceri animi, et mentis stola candida pura:
Hinc sindon sacris, linea grata viris.
Heareby appears that black is the color of sadness, sorrow or heuinesse of
heart, which most frequentlye is used at the burial of the dead: But the
white Robe or garment, is the token of a pure mind, and soul uncorrupted and
for that cause is most agreeable for the holy and consecrate to God. To what
use and purpose Belles do serve, is known to all men wherefore I do omit to
speak here any thing thereof. The said coat armoure is borne by the name of
Porter.

He bearethe Or, on a bend Gules, three Mollets de Argent.

These bendes are to be seen charged in sundry wise, as for example.

1 Argent on a Bend gules, three Buckes heads cabazed de Or, borne by the name
of Beche.

2 Argent on a Bend Azure, three Mollets de Or, persed, by the name of Morby.

3 Gules on a Bend de Argent, three Trefoiles slipped Uert, borne by the name
of Haruye.

4 Argent on a Bend Gules, three Escaloppes de Or, by the name of A^^orell.

5 Argent, on a Bend Gules, three Garbes de Orge, de Or, borne by the name of
Barley.

He bears Argent, on a Bend Gules, three Mascles de Or, voyded.

I find also the said coat thus varied, from that which is before displayde.

1 has three Losenges Sables voided, on a Bend de Argent, in a field Gules.

2 Bears Sable, on a Be^de de Or, three Losenges of the first voided.

3 His field is de Azure, on a Bend Argent, three Losenges Uerte, voyded of
the second. Hear I needed not to have said voyded of the second which is
Argent, for whenever ye shall see either Losenge, Mascle, or other thing
voyded of the field, Fesse, bend etc. whereon theye stand, it is sufficient
to say voyded only, as the variation of the first and second examples
next before put forth, does manifest unto you, if ye note well the blazon of
both the same.

He bearethe Argente, a Storke Sable, membred and becked Gules.

I read the color of the Storke to be all white, saving the tops of his
wings: his bill and legs be read. It is written of them that they have no
tongues, theye flea all serpents, in their age theye be fed of their young
birds. The Image of them borne in coat armoure, is the token of Justice. Of
this bird came a Greek word for a proverb, Antepelargein, which signifies
to be like a Storke, which proverb is to exhort men to be kind to their
parents, or to their masters, which teach or bring the^ up, requiting the
benefit which theye received of them.

The field is de Argent, a Castle triple towered, and v. flowers de Lize
Sable, ij.ij. and. one.

What is signified by castles and towers borne in Arms, I have sufficyently
declared before.

The field is d'argent, on a Cheuron sable, three roses of the first, and are
borne by the name of Gilbarde. Gilbard


When ye see any flower borne in coat armoure, ye may indifferently, and
without breach of any rule, blaze ye same by the propre color that he is of,
as the Rose, to call it a white Rose, wha^ ye would term it d'argent: and a red Rose, when ye see it of Gules etc. The Barbes of this flower have no
usual words in blazon, for that they abide always of their proper color,
which is green: and enuiron the leaves of the flower, as it were gardinge the^
from falling.

He bears Gules, a saltier verrey Argent and Azure, between twelve Crosses
patie fitche d'or, by the name of Champernon. Champernon.


The said Saltier being of the furre called Uerrey, is always found to be
d'azure, and argent, or else d'argent and azure. For (as ma^ster Gerard Leighe
says in his accidence of Armorie,) where the matter is doubtefull, there the
metal has of right^ the pre-eminence. And I find a Saltier varrey d'argent
and azure, in a field gules, borne by the name of Willington. Willington.


F. His field is parted per fesse Sable and Ermine, a pale contrecharged of ye
one and the other, three Escalloppes d'argente: and for the difference, a
Trefoile slipped d'or.

I find this coat blazed otherwise, as thus.

He bears Sable and Ermine party per Fesse, and contrecolored in 6.
quarters, three Scallops argent in the first.

Where he says (in the first) he means that the Escalloppes stand in
Sable, which is first named in the blazon: and the same I do commend, for that
he which used his blazon was an Heraulte, and well learned in their mysteries.

These coats thus parted (as aforesaid) are most commendably borne, when they
are charged, but with one token, as in triangle and not with two, which to
much augmenteth the Blazon, the same abidinge in so many quarters.

He bears azure, fretie d'argent, a chief Gules.

These also which follow are of the like bearinge in order and co^mixtion,
with two of the honorable ordinaries.

1 Arge^t, fretie, gules, a chief d'azure, borne by the name of Curteyn.

2 Sable, fretie d'or, a chief d'ermine.

3 Uerte, fretie d'Ermine, a chief d'argent.

4 Or. fretie d'azure a chief d'ermines.

5 Gules, fretie d'argent, a chief d'or.

I here use in the blazon of these coats (Fretie) because they be of more
pieces then viij. according to the rule of master Gerard Leighe in his
Accidence of armorie, where he treats of coats commixte with two of the
honorable ordinaries.

The field is azure, a bend engrailed Argent, between two Cotises d'or, borne
by ye name of Fortescue. Fortescue^
This (according to master G. Leighe his rule) I have set forth, for your
better instruction, wha^ to call this a Cotise, and when to name it a Batune.
And of a Bend not cotized in form a foresaid, take this one following for
example.

He bears gules, a Be^de engrailed d'or. This was the coat armoure of a
noble knight named Sir William Marshall. And as these bendes are seen often
thus engrailed, so are they found most usually plain, in this wise.

1 Or, a bend sable, borne by the name of Bonauile. 2 Argent, a Bend verte,
by the name of Kendal. 3 Sable, a Bend d'argent, by the name of Antingham. 4
Argent, a bend sable, by the name of Malley. 5 Or, a Bend dazure, by the name
of Carthorpe.
He bears gules, a cheuron between 3. Fores heads rassed d'argent. This
beast in Latin is called Vulpes quasi volupes. Est enim volubilis pedibus, and
nunquam rectis itineribus, sed tortuosis an^ractibus currit: fraudulentum
animal, insidijsque decipiens. Nam dum non habuerit escam, fing it mortem:
sicque descendentes quasi ad cadauer volucres rapit and deuorat. Let not the
bearer of this coat armoure apply his mind to deceiptfulnes, and then certes
be may bear the same to his high commendacion, being one of the 9. worthy
particions, whereof M. Leighe in his Accede^ce of armorie makes mention.

The field is Sable, a Cheuro^, between three cressantes d'argent, borne by the
name of Babthorpe. Babthorpe


What a Cheuron is, and also a Cressant, I have thereof sufficiently before made
mention, yet the said ensign being one of the most worthy particions, take
these also to be of ye same bearing, which follow.

1 Gules, a cheuron, between 3. cressantes d'or. 2 Argent, a cheuron between
three cressantes d'azure. 3 Uert, a cheuron between three cressants d'argent. 4
Ermine, a cheuron between 3. cressants d'ermines. 5 Azure, a cheuron between
three cressantes d'Ermine. 6 Or, a cheuron between 3. cressants vert.
He bears Sable, a bucks head cabaged de Or, double attyred vert.

The attire of this Buckes head, differs proprely for challenge.

He bears Sable, a frete transuerse in fesse, between two Escalloppes, and a
cressa^t d'or. This is a fair coat, and therefore neadeth no further
commendation.

The field is d'Ermine. 3. Battele axes gules: and is borne by the name of
Denis. Denis.


This weapon before displaid, is called Securis bellica, and y^ bearer
Securige^, which has been, and is an office of high credit, especial about
Princes, and martial affairs. It does demonstrate authority, to commitie
persons offending the laws, to the execution of death, for the suertie of ye
prince, and quietness of the common weal.

He bears Or, a Cheuron Checkey Ermin and Ermins, between three Hobies
savage volanie Sable. This kind of Hawk called ye wild Hobie, especially
seruethe to kill larkes and quails, for houering over the^, they keep down on
the ground, whiles they, which awaite on y^ pray do take them. It is to be
supposed that from Thratia came this disporte of hauking. For Pliny makes
mention, that in the parts of Greece called Thracia, men and hankes, as it
were by a confederacy, took birds together in this wise, The men sprang the
birds out of the bushes, and the hawks soring over them, be (...)them down,
so that ye men might easily take them, and (...)did the men (...)equally the
pray with the (...)which being (...)eftsoon and of a custom (...)to such
places, where being alofte, they perceived men to y^ purpose assembled. But (as
Sir Tho. Eliot says) in what (...)or whersoeuer the beginning of hauking was,
^ud^udtedly it is a right delectable solace, and being used measurably and for
a pastime, gives to a man good appetite to his supper, and at the least way
withdraws him from other daliance or disportes dishonest, and to body and
soul perchance ^nicious

He bears Azure and Or, parted per pale Nebule, vi. Martelets of the one and
the other.

This is the ensign of master William Fleetewood Esquier, Fleetewood.
Recorder of ye noble city of London.

His field is de Argent, two Bars Sable, borne by the name of Brereto^,
Brereto^
alias Bruerton.

Also Marton bears argent ij. Bars Gules.

The field is Sable a Bores head coped in Fesse, between two darts barwaies,
de argent. Histories make mention, that diverse noble persons have atteined ye
greatest part of their renowm for fighting with wild beasts, as Txheseus did,
which was companion to Hercules, who killed the great Boar called of the
Greeks, Phera, that wasted and consumed the fields of a great country.
Likewise Meleager for sleyng the great Boar in Calidonia, which in greatness
and fairenes excelled all other Boares: and had slain many noble and valiant
persons. Thus (as I have often said before) histories do much further (yea
altogether) the true disposinge, invention, and devise of all good and perfect
armorie, and without the which nothing is exactly done in this art, I dare
boldly say, for ye defense of histories, look in Sir Thomas Eliot, his book
entitled the Governor. li. 3. cap. 25. fol. 204. page 2

The field of this, is Losengie de Argent and Sable, Gairgraue
three Cressauntes on a bend, as of the first and second, and is borne by ye
name of Gairgraue. Of the bearing of Losengies read master Gerard Leighe his
Accedence of Armorie, where he treatethe of coats comirte with twoe of the
honorable ordinaries.

He bears barrie vndee, Sable and Argent, on a (...) might b^ taken for the
coat armoure of some (...)prince, who saved the same in the waters, that his
enemies should not atteine it, as did Julius Caesar, who at the battle of
Alex^^drie, on a bridge, being abandoned of his people for the multitude of
his enemies, which oppressed them, when he might no longer sustain the shot
of darts and arrows, he boldly lept into the sea, and diuing under the water,
escaped the shot, and swamme ye space of CC. paces, to one of his ships,
drawing his coat armor with his teethe after him, which marueilously defended
him from their arrows, so as theye both were preserved. This ensign next
before blazed, is one of the honorable ordinaries charged.

His field is Checkeye de Or, and Sable, a Fesse Gules.

The said coat is bone by the name of Winter. Winter.


Also I find Argent and Sable Checkey, a Fesse Gules, borne by the name of
Akelo^d A kelonde.


The field is Sable and Ermine parted per Fesse dented, in chief a Reyne
deeres head cabaged Dargent. Of such coat armours thus parted, and what this
particyon is called, I have spoken of before. Master Leighe sayethe thus of
such a coat, that if you be a gentleman of a first coat armor, and the
prince give you an addicion, it is at your choice if you will part your own
with the other on this fashion.

He bears Gold on a bend Gules, cotized with two cotizes, Sable, three
Phials, Dargent, Isidore says they be called Phialequod ex vitro fiant,
because they be made of glass. The said coat armor as it is my devise, so I
think the same not to be borne of any in such order and form as I have
above descriued.

His field is de Ermine on a Fesse, engrailed between three Griphons heds
erazed Sable, a Greyhounde coursa^t de Argent, with coler Gules and line de Or.

These perteined to master Frauncis Furbisher of Don caster in the county of
York, Furbisher
a right worshipful Esquyer, and just Iusticer: also when he lived, he was
one of the Queens Majesty's (...)rabble counsel established in the
(...)parts: a (...)which loved righteousness and (...) country does worthily
report of (...) the (...) sent days.

The (...)is (...) Esc^^lops, and a (...)engratledde Argent, borne by the name
of Earl. Earl
Of sundry borders ye have example before in fol. 37. a bordure must conteyne
the fifte part of the field, and so it requires, for that it is seen so
often charged with sundry tokens, yet I find in a certain written book of
armorie, that a bordure shall be no brother then the seventh part of half the
field, which can not be for the cause aforesaid. How a coat bordured, is to
be marshalled with any other, as to be a marriage with any man, or married to any
woman, or if any coat also that is bordured be honored with a chief, how it
shall be ordered, read ye accedence of armory, where is treated of.ix. sundry
differences for brethren.

The field is vert, ij. Cheurons de argent, between* iij. Papilions, Gules.
These does Isidore account among small birds, and are commonly called
Butterflies, in latin, Papiliones quae maxim abu^da^t florentibus maluis.
They have been thought of ancient time as signs worthy bearing in coat
armor, and for creast also.

He bears Sable, three plates in Fesse, between two Combs Darge^t. The co^be
in latin is called Pecten, and is an instrment toothed, and serves especially
to kembe the head. The Barbor cannot lack this instrumente: and it is an
ancient addicyon to armorie.

He bears Arge^t, two bars Azure, in chief as ye first, one pale between
two Esquiers bast dextre, and sinistre of the second, a Comete star Dor. This
star Co^metes is so called, eo quod commas luminis ex se fundat. The latins
call these stars Crinitae, because they cast from them flambes in manner of
hears, which kind of star whenever it appears, pronosticatethe, either
pestilen^e, famine, or war: Consider of the said coat armor, as of coats
comixte, and countercoloured, and yet ye shall find the same to be very
ancient and fair.

He bears sable, iij. Swords wauie Dargent, hiltes and pomelles de Or, Alas,
it is a grievous fortune, (says Boethius lib. 2. de conso. Phi.) as often as a
wicked sword, is joined to cruel venime, that is to say, venomous cruelty, to
lordship. The said swords wauie, are figured also tra^suers barrewaies in the
field. The field is de Ermin, on a pale sable v. Bi^lets de Or, 2.1.2. These be
also very ancient addicions to armory, and ennoblishe greatly the coat armor
wherein they are borne and therefore judge of the same with aduisement, for this
is an ancient ensign.

The field is de Azure, two wings jointly en Lewre de Argent, oppressed with a
bar Gules, charged with iij. Annulettes de Or. Wings are of ancient bearing
in coat armor, especially if they be of Angels, Pellicanes, Eagles, Swannes
or of Ravens, theye be the greatest succor to fowls, to help their young
ones the rather to pray for their sus^enance. In armorye they betoken
protection.

The field is Sable, a goats head rassed d'argent, triple coroned d'or,
gorged with a garlande of yuie propre.

This devise is strange, and much to be merua^led at, considering that the
token borne therein, has his head adourned Diademate modo Romanorum
Pontificum. It might therefore be applied to be th'engsine of some Romish
bishop, fraudulently aspiring thereunto, living most lasciuiously, and
therefore deposed worthily. That excellent clerk Bocatius, an Italia^ borne,
in his treatise which he writes of the fall of Princes, makes mention of a
woman that was pope, and what befell of her, and how she was put down. The
which history I will here set forth as it is translated, or rather metrized
out of Latin into our English tongue, by John Lidgate, where he writes, that
after the miserable end of many notable provinces.

Came a creature
Like a Bishop rounded and shorn,
And as a priest she had a broad tonsure,
Her apparaile outward and vesture,
Being a woman, whereof Bochas took good head
Like a Prelate shape was her wede.
She was the same that of yore agon,
Unworthily satt in Peter's place,
And was afterward called pope John
A berdeles prelate, no hear seen on her face,
Of her birth named was the place,
Magunce a city not standinge in Itaile,
But on the Rhine, full famous of vitaile.
In her youth and in her tender age,
Forsook her kin, and in especial,
Cast she would for her advantage,
Give her to cunninge, body, heart, and all,
And in the sciences called liberal,
In all seven by famous excellence,
By great study she had experience.
Her name couth in many land,
To show her cunninge first when she began
Serching provinces came into England,
No wighte supposing but that she was a man
Came to Rome, her story tell can,
Taught Grammar, Sophisterie, and Logic,
Red in schools openly Rhethorick.
In the time of Emperor Lotharie,
After the death as made is mention
From mine aucthour, if I shall not vary,
That the pope which called was Leon,
The said woman by election,
Istalled was no wighte supposing than
By no token, but that she was a man.
The book of sorts after that anon,
Of adventure turned up so down
She was named and called Pope Ihon*
Of whose natural disposition,
F^ll by process into temptacion,
Quick with child, the hour came on her tha^,
was delivered at Saint Ihon Lateran.
After put down for her great outrage,
I will on her spend no more labor,
But pass over all the surplusage.
Of her living, and of her great error.
Of this monstre, it needs not to show any further significacion, the matter
whereupon it depends, being known to all that be christians, and which
abhor the tyranny of that Romish Sea. But note hear, touching the said
tripled Crown, wherewith the Goats head is ensigned, I read, that the king
and people of that famous city in Indie the more, called Calechut, woorship
the devil in a wodderfull and horrible form, most loathsome to be recited,
and having a Diadem on his head, as the popish prelates uses, and that
which is more, Ternis insignitur cornibus. And this devil has also his
priests called Bramini, which do make clean and take away the spots of
his body with Rose water and such odiriferous licour, and perfume him
kneelynge) varijs odoramentis, yea with every thing that sauoreth well: and
many more other deuilishe ceremonies, whereof yea may read in the Cosinography
of Munstre, lib. ^^de terris Asiae maioris.

Now to conclude, of all the other signs, the which are to be found or
seen in arms, as of beasts, fowls, fishes, serpents, trees, flowers,
leaves, and other marvelous tokens quick and dead, I can not declare here,
there be so many of them, but ye shall know generally, that for all the arms
the which lightly any man has seen in his days, ye have rules and
examples in this work, sufficient as I believe to describe and blaze any of
them. Therefore take heed to the instructions aforesaid, if so be they be not
a general doctrine, yet shall they profit you in this art greatly: and
perfect you much in the prices and tokens of armorie.

A Rule or table declaring how coats of arms may be augmented, multiplied,
divided and parted.

1 Bears Sable, a Mollet de Argent, by the name of Penhurste.

2 Bears Sable, two Mollettes Dargent, persed in chief.

3 Bears Sable, three Mollets de argent. persed.

4 Bears Sable three Mollets de argent, persed, in fesse.

5 Bears Sable, three Mollets de argent persed, in pale.

6 Bears Sable, v. Mollets de arge^t persed, in Cross.

7 bears Or, on a Fesse Sable, three Mollets de Argent, persed

8 bears Or, on a pale Sable, three Mollets de Argent, persed.

9 bears Or, on a plain cross sable, five Mollets de Argent persed.

10 bears Sable, a Fesse between, iij. Mollets de Argent, persed.

11 bears Sable, a pale between two Mollets de Argent persed.

12 Bears Sable, a plain Cross between sower Mollets de Argent* persed

13 Bears Or, on a bend Sable, iij. Mollets de Argent, persed.

14 Bears Or, on a bend sinistre, Sable, three Mollets de Argent, persed.

15 Bears Or, on a Saltier Sable, v. Mollets de argent, persed.

16 Bears Sable, a bend between two Mollets de Argent, persed.

17 Bears Sable, a bend sinistre, between two Mollets de Argent, persed

18 Bears sable, a Saltier between four Mollets de Argent persed.

19 Bears party per pale Sable and Argent, a cross Furshe of the one and the
other.

20 Bears party per Fesse Sable and Argent, over al a cross Taue transmuted
of the field.

21 Bears quarterly Argent and Sable, a cross Flurte, contrechanged as the
field.

22 Bears party per bend, Sable and Argent, three crosses botonie, de le un
et le auter. Likewise party per bend sinister, is to be blazed.

23 Bears party per Cheuron arge^t, and Sable, three Crosses patie fitchie
contrechanged of the field.

24 Bears party per pile in point Sable and Argent, a long cross ragged
and couped de Or.



This ends the second book entitled the armorie of Honor.
The third book entitled of Cotes and Crestes.
This sign of the Cross, Cross humet tie ragnelet.
whereof I have spoken so much in my Book entitled the Armorie of honor, and
with the which sign the most ancient ancthors, who write of the description
of things Armoriall, order the beginning of their works. I can not therefore,
but following their trade, take the beginning of this my rude Book, entitled,
of Cotes and Crestes, with the same mark or sign: the which, as it was most
miraculously seen of Constantine the great, Constantyne.
in his conflict against Maxentius the Tyraunte whom he overcame, and
therefore. Magni cognomen meruit, Christumque ab omnibus coli praecepit: So the
same sign was used of the F. king, named Philippus Augustus, K. Phillippe
Augustus.
against the Turk, and enemies of the Christian faith. And in diverse
expedicions against them, the sign of the Cross has been seen in the very
elemente, yea, of diverse noble Princes, yet in diverse colors, and forms,
Polid. Vergil. lib. 14.
in especially of the valiant king and prince, our first Rychard of England,
Cor leonis cognominatus, who being at Donstable, when he prepared him self
toward his journey ad Hierosolymitanum bellum, saw at noone days in ye air, a
cross, and in ea imaginem hominis pendentis. Wherefore, the sign of the cross
has been taken to be borne in sondrye wise of most noble kings and puissant
princes, yet this Cross here, has been rare seen borne, being humette, and
ragueled, notwithstanding it is of honorable bearing, to whom so ever the same
should be assigned. It is no otherwise framed or hewne but of two trees, the
bows roughely cut of.

The Lion Rampante on a Cross Crosselet ragueled fitche, is here placed as a
Creste for the said cote armoure, all upon this Poesy or Apothegme, fugiunt
crucem tenebrae: the which form, I (for the most part) use here to stand
for the wrethe or torce, in that the same words have relacion, to the thing
borne and seen.

Here is seen in this field Sable, two Columbes, or Pillors, d'Argent
crowned. This might be th'ensigne of some prudent and valiant king, who having
his common weal and vassals utterly impouerished and decade, did by his
Justice and piety, twice releaue and sustain the same from decay or falling,
for this cause, Isid. lib. Etimolog. 9. ca. 3.
Kings, apud Graecos, are called Basilei, because tanquam Bases populum
sustinent, and therefore Pillors are ensigned with Crounes, as ye here may see.
Quanto enim qnisque magis preponitur, tanto amplius pondere laborum grauatur.

This cognizance, a Lions head garda^te, crowned within a garland of Laurel,
does plainly show his regal admonishement, where he says. An old
Proverb.
Rex eris, si recte facias,
A king thou shall be of might, If thou do, that which is right. Si non facias,
non eris.
If thou do not that truly, Reign thou shall not certainly To these agree
Horace his saynges, in his first epistle of his first book, at pueri ludentes,
Rex eris aiunt, Si recte facies.

And marvel not of the Laurel garlande, being a remedy against poison,
lyghtening, etc. In war also borne, it is a token of peace and quietness.
Perpetuo viret, Sacraeste Apollini.

This coat Armor has 4. armyng swords on a plain Cross, all poyncte to
poyncte crosseways, and is the first or chief honorable ordinary charged. A
cote of great excellency, for the sword is a regal weapon, Sword.
wherewith Kings do Justice, manteyne peace, and subdue vice. Isid. lib.
Etymo. 18. cap. 6.
And it is proprely called in Latin, Gladius, quod gulam diuidit, id est,
cernicem saeca^ And because it cutteth ye head from the shulders, for that
purpose (says Isidore) it was first made. Nam cetera membra securibus magis
ceduntur, collum gladio tantum. God grant that it may be more severely
used, against all rude rebels, and tyrannical traitors: that we may cry to him
with our most noble Gedeo^ of England, Judges. 7.
against those Madianites. The sword of the Lord, and of Gedeon. Then shall
the rablemente of those ragged and ruffyan runnygates flee, and be delivered
with their two cursed Capteynes Oreb, and Zeb into the hands of a daughter of
Israel, Persey and Ne ^ell etc.
who shall choppe of their heads on the North part of the water Thamys, to
her great renome, and to the honor and glory of the most highest.

The Clubbe is a weapon often used of men in the time of their soden
insurrection, and borne when thieves and felo^s are arrested or apprehended, and
is a cruel weapon amongst unarmed men, for upon who^ with violence it
lyghteth, he can not abide the stroke thereof: but either is slain, grievously
hurt, or maimed. It is a warlik weapon, and peace there is none where it is
handeled. But yet this Clubbe here, is ensigned with a mark of peace, for it is
bound about with Olyue, which forsheweth a token of peace, and stands upon a
Poesy agreeable thereunto. That peace is better than force. Oliua, sacra est
Mineruae.

Here is descried in the field of this cote Armor a Bear vulned with a
troncheon of a spear, whosoever did this act to the Beast, was a man of a
rare and marvelous strength. I read in the book of kings, that king David,
father to the peasible and most prudent king Solomon, when he offered him
self to go, Kings. 1.17. c.
and fight against the huge and mighty champion of the Philistines, Goliath
by name, king Saul thought him not able to deal with such a Gyante, who was a
man of war, even from his youth, and David but a child, and of small groeth,
yet he answered the king Saul in this wise. Thy servant kept his fathers
sheep, and there came a great Bear, and after a Lion, and took a sheep out of
the flock, and I pursued after him, and he fiercely assalted me, being al
together unarmed, and I smote him, and took it out of his mouth, and when he
aroase against me, I caught him by the berde, and slew him, and so thy servant
has slain ye Bear also. And as thy servant slew them, so truly shall it be
done with this vncircu^sised Philistine: whom in ye name of ye lord of hosts,
he slew at the first encountre, with a stone cast out of a sling. Thus of what
prowes David was in arms, and how valiant and good a captain in battle, it
may sufficiently appear to the^ that will read his noble acts and atchieuances
in the books before remembered.

The Lion here also figured rampante upon an harp does show the regalitie of
the said king David, and his excellency in plaiyng upon y^ instrumente. This
Lion can not well abide the field, wherefore? because ye would take him to be a
cowarde, not so: in that, he is simple, gentle, and meke of nature, he has
therefore more need of wings to fly. Yet the bearing of such an ensign is
noble, and conteyneth in it self an high mystery. A Prince geeuen to virtue
and godlynes, can seldom escape th'assaultes or malignities of his own
vassalles and subjects, wherefore such his innocence flies unto the heavens,
and there purchases an immortal Crown, for that earthely, which would have
perished, to the confusion of his enemies, and th'aduancement of the glory of
the high God. The clinging of the said Lion his tail between his legs,
shows that he is not very fierce or cruel, but is void of al spoil and rauyn.

This flower has his price, next ye Rose before all others, for his beautye
and clerenes, and is called in latin Lyllia, an herb (as Isidore says) of
the color of milk for ye most part, whereof it takes his name quasi Lyolya.
whose whitnes although it be in his leaves, yet within there shyneth ye color
of gold. It is written yt the root of this flower ministered in medecyne,
sometime brings present death, and some other ways, it spedely restores life
also. Therefore in it is both death and life, agreyng to the Apothegme or
poesy thereon ensigned.

After ye particio^ of this field, what are seen therein, mou^ a question in
Armorie, whether the Saltier and his particion, or the flowers divided hy the
same, should have the dignity in this Coat Armoure. It is to be thought, ye
saltier should obtain the pre-eminence, because he holds the 5. part of the
field, and that it is so much honored by his particio^. I will not here
dissolve the node, ne yet may not, but referring the same to the great masters
of these mysteryes, I will partly declare my simple judgment therein: that ye
flowers being of such prise ought to have ye Royalty and prehemine^ce in ye
field (although they grow, they I say) being Lyllyes, like swords, which,
(as diverse writers affirm) betoken to the bearers thereof persecution or
punishment (because they have their springing from a root of much virtue,
unto a flower of excellent beauty and soueraygnetie) they being also
redolent, the other dead, and of no sauoure.

This mollet in no wise may be taken for a Sterre, because it is already fallen
from the firmament, or the air. And Sterres (says Isidore) are so called of
standing. Stellae dictae a stando, because they stand firm in the firmament
always, and fall not. Isid. lib. Etymo. 4. ca. lxx.
Namque videmus e caelo stellas quasi labi, non sunt stella, sed igni culi ab
aethere lapsi^qui fiunt dum ventus altiora petens, aethereum ignem secum trahit
qui tractu suo imitatar stellas cadentes. Nam stellae cadere non possunt. They
are immovable, and cum caelo fixa feruntur. They are freque^tly borne in
arms, and that to good respects and consideracions to the Heraultes well
known. This Mollet here seen, is for difference persed, on a scrowe of the
words apparante, that wisdom, or to be wise, is from heaven. Deuyns can best
judge what that Poesy means.

Here needs not to speak any thing of the bend charged in this field,
either of the Canton, for that I have sufficiently given of them examples, in
my book entitled, The Armorie of honor. But the Cinquefoyles divided by reason
of ye said Bend, are to be considered well of, because they do not only
beautefie the feelde of the said cote Armoure, to ye sight of the beholder, but
also do much increase and augmente his worthynes and renoume, who is the
bearer: and ought to be a man sure and perfect in all his senses. The
Cinquefoyle of the Greeks is named Pentaphyllon, so called of the no^bre of
his leaves. Vnde and eam Latini quinquefollium vocant: because it has five
leaves. Isidore says, that it is an herb so precious or clean, that it was
wont to be applied of ye ge^tles, to the purification and adourning of their
Temples.

The hand here is figured, holding a pen full of yncke. But the hand of
Valens the emperor, Gregorius Nazianzenus.
at what time he had written many letters about the exile or banishment of S.
Basil, and yet could not finish the same: The pen it self yielded three times
no yncke, notwithstanding he would not refrain from his wicked ordynance and
decree, or from subscribing to the same, before that a great quakyng and
tremblyng did apprehende his hand, wherewith being hastily taken, and stricken
with great dread, he than immediatlye rent in pieces with his own hand,
whatsoever before he had begone to write. Therefore, Contra diuinam
potestatem, nihil potest humaena.

In this field are to be seen two of the greatest Planettes, which almighty
God of his infinite goodness made and created with all the rest, chefely for
man's use and profit. I mean above all other Planettes, the Sun, and the
Moon, to be for us his creatures, as perpetual bright Lamps and ca^dles:
th'engenderers, breders, norishers, and comforters of all living things (that
are made of the four elements, in this inferior world, both for the day
and for the night. But here the one is obscured, the other also has changed her
light, according to the saiynge of the Prophet Iohell. In the last days,
the Sun shall be turned into darkness, Iohell. 2. and 3.
and the Moon into blood, before the great and notable day of the Lord shall
come. The Sun and Moon also (says the said Prophet) shall be darkened,
and the Sterres shall withdraw their light. When Christ suffered his
passion, there was darkness over all the earth, Luc. 23.
from the sixth until the ninth hour: and obscuratus est Sol etc. which was
noted of S. Dionyse Areopagita, being than in Aegipte, Isid. lib. 7. Etymol.
ca. 22.
who seeing the Sun (Praeter naturae ordinem obscuratum) said: Aut Deus
naturae patitur, aut mundi machina dissoluitur. The bearer of ye said cote
Armoure, ought to have good consideracion, and to be myndeful of the last
days.

The Egles head and wings within a crown on the Apothegme apparante, may
congruently stand for a Creaste to the said cote Armoure, as the learned can
quickelye judge thereof, Christ was called Aquila, (propterque post
resurrectionem ad astrae remouit.



I being on a time in the South part of Yorkshire, at an old decade Town,
called Bawtrye, within three mile of the Queens Majesty's honor of Tyckehyll,
and walkyng nyghe the church, there I espied on the out side thereof, the form
of an Escocheon, and for that I was not able to see what toke^ was borne
therein, having acquayntaunce in the Town, I called for the keys of the Church,
which was delivered to one Charles Morton Esquyer, Morton.
dwelling thereby: who going with me into the Church, (after a few prayers
said) I sought out for the said escocheon, which I found, and therein
desplayed quarterly, Gules and Ermine, two Goats heads rassed, argent on the
first, and last quarter, being in very deed (as manifestly appeared) the cote
Armor of the said Esquiers au^cetors, whereof presently I took a note, which
taken, he asked me whether the same were not two cotes quartered, meaning the
quarters Ermyne, to be a cote Armoure of it self. I answered him, (with
advertisement to have the king at arms of that Province advise therein) that
my opinion was, that it was but one cote only, notwithstanding the said
quartering thereof. And so I think of this abouesaide, where ye may see
quarterly Ermynes and Gules, two Lions rampante Argent, on the second and
third, devised all contrary to ye said Morton his cote. And even as I thought
first of the one, so do I yet of the other, videlicet both of them to be but
single cotes. But here is seen an noble charge, which is a Lion. Christ was
compared to that noble beast, pro regno and fortitudine.

This Gryphon, is upon a mountain in Bactria, and there keeps gold, and
other things (as he says) unknown.

Marvel not of this sheilde, wherein is three escocheons, charged with
sondrye chau^ces of the Dice. Nor take not him to whom such a cote should be
assigned unto, to be a player at the dice: for their is here by this devise
nothing less me^te. But rather an earnest and perfect rule and toke^ to
eschew ye inconveniences that happen to them, which some time consume or waste,
yea, and hazard all their whole patrimonies and substance, at the frantic
and folish play of the dice. I mean, that as the play is but folishe of it
self and vain, so are the players thereof frantike and Bedlem. Therefore, such
an one as should possess these ensigns, utterly detested the uncertain
chau^ces of such idle games, and does diligently study, both to govern
himself well and discretly, as also the lands and goods committed and left
unto him, by the great providence and industry of his auncetors. Oh, would to
God the same laws were in this Realm now in these our days, as was among
the Grecians, and in especially ye Romans in old time: whereof here I
purpose not to entreat. But of the prohibitio^ of plaiyng at dise, note what
Isidore says, in his 19. book of Etimologies ca. 68. Ab hac art fraus and
mendacium atque periurium nunqua^ abest: postremo and odium: and damna reru^:
vnde and aliqua^do propter haec scelera interdicta legibus fuit.

This Sterre with the son beams, conteaneth in it a mysterye of the
incarnacion of our savior Jesus Christ, as is red in a prose of the church.

Sicut sydus radium, profert virgo filium, pari forma*
Neque sydus radio, neque matter filio fit corrupta.
The which, is thus metrized.

As the sterre shows forth the Sun beam,
So was a child borne of a virgin clean:
Neither with the son beam is viciate the sterre,
Nor yet by the bearing of a son, the mother.
Here in this field, Azure is to be seen, five Plates in cross, These are to
be taken for perfect money and good, although they be not signed or stamped
with the image or style of any prince, and although they be not so marked, yet
they are money, and ought to be so called (as Isidore says) whilst therein
is no fraud or deceit in Metal, Moneta
or weighte. And coin it is to be called, wha^ it is ensigned with the name
and image of the Prince of that realm, for whom purposely it serves. Numisma:
Some do writ that king Ninus did first inuente the coining of money,
others Phaelon, or the Aeginites. But among the Latynes, Numa king of the
Romans did first mark the same with the image and title of his name: of
whom also it took the name in Latin, Numus, for money or coin: some do write
this word with a doble M. Numus.
It was a Law among The Egyptians, that who so had clipped their coin (whereby
the roundenes thereof was defaced, either sorged it, or countrefaicted the
stamp, or abated with filinge the weighte thereof, should have both his
hands cut of: that such part of the body as had trespaced, might for ever
bear the punishment due for such offense: and that all others taking warnyng
by his example, might shonne the like. Plates, in cote Armoure, are of very
ancient bearinge.

The Swanne is of all birds most whitest, of a shyrle voice, and sings most
swetely toward ye time of his death, as it were to bewail his departure and
burial Ovid.

Dulcia defleta modulatur carmina lingua.
Ca^tator Cygnus funeris ipse sui.
The Swanne does tune, with
mourning breath,
Most plesaunt metres, before
his death.
He is a gentle and quiet bird, His mortal enemy is th'Egle, cui tamen
fortissime resistit: and therefore he deserves such just rewards,
wherewith his head is here adorned. agreeable also unto his nature. They are
consecrate to Apollo, ob praesagium finis, because he diuineth, or
coniectureth when he shall dye.

Devises heroiques, of the twelve labors, performed by Hercules.
1. I will not here speak how well this Lion is differe^ced, but of his
regalitie in ye field, standing in the worthest metal of all other, governed
of the Sun, and ennoblished with the genune Topazion.

This is a regal Lion, and a mighty, for he occupyeth the field alone: and
therefore he worthily deserves y^ name.

The first of the twelve labors which Hercules, son of Osiris, and king of
Egypt, called Hercules Libyus performed, was (as Diodorus writes) the slayng
of a Lion in ye wodde Nemea, that far excelled all other Lions in greatness,
which might not be slain with metal or stone. Wherefore he was constreyned
to kill him with his hands.

2. Of the killing of the monstre Hydra, which was his second labor, I have
spoken somewhat in my book, entitled the Armorie of honor. But yet here is to
be seen the Icon of the said monstre her head, as neighe as I could
conjecture the form thereof. For Isidore calls her a Dragon of many heads,
and says that in Latyne, she is named Excedra, quod vno caeso tria capita
excrescebant: because says he, that when one was stricken of, there did
eftsoon arise three other heads. Sed hoc fabulosum est. Nam co^stat Hydram
locum fuisse e^omentem aquas vastantes vicinam Ciuitatem: Is^d. lib. E^y. 1^.
cap. 3.
in quo vno meatum clauso multi erumpebant. Quod Hercules videns, loca ipsa
excussit, and aquae clausit meatus. Nam Hydra ab aqua dicta est.

3 Whosoever achieved this Bore, deserved the beasantes, if they had been
talentes.

Hercules his third labor (taken for the common profit of mankind (was the
taking of the great Bore of Erimanthus, which wasted the country of Arcadia,
and all people dradde him: but finallye Hercules took him on live, and bearing
him on his shoulders, brought him to king Euristeus.

4 Centauri, were a people in the Countreye of Thessalye whom the Poets
feyned to be the one half like a man, and the other like an Horse.

The fowerth labor, which Hercules (of his incomparable strength) performed,
was the Battle, which he had alone with a great nombre of those men called
Centauri, that were of great strength and swifte as horses. Centauris, id est
hominibus aquo mixtis species vocabulum dedit: quos quidam fuisse aequites
Thessalorum dicunt. sed pro eoque discurrentes in bello, velut vnum corpus
aquorum and hominum viderentur: inde Centauros fictos asseruerunt. Isodor. lib.
11. cap. 3. Etymol.

5. Take not this to be the Heart that Gaguyne in his Chronicle makes mention
of, which the French king Charles the sixth of that name, when he was hunting
in the wood Siluanectum, did find, and took with a brazen collar about his
neck, wherein was this inscription: Hoc Caesar me donauit. But take this as
the fifthe atchieuemente of the laborious Hercules, which was the taking of
the great Heart in runninge, that for his swiftness had his horns gilted.

6. Isidore says, that ye birds named Stymphalides, are so called of
certain Isles in Arcadie called Stymphali, where are great plenty of them: and
affirms, that they are Pelagvolucres, birds of the sea, and most frequent
those Isles. Against these birds Hercules used Darts, and destroyed them,
because they consumed the fruits, and grain of the Countries adioyninge. And
this was the sixte labor that he performed. This Stymphalie here, I have
caused to be figured volante, with a Garb, agreeable to his nature. These
birds are supposed to be so ^ygge, that they shadow all the Sun beams.

These Bendes sinister vndadie, or waterie, may foreshowe some notable devise,
or enterprise done by force, violence, or rage of the waters when they were
turned, altered, or otherwise broken out of their old and woonted course. The
seventh of Hercules his labors, was the making clean of the Hall of Angeus,
being full of donge, the which by his wisdom, and policy he performed,
bringing the River Pygnio through the Hall. Which by the swifte course of the
stream, in one day carried away the donge without any reproach to Hercules. It
may also be thought, that the bearer of such, or like Cote armor, had done
some great enterprise upon the seas, worthy of perpetual commendation.

This Bull is figured of color black, horns and hoofes read, a Collar of
the beast of Armonye, with a Chain of gold. How well he is differenced for
challenge, make no regard thereof. The Symbol, or device, proceedethe of
Hercules his eighte atchieuemente, which was the bringynge of a bull from
Creta, into Greece, drawinge him alonge the sea.

9. Hercules his ninth notable labor, which Poets write of, that he
performed, was the taking of Diomedes king of Tharcia, and casting him to
his horses, who feeding them with man's fleashe, was him self of them devoured.
And after Hercules breakinge those wild horses, and making them gentle,
brought them to Euristheus. This Euristheus was a king of Greece, and enemy
to Hercules, which commanded him to do most of his enterprises.

10. The tenthe of Hercules his labors, which he achieved, was his voyage
into Spain, and sleainge of Gereon and his sons, and taking the great kyne,
which he gave to a king in that country, who continually afterward did
yearly offer in Sacrifice to the honor of Hercules, one of the Bulls, that
came of those kyne.

11. The going down into hell of Hercules, and fetchinge thence Theseus and
Perithous, valiante men, and sometime his companions, is not so greatly to be
marueiled at, as in that he brought with him in a chain, Cerberus the dog of
hell, having three heads. And this was the eleventh of the notable labors,
which Poets write of, that Hercules achieved.

12. Here is to be seen a Dragon, supportinge a tree laden with golden apples.
The sleaynge of the terrible Dragon, which continually watchinge, kept the
golden apples in the gardens Hesperides, and taking them out thereof, was the
tweluth, and last labor that Hercules performed. Some say, those apples
which were called golden for the beauty of the^, were sheep, whose fleeces
were of golden color: and the Dragon signifies the diligence, and strength of
the shepherd which kept them. S. Hierome of the tenth chapter of Genesis
writes, that this Hercules so often before mentioned, called Hercules Lybius,
because he conquered Lybia, was he which performed the twelve notable labors,
which Poets write of, and not Alcydes, son of Alcmenae, who also was named
Hercules.

Polycrates was among the Samians, a tyran so fortunate, that he never
suffered any adversity or grief. Wherefore, he at the last dreadinge the
change of fortune, having a King with a stone of excellent value, did cast
the same into the sea, to the intent he would suffer sum displeasure, and
so satisfy fortune. But a fyshe deuouringe the King, Strabo.
was shortly after taken of a fisher, and given to the king for the
greatenesse of the fish: which being opened, the said King was found, and
brought to the king, whereat, as well he, as all other about him, marueiled.
Soon after the said tyran was taken of Orontes, Paeradin, Symbo. Hero. Fol.
50.
a Duke among the Persians, and hanged. Sic blandimenta, splendorue fortunae
(quae mundus hic passim pro foelicitate ducit) nec certa, constantiaue sunt,
aut dimansura: sed quo fulgentior apparet, eo vero facilius, ac celerius,
quemadmodum and natura fragile vitrum, laeditur. Et iuxta comicum, fortuna
vitrea est, quae cum splendet, frangitur.

Argus, whom the Poets feign, that he had an hundred eyes, whereby was
signified his wisdom, and circumspection, had appointed him by Juno, the
keeping of Io, whom she had transfourmed into a Cow. But Mercurius (being
sent by Jupiter) with his sweet Harmony brought Argus on sleep slew him, Auis
Iunonia.
took Io from him, and brought her into Egypt. Then Juno took Argus eyes,
and set them in the Peacockes tail, wherefore the Peacocke is consecrate to
Juno. When he has lost his tail, which happens once in the year, as all
ashamed, he seeks where to hide him self, until it grow again. He lives
twenty five years. The Peacocke, and the Dove love one an other.

This Fish in Latin is called Mugilis, a sea fish, of al skaled fishes,
Isidor. li. Ety. 12. cap. 6.
most swifte. Nam vbi dispositas senserit piscatorum insidias, confestim
retrorsum rediens, ita transilit rete: vt volare piscem videas. He is of
color white, they are so desirous each kind of ye other, that when fishers
have taken the Males, and tied them to a line, and let them down into the sea,
all the Females, when they per^eiue the Male, do gather together, and coming
to them, are taken in the nets. They are taken about Narbon in France, and
are called Muges, in the singular number a Muge. This fish may with more
congruence be borne in Arms, then many others, both for his celeritie, and
the mutual love which each kind bears to the other.

Heart.
The Heart is at continual debate with the Serpente, in so much, that he
pursues and seekethe for him at his hole, where he lies, and with the breathe
of his nostrilles compels him to come out, and after he has of long time
fought with him, he eatethe him. Therefore the smell of the Hearts horn burnt,
drives utterly away the Serpents. They never feale the Fever, but rather are
remedied thereof by the eatinge of the Serpente. It is said, that Hearts
fleashe eaten in the morninge, augmenteth man's life. If they be gelded, their
horns neither fall of, nor grow. They have no gall: and in Africa there is
none of them.

The Goose in Latin is called Anser, auis, quae vulgo vocatur Anca, Anseres.
quod non est Latinum. Anseris nomen anas ded^t per deriuationem, vel a
similitudine, vel quod and ipsa natandi freque^tiam habet. The Goose (says
Isidore) does declare manifestly the watches of the night, through the
continuance of his cryinge. And no byrd perceives so the savor, or sent of a
man, as does the Goose. The which of old time was best known to the
Romans, for as much as when the Frenchemen besieged the Capitole of Rome,
they within being on sleep, the Capitole had been won, if a certain number
of Geese, perceiuinge the enemies, had not cried. Wherewith the Romans
awaked, and by the valiant prowes of Marcus Manlius, slew, and drove out the
Frenchemen. Wherefore Geese were had in great reputation: and provision was
made, that they should never lack meat. Geese are of a feruente stomach. They
take pleasure in eating waterie and cold grass. Laurum non attingunt. In time
paste their heart was most commended among the delicate meats at the table.
So was their liver taken to be of best savor or taste.

He is a woorthye bird to be borne in Cote armoure. Licet Anser strepere inter
olores.

Here is seen three Flowers of the herb Alleluya, proper, united with a
scrowe, containing the word of the Flower. the which is well known. Alleluya,
Praisinge the Lord. Which may stand most congruently for a Creaste, to the
said Cote armor.

Fulica*
The Bird Fulica (says Rauisius) haunteth the water, and lives nighe Pooles
and Marshes. Her color is dark or black, whereof she takes her name. Yet
her beak, tippe of her wings, and legs are read. She is little bygger then
a Culuer. One excellent, and most gentle property remains in this bird,
which is, that when the Egle has cast forth of her neaste some of her
young ones before the time, she espyinge the same, takes them, and brings
them up. It may be thought she does it for obedience sake to her Sovereign,
because the Eagle is Omnium alitum Regina: and so her nature herein is to be
taken. If she cry in the morninge, it is a great token, that there shall
some tempeste ensue. Et quum ludit in littore. Isidore says, she is called
Fulcia, quod caro eius leporinam sapiat. Lagos enim Lepus dicitur: Vnde and
apud Graecos Lagos dicitur. Habet nidum in medio aquae, vel in petris, quas
aqua circundant: maritimoque semper delectatur profundo. She is a kind bird
both to her own, and to the Eagles. Therefore all the birds of this nature
ought especially to be borne in Ensigns, for the soueraignetie of them, and a
great respect to be had, to what persons they are assigned unto. For Eagles
are not to be borne of Fools, nor Lions of Dastardes: least that Diogenes
reprove them, as he did the man that was cladde in a Lions skin: thinkinge it
uncomely, that a man effeminate, or of a childishe heart, should assumpte to
wear upon him the garmente of Hercules.

The Creaste above described, is a beast less the^ a Fox, in color dark
yealowe, full of black spots, and is taken to be a black Genet, the furre
whereof has been very much esteemed here in England.

I read in the first book of the Machabes, the thirtenth chapter, that Simon
after the death of Ionathas his brother, made upon the Sepulcher of his
Father, and his brethren, a buyldinge hie to look unto, of Free stone behind
and before. Et statuit septem pyramidas, vnam contra vnam, Patri, et Matri, et
quatuor fratribus: and set up seven Steples one against an other (for his
Father, his Mother, and four brethren.) And round about them he set great
Pillars, with Arms upon them for a perpetual memory: and carved Ships
besides the Arms, that they might be seen of men saylinge in the sea. Here
appears the antiquity of bearinge of Arms, and long before this, as may
appear in the second Chapter of the Book of Numeri, whereas almighty God
commanded Moses and Aaron, that every man of the children of Israel should
pitche under his own Standerd, and under the Arms of their Fathers houses.
Whereby does manifestly appear, to what use the bearinge of Arms serve:
verily that one House, and the Progeny thereof might be known from an other,
as well at home in their own Country, as when they serve abroad otherwhere in
Martial affairs. Therefore (as Christine de Pyse says in the Book of the
feats of Arms) they were first found, that every estate might be known in
vattaile, one from an othrr, by their Arms or Ensigns. Ship.
The Ship, who first invented the same, I find no certainty. Some Writers
affirm Jason and Typhis to be the inuentors thereof, Secundum Ecclesiasticos
Noe^. Isidore says* that the Lydians made the first Ship, Pelagique incertae
petentes, peruium mare vsibus humanis fecerunt. Some say, ye Rhodians, or one
Paralus. Others, that Argus for his wisdom, called Sapientissimus, primus
Nauem condidit.

Pythagoras (as says Boethius) was the first inuentour of Music among the
Grecians, which he found out by the sound of Hammers, whereof he wrote a
Book, which Boethius and Apuleius translated into Latin. I cannot, neither yet
dare speak any thing in commendation of the principal tokens borne in this
Cote armor, Organ Pipes.
which are the Organ Pipes, an instrument of Music. But what say I,
Music? One of the seven Liberal Sciences? It is almost bannished this
Realm. If it were not, the Queens Majesty did favor that excellent
Science, Singinge men, and Choristers might go a begging, together with their
Master the player on the Organes. Yet this Cote Armor depends not all upon
Music, Music.
for peradventure good counsel, which is a sweet thing, and delights
much him which will receive the same, more then the noise of any Instrumente,
ought to have his merit, and commendation above all tunes, and ditties. And
even so it ought to have: and therefore such a Cote Armoure ought rather to
be assigned to a faithefull Counselor, then to an untuneable Musition. Hammer.
The Hammer is an Instrumente well known, and to be occupied of men of diverse
Sciences, but especially of the Smythe, or Ferrier. And it is called in Latin
(as Isidore says) Malleus: quia dum quid calet, and molle est, cedit and
producit. The Fasce of Palm, Palm.
of right ought to have his Bond of Gold, and to stand within a Crown,
because that it is always green. And (as witnesses Plutarchus) of that
nature and property, that there can no weighte, nor burden oppress it, but
that it will rise under it, and stand up as it should do. Propterea in
certaminibus Palmam signum esse placuit victoriae: quoniam ingenium eiusmodi
ligni, est vt vrgentibus, prementibusque non cedat.

Simonides, a Poet in Greece, was the first that invented the verses called
Lyrici, and was excellent in provoking of tears. He on a time when he
should take his journey, espied a dead man, to him unknown, lyinge on the
ground, ready to be devoured of birds, and wild beasts. Stayinge, he took
the dead body, and as soon as he could, buried the same. But when as he was
minded to take shippinge, the night before, he saw in his sleep, the man
whom he bad buried, admonishinge him, not so to do: for if he did, he should
perish by wrecke on the sea. When he told this dream to his fellows, they
mocked him, and left him alone on the shore. But when they had a little
launched from the land, there arose a sudden tempeste, and loosed so their
tackelinges, that their Ship broke, and they all perished. And so Simonides,
for the pleasure which he did to the dead man in buryinge him, Hawmed.
received the safegarde of his life. The Hawmede in this Cote armor, is a
manifest demonstration of burial, and is an aunciente token in Armorie.

I have here caused to be figured upon the said Cote armor, a Swalowe, of
color, as ye may see, on a wreathe, Or, and Uerte. Aristotle says, that
there be in the I Will Samo, white Swalowes, Quibus excaecatis, lumen iterum
restituitur. Cecina Volaterranus comprehensus hirundines, nuntias belli
mittebat amicis, in nidum pristinum redire solitas. They will not enter into
the City of Thebes, because that City has been so often taken, Sw^l^we.
and ransacked. They are not in danger to the Raven of other birds, Nec
vnquam praeda est. Therefore the Scrowe which she bears in her beak,
manifestly declares the same, Nulli praeda, that she is pray to none. If by
man's hands they be caught, they die, because they cannot be brought to feed
on any thing, but that which them selves can catch flyinge in the air.
Excaecatis Pullorum oculis, herba Chelidonia visum restituunt.

They which have been dilligent searchers of ye natures of all things which have
life, write, yt there be certain birds, and other beasts lackinge reason,
which save their lives through great silence, Like as Geese do, which
leaving the East coasts, for y^ great heat there, and flyinge into the Weast
parts, where the sun goes down, when they begin to fly over ye grene
mountain Taurus, which abounds with Eagles, they fearing those ravenous
birds, stop up their beakes with little stones, least the violence of their
usual and accustomed cryinge should break out, and be heard of the Eagles,
whereby they should be in ieopardie of their lives. But after they (with
great silence) have ^lowne over the top, and heighthe of the said Hill,
they refuse, or let fall their pebble stones, and so they escape away more
safely with their noise, and loud voices through the height of the
firmament. Hereby are we taught to keep silence, and to premeditate what we
will speak to any: and to take good heed it be spoken in conueniente time and
place. For as the common proverb is, The word spoken can not be called back
again. Aristotle, among many other things which he taught his Disciple
Calistheues, when he sent him to Alexander the Great, this especially he
enioined him, Vt quam rarissime and iocunde admodu^ apud eum loqueretur, qui
vitae necisque potestatem in acie linguae haberet. Proinde Anserum exemplu^
potius quam Calisthenis vtatur: illi enim paruo silentio vitam tutati sunt, hic
autem vel modica loquendi licentia, eam amisit, cum nec dicto optimi
praeceptoris auscultasset. Oportuni namque silentij mayor est laus, quam
intempestiuae orationis. The Creste prefigured is a Pie, set upon a Scrowe
containinge this Apothegme. Nescit vox mis sa reuerti.

Cyrus, king of the Persians, what time he was ready to die, gave in charge by
his will to make, or ordain no other Sepulcher, or Tomb for him, but only to
be buried, and laid in the earth, which brings forth grass, and flowers:
then the which no thing can be found more excellent (que he) nor that can
better become a gave.

Thus truly the form, or fashion of ye ancient Egyptians their burial is to
be laughed at, and mocked. Of the which Diodorus writes, that they contemninge
the state of this life, called our Houses, Innes, esteming them but as
lodginges to receive a friend, for a short and small time. But in buildinge
Sepulchers or Tombs, they spared neither labor nor cost. For they judged
such their Sepulchers to be continual, and everlasting habitations. And here
is seen a Cote armor, which is to be taken of aunciente bearinge, and also
good and perfect Armorie. Here is also displaide for the Creaste upon an Helm
on a Tor^e, Gold, and Uerte, an Arm Coupye, Party per Pale, Or and Ermine,
holding in his hand proper, a Billet Gold, manteled Sable, doubled Argent.
This Apothegme, or Posie added: Vana salus ab homine. These Arms thus
marshalled, ought not to be borne in this form, but of a Dubbed knight. An
Esquire ought to bear his Creast, like to the old ancient order, which is,
upon a wreathe of the colors, which are agreeable to the same: and in such
form, as next here before, and in those that follow, for the most part, ye
shall have examples.

The Cofer in Latin is called Scrinium, and is a necessary thing made for the
safe keepynge of Iewelles, or Ornaments, as also of Books, Evidences, and
Records of Judgments, or Enrolmentes. Plini writes in his natural
History, that among all the spoils, which Alexander the great got of
Darius king of Persia, he liked one most especially, which was a Cofer of
sweet Oyntementes, very sumptuous, and of great valor, both in Gold,
precious Stones, and Pearls: and shewinge the same to diverse his friends and
lovers, he questioned with them, to what purpose it would best serve. After
diverse, and contrary reasons by them therein declared, and showed, he said,
it would best serve for the safe keeping of the books of Homere, as the most
excellent work for the declaration of man's mind, judging no treasure more
precious then it. Ita visum est iuueni, qui se totum ad exemplar Achillis
componebat. Cofers, or Cheastes are for many good purposes, and respects to be
borne in Armorie. For diligence, and virtuous study is thereby signified, and
represented, and not negligence, or niggishe keepinge of worldely pelfre, and
mucke.

The Bison here figured for a Creaste, on a Torce Argente, and Gules, is a
Beast, having one horn standinge between his ears, and a very long
main. In shape he is like to an Heart, but in sum Countries he is black. I
read, that there is great stoare of them in Germany. Yet this is not the
Beast, which sum take to be the same that is named Bubalus, a Bugle, or
wild Ox. For the Poet Martialis makes them unlike, as this his Uerse
folowinge does declare: Illi cessit atrox Bubalus atque Bison.
The fierce Bugle to him gave place,
And also the Bison in his race.


Solea, as I read it Englished by Sir Thomas Eliot in his Dictionarie, is a
Shoe called a Gallage, or Patten, which has nothing on the feet but only
Latchettes. This manner of Shoe, before all others, has his commendation, for
it greueth not, or vexes the wearer thereof on his feet. A Shoe made
otherwise close, may wri^g a man: Si pede mayor erit, subuertet: si minor, vret.

A shoe too large for thy foot,
It cannot but thee overthrow:
If too little, it be again,
It vexes thee with greater pain.
A Shoe on a man's foot, may seem good, and ^itte, yet where it greeueth,
no man can tell, but the wearer. Paulus Aemylius, Son of Lucius Paulus, a
Consul most excellent among the Romans, hearing his Wife Papyria (the
daughter also of a Consul) commended for her beauty, Nobleness of birth,
modesty, and fruitefulnesse, showed his shoe to them, that praised her, and
asked how they liked it. They answered, it was a good shoe, and well made.
Sed qua part pedem meum distorquet, nescitis. But none of you does know
(says he) where it wringeth me. Meaning, that he alone felt it.

The Patten is a commendable token, and may well beseem a Cote armor. Who is
the bearer hereof (as none is) in fight on foot must seem to have the
maisterie. Here is also seen volante on a wreathe, Or, and Sable, an Agathal
d'Argent, guttie, beaked, and legged, Uerte, gesante an Alimon, proper. The
bird called Agathallus, has natural enimitie with an other bird, called
Achanthylis: so that if the blood of them be forcibly mixte together, they
will after sever each from other. The Herb aforesaid, which he bears, is of
that nature, that it will not suffer them that taste it, to be hungrye.

This Beast here figured, is now called a Mouse of Indie, otherwise Icheneuman,
a beast of Egypt, of the greatness of a Catte, and is fashioned like a Mouse,
yet having the tail, as of a goat, who creeps into the body of a
Crocodyle, when in sleep he gapeth and eating his bowels, sleaeth him, he
escapinge alive. The Egyptians among other their Gods woorship this little
beasts also for a God.

For the Creaste, here is to be seen a Bugles head, rassed d'Argente, a
branch of Juniper tree proper.

This tree accustomably grows in sandye places. The leaves and branches
thereof, is continually grene. It will not putrify, or stynke. Non floret: It
has no flowers. It is of the same virtue, or strength, as is the Ceder tree.
The Pithe thereof also is every where more sound, then is the Ceder: and the
wood principallye hard, as Mantuane reports. It is great beyond measure,
and huge in Spain, and growethe best on the hills, having prick^es in
stead of leaves. It is crooked, and wrapped together. Being burnte, it is
very odoriferous, and purges the corrupted Air. It is a sweet busshe in
this Realm, and woorthye great commendation. In London it is best sold. Who
so bears this in any sign, or token Armoriall, ought to be a man of an
excellent, and prompte wit, apt to do Justice without corruption,
parcialitie, or favor. Wherefore this Apothegme is added: Aequitas lucet per se.

Here in this field Sable, is to be seen a great Pyramide in Pale, port
displaide, between two Croisantes d'Argent.

This building here described, is in our english tongue to be taken for a
Steeple, which is a great buildinge made of stone or other mattier, and is
fourmed broad, and four square beneath, and vpwardes small and sharp as it
were ye flame of fire, which ends sharp. This is a Cote of great
excellency, and who so ever should bear the same, ought in all things to be
found discrete, and constant, and to abide therein.

The Hybre which here is assigned for ye Crest, is a kind of Hawks, which
very seldom or never is seen to fly in the day time, but seeks his pray
in the night. Pugnat cum Aquila acriter, adeo, vt ambae mutuo assultu implexae,
quandoque deferantur in terram.

There are three kinds of Weasels, one called Gales, an other Ictis, and the
third Meles. But the Weasel called Ictis, is that which is here described,
and is of color white, a destroyer of Beestals, and eats up their honey. A
beast that of good congruence may be borne in Arms without any reproach to
the bearer, or contempt of the thing borne. For the Beast is a lover of man,
and defends him sleaping abroad, from the hurt, byte, or sting of all
venomous Serpents: for to the serpent he is a deadly, and mortal enemy. Cui
congreditur commanducata ruta, quam scit esse ipsi Serpenti infensam, and
exitialem. The Weasel is woorshipped of the Thebanes. The stones of this beast
bound to a woman nigh her time, do keep, and preserve her in the birth of
the child: or, as some judge, do keep back, or let the birth of a child.

On a Torce Argent and Uert, here is ensigned two Arms, sleues, and ruffes
Ermyne, set within a Crown d'Or, holding in the hands proper, two Serpe^tes,
Azure.

I read, that Iphiclus, son of Alcmena, borne with Hercules at one birth.
But Hercules was gotten by Jupiter, and Iphiclus by Amphitrio. And when two
Serpents came to the Cradle of Iphiclus, and slew him, after when they came to
Hercules, he took in either of his hands one, and slew them. Touching that
the Torce is of white, and green, Darius, the king of Persia, at what time he
arrayed battle against the Great Alexander, did wear a Roll of the same
colors about the Diadem upon his head, called by the Persians, Cydaris.

These are properly termed in Arms, Tortcaulxes, wherewith the Cross is
charged, and are to be taken for cakes of bread, yet of heaviness, being
turned from their proper color to blood. Torta panis, is Latin for a cake of
bread, such as a Cracknell, or Symnell is. Of old time it was called a Wastle.

Our Savior Jesus, (as the Scriptures do witness) was borne in the City of
David, called Bethelem, distante from Jerusalem six miles, and was first
called Euphrata, and signifies in the Hebrewe tongue, the House of Bread.
Wherefore the Prophet says in his Psalm, Ecce audiuimus eam in Euphrata,
etc. Lo, we have heard of the same at Enphrata, and found it in the Wood.
The further interpretation hereof, I leave to Divines.

The Ram here divised for ye Crest, is quarterly parted S. and Ermyne, armed,
and vnguled d'Or. He is a noble beast, and best known in this Realm.
Laberius the Poet calls them, Reciprocornes, for the turning backward, and
eftsoons forward of their horns. They are also called Lanicules, because
they have their skin covered with woll. Some report, and affirm, that of
Rams horns buried, or hid in the ground, is brought forth an Herb,
called Asparagus, in English, Sperage.

Christ was called Aries, a Ram, Propter Principatum, for his Soueraignetie,
and Dominion.

The field of this Cote armor, is Geronnie of six pieces Argente, and Gules,
on the first quarter Sable, three Annulettes, d'Or.

Ringe.
The Ringe is the most principal ornamente to beautify the hand of man or
woman. But in wearing of them oftentimes is found detestable pride, offense, and
displeasure both to God, and Man. Are not oftentimes gemmes therein enclosed,
which stir and provoke the wearer thereof to filthye lust, and abominable
vices, are not oftener in place of stones (which are called precious) known to
be enclosed familiar devils, serving to work nothing that is good and godly,
but contrary altogether both to grace and godliness. God grant, that no
Christian man be found to wear such Ringes. I read in a profane history,
that Gyges, servant to Caudales, king of Lydea, had a Ringe of such virtue,
that when the brother part thereof was turned to the palm of his hand, he was
seen of no man, but he might see all things: and when he turned the Ringe of
the contrary part, he was him self seen openly. By the mean whereof he slew
Caudales, and committed adultrie with his wife: and so of a lasie shepherd, he
was made a cursed king.

Osprey.
The bird called an Osprey, is of such whiteness on his breaste, and wings,
that when he houereth over any runnynge water, or fish Poole, all the fish
therein turns up their bellies, and so he takes his pray. He is taken to
be a kind of Eagles that haunteth about the Sea.

Here is divised a field Geronnie of twelve pieces Ermyne and Gules, on a
Scocheon d'Or, the Beast Phattaga Uerte, crested Azure. This is a beast in
Indie like a Cockatrice, as bygge as a little dog, having a skalye, and
roughe skin, that cannot be pierced with iron. The fashion of his tail is
like unto the Lions, which in his fierceness he bears reflexed toward his
back. I have caused this Escocheon thus charged, to be set in proper metal,
the field requiringe no more. For I hold this opinion in Arms, that Ermyne,
or Ermynes ought never to be laid with the metal of their color, because
they are Furs, and have no proper Blazon with any metal.

The Bergander is a bird of the kind of Geese, somewhat longer, and bigger
then a Ducke, living in the water, breeding sometime in Conye holes, sometime
in hollow places in Rocks.

This byrd is here figured, bearing the herb Hiacinthe, with the flower
proper. It has leaves like a Porret, an hand breadth in height, less then a
maids little finger, grene of color, ye top lying down full of purple
flowers, and the root round. The flower springs out in spring time, with
the Uiolet, and before the Rose. It is commonly called here in England,
Crowetoes.

In this field parted per Pale, Sable and Gules, are to be seen on a Cross
Molyne, d'Or, a Dryme Worm between four Akornes Uerte. This Worm is here
figured with the tail flexed under his chinne, and is called Dryimus: a little
worm found in the root of an oak, so mischeuous a poison, that if one tread
on him bare footed, foorthewith the skin comes of, and all the leg
swells, and (which is more to be marueiled at) they that handle him that is
hurt, do loose their skin. This Cote armoure is Horoique, for the bearer
thereof ought without respect of person, to execute justice, and to give true
judgment after the Laws: not to be slothful in his office, but painefully
to maintain the just causes of the innocent, keeping them with double defense
from the violent oppression of the mighty. The office of an ynck Molyne, and to
what purpose it serves between the Myll stones, is, I think, known to most
men, but to Myllers especially, who in taking their toll, forget oftentimes
the Rule taught them by their myll ynck.

The Creste here seen, is an Erodye Gold, Guttie, set on a Torce, Silver and
Gules. Calepine says, that the byrd Erodius, is the greatest foul that
flies, and overcomes and deuoureth the Eagle. Other write, that in time of
treadinge, he sweateth blood.



The field of this Cote Armoure is verte, three cups covered in Pale between
ij. flasques d' Or, charged with two clustres of grappes, propre. And to the
Creste upon the helm, a kings head, with a Diadem crowned, set on a
Chapeau Sable, turned up Ermyne, manteled verte, dobled Argente, cotized of two
Equicerues propre, this Apothegme added, sato prudentia mayor.

The torn corpse of Pentheus, and the cause of his death sufficiently
displayeth all the said ensigns: who as the fables do report, was king of
the Thebanes, whose father was called Echion, and his mother Agaue. This
Pentheus despised the Sacrifice of Bacchus, the god of wine, or the droncken
god, wherefore his own mother Agaue cut of his head: and his sisters with the
other company of women, which than did celebrate the feast and sacrifice of
the said Bacchus, and tore his body all to pieces.

Equicerne.
The Equicerne, as I read, is a beast in the Orient, forma cerui and aequi
compositum, in form or shape of an heart, and an horse joined together, having
horns, and a long main to the shoulders, and a bearde under his chynne like
unto the goat, and fete round cloven like an heart, and is as great as an
heart.

Here is to be seen in this field sable, an Eale his head, coupie in Fesse,
between two lances d' Argente. This is a beast in India, like an Horse, and
has jaws like a Bore, and therein tuskes, a cubite long and more, which are
apt to what use the beast will, for they stand not fast, but are bowed as
he lists: so that when he fights, he sets up the one, and holds down
the other, to th'intente, that if the one in fighting wax dull, or be broken,
the other shall serve him.

This Beast is found in Indie, about great ryuers. He has a tail like an
Olyphante, in color black, or baye.

For the Creste it is thus assigned, upon the helm on a wreathe d'Or and
Sable, a Cardnell volante, beaked and legged Argente, all the rest proper,
manteled verte, dobled Argente.

This little bird is here figured, gesante a seade of the thistle, for that
she lives by the seades of them, vnde illi inditum nomen. Carduel^s.
She has a red head, yealowe wings, distinct with white and black.
Cardnales imperata faciunt, autore Plinio, nec voce tantum, sed pedibus, and
ore pro manibus. They are taught to do any thing, not only with ye voice, but
also with the fete and byll, in stead of hands. This Poesy is also added.

Tendit in ardua virtus.

Here is to be descryued, on a losenge Gules Crowned, a Lions head, rassed
Argent. Omphale that maiden and Queen of the country of Lidya, was so
valiaunte in deeds of arms, that after she had killed an huge Lion, she used
to were the head of the same upon her, to declare thereby her prowess, and
that she would seem to be rather of the male kind than female. Hercules did
love this Queen so much, that to win her favor, he did at her commandment
slay a great Serpent, nyghe the ^lodde of Sagaris, and afterward, became so
seruiseable unto her, as if he had been her woman seruante. In so much,
that she compelled him to pike wolle, and to spynne and card, and would
sometime so abuse him, that she would beat him about the head, with her
Sandale or slipper.

For the creaste, it is thus devised, on a Torce, Ermyne and Azure, a Pillar
fusillye d'Argente crowned, and cotized between two Tarandules d'Or, armed, and
vnged verte.

The Tarandule is a beast, commonly called a Buffe, which is like an Ox, but
that he has a bearde like a Goat.

Here is seen in this sheilde the head of Medusa a Crown in chief.

Medusa, a Lady of whom fables do report, that by Minerua, her hears were
turned into Adders, and they which beheld her, were turned into stones,
Perseus.
whom Perseus, that noble knight, afterward slew.

Take this to be a monstre, and not a perfect beast.

Almighty God, being greatly displeased with the pride of Nabuchodonozor, for
that he would have his image honored for god, sodeinly transformed him into
an horrible mo^stre, having the head of an Ox, the feet of a Bear, and the
tail of a Lion, who did eat hey as a Beast. And after he had done penance
in that form, God being moved with mercy, and accepting for him the continual
prayers of Daniel the prophet, restored him to his pristinate form, who
afterward lived well, and commanded that the very god of heaven should be
only honored.

Whosoever should bear these ensigns, let him only fear, serve, obey, and give
al praise, honor and glory to God for ever and ever.

The field is of the Moon, a Therebinthe tree, Saturn, floured and leafed,
Veneris. The wodde of this tree is black, and hard like box: Out of this
tree does run a Gomme, commonly called Turpentyne: albeit the common
Turpentyne is not it, but an other, which is as clear as glass, and is a
soueraygne medecyne to cleanse the stomach, of putrified humors. The flower or
blossom of this tree, is full of grapes or beries, like the Olyue, ye Leaves
also thereof, are so hard closed together, that they fall not away. In Sirya
it is aboundante, and fruitful, in Macedonia. Messibus reddit semen. It
yeldeth his fruit in the harvest time: And is a noble token, to be borne in
cote Armoure.

This Bird devised for the creaste, has a long bill and read legs, which
drincketh as though it did byte the water. She dippeth all her meat in the
water also, quem pede ad rostrum veluti manu affert, that is, which she
conueyeth to her bill, as with an hand. She is most esteemed in Concagena, a
part of Syria, and is taken of some to be the Pellycane* The Icon, or form
of the same bird, I have caused thus to be figured, portant a water Rose
propre.

A. For his creste bears an Eagle volante Solis, portant a Cross patie
fitchie, Mars, on a scrowe co^teining this word. Obediens ad mortem. This
Eagle is of the color of the Sun, nam Sol iustitiae Christus. The Cross is
here seen, quia pro nobis crucem subijt. Touching the Eagle, I have written
partly before in my former treatise, but of the nature of her wings I have
spoken nothing. Therefore this I read, that the winge of an Eagle entermingled
with any other thing, will not wax rotten or corrupt. Eius pennae mixtas auium
pennas deuorant.

This Eagle also in the breast, is charged with a man's heart propre, wherein is
contained a deuyne misterye.

B. Bears on a torce, Perle and Rubye, a Meleuete, Saturn, beaked and
membred Veneris.

This is a kind of Fawcons, yet very little of body, black and puyssante: she
haunteth the mountains, and fedeth her birds alone, ceterae fugant, others of
that kind drive the^ away. Sir Thomas Eliot, supposes it to be a Merlyan.

C. Has to his creaste, on a wreath Gold and Verte, a Tru^n* volant d'
Argent, beaked, and membred Gules.

This Bird is otherwise called Onocrotalus, and is like to a Swanne, which
putting his head into the water brayeth like an Ass. Whatsoever he eats,
he gathers it together in his jaws, and holds it there long before he
swaloweth it down: and that he does especially in fliyng from the water.

D. A torce d'Or, and Sable, one Pillor crowned d'Argente, on a mountain,
propre, lettered, ^. T. Y.

I read that Darius king of Persia, what time he went into Scythia, ^yght his
pauilio^s, at the head of a River in Thracia called Thearus, where he abode
three days: and deliting at the most pleasaunts water of the River, he set in
the same place a Pillor graven, with Lettres of Greek, declaryng his being
there, with commendation of the water. Here are to be seen on this Pyllor
three especial Greek Letters, Theta, Tau, and Ypsilon, every one containing in
it self a mystery, to Grecians well known.

E. Bears to his creste a shouelar d'Argente, beaked and membred verte,
seized upon a pearche propre.

This Bird is called in latin Platalea, she follows water fowls, that do
take fishes, and does pecke them so on the head, that they let go their
pray, which she takes, and lives therewith.

F. Has to his Creste a Fox propre, passant upon an armyng sword.

When it was laid unto Lysander king of Lacedemonia for a reproach, that he
got more by subteltye, than by prowes: he smylinge said. vbi quod vellet non
assequeretur Leonis exunium, ibi vulpinum ap plicandum esse. The meaning
whereof is this, that where the Lions skin does not a^ayle, a man must tie or
sow a Fox skin unto it.

Quo non perueninet Leonina pellis, vulpinam assuendam esse: quod sic lucidius
dixeris, vbi virtus non satis potest, adhibenda est astutia.

G. Has on this Poesy, Dulce natale solum, a lage volante, propre.

This Bird is most commonly seen in the Alps, and has feet roughe, as it
were with the hear of an hare, whereof she takes her name, and is called
Lagopus. Nam Lagos Greece dicitur lepus Latin, the residue of her body is all
whit, and of the bygnes of a Dove: It never eats but in place where it was
bredde, and never will be made tame. Pli. Ye may call it proprely, an hare
bird.

H. Has to his Creste, a Verme hariante propre, subsigned about the tail
with a scrowe, containing this Apothegme. Est inclyta virtus. which here must
thus be Englished. Puissance, is of great renown.

This is a Fish, in the river of Ganges, and in Latin is called Vermis, and is
in length. lx. cubits, being blew in color, which has such strength also,
that when Oliphantes come unto the water to drink, heewill take one of them by
the nose, and pluck him into him.

I. Bears to his Creste, a Sycomore tree propre.

Little Zacheus clymed up into such a tree, Paraph^as. Eral. in Luc. cap. 19.
to see our Savior Jesus Christ in the way, there as he was to pass by.
Th'euangeliste called it a wild fig tree, but ryghtely as it is there named a
Sycamore, (because it brings forth sigges of the own right kind, that
other fig trees be of, and by reason thereof, it is also called a fig of
Egipte, and yet in leaf it ressembleth y^ Mulberie tree) frequens est apud
Rhodium locis frumentarijs. It has abundance of milk, whose fruit comes
not out, at the tops of the boughs, as figs do, sed ex ramis ipsis.i. out
of the same boughs, and is sweet like a wild fig. Grana eius sunt minora
granis ficum. Nec maturescunt nisi radantur instrumento ferreo.

K. On a wreathe d'Or, and Sable, an Owsell d'Argente, beaked gold, legged
Gules.

This Bird in Latyne, is called Merula. Isidore says, that of ancient and
old time she was called Medula, eo quod moduletur, because she sings,
others, (says he) call her Merula, quia sola volat, because she flies alone,
and lives as it were sole, she has a yealowe beak, and is always seen
fly alone, and feadeth so likewise, from a black color, she grows to be
read, she sings pleasauntly in the Summer, in winter she stamereth, ci^ca
Solsticium muta. This Bird (says Isidore) whereas in all places she is
black, yet in Achaya she is white.

L. Has for his Creaste, a Plain tree gold, on an Haw mede, verte.

I read that Pithyus a Lydian, was so rich, and had such abundance of
Gold, that he received Zerxes king of Persia, with all his whole Army, which
was innumerable, and that with great magnificence: and that he gave to Darius,
father to Zerxes, a Plain tree of Gold, and a vine of the same metal.

M. Has to his creaste, on a torre d'Argente and Azure, a Meropie volante,
Sable, me^bred Gules, portant a branch of y^ herb Alymon propre.

This herb is of such virtue, that it will not suffer the^ that taste of it
to be hongrye, Plinye calls the said bird Merops, which by an other name is
called Apiastra, because he does eat bees. This bird has a large bill, and
read legs, and whose nature it is to keep their parents, which never come
abroad, and to norishe them, as them self were norished being young.

N. Has to his creaste on a wreathe d'Or, and Azure, a Ravens head rassed,
portant a Sickle d'Argente.

The Sickle has in it a spiritual mysterye, the which is most godly expounded
by that famous clearke Erasmus of Roterodame, in his paraphrase upon the
fowerth chapter of S. Marks Gospel. Therefore, who so desires th'exposicion
thereof, let him resort to that place.

Ravens are enemies to Bulls, whom when they epsy alone, they do strongly
assail, and of all the body, they desire most his eyes. They are enemies
also to the Cameleon, and kill him. Enemy to them, is a little Bird, called
Easalon, which breaks their eggs. The Raven is a noble token, to be borne
in cote Armoure, or creste.

O. For his creste, has an Esalon d'Argente, Easalon.
seized between the branches of a Tarandres head coped propre.

This little bird before spoken of, is of the kind of hawks, quae apparet
omni tempore. She is otherwise called Butco, the least of the kind of
Bussardes, but more white, and industrious after her pray. It is written that
these kind of Hawk, called the Bussarde, has three stones. Her Birds be
destroyed by the Fox, and likewise, she kylleth the Foxes whelps, if she may
come by them.

The Tarandre is a beast in body like to a great Ox, having an head like to
an heart, and horns full of branches, the hear roughe, and of the color of
a Bear.

P. Has to his creste, on a Escaloppe d'Or, a Pyne apple propre. The true
form hereof is set forth in Munster, his book of Cosmographye.

The Pyne apple in Latyne, is called Strobylus. The said Escaloppe is charged
sufficiently enough, although it has pleased some to charge greater tokens
thereon, and the same having life, wherewith I can not like, nor as yet ^an
find, either authority, or reason for the same.

Q. Bears a Saker d'Argent, in the Tallons, a spraye of Haythorne, propre.

This Haucke is of a noble prise, to all Faukeners well known, and therefore
(for me) they shall not only describe the nature, but also give the
commendacion thereof. Yet in part I will show, that rapit praedam non modo
sedentem in sublimi, sed etiam volantem in aperto. He is called in Latyne,
Accipiter hicrax.

R. Has to his creste, on a Pillowe d'Ermyne, an arm extended out of a
Crown, sleues and ruffes d'Or, holding in an hand propre, a ball d'Argente.

Alexander the great king of Macedonia, for that on the night seazon he
would not commit his army to the adventure of Fortune, as long as he slept
himself, used this experience, when he laid him down to take his rest: A
brazen pott was put under his elbowe, and afterward he put forth his arm
out of the bed: and held in his hand a silver ball, that when dead sleep
should louse the strength of his synewes, the ringing or sound of the ball
when it fell, might so break his sleep, and awake him. Hoc quidem documentum
Regem illum excellentissimum a Gruibus accepisse arbitratur, quae nocturnas
excubias semper exercent: and ne a somno decipiantur, lapillum altero pede
sustinent: quo lapso vel plaga in extensum pedem accepta, vel sono decident is
calculi expergefiunt.

S. Has on a mount, a Crayne, standing in watch, all according to his
nature, propre.

The sense hereof, is brefely declared in Latyne, as next above appears: This
Apothegme added also. Plus vigila.

T. Bears to his Creste, five arrows in fasce, with Pheons d'Argente,
fethered Gules, bound about with a scrowe, containing these words, Concordia
persto.

Plutarch.
I read that Scylurus Chaeronensis, a man borne in that part of Greece now
called Morea, had four score sons, who wha^ he died called them before him,
and delivered to every of them a shefe of arrows, commanding them to break
the shefes incontinente: which when they might not do, he took out of the
shefes one arrowe after an other, and brake them all lyghtely, declaring thereby
unto his sons, that if they continued and agreed well together, they should
be puissante: and if they varied, and were disseuered, they should be feeble and
shortly destroyed. A matter not unlike hereunto may be brought forth, which is
noted of Plinye, of the nature of the stones, called Cycladici, which as long
as they are hole, swim above the water, but being broken, they syncke and are
drowned. Sit igitur hoc Symbolum sagittarum fascis, a patre commeati, simulque,
memoratorum lapidum haec significatio: Coniuncta, firmaque faedera eo semper
firmiora, durantiora, ac certiora, vbi prudentiam ducem, and consultricem
adhibeas.

U. Has on an Hawmede verte, a Faucon vola^te, d'Argente guttie Gules, beaked
and legged d'Or, addita subscriptione. Delectare in domino.

This is a noble kind of hawk, hardye and puissante, well known to all
Faukeners, wherefore I need no further to describe his nature, or set forth
his comme^dacion. And other of this kind is called Gyrofalcum, a gyro and
cir^uitu, quo in minores vtitur, vt eas agat in praedam.

W. Has to his creaste, an arming Sword d'Argente, hilte and pommell d'Or,
impendent from a cloud propre, the blade insigned with a scrowe, containing
these words: potestate and formidine.

Power (as B^etius says) can not put away the bityng of carefulnes, nor
avoid the prickynges of fear: affirminge that princes would feign live
safely but they can not.

There was a king of Sisill named Dionisius, that was over sad, his familyer
asked him, why he was not merry: Thereupon he made a bancket, and caused his
familier to sit thereat, and a naked sword hanging over his head by a small
horse hear. The man seeing the sword could not be merye for fear, to whom
Dionysius said, such is my life, ever in fear, yet thou thoughtest it
happy: and such is the life of kings, always in fear of some evil
chance, for in hyeste authority is most ieopardie.

This Dionysius feared so much Barbors, that his daughters were taught to
shave him, and to clippe his hear.

Refer this Sword above figured, ad vltionis diuinae gla dium, perpetuo
supra infaelicium peccatorum ceruices, fragili, tenuissimoque filo impendentem.

X. Has on a Poesy containing these words, Pacis nuntia a Dove volant,
d'Argent, beaked Azure, legged gules, and bearinge an Olive leaf, propre. By
this Noe did know, that the waters were abated upon the earth, when the
general floude was.

Y. Has to his creste, on a torce d'Argente and Azure, a Lion rampa^t, Sable,
crowned, vibrante a sword, d'Or.

Judas, otherwise called Machabeus, in his Acts was like a Lion, and as a
Lions whelpe roaring at his pray. He fought with Appolonius, a mygh tie Prince
in Syria, slew him, and almost his whole host: he took their substance,
and also Appolonius his own sword wherewith he fought all his life long.
Machab. lib. 1. cap. 3.

Z. Here is seen on a Pil loure d'Argent, crowned and bazed d'Or, a Spanyell,
propre.

It is written of Diogenes the Philosopher, that he dyed being bitten of a
dog. After whose death, his scholars (to declare which of them did bear
greatest good will toward him) contended who should have his body to burye
it. That strife being appeased by the magistrates, they buried him honorably,
and not only made over him a fair tomb, but also erected a Pillar with a
dog standing thereupon, in perpetual remembrance of his death. I have
caused this dog to be formed like unto a water Spanyell, half hearye, th
other shorn. For I have known men excellentlye learned, to love such Dogs,
which we proprely call in Latyne Sagaces canes, Spanyels or hounds.

Finis.
Imprynted at London in Fletestrete within Temple bar at the sign of the
Hand and star, by Rychard Cottyl. Anno 1572.

Cum priuilegio.


