THE TRAVELERS BREVIAT, OR An historical description of the most famous
kingdoms in the World: Relating their situations, manners, customs, civil
government, and other memorable matters. Translated into English.

Imprinted at London by Edm. Bollifant, for John Iaggard. 1601

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD EARL of Worcester, LORD of Chepstoll, Ragland
and Gower, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and Master of the
Horse to the Queens most excellent Majesty.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
Having with an unskillful hand taught this book to speak English, I thought
that I should be like an evil player marring the last act of the tragedic, or
a careless pilot drowning the ship in the haven, if I ventured it to the
diverse censures of men, before it were entrusted to the patronage of some such
authority, as might restrain and bind the ouerflowings of other men's more
hard opinion. For although the worthiness of the subject might work in me an
ouerweening hope of his kind entertainment; yet I cannot satisfy my self,
unless it pass under the tutele and protection of some one, whose favor may
(like the vertical sun) abate all shadows, either of envy or disgrace,
which are in this (still worse and worse) age of the world ready to
discountenance the fruits of any man's labor. Wherefore considering with my
self, where to bestow it, I was emboldened by the inducement of diverse reasons
to presume on your Lordship, ascertaining my self, that the honorable virtues,
which have wound you into the liking of all men, have settled so good an
impression, as is forcible enough to make that seem commendable, which is
graced by your Honors name only. And for this respect amongst infinite others
here for special reasons silenced, in hope of favorable acceptance, I most
humbly present it to your Honor, challenging to my self nothing but the
imperfections in the harsh composure, and conueiance of the style, retaining
yet (as I trust) the former strength and substance. If your L. vouchsafe to
receive it, it may be that (although in the perusal it cannot inform your
Honor any thing, which you were ignorant of) yet it may confirm that, which
otherwise your Honor doubted; or make it cleerer by delivering the
circumstances in more particular terms. Only thus much (under leave of a
better judgment) I dare say, that there is no book extant touching the same
argument, which can aequalize it, either for soundnes in iudicially censuring;
truth in sincerely relating; or compendiousnes in briefing such variety of
matter to so small a volume. And here although I could according to the usual
form of epistles endeavor a draught of your most honorable praises; yet
knowing, that it is but tediousnes, where virtue is loved for the only inner
contentment, I put a period to these lines, and most humbly craving pardon take
leave.

Your Honors devoted in all humble seruiceablenes, I. R.

A general description of the World.
AS touching the description, division and inhabitation of the parts of the
earth most commonly described in universal maps, you shall understand that the
ancient Cosmographers, not knowing then the West Indies, nor many other places
situated both northward and southward, and sithence discovered, divided the
whole earth into three parts, Europe, Asia and Afrike, and the world into five
zones, two cold, two temperate, and one extreme hot, affirming three of those
zones to be uninhabitable, the one for extremity of heat, the other two for
extremity of cold: but because a new and whole world has been found out since
those times, our modern Cosmographers have added a fourth part called America;
so called from Americus Vespuccius a Florentine, which did first discover it;
which again is subdivided by our later travelers into three parts, viz.
Mexicana, Peruana, and Magellanica, having found by good experience (as in this
discourse shall be fully manifested) that these three parts are well inhabited
and woonderfully replemshed with people of sundry languages. Of all these six
parts because Europe is far less then all the rest, and yet exceeds all
others in noblenes, magnificence, multitude of people, in might, puissance and
renown, we will first begin with the description thereof. It is bounded on the
North with the north Ocean sea, on the South with the Mediterranean, on the
East with the flood Tanais, and on the West with the West Ocean. In measuring
with a right line from the furthest part of Ireland on the West unto the flood
Tanais on the East, both places having 52. degrees. of latitude, has in longitude
2166. miles, and in measuring with a right line from the furthest part of Morea
on the South, whose latitude is 35. degrees unto the North side having 72.
degrees of latitude, has in latitude 2220. miles. It contains more then 28.
Christian kingdoms, at this day as far excelling the residue of the provinces
in religion, arts, valor and civility, as in elder age it did surpass them
in power and reputation. The principal provinces are Spain, France, Germany,
Italic, Slauonia, Greece, Hungary, Poland, Litnania, Moscouia, and that toward
the North called Scandia, wherein are Denmark, Norwey, Swethland, and Gutland.
The Islands are Britain, containing the kingdoms of England and Scotland, and
Ireland, in the North Ocean: in the Mediterranean are Sicill, Can^ie, Corsica,
Sardima, Maiorica, Minorica, Nigropont, Malta, Corfu, Stalamine, Mitilin,
Sciro, and many other in the Archipelago. The air is passing good, wholesome,
temperate, and the soil exceeding fertile. Therein are many goodly cities,
famous mart towns, and learned universities. The people have in all ages
excelled all other nations ^n courage, arts, sharpnes of wit, and all other
gifts of nature. In times past it commanded Asia and Afrike by the arms of the
Greeks and Romans, and at this day it is of great force by the power of the
Turks and Moscouites, and by the nauigations of the Spaniards and Portugals: so
as it seems that nature has created this people fit to rule and govern
others, as men far surpassing all other nations in wisdom, courage and
industry.

Next unto Europe succeeds Asia, renowned by writers for the second part of
the world, in regard of the monarchies of the Persians, Medes, Assirians and
Babylonians: but indeed most celebrated in holy writ for our creation, fall,
and redemption, as the region wherein in a manner all the histories and acts
mentioned in the old testament, and a great part of those in the new, were
wrought and accomplished. It is bounded on the North with the North Ocean, on
the South with the red sea, with diverse other gulfes and seas appeering in our
modern maps: on the East with the East Indian Ocean, and the straight of
Anian. On the West it has the flood Tanais, and the fenne Meotis, with diverse
other seas, as Bosphorus Cimnereus, Mare Euxinum, the Bosphorus Thracius,
Propontis, part of the Mediterranean, and part of the red sea or gulf of
Arabia, which divides Afrike from Arabia foelix. In measuring with a right
line from the flood Tanais to the promontorie Tamos, both places having 50.
degrees of latitude, has in longitude 4284. miles, and in measuring with a
right line from the 150. degree of the Equinoctial unto the promontorie Tabin,
it has in North latitude 76. degrees, which being multiplied by 60. makes
4560. miles. The Ancients divided it into diverse parts, but at this present it
is best divided into five, according to the chief and principal empires
therein: the first whereof confining with Europe is governed by the great Duke
of Moscouie, the second belongs to the great Cham, the third is commanded by
the Turk, the fourth is the kingdom of Persia, the fifth comprehends that
which has always been called India and governed by diverse princes for the
most part vassals, feodaries or tributaries to other kingdoms. The principal
Islands are Iapan, Luconia, Mindanao, Burneo, Sumatra, Zeilan and Cipres:
Gilolo, the Moluccae, Banda and Celebes belong to Magelanica.

Afrike is bounded on the North with the straight of Gibraltar and the
Mediterranean sea, on the south with a sea which divides Afrike from the South
land not yet fully known, and on the East with the red sea: on the West with
the great Atlantike Ocean. In measuring with a right line from Gambra on the
West unto the Cape Guardafu on the East, both places having ten degrees of
north latitude or thereabout, has in longitude 4155. miles: and in measuring
with a right line from the 50. degree of the Aequinoctiall unto the
Mediterranean sea; it has in North latitude 32. degrees, which being
multiplied by 60. makes 1920. miles. In South latitude measuring with a right
line from the 50. degree of the Aequinoctiall to the Cape of Good Hope, it has
35. degrees, which being multiplied by 60. makes 2100. miles. By the Ancients
it has been divided into many parts, but at this day into eight, Egypt,
Barbary, Biledulgarid, Sarra, Aethiopia, Nubia, the large provinces of the
Abassines and Monomotapa. Of whose riches, laws, customs, natures and forces
you shall read hereafter in their several places. The chief Islands are
Socotora, Madagascar, S. Thomas, Capo Verd, and the Isles of Canarie and Madera.

Mexicana is on al sides environed with the sea, saving that nigh unto Nombre
de Dios it is joined by a neck of land to Peruana. The chief provinces are
Noua Hispania, Florida, Norumbega, Noua Francia, Estotiland, and many others.
The chiefest Isles lying on the North and Northeast part are Groinland,
Crokland, Island, Freesland, Bacalaos and Cuba.

Peruana is also environed on all sides with the sea, save whereas the
foresaid Land-streight does join the same to Mexicana. The chief provinces
are Brasil, Tisnada, Caribana, Carthagena, Peru, Charchas, Chili, Chicam, and
the land of the Patagones. The most renowned Isles are Hispaniola, Boriquen and
Margarita.

This sixth part of the world as yet is but little known, notwithstanding it is
thought to contain many large provinces, amongst the which Beach is supposed
to be very rich and abounding in gold. The chief Isles are Iaua mayor and Iaua
minor, Timor, Banda, the Moluccos, Romeros and the Isles of Solomon. Thus much
in general, now of the particulars.

The kingdom of France.
THE kingdom of France has for his bounds the Alps, which divide it from
Italy, the Rhodanus which separates it from Sauoye; Sagona, which parts it
from the Sebusiani, and Burgundians: and the river Mosell, which diuides it
from Lorraine and the Duchy of Lucemburge. It has on the East the river Aa;
on the South, the Mediterranean sea, and the Pyrenean mountains; on the. West,
the great Ocean; and on the North, the English Ocean. It contains from
Lorraine on the South side to Caleis on the North side, two hundred French
leagues, and little less from East to West from the river Varo to Paurus. The
nearer the North the narrower it is, and narrowest between Caleis and the
British promontorie. The figure thereof is between round and square, and
therefore bigger then a man would take it. It contains most large Provinces,
as Picardie, Normandy, Britain, the Isle of France, Champaigne, Burgundy,
Auerne, Dalphenye, Province, Bry, Blois, Turin, the Duchy of Aniou, Zantoin,
Bordeaux, and many others. The beginning thereof stands in forty two
degrees, and in^oyeth such diversity of air, that, that part which lies
toward the Mediterranean sea (where stands Languedoc and Province) brings
forth all sorts of fruits like Italy; that which is toward the English Ocean
(where stands Britain, Normandy, and part of Pieardie) brings forth no
wine; the residue of the kingdom abounds above belief with all kinds of
fruits which Europe affoordeth, except Olives, figs, and such like. The
gentleness of the air, with the fertility of the ground, and the situation of
the rivers is so propitions and natural for the increase of fruit, and every
other living creature, that France above all the other Regions of Europe may
best boast of these prerogatives. Between the mountains of Auerne, Dalphenie,
and the Mediterranean sea, the air is so temperate by reason of the coldness of
the hills (always almost covered with snow) and the gentle blasts coming from
the sea, that a man being in this place, would think he were under the climate
wherein Genua is seated. And again, the Pyrenean hills standing as a bulwark
to break and beat back the fiercenes of cold and tempests, give the like
moderation to another quarter of the country. These mountains are full of
bathes and veins of warm water; and the northern winds, which according to
most opinions make the air cold, are not here so cold as in other places. For
winds participate of the nature of the place by which they pass: if by snowie
mountains, then bring they with them the cold of those mountains; if by
marshes, contagion; if by woods, they are broken; if by sandy plains, they
are warm; if by lakes or seas, they are sharp and cold. Hence comes it that
the winds Panormi in Sicill are extreme hot; for before they pierce thither,
they scour through the plains of Sicill, and taking heat from the sands,
carry it into the city. The south wind is cold at Genua because it passes
the sea, and takes coldness thereof without touching the land before it
arrive. But the north wind which blows thorough France, comes from the
sea, and taking some measure of heat of the saltnes thereof, and finding no
mountains covered with ye or snow in his passage, augmenteth his heat by
passing over the fields of Normandy, Champaigne, the I Will of France, and other
provinces, even to the hills of Auuergne: which being moderately heated by the
south wind on the one side, and the north wind on the other, brings forth
every where excellent pastures, and feedings for cattle and sheep, besides
diverse sorts of medicinable plants and most perfect simples. Amongst many
branches of those mountains, there is one which is called the Golden-hill for
the noblenes of the simples and abundance thereof. Of these experiments England
may be a sufficient proof, which although it lie more northerly then France,
yet because it has few mountains, and is environed on every side with the
sea, the air is very mild and temperate even there, yea much more temperate
then France, which is farther distant from the Pole: as you may perceive by the
vines which never ripen in England, and yet yield most perfect wines in France.
Likewise it happens very often that the northren or western wind rising
from the sea, brings springtide in the winter season, decking the fields with
flowers, and the gardens with herbs, that the inhabitants of Turon, Poictou,
and the Isle of France, enjoy as forward a summer, as those of Province or Lago
di Garda.

The whole land of France is fertile and fruitful, and every where
plentiful of all good things. And as the Apennine spreading almost over the
fourth part of Italy, for the most part is barren, and yields small store of
fruit; so on the contrary in the mountains of Auuergne (being but few) stand
many good towns and rich places where clothing is exercised, and from whence
a good part of the kingdom is served with flesh, butter, and excellent cheese:
the rest of the kingdom almost is plain, here and there garnished with
fruitful hills and green valleies: in every place plenty does (as it were)
contend with variety, fertility with delicacie, commodiousnes of situation
with beauteous cities. Herein without all controversy Italy gives place to
France: for although some one corner thereof affoordeth exquisite pleasure and
delightful situation, as Riuiera di Salo, Campania, the territory of Croton,
Tarentum, and some other cities of Calabria: yet these are singular and few in
Italy, common and frequent in France, especially in Burgundy, Brie, the Isle
of France, Turon, Aniou, Zantoin, and Languedo^: in each of which provinces it
should seem that nature her self has divided, and as it were dedicated by
allotment some places to Ceres, some to Bacchus, some to Pomona, and some to
Pallas.

But there is nothing in France more worthy the noting then the number and
pleasure of the nauigable rivers, whereof some (as it were) gird in the whole
realm, as Sagona, Rhodanus, Mosell. Some others cut thorough the middle, as
Sequano, Loire, Garonne. Into these three rivers fall so many other rivers;
some from the uttermost bounds; some from the inmost parts of the realm, that
it makes the whole country commodious for trafique and exchange of each
others wants: insomuch that by this facility of carriage and intercourse of
merchandise, all things may be said to be in common to the inhabitants of this
kingdom. In Aniou only are forty rivers, great and small; whereupon Katherin
de Medicis was wont to say, that this kingdom contained more rivers then all
Europe beside. Truly this was a Hyperbolicall speech, yet not much more then
truth: for the goodness of the soil, and easy transporting of commodities, is
the cause that there are so many cities and so many towns, and those most
commonly seated upon the banks of the rivers. And although it have many goodly
havens, yet the vpland towns are fairer and richer, then those that stand
nearer the sea: which argues that their wealth is their own, and not brought
from foreign countries: for there the sea towns excel the land towns, where
more benefit and provision is reaped by the sea, then by the land, as Genua,
Venice, Ragusi: but where the state and prosperity of cities depends wholly
upon the land, there the vplandish towns far surpass the sea towns, as
Millaine, and many other in Flanders, Germany, and Hungary. All this
notwithstanding although like goodness of soil be proper to the whole realm of
France, as likewise the situation of the rivers commodious, yet, Paris except,
whose largenes proceeds from the kings court, the parliaments, and the
university, the towns there for the most part are but small and mean,
beautiful, commodious, and very populous. John Bodin writing a description
thereof in the time of Henry the second says, that there were seven and
twenty thousand villages having parish Churches, not comprehending Burgundy
among them. In another description written in the reign of Charles the ninth,
it is said, that the number of the inhabitants exceeded fifteen millions.

And as the cities and towns of France may boast of their rivers, so the
Castles and villages of the noblemen, are no less favored with the pleasure
and strength of lakes and marshes, which although they may not be compared to
the lakes of Italy and Swizerland, yet are they so many, and so full of
excellent fish, that the numbers of the one may equallize the largenes of the
others. The same may be spoken of woods, that they are not so spacious as
plentiful: out of these woods in times past the greatest part of the kings
revenues did arise, and the noblemen do make great profit by selling great
quantities thereof for firewood, but greater, by sales of timber trees: for,
for want of stone, the greatest part of their buildings consist of timber.

In regard of the commodious situation of these rivers serving so fitly for the
transportation of vittailes from one place to another, this kingdom is so
abundantly furnished with all plenty of provision, that it is able to nourish
any army in the field how populous soever. When Charles the fifth entered
France, first by Province, and afterward by Champaigne, it maintained more then
one hundred and fifty thousand soldiers, besides garrisons. In the reign of
Charles the ninth, and in our times also, there were maintained in this
kingdom 20000. horse, 30000. footmen strangers, and of French 15000. horse,
and 100. thousand footmen, neither did the kingdom for this feel want or
scarcity.

There are in France (as a man may term them) four loadstones to draw riches
from foreign nations; corn carried into Spain and Portugal; wines
transported into England, Flanders, and the inhabitants of the Balticke sea;
and salt wherewith the whole kingdom and the bordering nations are plentifully
stored. This salt is made in Province of the salt water of the Mediterranean
sea, and at Bayon in Zantoine, where the heat of the sun cease his virtue
of getting, making and boiling salt (of sea water) not daining to yield so
great a favor any farther northward. I said of sea water, because further
north there may be salt found also, but is made either of some special spring
water, as in Lorraine, or compound of some minerals mixed with fresh waters, as
in Poland, England, and Germany, or else it is taken forth of some salt
mines: and such in times past were in Sweueland; but they are now decayed. The
fourth loadstone is canuasse and linen cloth, whereof what profit arises, a
man will hardly believe, unless he has seen what abundance thereof is
carried into Spain and Portugal, to make sails and cordage for the
furnishing of shipping. There grows also Woad, Saffron, and other merchandise
of smaller value, which though they equallize not the abouesaid commodities,
yet rise they to a round sum, yea such as may enrich a kingdom. By reason of
these neuer-dying riches, Jews the eleventh was wont to say, that France was
a continual flourishing ^eadow, which he did mow as often as he list: And
Maximilian the Emperor termed the French king to be Pastorem ouium, cum
velleribus aureis, which he sheared at his pleasure. It is undoubtedly true,
that if the kings of France were as wise and politic, as they are powerful in
arms and riches, the affairs of Europe would much stand at their devotion.
But force and wisdom seldom keep company: therefore the Poets fained
Hercules furious: Ariosto fained Orlando sottish: Virgill describes Dares to
be insolent: and the Graecians termed all those people Barbari which wanted
arts and learning: Homer brings in Achilles as one unable to bridle his own
fury: and Mars so unadvised, that he suffered himself unawares to be caught in
Vulcans net. For what state can be more dreadful, or what power can seem more
terrible, then the majesty of that kingdom, which is able of it self to
feed fifteen thousand millions of people, and yet has sufficient remaining
for the nourishing and maintenance of any puissant army besides? For the
abundance of people and plenty of vittailes are the strongest sinews of all
kingdoms, and therefore the Romans highly prized the rusticke division for
their numbers and provision.

As touching their revenues, Jews the eleventh gathered a million and an
half: Francis the first attained unto three millions: Henry the second to
six: Charles the ninth to seven: Henry the third above ten: Jews the
twelfth left his kingdom full of gold and silver, and therefore was called
Pater populi: Francis the first, though he managed great wars, and made
infinite expenses, left notwithstanding eight hundred thousand crowns in his
treasury: but Henry the second his son, envying the greatness of Charles the
Emperor, and coveting to surpass him, took up money of every one at 16. per
centum, left his sons indebted 30. millions of crowns, and without credit
amongst the merchants to the value of a farthing: insomuch that Charles the
ninth and Henry the third his sons (the last more then the first) were
enforced to lay heavy impositions, not only on the people, but also on the
clergy. Whereby the world may see, that the riches of a prince consist not in
the abundance of revenues, but in the good government thereof; for Francis the
first made greater wars with less revenues, left his credit sound with the
merchants, and ready money to his son; where on the contrary Hemy made
far less war, and yet left the kingdom deeply indebted, and the people
poor and miserable.

With the foresaid revenues the former kings maintained 1500. Lanciers, and
4500. crosbowes (in report 4000. Lanciers and 6000. crosbowes continually
paid:) which troops of horse were accounted the strongest in all
Christendom. Every Lancier brought with him one crosbowe and an half, so
that one company of Lanciers had another of crosbowes, serving both under one
ensign, commonly called a Guidon, and one captain governed both companies,
consisting in the whole of 100. Lanciers, and 150. crosbowes.

One million and three hundred thousand crowns were yearly spent upon these
companies. A Lance received 250. crowns, a crosbowe eighty, the Guidon 300.
the Lieutenant 380. the Captain 820. Charles the seventh reduced these
ordinances to perfection, made the number certain, appointed their wages,
trained them in exercise, and placed them upon the frontiers under captains,
lieutenants, ensigns and Guidons. He likewise divided these ordinances into
men at arms and archers, adioined to them Targatiers, Harbengers,
Muster-masters, Pay-masters, and Commisaries, committing them to the charge and
government of the Constable, Marshall, and greatest Lords of his kingdom: they
did not much inure their natural subjects to serve on foot, for fear of
mutinies and rebellions: but Charles the eight considering how necessary
footmen were, instituted a squadron of five thousand French foot: that number
Francis the first augmented to fifty thousand: howbeit at this day they are
casheerd for their evil carriage and behavior. Jews the eleventh that at his
pleasure he might sheare or rather fleece the people of France, and make them
unapt for service, waged the Swissers: which example Francis and Henry his
successors following, continually hired great number of Germans. But
whosoever he be, that goes about to make his people unwarlike, and
entertaineth foreign soldiers, greatly ouershooteth himself. For by the
exercise of arms and the occurrences of wars, courage is increased, and the
commons by practice and experience will become hardy, and upon occasions of
necessity able like soldiers to maintain their actions: for as conuersing
with good men makes men good; so the company of soldiers makes others
courageous. Besides, many occurrences may happen, which may not be committed to
the experience of strangers, because they know not the situation of places,
neither may many matters, for the weight of the business, be trusted to their
fidelity. Wherefore it is very expedient, that that people be entertained
under military discipline, in whose provinces war is like to continue, either
by reason of situation, or other casual accidents: as it happened to France,
where after peace was concluded with the Spaniard, and the Swiffers and
Almaines departed to their own homes, yet by remaining full of French soldiers
all things were turned vpside down.

As concerning munitions, there is no kingdom wherein is greater plenty then
there; whereof are many: one, for that whereas the kingdom is divided into
many regalities and principalities, as Burgundy, Britain, Aniou and Normandy;
every one of these strengthens his frontiers: besides, the plenty of their
munitions has been increased by the war of the English, which commanded a
great part of France. Secondly, the situation and nature of the places fit for
fortifications, as also the willingness and readiness of the people, has even
with ease overcome the labor of these affairs. For there is no nation more
industrious in fortifying, and more prodigal in expense upon these works:
neither are the bowels of the kingdom less fortified then the frontiers,
Beauois, Trois, Orleans; Angiers, Bourdeaux, Lymosin, San Florum, Carcassona,
Soissons, are not inferior to Calais, Perone, Narbone, or other the frontiers,
in strength and fortification; so that every part thereof may stand in steed of
a frontier to any border of the whole kingdom.

The kingdom of England.
AMongst all the Islands of Europe, England (which the ancient called Britannia)
without all controversy for circuit and power challenges the chiefest
prerogative. It contains in circuit 1800. miles, divided into two kingdoms,
England and Scotland. The natural strength of Scotland (being barren, full of
mountains, lakes, and woods) is the cheifest cause of this division; in so
much that the armies of the Romans could never bring it wholly in subjection;
the Emperor Seuerus lost there a great part of his army. The kings of
England, though they far excel them in strength, and have overthrown them
in many battles, could never bring them under their jurisdiction. The lakes,
the woods, and the marrishes (which even in plains make great pooles) being
unto them a natural wall and trench against all incursions. On the tops of
mountains are many fruitful plains, plentiful and fit for the feeding of
^at^le, and thick woods full of wild beasts: These rockie and mountainous
places abounding notwithstanding with woods and pastures, do so strengthen the
country, that they neither fear to be forced by invasion, nor to be
constrained with hunger: for the dangerous access of the mountains, and the
thicknes of the woods, secureth them against the assaults of their enemies; and
in beseegings they do sustain themselves by cattle and wild beasts, which
can never fail them. To this helps the abundance of people, fierce of
courage, and excellent in the use of their arms: for necessities sake being
able speedily to assemble 25. or 30. thousand men against the inrodes of their
enemies; and trusting to the strength of situations of places and practice of
their arms, they endeavor not to fortify their ci^^e^, nor havens, which are
so thick in this country, that by reason of the inlets of the sea, there is
not almost one house distant above twenty miles from the Ocean. The king of
Scotland governs the Hebrides, being forty two, and the Orchades thirty two
in number. But since, neither Scotland nor the said Islands, are better stored
with plenty of corn, more then suffices for their own provision, and the
people are neither given to arts, or abounding in wealth, few merchants do
resort thither. But England, whereof we now treat, is divided into three great
provinces: England, Cornwall, and Wales. England stretches to the German
sea* Cornwall is right against France: Wales against Ireland. This most
flourishing kingdom contains two Archbishopricks, Canterbury and Yo^ke, 24.
bishoprics, and 136. walled towns. In the reign of king Henry and his son
Edward, there were reckoned forty thousand parishes, but now there are only
9725. Cornwall and Wales in comparison of England are barren, and in the vpland
places the people live upon white meats and oaten bread; especially in Wales:
yet has nature placed an Island commonly called Anglesey so near unto it,
abounding with corn and cattle, that it niay woorthily be called the mother of
Wales. Cornwall is exceeding rich in mines of Tin and Lead. England far
surpasses both these provinces in largenes, riches, and fertility: and though
it stand somewhat more northerly, notwithstanding by the benefit of the sea,
or some unknown influence of the stars, the air there is so gentle and
temperate, rather thick and moist, then sharp and cold, that it token
thereof, the bay tree and the rosemarie are always green. And it is most
certain, that Flanders and Brabant are more vexed with cold and ice then
England: wherein for the most part the land is plain; yet now and then so
garnished with fruitful and delightful hills, and those rising so pleasantly
by little and little, that they which see them a far off, can scant discern
them fro^^ the plain. The cheifest provision of the kingdom is corn, cattle
and fish, so stored therewith for plenty, goodness, and sweetness, that it
needs neither the help of France, no nor of any neighbor bordring country.
Among other things the flesh especially of their swine, oxen, and veales have
the best relish of any part of Christendom, and of fish their Pike and
Oysters. It brings not forth Mules nor Asses, but of horse infinite store.
The wealth thereof consists in never decaying mines of tin and lead: there
are also found veins of copper and iron, and in Cornwall is dug tin of
such excellent finenes, that it seems little inferior to silver in quality.
Here the wools are most fine, by reason of the hills, whereof the kingdom is
full. On these hills grows a final and tender kind of grass, neither
dunged, nor watered with spring nor river, but in winter nourished with the
moisture of the air, and in summer with the deaw of heaven, which is so
grateful and pleasing to the sheep, that it causes them to bear fleeces of
singular goodness and exceeding finenes. The Island breeds no wolves nor any
other ravening beasts, and therefore their flocks wander night and day by
hills, dales, and fields, as well enclosed as common, without fear or danger.
Most delicate clothes are wouch of this wool, which are transported in great
abundance into Germany, Poland, Denmark, Sweuqland, and other provinces,
where they are in high request. There grow all sorts of pulse, great store of
Saffron, and infinite quantity of beer transported from thence into Belgia,
as also pelts and seacoale. The Island is so commodiously seated for the sea,
that it is never without resort of Portugal, Spanish, French, Flemish, and
Easterling merchants. The trafique between the English and the Flemish arises
to an inestimable value for Gui^ciardin writes, that before the tumults of the
Low Countries they bartered for twelve millions of crowns yearly.

There are other Islands subject to the crown of England, as Ireland, Wight,
Man and Anglesey, the ancient dwelling of the Druides, Syllyes, Gernsey, Iersey
and Alderney.

Ireland is not much less then England in bigness, for it is three hundred
miles long, and ninety broad, mountainous, woodie, full of bogs, apter for
pasture then corn, and abounding with milk and butter. It sends forth
great store of butter, ski^nes and saffron. It is full of rivers and lakes
abounding with fish. It has two Archbishoprickes, Armach and Cassels: the
chief seat is Dublin, and that part which lies toward the East and the south
is best peopled. The provinces of Vlster, Conaught and Mounster situated to the
west and north, are less fruitful, and more savage. The other three Islands
are about one bigness: of them Anglesey is the ^^st, and therefore called the
mother of Wales: it is well replenished with cattle and plenty of corn. Man
is five and twenty miles distant from England: it has one Bishopric and two
havens: the land is not very fertile.

Wight is a hilly country: in it is Newport a town strongly fortified: it
incloseth the whole channel of Southhampton, which is over against it, and the
fairest haven in that sea.

In strength of situation no kingdom excels England: for it has these two
properties, which Aristotle wishes in the building of a city: one is, that it
be difficult to besiege: the other, that it be easy to co^uey in and out all
things necessary: these two commodities has England by the s^^, which to the
inhabitants is as a deep trench against hostile invasions, and an easy
passage to take in or send out all commodities whatsoever. On the west is the
Irish Ocean, a sea so shallow and so full of rocks and flats, that it is very
dangerous for great ships, and on the south the flowing and ebbing of the
British Ocean is so violent, and the remoouing of sands and shelues so
uncertain, that unless the mariners be skillful in taking the opportunities
of wind and ^ydes, they can hardly bring in their ships in safety. The sea
coast is on every side cliffie and inaccessible, except in some certain
places which are strongly fortified, as Barwicke, Dover, Dertmouth, Plymmouth,
Falmouth, Bristow, Milford, etc. so that the whole Island may be taken for one
impregnable castle or Bulwark.

To this strength of situation may be joined their sea and land forces. As
touching their sea-forces (besides the Navy Royal) the kingdom has so many
fair havens, and those so frequented with merchants, that two thousand ships
are reported to trafique there. Be this as it may, it is undoubtedly true, that
upon necessity they are able to put to sea above four hundred ships. Edward
the third at the siege of Caleis, and Henry the eight at the siege of Bullen,
waisted over with a thousand fail of all sorts: and therefore to invade that
Island, whose havens are hard to approach, and worse to enter, by reason of the
fortifications, and which have so many ships at command, I account a most
difficult and dangerous enterprise. And to this dangerous difficulty may be
added another, which is, that the English people are marvelous expert in
maritime actions, then whom at sea there is not a valianter and bolder nation
under heaven. For in most swift ships, excellent well furnished with ordinance
(wherewith the kingdom abounds) they go to sea with as good courage in
winter as in summer, all is one with them. They trade into Moscouie, Cathay,
Alexandria of Egypt, Constantinople, Liuonia, Barbary and Guinea. Anno 1585.
with a fleet of five and twenty ships, whererein were 2500. soldiers, they
sailed into the west Indies, and took Saint Iago, Saint Domingo in Hispaniola
and Cartagena on the continent, Saint Augustines a city built of timber, and
by them destroyed with fire. In the time of war they continually ve^e the
Terceraz and the coast of Brasill. Two of their Captains have sailed round
about the world, with no less courage then glory and good fortune. Their
force at land is nothing inferior to that at sea; for the kingdom is divided
into two and fifty shires, in one only whereof (commonly called Yorkshire)
it is thought seventy thousand footmen may be levied. Every shire has a
lieutenant, who sees to the election and trayning of soldiers when necessity
requires. In choosing of soldiers, they take the names of all the inhabitants
of the country from above sixteen years of age to sixty, and out of these
they choose the likeliest and ablest for service. The taller and stronger are
chosen for footmen, and these divided into four kinds. The first are archers,
by whose dexterity they conquered the greatest part of France, took king John
captive, and held Paris sixteen years. The arrows of the Parthians were
never more dreadful to the Romans, then the bows of the English to the
Frenchmen. The second sort used light staves well headed with iron, with which
they would strike a man from his horse. The other two, use and experience of
latter times has taught them: the one is the harquebuse, the other the pike, a
fit weapon for their constitution, by reason of their tall, strong and manlike
stature. For their service on horseback, they choose the men of small stature,
but well set, active and nimble. These horsemen are of two sorts; some heavy
armed, and those for the most part are gentlemen; other lighter armed, some
riding after the manner of the Albannesses; some after the fashion of Italy,
using a scull, a Jack, a sword and long light spears. And although they are
able to bring to the field two thousand lanciers, and infinite troops of light
horsemen; yet their horsemen never carried like reputation to their footmen:
for Edward the third which made so many iorneies into France, and obtained so
many famous victories, to show what confidence he reposed in his infanterie,
ever left his horse and put himself into the battle of his footmen: whereas
the French kings not daring to inure their commons to warfare (least leaving
their manuell occupations and trades, they should grow insolent in the wars,
to which humor they are greatly addicted) always put themselves and their
hopes in the fortune of their caualerie, being all almost gentlemen. But for as
much, as the French mantaine no good races of horse, and to purchase them from
other places is a matter of great charge, and good cannot always be gotten for
money; for these reasons, and for that horsemen are nothing so serviceable in
the field as footmen, I think the French have so often been overthrown by
the English. To show what force the King of England is able to bring into the
field, let this one example stand for many. Henry the eight passed to Bullen
with an army divided into three Battallions: in the vantgard passed twelve
thousand footmen, and five hundred light horsemen, clothed in blew iackets
with read gardes. The middle ward (wherein the King was, and passed last over)
consisted of twenty thousand footmen, and two thousand horse, clothed with red
iackets and yellow gards. In the rereward was the Duke of Norfolk, and with
him an army like in number and apparel to the first, saving that therein
served one thousand Irishmen, all naked save their mantles and their thick
gathered shirts: their arms were three darts, a sword and a skeane. They drew
after them one hundred great pieces, besides small. They carried upon carts an
hundred mils, which one horse would turn and grind. Their carriages were so
many, that therewith they entrenched their camp, as with a wall. And for the
carriage of their ordinance and their baggage, and for drawing of their
provision, they transported into the continent above five and twenty thousand
horse: and besides all other kind of provision, they brought with them
fifteen thousand oxen, and an infinite number of other cattle. The quantities
of ladders, bridges, shot, powder, and other furnitures following so royal an
army, what pen can number?

In England the nobility possess few castles or strong places environed with
walls and ditches, neither have they jurisdiction over the people. The dignities
of Dukedomes, Marquesses, and Earldomes are no more but bare titles, which the
king bestows on whom he pleases, and peradventure they possess never a
penie of revenue in the place from whence they take their titles: where on the
contrary the nobility in France possess some absolute, some mixed government
with the hereditarie titles of Lords, Barons, Earls, Marquesses, Dukes and
Princes. They are Lords not of towns only, but of great and goodly cities;
receiving homage and fealty of their tenants: but acknowledge the sovereignty
of the king and the parliaments.

Netherland.
OF all the three parts of Gaul, Belgia, which we commonly call Netherland, is
the noblest by the authority of Casar, Strabo and other approved authors, not
only for the nobility and excellency of the people of the country, but
likewise for the greatness and woorthines of those things that have been
invented there, and the accidents that there have happened. They invented the
art of printing, restored music, framed the chariot, devised the laying of
colors in oil, the working of colors in glass, the making of tapestrie,
says, searges, wosteds, russets, frisadoes, and diverse sorts of linen cloth,
with innumerable other small trifles: all sorts of clocks and dials, and the
mariners compass. It is divided into 17. provinces, viz. the Dukedomes of
Brabant, Limburg, Lutzemburg and Guelders: the Earledomes of Flanders, Artois,
Henault, Holland, Zeland, Namure and Zutphen, the Marquisat of the sacred
Empire, the Seigniories of Friesland, Mechlin, Vtrecht, Ouerissel and
Groningen, all territories rich, plentiful and exceeding populous. In them are
208. walled towns, stately and magnificent, besides 3230 towns having
privilege of walled towns, and 6300. villages with parish churches. It has
many mines of lead, copresse, and cole, and quarries of excellent good stone.
The Emperor Charles had an intention to erect it into a kingdom, but the
difficulty consisted herein, that every of these provinces being governed by
peculiar customs, prerogatives and privileges, would never have yielded unto
one royal law common to all, especially those that had the largest privileges;
for which cause he gave over his determination. It is seated commodiously for
all the provinces of Europe, and contains in circuit about 1000. Italian
miles: The air of later times is become much more wholesome and tempelate then
in times past, whether it be by reason of the increase of inahbitants, or the
industry of the people, who spare no charge to amend whatsoever is amiss. The
beeues of Holland and Friesla^d are very great, and weigh some of the^ 1600
pound, of 16 ounces to the pound: the ewes in these provinces and some part of
Flanders bring forth three and four lambs at a time, and the kine often two
calves at once. It brings forth great quantity of mather, very perfect
woad, but no great store; but of flax and hemp great abundance. Whosoever
shall consider what commodity they raise by their fishing and traffike only,
may well say, that no nation thorough the whole world may compare with them for
riches. For Guieciardine writes, that of their he ring fishing they make
yearly 441000 pound sterling; their fishing for cod 150000. pound sterling;
and of their fishing for salmon more then 200000 crowns, which is of sterling
money 60000. pound. The continual riches that grows to the country of other
sorts of fish taken all the year is infinite. The value of the principal
merchandise yearly brought in and carried out is likewise infinite; the
foresaid author esteems it to about 14. millions, one hundred and thirty
five thousand crowns: whereof England only brings to the value of five
millions, and two hundred and fifty thousand crowns. It is a wonder to see,
how that the inhabitants of all these provinces (especially of Brabant and
Flanders) understand and speak two or three languages, and some four or more,
according to their intercourse with merchants and strangers, yea in Anwerpe you
shall hear the women speak Dutch, French, Italian, Spanish and English.

The kingdom of Spain.
SInce the first time that man began to acknowledge a superior authority, and
submit himself to the behests of a ruler, there was never a more spacious
seigniorie, then that which the Spanish enioieth at this day: especially having
under a colorable and defensible title embezeled the crown of Portugal. For
(...) the large and fair provinces in Europe, the goodly regions of Asia, and
rich countries in Africa, he enjoys in peaceable quietness and security,
being not disturbed or contested by any rival or competitor, the new world,
in circuit more spacious then either Europe or Afric.

In Europe he is the sole sovereign of Spain, holding it whole and entire, a
thing worthy observation; because for the space of these 800. years before
this age, it never obeyed any one prince, but was dismembered, and peece-meale
claimed by diverse seigniors: He has very much shaked Belgia, and lordeth it
over the kingdom of Naples, containing in bigness 1400. miles: and retains
Insubria otherwise called the Duchy of Millaine, comprehending three hundred
in circuit. Of the Islands he holds Maiorique, Minorique, and Huisa: the
first of three hundred miles space; the second of 150. the third of eight.
Sicill is reported to be of 700. Sardinia 562.

In Africa he holds the great haven called Masalquiuir, the most secure and
safe harbor in the whole Mediterranean sea. He has also Oran, Melilla, and the
rock commonly called the Penion of Velez: and without the Streights he
possesses the Canarie Islands, twelve in number, and the least of seven
containing 90. miles.

In the right which he pretends to the crown of Portugal, he keeps the
worthy places of Septa and Tangier, which may rightly be surnamed the keys
of the Streights; yea of the Mediterranean, and Atlantique Ocean: without the
Streights he holds the city of Mazaga: and by the same title in the vast
Ocean, he retains the Terceraz, Porto Santo, and Madera, the ladie-like Island
of the Atlantique sea, containing by estimation 160^ miles in compass: then
the Islands of Cape Verd, seven in number. Under the aequinoctiall he holds
the Island of Saint Thomas, somewhat more spacious then Madera, but most
plentiful in sugar, and rangeth over that huge tract of land, which tends
from Cape Aguer to Cape Guardafu. Lastly he is lord of all the traffic,
merchandise, negociating, and navigations of the whole Ocean, and of all the
Islands which nature has as it were inameled the Ocean withal, and scattered
in the seas, especially between the Cape of good Hope and promontories of
Guardafu.

In Asia in the aforesaid right of the crown of Portugal, he rules the
better part of the western coasts, viz. Ormus, Diu, Goa, and Malaca. Ornius
for his commodious satuation, is grown so rich, that it is a common proverb
among the Arabians; Si terrarum orbis, quaqua patet, annulus ^sset,
I^^ius Armusium ge^^^ia decusque foret.


A great portion of Arabia Foelix belongs to the principality of Ormus, as
likewise Baharem, the Iland-queene within that gulf; both for the most
plentiful circuit, abounding in all variety of fruits; as also for the rich
fishing of pearl.

In this sea the Portugals possess Damain, Bazam, Tauaan, and Goa; which city
(to omit Ohial, Canora, Cochin, and Colan) is of so great esteem, that it is
thought to yield the king as great revenue, as many provinces in Europe do
their Lords: and finally the Portugals hold all that sea coast which lies
between the city Damain, and Malepura: wherein no prince (except the king of
Calecure) challenges one foot of land. The Island of Zeilan, wherein they
possess a strong haven and castle, commonly called Columbo, may rightly be
called the delight of Nature; and they enjoy also Malaca, which in those places
is the bound and limite of their empire, and also the key of the traffic, and
navigations of the east Ocean, and of all those Islands, which are so many and so
spacious, that in circuit of land they may be well compared to all Europe.

For trade with the Chinois, and Islands of Tidore, and for their safe
merchandising with Molucca and Banda, they are so secure of their welfare, that
they count it an unnecessary charge to erect any castles or fortifications of
defense, but only inhabit dispersed in weak cottages.

Certainly it would amaze and bewoonder a man to think, how many puissant
kings and fierce nations are brideled and yoked by the arms of twelve thousand
Portuguezes; (for in so huge atract of land and sea, there are, nor ever were a
greater number inhabiting) and not only to have discovered and conquered the
Atlanticke, Indian, and east sea, but also to defend it against all foreign
invasions or inrodes upon their confines; for it is 90 years since they
fortified those places with an ouerlasting memorial of their valiancie.
Neither can any man to eclipse or detract from their just comme^dation, object
unto them the facility of subduing a naked and unarmed people, altogether raw
and vnexperimented in the feats of arms; if he will recall to his
remembrance, how by the virtue of their arms they took the kingdom of Ormus
from the vassal and confederate of the king of Persia, as also that they
drowned and defeated at Diu the navy of the Sultane of Egypt, fully furnished
with Mammelukes, a kind of soldier no less famous for their arms and
discipline, then the Praetorian Turkish soldiers, called Ianizaries: as also
that they made good the said place against the leaguer of the Turks and
Guzarits: and in the red sea they have often forced the Turkish galleys to
retire, with a most dishonorable foil. In the year 1552. they defeated his
whole fleet at Ormus: In Trapoban they affronted and contested with the kings
of Decan, Cambaia, Calecute, and Achem; princes both favored, and also aided
with the forces of the Turkish Emperor: yea such have been their expeditions
in Cambaia, India, the whole Ocean, and along the coasts of Asia, that in
desert of glory and admiration, they are to be censured nothing inferior to
the victorious praises of Alexander the great; yea so much the rather to be
preferred, because neither in circuit of territory, nor numbers of people they
were ever comparable to the Macedonians; for with nineteen ships they
overthrew the Egyptian navy, far greater in number and furniture: with two
thousand soldiers they forced Goa, and recovered it being lost with 1500. with
800. they won Malaca, and not with many more Ormus.

Another member of the Spanish dominions lies in the new World, wherein
because be has no corriuall able to make head against him; he challenges as
his own, whatsoever either by discovery or conquest he attaineth unto. This
new Worlds dominions is divided into the continent and Islands.

In the north sea are so many Islands, most of them of forty miles compass,
that their number can hardly be ascertained or known; some of them so rich and
spacious, that they might suffice to erect a magnificent and stately
sovereignty. Of these Boriq^en is 300 ^iles long, and threescore broad: Cuba
is 300 miles long, and twenty leagues broad: Hispaniola is 1600 miles in
compass. As for the continent he is absolute lord of all that sea coast which
waters Florida, Noua Hispania, Iucatan, and that spacious south erly,
promontorie to the cape of California and Quiuira. For even so far the
discoueries and nauigations of the Spaniard have proceeded.

The coast of Noua Hispania counting his beginning at the town of Santa
Helena, and cutting by Panama to Quiuira, contains about 5000. and 200 miles
in length, to which if you please to add the vpland regions coasting toward
the north, you shall find no less then 9000. miles.

Peru beginning at Panama, contains by the maritimate coast 12000. and 600.
miles, of which three thousand lying between the river Maragon, and Argenteum,
and including Brasile, do acknowledge the supremacy of Portugal.

In the continent are many kingdoms and seigniories, amongst which these of
Mexico and Peru (once most powerful and wealthy dominions) were counted
chief, and as it were the two imperial seats. The kings of Mexico did not
claim by inheritance from their ancestors, but were chosen by six electors;
Him whom they judged young, valiant, and wise, of an able body, and fit for
the war, they crowned: and one of their kings, because he proved a coward,
slothful, and irresolute, they poisoned. There was a Senate of Sages
continually resident about his person, which consisted of four degrees of
Nobility and Magistracies; without whose authority and consent, no matters of
consequence or weight could be determined or put in action. They regarded
nothing so severely, as the good education of their youth, their ceremonious
superstitions, and their orders of soldiarie. Amongst them there was a most
worthy chiefetaine called Tlacaellell, so expert in military prowess, that
he subdued the greatest part of the Mexican seigniorie: and of so great and
admired spirit, that he obstinately refused and forsook the kingdom being
offered him; saying, that it was available and commodious for the
commonweal, that another should wear the crown, and he attend upon him as a
minister and counselor; and that his shoulders were too weak to sustain so
weighty a burden: adding moreover, that he would no less endeavor with a
careful and wary foresightfulnesse the safety of the commonweal, then if
he himself were invested in the sovereignty.

These kings lived in great majesty, inhabited sumptuous palaces, and
maintained a mighty troop of their vassals for the guard of their persons.

On one quarter they enlarged their bounds; and planted their religion and
language to the skirts of Teguante-Pecum, two hundred leagues remote from
Mexico: and on another quarter as far as Guatimall 300. leagues distant. In
these places they made the north and south seas their bounds; but Mecoican,
Tascalan, and Terpeacan, they could never bring under their yoke. Their
differences and troubles with the city of Tascala, encouraged the Spaniards to
invade their dominions: and being entered, made their victories easy without
any difficult resisting or hinderance from the pursuit of their conquest,
which happened in the year of our Lord 1518. The Mexicans (divided into seven
tribes) came into those regions, from that part of the north; where of late
years the Spaniards discovered a most wealthy and populous province, which at
this day they call new Mexico.

The most respected honor which does ennoble their men, is purchased by
alacrity and courageous forwardnes to arms. Matezuma their last king
instituted certain orders of horsemen, surnaming them Lions, Eagles, and
Leopards. These he priuileged to wear gold and silver, and a silken cassock
after the Arabian fashion; to go shod, and occupy gilded and painted vessel;
which things were prohibited to the vulgar, and forbidden all such, who had not
inwoorthied himself by some noble service.

The Empire of Peru, whose king was surnamed Inga, is found to be larger and
more magnificent: when it was in the prime and highest, it reached from Pasto
to Chile 1000. leagues in length, and 100. in breadth, even from the south Ocean
to Andi in the east. The merciless fury of the waters in some places
standing, and moorish, in other running, have gainesaid and put a period to
their further progresses; when without any colorable or just cause they invade
their confining neighbors. They most ridiculously pretend, that in the
universal deluge, mankind was preserved in their country, and so by tradition
have been nuzzeled in the true and ancient religion, which (as they say) they
are bound in conscience to sow and disperse in the minds of all men, either
by fair means or foul. Their chief gods are Viracoca, that is to say, the
Creator of all things, and the Sun. Inga Pacacuti, who instructed them in
their superstitions, when he had beautified the temples with offerings and
sacrifice, assigned none to the temple of Viracoca, alleging that forasmuch as
he is the maker of all things, he needs not any thing. Amongst other
memorable ordinances by him instituted in the winning of countries; one was,
that the conquered land should be divided into three parts: the first dedicated
to the gods, and maintenance of the charge of their ceremonies: the second and
greatest portion was given to Inga, therewith to maintain his estate, the
expenses of his court, parents, barons, and garrisons: the third was
distributed amongst the soldiers: no man could claim property in any thing,
to say this is mine; but by the favor and sufferance of Inga; neither might
that descend by inheritance. The lands belonging to the people and comminaltie
were yearly limited, and so much allotted to every man as might be thought
sufficient for the sustentation of his family; some years more, some less,
without exaction of any rent: in liew whereof, they conditioned to manure the
lands of Inga, and the gods: the increase they stored in most ample garners
thereunto appointed, from whence in time of scarcity it was shared amongst the
people; the like they did with their cattle, dividing them by head: which point
of government in mine opinion far exceeds either the partitions of
Lyeurgus, or the Agragrian laws of the Romans.

Besides merchandise, incredible treasures of gold and silver are transported
out of Noua Hispania and Peru: of those treasures commonly Peru yields two
parts, and Noua Hispania the third; which is more rich in commodities then
Mexico. Amongst the rest it gives Cochinella, a merchandise of inestimable
value; and infinite store of Hides. The Islands afford plenty of hides,
cotton, wool, sugar, cannafistula, hard wax and pearls.

Amongst these riches and treasures of Peru two things are wonderful; one,
that in the silver mines which were discovered in Potosie, in the year 1545.
there is, and has been found so huge a mass of Bullion, that the fifth part
(which is the kings) in the space of forty years amounted to one hundred and
eleven millions of Pezoes: neither yet did two third parts pay their due to his
majesty. The other is the quicksilver mines in Guancaualcan, found in the
year 1567. out of which the king has received 40000. Pezoes, all charges
defraied.

It is a strange thing to note, that whereas mother Nature has interlaced so
riotously her golden and silver veins in the bosom and womb of Peru, it has
bestowed no such blessing upon her nearest daughter Brasile; but in stead
thereof has enriched her with a most temperate and wholesome air, with many
pleasant springs and large rivers, not without sufficiency of wood: she has
divided the land into fruitful plains and delightsome hills, clothed it with
the beauty of continual greenenesse, abounding about belief with sugarcanes,
which the Portugals there planted, and now transport in infinite numbers into
foreign regions.

The Philippinae may well be termed the appendances to this new world; and
although in respect of their site by reason of their proximitie, they may be
thought a part of Asia; yet the discouerers thereof traveled through new
Spain, before they could discover them; of which Islands more then 40. are
subject to this sovereignty, and by them have been reduced to a civil kind
of life and policy.

Now bauing generally run over the spacions (I will not say boundless) members
of this empire, let us divide the discourse thereof (as much as concerns the
strength and policy) into four particulars: the first whereof shall entreat
of his pieces in Europe; the second of his dominions in the new world; the
third of his territories of the west and south coast of Afric; the fourth of
his principalities in India and Asia.

The provinces which he has in Europe are of the most puissant and powerful
sort, that are comprehended in this limitation. Spain it self has bin always
acknowledged for so wealthy, so puissant, and so spacious a kingdom: that not
without good cause it may challenge the primacie of all the provinces, and of
the continent, if not in any consideration else, yet in regard that the
Romans and Carthaginians continued so long and so cruel wars for the
possession and royalty thereof. The Goths and Vandals when they had with the
streams of their ouerflowing multitudes swarmed over the greatest part of the
Roman empire, here sat them down, and made it the place of their
inhabitation.

Trebellius Pollio terms it and France the iointes and sinews of the Roman
empire. Constantine, when he divided the empire, preferred it before Italy:
And in the division when England, France, Spain and Italy fell to his lot, he
little esteeming the last, and voluntarily leaving it to his competitor,
contented himself with the three foremost. Who knows not that the kingdom of
Naples is the flower of the Italian provinces? Who sees not, that nature has
confined and heaped into this territory, as if it were into her closet, all
those delightful happinesses, which with her own hands she has here and
there scattered and dispersed through the other of the European provinces? What
can we say otherwise of the Duchy of Millaine? And for Sicil, it may be
compared to any, yea it surpasses all the Islands of the Mediterranean for
fertilnes, for the concourse of merchants, for artizans, singular for populous
towns and for stately edifices.

The government of Spain is absolute and kingly,: in their regiment we may see
that they have attained to such perfection of aduisednes, that all things are
purposely discussed and questioned in several counsels, before they are put in
execution. Where the grave and considerate counsels of Fabius are received,
when the rash and headie precepts of Marcellus are rejected. Innouations and
change of ancient customs are avoided, in regard whereof, Innocent the eight
was wont to say, that the Spaniard was so complete in government, that in this
respect he never erred or miscarried, and by this policy he governs nations
different in natures, and dissonant in laws and fashions, Castilians,
Arragons, Biskaines, Portuguezes, Italians, Dutchmen, Indians, Christians and
Gentiles with such peaceable union, as if they were his own natural subjects.

And whereas some object, that this empire cannot long remain in this
flourishing estate, because it is disiointed and dismembered. To such men this
may be answered: that spacious dominions are easily secured from any inuasiue
attempts; but not so safely preserved from intestine and homebred dissensions,
as the kingdoms of smaller compass are.

But in a state thus divided, there is an union both of amplenes, and a
measurable mediocritie; the first is apparent in the whole body compounded of
several members; the second in the greatest parcel of the members. For seeing
that the portions thereof, as Spain, Peru, Mexico are so great and goodly
states of themselves, they cannot be but stored with all those good things
which are necessary either in greatness or mediocritie, viz. both with a
puissant powerablenes to frustrate foreign attemptes, and sufficient inward
forces to provide against all domestical discontentments. And it is as clear
as day, that by means of sea-forces all these members may strengthen one
another, and stand as it were united, even as Casar Augustus, by maintaining
one fleet at Rauenna, and another at Messana, awed the whole Roman empire,
and kept it in assured concord: and also we have seen the Portugals, by reason
of their sea-forces, which they maintained in Persia, Cambaia, Decan, and other
parts of the Indies, not only to have given the law to those famous princes,
but maugre the force of their enemies to keep it, and peaceably enjoy it.

Some wise and experienced commanders in discoursing this point, oppose the
jealousy and aemulation of the Turk, and affirm, that, if the king should
employ those treasures, which now he spends, in the erecting of fortresses
upon the increase of his navy; (an expense sufficient for the furnishing of
150. galleys) it would be an occasion, that the Turk, whose navy now
exceeds not the number of 130. galleys, would augment it to the number of
200. to the intent, that he may be superior and master of the sea: and that so
the king would be enforced to undergo an excessive charge, without gaining any
reputation thereby. But this their subtlety is mere booke-wisedome: and it is
very agreeable with reason, that there is nothing so dangerous in action, and
so ready to imbarke a man in an irrecouerabe disadvantage, as an ouer-weening
conceit, which commonly draws with it an headdie wilfulnes flexible to
nothing. But they ought to consider, not what the Turk will do, but whether
it be in his power to surmount such a navy: And although the Turk be Lord of
a larger sea coast then the king, yet he cannot compare, either in furniture or
mariners. Along all the coast of Afric he has not an harbor, where he can
build, or keep a couple of galleys, except Algier and Tripolie. In the Euxine
sea what place of name is there besides Capha and Trapezond? What better report
can we give of the coast of Asia?

More implements then a spacious seacoast are incident to this business: he
must have plenty of timber and cordage; he must be furnished with a people
practiced in sea affairs, able to endure the labor and working of the waters;
delighting in traffic and navigations; cheerful in tempests and rough
weather, which dare dwell as it were amongst perils, and expose their lives to
a thousand dangers: as for the Turkish subjects the better part never saw sea,
and those that have used it, are not to be compared to the Biskains,
Catalonians, Portugals, and Genowais. (I add this people for their many good
services done at sea in the behalf of this crown.) To conclude, in two things
the king excels the Turk; the first is, that although the Turk can command
more men, yet the best and greater part of them being Christians, he dare
hardly trust against us; the second is, that the sea coasts of the king are
nearer conjoined, then those of the Turk, and in that regard are sooner
assembled and provided. By this commodity experience has proved that the
Eastern nauies have been often overthrown by the Western, the Southern by the
Northern, the Carthaginian by the Roman, the Asian by the Grecian. Octauius
Caesar with the navy of Italy defeated the fleet of Egypt; and in our times
the Armada of the Christians, the fleet of the Turks. The Turks themselves
confess, that in sea fights the Christians excel, and are unwilling to deal
with those forces. As often as Charles the fife rigged forth his navy, it was
so puissant, that the Turk never durst leave the harbor. In his journey of
Algier he rigged five hundred vessels; in his Tunis voyage six hundred. Andrew
Doria conducted so gallant an armada into Greece, that the Turk not daring to
move out of his place, he took Patras and Corona in Morea.

His landforces consist in Cauallerie and Infanterie: the best footeman of all
the German nations is the Wallon: to say nothing of the natural Spaniard, it
is well known that in all ages it has been accounted one of the most
valorous nations of the world. The French in nine years were subdued to the
Roman yoke; the Spaniards held out zoo. The power and person both of Augustus
Caesar were requisite to the subduing of the Cantabrians. They not only
delivered their country from the subjection of the Moors, but invaded
Afric, and took therein many strong places. The Portugals invaded Barbary,
tamed the coast of Guinea, Ethiopia and Cafraria, they conquered India, Malaca
and the Moluccas. The Castilians sailing through the Atlantike sea subdued the
New world, with all the kingdoms, provinces and people therein: they drove the
French from Naples, Sicill and Millan.

The fortune of this nation does consist in discipline and dexterity: for no
people can readier find the occasion, and sooner take it or refuse it when it
comes: in celeritie, for through slothfulnes they let nothing slip; in love and
concord, for they were never known out of their own borders to strike stroke
amongst themselves: at a word, in suffering of hunger, thirst, heat, cold,
labor and extremities, they will lay up any nation whatsoever. By these
virtues they have achieved the glory of so many victories, and though
sometime they have been overcome, notwithstanding they have vanquished their
vanquishers, as it fell out at Rauenna. They never suffered any famous
defeature, but in the iournies of Algier and England; the one by the casualtie
of tempests; the other by the skillful prowess and seafaring dexterity of the
English. Three or four thousand of them turned topsie tur^^e the better part
of Germany, and made way every way with their swords thorough the thickest of
their enemies. These were they that at the journey of Caruen in Barbary being
four thousand foot soldiers of great valor, made a brave retraict the space
of four or five miles, be set and charged with twenty thousand horse by the
king of the Moors at least five or six times, with the loss only of 80.
men, and the slaughter of 800. of the enemy.

As concerning their Cauallerie, it cannot be gainsaid, but that the Spanish
genet is the noblest horse in Christendom, far excelling the courser of
Naples, or the horse of Burgundy so much esteemed of the French; or the
Frieslander in so great request with the Germans. It should seem that nature
hirselfe has armed this people, in giving them the Iron mines of Biskay,
Guipuscua and Medina, with the temperature of Bayon, Bilbo, Toledo and
Calatajut, the Armories of Millan, Naples and Boscoducis, the corn and
provision of the inexhaustible garners of Apulia, Sicill, Sardinia, Artesia,
Castile and Andeluzia, with the plentiful vintages of Soma, Calabria, San
Martin, Aymont, and sundry other places. To conclude, this prince is so mighty
in gold and silver, that therewith (to spare his own people, engaged in the
defense of so many territories, provinces and frontires, from undoubted
destruction) he is able to wage what numbers of horsemen and footmen of the
German and Italian nations it pleases him.

The princes, whose dominions are bordering, and in regard of their forces are
any way able to endanger his dominions, are the Venetians, the kings of France
and England, and the Turk. The Venetians (long since the Duchy of Millan came
to the possession of this crown) have sat them down in great quietness,
rather looking to the strengthening and keeping of their own towns and pieces,
then to the winning of others from their neighbors. And good reason it is,
sithence peace is the surest ankor-hold of their common wealth, that they
should eschew all occasions of war with their friends and allies. For we have
seen the Spanish in favor of the Venetians when their state stood dangerously
engaged with the wars of Bajazet, Soliman, and Selin the second, cheerfully
and resolutely to have entered into the action at Cephalonia, Preuisa and
Lepanto, when at the same instant they had at their own doors, Algier, Tunis
and Aphrodisium their dangerous enemies, nearer affronting Spain, Sicill,
Sardinia, the Baleres, and the kingdom of Naples, then Ciprus or the Islands of
the Ionian sea.

Concerning France, they are not to be blamed if by wishes and Jesuitical
sedition they could annex it to their crown: but says one of their own
writers, they may long enough desire it, before they shall be able to effect
it. And sithence the French have put an end to their civil discontents, what
trophee, or what triumph can the Spaniard boast to have carried from them.
Indeed it cannot be denied, but in elder days the warines of the Spaniards
has turned the furious attempts of the French to matter of too-late
repentance. For the great Captain surprising Barletta, and then incamping upon
the banks of Gariglano, first took from them the possession of the kingdom
of Naples, and afterward all hope of regaining it again. By the same
temporizing Anthony Leua wearied king Francis at Ticinum, and Prosper Collonna
cleared the Duchy of Millan. In assaulting of towns and fortresses, I
confess fury to be of great moment; I confess likewise that by this virtue
the French prevailed at Ioious, Momedium and Caleis, but in set battles, as at
Graueling, Saint Quintins, and Siena, most commonly they have had the foil:
for in the field good order and skillful conduction does more prevail then
valor and furious resolution: in assaults, fury and resolution, more then
counsel or temporizing. Since their falling at variance with the English, at
their hands they have received more dishonor, then in the wars of any other
nation. As to detract from the fame and well deserving glory of any Christian
nation, argued rather an envious humor, then an impartial writer: so to pass
the bounds of modesty in any action deserves no less a reprehension. For who
acknowledges not their discoueries of the Indies to be wonderful; their
conquests therein marvelous; their treasures inestimable; their continuance in
wars long, as being nouzeled therein since the infancy of Charles the fifth:
the brave provinces of Italy and Flanders annexed to their crown to be matter
of goodly consequence. But let us mark and consider their fortunes, sithence
they unsheathed their swords against the Christian world, as we shall soon
see, that their treasures, their Armadas, their long experienced Infanterie,
and their conquered provinces, have little or nothing augmented; nay have they
not discountenanced their reputation in these parts? By the expense of infinite
millions of gold, and effusion of so much Christian blood, what has he gained
in France? What in Netherland? The world sees more clear then day light, that
for all their great boasts, their large territories, and infinite treasures,
sithence the English have dealt with them, held them at the staves end, and
discovered their weakness; every bird has pulled a feather; their credit is
broken with the bankers of Germany; holds given over for want of pay; their
sea forces foiled (if not as they say discomfited.) In the year 1586. Sir
Francis Drake forced the town of Saint Domingo in Hispaniola, Saint
Augustines, and Carthagena on the continent. And when in revenge of like
pretended injuries they entered the English channel with their invincible
Armada of 150, sails, by the favor of God and valor of the English, they
were driven home without doing any thing worth remembrance, through unknown
seas, with the loss, taking and sinking of one hundred of their best and
tallest vessels. To requite this brauado, and to teach this proud nation that
the English (contrary to their opinion) were as well able to offend as defend:
in the year 1589. they showed their victorious navy of 126. ships before the
Groin in Galizia, assaulted the base town, won it, and with 6000. soldiers at
the bridge of Berges discomfited sixteen thousand: thence weighing ankor, and
sailing along the coast and sight of Spain, landed at length at Pincche in
Portugal, won the castle, marched fifty miles into the land, kept their
Courts of guard in the suburbs of Lisbon, and thence returning to Caskaies
without any great fight or skirmish took the castle, set sail for England,
and in their return landing at Vigo, took the town and wasted the country.
Now sithence their great and considerate care of future prevention both for
Spain and the Indies; their ships burnt and taken; their galleies put to
flight, Porto Rico won by assault, Cales sacked, and the Flemish by our
travels encouraged to strip him of his trade of Spicerie, may well put them in
remembrance what they have received at the hands of the English, sithence their
first ambitious apprehension of the western Emperie. What the Turk is able to
perform, you may read hereafter in the discourse of Turkey.

Let us now entreat of those countries which the Spanish has, as appertayning
to the Portugal crown.

This kingdom which is not above 320. miles long, and sixty broad, not very
populous, and but meanly rich in essential revenues, yet by reason of the
commodious situation for navigations and acquisition, it has equalized these
wants with surplusage with the most famous provinces of the whole world: yea,
this good fortune has so elated their minds, that they have undertaken diverse
famous expeditions into Barbary, Ethiopia, India and Brasile. Within these 90.
years they have taken and fortified the principal places and harbors of
those provinces, chalenging unto themselves the peculiar traffike of the
Atlantike and east Ocean. They seized upon the Terceraz, knowing that without
touching at those Islands no ship could safely pass into Ethiopia, India,
Brasil, or the New-world. Returning from those countries toward Spain or
Lisbone, they put in to relieve their wants, and sick passengers, and outward
they touch to take in fresh water, and fetch the wind. In Afric they are
Lords of those places which we spoke of before in the description of Spain. In
Persia they have Ormus: in Cambaia, Diu, Damain and Bazain: in the hither
India, Chaul, Goa, and the neighbor fortresses of Cochin, Colan, the Island
Mauar, and the haven Columbo in the Island Zeilan. Amongst these Goa is the
chiefest, as the place where the Viceroy keeps his court. Ormus famous for
the jurisdiction of the sea, and the traffike of the Persian and Cambaian
gulfes. Cochin and Colan for their plenty of pepper. Mauar, for the
pearle-fishing. Columbo, for the abundance of Cinnamon. Damain and Bazain, for
fertile provision. In these quarters they have some princes their confederates,
others their feodaries. The chief and wealthiest of Allies, is the king of
Cochin, sometime tributarie to the king of Calecute, but now by the intercourse
and traffike with the Portugals, he is grown so rich and mighty, that the
other princes do envy his prosperity. The king of Colan is likewise their
confederate.

Their chief force consists in situation and strength of their places, and
in the number and goodness of their shipping. As concerning situation, this
people wisely considering that in regard of their contemptible numbers, they
were not of power to make any famous journey into the inland regions, neither
to match the Persians, the Guzarits, the princes of Decan, the king of
Narsinga, and other barbarous potentates in Campania, turned all their
cogitations to immure themselves in such defensive places, that with small
forces they might ever have hope to divert great attempts, and make themselves
Lords and commanders of the sea and navigations: which when they had done, they
entertained and maintained so strong a navy, that no prince in those parts was
able to wrong them, yea, they furnished those vessels so thoroughly, that one
single ship would not refuse to cope with three or four of the Barbarians.
With this Armada of one and twenty ships, Francis Almeida defeated the
Mamelucks near the town of Diu. Alfonse Alburquerck with thirty great ships
won Calecute: with one and twenty he took Goa, and regained it with four
and thirty: with three and twenty he took Malaca: with six and twenty he
entered the red sea; and with two and twenty recovered Ormus. In process of
time, as their mightines increased, Lopes Zuarezius made a journey into the red
sea with seven and thirty Galleons. Lopes Sequeira with twenty four ships,
but with greater number of soldiers then ever before, laid siege to Gnidda in
the red sea. Henry Menesius wasted Patane with fifty ships. Lopes Vazius
Sampaius left in the Arsenal 136. ships of war, for the greater part all
excellent well furnished. Nonius Acunia undertook a journey to Diu with 300.
ships, wherein were three thousand Portugals, and five thousand Indians,
besides a great number of his guard and servants, which ordinarily follow the
Viceroyes in those countries.

Besides his confederates and feodaries, he is confined with most mighty
princes, his enemies, as the Persian, who chalengeth Ormus as holden of him in
vassalage: the king of Cambaia, who makes title to Diu and other places, which
were once under his jurisdiction: Nizzamaluc and Idalcam (for so the Portugals
call the two princes of Decan) and the kings of Calecute and Narsinga. As for
the kings of Persia and Narsinga, they never waged war against the Portugals,
because they have always had to do with more dangerous enemies: other princes
though they have enterprized to their uttermost to regaine Diu, Chial, Goa, and
other places, and have left no means unattempted to bring their desseignes to
effect, yet their ability could not work any prosperous success to their
laborious endeavors, by reason of the places situate so commodiously for the
transportation and receipt of continual succors from the sea. And though they
have undertaken the like actions in the deep of winter, hoping by tempests and
other casualties to bar the Portugals from their sea succors, yet they never
prevailed, because the ships and courages of the Portugals, the one resolute to
endure the siege, and by patience to overcome, the other determining (hap what
may) never to forsake their distressed contrymen, have set all upon hazard,
and exposed their fortunes to the mercy of the wind and waves of the sea.
Their woorst, greatest, and fiercest enemy is the Turk, who being backed with
the like advantage of situation, which the city of Aden affoordeth him,
sometime pricked by his proper envy, emulation, and ambition, sometime egged
on by the persuasions of the king of Cambaia, has often endeavored to dispoile
them of the sovereignty of the red sea, and finally to drive them out of the
east India. The greatest navy that ever he sent against them was to recover
Diu, consisting of sixty four ships, and by them defeated. Afterward he sent
a navy of greater ships to the conquest of Ormus, and that likewise was almost
wholly beaten, bruised, and drowned.

In the further Indies they hold nothing but Malaca and the Moluccas. In times
past Malaca was far greater then now it is: for it lay scattered three miles
along the sea coast, but the Portugals, that they might the better defend it,
have brought it into a round form, containing not above a mile in compass.
Here the king has two puissant enemies, Ior and Achem, the one mighty at
land, the other far mightier at sea, by whom the town not without great
danger has more then once been besieged, but by the aid sent from India
always relieved, with great slaughter of the enemy. At length Paulus Lima
defeated king Ior, and raced the castle built by him near Malaca, wherein
besides other spoils he found 900. brazen cast pieces. This territory is
subject to great danger, by reason of the puissance of this king of Achem,
bending all his cogitations to the rooting and final destruction of the
Portugals out of this province, and therefore the king of Spain of late years
sent Matthias Alburquerk with a great power into India, with authority to
secure the territory of Malaca, and to fight with the king of Achem. To secure
their trade of spices and nutmegs in the Moluccas and Banda, they built a
castle in the Island Ternate, of late years for want of succors delivered up
to the Mahumetans, and the Portugals reculed into the Island of Tidore, there
establishing their trade and factorie.

The Great Turk.
Under the Empire of the Turks is comprehended the better part of the ancient
threefold division of the earth. He holds in Europe the whole sea coast,
which from the borders of Epidaurus stretches it self to the mouth of Tanais:
whatsoever lies between Buda and Constantinople, and from the Euxine sea to
the banks of Savus, is his. In that perambulation is contained Hungary, all
Bosnia, Seruia, Bulgaria, Macedon, Epire, Greece, Peloponnese, Thrace, and the
Archipelago with the Islands. He holds in Asia and Afrike all that is between
Velez de la Gomera and Alexandria in Egypt, between Bugia and Guargula,
between Alexandria and the city Siene: and from the city Suez as far as
Swachen. The hugenes of this territory may be imagined by the circuit of some
of the parcels. Palus Meotis (which is wholly his) spreads it self one
thousand miles into the land: two thousand and seven hundred miles do hardly
incompasse the Euxine sea. The coast of the Mediterranean sea, as much as is
subject to him, contains in circuit 8000. miles. Egypt, wholly his, is
esteemed five hundred miles long. From Tauris to Buda is 3000. and 200. miles:
so far it is from Derbent upon the Caspian sea, to Aden upon the red sea; and
from Balsara upon the Persian gulf, to Tremissen in Barbary, is accounted
little less then 4000; miles. In the sea he is Lord of the most noble Islands
of Ciprus, Euboea, Rhodes, Samos, Chio, Lesbos, and many other in the
Archipelago.

In this progress are contained many most puissant kingdoms, abounding with
all sorts of sustenance for the use of man. What province is richer in corn
then Egypt, Africko, Syria and Asia? What region more flowing with all good
things then Hungary, Greece and Thrace? In these provinces has the Turk
four cities of inestimable wealth, Constantinople, Cair, Aleppo and Tauris.
Constantinople exceeds all the cities in Europe in populousnes: for it is
thought that there are therein more then 700. thousand persons; which if it be
true, it is twice as much as may be said of Paris. Aleppo is a great city in
Syria, and the staple of the whole traffike of Asia. Tauris was the seat of
the kings of Persia, but taken from them in our days, and thought to contain
more then 200. thousand persons. Amongst all the cities of Afric, Cair by
many degrees may challenge the principality, though some men compare Cano to
it for greatness. It may well be called the garner, not only of Egypt, but of
the greater part of Afric and India, whose treasures being conveyed by the
red sea, and from thence to Cair upon the backs of camels, are at length
distributed through all the regions of the Mediterranean sea.

This Empire from final beginnings has risen to such greatness, partly by
their own arms, partly by the discords of the Christians, that at this day it
is the only terror of the Christian commonwealth. It has been their
hereditarie practice, to stand upon their guard, and to prevent their enemies;
in their iourneies to use admirable celeritie; to keep their forces ready,
and to have them at hand; not to have many irons at one time in the fire; nor
long to manage war with one nation, least by practice they become better
warriors then themselves; not to spend their time and treasure in voyages of
base account; nor at one cast to set at all, but to proceed leisurely and
advisedly; and, which is not the least policy amongst many, that their princes
march in person in most of their actions. Diverse other lessons they observe, by
which in the space of 300. years they attained unto a most mighty dominion,
and that too, since the year 1500. to this day, they have almost doubled.

Their government is merely tyrannical: for the great Turk is so absolute a
Lord of all things contained within the bounds of his dominions, that the
inhabitants do account themselves his slaves, not his subjects: no man is
master of himself, much less of his house wherein he dwells, or of the
field which he tilleth, excepting certain families in Constantinople, to whom
for some good service, immunitie was granted by Mahumet the second. Neither
any man be he never so great, stands secure of his life, his goods or estate,
longer then Durante beneplacito of the Grand-Seignior. By two policies he
establishes this tyrannical government; by disfurnishing the people of
weapons, and by putting all commands into the hands of renegados, whom he
takes as tithe from their parents in their childhood. By this subtilty he
gleaneth the provinces of the flower and sinews of their strength, (for the
likeliest and ablest springals are chosen:) and secondly, with the same means
he armeth himself and secureth his estate. For these Ianizars being taken from
the laps of their parents, and delivered to the trayning of this or that
schoolmaster, are made Mahumetans before they perceive it, and so by reason of
their young years forgetting their father and mother, depend wholly upon the
pleasure of the Grand-Seignior, yielding him all dutiful and acceptable
service, as their maintainer and aduancer to honor and riches.

His forces consist in horsemen, footmen, shipping, corn and treasure. As
touching his treasure, it is generally received, that he inioyeth little less
then eight millions of ordinary revenue. And where some men think, that out
of so large a dominion a greater revenue may be raised, therein they deceive
themselves; for not calling to remembrance, that the Turks give their minds to
nothing but war, nor take care of any thing else but provision of armor and
weapons: courses fitter to destroy and waste, then to preserve and enrich
provinces. Hereupon to maintain their armies, and to continue their
expeditions, they do so pill and spoil the people, that they hardly leave
them wherewith to hold life and soul together. And therefore the poor men not
sure of so much as their household provisions; much less of their wealth (which
by time and industry they may gather) take no more pains about their
husbandry and traffic, then they needs must; yea no more then their own
necessity, as near as they can, shall enforce them to make clear at the
years end. For say they, why should we sow, and another reap? Or why should
we reap, and another devour the reward of our labors? This is the cause,
that in the Ottaman dominions, you shall see admirable huge woods, all things
laid waste, few cities well peopled, and especially the better part of the
fields lie unmanured. In our countries by the abundance of people arises the
decrenes of victuals, and in Turkey through the scar sitie of inhabitants. The
greatest number of the husbandmen perish with carrying provision and other
necessaries to the remote places, through which their armies are to travel. In
their galleies likewise falls most commonly so great mortality, that of ten
thousand rowers haled from their houses, scant the fourth part returns
again. This the rather happens, because the Turks in winter time moring
their galleies, do not inure their mariners and gally-slaues to the change of
air and discommodities of the tempestuous seas.

The whole trade of merchandise for the most part is in the hands of Jews, or
Christians of Europe, Epidaurians, Venetians, Frenchmen and Englishmen. In so
large a territory as the Turk has in Europe, there is never a famous
Marttowne but Constantinople, Capha and Thessalonica: in Asia, but Aleppo and
Damasko, Tripoli and Adena: in Afric, Cair, Alexandria and Algier.

Although the ordinary revenues are no greater then aforesaid, yet the
extraordinary arise to a greater reckoning, and that by confiscations and
presents. For the Bassas and great officers, as it were Harpyes, suck the
very blood of the people, and after they have heaped up inestimable riches,
for the most part they escheat to the coffers of the grand Seignior. It is
reported that Imbrain Bassa carried from Cair six millions, and Mahomet Vizier
a far greater mass. Ochiali besides his other riches had three thousand
slaves. The Sultana, sister to Selim the second, received daily two thousand
five hundred Chechini; and for the ease of pilgrims and travelers iournying
from Cair to Mecha, she began to trench a watercourse all along the way: an
enterprise surely great and maiesticall.

To raise his donatiues to a high reckoning, it is a custom that no ambassador
may appear before him empty handed: no man may look for any office or
honorable preferment, if money be wanting: no general may return from his
province or journey without his presents; and you must think that so
magnificent a prince will not swallow small trifles.

The Vaiuods of Valachia, Moldauia and Transiluania hold their estates by
virtue of this briberie, and yet they are often changed. For the estates are
given to the best chapmen, who again to make good their days of payment,
oppress the people, and bring the commons to extreme poverty. Notwithstanding
all this, we have seen the Persian war to have drawn dry his coffers, and
emptied his treasuries. Not long sithence, both at Constantinople and through
the whole empire, the value of gold was raised above belief, insomuch that a
Chechin of gold was double his value, the allay of gold and silver was so much
abased, that the Ianizars finding themselves agreeued thereat, brought great
fear not only upon the inhabitants, but also to the grand Seignior, in
threatening that they would set fire on Constantinople. In Aleppo 60. thousand
ducats were taken up of the merchants in the name of the grand Seignior.
Although his revenues are not so great, as the spacious firtil apprehension of
so mighty an empire may seem to object; yet has he an assistance of greater
value then his surest revenues, and that is his Timars or stipends. For the
Ottaman princes seize upon all the land which they take from their enimes, and
assigning a small parcel, peradventure none at all, to their ancient lords,
divide the residue into Timars, to every gallant seruitor a portion; but upon
condition, to find so and so many serviceable horse for the war. Therein
consists the chiefest preservation of the Ottaman empire: for unless upon
this consideration the care of manuring the land ^ere committed to the
soldiers, and they again set it over to others for their use and lucre, all
would lie waste through the whole empire: themselves affirming that wheresoever
the grand Seignior once treads with his horse hoof, if it were not for this
course, there never after would grow grass again. With these Timars he
mantaineth 150. thousand horsemen, excellent well armed, and always ready at
their own charges to march whither their leaders will command them. So great a
cauallery can no other prince maintain with the yearly expense of fowerteene
millions of gold. Which makes me wonder, that some writers comparing the
Turkish receipts with the Christians, never speak word of so huge a member of
the Turkish revenues. It is reported, that in the war of Persia, the Turk
conquered so much land, that thereof he erected forty thousand Timars, and a
new exchequer at Tauris, from whence he receives yearly a million of gold.
The institution of these Timars, and the choosing of the Azamogli (for so they
term the young lads whom they mean to make Ianizars) are as it were the very
arches or pillars of the Ottaman Empire. And herein they seem to have
imitated the Roman policy. For the Roman Emperors did always inure their
citizens to the war, and of them consisted the Pretorian Cohorts, which never
departed from the empires person. Tacitus says, that the election of the young
men which was made in this manner, gave the occasion of the Eatanian revolt. In
the Roman empire Timars or stipends were given to the soldiers in use, as
rewards of their good service, and they were called Beneficta, and the lessees,
beneficiarij. Alexander Seuerus confirmed them to the heirs of his soldiers,
but upon condition, that they should be always ready to serve, otherwise not.
Constantine the great made them hereditarie without exception or limitation.

By these infinite troops of horse the emperor works two exceeding politic
effects through the whole empire: by the first he so aweth his subjects, that
they can no sooner stir, but as so many falcons these Timarots are presently
on their necks; and this is the drift of dispersing them through the provinces:
the second is, that one part of them are always ready at the sound of the
trumpet upon al occasions to march, while the other stay at home to keep the
inhabitants in duty and obedience.

Besides this Cauallery, he entertaineth in pay a great number of horsemen
divided into Spachi, Vlufagi, and Caripici: these are as it were the nurserie
from whence springs the degrees of Bassas, Beglerbeis and Sangiaks. Then has
he his Auxiliaries, the Alcanzi, the Tartars, the Walachians and Moldauians.

The other pillar of his estate is his Infantery, consisting of Ianizars. In
them two properties are to be noted; their birthplace and practice. As
concerning their birthplace, they are not chosen out of Asia, but Europe: for
they always accounted the Asians effeminate and cowardly, always more ready
to fly then willing to fight; but the Europians, hardy, courageous and good
men of war. The Asians they term after their own name, Turks, the
Europians Rumi, that is, Romans.

As concerning their practice, they are taught when they are young; and
therefore no marvel if as they grow in age, so they increase in strength,
actiuitie and courage; for these three virtues make a perfect soldier. The
tithing of springals is made every third year, unless occasion constrain a
quicker election, as it happened in the Persian war, wherein they were forced
not only to make more haste then ordinary in their elections, but also
compelled to take up Turkish Azamoglani, that is, young men; which was never
put in practice before. When these young lads are brought to Constantinople,
they are suruiewed by the captain of the Ianizars, who registreth their names,
their parents and country in tables. From thence some are sent into Natolia and
other provinces to learn their law and language, where being nouzeled in the
superstitions and customs of them with whom they converse, they turn
Mahumetans, before they be of discretion to discern good from evil. Another
sort is distributed in the offices of the Seraglio; the third sort of the
fairest complexions and comliest proportion are appointed to services in the
port of the grand Seignior. During the time that they are accounted Azamoglani,
they have no certain governor, nor trained up in prescript orders, but some
are set to keep gardens, some to manure the fields, others to learn manuell
occupations, and dispatch household business. At riper and abler years they
are called into the schools of the Azamoglani, (for so they are still termed
till they are enrolled in the scroule of Ianizars) and then delivered over to
prescribed schoolemasters, who train them up in exercises of labor and
travel, allowing them spare diet and thin clothing: they sleep in spacious
lodgings, not unlike the celles of religious persons, where likewise they have
their overseers, without whose license they dare not depart from their
appointed places. Here they learn to shoot in the bow and harquebuse, or to
handle any weapon they have most mind unto, and when they have well profited
in any profession, they are enrolled in the roll of the Ianizars, or Spachy.
For their maintenance the one sort are allowed no less then five aspers, nor
more then eight a day, the other, ten. Being enrolled for Ianizars, immediately
they enter into action, to garrisons, or to wait in the Port. The latter sort
have three most spacious houses like monasteries appointed them for their
abiding place, and there every one lives under the government of his superior
of the same order, the yoonger serving the elder in buying and dressing his
provision, and such like services with obedience, good will, and incredible
silence. Those of one order eat at one table, and sleep together as it were
in long cloisters. If any one upon occasion chance to be out of his lodging but
one night, the evening following he is well bastinaded, and that with so great
severity and patience, that after correction he holds it no disgrace to kiss
the hand of his governor. In their iournies and expeditions, they account it
religious service to spoil the cottages and houses of the Christians, who must
not find fault with any outrage: whatsoever they bargain for they must carry
it at their own prices. They are subject to no Judge, but their Age, and he
neither can give judgment of life and death upon any of them, but in cases of
sedition and mutinies, and that seldom, and very secretly. They enjoy many
immunities and pruileges, they are croched to, and feared of all men, some of
them are appointed to converse with ambassadors, others to accompany
travelers, especially those of honest reputation, for their security
throughout the Turkish dominions. The election of the emperor is in their
power; for unless they approve and proclaim the election, the instalment and
inuesture is of no force. Every emperor coming to the crown gives them some
donatiue, and augmenteth their pay. In any dangerous war, part of them go
forth with their Aga, or his lieutenant, but these are the last men that come
to blows. There is not amongst the Turkish honors, an office more subject to
envy and jealousy then this captainship; for he and the Begler-bey of Greece
may not choose their lieutenants, but the grand Seignior only: the general
favor of the Ianizars is his assured destruction. Their number commonly is
four and twenty thousand, but in our times they carry not their woonted
reputation, because both Turks and Asians are enrolled for Ianizars, whereas
in former ages none were admitted but the Europian Christians: besides,
contrary to their ancient custom, they marry wives, and that without
restraint or limitation. By their long residence about Constantinople (then
which there is not a more effeminate city in the whole world) they are grown
vile, base, and men of small service, yea lazy, insolent, and proud above
measure. It is a common saying, that in their prowess and discipline
consists the flourishing estate of their empire, but the argument were easy
to disprove that opinion. Besides his Ianizars he has the Azapi, a base
Besonio, fitter for the spade then the sword, entertained rather with numbers
to tire, then by prowess to defeat armies, opposing them to all dangerous
services, yea to fill trenches with their carcases, and to make bridges of
their slaughtered bodies for the Ianizars to pass over to the breaches.

As the Romans had their Legions and Auxiliaries; the one the flower of their
chivalry, the other as an aid or augmentation: even so the Turk accounts
his stipendarie horsemen and Timarots the sinews of his armies; the Alcanzi
(such as he presses out of towns and villages) scarcrowes, and for
ostentation: the Ianizars as the Pretorian legions, and the Azapi as a rabble
of pedants.

Now a word or two of his sea forces: There is no prince furnished with better
means for building of ships then this prince: for not only the woods of Epire
and Cilicia, but also of Nichomedia and Trapezond are so huge, so thick, and
full of tall trees, fit for all sorts of buildings, that a man would take the
trunkes falling by violence of storm from the banks of the woods of Nichomedia
into the Euxin sea, to be triremes already built and framed. They want no
workmen to fit and square their timber; for vile covetousness has drawn whole
flocks of Christian shipwrights into their Arsenals. The year after his
defeature at Lepanto, he showed his navy whole and entire, yea itching to cope
with the Christian Armada. Neither can he want a competent number of expert
mariners: for out of the galleys which he maitaineth in Lesbo, Rodes, Ciprus
and Alexandria, and from the havens of Tunis, Bugia and Algier, he is able to
draw a sufficient proportion of seamen and gally-slaues, as often as occasion
requires to furnish his royal army.

The experience hereof we have seen at Malta, at Lepanto, and Goletta. Of
warlike furniture his store is infinite; his Ordinance innumerable: out of
Hungary he carried five thousand: in Ciprus he won five hundred: at Goletta
few less. The siege of Malta, wherein they discharged 60. thousand pellets,
may well declare their abundance of powder and shot: at Fanagusta they
discharged 118. thousand: at Goletta in 39. days they raced with their
incessant vollies of shot, a fortification which was forty years in building
by our people: in the last Persian war Osman Bassa drew after him five
hundred field pieces. Where ever they come, they never cease playing with their
munition, till they have laid all level with the ground; if that prevail not,
they fall to mining; if that fail, they go to work with spade and pickaxe; if
that too, they will never give over till they have filled the ditches with the
bodies of their slaughtred soldiers. They have three things wherewith they
terrify the whole world: multitudes of men, unconquerable: military
discipline, uncorrupted: corn and provisions, store infinite. Multitudes in
times past have bred confusion, and commonly we have seen great armies
overthrown by small numbers, but the Turkish multitudes are managed with so
good order, that although it be far more easy to range a small army then a
great, yet even in order have their great armies excelled our small; so that I
must needs conclude, that they go far beyond us both in discipline and
numbers; herein giving place no not to the ancient Romans; much less to any
modern nation how warlike soever. And this their due commendation consists
not only in arms, but in thirst, patience, and hard diet: as for wine, by
their law they are utterly forbidden it. In the field every ten soldiers have
their corporal, to whom without any grudging they dutifully obey. You shall
never see woman in their armies; their silence is admirable, for with the beck
of the hand and sign of the countenance they understand without words what
they are to do: rather then they will make any noise in the night, they will
suffer their slaves and prisoners to escape. They punish theft and quarrelling
extremely. They dare not for their lives step out of their ranks to spoil
vineyard or orchard. They fear not death; believing their destinies to be
written in their foreheads inevitable. The valiant are assured of preferment;
the cowards of punishment. They are never billetted in towns, nor suffered to
lodge one night within them. To keep them in breath and exercise, their
princes are always in action with some neighbor or other, being very jealous
of the corruption of their discipline.

The Princes adjoining.
Toward the east from Tauris to Balsara lie the Persians; toward the south and
the Persian gulf the Portugals; toward the red sea Prester John; upon the west
the Xeriffe and the kingdom of Naples; on the north border the Polonians and
the Germans. Without all question the Turk excels the Persian in military
discipline: for Mahumet the second took Vssuncassan, Selim the first; and
after him his son Soliman defeated Ismael and Tamas. Amurath the third by his
Lieutenants took from them all Media, the greater Armenia, and their chief
city Tauris. Their batallions of footmen, and the use of great ordinance,
which the Persians want and know not how to manage, have been the chiefest
occasions of these good fortunes. And although they have sometime overthrown
them in horse-fights, yet always with the loss of ground, not to themselves
only, but to their confederates. Selim the first, took from the Mamelucks
Siria and Egypt. Amurath the third almost wholly extinguished the nation of the
Georgians their surest allies.

To the Portugals he is far inferior; for in sea fights and sea forces there
is as great inequality between them, as between the Ocean and the Persian
gulf. The Portugals have in India havens and castles, territories and
dominions plentiful in timber, provision, and all sorts of warlike furniture
for the sea, not without many great princes their allies and confederates;
whereas the Turk has no one place of strength in the Persian gulf, but
Balsara. The tract of the sea coast of Arabia, which may seem to stand him
instead, has but four towns, and those weak and of small esteem: which are
reasons sufficient to induce, that in this gulf, as likewise in the red sea,
he has small means to rig out any gallant Armada. Besides, the soil is
utterly barren of timber fit for the building of galleies: for which scarcity
whenever he had occasion to set forth a navy in those seas, he was
constrained to send down his stuff from the havens of Bithinia and Cilicia by
Nilus to Cair, and from thence to convey it upon camels backs to his Arsenal
at Suez. What success his fleetes have had in those parts you may read in the
discourse of Portugal: for the Portugals take great care to prevent him of
setting foot in those seas, yea as soon as they do but smell that he is
preparing any sea forces, they presently look out and spoil whatsoever they
light upon.

For captains, soldiers, arms and munition he is better provided then Prester
John: for this prince has a large territory without munition, and infinite
soldiers without weapons. Bernangasso his lieutenant lost all the sea coast of
the red sea, and brought the Abissine into such extremities, that to obtain
peace, he promised the payment of a yearly tribute.

In Afric he has a greater jurisdiction then the Xeriffe: for he is Lord of
all those provinces which he between the red sea and Velez de Gomera, but the
Xeriffe has the richer, the stronger and better united. Neither of them for
the neighborhood of the king of Spain dare molest one another. The residue of
his neighbors are the Christians, and first the king of Poland: what either of
these princes can effect the one against the other, has been manifested by
their forepassed actions. In some sort it seems that the Turk fears the
Polaques: for upon sundry occasions being provoked (as in the reign of Henry
the third) in the war which Iuonia Voyvod of Walachia made with the Turks,
wherein great numbers of Polaques served. And (in the reign of Sigismund the
third) notwithstanding the incursions of the Kosacks, and the inrodes of John
Zamoseus General of Polonia, he stirred not, neither with woontlike disdain
once offered to revenge these indignities. Again since the unfortunate journey
of Ladislaus, they never enterprised journey against the Turks, no nor at any
time aided the Walachians their neighbors, their friends and confederates, but
suffered whatsoever they held upon the Euxin sea to be taken from them. This
vile part I rather attribute to the base mind of the king, then to any want of
good will in the gentlemen or nobility. Sigismund the first being by Leo the
tenth moved to war upon the Turk, answered, Few words shall serve; make firm
peace between the Christian princes, then will I be nothing behind the most
forward. Sigis^und the second bore a mind so far abhorring from war, that he
not only never made attempt against the Turk, but being iniuried by the
Moscouite, let him do what he would unrevenged. King Stephen a great
politician, thought the war of Turkey full of danger, notwithstanding
discoursing with his familiars, he would often say, that if he had but thirty
thousand good foote^en joined with his Polonian horsemen, he could have found
in his heart to try his fortune with this enemy.

The princes of Austrich are borderers by a far larger circuit of land then any
other prince, and being constrained to spend the greatest part of their
revenues in the continual maintenance of twenty thousand footmen and
horsemen in garrisons: they seem rather to stand content to defend their own,
then any way minded to recover their losses or enlarge their bounds. Ferdinands
journey to Buda and Possouia was rather courageous then prosperous: the reason
was, not because his soldiers wanted strength and courage, but skill and
discipline. For numbers he was equal to the enemy, and reasonably well
furnished with necessaries, but his troops consisted of Germans and Bohemians,
nations by influence heavy, slow, and nothing fit to cope with the Turks
skillful and ready in all warlike affairs.

The Venetians likewise are borderers for many hundred miles space by sea and
land: but they maintain their estate by treaties of peace, by traffike and
presents rather then by open war, providing very strongly for their places
exposed to danger, and avoiding all charges and hazard of war, yea refusing
no conditions, if not dishonorable, rather then willing to try their fortune in
battle. The reason is not, because they want money and sufficiency of warlike
furniture, but soldiers and provision incident to so great a warfare.

His last neighbor is the king of Spain, between whom there is no great
difference: the kings revenues (I mean those of Europe only) exceed the
Turkish: for he receives more then four millions out of his provinces of
Italy and Sicil: two and upward out of Portugal, and three from the Indies one
year with another. In these only he aequalizeth the Turk, and in the
ordinary revenues of Castile, Arragon and Belgia, he far exceeds him. But
what can you find (say some men) to compare to his Timars? First I answer,
that the kings revenues are far greater then the Turks, next his subsidies
which he leuieth extraordinarily (of late times for the most part ordinarily)
as his Croisados, do amount to as much as the entire profits of some whole
kingdom. His tenths of the spiritual livings are able to maintain one hundred
strong galleys: his escheats in Spain and Naples bring more into his cofers
then a man would think for. His beneuolences and presents sent him from
Naples, Sicil, Sardinia, Millan, and the New-world are infinite and
magnificent. Not long since Castile granted a contribution of eight millions of
gold to be paid in four years, which sum amounts to the Turks whole
revenue of one year. What should I speak of his Commendams of the orders of
Montegia, Calatrauia, Alcantara, and S. James, which were enough if he had
naught else to suffice him: he is great master of the said orders, and thereby
has means to advance and enrich his servants, whomsoever he pleases, as
freely as if he were king of France or Poland. In Spain he keeps three
thousand horsemen, as many in Flanders, in Millan four hundred men at arms,
and 1000. light horse: in Naples 1500. men at arms, and a greater company of
light armed Italians. The number of his soldierie in Sicill is one thousand
five hundred. Neither are his feodaries lightly to be esteemed, who upon
necessity are bound by their tenures at their own charges to serve personally
in the field, especially if you consider their numbers, wherein are reckoned
23. Dukes, 32. Marquises, 49. Vicounts, 7. Archbishops (for they likewise in
this case are bound to contribute as the great Lords) 33. Bishops. And in
Naples 14. Princes, 25. Dukes, 37. Marquises, 54. Earls, 448. Barons, to
speak nothing of Portugal, Sicill, Sardinia, Millan. Lastly you must note,
that these troops to whom the Turk grants these Timars, are not so renowned
for their valor as for their numbers: for the Timars and profits of the
villages and possessions, together with the greedy desire of enriching
themselves with the demains of their farms, has bred such love of ease and
peace in their minds, that they are grown cowards and base minded; by their
good wills hating the trauails of war and innouations. They are drawn from
their houses with an ill will, and they march with a greater desire of
returning home, and inioying the pleasures of their gardens, and the plenty of
their granges, then stomachs to cope with their adversaries, or enriching
themselves with their enemies spoils. For if by a little pillage fierce and
valiant soldiers have become cowards and men of small service, what will fair
possessions, a pleasant seat, a rich dairy, and wife and children left behind,
bring to pass? I may well say, and say truly, that these Timarots are fitter
to bridle and keep under the subdued provinces, then to fight in field against
armed nations: and to this use it is good policy to maintain them. For who
knows not that the Turkish subjects do hate his government, his religion and
tyranny? For religion only, the Moors and Arabians, who differ in opinion,
and for religion and tyranny, the Christians who make more then two third parts
of his subjects. For jealousy here of he is enforced to keep the greater
part of those troops at home, unless he should lay naked his estates to
infinite casualties. To speak in a word, his caualarie is so far and wide
dispersed throughout the provinces, that they can not easily be drawn unto any
famous journey in great numbers, without loss of long time, neither are they
able to stay long from their houses, but they will fall into diseases and
extremities; so that if the grand Seignior had no other aides but these
Timarots, he might happen to make many unfortunate iourneies.

The experience of forepassed exploits, do well show the difference of these
two provinces forces. The loss of the Spanish fleet at Zerby, may be put in
the balance against the Turkish flight from Malta. The loss of Goletta
against the taking of the rock of Velez. Tunis is always to be taken at his
pleasure that has a liking thereto. The Spanish king never enterprised any
sole journey against the Turk, but he has valiantly defended his own at
Malta and Oranum. I will speak nothing of the defeature at Lepanto, for other
princes had their shares therein. There was a treaty of truce motioned
between both princes, not many years since, and equally accepted of both
parties. For the one was invested in the war of Persia, the other in the
commotions of the Low countries. These wars by reason of their remote
distances were extreme chargeable to both princes, but woorser to the king then
the Turk: for though Persia be far from Constantinople (from whence the
principal sinews of the war were to be drawn) yet it bordereth upon
Mesopotamia, and other subdued provinces, from whence his armies are supplied
with provisions and treasure: but Belgia is far distant from any part of the
Spanish dominions. The Turk had to do but with the Persian (a state without
any mighty confederate worth speaking of) but the king was engaged in a war
of greater difficulty, favored by the English, the French and the Germains,
nations equal in all points to the Persians.

The Roman Empire.
THe Roman Empire in his greatest glory, even in the time of Traian,
stretched from the Irish Ocean, beyond Tigris: from the Atlantike Ocean, to the
Persian gulf, and from Catnes at the Calidonian wood to the river Albis and
beyond the Danubie. It began first to decline by the civil wars of Galba,
Otho and Vitellius. For in those times the legions of Britannie were
transported into the continent: Holland and the bordering countries revoked,
and immediately after the Sarracens finding the frontires of the Empire without
garrisons, passed over Danubius. The Alani won the streights of the Caspian
hills; the Persians endeavored to get them a name and reputation; the Goths
wandered throughout Moesia and Macedonia; the Frenchmen entered Gallia. But
Constantine the Emperor restored it to the former glory, made an end of civil
war, and tamed the barbarous and cruel nations: and had he not committed two
faults, the Roman Empire might long have flourished. The first was, the
translating of the Imperial seat, from Rome to Constantinople, which action
weakened the West, and overthrew the Empire. For it is more clear then day,
that as plants removed out of their natural soil and transported into
regions contrary in temperature and air, retain small vigor of their
natural virtue: So humane actions, but especially cities and kingdoms, loose
their glory and splendor by these great alterations. And for this cause the
Roman Senate would never consent, that the people should leave Rome and dwell
at Veij, a city far more pleasant and commodious then Rome, especially after
the sacking thereof by the Frenchmen.

The seat of Constantinople is so pleasant, so commodious, and so fertile,
that it is hard to judge whether humane wisdom or nature showed most
industry in the situation thereof. There is no city upon the face of the
earth better served by land and sea: on one side lie the most beautiful
meadows; on the other side the pleasant valleys: here rise the fruitful
hillocks; there flows and refloweth the plentiful sea, yielding all sorts of
needful and delicate provision to the inhabitants thereof. He that did see it
would say, that here strove Bacchus with Ceres, Pomana with Flora, magnificence
with plenty, who should be most bountiful to this city. After the sea has
made many gallant bays and safe roades, whereof Bospherus only in the space
of five and twenty miles yields thirty, it runs by the city and
country, with so quiet and gentle a stream, that the great ships bringing
corn from Siria and Egypt, and the riches of Trapezond from Capha do seldom
miscarrie. Here is evermore harvest, which now and then fails in Thrace and
Asia. Here sholes of fish frisking and playing hard under the walls of the
city, swim in such wonderful abundance, that he which has not seen it,
will hardly believe it: but he may easily be persuaded hereof, that considers
how in the winter time the fish flying the cold places, ascend by Pontus
Euxinus, even in the view of Constantinople, toward Propontus: then shunning
the heat of summer, return again by the same way, which they went before. At
these two seasons of the year, the inhabitants as well for their profit as
delight, store themselves with great quantities thereof. At this day on the
Northeast part of the city on the other side of the water is the town of
Pera; on the North part is the Arsenall, where the galleys are built and do
remain; and on the South side is all the ordinance, artillery and houses of
munition. To speak in a word, there is no place fitter seated for plenty of
all things for weakening men's valors, for corrupting virtue with vice, then this
great and most stately city of Constantinople: proved by the sloth and
delicacie of the greatest number of the Greek Emperors and their armies. For
if the pleasures of Tarent, and the soil of the Siberites were enchantments
sufficient to make men effeminate, and quite alter the nature of the
inhabitants: if the delights of Capua could soften and quench the fierce
courages of Hannibal and his soldiers: if Plato deemed the Cyrenians incapable
of discipline, by reason of their long prosperity, what may we think of
Constantinople, for situation proud, for buildings sumptuous, especially of
their temples, and for beautiful and commodious havens pleasant and
delightsome above any other city through the whole world? To conclude, when
nothing can be more dangerous to a state then innouations, what could be more
hurtful (I may say desperate) to the Roman Empire then that great, so daine,
and unlooked for mutation? That good well meaning Emperor, in this did neither
more nor less, then as a man endeavoring to add a greater grace to his body,
should place his face on his knees, and his heart on his heels.

The second fault of Constantine was the division of the Empire to his
children, ann. Dom. 341. By this division of one Empre he made three, and
withal a memorable diminution of his authority and force. For when his sons
fell to civil dissension, they consumed one another so cruelly, that the
Empire resembled a bloodlesse yea liuelesse body. And though sometime under
some one prince it stood on foot again, yet it remained always subject to
division, and departed into two Empires, the east and the west, till the
coming of Odoacer king of the Herules and Turingi, into Italy with a mighty
host: by which invasion Augustulus was brought to such a narrow pinch, that for
despair he cast himself into the protection of the east Empire. This happened
in the year of our Lord, 476. And about this time the Huns passed Danubius:
Alaricus king of the Goths took Rome: the Vandals first spoiled Andoluzia,
afterward Afric: the Alans won Portugal: the Goths conquered the greater
part of Spain: the Saxons, Britain: the Burgundians, Province. Justinian
restored it somewhat to a better stay, driving the Vandals out of Afric, and
the Goths out of Italy by his captains, anno 556. But this fair weather
lasted not long. For in the year 713. the arms and heresies of the Mahumetans
began to vex the east Empire, and shortly after (...) the Sarracens wasted
Syria, Egypt, the Archipelago, Afric, Sicill, and Spain. In the year 735.
they vanquished Narbon, Auignion, Tolouse, Burde^^, and the bordering regions.
Thus by little and little went the western Empire to ruin. As for the
eastern, it stood so weak and tottering, that with all the force it had, it
was scarce able to defend Constantinople against the arms of the Sarracens,
much less to minister aid to the western provinces. But in the year of our
Lord 800. Charles the great, king of France, obtained the title of the western
Empire, which Ado bishop of Vienna remembers in these words; Upon the holy
feast day of the natiuitle of our Lord, as soon as the mighty king Charles had
made an end of his prayers, Leo the Pope set the Imperial crown upon his
head, whereat all the people with one voice cried: C^^ol^ Augusto, (...) Deo
coronat^, magno, pacifico. Imperatori Romanorum, vita ^ victoria.

The western Empire was divided from the eastern in this sort: that Naples
and Sipont eastward with Sicill should belong to the Greek Empire: Bonon^a
should remain to the Lombards; the Venetians were neuters; the popedom free:
the rest Charles should possess. Bloudus says, that the Empress Iren gave
the first counsel to this division, which afterward was confirmed by
Nicephorus. Thus the beginning of the imperial division began at the
translation of the seat from Rome to Constantinople, increased by renting it
into many principalities, and took perfection at the coronation of Charles.
For before him there was one form of government, laws, magistracies and
ordinances tending to the good and honor of both Empires, ^^to members of one
body; and if one Emperor died without issue, the whole Empire remained to the
suruiuor. But when Charles the great was chosen Emperor of the west, there was
no more regard taken of the east Empire, neither the Emperor of the east had to
do with the west, nor the west with the east. The Empire of the west continued
in this line above 100. years, and failed in Arnolpho the last of that house.
In the year 1453. Mahumet prince of the Turks took Constantinople, and
utterly extinguished the succession of the eastern Empire.

In the year of Christ 1002. all claim of inheritance rejected, the creation
of the Emperor was granted to the free election of seven princes, termed
Electors. The reason why the Empire became elective, which had so long
continued hereditarie in the house of Charles, was, because Otho the third left
no issue male. After whom the western Empire was maruellously curtald and
diminished: for nothing was left but Germany and a part of Italy. The Pope
held Romagnia; the Venetians lived free, possessing great dominions joined to
their state: the Normans taking Naples and Sicil from the Greeks, held them in
fee of the Church, first under Clement the Antipope, then under Nicholas the
second and his successors, who for their private gain ratified the former
grant of the Antipope.

In Tuscane and Lombardy partly by the quarrels between Henry the fourth,
Henry the fifth, Frederike the first, and Frederike the second with the Roman
bishops: partly by reason of the valor of the inhabitants, the Emperor reaped
more labor then honor, more loss then profit. And therefore Rodulphus
terrified with the misfortunes and crosses of his predecessors, had no great
mind to travel into Italy, but sold them their liberty for a small matter.
They of Luques paid ten thousand crowns, the Florentines but six thousand.
And so every state by little and little forsaking the Emperor, no part of Italy
remained but the bare title. The Dukes of Millan, and so every other state,
usurped what they could catch, without leave asking, only they desired their
inuestiture of the Empire. But Frances after the conquest of Millan, did little
regard this inuestiture, saying, that he was able to keep it by the same
means that he had got it. The princes beyond the mounts also withdrew their
obedience; so that now the Empire is enclosed in Germany: and why the
Provinces of Germany are not all under one government, I will now describe.

Some provinces are as it were members of the Empire, yet separated; for they
neither do, nor will acknowledge that they belong to the Empire; as the kings
of Denmark and Sweathland, the Duke of Prussia, the Swissers, the
Neatherlands. Others confess the Emperor for their sovereign Prince; but they
come not to the diets of the Empire, nor will bear the tax and tallages of the
Empire; as the Dukes of Sauoy, Loraine, and the Princes of Italy. Other come
to the diets, and pay all impositions; those are the Princes and cities of
Germany. But the king of Bohemia by the grant of Charles the fourth is
exempted from all contributions. Other places do not only pay contribution,
but likewise a peculiar tribute to the Emperor: those are the cities, termed
Imperial. Some of the Princes of Germany have to do both in the diets, and
at the election of a new Emperor: those are the six Electors; three
churchmen, and three laymen, to whom upon equality of voices the king of
Bohemia is joined: and though he come not to the diets, yet has his voice in
the elections. To speak in a word, those are properly termed the cities and
princes of the Empire, who have to do in the diets, and as members of one
body, participate of good and evil, advantage and disadvantage throughout the
empire. These living after the manner of a commonwealth united together, have
the Emperor for their head for their common safety, who rules not absolutely,
but by the diets, and cannot call them without the consent of the greatest
number of the Electors. The Ordinances of these diets cannot be frustrated, but
by another diet: but of putting the decrees in execution, the Emperor has full
and sole authority. And therefore as touching pre-eminence and dignity, he is
chief of the Christian Princes, as he upon whom the majesty of the Roman
Empire rests, and ought to defend the Church of God, the catholic faith, and
procure the peace and welfare of the whole Christian common wealth.

Now seeing it is manifest that the glory of the western Empire consists in
Germany, it is good reason to say somewhat of this most ample and flourishing
province. It lies between Odera and Mosa; between Vistula and Aa; and
between the German and Balticke Ocean and the Alps. The form thereof is
four square, equal in length and breadth, stretching 650. miles every way. It
abounds with corn, cattle and fish, which experience shows. For Charles
the fifth had under his ensigns at Vienna 90. thousand footmen, and 35.
thousand horse; Maximilian the second at Iauerin almost 100. thousand footmen,
and 35. thousand horse, and yet no man complained of deerenes or scarcity. In
the war between Charles the fifth and the Protestants, for certain months
150. thousand men sustained themselves abundantly in the field. It is rich in
mines of gold, silver, and all sorts of metal, and therein surpasses the
residue of the provinces of Europe. Nature also has bestowed upon the vpland
countries many springs and pits of salt water, of which hard salt is boiled.
Neither is it less stored with merchandise; for the inhabitants more then any
other nation do excel in curious workmanship and admirable inventions: and it
is so watered with nauigable rivers, that all sorts of merchandise and wares
are with ease conuaied from one place to another. The greatest of them is
Danow, next the Rhene, which runs clean thorough the country from the
South to the North, as the Danow from West to East. Albis rises in Bohemia,
passes by Misnia, Saxony, Marchia, the ancient Marquisat. Odera springs in
Morauia, waters Silesia, the two Marquisates, and Pomeran. Then follow
Wesara, Neccarus, Mosa, Mosella, Isara, Oenus, Varta, Moenus. This divides
Germany into two parts, the high and the low. The high stretches from the
Mase to the Alps: the low from the Mase to the Ocean. It is divided into many
provinces, the chiefest whereof (I mean the true members of the Empire) are
Alsatia, Sweuia, Bauaria, Austria, Bohemia, Morauia, Silesia, Lusatia, the two
Marquisates, Saxonic, Misnia, Thuringia, Franconia, Hassia, Westphalia,
Cleueland, Magunce, Pomeran. In these Provinces besides Belgia and Heluetia are
esteemed to be ten millions of men. The people is divided into four sorts:
husbandmen, and they bear no office, citizens, noblemen, and prelates. The
last three sorts make the assemblies and states of the Empire. Of Prelates, the
Archbishops Electors have the chiefest place. The Archbishop of Ments is
Chancellor of the Empire; the Bishop of Coloin is Chancellor of Italy, and the
Bishop of Treuers is Chancellor of France. The Archbishop of Saltzburg is of
greatest jurisdiction and revenue. The Bishop of Maidburg writes himself
primate of Germany. Breme and Hamburg had great jurisdictions: next follow
above 40^ other Bishops, the great master of the Dutch order, and the Prior of
the knights of Jerusalem: then 7. Abbots, and they likewise are states of the
Empire. Of secular Princes the king of Bohemia is chief, who is chief taster:
the Duke of Saxonic, Marshall: the Marquis of Brandeburg, high Chamberlain: the
Earl Palatine, Sewer. Besides these princes there are thirty other Dukes,
amongst whom the Archduke of Austria holds the highest place, and of these
Dukes the king of Denmark by reason of his dukedom of Holsatia, is reckoned
to be one. Then the Marquises, Lantgraucs, Earls and Barons innumerable.

The free cities (which in times past have been 96. and are now but 60.
governing themselves by their peculiar laws) are bound no further then to pay
two five parts of whatsoever contribution is granted in the assemblies. The
cities Imperial, because (as we said before) they pay tribute to the Emperor,
pay 15. thousand Florens. The cities have sufficient revenue of their own, for
the most part amounting above the value of the contributions. It is thought
that the Empire receives every way above 7. millions, which is a great matter:
yet besides this ordinary, the people not ouerpressed as in Italy, do pay
other great subsidies to their princes in times of danger. The Empire is bound
(at leastwise accustomed) to furnish the Emperor when he goes to Rome to be
crowned, 20. thousand footmen, and four thousand horse, and to maintain them
for eight months, and therefore it is called Romanum subsidium. The revenues
of the cities and lay princes have been greatly augmented since the
suppressing of popery, and bringing in of new impositions, which taking their
beginning from Italy, (for evil examples spread far) quickly passed over to
France and Germany. In times of necessity great taxes are laid upon the whole
Empire, and levied extraordinarily, and that they may be gathered with the
greater case, Germany is parted into ten divisions, which have their
particular assemblies for the execution of the edicts made in the general
diets of the Empire.

As concerning the multitude of people, it is thought that the Empire is able
to raise two hundred thousand horse and foot, which the wars before spoken
of may prove to be true, as likewise the wars of France and Belgia: for since
the year of our Lord 1566. the war has been continued in those two
provinces for the most part with Germane soldiers; and yet to this day great
and continual inrolements are taken as well of horsemen and footmen through
the whole Empire. At one time Wolfang Duke of Bipontled into France an army of
twelve thousand footmen and eight thousand horsemen in the behalf of the
Protestants, and at the same time the Count Mansfield was leader of five
thousand horsemen of the same nation in behalf of the Catholics. William of
Nassow had in his army eight thousand Germane horsemen, and ten thousand
footmen: the Duke of Alua had at the same instant three thousand. What should
I speak of the numbers that entered Flanders with Duke Casimere? Or those that
entered France under the same leader in the year of our Lord, 1578? Or to what
end should I make mention of that army, where of part served Henry the
fourth, part the league, but to prove that this nation must be very populous,
seeing that wars are continually open in some one or other part of
Christendom, and no action undertaken therein, wherein great numbers of
Germans are not waged and entertained. To speak nothing of the Netherlands,
who in times past have resisted the whole powers of France with an army of
four score thousand men, or of the Swissers who in their own defense are
thought able to raise an army of 100. and twenty thousand men: I will only
put you in mind of that expedition which they made out of their own
territories into Lumbardy, in defense of that state against Francis the French
king, with an army of fifty thousand footmen. The best footmen of Germany
are those of Tiroll, Sweuia, and Westphalia: the best horsemen those of
Brunswick, Cleueland, and Franconia. Of weapons they handle the sword and the
pike, better then the gunne. In the field they are very strong, as well to
charge as to bear the shot; for order is of great effect, which is as it were
natural to them, with a stately pace and firm standing. They are not
accounted for the defense of fortresses, and for their corpulent bodies I hold
them not fit for the assault of a breach. And therefore they are to be
accounted rather resolute and constant, then fierce or couragions; for they
will never come to the service, wherein courage and magnanimity is to be
showed. After the victory they kill all whom they meet, without difference of
age, sex or calling: if the war be drawn out at length, or if they be
besieged, they faint with cowardnes. In camp they can endure no delays,
neither know they how to overcome by protracting. If their first attempts fall
not out to their minds, they are at their wits end and lose courage; if they
once begin to run, they will never turn again. But in delaying and
temporising, the Spanish pass all other nations. He that retains them must be
at extraordinary charges and great trouble, by reason of their wives consuming
so much provision, that it is a hard thing to provide it, almost impossible to
preserve, and without this provision they stand in no steed. Their horses are
rather strong then courageous: and because of ten which go to the war, eight
are pressed from the plough, they are of small service, and when they see their
blood their heart quaileth: But the Spanish genits in this case wax more
fierce. In sea forces they are not much inferior to their land forces,
although they use not the sea fights; yet the cities of Hamburg, Lubecke,
Rostoch and some others are able to make a hundred ships; some one hundred and
fifty, equal to the forces of the king of Denmark and Sweathland. When these
strong and ^nu^cible forces are united together, they fear no enemy; and in
imminent peril they are sure of the aid of the Princes of Italy, Sauoy, and
Lorraine: for these Princes never forsook the Empire in necessity. To the
Zigethan-warre Emanuel Duke of Sauoy sent six hundred Argoliteers. Cosmo Duke
of Florence three thousand footmen paid by the State. Alphonsus the second
Duke of Ferara was there is person with 1500. horsemen: better horsemen were
not in the whole camp. William Duke of Mantua was there also with a gallant
troop offootmen: and Henry of Lorraine Duke of Guise had there three hundred
gentlemen, with the aid of these Princes. Pitu the fifth, Maximilian the
second, had in the field one hundred thousand footmen, and five and thirty
thousand horse. The Emperor forty thousand footmen, and eight thousand
horsemen for eight months; and twenty thousand footmen and four thousand
horsemen for three years next following.

The Bishop of Rome.
THE state of the Pope consists in two things: the one is his temporal
dominion, the other his spiritual authority, His temporal dominion is either
immediate and of himself, without relation to another; or else mediate, and by
substitution, as representing another person. As touching his temporal
dominion immediate, he is Lord of a great part of Italy, of all that lies
between the river Flore and Caietta: between Preneste and the Truentian
Streights (except the Duchy of Vrbin.) In that compass are contained the
provinces of Bonnonia and Romandiolia, Marchia, Vmbria, the Duchy of Spolet,
Saint Peter's patrimony, and Tuscan. For situation it is seated in the very
heart of Italy, stretching from the Adriatique to the Tirrhene sea. And in
regard of this situation it is comparable to any state of Italy, as also in
abundance of provision, especially of corn, wine and oil: for Romandiola
imparteth great store thereof to their neighbors, the Venetians and
Slauonians. In some years Marchia has supplied the wants of the Venetians,
with many thousand measures of corn, and great quantity of oil. And although
Spoletum is not so plentiful of grain, as to spare for their neighbors, yet
is it able to maintain it self without buying of others, and in steed thereof
it is abundantly stored with wines, cattle, and some saffron. Tuscan has
often relieved Genes, and at some seasons Naples. This territory brings
forth fierce and warlike soldiers: and herein it is reported to excel all the
residue of the Italian Provinces. Bonnonia, Romania and Marchia, are able to
levy twenty thousand footmen, and the other provinces as many. In the time of
Pope Clement, Marchia alone aided him with one thousand soldiers. The chief
seat is Rome, once the Lady of the world, and at this day inhabited with one
hundred thousand people. The defensible places are the castle and borough of
Rome, Ouietta, Terracine, etc.

It is a great credit and commendation to this state, to have many noble men
therein so excellent in negotiation of peace and war, that the residue of the
states and princes do most commonly choose their leaders and lieutenants out
of these provinces. If the prince thereof were secular; for people and power it
might well be compared with any state of Italy. Besides these dominions, the
Pope has the territory of Auignion in France, wherein are four cities and
fowerscore walled towns. In Naples he has Beneuent.

As touching his temporal sovereignty, (...) mediate Lord of the kingdoms of
Naples and Sicill, and of the Duchies of Vrbin, Ferrata, Parma, Placentia, and
many others.

Where his authority is maintained, he has supreme government of all
religious orders, and bestows the ecclesiastical benefices at his dispose.
Having thus many strings to his bow, he has so many means to raise money,
that Xistus the fourth was wont to say, that the Popes should never want
money, as long as their hands were able to hold a pen. Paul the third in the
league between him, the Emperor and the Venetians, against the Turk, bore the
sixth part of the charges of the war. Against the Protestants, and in aid of
Charles the fifth he sent twelve thousand footmen and five hundred horsemen,
bearing their charges during the war: this was he that advanced his house to
that honor, wherein it continues to this day. Pius the fifth aided Charles the
ninth king of France with four thousand footmen, and one thousand horse.
Xistus the fifth in five years and an half of his Pontificie, raked together
five millions of crowns, and spent bountifully notwithstanding in bringing
conduits and waterpipes into the city, and in building pyramides, palaces and
churches.

The Dukedom of Austrich.
BEcause the western Empire has long continued in the most noble family of
the house of Austrich, and seven Emperors have successively succeeded one
another of that line; for the delight of the reader we will speak somewhat
thereof. This house grew famous almost about the same time that the Ottoman
Prince began his Empire, and (as it may seem) raised up of God to stand as a
wall or bulwark against the Turks and infidels. Philip the first, king of
Spain, Archduke of Austrich, etc. had two sons, Charles the fifth, afterward
Emperor, and Ferdinand the first, king of Romans. To Charles as to the eldest
fell Belgia and Spain, with the dependancies; Ferdinand succeeded him in his
Lordships of Germany, as Austrich, Boheme, Tirol and other provinces,
whereunto by the marriage of his wife Anne, Hungary was adjoined. This
Ferdinand left three sons behind him, who although they divided their
inheritance into three parts, yet their successors even to this day, did and
do govern them as one intier government; their counsels are one; their minds
one, their deseign^^^nts one, most lively representing the ancient Gerion,
where for the common safety, if any part be afflicted every member runs to
the succor of the other, as if it were to their proper tranquillity. Their
dominion stretches so large, and is of such force, that if by reason of the
great tract of land lying between the Carpathy mountains and Segonia, they
did not border upon the great Turk (who always constrains them to look to
their safety, and to be at excessive charges) no province throughout the
Christian world could go beyond them, for numbers of people, for wealth and
treasure, or for magnificent cities. Any man may perceive this to be true, that
considers the distance from Tergiste, to the borders of Lusatia: from Tissa,
to Nabus: from Canisia, to Constantia upon the lake Podame. In this progress
is contained Lusatia, Silesia, Bohemia, Morauia, Austria, and a great part of
Hungary, territories large and ample, abounding with people, corn and riches.
Then follow Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola, the Counties of Carinthia, Tirol,
Cilia, the Princedomes of Sweuia, Alsatia, Brisgouia, and Constantia. Amongst
these provinces Bohemia is the largest, stretching in length 140. miles, and
reported to contain 780. castles and walled towns, and 32. thousand
villages. Morauia, Silesia, Lusatia, are as large as Bohemia, but in strength
and numbers of people far inferior. These three provinces are four hundred
miles long, and 120. broad: they abound with excellent good horsemen and
footmen. The inhabitants of Lusatia (where twenty thousand men fit for the
war may be gathered) are accounted as good footmen, as any other: Stiria
rich in mines of silver and iron is 60. miles broad, and 110. long: Carinthia,
a hilly and wooddie country, is 75. miles long, and 55. broad: Carniola with
the bordering countries up to Tergiste is 150. miles long, and 45. broad. They
are plentiful of corn, wine, flesh and wood. The county of Tirol is full of
mines of silver and salt pits, and is eighteen German miles long and broad.
The territories of Sweuia, Alsatia, and Rhetia do pay little less then two
myriades and an half of ordinary revenue, and so much extraordinary: besides
the 18. cantons of Rethia, are under the same jurisdiction. They are so well
peopled, that upon occasion, they are able to levy 100. thousand footmen, and
30. thousand horse. I know no other province in Europe able to say the like.
And therefore the Emperor is not so weak a Prince, as those who are ignorant
of the state of kingdoms do suppose him, reporting his territories to be
small, unprovided of necessaries, poor in money, and barren of people. But
this is certain, that as he is a Lord of a large dominion, fertile, rich, and
infinite people; so let every man think that by the neighborhod of the Turk
bordering upon him, from the Carpathie mountains to the Adriatique sea, the
forces of a mightier prince may seem small and ouerlayed. For what prince
bordering upon so puissant an enemy, but either by building of fortresses, or
by intertaining of garrisons, is not almost beggered, I will not say, in time
of war, but even during the securest peace? Considering that the forces of
the Turk are always ready, strong and cheerful, yea better furnished in
the time of peace, then any other nation in the hottest fury of war.
Wherefore it stands him upon, that is a borderer upon so powerful an enemy,
either for fear or jealousy to be ever watchful, and to spare no charges as
does the Emperor; retaining in wages continually twenty thousand soldiers,
keeping watch and ward upon the borders of Hungary. These ask great
expenses, and yet less then these, are not to be defraied for the
strengthening of other places; besides other expenses not meet here to be
spoken of. Wherefore, seeing the Turk like an insatiable dragon, has
overwhelmed so many noble provinces, and so many flourishing kingdoms, yea
has brought under his yoke those cities which were thought impregnable; and
those bulwarks which the world deemed could never be forced, let us not shut
both our ears, and say, lie is far from us, when he stands at our doors,
yea close by our sides.

Denmark.
ALthough it may seem needless to make any mention of Sweuela^d, because it
is as it were situated in another world; and with whom there is no great
intercourse of trading, yet for the spacious largenes thereof, it may well
deserve a place amongst other kingdoms spoken of in these relations. It is
situate in that part of Europe which some term Scandia, others Scandania, or
Balthia; from whence issued the Goths and Vandales, the very treaders down
of the Roman Empire. It is subject both to the Danish and Sweuian crown. The
king of Denmark besides the Cimbrian Chersonese (where Helsatia, Theutomarsia,
the Dukedom of Slesia, Flensburge, Friesland, and Iuthland, regions fruitful,
replenished with store of cattle and wild beasts, do lie) retains other
spacious Islands, the best whereof stand in the entrance of the Balticke sea,
being 15. in number, all comprehended under the name Denmark. The chiefest of
them is Sclandunia, containing 60. miles in length, and little less in breadth.
It excels the rest in worth, both for the number of villages, the mildenes
of the air, and because it has been and is the seat of their kings. He has
also Gothland in his jurisdiction, which is placed right over against Gothia.
One of his kinsemen has the government of Osilia, a pretty Island in the
greater gulf of Liuonia; and rules those fat and plentious countries which
lie in the continent of Liuonia. Scania likewise acknowledged his sovereignty;
and he holds the kingdom of Norway; which from the confines of Scania
extends and stretches northward 1300. miles to the castle of Wardhouse, upon
whom border the Lappians. The Isles adioining thereto, Sania, Setland, and Faria
(lying in the maine sea) are in his tenure. In times past the people of Norwey
have been of great puissance: they afflicted England, scourged France, and
therein obtained a province called to this day Normandy. In Italy they
conquered the kingdom of Sicill and Appulia. And in the holy war, Boemand
leader of the Normans, won the principality of Antioch. In the north Ocean
(besides that of Friesland, and the sea coast of Island, and Gromland) he
holds the dominions of the foresaid Islands of Shetland and Faria. The
Orchades acknowledge the kings of Norwey for their lords, although they are
subject to the Scottish crown. Sithe^ce the kingdom of Norwey became
elective, and turmoiled with civil wars and intestine discords, it came to the
possession of the Danish kings, who, that he may hold it surely, entreats the
inhabitants cruelly, spoiling them of their substance, and to leave no hope of
better fortune to this miserable people, he holds fortified all the creekes
and havens of the sea coast.

The wealth of the kingdom consists in the abundance of cattle and sea fish,
whereof there is such store, that of the herring fishing only, a mighty mass
of money is yearly gathered; so huge is the number of all sort of fish, that
at sometimes of the year a ship can make but slow way in this sea; and the
marshes and meadows adioining thereunto are very pleasant and sauorie to the
feeding cattle. Scania is rich in corn, and pasture, and well replenished with
people: Norwey has no riches of any moment, except timber fit for the erecting
of houses, and framing of ships (from thence transported into Holland and
Flanders) and cattle, and great store of cheese and milk. Some profit also
arises of a kind of fish dried in the wind, which the Dutchmen call
Stockfish. It is taken in January, and laid in the wind and cold, until it
be indurate and hardened like wood, and then carried into diverse regions as a
kind of sustenance. The greatest matter of gain to the king of Denmark is
that narrow sea or straight between Cronburg and Eltzenburg, commonly called
the Sound, which is a passage so narrow, that no shipping can pass that way,
without the license and favor of the watchmen, keeping garrison there to
receive the impostes, and customs of the arriving vessels: it is easily
gathered to what some of money that impost amounts, by the infinite number of
shipping of Holland, Zealand, France, England, Scotland, Norwey, and the
Baltike sea, that sail in those seas, and of necessity must pass the jaws
of that narrow straight. The inhabitants are as needy of Rhenish, French,
Spanish wines, the spices of Portugal, or the fruits of Andoluzia, as they
again are greedy of the wax, honey, skins, and corn, which are brought
thither from Prussia, Liuonia, Moscouia, and the bordering nations. Touching
his powerablenes in land service, it was never seen that he enterprised any
journey of reputation, but that against the Theutomarsi, upon whom king
Valdemar laid the yoke of subjection: but falling again into rebellion, after
many chances of war, beginning in the year 1500. they were utterly
vanquished by Frederick the second, in the year of our Lord 1558. Before that
time they discomfited John the son of king Christian the first.

What this king of Denmark is able to perform at sea, may be gathered by the
names, which upon occasions he has rigged to sea at the entreaty of Henry
the second king of France. Christian the second sent a navy of 100. ships into
Scotland against the English, and in them ten thousand land soldiers. But for
as much as it is apparent that he is lord of so ample a sea coast, and
possesses so many havens in Denmark, Sca^^a, Norwey, and so many Islands
without the Baltike sea, it is most likely that he is able to assemble a
mighty fleet of ships if money were not wanting: which as I take it, cannot
but often fail him, considering that in his whole kingdom there is growing no
merchandise of value (excepting seafish) neither is there any famous Mart
town, which is able to draw, or long to maintain traffike with other nations.
The greatest matter is his customs of the sea towns, the profit of certain
mines in Scania, the horses and cattle of the Danish Chersonesse, the timber
and fish of Norwey, and the Islands. It has been observed, that fifty
thousand oxen has been driven out of these provinces into Germany; for
which, tole has been paid at Gutthorpe. He reapeth some profit likewise of
Wardhouse, whither the English of late years have sailed between Norwey and
Groenlant; some to Colmogro, others to Stockholme, not far from S. Nicholas,
where they traffike with the Russies for wax, honey, and flax: thither resort
likewise Hollanders, Scots, and Frenchmen. Almost in the middle of this baie is
an Island and town called Wardhuis, which Frederick the second caused to be
strongly fortified, and here the merchants pay their custom.

Sweueland.
THE king of Sweueland reigns in Scandia, which is larger then Denmark, for
it is accounted a journey of five and forty days from the borders of Scandia
to Lapland, and the coast of the Balticke sea is little less then 400. miles
long, and his tract of land is esteemed larger then France, and Italy. In
Liuonia this king possesses Riualia, the Narue, Danouia, and other pieces of
good esteem, the Island Vlander, Alandes, and many other places (not worthy
speaking of) situated in the Sweuian and Finland sea. These regions besides
Liuonia are divided into three kingdoms, Gotland, Sweueland, and Vandalia,
which again are subdivided into eleven provinces, and twelve Counties; among
the which the Lappians are not accounted, because this people (though
inhabiting a larger country then Sweueland) cannot be termed to live under any
certain dominion, because of their misery, poverty, and wandering from place
to place through woods and mountains; but they, who have any manner of
certain abode, or settled habitation, are under the Sweuish dominion, and pay
rich skins for their tribute.

Of the three kingdoms whereof we spoke, Gotland bordereth upon Scandia, and
is divided into east and west, both bounded with the lake Weret: in the midst
whereof the king (delighting in the pleasantnes of the place) keeps his
court. Twenty four rivers do run into this lake, yet it emptieth it self but
by one mouth. The inahbitants for the excessive noise of the waters, call it in
their tongue, the Devils Head. The word Gothia signifies a heavenly country,
which does well agree thereto for the abundance of sustenance: no region being
comparable unto it in fertility of flesh, fish, and corn.

Next follows Sweueland, larger then Norwey and Gotland both together. In
Sweueland is Vpsalia their chief city, and Stockholme (the kings seat.)
Stringa, Enuecopia, Orogundia, Arboia, Arosia.

Then comes Finland situate between the Balticke and Finland bay, where stand
Abo the chief city, Raugina and Augo both famous mart towns: Vames, Viburge,
and Castlehome in the Alandian Islands. The husbandmen inhabit without the
towns; and by reason of the plenty of timber, the woods, valleys, and other
places defended from the fury of the northren wind, they live here in very
good sort, keep in their houses flocks of cattle, and instruments to dig,
to build, or to make any thing necessary for the life of man: and this is the
reason, that towns here are neither so fair nor so frequent, as in Germany
or England. Over and above cities and villages, there are accounted 1433.
parishes; in some of which a thousand people, or (as they term it) a thousand
households or fires do inhabit: but there are few of these parishes, in which
at the least there are not an hundred families. By this a man may judge the
number of this people, especially if he consider the fruitfulnes of their
generation: for the women of Finland by a secret operation of their beer (as
some think) become exceeding fruitful. The men live here very long, chiefly
in the most northerly parts; neither is it miraculous amongst them to see a man
live above an hundred and thirty or forty years. This long living is the
true cause of their propagation: for where men live shortest lives, there the
virtue of generation must needs soonest decay: and therefore our Lord God in
the beginning of the world did permit mankind to live seven hundred years and
more, that the world might the sooner be peopled, and the act of generation
(which now for the shortness of our lives is determined within forty years)
was then more vigorous at one hundred and upward, then in this our age, at ten.

The riches of this kingdom consists in the plenty of victuals, which this
word, Gothia (signifying an heavenly region, as we said before) and Finland
(signifying a good country) do well witness. Their provision is flesh, fresh
fish, salt fish, fish dried in the smoke and sun, corn and beer: whereof
there is so great abundance, that it is a hard thing to see a beggar amongst
them, and travelers are there freely entertained. It is so rich in mines of
lead, copper, silver, and some gold, that no province in Europe may compare
therewith. And these mines are to be found in every place, if the country
people (bound to carry wood to the mines, and to other servile works) did not
hide and hinder the discovery thereof as much as in them lies. Most fine
silver is found in the province of Vestros; and more would be, were it not for
the envy of the inahbitants, who though they know not the use of trying of
metals, do notwithstanding murmur that any strangers should employ their
labors therein. And this their frowardnes toward strangers arises not of
hatred, but upon a jealousy that they should be ouerreached, or otherwise
abused by the^: for by nature they are simple and well meaning, not given to
ambition, nor infected with avarice. The kings revenue consists in four
things; the tenths of Ecclesiastical livings, in mines, tributes and customs.
The profits of the Church livings amount to a good sum of money: for in this
kingdom there were seven cathedral Churches, threescore Monasteries of men
and women endowed with most rich revenues. First Gustan, and after his son
Eric seized the greatest part thereof into their possessions. Some of the
foresaid mines are wrought at the kings charges; some at the charge of private
persons, allowing only the tenth part.

Of three copper-workes I have known the tenth part (which is the kings) to
amount to the value of three thousand dolars yearly: hereby estimation may be
made of the silver and lead. But his taxes do far surpass all other things:
for he leuieth the tenth of rye, wheat, barley, fish, oxen, skins and such
like. Of the tenth of oxen at some times he has gathered 18. thousand, and
with them maintayneth his court, his officers, his navy, and his armies: for
in the time of war, either with the Dane or Moscouite, he allows his
soldiers victuals, and by this means provides it at very easy rates, as
well offending as defending. The marriage of the kings daughters is at the
disposition of the people, and they allow them besides silver, plate and other
gifts one hundred thousand dolars for a dowry. Of the vplandish people and
others which pay not the imposition of victuals, the king is accustomed to
exact of every poll according to his ability, five dolars or more yearly. The
customs are paid in the haven towns; the chief where of are Calma^e,
Lod^^is, and Stockholme (where a^ some times three hundred ships of burden are
to be seen) Abo, Auge, Reualia, Parnouia, Narue. It is thought, that the king
does lay up in his treasuries six or seven hundred thousand dolars, besides
the expenses upon the fortresses of Reualia and Viburgh.

There are maintained in Sweueland and Gothland about thirty two troops,
every one consisting of five hundred or six hundred soldiers, al
harquebusiers, always ready to march, whither occasion calls. Because of the
thicknes of the woods, the horsemen serve with petronels, and seldom use pikes
or lances. The footmen are most excellent; for every soldier is able to make
and furnish himself with any furniture whatsoever, even to the making of his
own flaske and tuchboxe; as likewise the common people in Per^^ia, and the
neighboring provinces, being contented with a little, have always accustomed
to make all implements for their houses and bodies; to build, to weaue, to play
the tailors, to sow, to reap, and to forge tools fit for their business. And
as for those trades, which are neither common nor necessary, as to paint, to
work in silver, and such like, there are notwithstanding found among them
very good workmen, wanting rather matter then art to work upon. The Sweuian
horsemen are divided into thirteen companies: Sweueland and Gothland maintain
eleven, and Finland two; and upon necessity they can raise a greater force:
for the Dukedom of Vermeland (as report goes) is able to furnish better then
ten thousand men with horse. In Marchland there is such plentiful breed of
horse, that there they are sold at a very low rate: both these provinces are
in Gothland. Their horse is not so big bodied as the Frieslander, but
exceeding strong, hardy, active, able to endure travel, and fed with a little.
I will not omit to speak of two noble vsages of the king of Sweueland toward
his soldiers: one is, that if a soldier be taken prisoner, he is ransomed at
the kings charges: the other, that if his horse be slain, the king bestows
an other upon him. He gives yearly to his captains, and those which serve on
horseback, in part of payment of their wages, a garment, which the Romans
termed Idolis, and may be taken for a cassocke. As touching their sea affairs
by reason of their huge sea coast, and infinite havens, the kingdom swarmeth
with mariners and shipping, which the king may arrest in his dominions, as
other princes are accustomed to do: he maintains commonly fifty ships of
war, whereof every one carries forty pieces of ordinance, more or less.
King Gustan brought in the use of galleies. In the war which king John waged
with the Danes (before the peace treated on at Stetin was agreed) he put to sea
seventy great ships, besides others of smaller burden, in which were 22000.
fighting men. In the summer time they war at sea; in the winter at land: for
then the rivers are frozen, as likewise the sea near the shore for a great
space. Seeing I have spoken of guns, I will add this much, that the king is
thought to have about eight thousand great pieces, the most part of brass, and
that he could cast many more if he had more store of tin. In the castle of
Stockholme only are numbered four hundred.

Upon the west side of Sweueland is Denmark; on the east Moscouie, with both
which he has had long war. The Sweuians have suffered much loss by the
Denmarkes: for king Christian the second besieged Stockholme, and forced it,
committing all kind of cruelty against the inhabitants, filling the city
with blood and dead carcasses. The title which the Dane pretends to the
crown of Sweueland, is the cause of their enimities. The havens, the situation
of the country, and especially Gotland (which is a member of Gothia, and
therefore the Sweuian claims it as his right) affoordeth the Dane this
facility of inuading it at his pleasure. After Gustan recovered the kingdom,
he and his son Henry and John reigned successively: and although blood
enough has been shed in the wars between Gustan and the Danes, yet the
kingdom has retained her honor: and the city of Lubecke (the mightiest state
in that sea) sometimes by confederating with the one, sometime with the other,
does in so even a balance pease the differences of these two nations; as it
suffers not the one to practice against the other, upon the peril that may
ensue to the offender. In warring with the Moscouite the Sweuian has the most
advantage, because Finland (which bordereth upon Russia) by reason of the great
lakes and marshes, whereof it is full, yields hard and perilous passage to
the enemy, oftentimes swallowing up whole armies in those congealed waters:
there he keeps the castles of Viburge, Narue, Reualia and other piles and
pieces upon the borders of the great Duke of Moscouia, excellent well
fortified, as bridles to stop his violent courses. In which, he does very
wisely; for those pieces which lie in the territories of our enemies are to be
regarded most carefully, because they bring forth two notable effects: first,
they defend what is ours, and offend what is the enemies. The further they are
distant from our borders, the better they stand us in steed: for while the
enemy is occupied in besieging thereof, our own state stands in quiet, and
time affoordeth means for rescue, or delivery thereof at leisure, and that
without spoil to our own people, or loss of our proper revenues. They grieve
the enemy with so much the more damage, by how much the nearer they are
situated unto them. Of this effect was Cale is in the possession of the
English, and the places which the Spaniards and Portugals hold in Afric. But
the fortresses built in our own borders, serve to no other end then to defend
what is already ours, and that to our great disadvantage: for as often as they
are invaded, all things are done at a sudden, and it cannot be avoided, but
somewhat will fall to the spoil of the enemy. To end with the king of
Sweueland, he is so much better able then the Moscouite to defend his
territories, by how much sea-forces joined to landforces are able to prevail
against a state furnished with landforces only.

Poland.
THE kingdom of Polonia was never so great as at this day; the great Dukedomes
of Lituania and Liuonia being joined thereto. It stretches from the flood
Notes, and Obra (which divides it from Marchia, and Odera which seperateth it
from Silesia) to Ber^say and Boristhenes, which two parts it from Moscouia.
It reaches from the Balticke sea, to the river Niester, which parts it from
Moldauia; and to the mountains Carpathie, which divide it from Hungary. By
this limitation (from the borders of Silesia to the frontires of Moscouia,
between the west part and the east) it contains 120. Germain miles; and from
the utmost bounds of Liuonia, to the borders of Hungary, not much less. So
allowing the form thereof to be round, it is far larger then a man would take
it to be. It contains many and goodly large provinces, as Polonia the great
and the less, Massouia, Prussia, Russia, Volinia, Liuonia, and Lituania. Among
these provinces Poland was found inhabited of the Polonians; but Pr^se, part of
Pomeran, Podalia, Volinia, Masouia and Liuonia have been obtained and gained by
arms. Lithuania and Sa^otgathia (provinces of Russia) were the inheritance of
the house of Iagello. For in the year 1380. Iagello then Duke of Lithuania,
took to wife the Princess Hedinge the last of the blood royal of Polonia,
and was installed king on three conditions: the first, that he should become a
Christian; the second, that he should cause his people to do the like; the
third, that he should unite his principalities to Poland. These covenants were
accomplished in our age, when the race of Iagello ended. For when the people
were unwilling by depriving the heirs (which had right to the empire of their
just inheritance) to subject it to election, they always called upon the
performance of the conditions, hoping that the nobility and people of Lituania
would not loose their honor and dignity by this mixture: yet at last on the
one side, when they considered the issue of their Princes to fail (for
Sigismund Augustus was the last heir male,) and on the other side, fearing the
force of the Moscouite, they agreed to union and election. In times past
Liuonia was the seat of the Dutch Knights, and they had therein their chief
governor, whom they termed the Great Master: But in the year 1558. being
spoiled of the greatest part of their territory by the great Duke of Moscouie,
they fled to Sigismund king of Poland, who took them into his protection, and
until the reign of king Stephen 1582 the province was never regained.

For the most part, Poland is a plain country, and (but for certain
mountains (rather hills then mountains) situated in the lesser Poland, and
dividing it from Prusland) all the residue of the country stretches it self
into most ample plains, wherein are very many woods, especially in Lithuania.
The greater and the lesser Poland are better inhabited then any other province
of the kingdom. The like may almost be spoken of Russia, for the neerenes of
the sea, concourse to the havens, and situation of the rivers. Prussia and
Liuonia have fairer cities, goodlier buildings, and by traffike and concourse
of merchants greater plenty of riches. For, when the Dutch Knights were Lords
of the country, they builded cities like those of Germany, and all along
the sea coast for the space of fowerscore miles many castles and places of good
esteem. They have many fair havens of good worth, and are Lords of all the
traffike between Poland and the Balticke sea: which is a thing of great value
and consequence. For the river Vistula arising in the extremest bounds of
Silesia, waters all Poland the less, and part of the greater, and Mazouia
and Prussia, and falls into the Baltike sea below Danske, whither it
transporteth the greatest quantity of Rye, corn, honey and wax of the whole
kingdom, a journey of four hundred miles. From another coast the most famous
river Duina arising out of the lake Ruthenigo, and parting Liuonia into even
portions, falls into the sea about Riga, a city of great concourse. There
are in Prussia and Liuonia many lakes, amongst which one is called the new sea,
one hundred miles long: in Liuonia is a lake called Berhas, more then 400.
miles long: from thence spring the rivers, which running by Pernouia and Narue,
make two notable havens for traffike. Between these two cities stands
Riualia, giving place to neither in beauty. Samogithia is more rude and
barbarous then the other provinces, and Podalia more barren: which is not to be
attributed to the nature of the soil (for it is most plentiful of those
commodities which the climate under which it lies can afford) but to the
cruelty of the Tartars, which so vex it with continual inrodes, that the
inhabitants are driven either to fly for fear, or to be led away captives
of the barbarous Tartars.

The riches of Poland are the abundance of corn, and all sorts of grain,
which grow there in so plentiful sort, that in the year 1590. and 1591. it
relieved not only the bordring nations, oppressed with famine and scarcity,
but also yielded some portion of relief to the wants of the Genowaies,
Tuscane, and Rome. It flows with honey and wax, and whereas in all these
northerly nations of Poland, Lithuania, Russia, Muscouia, there are no wines
growing, instead thereof, nature has bestowed upon them incredible quantities
of honey, whereof these people do brew an excellent kind of Beuerage. The
Bees make honey either in the woods where they find the trees made hollow by
rottennes or man's industry, or in hiues set in the open field by the country
people, or in holes of the earth, or in any place where they can find never so
small a liking.

It abounds with flax and hemp, with sheep, cattle, and horses. Amongst
the beasts of the wood are found wild oxen, and wild horses, and the bufle,
which cannot live out of the wood of Nazouia. The riches of the land consist in
the salt pits of Bozena and Velisca, in the territory of Cracouia. The
revenues of the kingdom for the most part are equally divided between the
noblemen and gentlemen; for no man is left so rich by inheritance, that he may
excel others above measure; and the greatest revenue exceeds not 25. thousand
dukets. Only the dukes of Curland and Regimount exceed this mean. For
although they are feodaries of the kingdom, and acknowledge the king as their
superior, yet are they not as living members of the state; they come not to the
diets of the kingdom, they have not their voices in the election of the
prince, neither are they accounted as natural Lords of the kingdom; but for
strangers, (as in truth they are:) the duke of Curlan being of the house of
Ketleri, and the duke of Regimount of the family of Brandenburge. All Prussia
did belong to the Dutch Knights, who had their Great Master resident there, who
when he was not able to withstand the forces of the Polonians, yielded himself
feodarie to king Cassimere: afterward when Albert of Brandenburge their Great
Master became a Protestant, he was created Duke of Prussia; and the country
divided into two parts; the one regal, immediately holden of the crown, the
other Ducall, allotted to Albert, and his successors to hold by fealty. In the
kings partition stand Marieburge, Torouia, Gulma, Varnia and Danske: in the
Duchy (which yields 120. thousand ducats yearly) the chief town is
Regimont: the Germans call it Conningsburgh, and there the Duke keeps his
court.

The government of Polonia represents rather an Aristocracie then a kingdom,
because the nobility (who have great authority in the diets of the kingdom)
choose the king, and at their pleasure limite him his authority. They have
neither law nor statute, nor form of government written, but (by custom from
the death of one prince to the election of an other) the supreme authority
rests in the Archbishop of Gesne, who is president of the counsels,
appoints the diets, rules the Senate, and proclaims the new elected king.
Before king Stephen erected new Bishops, Palatines, and Castellanes in Liuonia,
few other besides the Archbishop of Leopolis, and his 13. Suffragans, 28.
Palatines, and thirty of the chiefest Castellanes, were present at the
election of the new king. In the time of their diets, these men assemble in a
place near unto the Senate house, where they choose two marshals, by whom (but
with a tribunelike authority) they signify unto the council what their
requests are. Not long since their authority and reputation grew so mighty,
that they now carry themselves as heads and governors, rather then officers and
ministers of the public decrees of the estates. There was one of the council,
that after the manner of Clodius, refused his Senators place to become one of
these officers. When a new king is to be chosen, these men do more and more
limit his authority, not suffering it to stretch one jot farther then
accustomed. But although the crown of Poland be at the disposition of the
nobility, yet was it never heard that they rejected or ouerslipped the kings
successor, or transferred the kingdom into any other line more then once, when
deposing Ladislaus (whom notwithstanding they afterward restored) they elected
Weneslaus the Bohemian. Likewise, they have always a regard to the kings
daughters, as of Hedinge, married by them to Iagello; and in our times of Anne
given in marriage to king Stephen. It was no small cause of the advancement of
Sigismund the third, to the crown of Polonia, that he was the son of
Katherine sister to Sigismund the emperor, and of the foresaid Anne: And
although the kingly authority be elective, yet after he is chosen, his power
is absolute in many things, as to call the diets, to appoint the times and
place at his pleasure, to choose lay counselors, and nominate the bishops,
and whom he will have to be of the privy council; he is absolute disposer of
the revenue of the crown, and Lord of those which hold of him immediate; but
over the tenants of the nobility he has no jurisdiction: he is absolute
establisher of the decrees of the diets, and sovereign Judge of the nobles in
criminal causes; it is in his power to reward and advance whom pleases him:
to speak in a word, such as is his valor, dexterity, and wisdom, such is
his power, authority, and government. As the Polanders say, the decrees of the
king endure but three days, and they converse with him not as cosins, as in
France, but as brethren. And as the king has absolute authority over them,
which immediately hold of him, so the nobility dispose absolutely of their
vassals, upon every of whom they exercise more then kingly authority, in
manner as upon slaves. In establishing their kingdom, they have done one thing
worthy the noting, which is, that as the Romans increased their names and
dominion, by communicating the laws and honors of Italy, and the city of Rome
to other cities, yea whole provinces: so the kings of Polonia have enlarged,
united and strengthened their estate, by participating the privileges of the
Polish nobility to those provinces, which either they have conquered by arms
or otherways purchased, gracing the nobles thereof with favors equal to any
bestowed on the Polish nobility. By this equallyzing, king Ladislaus strongly
united Russia and Podalia to Poland: Sigismund Augustus, Lithuania: Stephen,
Liuonia: for equality in offices and promotions knitteth affections in peace
and war.

The force of this kingdom (as of others) consists in grain, coin,
footmen, horsemen, armor and munition. Of grain we have spoken already. In
coin it is not very rich: for excepting Danske they have never a mart town
worthy estimation; and the wares that are brought from Prussia and Liuonia,
do not enrich the kingdom with ready money; yea they do hardly suffice to
barter with the English and Flemmish for cloth, silks and wools: or with the
Spanish and Portugals for sugars, spices, fruits and Malues^ies. For when the
country is not given to traffike, nor the cities to buy and sell, nor the
people to labor, and the nobility is very gallant, prodigal in expenses,
spending more then their revenues in diet and apparel, and the seasoning of
their meats (for the Polanders use more spices then any other nation:) and
their wine, their silk, and the greatest part of their woollen cloth is
brought from foreign nations, how can the kingdom be rich in silver? For in
transporting of rich ware, and returning of little, consists the wealth of
every kingdom; gathering together (by venting homebred commodities) the coin
of foreign countries, and keeping it once brought in, from passing abroad
again. In this practice consists the wealth of Naples and Millan: for Naples
sends to sea great store of corn, wine, oil, silk, woad, horses, fruits,
and such like, which bring in huge masses of foreign coin: Millan supplieth the
want of other provinces with corn, rice, clothes, iron works, and wares of all
sorts; and returns little again. If the kingdom of Naples and Sicill were
as well stored with artificial workmanship, as they are provided with corn
and wealth, no other kingdom could compare with them.

To return to Poland: notwithstanding, their riches are not so small as some
think they are; for the revenues of the crown raised of the mines of salt and
silver amount yearly to six hundred thousand ducats. True it is that
Sigismund Augustus pawned part of his revenues, and king Henry a month before
his flight (to bind some part of the nobility fast unto him) sold unto them
more then three hundred thousand ducats of yearly rent. It is lawful for the
king by sales of escheats falling to the crown, to purchase livings for
himself, and of the said revenues to retain great portions to his proper use,
and spare his own expenses: for when the king with his court abides in
Lithuania, the Lithuanians defray the charges: the like is done in most places
of Poland. He that waieth with himself that the revenues of Scotland, Navarre,
and Sardinia exceed not yearly one hundred thousand ducats, nor the kingdom
of Aragon to yield above one hundred thousand crowns every three years;
cannot lightly esteem of the revenues of this kingdom: yet the king might
raise his revenues to a higher reckoning, if he were less bountiful to his
Palatines and Castellanes: for most commonly he bestows on them two parts,
and three parts, yea now and then the whole profits arising in their
governments; but in the time of war and dangerous occurrences (yet by the
decree of the assemblies of the kingdom) the king does lay grievous
impositions and taxes on the people, which are either levied of the provinces,
or of the as^ise of bread: and these tallages have amounted to such a
reckoning, that therewith king Stephen sustained the burden of a most heavy
three-yeeres war against the great Duke of Moscouie; yea the gentlemen for
the defense of the kingdom, are bound to serve at their own charges. These
serve on horseback, some armed as our men at arms, some lightlier armed, some
like the Tartars, and those they term Cossaches or adventurers, trained up to
steal, to depopulate, to waste, to turn all things vpside down. These gent.
serve in the field gallantly furnished, attired in cassocks and hose shining
with gold and silver, and thousand other colors: they adorn themselves with
plumes and feathers of eagles, with the skins of leopards and bears, and with
many banners and partie-coloured ensigns. These and such like furnitures do
cause them to be discerned of their fellows, make them seem terrible to their
enemies, and encourage their minds to fiercenes and prowess: Their horse are
small, but nimble, and far more courageous then the Dutch. It is thought that
upon necessity, Poland is able to raisean hundred thousand horse, and
Lithuania 70. thousand, but far inferior in goodness to the Polish. They have so
great confidence in the great number of their horse, that nothing fearing the
power of any enemies, they regard not the building of fortresses, but resolve
that they are able to defend their country, their wives and children, their
liberty and goods, in the open field against any prince whatsoever; boasting
that in either chance of war, they never turned their backs to their
enemies. Sigismund Augustus labored, that in the diets of the kingdom order
might be taken for the fortifying of Cracouia, because of the neighborhood of
the Emperor: but he could never effect it, partly because it should not give
their kings opportunity of absolute authority, and tyrannical emperie, partly
because they think themselves by noble courage sufficiently able to defend the
kingdom. They have no infanterie; for all the people of the kingdom is
divided either into merchants and artificers (which inhabit the cities) or
laborers and husbandmen which live in the country, in such subjection as we
spoke off before: and this is the reason that the gentlemen only go to the
war, and will not in any case serve on foot; but when occasion serves, they
wage German and Hungary footmen: and of these, king Stephen in his journey
into Liuonia, entertained under his colors little less then sixteen
thousand, to convey their great ordinance: For pioners they use the Tartars,
and their own vplandish people. The kingdom is sufficiently stored with great
ordinance and all furniture belonging thereto, of which it can suffer no manner
of scarcity: first, because the noblemen keep many in their castles; next,
for the neighborhood of Germany, which is rich in metal to cast great
ordinance; and plentiful of artificers to forge any thing belonging to the use
of war. And though it is not usual to se^ many castles in Polonia, yet the
fortresses of Leopolis and Camentzie in Russia, the castle of Cracouia in the
less Poland, Polocensis in the frontiers of Moscouia, Marienbourge and some
other towns in Liuonia, are pieces of no small strength. These forces of
Polonia (which we have spoken of) are such in quantity and quality, that few
nations in Europe can equal them, none surpass them: one thing they want, and
that is celerity: for to the sure strengthening of every kingdom, four things
are required: that is to say, that their force be of their own subjects, that
it be populous, valiant, and quick: their own, because it is dangerous
trusting a stranger; populous, because of reenforcements after checks or
overthrows; valiant, because number without courage little avails; yea it
brings forth tumult and confusion: quick, that they may lightly move, and
speedily be drawn whither necessity enforces. The last of these four
virtues the Polands want, that is, celeritie: which comes two ways, one by
the authority of the prince, the other by ready money. The king has not
power to determine any thing; to denounce war, to impose taxes, or to gather
treasure without the consent of the parliament, and this parliament (where it
is necessary that many be present) is like an engine made of many pieces,
which without long delays and loss of time can never readily be joined
together, or moved forward. For in warlike affairs those princes make best
speed, which are best able to command, and have most money in readiness;
otherwise in appointing and ordring the diets, and devising that the actions
may answer the counsels; then in executing, and lastly in providing of money
there happens such loss of time, that little is left for the beginning of the
journey, much less for the accomplishment. Besides the Barons and nobles are
at such charges in travailing to the diets, and make such long tariance when
they are there, that at their departure they have little left wherewith to
maintain the war. It may be that for the defense of the state, quicker and
readier resolution would be taken, because of the imminent danger fatal in
general. But for the conquest of any place, I believe they would proceed with
like slownes and irresolution, for the hope of good does not so much move us,
as the fear of evil: yet has our age seen (in the reign of Sigismund
Augustus) the Moscouite to have conquered the provinces of Moloch and Smolock,
and that without resistance or revenge; a cowardice ill beseeming so high a
king, and so mighty a state: as likewise he invaded Liuonia without
impeachment, which had shadowed it self under the wing and protection of the
said Sigismund. In the days of Henry of Aniow, John prince of Moldauia (even
he that with an undaunted spirit and famous victory) held war against the
Turk, was shamefully forsaken of them, contrary to the covenants of
confederacy between him and Sigismund Augustus concluded. Yet must we needs
confess, that such as is the courage, valor, and reputation of the prince;
such is the resolution, alacrity, and forces of the Polands: of themselves
populous, valiant, and courageous. Stephen Bathor gave good testimony hereof,
in whose time Polonia not only maintained the honor and glory of a kingdom,
sufficient to defend it self from foreign arms, but also to make conquests
of great matters, from most potent enemies. And seeing we have spoken of
celeritie, a virtue most necessary for every state, it shall not be amiss to
speak of the causes of this celeritie, which (as is aforesaid) are two: viz.
the reputation of the prince, which gives it life; and store of coin, which
preserues it in action: for we have seen in most mighty armies, the body by
the slownes of the head, to have spent the time most idly, and very famous
victories for want of money, to give continual motion to the army, to have
brought forth small or no effects. Besides, the disposition of the soldier is a
great help hereunto: for no man can truly praise the Germane and Bohemian
footmen for celeritie; but this commendation without doubt is proper to the
Italian, Spaniard, and Frenchmen, not only for that they are of better
constitution of body, but for that (which in war is all in all) they are
better contented to live with a little: though they want coin they are not
discouraged, neither wax sick with fruits, if flesh be wanting; and happen
what may, they longer and better can endure hardness and scarcity. Their riding
light armed is of more execution then armed at all pieces, and their
argoletiers more serviceable then lanciers: for which cause the French also in
their late broiles have given over their lances, wherein of old did consist the
glory of their arms, and betaken themselves to the pistol. But to what
advantage they have thus done, let another dispute, for I say not, that a light
armed man is absolutely to be preferred before a man at arms in chances of
war, but only affirm, that he is more active and more ready: yea the
goodness of the horse is of great consequence. For the Flanders horse far
excels the Frieslander and Germane; the Hungary horse, the Polonian; the
Turkey horse, the Genet: the Barbary horse is more speedy then any of the
rest: Between both is the courser of Naples, who though he be not so swift as
the Spanish genet, yet he is better able to endure travel, and to bear the
weight of armor, not becoming ouer^low therewith. To speak truth, experience
manifests the Germane horse, by reason of their slow pace to work small
effect, either to pursue the fleeing enemy, or swiftly to fly from their
executing adversary: for if the Wallachian, Hungarian, Polish, Turkish,
Moorish, or Barbary horsemen should break the Germans, they are not able to
fly; and if it happen the German to overthrow them, they are as unable
speedily to pursue: for they charge slowly, and retire heavily. So in fights at
sea, ships of burden are of small service, because if wind want, they can
neither be moved nor turned: the great Galleons are somewhat better, yet
perform little more, but the best of all is the galley for his swiftnes. And
for proof hereof, we have seen the navy of the Christians consisting of great
ships to have spent the better part of summer and warlike season in
preparations only, and on the contrary, the Turkish fleet soon furnished,
and speedily put to sea; of such advantage is spare diet, and needful
provision to the Turkish affairs, and so discommodious is gluttony to the
proceedings of the Christians: for wine and other delicates only are as
troublesome to the Christians, as the whole provision for a camp, to the
Turkish army. Therefore let no man marvel if they march in all their iorneies
excellently well furnished with ordinance, shot, gunpowder, and all
necessaries: for at land they have their carriages laden only with provision,
at sea their ships, and not with wine, pullets, and such needless vanities. At
a word, they go to the war to fight, and not to fill their bellies.

The great Duke of Moscouia.
THE great Duke of Moscouia is Lord of a most large territory, and within the
limits of his jurisdiction are contained many regions. Northward his scepter
stretches to the north Ocean from the Bay of Granico to the river of Ob: on
the south all along the river Volga to the Caspian sea: westward it reaches
to the borders of Liuonia, and almost to the river Boristhenes, and eastward to
Volga. Some write, that it contains in length three thousand miles, in breadth
1500. wherein are contained fifteen Dukedomes, sixteen provinces, and two
kingdoms. They were once subject to the Tartars, whose Prince Roydo in the
year 1140. conquered all Moscouie; but John the first great Duke (encouraged
by their civil dissentions) denied them tribute. In process of time, when
Ammetes the last successor of Roydo, (who died at Vilua) had overcome the
Tartars Precopenses, the great Duke adjoined to his Empire, Permia, Veatia, and
Iugria, provinces subject to Ammetes. From this time the forces of the great
Duke increasing, Basilius Casan, and John the second conquered the provinces of
Citrahan, which are called kingdoms. To confess truth, the great Dukes have
mightily enlarged their bounds, and have taken the great Duchies of Seuerin and
Smoloncke, Bielchese, Prescouia, Nouogrod, Iaroslaue, Roscouia, some from the
Polands, and some from other provinces: they possessed part of Liuonia, and
made their arms fearful to their neighbors. The chief city of the kingdom
is Mosco, where the Patriarch resideth, Roscouia and Nouogrode are the seats of
the Archbishops: Cortisa, Resania, Columna, Susdelia, Casan, Vologda, Tueria,
and Smolonck, are Bishoprics: Plescouia, Porcouia, Staritia, Sloboda,
Ieroslaue, Volodomer (from whence the kings seat was translated to the city
Mosco, by John the second) Mosayco, Saint Nicholas, Sugana, Vstiud, Cargapolia.
The Emperor abides in the city Mosco, which takes his name of the river
Mosco, rising fourscore and ten miles higher into the country. The city has
been greater then now it is, and was nine miles compass: but since that in
the year 1570. it was sacked and burnt by the Tartars Precopie; it contains
not above five miles. According to Posse^inus a writer of good judgment and
industry, there are housed in this city thirty thousand people, besides oxen
and other cattle.

Nouograde has the name of Great, and yet the same author allows it not
above twenty thousand inhabitants; as likewise Smolonck and Plescouia. This
seems most incredible to me, if it be true as some write, that Plescouia when
king Stephen of Poland besieged it, had within it fifty thousand footmen, and
seven thousand horse. Truly this is a great number, and though they were not
all Moscouites, yet this reckoning asks a great proportion of inhabitants:
for if the king thrust in 57. thousand fighting men, it must needs be that the
inhabitants were very many more. Some will have it, that in times past the
country was better replenished with people, and that afterward it became
desolate for three causes: the first, the plague (a new disease in Moscouie)
which gleaned away many thousand people: the second, the tyranny of their
Emperors, who have put infinite numbers to death, especially of the nobility:
the third, the incursions and robberies of the Tartars Precopie, and Negaians,
which never cease vexing their bordering neighbors. These Tartars harrie not
only the country, but lead away captive whole cities, selling them to the
Turks and other nations. These inrodes have laid waste many and far removed
provinces.

The wisdom of a prince is not liuelier discerned then in his good foresight,
whether his enterprises are likely to prove hurtful or profitable to his
estate; and when he suffers not himself to be carried away with the vain
hope of atc^ieuing some conquest, which can neither continue to him sure nor
certain, but rather draws after it a continual disquiet to his own
safety. For that prince that is led with such an ambitious humor to enlarge
his estate, does but weaken himself in people and riches, and in mine opinion
is like the man that minding to raise the walls and roof of his house higher,
takes away the foundation of the building. It is the greatest glory well to
keep what we have got; but those gettings which are made with future loss
and diminution of our proper strength, are contrary to that Maxim. And seeing
these acquisitions are as it were incisions or graffings, they ought to better,
not to impair the estate of our affairs: for as these incisions are used to
make sower trees sweet, or unfruitful plants fruitful: So the enterprises of
princes ought to be such, as bring forth assured honor and profit, otherwise
they are labors unprofitable, pulling down more then they build, and heaping
to themselves more harm then honor, more trouble then safety. Of this kind
are those wars, which are waged to conquer kingdoms far distant, having
nothing near unto us, but are so disioined, that they ask greater garrisons
then reason, or our abilities are able to afford, to defend them. Therefore
let the resolution of every expedition be laid on three grounds: first, that
the quarrel be just; secondly, what hope and facility of conquest; thirdly,
what gain will arise of victory. For war undertaken without hope of assured
fruit, is mere madness: and many great captains have enlarged the bounds of
their empires, but not increased their own quiet and safeties. No prince made
longer iournies and greater expenses then the Great Duke John: he vanquished
the kingdom of Casan to Volga, and Astrachan upon the Caspian sea: he subdued
a great part of Liuonia. But what honor, what profit, or what continuance of
security gained he by these victories? What was the end of this war? In
these expeditions perished infinite numbers of men, in iourneying, in assaults,
with the sword, with sickness, with hunger and other extremities. When he had
overcome them, he was forced to maintain great garrisons, yea to bring thither
whole colonies: and besides, when men were so far from their homes, either
busied in getting other men's goods, or in keeping what they had got, their
wives stayed at home like widows without issue, and the inward parts of the
realm remained empty, as a heart void of blood, wanting his necessary
nutriment, whilst the inhabitants were wasted on the skirtes of the kingdom.
And therefore when it was invaded by king Stephen of Poland, these far and
remote forces were wanting to make resistance, and through this oversight ^e
lost again Pozouia, and other pieces of good reckoning, yea and enforced to
leave the whole possession of Liuonia to the Polander.

To return to our purpose; Moscouie for the most part is covered with woods
and lakes: these woods are the branches of Hercinia, spreading it self through
all the North, and perhaps more in this province then in any other. Here grow
the goodliest and tallest trees of the world, through which for their thicknes
the brightness of the sun beams can hardly pearce. An unspeakable quantity of
rosin and pitch distilleth out of these trees, and here is the neuer-wasting
fountain of wax and honey. For without any industry of man the bees
themselves build their hiues in the barks and hollownes of trees. Here is all
plenty of cattle and wild beasts, bears, martins, beasts called in Latin
Zibellini, and woolues: whose skins be are high prices. Of the timber of these
trees are squared all necessaries, as well for buildings as all other uses: the
walls of their cities are framed of beams cut fowersquare, fastened together,
filling the chinkes and vacant places with earth. Of these beams likewise they
build platformes of such height and thicknes, that they be are the weight of
great Ordinance how massy soever: they are subject to fire, but not easily
shaken with the fury of battery. Some men maintain great disputation,
whether fortresses built of stone, chalk or earth be of greatest validity.
For the last these be their reasons: they are sooner built, with less charge,
and make best resistance: when a breach is made, they are easiest repaired, and
any part thereof (if chance, occasion or necessity require) lightlier changed.
But all these reasons notwithstanding, in my mind fortresses built of stone
carry the credit: for, seeing there are four means to ruinate a fortress,
Ordinance, mining, fire and digging, peradventure the stone wall may avail as
much in resisting, as the earthen in receiving and deadding the bullet; but
against mining, fire, the spade and pickaxe, without comparison the stone work
excels: and to raise platforms on the inside of the wall is all you can
invent either defensive or praise worthy to a fortress built of timber and
earth.

For waters, Moscouie is the mother of rivers and lakes, witness Dunie,
Boristhenes, Volga, Desna, Onega, Moscua, Volisca, and the famous Tanais, the
lakes of Ina, upon which stands the great Nouograde, Voloppo, and many
others. The abundance of these waters do make the air colder then is requisite
for the increase of cattle, or growth of plants, and although cold is thought
more wholesome then heat, yet are their cattle of small growth thereby, and
many times their fruits come not to ripening: the earth drowned with the waters
for the most part becomes light and sandy, and then either with too great
drouth, or too much moisture, it destroieth the fruit. Winter lasts nine
months, little more or less, and yet the soil brings forth plenty of
grain and feeding for cattle, and by consequence abundance of cattle ^ame and
wild. It brings forth apples, nuts, and filberds: other kinds of fruits
they scarcely know. Of fish they raise their greatest gain, as having greatest
abundance of that commodity; they dry them in the frost and wind, as in
Norwey and other northerly nations, and they lay it up for store as well in
their towns of war, as for their private families. The kingdom is not full
of merchants, because by nature the inhabitants are idle, and that province
cannot abound with merchandise, where arts and artificers are not established.
They have not the use of the sea, because it is not lawful for a Moscouite to
travel out of his princes dominions: such, and such store of wares as they
have, as skins, rosin and wax they barter for cloth and other commodities,
which the Armenians bring to Astrachan by the Caspian sea, and the English to
Saint Nicholas in the bay of Graduic^or.

The government of the great Duke is more tyrannical then of any other prince
in the world; for he is absolute lord and disposer of the bodies and goods of
his subjects. Therefore Mahumet the Vizier was wont to say, that the Moscouite
and the great Turk amongst all princes of the earth were only lords of their
own dominions, and in that regard thought the journey of king Stephen of
Poland would prove full of danger and difficulty. To preserve his majesty
and reputation he uses incredible policy and severity: first, it is not
lawful for any of his subjects to depart the realm upon pain of death; and
therefore no man there dare go to sea, no not speak to an ambassador, or use
the counsel of a forteine physician without license. He wears apparel of
inestimable value, joining the ornaments of a bishop to the majesty of a king,
by wearing a miter on his head, shining with diamonds and most rich stones:
when he wears it not on his head, he places it before his chair of estate,
and oftentimes changes it, in boast of his riches: in his left hand he bears
a most rich crosier, apparelled in a long garment, not much unlike to that
which the pope we areth when he goes to ^^ss^: his fingers are full of gold
rings: and the image of Christ and his blessed mother the virgin, are over the
chair wherein he sits. The privy chamber and great chamber are full of men
clothed in cloth of gold down to the foot. In ceremonies of religion he uses
great devotion and reverence: at the table as often as a dish is changed, or he
has a desire to drink, he makes many signs of the cross: he bears
singular regard to fasts, and in the church he kisseth the ground with his
forehead, even as others do: That no man should prove a better scholar then
himself, he suffers no school but of writing and reading to be kept; they
read nothing but the Evangelists, some history, the lives of saints, a Homily
of John Chrysostom, or some such like, yea they would hold him for an
heretic, that should go about to profess himself better learned, and assure
himself, he shall not escape punishment. Which is the reason that their
Notaries, nay the Secretaries themselves commonly can neither write, nor
answer ambassadors of foreign princes no farther then they are taught of the
great Duke: when they negotiate, they no sooner name the great Duke, but all of
them rise up with great reverence: the like is done at his table, when he
drinks or carueth to any man, and so in a thousand like casualties: they are
taught even from their cradles to believe and talk of their great Duke as of
God: using these phrases in their ordinary talking, God only and our great
Seignior knows this: Our great. Lord knows all things. All^^e enjoy health
and riches; all proceeds from our great Duke. For his subjects seeing such
state and magnificence in their prince, and knowing no more then they are
taught at home, reverence and obey him as slaves, not as subjects, accounting
him rather a god then a king. He has not under him Lords graced with titles as
we have, dukes, earls, barons, etc. but he bestows upon one a hamlet, upon
another a farm, and these not hereditary, unless he confirm it: and when he
has confirmed it, the farmers notwithstanding pay him a portion of their
fruits, and owe him villaine-seruice: which is the cause that every man
depends on the will of the prince, and look by how much the richer, by so
much the deeper is he indebted unto him. To prevent rebellion, he transferreth
whole families and towneships from one province to another, and sends the one
and the other into garrisons, as into exile: so far away are the miserable
people carried from their own homes.

By this a man may guess of his wealth and riches: for seeing he is absolute
Lord of all, he uses the service of their bodies at his pleasure, and what
portion of their goods him lists. Of the skins of wild beasts he challenges
what portion he likes; and of every sort of fish, even what he will. The skins
are sold or given, as pleases him: the fish dried in the wind is kept for
vittailing the garrisons. In the market no man may sell his wares before the
king has sold. He has not any mines of gold or silver. The best mart towns
from whence he gathers the greatest part of his revenues, are Astrachan at
the Caspian sea, whither the wares of the Persians and Armenians are brought;
and Saint Nicholas, whither the ships of the English and Hollanders do arrive
laden with cloth and other merchandise, which from thence are transported to
Vologda. When his ambassadors return, he takes from them the presents given
them by foreign princes, and instead thereof bestows upon them some other
reward, and many times nothing at all. To speak in a word: he gleaneth
whatsoever is good or ought worth through his whole kingdom: it is thought
that he has great store of treasure in his castles of Mosco, Ieroslane, and
the marshes of Albi, which may be true: for the great Duke John wasted in a
manner all Liuonia, sparing neither relic, chalice, crucifixe, nor any
ornament of silver: and of thatwhich is once brought in, he suffers no part
thereof to be transported out of his dominions, unless it be for the ransom
of soldiers taken in the war, or of other poor people carried into
captivity. This is most true, that when he lost Liuonia, which king Stephen of
Poland reconquered in the year of our Lord 1582. he lost the richest province
of his dominions for the traffike of the Baltike sea, and the best, for the
strength of 34. castles standing therein.

The strength of the kingdom consists in the manifold numbers of rivers and
marshes, and in the thicknes of woods. Besides, they use to lay waste the
parts nearest their enemies; that there the woods may grow thicker, which for
the moisture of the soil quickly comes to pass, and are as auailable as a
wall or trench to the defense of the next towns. This policy brought great
travel to the Polanders, for they were constrianed to loose much time in
cutting down the woods before they could come to the inhabited places of their
enemies. They have a few fortresses, some built of stone, some of brick after
the Italian fashion, but without strength of modern diuises or cunning
workmanship. Such are the castles of Mosco, Nouograd, Plescouia, Porcouia,
Sloboda: some are wrought with twigs and earth well trodden down, as Smolonck.
But commonly the walls of strong places are built of great beams stuffed with
turffe or moss, leaving loopholes for their shot. This fortifying is very
auailable against great ordinance, but exceeding subject to ^^ri^g. They serve
in the field (as we told you before treating of his government) rather bearing
themselves valiantly for fear of punishment, then of their own natures
showing alacrity or willingness to the service. He has his captains at a
beck; his soldiers suffer all extremities patiently; they care not ^or^^ost or
rain; they endure hunger and scarcity with incredible conte^tment; they live
with a little; better able to defend a fortress, then fight in field: for here
courage and agilitie; there constancy and resolution are most serviceable,
whereas the Polanders are better to fight in the field, then to keep a castle.
And therefore the Great Duke John finding by experience the unaptness of his
soldiers, and the readiness of the Polonians in skirmishes and assaults, was
wont to say, that his men had need of a spur to drive them forward, and the
Polonians wanted a bridle to hold them back. His chiefest force is in his
horse, but what number he can raise, who can show? For I do not believe that
he is able (as some say) to arm three hundred thousand, because though his
Empire be large, yet for the greatest part it lies unmanured, as the
many-daies journey between Cazan and Astrachan, and scarce meeting with one
village in the way, may well witness. In the war which king Stephen waged
against him (being not above 60. thousand foot and horse strong) he was not
able to raise so great a force, I will not say, to meet him in the open field,
yea, not to hinder him from the forcing of Pozouia, Vilocoluc, and other
pieces, no, nor to divert him from the siege of Plescouia. In the year 1570.
the prince of the Tartars with fourscore thousand soldiers pierced even to the
bowels of his kingdom, and set fire on his imperial seat Mosco. Therefore I
think that they that report, that the Great Duke can levy three hundred
thousand men, and the king of Polonia two hundred, do rather mean heads of
horses then riders: for there may be so many thousand horse, and yet every one
is not to be accounted a horse of service, no more then every horseman a rider,
or able to find himself armor. One has his heart in his hose; another wants
ability; a third wants strength of body; a fourth both courage and strength:
yea admit he could raise so many horse and men, as these men speak of, yet
would it be a hard matter, perchance impossible, for him to assemble them in
one place; or if he could, where would wages, or victuals be found sufficient
to sustain them. For 200. horsemen in Moscouie, require 300. packhorses, and so
many tenders, who must all befed; as likewise the victualers, the merchants,
the artificers, and such servants as can hardly be spared in warlike
enterprises: To perform this, whole Moscouie must of necessity be gathered
into one place, and then it were to be feared, least in so great a journey from
one part of the kingdom, the other part opposite would run to ruin and decay.
Likewise although such a proportion of horse, as has been spoken of, might be
raised: it were not wisdom for the state to strip the borders of their
garrisons; the provinces of their sinews; the cities of their magistrates; and
the country of husba^dmen. Therefore I conclude, that prince whose kingdom is
able to afford him 150. thousand horse, to be bravely furnished, if he can
bring into the field but the third part: I speak of war and not of
incursions. Some more modest in writing affirm, that the Moscouite could levy
150. thousand horse, if necessity to defend himself, should constrain him
thereto, and that John the third in the voyage of Astracan entertained 120.
thousand horse, and twenty thousand foot. The same king inuading Liuonia in
the time of king Alexander, levied a mighty army, and kept another upon the
borders of the kingdom. The Great Duke John adjoined to his troops of horse
certain thousand of shot, most strangers, which yielded him notable service in
the defense of his cities. Every second or third year he renueth his
soldierie throughout the provinces, and keeps a register of the sons of
noblemen, and the number of his servants and horses. The wealthier horsemen use
a curasse of brass, a helmet light and thin; bucklers brought out of Persia,
and lances: others are armed with Iacks quilted with bombast to resist arrows.
These handle the bow, and many of them the harquebuse, all the sword and
dagger. The Germans serve them in the field, and the Italians in their
fortifications.

To the Duke of Moscouie are adjoining the Tartars Precopenses, the Taurici,
the Chersonesi, the Circassi, and the Tartars Negayans. These people inhabit a
country seven days journey distant, and are governed by Dukes after the
manner of the Heluetians. He has received great injury of the Precopenses
without hope of amends, because they are confederate with the great Turk: and
by him furnished with harquebusiers and ordinance; and have in their kingdom
many strong places fortified with Turkish garrisons; and therefore he thinks
it hard and dangerous to invade them, being backed by the Turk, whose power he
should stir up likewise against him. It is the custom of the Precopi often
used, to make inrodes into the provinces of the great Duke, as likewise of the
Polonian: and to carry away whatsoever comes to hand. If the great Duke have
vanquished the Tartars of Cassan and Astracan, let him attribute the conquest
to his great ordinance, which they wanted. This Duke led against the Cassani,
an engine devised on this fashion: he fastened to the sides of charriots a
broad and large planke, bored full of holes, and fitted for the shooting of
harquebusiers and musketers; with the which they did grievously wound their
enemies, and could not be hurt again by the arrows of their adversaries. By
these helps it was no masterie to vanquish and subdue them. But the Precopi
have the use of gunnes, and (worth all the rest) the favor and protection of
the Turkish Emperor, who thirsting to open a way into Moscouie, or the Caspian
sea, assaied not many years since to dig a trench from Tanais to Volga: but
his forces were put to flight by the Moscouites with the aid of the Tartars,
who feared their utter destruction if the Turk had brought that designement to
pass. This was a devise of greater courage then wisdom: for the Moscouites
not only defeated his navy, taking part thereof, but put his landforces to
the sword, consisting of fourscore thousand Tartars, five and twenty thousand
Turks, and amongst them three thousand Ianizars. As we said before, the
Circassi live after the manner of the Swissers, they endeavor not to enlarge
their own bounds, but serve for wages, sometime the Turk, sometime the
Persian, and sometime the Moscouite, from whose dominion they are so far
disioyned, that they stand in no fear of their several mightines. The Tartars
Negayans are more to be dreaded for their sudden inrodes, and furious
incursions, then for jealousy of their forces, or that they are able to raise,
or undertake any voyage royal. Of late times they threatened the Moscouite, but
their fury was appeased by sending them presents. It is the best course to
hazard our money, rather then our forces against the thefts and spoils of
these barbarous nations: for when they have nether city nor strong place to
subdue, to keep them in subjection: what can you term the war made against
them, but a labor with loss, a charge without profit? The great Duke is
constrained to keep great troops of horse in Citrachan, Casan, and Viatca,
against these Nagaij: as likewise a great garrison in Culagan upon Danais
against the Precopi. The next bordring neighbor by Finland side is the king of
Sweueland. Of late times this king holding a long war against him, took from
him by force the castles of Sorenesco, and Pernauia the great and the less in
Liuonia on the one side, whilst king Stephen cruelly vexed him with war on the
other. In the uttermost bounds of the Fioland Bay, the Sweuian to his great
charges possesses the fortress of Viburge, maintaining therein a great
garrison to resist the attempts of the Russies, and the great Duke. Likewise in
that sea and the coast adjoining, he maintains ships of war, as well to be
ready at all assaies against the approches of this great Duke; as likewise to
forbid the Easterling the bringing of any munition or warlike furniture into
any part of his dominions: neither does he suffer other ships to sail in those
seas, without a special placard signed with his own hand. By the benefit of
this navy and sea force, the king of Sweueland wheresoever he finds means
to use it, becomes master of the field, and by virtue thereof cease upon
many places on the coast of Liuonia, and the bordering territories: but where
the Dukes horse and his great numbers of footmen may stand him in steed, as in
the open field or places removed from the sea, there he makes his part good
enough, and most commonly puts the Sweuian to the woorst. The best is,
nature bath placed between them such rough mountains, such cold, such ice,
and such snowes, that they cannot greatly endammage one another.

The last neighbor is the king of Poland, between whom and the great Duke
this is the difference: the Moscouite has more territories; the Polonian
better inhabited and more civil: the Moscouite more subjects, and more
subject; the Polonian better soldiers and more courageous: the Moscouites are
apter to bear the shoke then to give a charge; the Polonians to charge: the
Moscouite is fitter to keep a fortress; the Polonian to fight in the open
field: the Moscouites forces are better united; the Polonian more considerate
and better advised: the Moscouite less cares for want and extremities; the
Polonian death and the sword: yea either nation is of the greater worth, when
either of their princes is of greatest valor and magnanimity; as it happened
when Basilius conquered the great Duchy of Smoloncke and Poloncke, and the
large circuit of Liuonia; And again, when Stephen king of Poland in his last
war against John (Basilius son) reconquered Polonck, with diverse other
places of good reckoning, besieged the city of Plesko, and forced the
Moscouite to leave all Liuonia: whereby I conclude: such as is the valor and
wisdom of the prince, such is the force and courage of his people.

The Great Cham.
AS our Ancestors were ignorant of the regions situated upon the east side of
the Caspian sea, which they imagined to be a branch of the Ocean: Even so as
yet little or nothing knows this Age, what regions lie, or what people
inhabit beyond that sea, and the mountains, commonly called Dalanguer and
Vssont. Mark Paul Venetus was the first that broke the ice in describing of
those countries, and of him have we received what we know of the Tartars. For
the great distance of countries, the difficulty of the journey, and the
inaccessible situation of places, has hindered the discovery of those
provinces: for the great Duke of Moscouie (by whose dominions we may easiest
travel thither) will suffer no stranger to pass thorough his kingdom: the
Caspian sea, a passage no less fitting for the journey, is not frequented: and
by the way of Persia infinite mountains and vast deserts, dividing both
provinces, oppose themselves against us. And to the further hinderance of this
discovery, neither the great Cham, neither the king of China, nor the Duke of
Moscouie will suffer any of their subjects to travel out of their dominions,
nor any stanger to enter in, unless he come as an ambassador, neither (in this
case) is it lawful for him to converse freely or range at his pleasure.

They live under diverse princes, the principal whereof are those that wear
green on their turbants. These inhabit Shamarcand, and are at continual
enmity with the Persians. Next are those of Bochan, Mahumetans: then those of
Mogor, of whom you shall hear hereafter; and lastly those of Cathay, whereof
we now entreat.

Never was there any nation upon the face of the earth, that enjoyed a larger
emperie then they do, or have undertaken haughtier exploites: and I would that
they had had some, who might have recommended by writing their doings to the
world.

M. Paul Venetus writes, that this people once inhabited Ciurga and Barge,
provinces situated upon the Scythick Ocean, without city, castle or house,
wandering like the Arabians from place to place, according to the season of the
year. They acknowledged Vncham (whom some interpret Prester John) for their
sovereign Lord, to whom they gave the tenth of their cattle. In process of
time they multiplied to such numbers, that Vncham being jealous of their
neighborhood, began to lessen their number and forces, by sending them, now
hither, now thither, upon most long and desperate voiages, as occasion offered.
Which when they perceived, they assembled themselves, resolving to leave their
natural soil, and to remove so far from the borders of Vncham, that never
after he should have cause to suspect their numbers: this they performed. After
certain years they elected amongst them a king, called Changis, to whom for
the greatness of his glory and victories, they added the surname of Great. This
Changis, departing from his own territories in the year of our Lord 1162.
with a most fearful army, subdued partly by force, partly by the terror of
his name, nine provinces. At last, being denied the daughter of Vnchan in
marriage, he made war upon him, and ouercomming him in battle, cast him out
of his kingdom. After the death of Changis, his successors afflicted Europe:
In the year 1212. they drove the Polosochi from the banks of the Euxine sea.
In the year 1228. they invaded and spoiled Russia. In the year 1241. they
raced Kiouia the chief city of the Rutheni, and Battu their captain wasted
Polonia, Silesia, Morauia, and Hungary. Innocentius the fourth amazed with the
tempest of these invasions, in the year 1242. sent certain friars of the
orders of Dominicke and Francis, to the court of the great Cham, to entreat a
peace for Christendom.

The circuit of this Empire in the times above spoken of, stretched from the
utmost bounds of Asia to Armenia, and from Bengala to Volga, yea their
incursions pierced even to Nilus and Danubius. The Macedonian and Roman Empires
were never so large. But because they were rather runnagates then men of war,
wanting politic government and military discipline, sometime ruling one
province, sometime another, they rather wrought spoil and terror to the
conquered nations, then fear of bondage or subjection, and at last seated
themselves beyond the mountain Caucasus. After it became divided into many
principalities, yet so that the title and majesty of the Empire, remained
always to the great Cham, who (as we said before) took the original of his
name from the great Changis. At this day, this Empire reaches from the desert
Lop on the one side, and the lake Kicauia on the other, to that famous wall of
China situate between 43. and 45. degrees, which leads from mountain to
mountain, till it end at the Ocean, and divides the Tartars from the Chinois:
and from the Scythian Ocean, to the confines of Tipura and the bordering
regions.

In the foresaid compass are contained many and mighty kingdoms, and many
puissant provinces, as Tangut, wherein are the cities Succuir and Campian,
built after the manner of Italy, Ergimul, Carazan, Tebet and Caindu, the
chief cities of provinces. In the midst of the Empire is Tenduch, which in
the time of Paul Venetus was in the jurisdiction of Prester John, but now
subdued by the great Cham. The greater part of the people were Christians but
Nestorians, the rest Mahumetans. Here is the city Cambalu the imperial seat,
containing in compass 28. miles, and near unto it Taiduc situated upon a
lake, and containing in compass 24. miles. Then Xaindu the palace of the great
Cham, being four square; every square containing eight miles, and four gates.
Within that square, is another palace, six miles square; in the midst
whereof are three gates toward the south, and as many toward the north; from
whence, as likewise from every corner you may behold the imperial palace. And
within this circuit is yet an other square of one mile, having six gates like
the former. Between every wall you may see meadows and woods, and within this
square is the Imperial palace, of whose pleasures, riches and magnificence,
neither of his chases, fowlings and fishing am I able to write. This whole
region for the most part is very populous, full of towns, rich and civil,
which you may the rather believe; first, for that the Tartars choosing this for
their seat and country, beautified it with the spoils of Asia, China, and
that part of Europe which they harried, and were never won or taken from
thence again to this day: next, for that the provinces are most commodiously
situated for traffike and negotiation, partly by reason of their admirable
plains and huge lakes, amongst which are Cazaia (whose waters are salt) Guian,
Dangu, Xandu, and Catacora: partly by reason of their large rivers, which with
a long course do run by the provinces of Curato, Polisango, Zaiton, and Mccon.
Paul Venetus calls it Quion. A great help hereunto likewise is the variety
of fruits, and the abundance of grain, rice, wool, silk, hemp, Reubarbe,
musk, and excellent fine chamblets wouen of camels hair. Paul writes, that
it affoordeth ginger, cinnomom, and cloves, which for my part I hardly believe.
In many rivers are found grains of gold. Their coin is not all of one value.
In Cathaia a coin is current made of the black rind of a certain tree,
growing between the body and the bark. This rind being smoothed, rounded
and tempered with a gummie substance, is stamped with the image of the great
Cham. In the kingdoms of Caiacan and Carazan, certain sea shells are current,
which some men term Porcelline. This kind of money is frequent in many places
of India and Aethiopia. By this means the princes get unto themselves all the
gold and silver of the provinces, which they cause to be molten and laid up in
most safe places, without ever taking any thing from thence again. In like
sort Prester John is thought to be Lord of an inestimable treasure, while he
makes grains of salt and pepper to pass for current coin amongst his
subjects. They brew an excellent beuerage of rice and spices, which sooner
procures drunkenness then wine. As the Arabians, so they delight in sower
milk, or Cosimus, a kind of charmed sower mares milk very forcible to turn
the brain.

His force consists first (as we told you) in situation, in spacious
territory, in magnificent cities, in plenty of provision, and in rich
revenues: for amongst many other things, he takes the tenths of wool, silk,
hemp, grain, cattle, and is absolute Lord of all: but the chiefest sinews
of his state consists in his armed troops which he keeps in continual pay
and action. These live always in the field, four or five miles remote from the
cities. Over and above their salary, they are allowed to make profit of their
cattle, milk and wool. When he goes to warfare, according to the custom of
the Romans, he mustereth part of that soldierie which lies dispersed through
the provinces. For the most part all the nations of the Tartars except the
Varcheni, who are not subject to the Great Cham, fight on horseback. Their
weapons are the bow and arrow, which they use as desperately in their flight,
as in the charge. They are very swift; their tents are made of wouen wool,
with which they shelter themselves from foul weather. Their chiefest
sustenance is milk dried in the sun after the butter is queased out, yea the
blood of their horses, if famine enforce. They fight not pel-mel with their
enimes, but sometime on the front, sometime on the flank, after the Parthian
manner they ouerwhelme them, as it were with a shower of arrows. Whosoever
carries himself valiantly, stands assured of reward, and are graced with
honor, immunities and gifts. Twelve thousand horsemen are appointed for the
guard of the Prince, and it is said that of this kind of force, he is able to
levy a greater power then any other potentate. Howsoever it be, two things in
his kingdom are worthy consideration: the one is, numbers which may be
imagined by the spaciousnes of his dominions: the other, their discipline,
because he keeps them in continual pay. For as discipline rather then fury
is to be wished in a soldier; so in armies, a few trained and experienced
soldiers, are more worth then many strong, huge of stature and raw. The one
may well be compared to eagles, lions and tygres, which obtain principality
amongst other beasts; not because they exceed them in hugenes of bodies, for
then should they be a pray to the Elephant, horse, and bufall; but because they
excel them in swiftnes and nimblenes joined to the strength of their bodies.

Beside these things which Mark Paul writes, certain Englishmen sailing by
the Moscouite sea, and the bordering regions have pierced even to Cathaia, and
have set down many memorable matters of this Prince, whom the Moscouite
terms the Caesar of Cathay, and the Turk Vlucham, that is, the Great Prince.
And not without reason, for in magnificence of courts, amplenes of dominion,
abundance of treasure, and number of soldiers, he goes far beyond all the
kings and potentates of Asia, and reigns in such majesty, that his subjects
foolishly call him the shadow of spirits, and the son of the immortal God.
His word only is a law, wherein consists life and death. He maintayneth
justice with admirable severity, except for the first fault: for which the
offender is grievously whipped: for every other fault, he is cut in pieces by
the middle: herein it should seem they immitate the opinion of the Stoikes,
concerning the equality of offenses. A thief is likewise slain, if he be not
able to repay ninefold, as well for a farthing as a pound. The first begotten
son is heir to the crown, and installed with these ceremonies. The chief
of their seven tribes clothed in white (which is their mourning color, as
likewise of the Iapans) cause the prince to sit upon a black woollen cloth
spread upon the ground, willing him to behold the son, and to fear the
immortal God; which if he does perform, he shall find a more plentiful
reward in heaven then in earth; if not, that piece of black cloth shall
scarcely be left him, whereupon to rest his wearied body in the field, besides
a thousand other miseries that shall continually attend him. Then set they the
crown upon his head, and the great Lords kiss his feet, swear fealty, and
honor him with most rich gifts. Then is his name written in golden letters,
and laid up in the temples of the metropolitan city. He has two councels,
the one for war, wherein twelve wise men consult: the other of state matters,
consisting likewise of as many counselors. These manage all things belonging
to civil government, rewarding the good, and punishing the evil, taking
especial care to see those preferred, who have done any good service, either
in war or peace, to his country and Emperor, and others severely punished,
who have borne themselves carelessly and cowardly in the charges committed to
their discretion. In these two points, (that is, in rewarding and punishing)
consists so high a policy of good government, that it may well be said, the
greatest part of the barbarous princes by these two virtues only, imprint so
maiestical a reverence in the hearts of their barbarous subjects.

For what other face of good government see you in the Turk, Persian, Mogor or
Iariff? whom reward they but captains and soldiers? where use they
liberality, but in the field amongst weapons? Surely they built the foundation
of their state upon no other groundwork, nor hope for peace and qutetnes, but
by victory and strong hand: yea they have no mean, in disgracing base minds
and cowards, and in honoring high spirits and valiant soldiers. Never was there
common wealth or kingdom, that more devised to honor and enrich the soldier,
then these Barbarians, and the Turk more then all the rest. The Tartars,
Arabians, and Persians, honor nobility in some good measure; but the Turk
rooteth out the families of Noble men, and esteems of no man, unless he be a
soldier, committing the fortunes of the whole Empire to the direction of slaves
and base borne, but with an especial consideration of their fitnes and
sufficiency. Let us return to the Tartar, and his form of government.
Astrologians are in great request in those provinces; for M. Paul writes, that
in the city of Cambula are fifty thousand: and when Cublay Cham understood by
them that that city would rebel against him, he caused another to be built
near unto it, called Taindu, containing four and twenty miles besides the
suburbs. There are also great store of fortune tellers and nigromancers in the
kings palace of Xandu, as also in China they are in high esteem. Ismal king of
Persia enterprised few matters without their council, and it is no wonder
that it carries such reputation in those places: for between the Caldeans and
Assirians it took the first original in those countries. The Turks cannot
abide it. The Roman Emperors did more then once banish it, and the professors
thereof, out of their governments. I would to God the like might be done
amongst us Christians, for it is nothing else but a branch of Paganism. To
end with the nature of this people, in outward shape they are unlike to all
other people; for they are broader between the eyes, and bals of their cheeks
then men of other nations be: they are of mean stature, having flat and small
noses, little eyes, broad faces, and eie-lids standing straight upright,
swartie of complexion, strong of constitution, patient of extremities,
excellent horsemen, and very good archers. And as part of the Arabians
inhabit cities, and are called Moors, part live in the fields and mountains,
and are termed Baduini: so some of these Tartars dwell in cities, as the
Cathaians, Bochars, and those of Shamarcand: others wander through the plains,
and are divided into hords, and they are five in number, Zauolen^ses,
Cossanenses, Praecopits, Nagaians and Kossacks.

The Great Mogor.
IT has been always believed, that the territory lying between Ganges and
the river Indus, has been evermore subject to great and mighty Monarchs. For
(to be silent in matters of more ancient memory) about the year of our Lord
1300. there reigned in the kingdom of Delos an Arabian Prince of the sect of
Mahumet, named Sanosaradin (as John Barros reports) of so great power and
strength, that he enterprised the conquest of Asia. Upon which resolution
forsaking those regions, in which Indus and Ganges take their beginnings, with
a huge and mighty army, by little and little he subdued those Princes and
people which did oppose against him, until he pierced to the bounds of Canora,
where it begins at the river Bate above Chaul, and stretches between Bate
and the gulf of Bengala to Cape Comorine. When he had won so large and famous
a territory, resolving to return into Delos, he left Abdessa his lieutenant
in Canora. This man encouraged by the victories of his master, and presuming
upon his own good fortune, bereaved the Gentiles of the greater part of
Canora: and having gathered a most mighty and populous army compacted of
Gentiles, Mahumetans and Christians, after he had reigned twenty years, he
died in the height of his prosperity, leaving his son Mamudza behind him; whom
the king graced with his fathers regencie, upon condition to pay him a yearly
tribute: which payment the young man neither regarded, nor showed himself
loyal to his sovereign in many things besides. It happened that Sanosaradin
dying in the war which he made against Persia, left behind him a son of
such pusillanimitie and so base a spirit, that Mamusda hereupon took courage
to entitle himself king of Canora, calling the country Decan, and the people
Decaini, that is, illegitimate. After this, he erected eighteen captainships,
and divided his dominion amongst them, assigning to every one his limits,
only with this penalty, to find always in readiness a certain number of
footmen and horsemen.

To prevent future rebellion he did choose these Captains, not out of the
orders of his nobility, but from the number of his slaves. Nay more then this
(to be assured of their loyalty) he commanded that every one of them, should
build him a house in his royal city Bider, in which their children should
remain: and that once every year at least, they should make their appearance
in his court.

But because all authority, which is not as well underpropped with his proper
virtues, as grounded upon the affections of the people, is of small
continuance; so happened it to this Prince: for his slaves and vassals having
sovereign authority put into their hands, made no more account of him then of
a cipher, stripping him poor Prince without respect or reverence of all his
dominions, saving his chief city Bider, with the territory adjoining. For
every one of a Lieutenant, became an usurper of those states which were
committed to his trust; the mightier always oppressing the weaker: so that all
in the end became a pray to a few. Two of them are famous at this day: the one
of them stretching his dominion to the borders of Cambaia; the other to the
skirts of Narsinga: the first called by the portugals Nissamalucco, the other
Idalcan* Either of them is so puissant, that in the year 1571. Idalcan
belegred Goa with an army of thirty five thousand horse, threescore thousand
elephants and two hundred and fifty pieces of ordinance. Nissamalucco besieged
Chaul with less forces, but better fortune: for though he did not force it,
yet he brought it to an hard pinch, with the slaughter of twelve thousand
Moors.

In those countries in which Sanosaradin began his empire, not above 70 years
agone, a great prince (whom the east people call the great Mogor (in the same
sense as we call the great Turk) laid the foundation of a mighty empire; for
as the king of Biarma in our times greatly hazarded the states of Pegu and
Siam, and the bordering regions; even so the Mogor turned topsie turuie the
kingdoms lying on this side the river Ganges. The received opinion is, that
they took their original from Tartaria, and that they came from that coast,
where the ancient Mossagetae, a people accounted invincible in arms, did once
inhabit, and living as it were lawless, and under no government, by invasion
of their neighbors, procured unto themselves the sovereignty of most spacious
kingdoms. By the river Oxus they border upon the Persians, and are at
continual enmity with them, sometimes for religion, sometime for enlargement
of the bounds of their empire. Their chief city is Shamarcand, from whence
came Tamarlan, and of whose blood these Mogor princes do boast that they are
descended. The predecessor of him (who is now prince of the Mogors) was very
famous in the east; for in the year 1536. being solicited by king Mandao of
the north (from whom Badurius king of Cambaia had taken his kingdom) to aid
him against the Cambaian, he is reported to have brought with him an infinite
number of soldiers, which we may conjecture out of that which Maffeus writes
of the army of king Badurius: to wit, that this king had under his standard
one hundred and fifty thousand horse, whereof five and thirty thousand were
barbed: the number of footmen was 500. thousand. Amongst these were fifteen
thousand foreign soldiers, and fower-score Christians, French and Portugals:
at which, by what means or by what way they should come thither, I do mightily
wonder. Their Galleon (which they called Dobriga) suffered shipwreck in the
channel of Cambaia. I know, that if these preparations and provisions for
war, be compared with our forces of Christendom, they will hardly be taken
for true: but we have already declared the causes, why the princes of the east
and south may gather greater armies then we can, and consequently that those
things which are spoken of their incredible store, and wonderful provision of
furniture, may be answerable to their leuies and proportions of soldiery. And
as they are able to levy millions of men (for arming and feeding them they
take no great care;) so likewise do the provinces afford great plenty of
provision, and an inestimable multitude of warlike engines: for they carry
nothing with them save that which is necessary and needful for the wars:
Wines, cates and such like, which cannot but with great expense, labor and
trouble be carried along with armies, are by these men wholly omitted and
utterly rejected. All their thoughts tend to warlike provisions, as to get
brass, iron, steel, and tin, to forge pieces, and cast great ordinance;
iron and lead to make bullets; iron and steel to temper cymitars; oxen and
elephants to draw their artillery; grain to nourish their bodies; metals to
arm them, and treasure to conserve them.

They are all tyrants, and to preserve their estates, and induce submissiue
awednes, they hold hard hands over the comminaltie, committing all government
into the hands of soldiers. And to make these men faithful and loyal, they
ordain them lords of all things, committing unto their trust, towns, castles,
and expeditions of great weight: but the expectation of the prince is often
deceived by the rebellion of these vassals, for sometimes they usurp whole
provinces, and impose upon the people all kind of miuries. But let good
princes think it as necessary to build their safety upon the love of their
subjects, as upon the force of the soldier. Fear admits no security, much
less perpetuity: and therefore these tirants expecting no surety at the
hands of their subjects, trust wholly upon their men of war, flattering them
with promise of liberty, and bestowing upon them the goods of their subjects,
as rewards of their service. So with us the Turk strengthens his estate with
Ianizars, and as he coueteth to be beloved and favored of them (to that end
bestowing upon them the riches and honors of the empire) so they again
acknowledge no other lord and master, I may very well say, father and
protector. And so many of the Malaber princes using and accounting the people
but as beasts, lay all their hopes and fortunes on the Nairs: the kings of
Ormus, Cambaia, Decan and Achan lay all upon the shoulders of these slaves. In
a word, as a lawful and just prince has a great regard and singular care to
have the liking and love of the people, by which being guarded and environed
(as with a strong rampire) he is able to withstand all attempts: so
contrariwise tyrants knowing themselves hateful to the people, employ their
whole study how to win the favor of their soldiers and slaves, thereby to
repress innouations at home, and invasions from abroad. Seeing therefore the
safety and foundation of their greatness is built upon the intertainment of
their soldiers, as their Nairs, their Ianizars, free or bond, strangers or
subjects, yea whatsosoeuer they be, it must needs follow that only actions of
war be the end and scope of all their cogitations, as likewise that they be
very prodigal to keep their estates very well furnished and appointed with
soldiers and provisions. And this reason I take to be a sufficient inducement
to believe these reports of the king of Cambaia, and these other barbarous
Indian princes. For (besides that I spoke of before) it is reported, that with
this army did march a thousand pieces of ordinance, amongst which were four
basiliskes, every one drawn with an hundred yoke of oxen: five hundred wagons
laden with gunpowder and bullets, two hundred armed elephants; five hundred
vessels full of gold and silver to pay soldiers wages; many princes and petie
lords with their courtiers and followers, merchants, vittailers, artificers,
and their servants numberless. Notwithstanding this incredible preparation,
he was twice overthrown by Marhumedio: once in the territory of the city of
Doce, another time at Mandao, from whence disguising his apparel to save his
life, he fled to Diu. Being out of danger and fear, he sent ambassadors to
Soliman, with a present esteemed worth six hundred thousand crowns, desiring
his aid and assistance in these wars. But afterward weighing in his mind,
that his affairs required speedier succors, he contracted a league with
those Portugals, which were nearest adjoining: to make them his friends and
partners of the war, the composition was, that he should permit them to build
a castle in the Island of Diu. Now to speak of Marhumedius. His fortunes were
not much unlike to those of Tamerlane: for as this prince brought terror and
fear upon the inhabitants of Persia and Asia; so did that, no less innovation
and trouble upon India and the Orient: this defeated in battle Bajazet emperor
of Turks, that overthrew Badurius king of Cambaia, and his army far greater
then his own: both of them had the surname of Great. When the Mogors
understood of the riches of India, and the fertility thereof, they never
ceased by a continued course of victory their arms and invasions, until they
had made themselves Lords of all the provinces lying between Caucasus and the
sea, Ganges and the river Indus: in this tract are contained 47. kingdoms. For
Adabar the successor of Marhumedius won Madabar, with the better part of
Cambaia. Of what goodly consequence this province is, may be magined by the
famous cities of Madabar Campana (so called for the situation upon the top of
an high hill rising in the midst of a spacious plain) and Cambaia (a city
consisting of one hundred and thirty thousand houses) as likewise by the
populous host of king Badurius, his warlike provision for such an army, and
plenty of grain to sustain such a multitude. I assure you the world affoords
not a soil for all necessaries for the life of man (as rice, corn, pulse,
sugar, oxen, sheep, pullen of all sorts, and silk) more richer or plentiful
then this province, wherein also there are reported to be sixty thousand
borroughes: which number certainly is very great and admirable. Guicciardine
writes, that in Netherland within the territory of the 17. provinces are
contained 208. walled towns, and 150. borroughes, enjoying the rights and
privileges of cities, and 6300. villages having parish churches. In Naples are
1800. of these some are towns, some but castles. In Bohemia are 780. towns,
and 32. thousand villages. In France (as John Bodine writes) there are 27.
thousand borroughes having churches and bells, besides those in Burgundy, which
in those times were not numbered amongst the towns of France. I write not this
to induce a true and absolute judgment of the power of any province by the
number of parishes, for I know that ought to be made according to their
greatness, but yet their number makes much to the purpose, as in both which,
Cambaia may carry the credit and esteem of a most spacious, populous and
puissant kingdom.

Acabar also conquered the rich kingdom of Bengala; so that a man may truly
say, that in this part of the orient there are three Emperors: one in Cambaia,
the other in Narsinga, the third in Bengala: whereof Cambaia and Bengala far
exceed all the other provinces in fertility of soil, and concourse of
merchants: both riotously abounding in sugar, cotton wool, cattle, elephants
and horses: in Bengala also grows long pepper and ginger. The first, is
watered and cut as it were into two halfes by the river Indus, the other by
Ganges, having two famous mart towns, Satagan and Catagan.

The great Mogor does likewise possess the kingdoms of Citor, Mandao and
Delly, wherein he keeps his court. He has infinite store of horses,
elephants and camels, as also all sorts of artillery and warlike furniture, by
means whereof, he is grown fearful to the whole inhabitants of the East. It
is written of him, that he is able to bring into the field 300. thousand horse,
and that there are within his dominions fifty thousand elephants.

Some man perhaps will ask, how it comes to pass that this Prince (being so
mighty, and his neighbors so naked, unarmed and poor) does not get into his
possession the dominion of the rest of India and the Orient? In this as in the
former vnlikelihoods, the wisest man is soonest answered. There are many
obstacles: one is, that as the spirit and body of man cannot endure in
continual travel and motion (for that only is proper to God and Nature:) so
a continued and open passage is not evermore given to the ambitious reaches of
kings and Princes. Great Empires seldom fear foreign invasion, yet
oftentimes faint they under their own weight. It is not destined unto great
things to stand always at the highest, much less to increase: they have their
flood, but upon a condition, that there follow an ebb. They are lifted on
high, but by the irreuocable decree of nature, that a fall succeed: yea and
that themselves by themselves decline. The greater they are, the more subject
to mutabilitie: the larger the harder to hold and manage: they move but
slowly, and of what effect celeritie is in war, who knows not? The greatest
conquest carries the greatest envy with it, and greatest care to conserve
what is got, and yet not care but long continuance perfecteth these actions:
and while time passes, the neighboring nations provide (if not infest) for
their own safety, yea most commonly by loss of time proceeds the loss of
victorious opportunity. He that has overcome his enemy, stands oftentimes
in fear of his friend, yea of such as have bin fellows and partners with him
in all his fortunes: so that to secure himself of these, and such like
infinite casualties, he is constrained even in the course of victory to sound
the retraict, and surcease his designements. Again, continual victory make
leaders insolent, soldiers mutinous, refusing to pass forward at the command
of their general, as it happened to Alexander and Lucullus. Great enterprises
even brought to their wished end, enrich the purses of certain private men,
but leave the Princes cofers empty, who nevertheless must be at the charge to
maintain continual companies, and keep them in continual pay; without which
course, the cashed soldier is ever ready to follow any faction whenever it
shall be offered. Moreover, this numberless army, which Marhumedius led
against the king of Cambaia, did not only waste the regions where through it
passed and encamped, but likewise by devouring all things that the face of the
earth yielded, bereaved itself of the means, which nature in measure
affoorded to every one to maintain his life: and so it often happens, that
those armies which in apprehension seem invincible for their hugenes, are most
commonly overthrown by famine, the forerunner of pestilence. For proof hereof
we have seen the inundations of Attila, Tamerlan, and those barbarous nations
stand on foot but a little space, whereas the Grecians, Macedonians,
Carthaginians, Romans, Spaniards and English, have done great matters with
mean armies. For things that are moderate last and endure, as small rivers,
which what they cannot do in one year, in two or more they finally
accomplish; whereas immoderate and violent, are like unto Torrents, making more
noise and fury then hurt or hinderance, violently coming, and violently
carrying themselves away. Therefore against such mighty impressions, the
surest safety is, to draw the war out in length, and only to stand upon the
defensive: for let such armies rest assured, that they cannot so long hold out,
but they will waver, either for want of provision, scarcity of coin,
infection of the air, or infirmities of their own bodies. The other thing is,
that prosperity blinds the winner, making him careless; adversity ripeneth
the looser, and makes him wary and industrious: so fortune changing her
copy, the affairs of the winner decline, and the good success of the looser
grows every day better then other. Besides, conquests are not perfected but
by process of time, and in process of time old age creeps upon the persons
of Princes, and how fit a crasie body, and a vigorous spirit nummed with old
age, is for the consummation of a conquered estate, the lives of Julius Caesar
and Charles the fifth, may stand for examples.

Lastly to answer those, who unless they be ere witnesses, will never be
answered, let them know that nothing so much hinders the inuasiue ambition of
this prince, as the nature of places. For Caucasus stretching it self into a
thousand branches in those parts, incompasseth whole kingdoms with some
parcels thereof: by some it runs by the sides; to others, it is more
defensive then any artificial rampire: sometime it wholly shuts up passages,
sometime it meaketh them inaccessible. These difficulties are more injurious to
the Mogor then to any other Prince, because the strength and sinews of his
forces consist in horse; which as they are of great consequence in Campania, so
amongst hills and rocks they are of no service. Of this quality are the
frontires of Persia, and the kingdom of Sablestan, on every side he^d in with
that part of Caucasus, which the Grecians call Paropanise. Segestan is likewise
so environed, that the river Il-mento (were it not for searching out infinite
windings and turnings through natural valleys) could hardly find passage to
pay his tribute to the famous Ganges. In Cambaia it self, where the Mogors are
of such fearful puissance, live the Resbuti, not dreading them one whit, by
reason of the strength of the mountains. These Resbuti are the remainder of
the Gentiles, that betook themselves to the mountains between Cambaia and
Diu, when the Mahumetans first entered these countries; and since that day by
strong hand they have preserved their liberty, infesting very often the
plain country with their incursions. Other provinces there are utterly
barren, not only wanting water, but all necessaries else: of this kind is
Dolcinda, upon the skirts of Cambaia, thorough which it is impossible to lead
an army. To these discommodities you may add the loss of time, which Princes
(being lords of ample and spacious dominions) are constrained to make in their
voiages. For the better part of summer is spent before they can arrive at their
rendeuous with their horses half dead through travel, and the army half in
half in number and courage diminished, yea winter ouertaketh them, commodious
for their enemies, and disaduantagious for them. For they must lie in the field
and open air amongst mire and frosts, their enemies under a warm roof, and
wholesome harbor. Whereupon wise princes, which have been to make long
land-iourneies through diverse provinces of diverse natures, for fear of such
like discommodities, have thought it best to provide shipping, and to use the
opportunity of rivers or sea, as did Caesar Germanicus in the war of
Germany, after he perceived that in the protracting of time (which was
requisite for the marching of his army) the greater part of his men and horses
were idly consumed by infirmities, labor, and the length of iourneies. But
the Mogor is utterly destitute of this advantage: upon one side he has no
haven, on an other the Portugals are his jealous neighbors, who with two
castles of great strength, at Din and Damain, have shut up the whole gulf of
the Cambaia^ sea. Finally, the puissance of their neighbors has been as
great a control to their furious invasions, as any other natural cause: viz.
the king of Barma, who is nothing inferior in power and riches: for he is lord
of so many kingdoms, and so fierce and warlike a people, and can bring such
swarms into the field, that he is fearelesse of any his Tartarian neighbors.
And as the Mogor rules fare and wide between Ganges and Indus, so does this
king between Ganges and Siam. As the one deuiseth to offend; so by little and
little the other waxes wise to defend.

For by nature man is more prone to procure his own safety, then ready by
wrong to oppress others, being always more careful to conserve, then forward
to destroy. It cannot be expressed how full of subtlety, shifts, devises, and
industry man is to defend him and his: for he uses for his own safeguard, not
that only which is properly defe^siue, but even that also which may be any way
offensive. Neither ever was there any instrument invented for offense, but that
the same might be turned to defense; of which kind are castles built of later
times, and the devises of modern fortification. And therefore the closest
castles are never accounted the best, because they which are forced to guard
such places, are deprived of the facility of offending the enemy by sallies,
shot, wilde-fire, and such like: all which, and many other stratagemes were
easily performed in an open hold. But of all inventions, there is none more
admirable then that of fortification: for even the terms thereof (as Curtains,
counterscarps, parapets, trenches, vamures, mines, and countermines, casemats,
and such like phrases) are very ingenious and mystical: for by this art few
soldiers have resisted great armies; and a small place made tenable, has
wasted the forces and treasures of a mighty Emperor: As well witnessed the
fortunes of 800. Portugals at Damain upon the coast of Cambaia, who by this
art scorned and deluded the whole forces and attempts of this mighty Mogor.

The kingdom of China.
IN times past the kingdom of China has been far larger then now it is.
For it appears by their histories (containing the Annals of 2000. years and
upwards) and by other of their manuscript Cronicles written in their own
language, (whose fragments are yet to be seen) that their kings were Lords
almost of all the sea coast of Asia from the straight of Anian, to the kingdom
of Pegu: the provinces of Meletai, Bacam, Calan, Boraga, and other territories,
situated upon the north side of Pegu: where their monuments with their
epitaphes and devises are to be seen at this day. For in all the foresaid
regions, the relics of their ancient ceremonies, (whereby the knowledge of
the Mathematiques, as the division of the year into months, the Zodiake into
twelve signs, true testimonies of their emperie) are observed and taught by
tradition. Neither is the time long, sithence all those kingdoms accounted the
king of China their sovereign, sending their ambassadors with presents to his
court every third year. These ambassadors ought to be four at least, for
before they could arrive at their iourneies end, some of the^ either by
remotenes of place, difficult access of audience, or delay in dispatch, could
not but surely die; those whose chance it was to escape, the Chinois in some set
banquet would poison, and erect unto them stately tombs, with the inscription
of their names, the place from whence they came, and with the title of
ambassadors: thereby (say they) to commit to eternity the remembrance of the
bounds of their empire. They enlarged their dominions no less upon the Ocean,
then upon the continent. For they first of all invaded the Isles of the Orient;
next them followed the Giau^; then the Malaccans and Moors, and lastly the
Portugals and Castilians, who hold them at this day. But none of these nations
were of equal power and magnificence to the Chinois: for besides the conquest
of the bordering Isles (which in regard of their numbers, their spaciousnes and
fertility, were of great reckoning) they became Lords of the greatest part of
all the inhabitable places in that vast Archipelago, even to Zeilan, where they
left their speech and caracters, as also they did the like upon the opposite
continent. We read also in the papers of certain Jesuits, that in one quarter
of the Island of S. Laurence, they found white people, which said that they
descended of the Chinois. They first discovered the Moluccas, gave names to the
spices, and planted colonies in many of them, which to this present keep their
old names, as Batta China a Muar, Batta China, Mauri: Batta signifies a town,
Batta China, a town of the Chinois. It is likewise thought that the
inhabitants of Iaua descended of them, and to speak truth, there is no great
difference between their manner of living, clothing, building, industry,
traffik, and manual occupations. But after the shipwreck of 80. vessels, and
the loss of their people in the sea of Zeilan, comparing their profit with
their loss, they resolved to try no more such hazards, but to contain
themselves within their own bounds. And to cause this edict to be inuiolably
observed, they enact ed, that none thereafter upon pain of the loss of his
head should offer to sail into those parts: the kings themselves did ever
after abstain from future invasions. For sithence they enjoy a very earthly
paradise, where nature and art are at strife to content the inhabitants, where
no good thing is wanting, but much superfluous and to spare; what mad men would
consume their bodies and treasures in getting those things, which are more
chargeable to get, then profitable to keep? Polibius writes, that upon the
same reasons the old Carthaginians forsook part of those things, which before
they had conquered. The Romans after they had suffered a greenous loss of
their best vessels in the second Punicke war, in mere despair bid
navigations adieu; but afterward perceiving that they who were commanders of
the sea, were likely to prove Lords of the land, built a new navy, and at
length saw the success answer their latest opinions. Therefore can we not but
ascribe this resolution of the Chinois rather to good conscience and
aduisednes, then to wisdom or good policy. For seeing there can be no
greater folly then to hazard our own goods, upon hope to gain another, to
waste the borders of our own dominions to invade our neighbors, to shed our
own blood upon desire to spill a strangers: it is more honorable and worthy
the office of a king, to content himself with his own right, rather then by
wrong to possess another. Content breeds stabilitie, conquest brings care to
see to the conquered: therefore why should any prince wear out himself to
enlarge his dominion, if enlargement do not only do no good, but even
spoileth that which was good before, making that uncertain which before was
certain, and weakening that which before was strong. Let a wise prince utterly
refrain such iournies; if they bring not assured security, and more then
common profit. For security is one scale wherein a state hangs, which, if
the beam stand true, must only aim at that which is likely to breed greater
security, and that is, the seizing upon streights, sconces, passages, and fit
places to remove the enemy far away: In the other scale should hang profit,
and that is, by conquering those provinces which are rich or able to yield all
kind of provision for living creatures and furniture for war and shipping.

But to return to the Chinois. When this surrender was resolved in full
counsel, they set the people whom they had vanquished, free; yet some of their
good wills remained feodaries, shadowing their estates under the wings of their
puissance, as the kings of Corea, Lequi, Canchinchina and Siam. And
notwithstanding their retrait within their own bounds, yet possess they a
dominion little less then all Europe: for from the North toward the South, it
reaches from 17. to 52. degrees, from the East to the West are 22. degrees.
Pacquin, wherein the king keeps his court is situated in 48. degrees. The
Empire is divided into fifteen provinces, six maritime, Cantan, Foquem,
Chiqueuan, Pantora, Nanquij, the rest inland, Quichiu, Iuana, Quancij, Suiuam,
Fuquam, Cansij, Xianxij, Nonam, Sancij. The provinces of Quinci, Cantan, and
Foquem are divided from the vplandish, with mountains like the Alps, but not
above two days journey asunder. Thomas Perez the king of Portugals ambassador
made four months journey from Cantan to Nanquij, always bearing northerly.

It is not so spacious, but it is as fertile: for it yields not only what is
fitting for humane life, but whatsoever the delicate and effeminate appetite of
man may lust after. Many plants yield fruit twice or thrice a year, and that
not only by the temperature of the air, but by the number of rivers and
plenty of waters, which do both cause traffike through every corner of the
region, and so water it on all sides, that it resembles a most pleasant and
delectable garden plot. Of this plenty there are two causes: one, the
prodigal expenses of the king in digging of trenches through the whole land;
sometime cutting through rockie mountains, sometime damming up deep valleys
to make them level with high mountains, and to draine the waters of lakes and
marshes: the other, for that the whole region is situated under the temperatre
Zone, and in no place, either by nature or man's industry, wants moisture; so
that all creatures taking nourishment of heat and moisture must needs here
wonderously prosper: In no place plants may take larger scope to spread their
branches, nor cattle larger walks to wander in, then in this country. The
last reason is, for that the idle are neither severely punished, nor altogether
tolerated, every one is forced to do somewhat, no foot of land is left
unhusbanded, nor dram of stuff cast away unwrought. Amongst all admirables,
one thing is worthy consideration, that in Cantan they keep four thousand
whales to grind corn and rice. In China every one is set about somewhat,
according to his years and strength, one labors with his hand, one with his
foot, one with his eye, another must be doing with his tongue, those only
who are impote^t in their limes, and have no friends living to succor them,
are provided for in hospitals. That none may excuse themselves, in saying he
can do nothing, every one is bound to learn his fathers occupation, which is
the reason that the children (borne as it were tradesmen) learn their fathers
occupations before they perceive it, becoming in time most artificial
mechaniques. He that can not live at land, seeks his maintenance at sea,
(for that is no less inhabited then the land,) yea infinite households live
upon the rivers in boats without coming to land for a long season. Some of
these live by ferrying over people, some by transporting passengers and their
merchandise: others keep shops, other vessels of lodgings for merchants and
travelers. Whatsoever is needful for clothing, for food or nourishment,
delight or case of a civil life, is to be found in the midst of great rivers.
Many nourish all sorts of poultrie, especially ducks in their vessels. To hatch
the eggs and nourish the young ones, they use not the dams, as we do, but an
artificial heat, in a manner as they do in Egypt, especially at Cair. All
night he keeps them in his boat, and at morning sends them to feed in the
fields sowed with rice, whence all day long having fed upon the weeds, to the
great good of the husbandman, they return toward evening to their cages, at
the sound of a little bell or cimball. Many live by carrying fish, both salt
and fresh, into the high countries: for in the spring, when the rivers rise
through thawes and land-flouds, so incomparable quantities of sea fish do
abound in the havens or creekes, that the fishermen depart rather wearied then
wanting. This fish the skippers buy for a small matter of the fishermen, and
keeking them alive in certain vessels made for the purpose, they transport
them into provinces far remote from the sea. There they are sold and
preserved in pooles and stews near cities and great towns to serve the
markets and tables of the Chinois all the year long.

Because it is forbidden any inhabitant to pass out of the land without leave,
and therewith neither but for a time limited, it must needs be that by the
daily increase of people, the country be even pestered with inhabitation. It
has been observed amongst themselves, that for every five that have died,
seven have been borne. The climate is so temperate, and the air so
wholesome, that in man's memory any universal pestilence has not been known
to infest the country. Notwithstanding least any man should think this people
to enjoy all sweetes without some mixture of sower, you must note, that their
earthquakes are more dreadful to them then any pestilence to us: for whole
cities have been swallowed, and provinces made desert by this punishment. They
choke up the course of ancient channels, and make new, where were never any
before, they lay mountains level with the ground, making havoc of the
people. In the year 1555. a deluge breaking out of the bowels of the earth,
devoured 180. miles of firm land, with the towns and villages standing
thereupon: those which escaped the flood, lightning and fire from heaven
destroyed.

There are said to be in China 150. cities, 235. great towns, 1154. castles,
and 420. boroughes without walls, wherein soldiers are quartered: of villages
and hamlets (some of them containing a thousand households) the number is
infinite; for the country is so covered with habitation, that all China
seems but as one town. They have two metrapolitan cities, Nanquin and
Panquin. In Nanquin toward the north the king keeps his court; Under the
jurisdiction of the one are seven provinces, under the other eight. Both of
them are so spacious, that it is a days journey for a horseman to ride from
one end to the other. Of the number of inhabitants no certainty can be
produced, but according to manuscript relations, and report of travelers, it
is said, that the kingdom contains 70. millions of living souls. This is an
admirable report, and not to be believed, if it be compared with the provinces
of Christendom, but surely something above conceit is to be credited to these
spacious, populous, and barbarous nations. Let us set the largenes of their
provinces, the circuit of their cities, their plenty and abundance of all
things, and in all places, either prospering by nature or man's industry, with
their numbers and inhabitation, and we shall find a country like enough to
afford such a reckoning, cities and dwellings able to contain them, and
nourishment sufficient to maintain them. Italy exceeds not nine millions:
Germany (excluding the Swissers and Netherlands) not ten, and with the foresaid
provinces not above fifteen, which number peradventure France may reach unto.
Spain is far inferior to Italy: Sicilie has but one million, and three
hundred thousand: England three millions, and Belgia as many, if by the
continuance of the war in those countries that number be not much decayed. The
Italians conceiting marvelous highly of themselves, think no province upon
the face of the earth for wealth and people comparable to Italy, but they
forget, that as it is long, so it is narrow, and nothing wide or spacious,
neither that two third parts have not one nauigable river (a want of great
consequence) neither that the Apenine, a mountain rockie and barren, does
spread itself over a fourth part. Let them not deceive themselves, nor condemn
others plenty, by their own wants, nor measure others excess by their
handfuls. For fertility, does France in plenty of grain or cattle give place
to Italy? Or England, for cattle, wool, fish, or metal? Or Belgia, for
number or goodlines of cities, excellency of artificers, wealth or
merchandise? Or Greece for delectable or commodious situation, havens of the
sea, or pleasant provinces? Or Hungary for cattle, wine, corn, fish, mines,
and all good things else. But I will not stand upon these discourses, only let
me tell you, that Lumbardie contains the third part of Italy, a province
delightsome for battle plains, and pleasant rivers, without barren
mountains, or sandy fields, and to be as full of people as the whole half
of Italy besides. Yea, what may be said of Italy for profit or pleasure, that
may not be spoken perticularly of France, England, Netherland and both the
Pannonies? Wherefore sithence the country is not only large, mighty, and
spacious, but united, populous, plentiful and rich, at least let it be
believed and accounted for one of the greatest empires that ever was.

The government is tyrannical: for throughout the kingdom there is no other
Lord but the king. They know not what an Earl, a Marquess or a Duke means.
No fealty, no tribute or tole is paid to any man but to the king. He gives al
magistracies and honors. He allows them stipends wherewith to maintain their
estates, and they dispatch no matter of weight without his priuitie. His
vassals obey him, not as a king, but rather as a God. In every province
stands his portraiture in gold, which is never to be seen but in the new
moons, then is it showed and visited of the magistrates, and reverenced as the
kings own person. In like manner the governors and Judges are honored, no man
may speak unto them but upon their knees. Herein the people show their base
minds, making themselves the slaves (not the subjects) of the prince.
Strangers are not admitted to enter into the kingdom, least their customs and
conversation should breed alteration in manners, or innovation in the state.
They are only permitted to traffike upon the sea coasts, to buy and sell
vittaile, and to vent their wares. They that do traffike upon the land,
assemble many together, and elect a governor amongst them, whom they term,
Consul. In this good manner strangers enter the kingdom, but always awaited on
by the customers and kings officers. The inhabitants cannot travel but with
license, and with that neither, but for a prefixed season: and to be sure of
their return, they grant no leave, but for traffikes sake, and that in ships
of 150. tun and not above: for they are jealous, that if they should go to sea
in bigger vessels, they would make longer iourneis. To conclude, it is a
religious law of the kingdom, that every man's endeavors tend wholly to the
good and quiet of the common wealth. By which proceedings, Justice the mother
of quietness, policy the mistress of good laws, and industry the daughter of
peace, do flourish in this kingdom. There is no country modern or ancient
governed by a better form of policy, then this Empire: by this government
have they ruled their Empire two thousand years: And so has the state of
Venice flourished 1100. years, the kingdom of France 1200. It is two hundred
years since they cast off the yoke of the Tartars, after their ninety years
government.

For their arts, learning and policy, they conceive so well of themselves,
that they are accustomed to say, that they have two eyes; the people of Europe,
one; the residue of the nations, none. They give this good report of the
Europeans, because of their acquaintance with the Portugals, with whom they
traffic in Macao and other places, and the renown of the Castilians, who are
their neighbors in the Philippinae.

By the multitudes of people (before spoken of) you may imagine the state of
his forces, for herein all other provisions take their perfection. But to
speak somewhat in particular. The power of this Prince (remembering his
contentment, and nature detesting all invasion) is more ready and fit to
defend then offend, to preserve rather then increase. His cities for the most
part are builded upon the banks of nauigable rivers, environed with deep and
broad ditches, the walls built of stone and brick, strong above belief, and
fortified with caualiers, and artificial bulwarks. Upon the borders toward
Tartarie (to make sure work against such an enemy) they have built a wall
beginning at Chioi a city situate between two most high mountains, and
stretching it self toward the east six hundred miles between mountain and
mountain, until it touch the cliffes of the Ocean. Upon the other frontires
you may behold many, but small holds, so built to stay the course of the
enemy, until the country forces be able to make head, and the royal army
have time to come leisurely forward: for in 400. great towns he keeps in
continual pay forces sufficient upon the least warning, to march to that
quarter whither occasion calls. Every city has a garrison and guarde at the
gates, which at nights are not only fast locked but sealed, and may not be
opened before the seal at morning be thoroughly viewed. To speak truth, their
soldiers, horsemen and footmen, by land or sea, are more famous for their
numbers, their gallant furniture, and plenty of provision, then for strength
and courage. For the inhabitants partly by their effeminate and wanton kind of
life, partly by their form of government, whereby they are made vile, base and
vmbragious, have little valor or manhood left them. They use noforren
soldiers, except those whom they take in war: these they send into the inland
countries, where being marked (to distinguish them from other) they serve more
like slaves then soldiers, yet have they pay, with rewards for their good
service, and punishment for their cowardice: true motives to make men valorous.
The rest, which are not inrold, are not suffered to keep weapons in their
houses.

Their sea forces are nothing inferior to their land forces: for besides their
ordinary fleets lying upon the coasts for the safety of the sea towns, by
reason of the abundance of nauigable rivers, and so huge a sea-tract full of
havens, crecks and Islands, it is thought that with ease they are able to
assemble from five hundred to a thousand great ships, which they term Giunchi.

To think that treasure can be wanting to levy so great a number of ships,
soldiers, and mariners, many men affirm, that the kings revenues amount to
120. millions of gold, which value although it may seem impossible to him that
shall make an estimate of the states of Europe with the kingdom of China; yet
may it find place of belief, if he do but call to mind, first the nature and
circuit of the Empire, being little less then all Europe; next the
populousnes of the inhabitants, accompanied with inestimable riches, then tho
diversity and plenty of mines of gold, silver, iron, and other sorts of
metal, the unspeakable quantity of merchandise, passing from hand to hand by
so many nauigable rivers, so many arms and inlets of the sea, their vpland
cities and maritime towns, their toles, customs, and subsidies. For he takes
the tenth of all things which the carth yields, as barley, rice, olives, wine,
cotton wool, flax, silk, all kinds of metal, fruits, cattle, sugar, honey,
rubarbe, campher, ginger, woad, musk, and all sorts of perfumes. The custom
only of salt in the city Canto (which is not of the greatest nor the best
traffike) yields 180. thousand crowns yearly: the tenth of rice of one
small town and the adjacent territory yields more then 100. thousand
crowns. By these you may conjecture of the rest. He leaves his subjects
nothing, save food and clothing. He has under him no Earls, Lords, or Nobles
of any degree, no nor private persons endowed with great wealth. Wherefore
sithence this empire is so huge, and all the profits thereof are in his hands,
and at his disposition, how can the former assertion of so great a yearly
revenue, to men of reason seem any thing admirable? There are two things
moreover which add great credit to this reckoning, one is, that all his
impositions are not paid in coin, but some in haie, some in rice, corn,
prouender, silk, cotton wool, and such like necessaries: the other is, that
the king of 120. millions which he receives, disburseth again three parts
thereof. And so sithence it goes round from the king to the people, it ought
to seem no wonder, if the people be able to spare it again for the princes
use at the years end. For as waters do cbbe as deep as they flow, so
impositions easily levied suffice for the expenses of the state, and the people
receive again by those expenses as much as they laid out in the beginning of
the year.

The king of China fears no neighbor, but the great Cham of Tartaria: all
the rest acknowledge vassalage. Against this enemy the ancient kings built
that admirable wall, so much renowned amongst the wonders of the Orient.
Toward the sea he bordereth upon the Iaponians and Castilians. The distance
between Iapan and China is diverse. From Goto one of the Islands of Iapan to the
city Liampo is threescore leagues: from Cantan 297. The Ilanders of Iapan do
often spoil the sea coasts of China by their incursions, descending on land
and harrying the country, more like pirates then men of war. For in regard that
Iapan is divided into many Islands, and into diverse seigniories (ill agreeing
amongst themselves) though they excel the Chinois in arms and courage, yet
are they not of sufficient power to perform any action of moment against them.
Upon another frontire lie the Spaniards, of whom the Chinois not without good
cause are very jealous, because of the situation of the Philippinae
(commodiously seated for the invasion of China) and the fame of their riches
well known to the Spanish. But the king of Spain wishes rather to plant
Christianity peaceably amongst them, whereof there was once good hope that God
had opened a passage thereunto. For though the Chinois will suffer no stranger
to enter within their dominions: yet certain Jesuits (zealous in the increasing
of the Christian religion) in a territory, so spacious as that is, entered
with great secrecy and danger, and obtaining the favor of certain governors,
obtained a privilege of naturalization, especially friar Michaell Rogerius, who
in the year 1590. returned into Europe to advise what course were best to take
in this business. About the same time intelligence was brought from two friars
remaining there, that after diverse persecutions they were constrained to
forsake the city wherein they soiourned and had converted many, and to make
haste to sea-ward. The Portugals are likewise eie-sores unto them, but by the
report of the justice and moderation of Ferdinand Andrada, which he showed in
the government of the Island of Tamo, and by the traffike which they exercise in
those seas, they can better digest their neighborhood, then that of the
Spanish. This was the first Portugal that arrived in the city of Cantan, and
set a land Thomas Perez Iegier for Emanuell king of Portugal. But other
captains being there afterward disimbarked, behaved themselves so leudly,
that they occasioned the said Ambassador to be taken for a spy, and cast in
prison, where he died most miserably: the residue were entreated as enemies.
At last it was permitted the Portugals for traffike sake to settle a factory in
Macao, where again before they had strongly fortified their colony, they were
constrained to submit to the limitations of the Chinois, to whom in short time
for their strength, wisdom, friendship and allians with the Castilians, they
became suspicious: and therefore they do daily more and more bridle their
liberty of traffike, carrying so heavy a hand toward them, that they would
feign give them occasion to leave Macao of their own wills, and retire back
again into India, from whence they came.

The kingdom of Siam.
Upon the borders of China, (to speak nothing of Cauchinchina because we know
nothing worth relation of that territory) ioineth the country of Siam,
accounted amongst the great kingdoms of Asia. It took his name of the city
Siam, situated upon the entrance of the river Menan: It is also called Gorneo.
It stretches by east and west from the city Campaa, to the city Tauai, in
which tract by the sea coast are contained 500. leagues. Of which the Arabians
once usurped 200. with the cities Patan, Paam, Ior, Perca, and Malaca, now in
the possession of the Portugals. From the south toward the north it reaches
from Sinca-Pura situate in degree, to the people called Gueo^^ in 29. degrees.
The lake Chiamai is distant from the sea six hundred miles: the vpland circuit
stretches from the borders of Canchinchina beyond the river Auan, where lies
the kingdom of Chencra. Besides the lake of Chiamai, the rivers Menon, Menam,
Caipumo, and Ana (which cause greater fertility of grain through the whole
region, then a man would believe) are all his. The better part of his kingdoms
are muironed with the mountains Ana, Brema, and Iangoma: the residue is plain
like Egypt, abounding with elephants, horses, pepper, gold and tin. In the west
part are huge woods, tygres, lions, tinces and serpents. It contains these
provinces, Cambaia, Siam, Muantai, Bremea, Caipumo, and Chencra. The
inhabitants of Lai which border upon the north of the provinces of Muantai and
Caipumo, and are divided into three principalities, are under his obeisance.
The first is that of Iangoma, the second of Cucrai, the third Lanca near
Chachinchina. They inhabit a plain and welthie country, into which the
Gueoni (Mark Paul calls their country Cangigu) discending from the
mountains to hunt for men, make oftentimes cruel butcheries amongst them. The
people of Lai for fear of these anthropophagi acknowledge the soueraingtie of
Siam, but they often rebel, and obey as they list.

The wealth of the country may be coniectured by the firtilitie: for being
situated in a plain, and watered with most noble and famous rivers (like an
other Egypt) it cannot but abound with plenty of all things. It brings
forth rice, grain of all sorts, horses, elephants, infinite store of cattle,
gold and tin: silver is brought thither by the people of Lai. By reason of
this plenty, the people are drowned in pleasure and wantonness. They follow
husbandry, but take no great delight in manuell occupations, which causes the
kingdom to be poor in merchandise. Amongst many other cities three are
famous, Cambaia, seated upon the river Menon: which rising in China, is so
hugely augmented by the falling in of many rivers, that his own channel not
sufficing for receipt thereof, it renteth the earth to disgorge it self, into a
thousand Islands, making a second Meotis more then 60. miles long. Meicon
signifies the captain, Menon the mother of waters. The second city is Siam,
whose statelines gives the name to the whole country. It is a most goodly
city, and of admirable trasfike, which may the better be imagined by the
writing of a certain Jesuit, who reports that besides the natural
inhabitants, there are more then thirty thousand Arabian households. The third
city is called Vdia, greater then Siam, consisting of four hundred thousand
families. It is said that two hundred thousand boats belong to this city, and
the river Caipumo, whereupon it is seated. This king to show his majesty and
magnificence keeps a guard of six thousand soldiers and two hundred
elephants: of these beasts he has thirty thousand, whereof he traineth three
thousand for the war. This is a great matter, if you weigh their worth and
their charges in keeping.

His government is rather tyrannical then kinglike: for he is absolute Lord of
all the demeanes of the kingdom, and either sets them out to husbandmen, or
gives them to his nobles for their maintenance, during life and pleasure, but
never passes the right of inheritance. He bestows upon them likewise towns
and villages with their territories, but upon condition to maintain a certain
number of horsemen, footmen and elephants. By this policy without any penny
pay or burden to the country, he is able to levy twenty thousand horsemen,
and 250. thousand footmen. Upon occasion he can wage a greater number, by
reason of the largenes of his kingdoms, and the populousnes of his towns. For
Vdia only (the chief seat of his kingdom) mustered 50. thousand men. And
although he be Lord of nine kingdoms, yet uses he no other nation in the
war but the Siamits, and the inhabitants of the two kingdoms of Vdia and
Muantai. All honors and preferments are bestowed upon men of service in this
kingdom.

In times of peace they have their warlike exercises, and in certain pastimes
which the king once a year exhibiteth at Vdia, are showed all military feats
of arms upon the river Menon, where more then 3000. vessels (which they term
Paraos) divided into two squadrons, skirmish one against the other. Upon the
land run the horses and elephants, and the footmen try it out at sword and
buckler with point and edge rebated: the remainder of their days they spend in
riot and wantonness.

Their borders toward the East reach to Canchinchina, between whom are such
huge woods, lions, tigers, leopards, serpents and elephants, that they cannot
infest one another by arms. Toward the lake Chiamai they border upon the
Chinois. Toward the sea they affront the Arabians and Portugals. The one took
from them Patan, Paam, Ior, and Peam, the other Malaca, and the territory
adjoining; so that between them they bereaved him of two hundred miles of
land: and contenting themselves with the sea coasts, and the customs arising
upon the carriyng out and bringing in of merchandise, they abstain from
further invasion of the inland provinces, and hold it good policy to keep
firm peace with the king and his countries. Toward the west lies the kingdom
of Pegu like an half moon, between the mountains of Brama and Iangoma.
Toward the north lie the Gudoni, inhabiting the barrein and sharp mountains,
between whom and Siam dwell the people of Lay. This people is subject to the
crown of Siam for fear of these Canibals, of whom (if it had not been for
his protection) they had long agon been utterly devoured. Not forty years
since the king made a journey against them with twenty thousand horse (their
horse are small, but excellent good in travel) 250. thousand footmen, and ten
thousand elephants; part employed for service, part for carriage. No kingdom
has greater store of these beasts, or does more use them. An innumerable
number of oxen, buffals, and beasts of carriage followed this army, whom they
slew when they wanted other provision.

Hitherto have we devised of Siam and Pegu (as they stood) before the coming
of the Portugals into India, but how in process of time the state was altered,
you shall now hear. In times past diverse kingdoms of Barma situated along the
river toward the lake Chiamai obeyed the king of Pegu under the government of
certain Lieutenants. Sixty years sithence one of these captains ruler of
the kingdom of Tengu, by the aid of his faction and reputation of his
virtues, entered into rebellion, and slaying the Nobles of the land, usurped the
kingdom. Afterward he forced the cities, and conquered the kingdom of Prom,
Melintai, Calam, Mirandu, and Ana, all inhabited by the Bramians, for the space
of one hundred and fifty leagues toward the north. He assaied likewise the
conquest of Siam; but coming before Vdia the chief city of the kingdom, he
was forced to raise his siege and depart. He undertook this journey with 300.
thousand footmen, consuming more then three months in making way for his
army through stony mountains, huge woods and maccessible places; and in lieu
for the loss of 120. thousand of his soldiers, he took two hundred thousand
Siamits prisoners. At his return home he invaded the kingdom of Pegu, and
woone it. Afterward in the year 1507. he renewed his journey against Siam, and
overcame the king thereof, who slew himself with poison, but he took his
sons and with them the better part of the kingdom. He belegerd Vdia with a
million of men and upward. Our late writers call this man and his successors
(because their fame arose by the conquest of the kingdoms of Brama) kings of
Brama or Barmia, but the Portugals of a more sound judgment grounded upon
nearer neighborhood, call them kings of Pegu.

And for that it may not seem that what we write as concerning their infinite
numbers, is either fabulous or reported altogether upon heresay, because that
now, heerebefore and hereafter we shall have occasion to discourse of this
point, we think it not amiss, to spend some time in showing how and by what
likelihoods, both in this and the other barbarous dominions such huge and
numberless companies are levied and nourished. First therefore it is a ground
infallible that populous armies, at home or abroad, cannot long endure without
great revenues, and a continual sea of ready money: for as the members of our
body cannot move without sinews, nor motion avail us, if ioints were
wanting; so without money an army can never be gathered, nor being gathered
kept together, nor resolutely lead forth to any piece of service, if coin be
wanting, which preuenteth infinite mischances, and draws after it armor,
provision, victuals, and whatsoever is necessary for life or arms. And
sithence the wealth of Princes, even as of private persons (from whose purses
they supply their occasion) has limits and measure: Let them not think to
begin any long war, much less to continue it, unless they thoroughly provide
aforehand, or are Lords of mines rich and inexhaustible: for great treasures
are soon spent; and that which has thriftily been gathered in peace, must
prodigally be disbursed in war: even one year of war wastes the reprisals
of many years peace. Which moved a certain Portugal captain to tell king
Sebastian, providing for his journey into Barbary, that wars should be
performed with three streams; the first of men, the second of vittaile, the
third of silver. For all wars are exceeding chargeable, but those most
excessive and beyond opinion which are managed far from home. The great Turk
in his Persian iourneies felt the smart hereof, who though he were so potent a
prince, was notwithstanding constrained to raise the value of his coin, and
abase the allay, so far forth, that the Ianizars finding themselves
aggrieued thereat, raised commotions, set fire on the city of Constantinople,
and rifled a great part thereof. Neither could the king of Spain sustain the
burden of so many wars, and in so remote provinces, if he trusted to no other
supplies then those of Spain, but Fortune has given him a country prodigal
in mines of gold and silver, assuredly paying the expense of one year with the
income of another. This clotheth and feeds the soldier, brings them to a
head, and makes them to march cheerfully upon all services. John laques
Triuulce being demanded how many things were necessary in war, answered
three, Money, money, money. But these grounds only hold when the burden of
the war lies upon the purse of the prince and his people: for sometime it
happens, that the soldier lives upon the enemies country, as did the Huns,
Vandals, Goths, Arabians, and in our days Tamerlane. They entered the
provinces without control or resistance, being unprovided of forces, and made
pray and spoil of whatsoever came into their reaches; they ransacked the
cities, and fed upon the villages. The like good luck had the Portugals in the
East Indies, and the Castilians in the West, but the one far better then the
other: for never any nation conquered with less cost so much as the Spaniards
have done in New Spain and Peru. But let not any people think to do so in
these days, no not in Asia or Afrike, much less in Europe, where the use of
great ordinance is in perfection, and the art of fortification so ingenious,
that one castle shall be able to sustain, yea well provided, to weary the
forces of the greatest potentate. The Turks at Zigeth (a sinall castle in
Hungary) approved this, which in the year 1566. Soliman belegered with three
hundred thousand men of war, and at last forced, but with so great a
slaughter of his people, that scant the third part of this huge army returned
to their houses. In like manner the Portugals in the beginnings of their Indian
acquisitions, with a few soldiers and in little time won admirable victories;
but when the Barbarians began to grow acquainted with artillery, to allure
Carpenters and Masons to build them castles, and to arm vessels to sea, their
courages became calm, and there set an end to their plus vltra. The like did
the Spanish in the new world, to their Non sufficit orbis. For after their
first good fortunes they found in Noua Hispania, the Chichimechi, and in Peru
the Pilcosonij, the Ciriguani and the Luchij, people so well provided to stop
the furious course of their former victories, that sithence, in twenty seven
years space they have not been able to add one footes breadth to their new
emperie. In the vale of Aranco, Tecapel, and the kingdom of Chile, when the
inhabitants saw them to be wounded and slain with the strokes of their arrows
and swords, they never afterward vouchsafed them their former reverence, nor
carried the woonted conceit of their immortality: and now being beaten by
experience, they fear not the cariere of the horse, nor the terror of the
harquebuse.

If the war be at or within our own doors, then is it easy to levy strong
and populous forces, as we read of the Crotons, Sibarites and Gauntois, who
made head against the power of France with fourscore thousand fighting men.
For when the war was made in these populous countries and near at hand;
every man made one in the meddle, gallantly armed, and well provided with
furniture and victual to hold out certain days: but when the war continued
longer then expectation, for want of money and food every man retired, one to
the plough, another to his shop, the rest to those trades, whereby they
sustained themselves and their families. The Scots for want of wealth never
made famous journey out of the Island, but at home they have lead mighty armies
for a short time, either to revenge wrongs or defend their frontires: even as
did the Romans for certain ages, warring with their neighbors at their
private charges. They took the field every man provided with victual for two
or three days, and in one battle and few hours finished that war. But in
the journey against the Veij, the war continuing beyond opinion, the State
was enforced to procure pay for the army. That armies may far casier be
gathered in the east and in Afric, then in Europe: the reasons are many.
Those regions for the most part are more plentiful and copious of all
necessaries for humane life: the people of the south are better contented with
little then we: their diet is spare and simple, only to maintain life and not
excess: but the Europeans must eat and drink, not to sustain nature, but to
comfort the stomach and expel colds. Wine which with us is deerer then bread,
is not to be found amongst them; their waters are better then our drinks.
Cookerie is in no such request with them, as with us, nor their tables
accustomed to such cates: their banquets are only furnished with rice and
mutton. Neither do the people of the east spend a quarter of that clothing
which we do: they go to the war half naked, hiding nothing but their
priuities: they stand not in need of that number of workmen which we do,
amongst whom the greatest part of our life is spent in weauing and devising
stuffes and fashions to cloth the carcass and adorn the body, with cloth,
silk, colors and imbroderies. All their expenses are only upon clothing of
cotton wool, and that but from the navel to the knee. These are the reasons
which I meant to lay, why they may gather forty thousand men with more ease,
then we ten; and to these may be added this as the last, that upon ordinance
and their furnitures; upon provisions and their carriages; upon horses,
pioners, and a thousand like necessaries, infinite sums are expended; of
which the people of the east are utterly ignorant, especially those which have
not to deal with the Portugals or Arabians. They go to the war without
armor, without curases, helmets, lances, or targets, which with us cannot be
conveyed from place to place without great expense. Virgil calls this,
luggage, iniustum fascem, because it seems a needles trouble: and therein we
degenerate much from the ancient Romans, who for ten days journey and more,
carried every man's his proper weapons both offensive and defensive, yea and
sometimes his victuals. What should we speak of the armies of the Assirians,
and Ethiopians, of Belus, Ninus, Simiramis, Cambises, Cirus, Darius, Sesostris
and Sesacus, were they not as huge and populous by the report of all histories,
as these whereof we entreat? Or in times less ancient have not we and our
ancestors seen the Arabians, Tartarians and Turks inuading provinces with
armies of three hundred thousand people and upward. By modern examples and
memory of later accidents to give credit to the ancient, I will set down what
happened in Angola (a noble and rich province of the west Ethiop adjoining to
Congo) reported by the letters of certain Jesuits and Portugal captains. In
the year 1584. Paulus Diazius by the favor of God and valor of his people,
upon the second day of February put to flight the king of Angola, and defeated
his army, consisting of one million and two hundred thousand Moors: which may
well prove that these populous armies are of little service and small
continuance, rather like violent storms, then dripping showers; and though
with ease they are gathered, yet without greater provision then any province is
able to afford them, they are not easily held together. When their provision
is spent, they begin to break, and bid adue to the action; and that most
commonly not in the midst of their course, but even in their first remooues:
for merchants, victualers, tailors, shomakers, smiths, and such like follow not
their wars: and if they should, then this inconvenience would follow; that
for one million of soldiers, it were necessary to provide another million of
wagons, packehorses, carters, carpenters, victualers, merchants and their
servants, and then, neither rivers would serve them for drink, nor the fields
with bread, nor the earth for lodgings: so must they needs sink under their
own weight, which the eastern Princes (leading these unaccustomed numbers upon
long iourneis) in some sort forecasting, did always provide incredible masses
of money, victual, and such like warlike provisions, long before they entered
into action: as was well seen in Xerxes, who to maintain that great army, as
well at sea as at land, which he led for the conquest of Greece, spent seven
years in preparation for the journey.

To return to the king of Barma: of late years he took the havens of Martela
and Pernasor; and turning his armies sometime toward the north, sometime
toward the west, he vexed the Princes of Caor and Tipura, took the kingdoms
of Aracan and Macin, leading upon this journey 300. thousand men, and forty
thousand elephants.

Aracan is a kingdom round environed with mountains and woods as with a wall
or trench: the chief city which gives the name to the country is situated
upon a river fifteen leagues from the sea, and 35. from Catagan.

Macin is a kingdom abounding in Aloes: this wood which the Arabians call
Calambuco, and others Lignum vitae, for the sweet savor is valued by the
people of the east at the weight in silver. In India and Cambeia they use it at
the burial of great Lords, in bathes and in other wantonness. It grows most
frequent in the rough mountains of Campa, Cambaia and Macin. That which is
brought to us is in no esteem with them: the right is found (say they) in
Congo and Angola and the bordering country, and used by them in all their
grievous and dangerous maladies; which if it be true, I marvel that the
Portugals will let slip so precious a commodity.

Narsinga.
IN the row of these potent princes inhabiting between Indus and Ganges
dwells the king of Narsinga. Whatsoever lies between the mountains Gate
and the gulf of Bengala, between the promontories Guadauerne and Comorin for
the space of 200. leagues, abounding as prodigally (as any other province in
the Indies) with all good things, is under his dominion. The waters sometime
falling from the mountains, sometime from the rivers, and received into
trenches, meres and lakes do woonderfully cool, moisten, and enrich this
land, causing the grain and cattle to prosper above imagination. It is no
less plentiful of rice, birds, beasts wild and tame, buffals, elephants, and
mines of precious stones and metals. It breeds no races of horse for the
war, but they buie them of the Arabian and Persian merchants in great numbers:
the like do all the princes of Decan. Within the bounds of Narsinga dwell five
nations different in language; he has many strong places upon the Indian
Ocean. Canora is at his command, wherein are the haven towns of Mangolar,
Melind, Batticala, and Onor: but the Portugals receive the custom of
Batticala, and in times past of Onor. In Narsinga are two imperial cities;
Narsinga and Bisnagar: by reason whereof he is termed sometime king of
Narsinga, sometime king of Bisnagar.

It is undoubtedly believed, that this king receives yearly twelve millions
of ducats, of which he lays up but two or three, the residue he expendeth
upon the troops of his soldierie, that is to say, forty thousand Nairs, and
twenty thousand horsemen kept in continual pay. Upon necessity he is able to
levy a far greater number: for besides these allowances he sets out
certain lands to 200. captains, upon condition to keep in readiness a
proportion of horsemen, footmen, and elephants. The wages of these captains
(to some of whom he gives a million of ducats yearly) may be an argument of
his great revenues; for to these proiects, this prince and all the potentates
of the East, keep in their possession all the profits of the lands, woods,
mines, yea and the waters of pooles and rivers through their whole dominions.
No man may wash himself in Ganges (which runs by Bengala) nor in Ganga
(which waters the land of Orissa) before he has paid tole to the king. The
king himself is now enforced to buie this water, causing it to be brought unto
him by long iourneies, upon a superstitious custom, either to bathe or purge
himself therein. He is absolute Lord of the bodies and goods of his subjects,
which he shareth to himself and his captains, leaving the people nothing but
their hands and labor: of lands the king has three parts, and his captains
the residue. Whereupon sithence all these barbarous princes maintain not peace
and justice, as arches whereupon to lay the groundworke of their estates, but
arms, conquest and the nurserie of a continual soldierie, it must needs
follow that they are able to levy greater troops of horse and foot then
otherwise we were bound to believe. But to induce some measure of credit, let
us compare the abilities of some Christian princes, with theirs. If the king of
France were absolute Lord of all the lands and profits of his whole dominion
(as these men are) it is thought that his yearly revenues would amount to 15.
millions, and yet therein are neither mines of gold nor silver; The elergie
receives six millions, the kings demesnes amount to one and an half, the
residue is theirs who have the inheritance, and yet the peazants live well here,
in comparison of the villagois of India, Polonia and Lithuania. Besides this
the king has eight millions of ordinary revenue, arising of customs and
escheats. How mighty a prince would he be, if he were landlord of the demesnes
and rents of the whole kingdom, and should employ them upon the maintenance of
soldiers, as does the king of Narsinga? Surely whereas now the kings revenues
do hardly suffice for the maintenance of four thousand men at arms, and six
thousand crosbowes; if this allowance were added to the former, he might as
easily maintain 150. thousand.

To return to Narsinga: the king to see that his captains perform their
duties, once a year proclaims a muster, whereat they dare not but be
present. At the muster day those who have presented their companies defective
either in number or furnitu^e, are sure to be cassed: but those who bring their
companies complete and well armed, he honors and aduanceth.

What forces may be gathered out of so ample a dominion (armed after their
manner, as aforesaid) you shall gather by that which John Barros writes of the
army which king Chrismarao led against Idalcan in the journey of Raciel. These
are his words verbatim. Under sundry captains the army was divided into many
battailions: In the vantgard marched Camaraique with one thousand horse, 17.
elephants and 30. thousand footmen. Tiarabicar, with two thousand horse,
twenty elephants, and fifty thousand footmen. Timaipanaique, with three
thousand horsemen, and 56. thousand footmen. After them followed Hadainaique
with five thousand horsemen, fifty elephants, and one hundred thousand
footmen. Condomara, with six thousand horse, sixty elephants, 120. thousand
footmen. Comora, with 250. horse, forty elephants, and 80. thousand footmen.
Gendua, with one thousand horse, ten elephants, and thirty thousand footmen.
In the rereward were two eunuchs with 1000. horse, 15. elephants, and forty
thousand footmen. Betel one of the kings pages led 200. horse, twenty
elephants, and eight thousand foot. After all these followed the king with his
guard of six thousand horsemen, three hundred elephants, and forty thousand
footmen. Upon the flanks of this battle went the governor of the city of
Bengapor with diverse captains, under whose colors were 4200. horse, 25.
elephants, and sixty thousand footmen serving for wages. Upon the head of the
battle ranged 200. thousand horsemen in small troops, like our vantcurrers,
in such sort and order scowring the country, before, behind, and on all
sides, that no novelty could so suddenly happen, but notice thereof was given
at the Imperial tent in a moment. Twelve thousand carriers of water, and
twenty thousand light huswifes followed this army. The number of lackies,
merchants, artificers, scullions (they call them Maniati) oxen, buffals, and
carriage beasts, was infinite. When the army was to pass any river knee-deepe
before the foremost were passed, there was scant remaining sufficient for the
latter whereof to drink. Before this journey the king sacrificed in nine days
20736. head of living creatures, as well of birds as beasts, the flesh whereof
in honor of his idols, was given to the poor. The soldiers were clothed in
garments of cotton wool so close and hard quilted, that they would bear out
the thrust of a lance or sword. Every elephant was trimmed in a covering of
cotton wool, with a frame on his back bearing four men. To their tusks were
fastened long and broad swords, to cut in sunder whatsoever stood in their way.
The footmen were armed with bows, iauelins, swords and bucklers. These last
the better to cover their whole bodies, and to manage their heavy bucklers
carried no offensive weapons. In the fight when the king perceived Idalcan by
the fury of his great ordinance to make havoc of his men, and dismay the
residue, leaping into the head of the battle, is reported to use this
prince-beseeming encouragement: Believe me, my companions, Idalcan shall rather
boast that he has slain, then overcome a king of Narsinga. With which words
and ensample his soldiers all inflamed, and ashamed of their cowardice, with a
furious charge broke the enemies array, and put Idalcan to flight. Amongst other
spoils they took four thousand Arabian horses, one hundred elephants, four
hundred great pieces, besides small. The number of oxen, buffals, tents and
prisoners was inestimable. With Idalcan were forty Portugals, with the king of
Narsinga twenty. In his reign two of his captains rebelled; Virapanai
usurped Negapatan, and Veneapatir the territory adioining to Matipura.

Calecute.
THE most noble part of India is that which lies between the mountain Gate
and the Indian Ocean. It stretches from Cape Comerin to the river Cangierecor,
three hundred miles long. In this province reigns the king of Calecut, who
though he may not be compared to the princes above spoken of, for number and
power, yet for pleasant and plentiful situation, he may be said far to
surpass them. For the region is so cut (as it were) into many parcels,
sometime by creekes of the sea, sometime by rivers, and sometime by lakes, that
nature (as it should seem) would have it divided into several provinces, as
Trauancor, Colan, Cochin, Crangonor, Calecute, Tano and Canonor. Seven years
agone Pereimal king of all Malabar ruled these provinces, who after he became a
Mahumetan, and resolved to travel to Meca, there to spend the remnant of his
days, divided the land into many principalities, but with this prouiso, that
all sovereign authority should rest in the king of Calecute, with the title
of Samori, which signifies Emperor, or as some write, God on earth. Although
the reputation of this king be much ecclipsed by the Portugals, partly by
diuersion of traffike from his countries, and partly by astisting his rebels
and vassals (the kings of Tauor and Cochin) and though his title of Samori be
little regarded, yet maintains he his woonted majesty in very good sort
amongst the Barbarians. Calecute is 25. leagues long: Malabar in the broadest
place exceeds not ten.

The city of Calecute (from whence the province takes his name) is three
miles long, situated upon the sea side. It contains but few houses, and those
of little worth, not above ten, fifteen, or twenty nobles rent by year,
which is the common rent of all the housing of the East Indies, if the Arabians
or Portugals be not dealers therein. The inhabitants live upon rice, palmito,
cattle and fish. Their riches consist in ginger and pepper, which draws
yearly a great mass of treasure into the havens of this kingdom. The
Arabians were Lords of this traffike for many ages, till the Portugals setting
light by the incredible dangers of a long navigations, arrived there not above
100. years since, and bartred their wares for pepper and other commodities of
the land. And as the Portugals enriched the towns of Cochin, so did the
Arabians Calecute and that kingdom. For this commodity is of such
consequence, that it not only enricheth the prince with presents and customs,
but in such sort so augmenteth the state of the merchants, that some of them
are comparable to many dukes in Europe and kings in Afrike.

In their wars in Malabar they use not the service of horse, not only for that
the climate breeds none, (for those that they have are brought out of Persia
and Arabia) but for that the nature of the country is not fit for
horsemanship. For as in Sweuia the footmen use no pikes, and the horsemen no
lances for the thicknes of the woods, which makes them unserviceable, so in
Malabar because of the streights, rivers of the sea, and marshes, they seldom
use horses, so that all their forces consist in shipping and footmen. It is
strange to see how ready the soldier of this country is at his weapon; they
are all gentlemen, and termed Naires. At seven years of age they are put to
school to learn the use of their weapons, where to make them nimble and
active, their sinews and ioints are stretched by skillful fellows, and
anointed with the oil of Sesamus: by this anointing they become so light and
nimble, that they will wind and turn their bodies, as if they had no bones,
casting them forward, backward, heigh and low, even to the astonishment of the
beholders. Their continual delight is in their weapon, persuading themselves
that no nation goes beyond them in skill and dexterity. Every one inureth
himself to that weapon, whereto he finds his body most agreeable. Their
ancient weapons were the Iauelin, the bow, and the sword; but after the
coming of the Portugals, they learned so exactly the mixing of metals, the
casting of great ordinance, and the practice thereof, that (some say) their
artillery and powder surpasses ours. They go to the war all naked save
their priuities, neither use they head pieces, which is the reason that in
fights and skirmishes they show exceeding agilitie, charging and retiring more
like falcons then soldiers. When a man would take them to be far off, he
shall see them houering round about him in a trice, so that it is as dangerous
to follow them flying, as to deal with them fighting. They are swift as
leopards, and their flight as much to be feared, as their charge. If they come
to handstrokes (which they will not do but upon necessity or advantage) they
use altogether to strike with the point. They bind copper or silver shingles
to the hilts of their swords, the sound whereof in steed of drums and trumpets
encourages them to the encountre. They will lie so close under their bucklers,
that you shall not see any part of their bodies lie open to danger. There are
one kind of Nairs (called Amochi) which accurse themselves, their kindred and
posterity with most bitter execrations; if they leave injuries done to their
society unrevenged. If their king happen to be slain, so much the more
furious run they through fire, water, and assured destruction to revenge his
death. And therefore the kings of India suppose their estates weak or strong,
as they perceive the numbers of those Amochi to be few or many. By the law of
the country they may not marry, but they are all allowed women in common.
They maintain those women very well according to their birth and degrees. They
must be all gentlewomen, for the Nairs may not take any countriewomen, yea so
great is their disdain and pride, that without ill usage they will not endure
any of the common people to come near them. In their iournies they send their
servants before to the Innes and villages to declare their masters approach:
then must all travelers depart and give room. If it be thought in Turkey,
that by licentious liberty in time of peace, the Ianizars become more hardy
and courageous in war: what may we deem of these Nairs, who will not indune
a man of mean calling to look them in the face? They inhabit no towns, but
dwell in houses made of earth environed with hedges and woods, and their ways
as intricate as into a laborinth.

Of what force this kingdom is, may be gathered by the army of sixty
thousand soldiers, and two hundred vessels of war, which he levied 1503.
against Edward Pacheco the king of Portugals captain, taking part at that time
with the king of Cochin: this war lasted almost five months. In the year
1529. with an army of one hundred thousand he belegered the fortress which
the Portugals built in Calecute, under the keeping of John Lima. In this siege
he spent a whole winter, wherein although the Portugals behaved themselves very
valiantly; yet weighing the kings forces and their own possibilities, they
thought it best to destroy it with their own hands. In the year 1561. he
besieged Ciale with 90. thousand men, and took it by composition. He has more
then once given an instance of his power at sea. He is Lord of many havens,
whereunto great numbers of shipping do resort, and in that regard, cannot
choose but be well furnished with a great navy. But in goodness of shipping and
martial discipline we must needs confess the sea-forces of all the Indian
princes to be far inferior to those of the Portugals; whose dominion (both at
sea and land) nothing has so much augmented, as their defensive warfare. To
speak truth, it seldom falls out, but the naked man fears the sword, and
the armed more encouraged thereby, bearing himself bolder upon his skill then
his strength, and prevailing more by temporizing, then in joining foot to
foot by rash fighting, whereas the Barbarians putting more confidence in their
numbers then goodness, have always wanted that virtue, which should make armies
dreadful and fortunate, and that is good order and warlike discipline.

The kingdom of Persia.
PErsia, and the Persian glory, has been often obscured, first by the
Arabians (who to bury in oblivion the memory of their former reputation,
enacted by law that they should no more be called Persians, but Saracens:) then
by the Tartarians lead by Chingis, and lastly by Tamerlan and his followers.
But not long before our times by the virtue of Ismaell Sophy (of whose
original and fortunes for the better understanding of the state and history
of Persia, it shall not be amiss to deuile) the kingdom regained his ancient
splendour. When Mahumet, after the decease of his first wife (who adopted him
her heir) by her riches and his new superstition had gotten him a name amongst
the vulgar, he married for his second wife Aissa the daughter of one Abubacer,
a great rich man, and of high authority in those quarters. By this man's
countenance, and the friendship of Omar and Ottomar his kinsemen, he gathered
together a great rabble of Arabians, and partly by fair means, and partly by
color of religion, he became master of many of the bordering towns: and about
the same time gave Fatime his daughter by his first wife to Haly his cousin; and
to him after his death, all his earthly substance, making him the head of his
superstition, with the title of Caliph. Abubacer, by whose countenance Mahumet
became gracious, taking in ill part the preferment of the young man, by the
aid of Omar and Ottomar (whose desires were in hope of succession by reason of
the old man's years, and for kinreds sake, rather to see Abubacer then Haly
Caliph) began openly to resist Haly, and to spoil him and his wife Fatime of
all the substance which was left him by his uncle. Abubacer died: Omar and
Ottomar succeeded. Omar was slain by a slave; Ottomar in a private quarrel:
after whose decease Haly succeeded. Against him rose Mauie, who accusing him as
accessarie to the death of Ottomar his Lord, caused him to be slain near
Cafe, a city within two days journey of Babylon, where likewise he lies
buried. The place is called to this day Massadall, that is, the house of Haly.
After his decease the inhabitants of Cafe proclaimed Ossan the son of Fatima
Caliph, but him likewise Mauie resisted, and slew by poison. Then was he
absolute Caliph, and after him his son Iazit. Ossan left behind him twelve
sons, one whereof was called Mahumet Mahadin. The Moors say he never died,
but that he shall return again to convert the world, and therefore they keep
always ready in the mosque of Massadella, a horse gallantly furnished, where
in their fopperie they affirm that this worlds conversion shall there first
begin. Upon these differences of Haly, Abubacer, Omar, Ottoma^, and Mauie, have
mighty factions of arms and opinions arisen amongst the sectaries of this new
superstition. The Persians labor to prove Haly true Caliph by the last will
of Mahumet; the Arabians stand as stiffly to the three first. When from the
year of our Lord God 1258. to the year 1363. the Moors had no Caliph
(Mustapha Mumbala the last Caliph being slain by Allacu king of the
Tartarians) a certain noble man in Persia named Sophi, Lord of Ardeuell,
deriuing his pedigree from Haly by Musa Ceresin his nephew, and one of the
twelve sons of Ossan, in memory of whom he altered the form of the Turbant,
by his virtue and valor won great credit and estimation to his new faction.

To him succeeded Adar the son of Guine, to whom Assembeg a powerful Prince
in Siria and Persia gave his daughter in marriage. But his son Iacobbeg
fearing the power and estimation of Adar, caused him to be slain, and
delivered his two sons Ismael and Soliman to his captain Amanzar, willing
him to cast them in prison in Zaliga a castle in the mountains: but Amanzar
detesting the tyranny of his Lord, conveyed the children to his own house,
and brought them up like gentlemen amongst his own sons; and falling sick
of a deadly disease, forecasting what might happen after his disease, gave them
horses and money, willing them to fly, and to betake themselves to their
mothers house and tuition. Ismael the eldest was no sooner returned to his
mothers place, but he vowed revenge for his fathers death, and after some
fortunate expeditions, took upon him the cause and protection of the followers
of Haly, from whom he derived his pedigree. He made the turbant higher, and
sent Ambassadors to all the oriental Mahumetans, to exhort them to unity in
religion and cognisances. By these means and fortune of his arms, he became a
terror to the east, and slew Ossan then usurper of the Persian estate with his
ten brethren, except Marabeg, who saved himself and fled to Soliman the first,
Emperor of Turks, imploring his aid. This Ismael at the lake Vay overthrew
with a great slaughter the Prince of the Tartars Zagatai, and in heat of this
victory had passed the river Abbian, if his Astrologian in whom he greatly
trusted, had not foretold him, that his passage should be prosperous, but his
return unfortunate. He left to his sons a most spacious Empire, bounded with
the Caspian sea, the Persian gulf, the lake Sioc, the rivers Tygris and Oxus,
and the kingdom of Cambaia; which provinces contain more then twenty degrees
from east to west, and 18. from north to south. And although these kingdoms
lying within these bounds held not immediately of the crown of Persia, yet all
acknowledged the Persian for their sovereign Prince, that is, the kings of
Macran, Patam, Guadel and Ormus. The Georgians did follow their fortunes; so
did Media, now called Siruan, Dierbechia, once Mesopotamia, Cusistan the
habitation of the Susiani, Farsistan the country of the Persians, Straua once
Hircania, ^athia at this day called Arac, Caramania now Chermain, Sigestan,
Carassa, Sablestan, and Istigiu, whose ancient names were Drangia, Bactria,
Parapamisus, Margiana. Of these regions, those which lie nearest to the Persian
sea are most plentiful, by reason of the rivers every where dispersed through
the whole land. Amongst these rivers the most famous is Bindimir, to whose
waters the inhabitants are much beholding, conuaying it by trenches and other
inventions into their grounds, to their great ease and commodity. The
provinces lying upon the Caspian sea, for their rivers and temperature do
likewise participate of the said fertility, especially all those quarters
which are watered with the river Puly-Malon, falling into the lake Burgian: the
residue of the province is dry, by reason whereof towns and villages are
seldom seen in those places, unless it be by some spring or waters side. The
most ample and magnificent cities of Persia are Istigias the chief se at of
Bactria, thought to be one of the pleasantest cities of the east. Indion, the
chief seat of Margiana, situated in so fat and fertile a territory, that
therefore Antiochus Soter caused it to be walled about. Candahar, the chief
seat of Paramisus, famous for the traffike of India and Cathaio, whither the
merchants of those countries do resort. Eri the chief city of Aria, so
abounding with roses, that thereof it should seem to take the name. Barbarus
says, it is of thirteen miles compass. Ispaa the chief seat of Parthia, so
spacious that for the circuit thereof, the Persians hiperbolically term it,
the half world. Chirmain is the chief seat of Caramania, renowned for the
excellent cloth of gold and silver wrought therein. Eor is a noble city, and
so is Custra of Susiana. But all these for beauty and magnificence may bow and
bend the knee to Siras seated upon the river Bindimire. It was once the chief
seat of Persia, and as some think called Persepolis. Alexander the great burnt
it to the ground at the entreaty of his Concubine; but afterward being ashamed
of so vile an action, caused it to be reedefied again. It is not at this time
so great as in times past; yet it is thought to be one of the greatest cities
of all the Orient, with his suburbs containing twenty miles in compass. It is
a proverb amongst the Persians, quando Suars erat Siras, tunc Cairus erat eius
Pagus: yet they account it not very ancient, neither are they of their
opinions who will have it the head of Persia. Tauris and Casbin are most famous
cities; and besides their magnificence may glory that in them the kings of
Persia keep their courts.

The form of government amongst this nation is not like the government of any
other Mahumetan people; neither is there to be seen the like policy in any
place through the whole east, as amgo^st the Persians. All the rest hate
nobility, and depending upon the faith and service of slaves do either murder
their brethren, or put out their eyes. But amongst these people, nobility is
honored: the king entreats his brethren kindly and magnificently, and they
allow in their dominions many noble, rich, and mighty Barons, of which sort
there is not one to be found through the whole Ottoman dominions. They likewise
grace gentilitie, and highly esteem their service on horseback: they delight
in music and learning, they study poesy, and therein become excellent. They
give their minds to Astrology: all which good parts the Turks do utterly
reject and despise. Merchandise and Mechanical trades are favored in Persia,
and in all kind of civility and courtesy excel the Turkish.

The security of this state consists rather in prowess then numbers; they
maintain three sorts of soldiers: one sort the king keeps in continual pay,
and always about his own person. The second is the Timarotes, (for this
kingdom likewise as does the Turk, in lieu of wages allotteth certain
quantities of land to great numbers of horsemen.) The third are Auxiliaries,
which serve for pay, and those are only Georgians and Tartarians. To speak of
the two first (the essential sinews of this king and kingdom) they are all
horsemen. For where princes rely only upon the valor of the gentry, there
is little regard had of the footemans service; the like reason may be given for
their want of shipping. For although on the one side lies the Caspian, and on
another the Persian gulfs, yet to this day were they never owners of any
warlike shipping. If they chance to sail upon the Caspian (a sea eight hundred
miles long, and six hundred broad) they dare not venture into the maine, but
houering by the shore, timerously sail from one place to another. Of the
Persian sea the Portugals are lords. It abounds in metal of excellent fine
temper, especially in the province of Cazan. They have not the use of
artillery, neither the Art of defending, besieging, assaulting, mining, or
intrenching of fortresses, and all because they want the use of footmen, to
whom these pieces of service do properly belong, as it does to horsemen to
fight in plain and open field. Besides these wants, they are infested with two
other more grievous mischiefs: and those are civil dissentions arising of the
greatness and disloialtie of their Sultans, with the length of iourneies, and
the scarcity of nauigable rivers. Those rivers which they have are not
frequented at all, or at leastwise so little, that small ease arises thereby.
They fall all into the Caspian or Persian seas. The Inland regions are sandy,
and utterly destitute of water. How can then the forces of that land make any
commodious or speedy rendeuous when half the land is dry and barren? in so
waste a tract not one river serving for nauigable transportation, as does the
Loir in France, Poo in Italy, Vistula in Poland, Shield in Flanders, and such
like in other kingdoms.

There are also many deserts and many mountains disioyning the provinces far
in sunder: Here in it resembles Spain, where for want of nauigable rivers
(except toward the sea coast) traffike is little used, and mountains and
provinces lie unmanured for scarcity of moisture. But nature unwilling that
humane life should want any easement, has so provided for mutual commerce in
these sandy and barren places, that through the labor of Camels the want of
navigations is richly recompensed throughout Persia, and the bordering
countries. These beasts carry woonderous burdens, and will longer continue
then either horse or mule. They will travel laden with one thousand pound
weight, and will so continue forty days and upward. In sterill and deep
sandy countries (such as are Lybia, Arabia, and Persia) they drink but once
every fifth day, and if extremity enforce, they will endure the want of water
ten or twelve. When their burdens are off, a little grass, thorns, or leaves
of trees will suffice them. There is no living thing less changeable and more
laborious, certainly ordained of nature a fit creature for those sandy and
deep places of Asia and Afric, wherein even man himself feels the want of
food and water. Of these, there are three sorts: upon the lesser men travel;
the middle sort have bunches on their backs fit for carrying of merchandise:
the greater and stronger are those which carry burdens of one thousand pound
weight.

What numbers of horsemen this king is able to levy, was manifested in the
wars between Selim the first and Ismael: between Ismael and Soleman, and
between Codabanda and Amurath. Not one of them brought above thirty thousand
horse into the field, but so thoroughly furnished, that they had little cause
to fear greater numbers. The richer and abler sort arm themselves after the
manner of our men at arms, the residue, being better then the third part of
their Caualrie content themselves with a skull, a jack and cemiter. They use
the lance and the bow indifferently. Touching their riches, the common opinion
is, that in the days of king Tamas, the yearly revenues amounted to four or
five millions of gold, who by a sudden doubling of the value of his coin
raised it to eight, and accordingly made payment to his souldans and soldiers.
But in these days by the conquest of the great Turk they are much diminished,
and it is thought that they amount to little more then two millions: but the
feodarie lands, towns and villages (which are very many) supply a great part
of the pay due to the companies of the horsemen above mentioned.

Toward the East bordereth the Mogor, upon the North the Zagatai. Toward the
West the Turk possesses a large frontire: upon the South lies Ormus, and
therein the Portugals. With the Mogors he is little troubled: For as Spain and
France by reason of the narrow streights and difficult passages over the
mountains, cannot easily convey necessaries (the life of an army) to infest
one another: so toward the frontiers of India and Cambaia, provinces belonging
to the Mogors, high mountains and vast deserts keep good peace between these
two princes, Yet infest they one another on the borders of Cabul and Sablestan,
of which certain Lords of the Mogors have gotten the dominion. He comes not
near the borders of the great Cham, between whom certain petie princes and
impassible deserts do oppose themselves. It seems that toward the Zagatai
he stands content with those bounds which the river Oxus has laid out: for
he never durst pass it; and when Zaba king of the Zagatai had passed it, he
was overthrown with a great slaughter by Ismael: So again was Cyrus by
Tomiris, who slew him and all his host. The Turk is a borderer all along the
western coast of this whole empire, even from the Caspian sea to the gulf of
Saura, a tract almost of 15. degrees. He has no enemy like dangerous to this
prince, more to be feared, or of greater power, at whose hands in all conflicts
(for the most part) he has reaped nothing but loss and dishonor. Mahumet the
second overthrew Vssanchan, and took from David (his vassal and confederate)
the empire of Trapezond. Selim the first overthrew Ismael in Campania, and
took from him Caramit, Orfa, Merdis and all the territory which they call
Alech. Soliman put Tamas to flight, and took from him Babylon and all
Mesopotamia. In our days Amarath won whatsoever lies between Derbent and
Tauris, wherein is comprehended Georgia and Siruan, and by building of
fortresses in Testis, Sumachia, and Eres, assured the passages of Chars,
Tomanis and Lori. He is Lord of all that lies between Erzirum and Orontes, a
river three days journey beyond Tauris. In this city he caused a citadell to
be built, not minding to leave it, as did Selim and Soleman, but thereby as
with a curb to bridle and keep it for ever. In this war which lasted from
the year 1591. to 1597. the Turks altered their form of warfare. For whereas
they were wont to lay their whole hopes upon their numbers, the valor of their
horsemen and footmen, their store of artillery, and warlike furniture,
scorning to be cooped up in castles and fortresses, for the most part burning
whatsoever they became Lords of, and little caring to keep what they had
conquered (supposing it no good policy to strengthen towns by weakening their
companies) in these wars, to avoid the inconveniences whereinto Selim and
Soliman were plunged, were glad to build strong places upon commodious
passages, and citadels in the chiefest towns, furnishing them with good
garrisons and great store of artillery. This war cost them very dear: for
by surprises, by famine, and extremities of weather, infinite thousands
perished, yet always to the loss of the Persian or his confederates. In the
field the Persian is far inferior to the Turk in numbers and goodness of
footmen, in ordinance, in all sorts of warlike furniture, and (the chiefest
stay of a state) in obedience of subjects. Notwithstanding if Selim, Soliman or
Amarath had not been allured either by rebellion or intestine discords, they
durst not have meddled with this war. Selim was called in to the aid of
Marabeg the son of Ossan, a most mighty prince in Persia. Soliman came in
aid of Elcaso the brother of Tamas, hateful to his sovereign for his ambition
and aspiring humor, and in the end abused the credit and good will of the
people toward Elcaso, to the furtherance of his own desseignes. Amurath never
took weapon in hand against this people, before he understood by the letters
of Mustafa Bassa of Van, that all Persia was in uproar about the election of a
new prince, thereby certifying him that some had chosen Ismael, some Ayner
(both sons of Tamas) and that Periacocona slaying her own brother Ismael,
and betraying Ayner, had procured the kingdom to Mahumet Codobanda. After this
mischief fell those fatalliars between Codabanda and his son, and between
the Turcoman nation (a mighty family in Persia) and the king: a faction no
less disastrous to the state of Persia then the war of Turkey.

Against the Portugals of Ormus, for want of sea forces he stirs not, and
again for want of land forces the Portugals are not able to molest his vpland
countries. Tamas being counseled to make a voyage against Ormus, asked what
commodities the Island brought forth, whether corn, cattle, fruit, or what
other good thing? When it was answered that the soil was utterly barren and
destitute of all provision, but excellent well seated for traffike and
navigations: scoffing at the motion, replied, that of this kind of revenue he
had released unto his people above ninety thousand Tomana.

The kingdom of Iapan.
IApan may well be called a politic body compacted of many and sundry Islands
of diverse different forms and circuits, which as they are divided from the
rest of the co^tinent, so are they inhabited by a people much differing in
manners and customs from the residue of the Orient. They stand round and close
together like the Maldinae in the Indian sea, and the Hebrides and Orchades in
the north Ocean. They are in number 66. divided into three partialities. The
first contains nine, the second four, the third fifty three. Amongst these,
five are renowned, but especially one for the famous city of Macao. And it is
most commonly seen that they who have the sovereignty of those five, are
Lords of all the rest. It is distant from new Spain 150. leagues; from China
60. The soil is to be accounted rather barren then fertile. The inhabitants
are of a very ready wit, and marvelous patient in adversity. Their newborn
children they immediately wash in the rivers, and as soon as they are weaned
they take them from their mothers, and bring them up in labors of hunting and
such like exercises. They go bare headed men and women, as well in foul
weather as fair. They are very ambitious and desirous of honor. Poverty is no
disgrace to the Gentry of their blood. They will not suffer the least wrong to
pass unrevenged: they salute one another with many courtesies: they are very
stayed and of a settled resolution. They are very jealous to show themselves
fearful or base minded in word or deed: they will make no man privy of their
losses or misfortunes: they have the like beasts both tame and wild as we
have, but they will scarcely eat any thing save herbs, fish, barley or rice,
and if they do, it is the flesh of wild beasts taken by hunting. Of these
grains they make their wines, and water mixed with a certain precious powder
which they use, they account a dainty beuerage: they call it Chia. Their
buildings for the most part are of timber, partly because the vpland places are
destitute of quarries, but abounding with cedars of admirable height and
thicknes fit for building, and partly because the country is very subject to
earthquakes. In times past all Iapan obeyed one prince, showing him great
obedience and subjection, and this government endured with no less state and
majesty, at the least 1600. years, until about 50. years sithence by the
rebellion of two of his chiefest lieutenants, the whole kingdom was
distracted, each of them holding by arms whatsoever he atchiued by usurpation.
By their example others becoming as ambitious, seized upon the rest of the
kingdom, some on one part, some on an other; leaving nothing but the bare name
of Dairi, which signifies the Lord of all Iapan, with the title of Iucata,
viz. king, to their rightful sovereign. Yea those princes which were Lords of
the territories about Meaco, would hardly allow him whereof to find him
victual and apparel, so that now he resembles the shadow rather then the king
of the ancient and magnificent Monarchy of Iapan. Sithence those times
whosoever lays holdfast on the dominion of the Coquinai (those are the five
kingdoms bordering upon Meaco) in steed of Dairi, calls himself Emperor
and king of Iapan, and Lord of Tenza. Nabunanga was one of them in our days,
and after him Fassia in power and majesty excelling all his predecessors.
Nabunanga was Lord of 36. provinces, Fassih at the least of fifty.

Their form of government is nothing like the policy of Europe. The strength
of the Prince consists not in ordinary revenues and love of the people, but
in rigor and the princes pleasure. As Soon as the prince has conquered one or
more kingdoms, he shareth them wholly amongst his friends and followers, who
bind themselves by oath faithfully to serve him with a limited company of men
as well in peace as war. They again to make their followers trusty and
ready for all services, reserving some small matter for the sustentation of
themselves and their families, divide to every man a portion of the former
division; so that all the wealth of Iapan private and public is in the hand of
a few men, and those few depending upon the pleasure of one, that is, the Lord
of Tenza. He as him lists, gives, takes, disgraceth, honoreth, inricheth,
and impouerisheth. When he casleth any governor of his province, all the
leaders and soldiers of the said province are changed, and none left there but
artificers and husbandmen. This government draws with it continual dislike
and innouations. For Dairy (though he has neither power nor government) yet
being in favor and estimation of the people, cease not to insinuate into
their heads, that this Lord of Tenza and the other tyrants, are usurpers of
other men's right, destroyers of the monarchy, and enemies to the state and
liberty of Iapan. Which persuasions take so deep root in the hearts of the
people, and so extenuate the reputation of these usurpers, that under color of
suppression of others, they often take arms upon hope to raise their own
greatness: so that by this daily change of governors, the people not knowing
who are their right and natural Lords, know not whom to love and obey: and
again, their Lords being as uncertain of their continuance, care not for the
people, nor for the welfare of their own vassals, no more then if they were
mere strangers: but always aspiring by the same facility whereby they gained
one, to conquer a better, after the manner of ga^^esters, continually hazard
one, upon hope of winning another: in this sort sometime one alone, sometime
many together vexing the Islands with perpetual warfar. Fassiha to assure his
estate, and disable the great ones from enterprising against him, does often
transport them from one province to another, causing them to forgo their
ancient inheritances, and to lead their lives amongst unknown neighbors:
neither in those places will he suffer them to enjoy livings united, but far
divided in pieces and parcels. For all this, they are never at peace amongst
themselves, by reason that the frontires of their petty jurisdictions
neighbor so near one upon another. In these alterations Fassiha constrained
as well the loosers as the winners to do him homage and obeisance, and once a
year to pay him a rich tribute, drawing to his own coffers the greatest part
of the wealth of Iapan by these tyrannies. He keeps his own people busied in
building of admirable palaces, sumptuous temples, towns and fortresses, the
like whereof are no where to be seen. In these works he has more then an
hundred thousand workmen laboring in their several occupations at their own
charges. Amongst the rest he is now in building a temple, for whose iron works
all the stuff in Iapan will hardly suffice, and therefore he has given
commandment to all his people and merchants to bring all their iron and armor
into one place.

Besides the oath of fealty whereby the residue of the kings and princes are
bound to aid and assist him in peace and war, he receives yearly two
millions arising of the profits of rice reserved upon his own possessions. He
was determined after the finishing of these fabriks, to attempt a journey into
China, and for that enterprise caused timber sufficient for the building of two
thousand vessels for transportation to be felled. By these magnificent fabriks,
this haughty resolution, this large dominion and conquest of foreign
kingdoms, he hops to attain the reputation of immortality amongst his
subjects, as diverse of his predecessors have done before him. For Amida, Xaca,
Canis, and Fotoque, were no other then Lords of Iapan, which either for their
glory in war, or invention of some good arts in peace, were accounted as
gods amongst the Iaponians, as in the old world Hercules and B^cchus were
amongst the Graecians, and Saturn and Ianu^ amongst the Italians. Of these
demigods they report as many strange and fabulous inventions, as the Graecians
and Italians did of theirs. But Fassiha understanding by the preaching of the
Jesuits, that there can be no God but one, who created the heaven and earth of
nothing, and all other deities to be foolish and detestable, determined to
banish them all, and to weed up that good vine which began to take deep root
in those provinces. Surely this may stand for a memorable example of the pride
and blindness of man's heart. The Roman Emperors opposed their forces against
Christian religion, only to maintain and uphold the worship of their idols,
condemned for vain and devilish by the law of Christianity: but this man
raises persecution against true religion, to arrogate to himself the name of
God, an imagination (as I said before) full of extreme ambition and madness. But
in the midst of these proud and unreasonable cogitations, God raised up against
him a new enemy from the eastern parts of Iapan, who as we understand by
aduisoes of the last year, is likely to give him his hands and head full of
business. 1597.


The Xeriffe.
AMongst all the potentates of Afrike, I do not think that there can any one
be found to excel this prince, either in wealth or power. His dominion
contains all that tract of Mauritania, which the Romans called Tingitana, and
stretches from the promontory Bayador to Tanger, and from the Atlantike Ocean
to the river Muluia. In which progress is contained the best portion of all
Afrike, the best inhabited, the pleasantest, the fruitefullest and most civil.
Herein amongst others are the famous kingdoms of Fez and Marocho, the one
divided into seven provinces, the other into eight. The country is divided
into plains and mountains. The mountains are inhabited with a strong and
fierce people, rich in pastures and cattle, and possessing a great part of the
less and bigger Atlas. Between the greater Atlas and the Ocean lies the
plain country, and therein the royal city of Marocho distant fowreteene
miles from Atlas, watered with many springs, brooks and rivers. In times past
this city contained one hundred thousand households, and was the chiefest of
Afrike, but by little and little is decayed, and now lies more waste then
inhabited. In the kingdom of Marocho besides others is Tedsi, a town of five
thousand households, and Tagaost of eight thousand. Taradant gives place to
none for noblenes and traffike, though for largenes and circuit. It is situated
between Atlas and the Ocean in a plain sixteen miles long, and little less
broad, abounding with sugar and all kind of provision. The good regard and
continual abode which Mahumet Xeriffe made in this place, did greatly augment
and innoblish this town. Being past Atlas you enter into most batle plains,
wherein how fruitful the soil is of sugar, olives, cattle and all good
things, can hardly be spoken.

The kingdom of Fez likewise contains diverse provinces, excellent well
peopled. Amongst them is Alga, a territory of fowrescore miles long, and
sixty broad: Elabut is 100. miles long, and 60. broad. Eriff is a province
wholly mountanous: therein are said to be 23. branches of the mount Atlas,
inhabited for the most part with savage and barbarous people: Caret is dry and
rockie, more like Lybia then Barbary. Now because the glory and majesty of
this kingdom consists especially in the city of Fez, I think it not amiss
to describe the situation thereof. It is divided into two parts, a little
distant one from the other, the one called the old town, the other the new. A
little river likewise divides the old into two parts. The east part is called
Beleyda, containing four thousand households, the west part is commonly called
old Fez, and has fowerscore thousand and upward, standing not far from the
new Fez, which likewise has eight thousand. Old Fez stands partly upon hills,
partly on plains, and has in it 50. Mahumetan temples of admirable largenes.
All of them have their fountains, and pillars of Allablaster and Jasper:
besides these, there are six hundred of a less sort: amongst the which that
which is commonly called Carucen is most beautiful, builte in the heart of the
city, and containing half a mile in compass: in breadth it contains
seventeen arches, in length 120. borne up by 2500. white marble pillars: under
the chiefest arch where the tribunal is kept, hangs a most huge lamp,
encompassed with 110. less. Under the other arches hang very great lamps, in
each whereof burn 1500. lights. They say in Fes that all these lamps were
made of the bells which the Arabians brought out of Spain, who not only made
pray of bells, but of columns, pillars, brass, marble, and whatsoever was rich
and curious, first erected by the Romans, and afterward by the Goths. There
are in Fez above 200. schools of learning, 200. Innes, and 400. water milles,
every one driven with four or five wheels. There are also diverse Colleges,
amongst the which, that which is called Madarac is accounted for one of the
most finest pieces of workmanship throughout all Barbary. There are likewise
600. conduits, from whence almost every house is served with water. It were a
long labor to describe their Burse (they call it Alcacer,) it is a place
walled about, having twelve gates, and divided into fifteen walks, where the
merchants meet and dispatch their business under tents. Their delightsome
gardens, and pleasant parks with the rillets and waters running through them, I
can hardly describe.

For the most part the king keeps his court at Fes, wherein he has a castle,
palaces and houses adorned with rare workmanship, rich and beautiful even to
his hearts desire. He has a way under ground from the old town to the new. For
the greatness and statelines thereof by the grant of former kings it enioieth
this strange privilege: not endure any siege, unless the citizens shall
think their prince for strength and forces able and equal to cope with his
enemy: if not, without reproach of treason or ignominy, they may yield their
city before their enemy approach within half a mile of the walls. This have
they done, that so goodly and so flourishing a city should not suffer spoil
under pretext of unprofitable temporizing.

It is of no less moment for situation, store of corn, oil, flax, and
cattle, then for pleasantnes of territory, and plenty of water. The walls are
very strong, and defended with many bulwarks. The inhabitants are very
thriftie, given to traffike, and especially to the making of clothes of wool,
silk and cotton. The kings eldest son is called the prince of Mequiuez.
Though the kingdom have no good havens upon the Mediterranean sea, yet great
store of Englishmen and Frenchmen resort to Alarach, Aguer, and other ports in
the Ocean, whereof some belong to the kingdom of Fes, and other to the
kingdom of Marocho. They carry thither armor and otherwares of Europe, which
they bartre for sugar and other commodities.

Now how the kingdoms of Fes and Marocho (two several principalities) with
their dependances became subject to one crown, I think it worthy relation,
because a more strange and memorable accident has not happened in our age.
About the year of our Lord 1508. a certain Alfaique borne in Tigumedet in the
province of Dara, began to grow in reputation, a man of a reaching wit, and no
less ambitious then learned in the Mathematics. His name was Mahumet
Be^-Amet, otherwise called Xerif by his own commandment. This man deriuing
his peregree from Mahumet, and imboldened by the civil wars of Afric, and
the differents of the states and commonweals thereof (wherein in those days
the Portugals were of no small puissance) began to dream upon the conquest of
Mauritania Tingitan. Which the better to effect, he first sent his three sons
Abdel, Abuet and Mahumet on pilgrimage to Meca and Medina, to visit and worship
the fepulchre of their great prophet Mahumet. The young men returned from this
pilgrimage with such opinion and estimation of holiness and religion (if it be
lawful to use these terms to so great impiety and fopperie) that the
inhabitants as they traveled could not be kept from kissing their garments,
and adoring them as saints. They again as men rapt in deep contemplation,
iournied through the provinces sighing and sobbing, and crying with a high
voice, Ala, Ala. They had no other sustenance but the alms of the people.
Their father received them with great joy and contentment, and perceiving the
favor and opinion of the people not to be like a wonder of nine days, but to
continue fresh and the same as at first, resolved to make use thereof, and
thereupon sent two of them Abnet and Mahumet to Fes to the court. The king
received them kindly, and made one of them president of the most famous college
of Amodorac, and the yoonger tutor of his children. In process of time when
they perceived the king to grace them, and the people to favor them, by the
counsel of their father (taking occasion of the greenances which the Arabians
and Moors serving under the Portugal ensigns had done to the professors of
their superstition) they desired leave of the king to display a banner against
the Christians, making him believe that they would easily draw the
Portugal-Moors to their party, and so secure the provinces of Sus, Hea,
Ducala, and Maroch. Muley Nazer the kings brother resisted this petition,
alleging that if once under the show of holiness and color of religion, they
grew to a head, it would not afterward lie in his power to suppress or range
them under his obedience again. For war makes men awlesse, victories insolent,
popularitie ambitious and studious of innovation. But the king in whose heart
their hypocritical sanctimonie had taken a deep impression, little regarding
his brothers counsel, gave them a banner, a drum, and twenty horsemen to
accompany them, with letters of credence to the princes of Arabie and cities
of Barbary. In these beginnings many things falling out to their honor and
good liking, they began to make incursions into Dencala and the county of
Safi, ranging as far as the promontorie Aguer, then under the government of
the Portugals: and perceiving themselves to be favored, strong and well
followed, urged the people, (who for the most part in those days lived in
liberty) to aid those which fought for their law and religion against the
Christians, as likewise with willing minds to give God his tithes, which they
obtained of the people of Dara. Then by little and little they incroched upon
the territory of Taradant (of which they made their father governor) and
invaded Sus, Hia, Dencala, and the neighboring places. They first seated
themselves in Tednest, and afterward in Tesarot. In their next journey but with
the loss of their elder brother, they defeated Lopes Barriga, a famous
warrior, and captain general of the Portugal army. By fair and flattering
speeches they entered Marocho, poisoned the king, and proclaimed Amet Xerif king
of the country. After this happened the war of the Arabians of Dencala and
Xarquia with the Arabians of Garbi, where while each party weakened other, and
either promised to himself the favor and assistance of the Xerifs: they
turning their arms upon both factions, carried rich prays from both the
nations. Before this war they sent unto the king the fifth part of all their
spoils: but after this victory little regarding their sovereign and aduancer,
they sent him only six horses and six camels, and those very lean and ill
shapen. Which the king disdaining, sent to demand his fifths, as also the
tribute which the kings of Marocho were accustomed to pay him: which if they
denied, he vowed revenge with fire and sword. In the mean time the king died,
and Amet his son, once the pupil of the yoonger Xerif, not only allowed, but
also confirmed Amet in the kingdom of Marocho, upon condition that in some
things he should acknowledge the king of Fes to be his Lord paramount. To this
the Xerifs (whose power and estimation did daily increase) when the day of
payment of the tribute came, willed the messenger to say unto his master, that
they were the lawful successors of Mahumet, and therefore that they were bound
to pay tribute to no man, yea that they had more right to Africa then he had:
but if he would reckon them in the number of his friends, no doubt but it would
turn to his good and honor; but if he diuerted them from the war of the
Christians, they would not leave him so much as a heart to defend himself
against them.

The king taking this in ill part proclaimed war against them, and besieged
Marocho, but for that time was constrained to dislodge. Afterward returning
with 18. thousand horsemen and two thousand harquebushers to renew the siege; as
soon as he had passed the river, he was overcome of the Xeriffes, who led an
army of seven thousand horse, and one thousand two hundred shot. In the pride
of this victory they exacted tribute of this province, and passing Atlas they
took the famous city Tafilet, and partly by love, and partly by force
compelled diverse people of Numidia and the mountains to bear the yoke of
their subjection. In the year 1536. the yoonger Xeriffe which called himself
king of Sus, gathering together a mighty army with great store of artillery,
part whereof he took from the king of Fes, and part whereof were cast by
certain renegado Frenchmen, made a journey to Cape Aguer. This place is of
great consequence, and possessed by the Portugals, who built it and fortified
it, first at the expenses of Lope^ Sequiera, and then at the charges of king
Emanuel, after he understood of the commodious situation thereof. It was
fiercely assaulted, and as valiantly defended, until the fire began to take
hold upon the bulwark wherein their provision of gunpowder was stowed, with
which misfortune the companies appointed for the defense of that quarter,
growing fearful and faint-harted, gave way for the Xeriffe to enter the place,
who made slaves of the greatest part of the defendants. After which victory
they subdued almost all Atlas, the kingdom of Marocho, and the Arabians which
were vassals to the crown of Portugal: the residue, as Safi, Azamor, Arzil,
and Alcazar (places situated upon the sea coast of Mauritania) king John the
third perceiving the profit not to equalize the charge, voluntarily resigned.
These prosperous beginnings brought forth sower endings: for the brethren
falling at discord and dissension, twice put their fortunes upon the hazard of
a battle, and twice the yoonger overcame the elder, took him, and cast him in
prison in the city Tafilet. Then turned he his arms against the king of Fes,
took him prisoner, and restored him to his liberty: but taking him again,
for breach of covenants, he deprived him and his son of life and kingdom. By
the valor of his sons he took the city of Tremissen. But Sal-Aries viceroy
of Algier being jealous of these good fortunes, gathered a puissant host,
recovered Tremissen, put the Xeriffe to flight, took Fes, and bestowed it with
the territory upon the Lord of Velez, who afterward in a battle against the
Xeriffe lost both life and kingdom. At last in his journey to Taradant by the
subornation of the viceroy of Algier he was murdered in his tent by certain
Turks, who with their captain Assen coming to Taradant, rifled the kings
treasures, but were all slain (except five) by the inhabitants in their
journey homewards. This came to pass 1557. when Muley Abdala the Xeriffes
son was proclaimed king. Let this suffice for the original of the Xeriffe:
now let us see how these risings were like the fortunes of Ismael king of
Persia. Both of them in small time conquered many provinces: both grew great by
the ruin of their neighbors: both suffered great crosses by the arms of the
Turks, and to them lost part of their dominions. Selim took from Ismael
Caramit, and diverse other cities of Mesopotamia, the viceroy of Algier drove
the Xeriffe from Tremissen and the adjacent territory. Selim won Tauris the
chief seat of Persia, and then gave it over: Sal-Aries took Fes the head
city of Mauritania, and left it when he had done.

This potentate is absolute Lord of the bodies and goods of his subjects:
whatsoever impositions he lays upon them, they dare not repine at. For
tribute he takes the tenth, and the first fruits of their fruits and cattle:
yet is it most true that for first fruits he takes not above one in twenty,
and though it exceed that number, even to one hundred, yet he never takes
above two. Of every acre of land he takes a ducat and the fifth part, and so
much of every household and of every pole male and female above 15 years of
age, yearly. If he want, he takes a greater sum. To make the people more
willing to pay what is imposed, he always demands more by half then is to
be paid, that so, by paying their due, they may think they are well dealt
withal, in seeming to be forgiven somewhat of his full demand. The inhabitants
of the mountains, a people savage and uncivil, for the difficult access unto
them, he cannot enforce to pay tribute, but those that manure the plains he
constrains to give the tenth of their harvest. Besides these revenues, he
takes tole and custom of all kinds of merchandise in cities: inward, of a
citizen two in the hundred; of a stranger, ten. His rent of mils is a great
matter: for upon every asse-load of grain grineded in Fes, he takes half a
riall: in this town there are above 400. mils. The church of Carruven was
endowed with four score thousand ducats of yearly revenue, the colleges and
monasteries of Fes with much more; all which now are escheated into the kings
cofers. Moreover he is heir to all the Judges (which they call Alcaids) and
has the bestowing of all their offices. When they die he seiseth upon all
their horses, armor, apparel, and all their other chattels. If the intestate
leave children behind him fit for the war, he bestows their fathers
annuitie upon them; if they be sons and young, he nurseth them till they come
to full years; if daughters, he maintains them, till they find husbands. To
be fingring the wealth of the richer sort, he has always some office or
lieutenantship with an annuitie to sell them: but commonly to prevent those
sales, they will not be acknowne of their abilities, remoouing their abodes far
from the court and the kings sight, which is the cause that the city of Fes is
much fallen from the ancient splendor.

He has no castles or pieces well fortified, but only Aguer, Labace, and
Tetuan upon the sea side. His chiefest confidence is in the valor of his
soldiers, especially his horsemen, like the Turk and Persian. In this regard
he takes no great care to furnish himself with ordinance, yet has he great
store thereof in Fes, Marocho, Taradant, and in the foresaid haven towns taken
from the Portugals and others. As he sees occasion he causes new to be cast,
for which service he can want no workmen out of Europe. In Marocho he has an
Arsenall, wherein he la^eth up monthly at least 46. quintals of gunpowder.
Here he causes his harquebushes and bows to be likewise made. In the year
1569. by fire which happened amongst the gunpowder-houses the greatest part of
the city was very much defaced.

His soldierie is of diverse sorts: The first consists of 2700. horsemen, and
2000. harquebushers, part lying in garrison in Fes, and part in Morocho, where
lies the court. The second consists (as a man may say) of a royal troop of
six thousand horse, all Gentlemen pensioners and of great reputation. These
ride upon brave horses with rich caparisons; their arms and furniture shining
with gold, silver, stones and all things else, which for variety of colors or
rich devises may delight the eye with gallant show, or feed the humor of the
curious beholder. To these seruitours besides their allowance of corn,
prouender, butter and flesh for themselves, their wives, children and servants,
they receive yearly from seventy to one hundred ounces of silver. The third
^ort are a kind of Timarots: for the Xeriffe does alot a certain portion of
land and tenants to his sons, brethren, and men of quality amongst the
people of Afric and Arabia, for the maintenance of their degrees. Those whom
they term Alcaids, look to the manuring of the fields, gather the rents of
corn, rice, otes, oil, butter, flesh, poultrie, and money, and distribute it
monthly amongst the soldiers, to every man according to his place. They
likewise give them woollen, linen, and silk for their garments: armor, and
horses for service. If their horses chance to be slain, they give them new: so
did the Romans to those which served upon the horses of the state. The
commanders of these troops are very careful to see their soldiers in heart
and full of life, excellent well armed, and competently attired. They receive
between four and twenty and thirty ounces of silver yearly. The fourth
sort make the Arabians, who commonly live in tents, divided by 120. under their
several leaders, to be always ready upon all occasions. They serve on
horseback, but more like thieves and outlawes then soldiers. The fifth sort is
like the press of the Christian commonweals. These companies consist of
citizens, villagois, and mountain people. Of these men the king makes no
great reckoning, neither does he willingly arm them for fear of sedition and
innouations, unless it be to war upon the Christians, wherein he cannot
forbid them to serve. For upon remembrance of the slaughter of the Moors by
the Christians spoken of in their Mahometicall legend, the more Christians they
slay, the easier they think shall be their passage to heaven. Hereupon you
shall see herds of men and women running to this war, desiring there to die
upon hope of meriting salvation by the slaughter of our people. The same fury
(be it spoken to our shame) inrageth the Turks: especially for the propagation
of their heresies you shall see them more liker people running to the
celebration of a marriage feast, then to a warre-iourney, hardly enduring to
stay the limited time of the rendeuou. They account them Saints which die with
their weapons in their hands; and those most unhappy which depart this world
amongst the tears of their children, and the mournings of their wives.

By this it may sufficiently appear what forces the Xeriffe is able to bring
to the field, but examples will make it more clear. Muley Abdala belegred
Magazan with two hundred thousand men. He filled the ditch with a mount made of
earth, and with his ordinance beat the wall level with the ground. But by the
prowess of the Portugal, and fury of their mines, he was enforced to raise
his siege and depart. It is certain, he is not able to hold out any war
above three months, because the soldier lives upon his daily allowance of
diet and apparel: and when such like provisions cannot be conuayed to the
place of necessity, without great labor and hazard, it comes oftentimes to
pass, that for want of provision the army is constrained to break and
retire. Molucco king of Fes, who defeated Sebastian, had under his standard
forty thousand horsemen, and eight thousand hired footmen; and with the
Arabians and other common soldiers it is thought that he is able to levy
seventy thousand horse, and a far greater number of foot.

Prester John.
ALthough the sovereignty of this prince be very magnificent, powerful and
spacious; yet in truth does it nothing answer the fame and report of the
vulgar. Horatius Malaguccius in his discourse De amplitudine dominiorum huius
temporis, maintains it to be larger then the empire of any other potentate,
excepting that of the king of Spain. Truly I must needs say, that in elder
age, by the number of his titles, it may be coniectured, that his dominions did
stretch far and wide: for he did entitle himself king of Goiam (which is
beyond Nilus) Vangue and Damur, places situated beyond the river Zair, whereas
at this day he hardly comes near the banks of either river: yea John Baroz
writes, that the Abessines by reason of the mountains between them and Nilus,
have little or no knowledge of that river. In the center of his kingdom is
Barcena; eastward it stretches from Suaquen to the entrance of the red sea, a
tract of 122 leagues, and yet between him and that sea lie infinite mountains
inhabited by Moors, doing what outrages they list upon that coast. Westward
upon the banks of Nilus lie a ridge of mountains, inhabited by Gentiles, who
pay him tribute. Toward the north his bounds are to be limited by an
imaginary line to be drawn from Suaquen to the head of the Island Meroe,
containing the space of 125. leagues; then making a semicircle like a bow, not
too much bended toward the south, as far as the kingdom of Adea (in whose
mountains the river which Ptolomey calls Ratto, arises and falls into the
sea about Melind) for the space of 250. leagues, it stretches even to the
frontires of the Gentiles: and from thence turning your imaginary line, and
abutting the end in the principality of Adel (whose chief city is Acar in
the altitude of 9. degrees) you shall find this Empire to contain in compass
672. leagues. It is divided into vast plains, fertile hillocks, and mountains
though woondrous high, yet fit for tillage, and full of habitation. It is not
very well stored with wheat, but it brings forth barley, millet, a certain
other grain wholesome and indurable, Indian wheat, and all other kind of pulse
(as well known as unknown to us) in very plentiful manner. They have vines,
but make no wines, unless it be in the kings court, or the patriarchs palace, in
steed whereof they brew a kind of sharp beuerage made of the fruit of Tamerind.
The orange, lemon and, cedar tree grow wild. They make oil of a certain fruit
which they call Zaua, it is of a good color, but unsavory. The Bees build
their hiues even in their houses, whereupon arises great quantity of wax and
honey. Their garments are wouen of cotton wool. The richer sort are clothed in
sheep skins, the gentlemen in cases of Lions, Tygres, and Linces. Their riches
consist in herds of oxen, goats, sheep, mules, asses, and camels. Of horses
their breed is small, but they have great store of goodly coursers brought them
from Arabia and Egypt. They leave the foles with the mares not above three
days, but put them unto kine to suck and rear up. They have hens, geese,
wild swine, hearts, goats, and hares, but no conies, yea and such beasts, of
which we have not the like, as panthers, lions, elephants, and linces. To speak
in a word: there is no country under heaven fitter for increase of plants and
all living creatures, but none less helped by art or industry; for the
inhabitants are idle and unthrifty. They have flax, but make no cloth, they
have sugarcanes and iron-mines, but know not the use of either: and as for
smiths, they fear them as f^ends. They have rivers and streams, yet will they
not take the pains in drouths to cut the banks to water their tillage or
harten their grounds. Few give themselves to hunting or fishing, which causes
their fields to swarm with foul and venison, and their rivers with fish. But
it seems that the true ground of their idleness arises from their evil
usage: for the poor people perceiving their landlords to pole and pill them,
never sow more then they needs must. They keep no method in their speeches,
and to write a letter, many men (and that many days) must lay their wits
together. At meals, they use neither cloth, napkin, nor tables. They are
utterly ignorant in physic. The Gentlemen, Burgers, and Plebeians dwell
apart, yet may any man rise to honor by virtue and prowess. The first borne
is heir to all, even to the utmost farthing. Through the whole land there is
not a town containing above 1600. households, and but few of that quantity:
for, for the most part they dwell dispersed in small villages. They have no
castle or fortification, in imitation of the Spartans, maintaining that a
country ought to be defended by the sword, and not by strength of earth or
stone. They barter one thing for another, and to make reckonings even, they
supply the want with corn and salt. For pepper, frankincense, myrrh and salt
they give gold, and that by weight: as for silver it is in little request. The
greatest concourse of people is about the kings court, which never staieth long
in one place, but is ever in progress, sometime in one place, sometime in
another, and ever in the open fields under tents and pauilions. It is said to
contain ten miles in circuit.

His government is tyrannical: for he entreats his vassals, rich and poor
more liker slaves then subjects; which to do with the greater safety, he
carries himself amongst them with a certain holy and Saintlike adoration:
for at his bare name they bow their bodies, and touch the earth with their
hands. They reverence his pauilion, yea though he be absent. In old time they
were accustomed to show themselves unto the people but once in three years,
but sithence they are grown less maiesticall, showing themselves thrice in
one year, to wit, on Christmas day, on Easter day, and Holy Rood day, yea and
in these times Panufius which now reigns is become more gracious. When any
matter of weight is committed in the princes name to any man be he never so
great, he is to attend his commission stark naked to the middle, neither may
be put on his garment without license. Being called to witness a matter in
controversy, they hardly speak truth, vniesse they swear by the life of the
king. He gives and takes to whom and from whom he pleases, neither dare he
from whom he takes, for his life show a discontented countenance. He
presents to holy orders, and disposes at his good pleasure of the goods of
the spirituality as well as of the laity. In traveling he rides shadowed
with red curtains, high and deep incopassing him round about. He wears on his
head a crown, the one half wrought of gold, the other of silver, and in his
hand he bears a silver crucifix. He covers his face with a piece of watchet
taffata, which more or less he lifts up and puts down, according as he
is minded to grace him with whom he talks. Sometime he shows his whole leg,
lifting it without the hangings, then may no man approach but by degrees, and
after many courtesies and diverse messages passing to and fro. No man has
vassals but the king, to whom once a year they do homage, and protest
obedience as subjects to their liege sovereigns. He deriueth his pedigree from
Mileich the son of Solomon and Saba. In the reign of Candaces they received
the Christian faith: and about that time one Gasparis became famous in
Aethiopia; from whom after thirteen generations descended that John, who first
took upon him the ^^rname of Sanctus, and left it an hereditarie title to his
house and successors. This man having no issue of his body, about the time of
Constantine gave the kingdom to the eldest son of his brother Caius, and
invested the yoonger (Balihasar and Melchior) the one with the kingdom of
Fatigar, the other with the kingdom of Goiam, and so divided the bloodroyall
into three families, the Gaspars, Balthasars, and Melchi^rs. To avoid sedition
and innovation, he made a law that the sons, brethren, and nearest kindred of
the Emperor should be kept and shut up in the castle of mount Amara, and that
they should neither succeed in the Empire, nor enjoy any honorable estate: for
which cause the Emperors ever since have seldom married.

He manureth his own fields with his own slaves and cattle: who, by reason
they are suffered to marry, and their issues remain in the same estate of
villenage, as do their fathers; they daily increase to infinite multitudes.
Every man that has any inheritance, does likewise pay tribute, some horses,
some oxen, others gold, cotton wool, or such like commodities. It is thought
that he is Lord of infinite treasures, and to have storehouses full of cloth,
jewels, and gold. In his letters to the king of Portugal, upon condition that
he would wage war against the Infidels, he offered him a million of gold, and
a million of men, with provision according. He his reported to lay up yearly
in the castle of Amara three millions of gold. And true it is, that before the
days of king Alexander he did hoord up great store of gold in rude and
unwrought masses; but no such quantity, because they knew not how to refine
it. His revenues are of three sorts; the first arises of his crown land: the
second of the taxes of his people, who pay every man by house somewhat,
besides the tenth of all that is dug out of their mines: the third, he
leuieth of the great Lords, and they give him the revenue of any one of their
towns (which he will choose) so he choose not that wherein themselves
inhabit. And albeit the Prince be very rich, yet the people are idle and
beggarly; partly because they are entreated as slaves, which usage takes from
any people that courage and alacririe of spirit, which should be in men
professing arms and undergoing dangers: and partly because in respect of that
base bond of servile fidelity, wherewith they are ouerawed to his Majesty,
they perceive their hands are fast bound; through fear whereof they have no
other weapon fit for service, then a rustie headpeece, a skull or curasse which
the Portugals have brought thither: so that having neither fortress to fly
unto, nor weapons to repulse wrongs, their villages and substance lie always
open to the pray and spoil of whosoever will invade them. Their offensive
weapons are certain darts and arrows without feathers. They observe a Lent of
fifty days, which by reason of their true (or rather superstitious)
abstinence does bring their bodies so weak and low, that for many days after
they are not able to gather strength to move themselves from one place to
another. At which time the Moors watching the opportunity, invade their
dominions, and carry away men, women and wealth. Francis Aluarez writes, that
he is able to bring into the field an hundred thousand men: but experience has
manifested, that even in his extremities his numbers were far inferior to that
reckoning. He has knights of the Order dedicated to the protection of Saint
Anthony. Every gentleman father of three sons (excepting the eldest) is
bound to give one to the service of the king: out of these are chosen twelve
thousand horsemen for the guard of his person. Their vow and oath is to defend
the bounds of the Empire, and to fight against the enemies of the Christian
faith.

He is affronted with three puissant neighbors: the king of Borno, the great
Turk, and the king of Adel. The king of Borno is Lord of that country, which
from Guangula eastward stretches about five hundred miles between the deserts
of Seth and Barca. In situation it is very uneven, sometime mountanous, and
sometime plain, the people indifferent civil, the country reasonably well
inhabited, and in regard of plenty of victual, somewhat resorted unto by
merchants. Upon the mountains dwell neat-herds and shepherds, living for the
most part upon millet, leading a beastiall life, without religion, and
accompaning with one an others wife in common. They know no other names, then
such as are given them for some note or mark of their body, as blind, lame,
tall, bold, etc. This king is very puissant in people, of whom he exacteth no
other tribute then the tenths of the increase of their lively hoods. For
exercise and instead of occupations they give themselves to steal, to slay
their neighbors, and to take them prisoners, and then to barter them for
horses with the merchants of Barbary. He has under him many kingdoms and
nations, some white some black. He is an heavy enemy to the Abessines,
taking away their cattle, rifling their mines, and leading away the people in
captivity. His horsemen ride after the Spanish manner, armed with lances
(steeled at both ends) darts and arrows: but their inrodes resemble rather
robberies and garboiles, then wars managed by valiant soldiers.

The Turk likewise on the east, and the king of Adel on the southeast, do
cruelly vex him: for they have curtald his large dominion and brought his
provinces into great misery. In the year 1558. the Turk harried the whole
territory of Bernagasso (but since expulsed) and took from Prester John
whatsoever he was Lord of upon that sea coast, especially the haven and city
of Suaquen and Erococo, in which place the mountains between Abex and the red
sea, make a gate as it were for the traffic and carriages of the Abessines
and Arabians. And sithence that, Bernangasso was enforced to submit himself to
the Turkish commands, to buy his peace, and in name of a tribute to pay one
thousand ounces of gold yearly.

The king of Adel is his no less infestious enemy: he bordereth upon the
kingdom of Fatigar: and his siegniorie stretches along the red sea as far
as Assum, Salir, Meth, Barbora, Pidar and Zeila. Many ships come from Aden and
Cambaia to Barbora with merchandise, which they trucke for flesh, honey, wax
and vittail: these commodities are carried to Aden; gold, iuorie, and such
wares are sent to Cambaia: the greatest part of vittail, honey, wax, corn and
fruits brought from Zeila, are carried into Aden and Arabia, as likewise much
cattle, especially sheep having tails of 25. pound weight, with heads and
necks all black, the rest of their bodies all white. Of these cattle there
are some altogether white, with turning crooked tails as long as a man's arm,
and dewlaps like oxen. Some of their kine have horns with many branches like
our dear: othersome have one horn in their forehead growing backward a span
and half long. The chief city of this kingdom is Arar 38. leagues distant
from Zeila toward the southeast. He professes Mahumetisme, and since his
conversion he has entitled himself with the surname of Holy, a^owing
continual war against the Abessine Christians: and therefore he watches the
time of the foresaid fast of fifty days, when he enters their territories,
burns their villages, takes prisoners, and then commits a thousand other
mischiefs.

The Abessine slaves do often leave their country, and take upon them great
iournies, putting themselves in the service of great Lords, where many times by
their industry and good carriage they become high commanders in Arabia,
Cambaia, Bengala and Sumatra. For the Mahumetan princes being all tyrants and
Lords of those countries, which they have forced from the Gentiles, to secure
their estates do never trust their homebred subjects, but wage strangers and
slaves, unto whose fidelity they commit their persons and the managing of all
the affairs of their kingdoms. And amongst all sorts of slaves, the Abessine
is in greatest esteem for his faithfulness and towardly disposition. The king
of Adel ouerlaieth Egypt and Arabia with these slaves, which he changes with
the Turks and princes of Arabie, for armor, provision of war and soldiers.
In the year of our Lord 1500. Claud king of Abex perceiving himself inferior
to Grad-Ameda king of Adel (for he had vexed his land with 14. years
incursions) forsaking the frontires, retired himself into the inward parts of
his kingdom, entreating for aid of Stephen Gama viceroy of India under John
the third king of Portugal, who was then in the red sea with a warlike navy.
In compassion of his miseries and religion, he sent him four hundred
Portugall-shot very well furnished under the conduct of Christopher his
brother. By their aid and use of their artillery he overthrew his enemies in
two battles: but the king of Adel obtaining of the governor of the city of
Zebit one thousand harquebushers, and ten pieces of ordinance, in the third
fight put the Portugals to flight, and slew their captain. Afterward when
Adel had sent away these Turks, king Claudius set upon him at unawares by the
river Zeila and the mountain Sana with eight thousand footmen, five hundred
Abessine horsemen, and the remainder of the living Portugals, one of whom gave
Grada-Amada his deaths wound. But in March 1509. Claudius fighting with the
Moors of Malaca, gaining the victory, was slain in the battle. Adam his
brother succeeded, against whom being a demi-Mahumetan, the greatest part of
the Abessine nobility rebelled, and was overthrown in the year 1562. by
Bernagasso. By this casualtie did the Ethiopian affairs ebb and flow, until
in the reign of Alexander things began in some sort to return to their
ancient estate by the aid of the Portugals, who furnished them with weapons
both offensive and defensive, and by their examples encouraged them to be stout
and courageous against their enemies. All that were living after the defeature
of Christopher Gama, and all that ever went thither since that day to this, do
still remain there, marrying wives and begetting children. King Alexander gave
them leave to elect a Iusticer, and to end all matters of controversy amongst
themselves, which makes them so willing to stay and to teach them the use of
their weapons, the manner of our warfare, and how to fortify passages and
places of importance. Sithence those times (Francis Medices contracting
friendship with the Abessine) diverse Florentines, some for pleasure and some
for profit, have traveled into those provinces, wherein when they are once
entered, the king entreats them so fair, and gives them so largely whereupon
to live, that they can hardly obtain license to return again into their own
countries.

Besides these, he has other enemies, as the king of Dancali, whose city and
haven is Vela upon the red sea, and the Moors of Doba, a province divided into
fourteen Lieutenantships. These people though they are accounted within the
limits of the Abessine Empire, yet do they often rebel, having a law amongst
themselves, that no young man may contract matrimony, unless he can bring
good proof that he has slain twelve Christians.

Monomotapa.
IN the residue of Aethiop reign diverse powerful princes, as the kings of
Adel, Monomugi, Monomotapa, Angola, and Congo, of which as yet we understand
very little. But that the Reader by the description of one, may conjecture of
the rest, I will speak somewhat of the state and policy of Monomotapa, because
it is mightier and more famous then the rest. This kingdom contains all that
Island which lies between the rivers of Cuama and Spirito Santo (a territory
of 150. leagues in compass) and from Spirito Santo it stretches even to the
Cape of Good Hope: for the Vizeroys of that huge tract do acknowledge him for
their sovereign and supreme governor: of towns and villages they have few,
those cottages which they have consist of timber and t^ach. One of their chief
cities is called Zimbas, and other Benema taxa, the one fifteen miles, the
other 21. distant from Cefala toward the west. The soil abounds with corn
and with cattle great and small, wandering by herds through the fields and
woods. By the store of teeth from thence transported, we may conjecture that
less then 5000. elephants cannot but die yearly in this country. These
beasts are here very great. There is no climate like it for plenty of gold:
for by report there are 3000. mines, whereout gold is dug: gold is likewise
found in the earth, in rocks and rivers. The mines of Manica, Boro, Quiticui,
and Toroe (which some men call Butua) are the richest. The people are mean of
stature, black, and well set. They converse with the king kneeling on their
knees, and to sit in his presence, is the use with them, as with us to stand,
and that is granted but to great lords. The assay of meat and drink is not
made before, but after the prince has eat and drunk. Here are no prisons,
because law passes upon the offender in the very moment wherein the offense
was committed. The offenses most severely punished are witchcraft, theft, and
adultery. They pay no other tribute but certain days work, and presents,
without the which no man may appear in the princes presence. The king bears
in his coat of arms a certain little spade, with an Iuorie handle, and two
small darts. He keeps for his faithfullest guard two hundred dogs. He keeps
the heirs of his vassal princes to be secured of their parents loyalty. One
of the kings not long sithence was converted and Baptized by Gonsalua Silua a
Jesuit, with the greater part of his courtiers, but afterward (by the
persuasion of certain Moors in great credit about him) he caused him to be
slain. Sebastian king of Portugal offended heereat, proclaimed war against
him under the leading of Francisco Barre^^o. This army consisted of sixeteene
hundred, the greatest part gentlemen, to whom the Monomotapa fearing their
arms and valor, offered honorable conditions, but the captain (whom no offer
or indiffeferencie could satisfy) was overcome, and his army utterly
consumed, yet not by the enemy, but by sickness and the infectious air of the
country.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 17. lin. 30. for lanciers, read men at arms.

Page 20. lin. 38. for defensible, r. defeasible.

Page 24. lin. 22. for supremacy, r. sovereignty.

Page 28. lin. penult. these words, without relation to the kingly authority,
are superfluous.

Page 65. lin. 30. for it might, r. he might.

Page 65. lin. 34. for he is immediate, r. mediate, he is

Page. 127. lin. 24. for can be wanting, r. cannot be wanting.


