THE Overthrow of the most part of the Prince of Parma his forces, both horse
and foot.

Performed on the twelfth and fifteenth of July last, by the Grave Maurice his
Excellency, General of the Armies in the Low Countries.

With the breaking of the huge bridge leading to the Value, near Arnham.

Seen and allowed.

Printed by T.S. and are to be sold over against the South door of Paul's.

1591.

A Letter written in Arnham by a Gentleman of account on the sixteenth of July,
concerning the great overthrow which the Prince of Parma lately sustained.
THe honorable services, assaults and battles, lately made by his excellency
upon sundry Towns in the Low Countries, together with the good success
which he has had therein, has of late given a great fear and terror to all
the Towns near thereabout, who although some of them do still stubbornly
resist and withstand his forces, hazarding their lives in the defense of the
most capital enemy unto all true professors of Christian religion: yet the
unexpected victories which it has pleased God to give him of late, has so
daunted the most part of those, who-doe still wilfully resist him, as they did
his excellencies Father, namely, the wise and valiant Prince of Orange, that
the chiefest of them know not well what to do, nor which way to turn them.

Wonderful has been his success since he took the cause of his country in
hand, yea he has daunted the enemy more within the space of one year, then
was done by any other in seven years before. How many Towns has he lately
obtained, wherein the enemy has not made trial of his valor Nay, what Town
or City in all the Low Countries that does forcibly resist the states, which
with an undaunted courage he does not attempt to conquer? Surely there is none
that he can easily come at, but he seeks means to compass and
countermaund the same, either by the Cannon or Cutlasse.

For proof whereof look into his politic attempt lately made at Bredau, a
thing most worthy of memory, where under the color of bringing in Turfes to
serve the Town with some kind of fuel (whereof then they were in great want)
he brought into the harbor hoyes laden with Turfes on the top, and armed men
underneath, who in the dead time of the night, came forth and surprised the
Town.

Call to mind his forwardnes at Grave sconce Zurphen, Deuenter, Delftes I Will,
and sundry other Towns, whole honorable service, prowes, and valor performed
at the same, makes truth to spread forth his rare renown into all Christian
nations, in so much as every one says, his deeds deserve to be chronicled,
and his invincible courage to be registered in letters of gold.

The Lord of hosts has assisted him, yea has preserved him, as the apple of
his eye, even as he did defend David from the hands of the mighty Captain
of the Philistines: And although his excellencies power at the first was but
very weak, and then the enemies army very strong, yet has almighty God
now greatly increased his power, and in most wonderful sort pulled down and
weakened the forces of the said Capital enemy, yea, and that in such sort, as
the same may seem most wonderful and strange to those that enter into the
due consideration thereof.

This Capital enemy of whom I make recital, is the Prince of Parma, who,
although he were (not long since) sortie thousand strong, he is now greatly
weakened, and his forces not above eight thousand sighting men in the field.
The reason is, because some of his chiefest Towns are revolted, and his
greatest strength of horses and horsemen lately by Gods providence scattered,
slain, and taken prisoners, besides sundry of his footmen maimed, discomfited,
and put to the sword, as appears by this history particularly ensuing.

The Prince of Parma for truth, lying at Huffen, a Townescituate between
Nimweghen and Arnham, after that he perceived his strength was impaired, by
reason of the Towns of Deuenter and Zutphen, which have lately yielded by
constraint, mustered up his men, having in all about ten thobsand soldiers,
namely, two thousand horse, and eight thousand foot, of which power, the
greater part came and lay before Knotsenburgh sconce, a fort builded very
strong, and holden by the Grave Maurice his excellency. This his army has
made two several assaults upon the said fort or sconce, neuerth elesse he has
been repulsed to his great hinderance and loss, for in the first assault the
said Prince of Parma has lost about six hundred men, and twenty several
Captains, the principal whereof was the County Octauio de Manfuelt, with
Lamberlot his Lieutenant, and an Italian Prince. Besides those aforesaid which
were slain, there was also about the number of four hundred more, who being
sore hurt, wcre carried into Nimweghen. This was upon Monday being the 12 day
of July last past after our English computation: in which fight they seemed on
both sides very hardy and courageous.

And whereas the Prince of Parma had compacted a great and mighty bridge made
of Lighters, sir poles, and great planks, which reached over the River of
Rhine, into an Island called Value, the same beeiug chained together, was of
such breadth and strength, that the Princcs armies, and troops of armed men
did easily march and pass over it, when and so often as they pleased. The like
bridge he had also made from the wall by Nimweghen, over to the other wall or
land side, leading toward Arnham, both which bridges are fortified with sconces
at the end, so that there was no easy way to come unto them: between which
lies that Town of Hussen, where the Prince of Parma remained, thinking
himself there in greatest safety. But the Grave Maurice perceiving that the
bridge leading into the Value was a great hinderance to his purpose, for
passing up the river before Nimweghen, polititikely and secretly set forth a
great many vessels together called Drummedaries, which being well manned, came
early in the morning forceably with Sea and Tide, and beat upon the bridge
with great labor, for the space of four hours together, in which time they
had broken, cut, and sawed the same in sunder: this done, the force of the sea
tore the rest of the bridge in pieces: by means whereof the Grave Maurice has
now free passage with his forces to pass up to Nimweghen by the river, so that
the Prince of Parma finding his hold weakened, was constrained to fly to
Nimweghen, where since his coming he has taken from them al their armor,
and weapons of defense and delivered the same into the custody of his own
soldiers, who are joined in equallitie with the principal surueiors and
governors of that City. The Princes army and the Grave Maurices, do now lie
within three English miles one of an other, and it is supposed that their
armies have met and fought together before this time, whereof you shall have
certain intelligence by the next Post.

After that his excellency had received this good success over his enemies,
he with his forces gave thanks unto Almighty God, which done, they refreshed
themselves, and rested without doing any thing until the Thursday morning
following.

Upon which day, his excellencies forces having intelligence by some scoutes
appertaining to their army, that the Prince of Parmas ten Coronets of
horsemen were at hand, yet secretly ambusht, until some troops of footmen
should have come up to them, prepared themselves to fight, setting them selves
in battle ray, and so marched forwards.

The Prince of Parma, by reason he saw the Grave Maurice his company grow and
increase still in greater multitude, was resolved to bid his excellency
battle, thinking that if he should not do it, his power would in short space
grow mightier than his, yet not meaning to advertise him thereof, but what he
did should be on the sudden, to the end he might take the greater advantage
of his excellency, and to that end he prepared these Cornets of horsemen, who
being placed in an ambush, was commanded to keep silence, and not beseene
until the footmen were come unto them, which were preparing with all speed, at
what time these horsemen should suddenly have come upon the forces of the Grave
Maurice, and in a moment to have wrought the spoil and overthrow of them all.
But of this politic pretense he was merely defeated, for his excellency
having perfect knowledge of their strength, and place of abode, did forth with
set upon them in most courageous sort, which was at Betue, and there like
ventrous and most hardy soldiers, within four hours space did obtain a most
happy and famous victory over them. Of which ten Coronets of horsemen, seven
companies were slain and taken prisoners forthwith.

The first company of these horsemen so taken and slain, was Don Pedro
Francisco de Nicello, Captain of the Guard to the Prince of Parma, he was
chief General over all these companies of horsemen, in the absence of the
Marquis del Guasto: also his Coronet, and Sir Tarquinio Geapido, being a
Gentleman of a great house, was taken.

In the second company or Coronet of horsemen was Conto de Fio de Mantere,
Lieutenant of Captain Ieronimo Caraffa.

In the third company or Cornet, was Captain Paradilla, being grievously hurt
with three wounds, whereof he died the next day, yet offered for his ransom
before his death, fifteen thousand crowns.

In the fourth company or Coronet was taken don de Aualos Altiueso, brother to
the Marquis del Guasto, who offers for his ransom thirty thousand Ducats:
his Coronet was also taken.

In the fifth company was taken Don Antonio le Iaio with sundry Gentlemen of
account.

In the sixth company or Coronet was taken Biagio Cappizucca with sundry other
Gentlemen.

In the seventh Coronet was no men of name, they were all common Rutters, yet
all taken prisoners.

Of these aforesaid companies or Coronets of horsemen, there was four hundred
and odd horses taken alive, who were all by his excellencies forces conducted
and brought into the town of Arnham, on the day aforesaid, who were all taken
at Betue.

Besides the taking of all these Captains, Coronets, and horsemen, the enemies
bloody ancient was taken, which remains in the said Town of Arnham.

Grave Maurice his excellency, in all these two assaults, has not lost above
twenty men, being common soldier, and no one man of name or account among them.

His excellencies forces is at this present fifteen hundred horse, and ten
thousand footmen. He lies in the field ready to give the enemy battle every
hour. As for the Prince of Parma he comes not into the field, but keeps
himself close for fear of danger that might thereby ensue unto his person.

It was a great encouragement and comfort unto all the common soldiers, to see
his excellency continually in the field all the time of the battle, who
promised unto them all, that they should not go one foot further than he
would hazard his own person.

Besides those seven Coronets of horsemen before recited, there was four
Coronets all Rutters more, which they followed in chase, of whose success I
have not as yet received the particulars, but it is likely that they are taken,
for that the passages were laid round about.

Thus I cease to write any more of his excellency till further occasion, whom
I beseech God to prosper with all his Army, and to grant him victory, that he
may overthrow the enemies of Gods truth, and build up the decayed Temple in the
land of Israel, which he grant for his mercy sake. Amen.

FINIS.

