The pryncyples of Astronamye the which diligently perscurutyd is in manner a
pronosticacyon to the worlds end compylyd by Andrew Board of physic Doccor



Thet preface
Hit is greatly to be dolentyd ye all men almost does now adnichilat the.vii.
lyberall scyences specially. Astrona mye the which of truth is. a. necessary
science And does illucidat all other scyences, not only ye liberal scye^ces as
gra^er retorick logic Arithmetrick geometrick and music. but also hit is an
Introduccyon to philosophy, phylicke and divinity it is not unknown yt
philosophy consyscyth in natural philosophy and moral philosophi. to ye
naturalite and moralite of the which no man can attynge with out. Astronamy, Also
Astronamy does illucidat physic for hypocrates says. Cecus medycus est qui.
Astronamyam nescyt yt is to say he is a blind physycyon ye which does not know
Astronamie also Astronamye does give knowledge to dyuynyte as hit does plainly,
appear in the first Chapter of ye genesys. and dyuerce other places wherefore
david does say Celienatrant gloriam dei et opera mamum eius annunciat
firmamentum. heuyns does show ye glory of god and the fyrma^ent does show the
warkes of god I consyderyng these premysses with the great vtylyte of the affore
said s^yrnce do make this book to any met al men to have a respect to hit and to
sludy hit to laud and to praise god in his warkis and where I have ometted and
lefft out mani matters apertayng to this book latt them look in a book named
the Introduction of knowleg a book of my making the which is aprintyng at old
Robert Coplands the eldist printer of Ingland the which does print these year mi
pronosticacions.

Finis.
The Capytles of contences of this boock folowth
The first Capytle does show the names of the.xii. synes and of the. vii.
planetes. And what the zod. ack and how many minutes a degree does co^taine. The
second Capytle does show what signs be mouable, and what signs be not
mouable and which be commone and which be masculyn signs and which be
femynyne and of the tryplycyte of them. The.iii. capytle does show in what
members or places in man ye signs has their domynion and how no man out to be
let blod when the moon is in ye sign where the sign has domynyon and also
what operacion the signs be of when ye moon is in there. The.iii. capytle does
show of the fortitudes of the planetes and what influens they: does give to us.
The.v. Capitle does show the natural dyspocycyon of the moon when she is in any
of the.xii. signs. The.vi. capytle does show of ye nature of al ye.xii. signs
And what influe^ce they has in man. And what fortitudes ye planetes has in ye
signs. with the names of the Aspects. The.vii, capytle does show ye natural
dysposycions of the planetes. And what operacyon they has in man's body.
The.viii. Capitle does show of the. v Aspectus. and of their operacyon The ix
capitle does show of ye mutacio^ of ye Air when any rain wind wedder froste
and cold, should be by the course of ye signs and planetes. The.x. capytle,
does show ye pedyciall of the aspectus of the moon and other planets and what
dayer be good. and what days be not. etc. The.xi capytle does show of
flenbotho my or lettyng of bold The xii capitle does show how when and what
time a physician should minister medycynes The.xiii. Capitle does show of
sowi^g of seeds and plantynge of trees and setyng of herb.
Thus endyth the table.


The first capytle does pertract of ye names of planetes and also of the names
of the signs and what the zodiac is and how many degrees be in ye zodiac and
how many minutes adegre does contain.
THe names of the.vii. planetes be these. Saturn Iubiter. Mars ye Sone. venus
Mercury and the Moon. These be the names of the.xii. signs Aries. Taurus,
Gemini. Cauncer Leo. Virgo. Libra. Scorpyo. Sagittary. Capricorn. Aquary. and
Pisces. The zodiac is the Circle in the which the.xii. signs be in named the
circle of beestes. or ye oblique cyrcle hit may be called well ye circle of
bestes for the signs within the cyrcle has or be of that dyspocycyo^ of the
ye bestes of whom they does take their names. or be lykyned unto. As Aries is
lykinned to the Wedder or Rame. Taurus is like to the Bull. Geminy is lykned
to.ii. chyldryne borne at a bordyn. Cancer. is lykened to the Crab or Crauys.
Lio is lykned to the Lion. Virgo is likened to a Maid. Libra is lykened to a
pair of balaunce. Scorpio is lykened to a venemus worm named a Scorpion.
Saget tarms is lykened to a monsterus archer or shoter the which is lycke a man
from the mydle upward and lyck a fore fo^ed best from the mydle downward.
Caprycornus is lykened to the watter Pisces is lykened to fyshes These signs
gives influence to us by leke operacyon as the bestes be of nature. Every one
of these signs is deuydyd in.lx. degres And every degree does contayn.vi.
mynutes. So that in ye zodiac is.CCC.vi. degres.

The second Capitle does pertract of the signs which be mouable And which be
not mouable. And which be comone And which be maculyn signs, and which be
feminyn And of the triplycyte of them
These signs be mouable. Aries Caucer. libra. and Capricorn. And these signs
be fixed. Taurus leo Scorpyo and Aquary. These signs be comne Gemini. virgo.
Sagittary and pisces These signs be masculin signs, Aries. Semyny. leo libra.
sagittarius and aquary And these be femynie signs. Taurus. Caucer vyrgo.
Scorpyo caprycorne and pysces. Alsother be.iiii. triplycytes. Oriental
meridyonal Occideutal And ye Septrionall The oryent tryplicite the which is in
the est is colorycke fire and masculyne And this triplicite has there is.iii.
signs Aries. leo and Sagittary. The lords or planetes of this triplicite is
the sone. in ye day. And Iubiter in night And Saturn is in both. And. this
triplieite is dyurnall The second tryplicyte is the meridionall triplicyte
which is in ye sowth. And this tryplicite has other.iii. signs. Taurus virgo
an Capricorn This tryplycite is melancoly and feminyne The lords or planetes
of this tryplycyte is venus in the day And the moon tn ye night And mares in
both And this triplycyte is nocturnal The therde tryplycyte is the occidentall
tryplycyte, which is in the west And is sanguyn and femynyne And this
triplycite has other.iii signs. Gemyni lybra and Aquary. The lords or
planetes of this tryplicyte is Saturn in ye day marcury in the night And
Iubyter in both, And this triplicite is dyurnall The.iiii, triplycyte is the
Septemtryonall triplycite which is flewmatick and femynyne and this tryplicite
has.iii. other signs. Cancer Scorpio and pisces. The lords or planetes of
this triplicite is venus in ye day mairs in the night the Moon in both.

The.iii. Capytle does show in what members or places in man ye signs has
there domynyon or power And how no mane owght to be let^ blod when the moon is
in the sign where the sign has dominyon And also what opercio^ the signs be
of when the moon is in them
The.xii. signs has domynyo^ upon the members of every man, for Aries
beholdyth the head. Taurus the neck. Gemini the arms and hands Cancer the
breast Leo the heart. Virgo ye belly. Libra the raynes and but tokes. Scorpio the
secret places of man Sagittary the thyes Capricorn the knes Aquary the legs
pisces the feet. Let every man be ware ye not flebothomator or letter of blod.
nor no manner of Chirurgyon do tuch him in opnyng any vain or do make any
incicio^ or cutting when the moon is in any sign where the sign has any
domynyon dominion or does regne also when ye moon is in a mouable senge hit is
good to tak a vomet and good to tak a Iurney or to good about any manner of
busynes or to begin any matter pertaining to worldly polise when the moon is
in a fexed sign hit is good to make fundacione of howses or wailes good to bild
and to re^difi and to goo about stable warkes when the moon is In a comune
sign hit is not good to make no mareg nor to mari nor to make no bargyn with out
record and sure wretcing nor good for sick men and signfieth much in stabilite.

The iiii capitle does show of ye fortitudes of planetes having or geueng their
influence to us
THe planetes has.v. fortitudes or strengthes or testimonialls which be these
ye house ye exaltacio^ ye Triplicyte the term And the face. The house has.v.
fortitudes, The exaltacyo^ has.iiii. fortytudes. The triplicite has iii
fortitudes. The term has ii. fortytudes and ye face has one Every planete in
his house is as a king syttyng in is mageste in a parliament. Every planet in
his exaltacyon is lek a king that is a crownyng every planete in his replicyte
is as a king in actoryte amogs his lords which be his helpers in euere planete
in his term is as a man that is a mongs his friends and kings folk the face
gives to a planete room or space as a chayer or a set is for a master.

The v capytle does show the natural dyspocycyon of the moon when she is in
any of the.xii signs.


When the moon is in Ariete. hit is not good for no sick man no sickely men
to shave their head or berd. for every here has a hoole. by the which evil
vapoures be in haustyd. Also hit is not good to medyl with the eres nor eyes nor
tongue nor no other place in or about the head with no instrument of Iron nor to
let blod or to box or cupp any place or vain about the head and neck and be
ware that no blod be exhaustyd out of a vain named Cephalica. But it is good
for bathes. and also it is good to begin any thing that would have short
expedycion and good to goo about any matter that a man has to do with great men
or rych men

Wha^ the moon is in tauro hit is not good to medyll with the neck to exhaust
any blod But this time is fortunat to many things. it is good to bay oxen kyne
and calves hit is good to byld any house or mansyon or to begin any other
thing it is good to plant and to Impeor to graf tres it is good to sow al
manner of corur or seeds and good to common with women etc.

When the moon is in gemini exhaust no blod out of the arms nor hands it is
good to putt children to shole or to any science or crawght and good for a man
to begin that thing that he would have it reite ratyd or begone agene.

When the moon is in cancro a man may be let blod without parell and ptholomy
says it is a good time to take medsons specially electuares also it is good to
tak any journey and to remove from one place to an other and from one castyll or
mansyon to another

When the moon is in leone it is good not to tak any vomyte for hit will hurt
ye heart and breast and it is good to begin that thing that a man would have
continue

When the moon is in virgin it is not good to make any incycyons for ruptures
another to meddle with the huckyl boones, to exhaust any blod, to mary in this
time is not praised lest ye woman bear no fruit to obtain the love of a maid
in the way of marage is good and Also this time is good to set children to
skole.

When the moon is in Libra exhaust no blod from the buttockes and tak no
medsons from the raynes of the bake this time is good for a man to bay or to
sell and good to take a iurney and this time refrain from all veneryouse acts
also this time is good to go about any matter bisines works or of doings

When the moon is in Scorpione be ware of al manner of incysion for the stone
for harnyes and for ruptures. And be ware of bathes this time is good for few
things or noone.

When the moon is in. Sagittario. exhaust no blod out of the thyes to have
busynes with judges justices and men of law it is good and this time is good for
Archers And merchants and good to make bargins Wha^ ye moan is in Capricorn
exhaust no blod out or from the knes this is an evil time to take any
medycynes hit is good to ere and to plant and to set herbs When the moon is
in Aquari hit is not good to exhaust any blod out of ye legs nor to take no
medicens. hit is a very good time to byld

When ye moan is in piscibus. be ware of exhaustinge of any blod out of the
fete and legs nor medyl with no sickness or dyseses in the fete or legs this
time is good for them that will take any iurney and good for Feshers and for
them that vsyth the water.

The.vi. capitle does show of the nature of all the signs. and what influence
they has in man. And what fortitudes the planetes has in the signs. with the
aspectes.
ARies does govern the head. and is a masculine sign. and is hure and has his
dominion in the house of deith and lyef. geuynge influence to them the which be
borne under him to have a loge neck. a lene face. short eres and some what hery.
Taurus does govern the neck and is a feminin sign and is cold and dry leke
to melancoly. And is in the house of substance and possession. of gift and
recaite giving influence to the^ ye be borne under this sign to have a broad
face. a great nose great eres great nostrells and a great neck Saturn in Tauro
has.ii. fortitudes. ye term and the face. Iubiter in Tauro has one ye is ye
term. Mars in Tauro has, ii fortitudes. A triplicite and a term. The sone
has none. Venus has.iii. ye house the triplicite and the term. Marcury
has.ii. The term and the face. The moon has.iii. fortitudes in Tauro
exaltaciont the face. And the triplicite. Gemini does govern the Arms and
hands. And is a masculyn syne and is hott and moist leik the Air and like
sanguyne complexion. And is in the house of Kynred fraternite and counsel,
geuyng influence to them yt which be borne under this sign to be bewtyfull
and fayer and comely. and somnolent. Saturn in Gemini has.ii. fortitudes. A
term. and a triplicite. Iubiter has.ii. A triplicite. The face and term Mars
has.ii. The face and term. The sone has one which is the face. and Venus
has one which is The term. Marcury has.iii. which be these. The triplicite ye
house and the term and the Moon does not posses not dyngnite in gemini. Cancer
does govern the Breast the longes and the stomach. And is a feminine sign. And
is cold and moist like the watter and ye complexion of flewmatyck persons And
is in the house of the father of hosbonds and wives. Cytes. Tresures. buryalles
and herytag. this sign is also unstable. wyndy and waitery she geuynge
influence to them the which be borne under this sign be greose byneth and
slender about Saturn in cancro has but one fortitude which is. The term
Iubyter has.ii. fortitudes. The exaltacyo^ and the term Mars has.ii. a
triplicite and a term. The Soon has noone Venus has.iii A triplicite. a
term and The face Marcuri has.ii. The term and the face and the Moon
has.iii. the house the triplicite and the face.

Leo does govern the heart and ye liver And is a masculine syne. and is hot
and dry like the complexion of colerike men And is in the house of honor. and
children And does give influence to them the which is borne under this sign
to be gross above and slender underneath the waste Saturn in Leo has.iii
fortitudes. ye triplicite the face and the term Jupiter has. iii. The.
Triplicite the term and ye face. Mars has. ii. the term and ye face The Sone
has. ii. ye house and Triplicite Venus has one which is the term And the
moon has noone.

Virgo does govern ye intrayles or womb And is a feminin sign And is cold
and dry leek the earth And complexion of mela^coly parsons And is in the house
of sycknes. And catell And does give influence to the^ ye which be borne under
this sign to be beuty full having a fayer and loving visage Saturn in
Virgin has one fortitude namid the term, Iubiter has one named the term
Mars has. ii The Triplicite and the term. The sone has one which is ye face,
Venus. iii. The triplicite the face, and the term Marcury has iiii. the
house. the term. ye exaltacion and the face. The Moon has one which is a
Triplicite

Libra does govern the raynes of the back and ye buttockes and is a masculin
sign and is hot and moist lyek the air And sanguine persons. And is in ye
howses of marriage theffth. strife and robery. and does give influence to them
the which be borne under this sign to evil dispoticions onles grace wark
above nature Saturn in Libra has. iiii. fortitudes. The eraltacyo^ ye term
ye Triplicite and the term and the face Mars has one which is the term. The
Sone has none. Venus has.ii. The house and the term. Marcury has. ii the
Triplicite and the term And the Moon has one. which is ye face

Scorpio does govern ye secret members of man and woman. And is a femynyne
sign. And is cold and moist. lick ye watter and the complexio^ of slewmatick
persons And is in the house of death fere.

debate. war. det labor chastyte and wit And does give influence to them the
which be borne under this sign to have a ruddy face slender and small leges.
And great feet Saturn in Scorpione has one fortitud which is the term
Iubiter has one which is the term. Mares has. iii. which be these ye house.
ye term and the triplicite. The sone has one which is the face Venus has.
iii. The triplicite the term and the face. Marcury has one which is the
term. The Moon has one which is the triplicite.

Sagittarius does govern ye flanckes And the thyes And is a masculyne sign
And is hot and dry liek the fire and colorick persons. And is in ye house of
honor. And master sheep by way of office. And does give influence to them ye
which be borne under this sign to be wise and to have knowledge in. Astronami.
And should have a long visage and a bygge belly and not greatly hered but
suffycyent and straight Saturn in Sagittario has.iii. fortitudes. The
Triplicite The term and the face Iubiter has.iii. the house the Triplicite
and the term Mars has one which is ye term The sone has one which is ye
Triplicite Venus has one which is the term. Marcury has.ii. ye term and
the face. The moon has one which is the face.

Capricorn does govern ye knes. And is a feminye sygne^ And is cold and dry
as the earth. and melancoly persons and is in ye house of lordshep. honor. and
substance And does give influence to them the which be borne under this signs
to be slender legged. having a dry body and a hery face. repletyd with
melancolines

Saturn in Capricorn has.ii. fortitudes. the house and the term. Iubiter
has.ii. the term and the face. Mars has.iiii the exaltacion ye term ye
Triplicite and the face. The sone has one which is the face. Venus has the.
Triplicite and the term. marcuri has one which is ye term. And the moon
has one which is ye triplicite Aquarius does govern ye legs by neth ye knes
to ye feet. and is a masculine sign And is hot and myeste as the Aier lyck
to the co^plexeon of sauguine me^ And is in the house of friendship and
substance and does give influence to hem the which be borne under this sign to
be amiable how be hit the one lege most co^me^li is longer than an other or else
bigger than an other and such persons should be a boster and a great waster
Saturn in aquario has.iii. fortitudes The house the term and the triplicite
Iubeter has.ii. the triplicite and the term, Mars has one which is the
term, The son has no one. venus has.ii. the Term and ye face Marcury
has.iii. The triplicite the term and ye face The moon has one which is the
face

Pisces does govern the feet. And is a feminyn sign And is cold and moist
as the watter liek to fleumatick persons and is in the house of heaviness and
enemies and ryding bestes. And presonment. And does give influens to them the
which be borne under this sign to be of alarg breast a little heed and whitly
faced rownderes and of good corag Saturn in pissibus has.ii. fortiudes The
term and the face Iubitor has.iii. the triplicite the term and the face The
son has noone, venus stath.iii. the exaltacion the term and ye tryplicite
Marcury has one which is ye term and the sone has one which is ye
triplicite.

Now her is to be notid for Aspectes which be these. A. sextyl a term. A
quartyle a coniuctyon and an opposicyon Ever mor haueng a respect to ye
Aspectes of the planetes. And if the Aspectes be good of ye moan. and the
signs above named be good. the matter shall be of affecte and if the aspectes be
evil of ye Moon the matter will take little affecte or none. And which be good
aspectes and which be evil. shall be showed in the next capytle after this that
follows.

The.vii. capitle does show of ye nature of the planetes. and of their
operacyon in man.
AS necessary hit is to know ye nature of the planetes with there operacione. as
it is to know the nature and operacion of the signs. Saturn is the highest
planete which is cold and dry like ye earth having a great interest in
malancoli men. This planet is a masculine planete And his house in Capricorn.
and this planete has an interest in the clargior spirituallte for he enducithe
diugnite pontificalnes polyce and ingeniousnes. how be it he is a signifier of
such as does warke in vise handy chraftes. and is enimito ye life of man for he
is enemy to nature And is a slow planete in fetching his cercuite or
curcunference and they yt which be borne under him be slow and not quick hasty.
and malycyouse except grace warke above nature Saturn does govern ima^
Melancoly. the splen. the gal the bladder And has a perticipacion of flume And
he does engender these infrimites. splenyticknes and pricis and the fener etick
be co^sumpcyons. Also be is one of the causers of the.iiii. kinds of
leprosnes. The.iiii. kinds of the ydropises The.iiii. kinds of the gowtes.
The to kinds of the palsyes and Room descendyng from the head to the breast
named catarrus. And ye Canker and all manner of sickness in the which is any
coldness for this matter look in the Breuyary of health and in the Introduccyon
of knowleg Iubiter is the second highest planete which is hoot and moist lick
to the Air and he is a masculyne planete having an interest in sanguine
persons. and his howses be in Sagittari and Pisces and he is lord over the
temporalte. Specialy of chyualry. and men of estate. as a veniuoluse planete.
how be hit he is so^e what slow in fetchyng his circuit. and they ye which be
borne under this planete. should be manly. comely. gentle and honest. etc.
Iubiter does govern in man the longes the nature of man and woman. the boones
with the cartalages. and these be his sicknesses. The squince. periplumo^ia
which is an impostume about the longes. the plurese the Crampe The Appoplexe.
the Litarge the Cephalic and the Cardiack and such lyek the which does com by
the occasion of blood.

Mars is the therde planete. which is boot and dry leke to the fire. And is
a Masculyne planete. And has interest in colerick persons. and his howses be
in Aries and Scorpion. and he is full of malice wrath and vengyons. furicuse
and full of bate and strife how be hit he^ is indyfferent infetching his
cercunference. and they the which be borne under this planet except grace
warke above nature should be a lyera robber a morderer furyouse and vengable.
full of wrath and angry hasty and testy and evil disposed And he does govern
in man and woman ye veins and the testicles of man and colet And albumeser
says he does govern ye Liver. And I say he has interest in the gall of a man
and woman. And these be his sicknesses the fever t^^ciane ye cen^nt wan and the
causen and al other hot fevers. and hot appostomacions. Also the migrime.

And woman that be delivered before their time and all other infirmytes the
which does com of extrmee hete. The sone is in the mydle of the.vii. planetes.
geuynge as much light upward to heaven as he does downward to us The son is
hot and dry lyek ye fire and yet he is a friend to blod and singuin persons
And his house is in the lion he is a masculin planete beniuolense and good in
all things and a confortor of all terrestiall things And does induce natural
strength and is a friend to great men of Honor And he does fetch his cercuite
ons in a year. And they the which be borne under the sone should be strong
welfanerd and lusti wise descret and rich. and he does govern in man and
woman the heart. the brain. the mari with in the boones the senowes and the
sight. how be hit through his vehement hete in somer he does hurt the head and
does califi or chaffith ye blod to much of ye which he has vigor and strenght,

Venus is a pulcrus planet. and is cold and moist lycke the watter and has
interest in blod and fleme she is a feminine planete and her howses be in Tauro
and Libra. she is lady over louyers. and she does fetch her cercuite almost as
soon as the Some She does induce love and veneryonsues. And he or she that is
borne under this planete should be a true lover. Loving. Merthe melady and
music loving also syngyng and dawnsyng ^nterludes games and sportes and
gestes and they should be fayer and amyable and full of bewty and pleasant. And
She does govern in man and woman the seed of man the rydgboones the loins the
matrix and ye secret parts. and the fames in man and woman and ye smellyng.
and these be her sicknesses. coldness of the stomach ye slacknes of the liver to
dygest. the passions of the heart the Ilica passio the colyck the fystyls the
plyes ye heinerodes ye suffocacyon of the matryx and other infyrmytes ye be
about the secret places of man and woman yt commyth of superflug humores,
Marcury. is temperatli hot and dry. good with goodness and evil with euylnes.
he is a masculyne planete and his howses be in Gemini and virgo and he does
fetch his cercuyte almost as soune as the son. He does induce ingenyosues
and great knowleg of diverse arts. sacultes and scyences. And good in travel and
messages doing. who so that is borne under this planete should be gentyl and
amabell And a great traveler and good to send or god in messages and he should
expert in seyences. for he should have a good wytt and cast fare in polytyche
reason Marcury does govern ye memory and the long and the gal. And these be his
infyrmytes. the.iii. kinds of madness. ye iii. kinds of the falling sycknes.
The cowgh ye percipitacien of the matrix. and parturbacio^ of mind and other
infirmites the which comes of siceite or drynes. The Moon is the lowest
planete. And is cold and moist lyck the watter. and has an interest in
flumatyck parsons. and she is a feminine planete and is mother and a ministrix
to all moyster and is lady and gubernatrix ever the sees and watters and her
house is in Cancer and she does fetch her cercuite ons in a mounth. And the
does induce mutabilite. inconstance. Travel. message embassage. And fortunate
to aquatical matters or bysines. they that be borne under the Moon should not be
stabyll wytted. and should be a traueler and seek strange cou^tres. The Moon does
govern in man or woman the stomach and the belly and the secret place of women
and has also an interest in the head. And these be her infirmites. comocyon
trymblyng or shaking of members universal or particular the cardyack the
palses and such leke. who so ever would have a forder noticion of the signs
and the planetes and of their influence or consteltacyon. let the^ look in a
book that is now a pryntyng at Robert cooplondes named the Introductyon of
knowleg. And he that will have the knowleg of, all manner of sicknesses and
dysesys let them look in the breuyary of health which is pryntyd at Wyllyam
Mydyltons in flet stret.

The.viii. Capytle does show of the.v. a spretes of the planetes.
AS I said in the.vi. capytle there be.v Aspectes of the planetet. A
coniuction. A sextile, a trme A qurtile and an opposicyon. A comunctione
perpeily is not takyn for an Aspect. sor an Aspect is a dystance of signs. But
planetes centunet. does not distere by distance of degrees. for a coniuctio^
among ye planetes is when the planetes does draw to gydder by lesser dystance
than.vii. degrees. and that one of them falldth under the bright beemea of an
other. than it is named coniunct to the son. And when the planete does
drawenygh to ye sone by.xv. degres than is ye planete combustid by ye splender
or beemes of the sone. And than dyuerce times happynith rain as it does. when
the sone and the Moon be almost to gydder in there orbs or cercles. than in the
end of that moon should be rain This aspect which is a conjunction And first
in order is named a beniuole^t or a frendful aspect for good to goodness is in
cresyd of a great and high beniuolence and virtue. And if goodness be Iowned to
evil. tha^ yt euilnes takyth a way half the goodness. wherefore he that will go
about to do any good thing out to mark the moon specially if she be coniunct to
good planetes or else seperatid from evil planetes And he that will go. about an
evil or a shrod turn must chose the time when the moon is coniunct with evil
planetes. or else seperatid from good planetes.

The second aspect is a sextyle. that is when the planetes be dystant one from
another by.vi. parts of the zodiac. as thus in making a similitud of.ii.
planetes. that venus be put in the beginning of Aries. and another planet in ye
beginning of Gemini Or else one in the the mydle of Aries and another in the
mydle of Gemini and so in leke manner of all other Planetes. but this. Aspect is
not perfyt in frendshep for the aspect is not certin mor opyn but pryne

The therd Aspect is a quartyll. And yt is when a planete has an. Aspect to an
other planete. by dystaunce of.iii. signs the which dystance is the.iiii. part
of the zodyack. as thus if one planete be in the beginning of. Aries and
another in the beginning of Cancer. Or else one planete in the mydle or end of
Aries. and another in ye mydle or end of Cancer. Such aspect is inperfit of
hatred and envy and traytery.

The.iiii. Aspect is a tryne. And that is when one planete is dystant from an
other by.iiii. signs. the which distance is the therd part of the zodiac as
thus, if one planete. Ware in the begynyng of Aries. and the other in the
beginning of Leo this is a manifest and a perfect aspect of frendshep

The.v. Aspect is an Opposicion and that is when one planete is distant from an
other by half of ye whole zodiac as thus that one planete be in the
begyunyngeo in the middle or end of Aries and the other be in ye beginning mydle
or end of Libra taking both lyek and so is hit in all other signs This aspect
is an evident and manifest aspect of hatrede of war and other displesures

The.ix capitle does show of ye mutacio^ of the Air when any cayne. Wynd
thonder hayle frost or snow shall fall.
WHo so ever yt will pernosticat of the mutacion of the Aier he must first mark
the.iiii. times of the year. which be to sai ver estas Autu^nus and hiems that
is to say, the spring ye somer haruyst. and wyntter. Ver which is the spryng by
nature should be hot and moist And in this time blod does move and in cresyth
with all other natural things, Eitas which is somer is hot and dry and than
coler does move and incresith. Atu^nus or haruyst is cold and dry and has
respect to melancoly, hyems which is wyntter is cold and moist and has
respect to flume. Secundaryly. one must mark the nature and the qualytes of the
signs, which be moist which be cold And which be dry Cherdly one must
consider the nature or propertes of the planetes. for the house of cornscacyon
is Iubyter. The house of tempests is Mars, and if they be coniu^ct or be in a
quartyle aspect both will happen If. saturn and venus be coniunct, or be in a
sertyle than hit wylbe cold, Iubyter is the sone. or in an opposytine aspectt
will have grett wynd Marcury with venus causyth rain Forder more a contu^cty on
of saturn with the moon. maki^h mutacyon in the Air forrayne and gross
eloudes be elenatyd with cold. specially wha^ this coniunctyon is in any
aquartycal or tereestyall sign. A coniunctyo^ of Iubyter with the moon.
causyth dyuerce and many whyt clouds. A coiunctyon of Mars with the moon in
moist signs casyth rain A coniunctyon of the son with the moon. causyth rain
specially in moist signs. A coniunctio^ of Venus with the moon in moist signs
causith swet dwes and soft rain A coniunctnon of the moon to Marcury in moist
signs causyth rain with Wynd. A conjunction of saturn with Iubiter.iii. days
before or.iii. days after causyth great mutacyo^ in the Air. A coniunctyon of
saturn with mars in moist signs.iii days before and after the Air to be
coruptyd by the whch many men women and chyldryn be infectyd with dyuerce
disesis spec^^^ with the pestylence. And dyuerce tym^^^ causyth hayle rain
lyghtuynge and th^^ dryng. this coniunctyon for man or woman is moist worst A
coniunctio^ of saturn with the sone. causith cold rainy wedder A conjunction
of saturn with. Venus coniunct in any aquatycal sign makyth cold raynes to
induce and A conjunction of saturn with Marcury in aquatycal signs causyth
rain And in dry signs causy th. drynes, A coniunctyon of Mars with marcury. in
hot sign causyth. Hete in dry signs. in aquatycall signs rain.

The.x. capytle does show the Iudiciallnes of the Aspectes of the Moon another
planetes what days be good. etc.
A Sextile aspect of the Moon to Saturn is a good day to sped matters with
women and to take counsel of lernyd men or wise me^. this day is good to begin
byldyng or to rehedyfy. good to to till or dyg the grown and to set and plant
herhes and tres.

A sextile aspect of yt Moan to Iubiter is a good day for A man to spek to a
spiritual Judge and to lawyers. this day after astronamy is good for all
matters.

A sextile aspect of Mars to the Moon is a good day to speak to any great man of
nobylyte. and good to comone or talk with strenuose and armigernse men of berth.
and good to bay any thing. And to set forth horses with horsemen in war seson.

A sextile aspect of Venus to the Moon is a good day to make a marriage. and to
seek love and fauer of any parson and good to speak to any noble parson. A
sextil aspect of marcuri to ye moan is a good dai for a man to make a co^pte.
and to show or plet his caves and good for ama^ to by or sell or to make
merchants. And good to set chyledryn to lerunyng And good to take a Iurney.
and good to make meter or oracyons or to prech. or read a lecture.

A sextyle aspect of ye sone to the moon is a good day to mete and to salute
kings and princes and to ask or desyer lefull and lawful things and a good
day to sek out ye truth of a matter. and good to assocyatt with wise men

A tryne aspect of saturn to the moon is good to be associat or in the
company of old menor women and good to dydg delue or ere the grown or to sow
any seeds. good to plant and to set herbs and good to make fundacyons to byld

A trine aspect of Iubetor to the moon this is a fortunat day for all manner
of matters or causes and very good to spek to judges and men of law specially
of ye spiritualte

A tryne aspect of. Mars to the moon to be with the company of knights and
squyers and such lick. And to

procure ordin and spare for all things perteynyng to wat and good to bay bestes

A trine aspect of the sone to the moon is a good day to ask a pdon of a king
and good to spek to a king pronce lord or counsellets

A trine Aspect of the moon to venus is a good day to geti friends and louets
and to make mariags

A trine aspect of the moon with marruri is a good day to reason and to make
aco^pt and to make bargens with marchaunth and to put children to shole and to
mete with wise me^ and good to tak a Iurney

A quartil aspect of saturn with the moon let eueri man be ware that day a bout
what matter or bisines be goth a bowt.

A quattile aspect of Iubiter with the moon is a good day to co^sull with
prelates and judges

A quartile aspect of Mars with the moon is an evil day to sek ane fauer or
friendship of knyghts or squiers or of me^ of war

A Quartile aspect of ye sone with ye moan is an evil day to goo about any great
matter

A Quartil aspect of venus with ye moan is a good day to goo about any thing and
specialli hit is a good day to make a mareg or to get love etc

A Quartill aspect of Marcuri with the moon is a good day to send forth
ambassitors or messangers good to tak a Iurney good to bai or to sell or to make
merchants or to make a reckning or acount

Anopposicion of Saturn with ye moan is an evil day to goo about eni great matter

An opposicion of Iubetor with ye moon is a good dai to make sewt or service to
any great man spiritual or temporal or to god to him for any other matter

An opposicion of the moon to Mars is an euel dai to tak servants or to sek
friend shep for hit is a day of malice anger and strife and war and euel for
other matters

An opposicion of the moon to the soon is an evil day to medell with great me^
or with any great matter.

An opposicion of the Moon with venus is a good day in all matters to be don. An
opposicion of ye Moan with Marcury is an indifferent day A conjunction of Saturn
with ye men is a (...) day to goo about any great matter (...) to medell with
old me^ or with (...) or chor lish persons

A coniunctio^ of Iubiter with ye moan is a good day to make piece and to
intrete for any matter how be hit verite and justice will this day have
interest.

A conjunction of Mars with ye Moan this is a day of anger of war of strife
and beat wherefore maryd men that has shrewes to their wives must not dysplese
them for fere of after clappes.

A coniunctyon of the sone with the moon is an evil day for all things. how be
it it may be good to do that thing that no man shall know

A co^iunctio^ of ye moan with ve^us is a good to make a mareges or to get love of
women and so co^uerse and good to hire me^ and women to saruece

A conjunction of ye mon with Murcuri is good to bay and to sell and to make
marcha^dis to take a Iurney etc

When thee is no aspect night to the moon or far from an evil conjunction yt
day is good for all manner of things

The moon coniunct in the drogons head is very good And coniunct with the tail
of ye dragon is evil

The moon Iunct with good steres is good And Iunct with even sterres is evil

The.xi. capitle does show of flenbothom* or letting of blod
WHo so ever will chose a day to be let blod in first he must chose a fire
sign which is hot and dry. as ares Sage tari And leo And althowth leo is a
free sign and is the house of the sone and the sone in nature is contrari to
the nature of the moon for ye sone is hot and dry the moon is cold and
therefore ye house of the sone which is. Leo in him is no good lettyng of blod.
Secundaryly he must choose an Ayery sh sign which is hot and most As the
first medieate of Libra. And the wole sign of Aqury. and although yt Gemini
and ye second mediate of Libra be Ayerysh. yet the Galax has his course that
way in ye which be many sterres of the nature of Mars. wherefore ye mooone being
in that place is combustio And therefore in that signs at that time is not good
to let blod Therdli watterish signs which be moist and cold begood to let
blod As Cancer and pisces, And Scorpio althowght of nature he be waterysh yet
not with stonding he is an oppositiue sign of the exaltacyon of the Moon for
Taurus is the exaltacyon of the moon and Scorpio is oppositine in descendyng
of ye muoe Also Scorpio is the house of mars wherefore exhaustyng of blod in this
thing is not good Also ye coniunctyon of ye moan with the sone.iii days before
and.iii. days after is not good (...). Nor ye coniunctyon of the move with
sature. Nor ye coniunctyon of the moon with mars and iz. degres before an as
many after. Nor the oppsicyon of the moon with the sone. Nor the oppsycon of ye
moan with Mars is not good to exhaust blod. Also a quatile aspect of the moon
to the sone. And a quartile aspect of the moon to saturn. And a quartile
aspect of the moon to Mars. all these aspectes be not good to minishe blod for
the Moon being in these Planetes and Aspectes is contrary to the nature of man
consyrnyng flebotomy

A tryne aspect and a sextyle aspect is good to let blod so be hit the moon be
in a good sign Also the moon coniunct with Iubyter in a good sign is best
lettynge of blod The moon coniunct to venus or Marcury althowh they be good
co^iu^ctons yet for as much as the moon is ver^ night the coniunctyon of the
sone hit is not good to let blod Also ye moan being in a good sign having a
sextyle or a tryne aspect to Iubiter or venus. (...) is best to let blod
forthes aspectes be good Also the mone^ coniunct with the heed or tail of the
dragon being with in.xii. degrs before or after is not good to exhaust blod.
Forder more no wayne nor member of man owght to be tochyd or hurt with any
instermnent or Ierne when the mon is in any sign that has domynyon of ye
member. wherefore in all manner of exhaustyng of blod from man or woman ye day and
the time must be electyd and poyntyd by some doctor of physic or Astronamer.
what vain, should be opynyd for and if aman do let blod of a vain named
cephalica which is a vain for the head and the sign be in Aries. here ye
flebothome does great harm through his ignorance and thus in lyek man^^^^ may
offend in lettyng* blod in any other place of man. Forder more ye.iiii. fire
signs be good for slemy tyck parsones for ye signs be of nature contrary to
the co^mplexione therefore Contraria co^trariis cura^te. So in liek manner
Aierish signs is good for melancoly me^ And watreysh signs ar good for
(...)ryck men And I say now a days to use lettyng of blod except for the
squynce ye pestylence or for the kinds of lepery. is not good. for no man can
exhaust evil blod but he must tak good blod with all. And ye leyf of man is in
ye blod for ye spryt of man is in ye blod. And there be other ways to cleanse or
to puryfy the blod without flebothomy or lettyng of blod

The.xii. Capitle does show. how wha^ and what time a phisicyo^ should mynyster
medycynes
HYpocrates says ye physician is a blind physician ye knowth not Astro^amie
for Astronamy does show how wha^ and what time al manner of medsons owght to be
ministered wherefore I do say if an expulcyue medycyne be takyn inferyally. And
the moon being in. Ariete. Tauro. or. Capricorn which takyth their name of
terrestyall beestes named. The Rame the Bull and the Goote which has doble
belys. one is molifycatyue chewyng their cud ye other is digestive mow by reason
of the influence of the celestyal signs of lyek properte. shall cause the syck
parson other to vomyte or else shall cause nauseons or eructuatio^. or cause the
substance that is in the stomach to ascend to the orifice of the stomach and
this does let ye operacione of such medicynes specially if Saturn by a
quartil Coniuntion or an opposicyon does give their fortytudes to ye said
signs. Where for let phisicyons be circumspect in these matteres and in all
other. for hipocrates says in his first pronosticates. There be certyn
celestyall thing in the which the phisicyon must prouyd and he must be of great
prouydence. etc. Wherefore Auice^ faith of celestyal and terrestyal matters
hapynth.etc. Wherefore hit is to conclud that every phis^^on should know yt nature
and conplexio^ of ye signs and ye planetes. with ye aspectes of them and to have
in a memory the cretyck days. And not to forgett ye operacio^ of the signs
which be attractyue. reten time dygestyne and expulcyne Wherefore I do say that
the virtue of actraction consistith in hete and drynes And he that will confort
and help ye virtue of actracio^ must do hit when the moon is in a hot sign as
in Sagittary ad Leo. To comfort or to help the virtue of retencyon. is when
the moon is in a cold sign and dry as in tauro and virgo. The sucur and help
the virtue of dygestyon is when the mon is in a hot sign and a moist as in
Gemini Libra and Aquary. To help expulcy ues is when the moon is in a cold
and a moist sign as Cancer Scorpio and pisces. When Venus regnyth in a good
aspect to purge Coler. wha^ the sone does regne in a good aspect, purge flem me
wha^ Iubyter does regne in a good aspect, purge Melancoly, Wha^ there is a
co^iunctyon or a quartyle aspect of saturn with the moon minister tha^ no
medycyne uor wha^ Mars is in a coniunctyon. etc^.



The.xiii. capytle does show of sowyng of seeds. of setting of herbs. and
plantyng and Greffyng of trees.
THe moon being in Tauro is good to sow seeds to set herbs to plant and
graff trees taki^g the time of the year. being in a sextile or a tryne aspect

The moon being in Cancer is good to sow seeds althowh it be a movable sign
And so hit is in virgo having a sextile or a tryne aspect with to Saturn and
ptholomy says in the first of his quadripertites hit is good to plant

The moon being in libra having a good Aspect is good to delue and dygg and to
gooe to plow and to ere and to sow And so is ye moon when she is in caprycorne

The moon being in libra is good to set herbs and to plant tres haue^g good
aspect

Hereis to be notid that all these things is not good to goo about if Saturn or
Mars have any evil aspects

Now to conclud I desire euere man to tak this lytil wark for a past time. for
I did wrett and make this bok. in.iiii days and wretten with one old pene with
out mendyng and where I do wret ye signs in Aries in. Taurous and in Leo is for
my purpose it stondyth best for our maternal tongue

FINIS
Enprynted at London in ye Fletestrete at the sign of the Rose garland by
Robert Coplande.


