A NECESSARY AND BRIEF TREATISE OF THE Contagious disease of the Pestilence,
with the Causes, Signs, and Cures of the same. COLLECTED And newly Composed
for the benefit and comfort of the vulgar sort. BY W. BORASTON of Salop,
Practitioner in Physic and Chyrurgerie.

LONDON. Printed by B. ALSOP and T. FAUCET. dwelling in Grubstreet. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT Wor: THO: HIGGONS, Doctor of Divinity, an earnest Favourer of
all good and lawful Intentions: W. BORASTON wishes all Prosperity both now
and ever hereafter.
THe most Mighty ELOHIM, Creator of all things, by reason of our grievous
Sins, and heinous transgressions against his Precepts and divine Ordinances,
have threatened his people to inflict upon them, the plague of Pestilence and
diverse other Sicknesses, as Holy and Divine writ testifies. Notwithstanding
the foresaid Afflictions and manifold Diseases wherewith for our sins, from
time, to time we have been often punished; We have not perceived (by reason
of the custom of sinning) how horrible the rust and Canker of Sin is, until
GOD out of his wrath powers again his punishment upon the offenders, and
thereupon have not only inflicted man which principally have transgressed, but
also all other creatures which were created and ordained for man's use, and have
caused the Stars to cast down there venomous influence upon his creatures,
in regard we would not repent and acknowledge the wickedness of our corrupt
nature, but rather have farther in the midst of all our inflictions of the
Plague of Pestilence either through want of Charity or diabolical hate have
sought to infect others, for which I would wish all so evil disposed, to
prevent the punishments ordained for them which are so presumptuous, for as
CRATO says, Qui malitiose pestifera diffundit, homicida est proximi sui, and
paenas non modo aeternas sibi luendas sciat, Sed in hoc etiam seculo
Magistratus seueritatem experietur.

And even as this wickedness and desperate blindness is of all men to be
abhorred; So the unmeasurable Mercy of GOD purchased through Contrition,
Penance and Satisfaction is to be embraced, Seeing that he in the midst of
all our abominations and deseruings of extreme punishments, have ever
remembered them which are contrite of heart, and sorrowful for the hazard and
loss of GODS favor, and toward them he have yielded compassion, and have
infuded blessing unto Herbs, Stones, and Metals, for their recovery and cure
of all their Malladies, as well also for nutriment as preservation.

So that we may plainly see that GOD takes not any delight in punishing his
creatures, but rather to make us know how detestable a thing sin is, for by
it we often loose his divine Favor and Grace, So we ought with all diligence
by Humility and Obedience to obtain the same again, and to frame our course
of life thereafter, that we may return to him as fa^thfull and obedient
Children.

Now even as they which with study and travail have sought out the wonderful
Works of God in the Firmament, are to be commended; So deserve they not the
least praise, which have indeauoured to find out the properties and virtues of
such things which may comfort and succor the necessities of their distressed
Neighbors, And in regard the Plague of Pestilence is so terrible unto human
Nature, that it oftentimes separateth the Father from the Child, the Husband
from the Wife yea the Physician from his Patient, and one friend from another,
for their own safety, as is supposed, I therefore receiving my Talent at the
last hour, would not negligently bury it in a Muckhill.

But for the reasons aboue-specified, I thought it not amiss (let busy
speakers rather then dooers babble what they please) to bestow some pains in
setting forth some directions and Remedies for them that are subject to the
foresaid contagious Sickness; especially, for them which are not able to fee
the Physicians and Chyrurgians. And in regard I have always found love and
received friendship, at your Worships hands; I now farther presume upon your
favor, and right godly judgment, with desire to accept of this my poor
Dedication in good part. And pardon the boldness of your poor Neighbor in
this attempt, and he shall ever rest,

At your Worships command, W: B.

To the Courteous and loving READER.
I Find by Common experience (Gentle Reader,) and the effects are to much seen
and proved amongst us; That amongst many dangerous Diseases which happens to
Man's body, there are none so Contagious and venomous as the Plague or Pest. And
forasmuch, as the Curing of this Disease consists in removing the cause, I
therefore wish all men, to hate and abhor Sin, and to use penance for the
same. The chiefest cause being thus removed, I doubt not, but by GOD his
Assistance with the Remedies, and Instruction hereafter noted you shall receive
benefit. Thus expecting the favorable acceptance of these my Labors, I shall
be willing to consecrate the residue of my studies to thy Commodity.

W. B.

A TREATISE OF THE PESTILENCE: Wherein is showed the Causes, with most certain
Preservatives against the Infection thereof.
THis contagious Sickness called the Pestilence, is no other thing then a
pressure, Contagion and whip, which GOD out of his indignation uses to
chastise men for their transgressions, as it is written in the 28. of Deuteronomy.
saying; If thou will not obey the voice of the Lord thy GOD, and keep and do
his Commandments; the Lord shall make the Pestilence to clean unto thee. For
God the Creator of all things is the chief and principal moouer of all things
created, and uses them as secondary means to execute punishment against the
offenders. So that the Pestilence is either Supernatural, and immediately
comes from GOD to Man; or Natural, as when God punishes man he performs
it by his creatures. Also, the Pestilence supernatural is to be understood two
manner of ways, that is to say; either when God does it wholly from himself,
or else permissiuely he suffers Satan to punish Man for the reasons
aforesaid; He being the most cruel enemy both of God and man, who grieueth
and repineth at man's felicity, and enuiously seeks to extirpate and root
out all Mankind. Even as the History of Job testifies. So that his power is
also twofold, viz. He either does this office of himself, or else by
Inchanters and Witches, ( Exodus 7, and 8.) of whom Christ spoke, Act. 8. Math.
7.

The Pestilence natural, is also taken two manner of ways: The one generated
from an astrall Impression, the other from the microcosmus or little wo^lds
Imagination. The Pestilence of Impression proceeds from the firmament of
Heaven, when God punishes man by second causes, he uses the conjunction of
Saturn and M^rs, and other Stars, Eclipses for correction, even as a Father
chastises his Child with the rod. The arsenicall Sulphurious, Antimoniall,
Napellosous, Cicutosons beams of the Stars, infects the nutriment both
Spiritual and Corporal. This is the generation of Pestilence of the influence
Astrall.

Lastly, Paracelsus in his Book De occulta Philosophia, says; that Of
imagination springs the Pestilence, as is there instanced between two
Brothers.

Also it is reported, that a man having the Hemerhodes and the Pestilence
together, aspecting another being sound, infecteth him also; yea, very many
much more, by the intuition and earnest beholding of women, Quae simul
menstruorum and Peste laborant. Moreover by the breath, heat, sweat, smell,
habitation, and garments from the steke, the Pestilence is propagated, and
creeps from one house unto another and infecteth the Inhabitants thereof, so
that it proceeds of an invisible essence, Spirituell and Astrall, and not of
any humor or liquor only.

Presages and judgments taken from the Superior bodies and Constellations of
the Heavens.
AMongst all other bodies Celestial, there are two called evil and malicious,
which are Saturn and Mars, as aforesaid; by whose bad influence manifold
infirmities, especially of the Pestilence arises: For Saturn through Cold,
causes Rheumes, Elephantia, etc. Mars by reason of Heat, brings forth
Feauers pestilentiall, spitting of Blood, Plurifies and such like. Consider
well the ^^tring of the Sun into Aries by true Equation of the houses and
Planet^, for that influence has more domination, then have all other
influences of the whole year beside, (^xcept the superiou^ Conjunctions of the
Planets, or some great Eclipses.) And this entering of the Sunn^ into Aries
passes all entrings of the ^^ua into any other Sign. Therefore consider how
the Lord of the sixth house in the figur^ is disposed for he is the Lord of the
Sickness, v z. You must consider, whether he be impedite or no. An^ ^f he be
impedite there shall be many S^^knesses according to his nature and his house,
that is the sixth house.

As for example, be it in case that Saturn is Lord of the sixth house, and some
earthy sign is in the same house, then most commonly the sickness of that
year, shall be of like nature, that is cold and dry. And over this thou must
consider, whether the Lord of the sixth house has any aspect with the Lord of
the house of Death; to him, then most commonly the end of those sicknesses that
are cold and dry, shall be death.

And likewise, as it is declared of the entering of the Sun into Aries, So
must it be said of the conjunction of the Sun and Moon through all the
year, marking every nature of the Planet being in the sixth house, If there be
any, and the aspects to those two houses aforesaid.

Also consider, whether this entering of the Sun into Aries or any of the
conjunctions of the Luminaries, be in the eight house or no, for then it shall
be much worse. Note also, that if the Eclipse of the Sun or Moon be in any
angles of the Nativity of any person, or in any of the angles of the
reuolusion of his nativity, then he shall suffer sickness according to the
nature of the same angles. And if the Eclipse be in Medio Coeli, he shall
suffer hurt in his honor and same. And if it be in the Ascendent, he shall be
grieved in his body, and so forth of the other houses. But it shall be the
worser in case the Eclipse be in the ascendent, especially, if it be the
Eclipse of the S^n, for that is the more dangerous of the two. Forasmuch as the
effect of the Eclipses of the Moon is always finished in the space of one
year at the most, sometime in less, and for the most part in three Months.
But the effects of the Eclipse of the Sun is very long or it come to pass.
Sometimes twelve years, as Ptolome in his Centiloquio witnesses.

The Astrologians take the judgment of the year, by the entering of the Sun
into Aries in the first minute. And if it then happen, that all the ill Planets
be in the eight house, which is the house of Death, they say; that year shall
arise a Pestilence and diverse other siknesses, according to the nature and
conditions of those Planets. And if the Moon in the same entering be near
unto the conjunction of the Sun, that is to say, within two or 3. or 4.
degrees; That year shall be a death of Pestilence universal, and that shortly
after that Conjunction; especially, at the coming of the Moon and evil
Planets to infortunes: and as the infortunes be, the effects shall so appear,
be they more or less.

Furthermore, you must consider the great conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in
the 13. degree of Scorpio as it was in the year 1625. in the last of August,
which conjunction changed from an ayrie triplicitie into a waterie, and it was
in a waterie Sign, whereof there chanced very much rain, and thereupon
followed excessive humectation and moystening of Man's body, which by and by
turned to putrefaction and thereupon ensued many perilous and corrupt Feauers,
Pestilence and Agues as Phaierus and many others have related, specially,
because the conjunction of Saturn was exalted in the North above Jupiter,
which Saturn is of ill influence.

Furthermore, there are assigned seven prognostics, presages or signs of the
Pestilence, more common and usually observed as hereafter follow: viz.

First, when in a Summer day, the Wether is often changed, as in the morning
like to rain, and after stands still cloudy, and at last, the wind turns
into the South.

The second is, when often in the time of Summer, the days shows wholly
obscured, as if it would rain and yet not rain, and then if it do so
continue long, it is to be feared, a great Pestilence will after ensue.

The third Sign is, when there are many Flies upon the Earth, for this
signifies that the air may be venomous and infected.

The fourth sign is, when the Stars do seem often to fall, for it is a token
that the air is corrupted by many venomous vapors which ascends.

The fifth sign is when Come to do seem to fly in the air an it appears in
Meteors, and that those happens, when the Comet appears, it signifies
bloodshed, wars, etc. Vnde versus.

Mors furit, vrbs rapitur, Seuit mare, Sol operitur.
Regnum mutatur plebs peste faeme cruciatur.
The sixth sign is, when many thunders and lightnings happens, and especially
from the South part.

The seventh is, when many Winds proceeds from the South part, for they be
foul and unclean, when these signs appear, a great Pestilence is much to
be feared, except our Lord omnipotent auere it.

Means to prevent Infection, the Causes and Prognostics being already
d^clared.
NOw shall it be directed by what means every man ought to preserve himself
from this infection, And according to the speech of David saying, that a man
ought Diuertere a malo, ad bonum, to turn from evil and do good, And most
humbly Pecatasua confiteri, to confess his sins, for in the time of
Pestilence, Penitencie and Confession are to be preferred before all other
Medicaments, and withal to change the place for a more pure air. But if it
cannot be done conveniently, in as much as possible may be, let all causes of
corruption be ^uitated and ^uoyded, and consequently Venerie. Also the Wind
procee^ing from ye Meridian or South point, is con^agious and infectiue
naturally: Therefore in (...) time of the Pestilence, the Windows on ^he same
side the house ought to be shut vn^ill one of the clock afternoon, and let
the ^indowes be open toward the North part. For the same cause, let there be
no evil sents or smells as from stables, streets, fields where dead carcasses
corrupted and putrified may annoy you, and chiefly putrified Waters, as from
sincks and houses of Office, for Paracelsus says; Omne putrifactum m^re est
venenum. And most commonly we find they dye in greatest number, where the air
is corrupted with these an^yances; For, Sicut per odorem, aromaticam cor and
spus recreantur, ita ex nocino fetore debilitantur. Therefore the house is to
be kept, that no infectiue air enter therein, especially that which is humide
and moist, which naturally causes putrefaction in the house and place where
one sleeps: For prevention thereof the same house or places ought to be ayred
with fires of wood yielding clear flame, and withal to fumigate the rooms
with these herbs and seeds subscribed, Bayberies, Juniper, Vbery, O^gany,
Wormswood, Hysop, Rue, Magw^ort, and of Lign^^ ^ees, let these ^^me^ be
insp^red and ^ak^n at the mouth and nosthrils, so that it may pen^trate into
the interior and inward par^s.

Let all superfluity and overmuch repletions be refrained, for Auincen in 4.
Canonis says; that Illi qui repletionem semper curant periodum and sinem vitae
suae abreuiant^

Likewise, the common Bath is to be avoided, for Modicum fermentum totam
mass^m corrumpit. Finally, communities and concurfes of people are also to be
left off, as much as possible may be, least the breach of the infected be
received. But in case they cannot be shunned, let these remedies be used which
follow.

When one arises in the morning, by and by let him eat a little Rue washed in
clean water, and sprinkled with salt, with one or two Walnuts well cleansed, If
that cannot be had, let him eat some bread or a toast intincted with Viniger,
especially in a turbid or cloudy day. Also in the time of Pestilence, it is
better to stay within doors, then to go abroad into any Town or City, and
l^^ the house especially in the Summer be sprinkled with Viniger, Roses and
Vine-leaues, also it shall be good oftentimes in the ^ay, to wash the hands
with water and vin^ger, and a^terward to cleanse the face, and to smell unto the
hands washed as aforesaid. It shall be also a wholesome course as well in Summer
as winter to smell unto sower things. And for those that are visitors (...) the
sick, to take a sponge or piece of bread steeped in viniger, and to hold it to
the Nose or M^^th, for all acetosus and sower things ^^e so close the powers,
and passages of the humors, that no venomous air can enter therein as by
experience I have often found. Also if you take Rue, Wormwood, Sage, Marigolds
of each three handfuls, ^^ruse them wholly in a gallon of Ale newly ^^nued up,
and paste it close that no air breath out, and after that it is fined for
(...). hours take six or seven spoonefuls thereof mixed with the best
Venice-triacle in quantity of a Bean, and moderately walk thereon, and do
thus every morning before yonges forth of your house, as long as the Sickness
continues, and r^^ew your (...) ^s occasion requires to prevent the impr^sion
of the contagious air.

Another Preservative.
TAke Aloes clean washed i^ Rose Water half an ounce, of good Myrrh, of
^^sse^^ o^ ^arh two dragmes, of Bale Ar^onie ^^epared one scruple, of seed
Pearl and scruple, of the sirup of Lemons as much as will make it in form of
pa^^e, made in pills, and ^^^e thereof every ^^^^ing the weight of a great,
fasting, and within one hour after, to take a little thin broth, Alebery or
white Wine, and fast thereon three hours after, and then to use your
accustomed diet.

Another.
But if the body he very costine and distempered therewith, then may ye use
these pills in quantity as aforesaid; Every morning for four or five days
together if need require, and prepared as thus: Take of Rheubarb, Myrrh, of
each one dragme, Aloes two dragmes, Z^^^orie roo e, Saffron of each one
scruple, sirup of Roses sul^tine as much as will suffice to make it in form of
pills, and to take them in manner as before directed.

Another Preseruative.
TAke of Methridate, conserne of Roses of each half an ounce, Bole Armoniacke
prepared two dragmes, mix them together, and take thereof as much as a (...)
at once, and fast thereon two or three hours after.

Or else you may take of Triacle of An^ro^^chus, and of Michridate of either
tw^ dragmes, of conserve of Rose 3. dragme^ Bole Aemoniack prepared two
scruple, of the seeds or roses of Angelica two scruples, of the seeds of
Citrons half a dragme, of the sirup of Lemons half an ounce, mix all
together and take thereof the quantity of a hassell not, in the morning or at
any time of the day else (if you go into any throug of people) and fas^ a
while after it.

There are also many other preservatives more costly, yet far more powerful
in their effects, which may be had at the hands of the Chemists, as Potus
Pestilentialis Paracelsi, whereof one dragme being taken in the morning
fasting, and to sweat thereon, is a preservative from the Pestilence for six
days.

The second preservative is, Sulphur sublimed with Myrrh and Aloes. Half a
dragme with Sugar thereof being taken in the morning, preserves a man that ^ay
from all astra^l impression.

The third preservative is, Zenechthon, Paracelli, which being hanged about the
neck, hinders the attractiue power of the Microcismus or little world, which
is man.

The fourth, against the intuition or venomous aspe^^ of women, and men as
aforesaid. Is Chelidonia gathered in the full of the Moon, and carried above
one.

The fifth for them which are visitors of the sick, let them hold in their
mouth fra^kensence, and withal let the infected a^ the same instant hold also
in their mouth of the roots of Imperitoria.

The sixth, is the essence of Hearts and Storkes blood.

The seventh, which is most potent and powerful, is Alexipharmacum
Spagi^^^^n^, whereof being taken in a morning, the quantity of a Bean or
less, with sugar, or in any other convenient liquor, has a marvelous effect.

Also for correcting of the air, R. Sulphuris lib. ss. Thuris zij. Mirrhae
z^j. ss. assae setidae z. ss. ^ulu^riz^^tur and misceantur.

To this powder add a double quantiti^ of the ^ortex or shells of Bayberies,
of white Amber half a part. Take of this powder two dragmes, and cast it upon
coals, and make a perfume thereof daily ^wise or thrice.

For want of this powder you may take the wood of Juniper, and use it in like
manner, but it is nothing so good as the powder.

Rules to be observed in Common communities.
SVch things as do rarifie and subtle the spirit interior, are Saffron,
Cassia, Fistula, Plannton, with mirth in measure, those do specially serve in
common communities, and Companies, where quickly one is infected of another.
The eyes are obscured and darkened by an infectiue air, if a man carry not the
foresaid things or such like in his hand. Therefore it shall be a safe course
to wash the eyes, mouth and hands oftentimes in the day, with Rosewater mixed
with Viniger as aforesaid, but if both cannot be had, let Viniger alone he
used. This being observed, thou may with more security enter into any
company.

To keep the body soluble is thought to be an effectual remedy, if it be
not laxatiue naturally, let it be provoked artificially by suppositors, for
which purpose also serves the Pillulae Pest^lentiales which may be had at the
Apothecaries. Let there be also fire made in the House, because it much
hinders Celestial impression, and clarifieth the air,

To take Triacle is also profitable and good, as well for the sick as while I
mean the right Venice-triacle, or Treacle of Andromochus (or Iene-triacle) if
it be administered twice in a day with pure and clear wine, Beer or
Rose Water, in quantity of a small Bean or Pease at each time, mixed with two
spoonefuls of any of the foresaid Liquors: Let Dinner be deferred, until
midday, whereby the Triacle, may have its operation in the Body. Then choose a
good mess of meat with pure wine, Drink is to be taken often in the day, but
not much at once, because, Nimia Superabundantia putrifactionem humorum inducit.

Beware of all hot things in meats, as Pepper and Garlic; for although
Pepper purges the brain of Phlegm and likewise the Spiritual members from
viscous and clammy humors, ye it heateth overmuch, and Calefaction and heat
causes putrefaction.

Bitterness is more wholesome then hot Odours or Savors: Garlic, although
it purges also Phlegm and casts forth evil humors, provoke appetite to
Meat, and permits not any dry air to enter; because it perturbateth and
vexes the eyes, and heateth the head of every one which often uses the same;
therefore it cannot prove agreeable: For the Pestilence through the use of hot
things is oftentimes augmented and increased. All kind of meats by so much
easy they are of digestion, so much better they are. In the morning boiled
meats are more to be commended, but in the evening roasted. Brothes and Pulps
are to be eschewed, except they have some pleasant sowernesse; for sower meats
in time of Pestilence serves to all medicines. In like manner all fruits must
be refrained, except those of a sower taste, as Cheries, Pomgranuts, or a little
quantity of a Pear or Apple in place of medicine, for most fruits commonly
induces putrefaction. As for Spices which are commonly used, and convenient,
are Ginger, Cinnamon, Cumine, Mace and Saffron, with these are made sauces for
the richer sort. The poorer folks may eat Rue, Sage, Walnuts, Parcely minced
and mixed together with Vinegar. These do hinder putrefaction.

Likewise, beware ye dread not Death overmuch, but think well to live: For
he that dreads overmuch, shall imagine he feels pricking and moving thereof
at the cleansing places in his own conceit, when he feels nothing.

Having set down sundry means for prevention, It shall be convenient to
speak of some signs and tokens, whereby a man may judge whether he be
insected with the Pestilence or no, and are these that follow.

The first is, great pain and heaviness in the Head.

The second, when the body is inwardly affected with heat, and the outward
parts cold and ready to shake, and is thirsty and dry withal.

The third is, difficulty of breathing and that with pain.

The fourth sign is, he has a great desire to sleep and can hardly refrain
it, Sometime want of sleep and cannot obtain it.

The fifth is, pain and swelling in the stomach, breaking forthwith stinking
sweats.

The sixth sign is, diverse and heavy looks of the Eyes, seeing all things of
one color, ^s green or yellow, and the color of the eyes are also changed.

The seventh sign is, loss of appetite, unsavory ^ast, bitterness of the
mouth sower and stinking.

The eight is, wambling of the stomach and a desire to vomit, and sometime
vomiting humors bitter and of diverse colors.

The ninth is, the Pulse beats swift and deep.

The tenth sign is, heaviness and dulnes in all the body, and saint, and
weak limbs.

The eleventh is, the Urine most commonly is troubled, thick like beasts
water, and stinketh, but smell it not if you love your health; but oftentimes
the water does not show at all, especially in the beginning of the Sickness.

The twelfth and last sign and surest of all other is. There arises in the
neck, under the arm, or in the flank a tumor or swelling, or in some other
part of the body there appears a red, greenish, or blackish colored sore:
this is an apparent Sign of infection with the Pestilence.

As Soon as by the signs and tokens aforesaid, any one perceives himself to
be infected with the venomous quality of the Pestilence: Let him take of the
foresaid Potus Pestilentialis Paracelsi, in quantity agreeable unto the age of
the Patient, that is to say; If he be above Fourteen, he may take thereof at
a time, half an ounce or a good spoonefull; But if he be of younger years,
two dragmes, or more or less according to the condition and respect of the
patient, and let him be well covered in his bed with clothes, and sweat
thereon for four or five hours after. Within six hours after that, let him
take the like dosse and again let him sweat. After six hours are past, let
him take the third dosse; especially, If the patient feels and perceives any
punctions or prickings remaining: For with the third dosse (God willing) all
the venom will be expelled and driven forth.

For three days following (the venom expulsed,) Every morning the Patient
shall take one dosse of the said liquor or drink, whereby Nature may be
corroborated and comforted. Alexipharmacum Spagiricum will perform the same,
of which you may give unto them that are above Fourteen years one dragme,
but unto them that are younger half a dragme, and that thrice in four and
twenty hours space. And for three days one dosse every Morning, either in
Wine, Rose-vineger, or other appropriate waters.

And when the Apostumation of the Pestilence comes forth, a Cataplasme of
Figs and of the fruit of Alkakengie, of each a like quantity bruissed
together, shall be applied thereon, and it will break it presently; For
Venenum, venonum atwahit

And this you must remember, that if the Botch arise near unto the heart
before you sweat, that then you apply this defensatiue unto the heart upon a
fine linen cloth thinly spread, as broad as will cover the heart, which
medicine is thus prepared.

Take of good Triacle of Andromachus, half a dragme, of Methridate one dragme,
red Sanders, of Torralemnia half a scruple, Rose Water and of Vinegar, of each
as much as will suffice to make an Unguent, and let it be applied as above
directed.

When the Apostume first appears, you may (if you please) take Walnuts, or
Filberd nuts, Figs and Rue beaten together, and apply it thereto.

Also, when the said Apostume breaks and the venom penetrateth the heart,
whose sign is perceived by the live from the Center or midst point of the
apostume leading to the heart: Bruise then some of the green plant called Vna
inuersa, or Leopards have, and apply thereto; but if it cannot be gotten
green but withered, then macerate it in Wine, or Vinegar, and apply it after
the same sort, and let it be repeated twice or thrice over: For this does
extract and draw out the venom mightily, the Patient being in an agony; and
do revoke and call him back as from the Grave, and drives many into
admiration thereof.

Against the Symptoms of the Pestilence.
IN Constipations and Costiuenesse of the belly, the patient may use some
purgative medicine; except it be at such time when the Botch or Carbuncle
appears, any other sores of the Pestilence growing toward ripeness: For if
it be done then, it will contrary to nature prove her intention.

But the second day after Sweating, If no Botch or sore appears, then may he
use either Sena or Rhewharb, or the extract of either. They that have any of
the Fluxes of the bowels, called Diarrhea or Dise^teria, joined with the
Pestilence; Morning, Noone and at night, they may take half a scruple of
Crocus Martis, in the extract of Acorus Luteus, to the full effecting of the
cure. They that are dexed with burning heates, let them dip linen clothes in
Rose Water vitriol, and with the juice of Semper viue, and apply to the pulfes,
and when the same clothes are dried, let them be we^ again in the same
liquor and applied in like manner.

And if the Patient be very dry and thirsty, give him of this Iulip three or
four spoonefuls at once, viz. Take of Rose Water, of the waters of Endive,
Buglasse, Sorrel, sharp Viniger, and of the juice of Lemmons of each four
Ounces, of Sugar one pound, boil them a little with a gentle fire, and when it
is cold, give thereof to drink three or four spoonefuls at once. Or else,
take of the waters of Roses and of Buglasse of each three Ounces, of ye Sirr^p
of Endine and Lemmons of each two ounces, of the Oil of Vitriol one scruple,
mix them, and take them as aforesaid. If the Patient cannot sleep, if after
vomiting Bezoardicks, and other means fit to eua^^^te gross humors, a man
may give the Patient Landanum Paracelsi, three grains thereof in Carduus
benedictus water, or for want thereof the Temples of the Patient may be
anointed with this ointment. Take of Vnguentum Populionis, of Vnguentum
Rosarum, of Vnguentum Alabastrinum, of each half an ounce, of the oils of
Violets and of water Lillies, of either two dragmes, of Opium one scruple, or
two, first dissolved in Rose Water, and then together mixed; anointing the
Temples therewith, will both cause sleep, and stay raging. Or if you will you
may use this.

Take of the sirrup of Violets, of the sirrup of of Lemmons, of the sirrup of
Popple of each one ounce, of Diascordium, three dragmes, let them be mingled
together, and give thereof sometime to the patient to driu^e for the foresaid
purposes.

If through the heat of the stomach, the Mouth, Throat and Tongue be hot, dry
and furred. Take French Barley, S^uckfolly, Violet and Strawbery leaves, of each
one handful, of Woodbind and Col^^bind half an handful, Boil all these in a
Quart of fair water, and to the same Liquor strained out, put thereto of
Diamo^um and of Mel ^osarum, o^ either two ounces, of the oil of Sulphur as
much as will a little sharpen it, and let the Patient with some of the same
liquor warmed, gargarize and wash his Mouth, Tongue and Throat.

Of Fleubotomie.
FLeubotomie may be used once in a Month, except age or any other cause
prohibit it, as in women with child, or on them that are brought low by
sickness, or on them that are subject to any flux of the Belly, or on them
which are already infected with the Pestilence, and the Botch or Sore grows
toward ripeness.

Let bloodletting be done upon the vein Basilica, whether it be in the right
or left arm, before he eat or drink, and after the opening of the same let
the Patient be jocund, merry and cheerful, and to drink good Wine or Beer,
but always temperately. Neither is it lawful nor convenient to sleep the
same day that the vein is opened, if any feels himself infected with an
Apostume, then let him altogether refrain sleep, and prevent it by walking,
for in sleep, heat inwardly induces the Venom unto the Heart, and other
Spiritual Members, in such sort, that scarce any Herb may revoke the same
venom, unto its former state, which thing happens not, as long as a man is
in motion.

But it may be, some men will ask, of whom is sleep to be avoided? What if
he should have a continual sleep? To this I briefly answer, that in the
time of Pestilence; if any have an appetite to sleep presently after he have
eaten any thing, thou such desires ought to be hindered for a space, either in
ye Garden or Fields for one hour, and then with natural sleep, the body may
have for one hour its natural refection and rest. Therefore Auincen says;
That if a man will sleep, he ought to drink a good draught before his
sleeping, because in sleep he attracteth and draws many humors and those
evil humors are repelled by the humor of a good draught; But again, if a man
shall ask, when a man is infected how he ought to know it. To this I say and
answer, that a man that is infected; the same day he shall not eat much,
because he is repleate with evil humors, and presently after Dinner he has a
desire to sleep, and perceives a great heat with coldness, he has great
pain in the former part of the head, but all these are revoked and put away by
moving hither and thither, and for to walk he is not able by reason of
overmuch vnweldines and sluggishnesse of body, for a man infected has always
a desire to sleep, because the venom iniernall does perturbate and trouble
the spirits vital, so that it always tends to rest, by these signs and all
others before related, a man may always perceive himself to be infected. If
he will not give credit unto it, let him make trial for half a days space,
and presently he shall feel the Apostume under his Arms, or about the
groine, or else about the Ears. Therefore the chiefest remedy is, if a man
perceive all these tokens in time of the Pestilence, that he shake off sleep
as I have said before, for as by the reasons before also alleged it is
manifest, that in sleep the Spirits vital does rest, but the venom is
scattered, through the membrands from one place unto another, as I have often
observed. This being truly marked, when a man finds himself infected, as
soon as possible may be, let him let blood in as ample manner that he almost
saint thereon, for the taking of small quantity of blood stirs up the
venomous quality more forcibly. If a man will not cut many veins at once, then
he shall suffer to go over the same vein incided as aforesaid, even unto the
retardation and staying of the Blood.

Also he that is let blood, whether he be infected or not, he must also shun
sleep the whole day even to midnight. And always in the same part of the body
that the Apostume shall appear, shall be made the incision of a vein.

As for Example.

If the Apostume shall appear under the right Arm, Phlebotomie shall be made
in the middle part of the same arms, from the vein Mediana; but if under the
left arm the apostume shows it self, then must you open the Mediana, as
aforesaid, in the same arm, or the Hepatien, that is to say; in the vein
about the middle finger. If the apostume be about the Groyne, let a vein be
opened in the Foot, about the heel on the same side. If the apostume be in
the Neck, Phlebotomize the Cephalica, about the Thumb in the hand of the same
side, or the Mediana of the same arm, or in the hand on the same side about
the lesser finger. If it shall appear about the Ear, incide the Cephalica on
the same side, or the vein which is between the forefinger and the thumb,
least many venomous vapors invade the brain. Or the vain which is about the
less finger, or about the article, which of Physicians is called Basilica. If
the tumor shall appear about the shoulder blades, heart and throat: Use
scarifications with application of Ventosis: And first let blood on the Median.
If the Apostume appear on the back, open the vein called Pedia Magna. And
all these may be let blood, If a man have not slept before the knowledge of
the Apostumation: But if he feel such Apostumations after sleeping; then
bleeding ought to be made on the contrary part. As if the Apostume appeared in
the right arm, the Basilica or Liver vein; or Mediana in the lest arm, shall
be opened.

And if the Apostume shows under the right arm, let it be as it is spoken
of the left arm; and so of other places in which the Apostumation appears.
And whenever Blood-letting is to be used, let it be always done in
opposite manner: And if he that have been let blood be very weak, then may
he sleep after the midst of the day. And before the midst of the day he
ought to be in continual motion, either riding or moderately walking.

And if afterward, the Botch increases fear not: For it is a token, that
Nature puts out the venomous quality, and restores a man to soundness,
then may you apply such remedies thereto as is abouementioned.

And if any there be, that shall receive benefit and recovery by these
Directions* First, let him thank GOD, that ha^^ created Medicine of the Earth
to heal his people: and secondly, pray for me Sinner the writer of this
little Treatise, for to that intent I took the pains.

FINIS.



