The things which happened upon the Prince of Parmas retire since the 20. of
Nouembre, till the 27. of the same Month.

With the news from Dauphine.

Published by authority.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, for Andrew White, and are to be sold at his shop
at the Royal Exchange, over against the conduit in Cornehill, 1590.

The things which happened upon the Prince of Parmas retire since the 20. of
Nouembre, till the 27. of the same Month.
THe 20. of Nouembre she king being departed from Coeuures to pursue the Prince
of Parma and the Duke de Main, who were together: met in a great plain a
company of natural Spaniardes, which he discomfited in the sight of the Duke
de Main, where the Baron du Fort was hurt with a musket shot.

Since the 25. of the said month, his Majesty removed from Feres in Tartenois,
upon notice that was given him of the Prince of Parmas departing from Fismes, a
small town, where the river of Voeste passes through, and marched directly
after him, accompanied with eight hundredth launciers, and as many carbines,
commanding the Baron of Biron to take 15. light horsemen, and send them for
spies to get the watch word. In the mean while he went into a wood lying upon
the right hand, accompanied only with 25. horses. The spies of the said baron
of Biron brought news, that the enemy was departed from a small village called
Bazoge, and that they marched toward Pontauers where the river of esne
passes through. Upon the same time the king came into the said village, where
he found none but certain farmers and husbandmen armed, and ready for to
fight in his Majesty's behalf. The king sent Monsieur de Fronterac, Chicot,
and Dauerus to epsy upon S. Martins mount if the enemy had no ambushes at the
foot of the hill, but they saw them plainly in an open plain, their faces
turned toward Pontauers. His Majesty passed the river of Voesle in the
foresaid village, and commanded Monsieur de la Noue to march in all have with
his forces toward Pontarsy, to stop the passage of the river of Fsne, when in
the mean while he went to pursue the enemy. And being somewhat forward in
the plain, espied some horses to follow him, with four regiments of footmen,
who arrived in the said town of Fismes, and were appointed to conuoye the
tronkes and bagage. If his Majesty had been supported with five hundredth
horsemen more then he was, he would have set upon them: but searing that his
men would linger about the stuff and carriage, it made him not to venture, but
marched a great league within the plain, sending the said baron de Biron with
25. lanciers before his cornet of light horse. Commanded also Monsieur de la
Noue to send him ten soldiers out of every company, and to lodge and refresh
the rest of the army, which he did. Then his majesty made five small
squadrons of horsemen of 50. or 60. horses in every troop. The carbines of the
enemy began to draw toward the baron of Biron, whom his Majesty did back a
far of, accompanied with the Lord Alfonze Lorse, and at the same time the
said baron charged the earbines, in so much that of them eight or nine were
slain upon the place.

The king being joined with him, the said Lord Alfonze showed unto his highness
the Duke of Parma, who wore at that time a flat crowned hat, a great ruff, and
a short mandilian furde, and was mounted upon a gray horse, laying his hand
upon his sword for to make his men to retire, and in a bravery making his
horse to leap six or seven times, the king doing the like of his side, being
distant one from an other not much more then 100. paces. His Majesty dougting
that this refrait of the enemy, was onelys but to draw him further in, and so
to compass him with the whole body of their army, at the arrival of
Monsieur de la Noue, who told him that he had seen unto his thinking, all the
enemies cauallerie and infanterie in battle array, commanded presently a
retrait, and not thinking that the retire would fall so long, was forced to
remain four hours in battle array before the enemy, who came armed unto
him. Whereupon he left to back him, the Baron of Biron with his troop of
light horsemen, conducted by Monsieur de Sandall, who had left Captain Broust
and two companies of light horse twenty paces behind him, to keep the
carbines in breath. An indiscrete soldier and one of his Majesty's troops
being fallen into the hands of the enemies light horsemen, began to cry
aloude for aid, three went to help him, where captain Broust received a shot
in his left eye, wherewith he fell dead from his horse. Hereupon the said
baron de Biron returned directly toward the enemy, and causing the dead
body to be laid upon a horse, and to be carried unto the town of Longauall,
made a ferme standing upon the top of the hill, from the which he could not
come down into the said village, enclosed with a low brick wall, but through
a straight and narrow way. His Majesty thinking that the baron of Biron was
inda^gered, would have commanded Monsieur de Sandall to give a charge with his
light horses, but ere long notice was given how he had prevented the enemy,
and that his back forces being joined with him, had together pursued the
enemy more then a thousand paces in the plain. The king knowing that besides
the narrownes of the way, where he was forced to pass through, his enemies did
urge and press him very near, thought it better to hazard certain carbins
that were with him, then to venture and cast away his Nobility, caused
therefore two companies, the one of S. Denis, and the other of S. Feliz, to
light, and by these means there began a very hot skirmish. In the mean while
all his Majesty's caualerie retired, the carbines also dismounted and came
furiously running from the hill into the said town of Longauall where his
Majesty was. The shot also retired thither, but Captain Felix in the retrait
was slain with one of his small shot, and one of his Majesty's light horsemen,
and four or five horses of the deadmens. The said hargebusiers had
notwithstanding yet leisure enough to bring the Captain away, drawing him by
the legs into the village, and therewith they shut the gates upon the enemy,
who with their swords gave many blows upon the gates, and through the flites
there of with their pickes and lances. Our shot in the mean time kilde a
great number of them through the loop holes that were in the wall, which when
the enemy did see, he went to assault the place at an other side, in hope to
come within the village, where he found the gates shut, but having gotten
means to open it by the help of a country man, six of them entered, where
presently they met Captain Bonomouer, Captain S. Denis, an a shot. The
Captain Bonomouer went directly toward them, and having thrown one down
with a short pick, caused the said shot to discharge his piece, who kilde an
other. The rest seeing this, they abandoned the place again, and thereupon the
said S. Denis shut the gates. The hargebusiers took their horses and followed
the king, who lest the town, where into the enemy presently entered. Between
this village and the town of Pontarsy there lies a wood, at the side whereof
his Majesty placed his lanciers in battle a, ray, to make their standing
sure, and so passing the wood, got the town of Pontarsy, where all his troops
passed the river. The enemy went directly out of the village, standing still a
while by the way, for fear of ambush of shot, that might be lodged in the
wood, but at last they passed through it, and met with the baron of Biron, who
gave them a charge, and slew five and twenty or thirty of them. His Majesty
caused Captain Langemis company to light, who saluted the enemy with such a
value of shot, that they kilde a great number of them, and thus they retired to
the town again and passed the river. The duke of Parma began likewise to
retire, encamping him all night there about, fearing an alarm, thinking that
Monsieur de Neuers came behind him. Next morning 25. or 30. of the enemies
carbines having lost their way, came before the said town, enquiring for the
Prince of Parmas quarter: and being suffered to enter into the town, the
inhabitants thereof having disarmed them, threw them from the bridge into the
water and drowned them. His Majesty joined with Monsieur de Neuers the 27. of
the said month, as also with Guiret and Parauall, who brought him certain
troops very well appointed, with the which they parting the said day from the
Castle of Nisy, persued the enemy, marching toward Larbre de Suyse: The
surcesse of which pursuit, you shall fourth with receive.

Nevves from Daulphine.
THE Lord Diguires having received the Kings commandment by two letters of
his Majesty to war against the Duke of Sauoy, thought it good to delay no
longer the execution of his will. But upon the receipt of his Letters, which
was about the latter end of May (having delayed his purpose until then, but
only for the lets and hindrances he had in Prouence which was assaulted in
diverse places by the leagers of Sauoy, Lionnois, and Daulphine) purposed to put
in all haste the Kings commanndement in execution.

This deliberation was yet stayed for the aid which he in person was forced to
give to the Lord de la Valette, in the month of June and July, which were
almost wholly spent in the affairs of Prouence, where they had so good a
success, that the enemy (having refused the combat, and lost the field)
abandoned in token of his cowardnesse the Towns and Castles of Peruis,
Pumichet, Vallansele, Montaignac, Soluiers, Pignauers, and Lorgis, some of them
brought unto the Kings obedience by force, and some by composition.

During this absence, the Captain la Cazette, being his Majesty's subject, but
yet affectionated unto the Duke of Sauoy, compounded with the Duke upon the
taking of the Towns and Castles of Briancon, and Essiles, kept by those of the
Neutralles, and having received commission to that end, to leauie soldiers,
expected the arrival of four and twenty Spanish companies for to bring his
enterprise the more easier to effect by their aid and assistaunce.

The Lord Deguisires informed of long time of his practizes, and foreseeing
the importance of that loss, which should hinder and shut up the passage of
the Artillery and French army, and leave no way to come by any means in
Piemont, practiced so purposely with the chief inhabitants of the ballies:
that by their means the house of Cazette was blown up, and he slain, the
fifteenth day of July. And so the Duke was there for that time prevented of his
purpose.

This news being brought unto the Lord Deguisires, it caused him to turn
back into Daulphine, and to march in all haste toward d'Ambrum, where the
deputies of the said valleys did meet him, who (after they had declared unto
him the treasons of Cazette, by the Papers which were found in his house)
bound themselves by oathe to be faithful unto the King: and so they were sent
back again, to bring the people that had sent them more affectionated unto
his Majesty's service and obedience.

In the mean while the said Lord Deguisires being advertised of the
wavering, which the said death, voluntary yielding of that people, and the
Town of Briancon did cause, and knowing also, that those which were of the
Kings side within the Town, began to be encouraged, caused four Cannons to
be drawn and brought before that place. Which when they were planted, and a
breach made, the enemy did parlee, in so much, that the Town and Castle
thereof were rendered at the last, being the sixteenth day of the month of
August, by Clauison, who was appointed Governor by the Duke de Maine of that
place.

From thence the Lord Deguisiers went to Montgeure, to take Essiles upon a
contract which he had made long before with the Governor thereof. And seeing
that this bargain was made but in words only, and that he was not
sufficiently provided to force the said place, and that the Lord de la
Valette did daily sosticite him to give aid to Saint Maximine, beseeged by
Martiningo, he was contented to take, for that time, the oaths only of the
communaltie, who showed themselves greatly affectionated unto the Kings
service.

After this he took his way toward Prouence, and lodged the fifteenth day
of August neare-vnto Barcelone-Salines an old Spanish Captain, being chief
Colonel of the light horsemen of Piemont, during the Kings wars, departed
at that time from Barcelone, whereof kee was Governor under the Duke, and
assaulted one quarter where one company of the Infanterie of Boys^t, and
twelve lances of the Lord Brickmorte were lodged, who received them so
valiantly, by the aid of two other companies of footmen that came running
thither in all haste upon the noise they heard, that Salines left six score
of his men dead, and thirty Spaniardes taken, saving himself but with six
other. Voluant Captain of the Dukes guarde was there also taken, and hurt,
whereof he died within a day after, receiving by his death a just reward and
punishment according unto his deserts, because he had sold unto the deceased
Duke of Sauoy, after the death of the Marshall de Bellegarde, the Town and
Castle of Cramanolle, where he and his sather were Governors of for the King.

The next day following, being the sixteenth day of August, the said Lord
took by composition the Castle of Rosolez, which is the Dukes, and had there
in garrison two companies of footmen that were permitted to depart with their
armor, but left their colors behind.

After this exploite, continuing his way, he came into Prouence so fitly for
those of Saint Maximine, that Martiningo advertised of his coming (his army
being very weak and disordered) removed his siege. And the Lord Diguisiers
now entered in the country, to the end, that he might there leave some token
of his coming, caused three Cannons to be brought before the Castle of Barles
to batter it. And after a siege of eight days took it at his own discretion
the last day of August.

During these iourneys the Duke of Sauoy, being accompaned with three thousand
footmen or there-aboutes, and four hundredth light Horsemen came to besiege
and batter with three Cannons, a Church called, Saint Paul's, which the said
Lord Diguisiers had but in passing by fortiffed, situated in the dominion of
the said Duke, four or five leagues from Ambrum, and took it by composition,
the garrison thereof going away with their armor, colors, and drum in
battle array, the very same day that Barles was taken.

The same day also the saw Lord Diguisiers being advertised of the seege of
Saint Paul, Marched in all haste and diligence to succor it, with intent to
offer the Duke a battle, using to that end so great a celeritie, that the
third day of September he lodged in Varret, three leagues from his Highness,
when being dismayed at his sudden and unlooked for arrival, took the pains
to retire in person the same night from the mountain of Larche, and marched
all that night with Linkes, being the nerte day followed by his own forces,
whereof some in the rerewarde were slain and taken, and amongst other, Don
Pedro de Vegiers a Spaniard, and archer of the Dukes sooteguarde was taken.

The next day following, which was the firte day of the saw month, the Lord
Diguisiers was resolutely determined to force and assault Saint Paul again,
and although he had not his Cannons ready at hand, yet did he lay seege unto
it, assaulting it with handiblowes, and hatting blown up the gates, and made a
breach caused two hundredth of the souldfours that were within it, to be put to
the Sword taking none prisoner, but the Captain de Strata, governor of the
said place, and his Ensign ralled Hercules Couero of Millan. This Forte
remained but four days in the ennemies hand, and was taken again in a
skirmish which continued three hours, wherein, of the Kings side, but one
Captame was flaine, called Bolleuene, and some few Souleiours hurt, although
that the Forte had Flanquers and Ditches round about it.

At the same time that the Duke did batter Saint Paul, he had caused his army
with some part of the forces of Sauoy and Piemont to march toward the valley
of Essiles, hoping by his forces which were of four thousand footmen, and
three humdeth horse, to sake and spoils all the Country of Briancon, to batter
Guilester, and overrun Lambriuois. But the lord Deguisiers being hereof
infourmed, and desirous fo disapporint the Duke of his purpose, presently after
the taking of Saint Paul, which he racrd unto the ground, took his tourney
toward Briancon, and knowing that the ennemie, who was lodged in Cheumont,
made preparation to force the passage of Selte, kopt and fortified by the
inhabitants of the valleis, sent thither Monsieur de Morges his nephew with his
company of fifty horsemen, and two Ensigns of footement, and arriving
thither, upon the point and instant that they were in a skirmish, he lighted
with his men, and setting them in battle array, encouraged so much the hearts
of every man, that the ennemy (affaulting in three sundry places the Forte and
Bulwarks with fifteen hundredth footmen, and four score or a hundredth men of
arms) was repulsed, leaving six score of his men dead upon the place: which
happened upon the ninth day of September.

The thirteenth day of the same month the lord Deguisires arrived in Douley,
three leagues from Essiles, where news was brought him, that the Duke having
sent one part of his forces unto Monsieur de Sons, was gone himself to
Nice, which did cause him for to judge, that the said Sons, being now
strengthened with a new supply of men, would adventure and hazard the bolder
the combat. Whereunto the said lord desirous to draw and bring him,
determined to batter Essiles, and to that end brought four Cannons from
Ambrum, making them to pass the mountains, and to be planted in sight of the
place, not ceasing nevertheless to show himself every other day before
Chamois, where the said Sons was. Who being grieved with his importunacie,
left Chamois, and retired to Suze, where the said lord Deguisiers following
him the six and twentieth day of September, to view the place and to mark the
countenance of his ennemy, encountered him by chance not far from Ialasle,
and half a league from Suze, accompanied with fifteen hundrethe
harquebuziers, and five cornets of horsemen, whom he assaulted so furiously at
the entering of the plain, that the ennemy being charged with one hundred and
three score horsemen, was discomfited and put to flight, leaving four hundred
launciers dead upon the place. Amongst whom were Clapot the elder, sergeant
of the battle, the lord Montaignes and Valuernes. There were seauenteene
head Captains or chief officers slain and taken. And amongst the prisoners
was Clapot the younger Marishal or the camp, who also dyed two days after,
Labras lieuetenant of the Marquess of Traforts cornet, the governor of
Bresche, Captain Trisolts of Sauoy, Captain de la Riuier, and the Captain S.
Orens. And if they had not retired in time, not one should have escapes. As
touching the General Sons, he was lost, in so much, that his men supposed
him to be slain till about midnight, that he came before the gates of Sauze.

The day before being the five and twentieth day, upon advice that the ennemy
should make a course in Prerallo Monsieur de Briquemault was sent thither, and
arrived in good time with his cornet of light horsemen, and found the ennemy
upon his retire, of whom hie caught a dozen.

The seven and twentieth day the lord Diguisiers finding hunselfe renforced by
those of Ponts and Briancon, who had sent unto him two hundred Souloiours as
well of their troops as of the goueruours, and S. Sauuois companies, and two
or three hundred shot, changed and altered wholly his purpose upon Essiles,
which began already to parlee.

The rest of that month was spent in the seege of Essiles, whereof the
governor called Ponsonnes, and was there by the Duke de Maines appointment,
seeing the ill estate of the Duke of Sauoys affairs, the Cannon planters, the
lord Diguisiers fortified with new supplies, all the communatty bent against
him, and no likelshoode of any aid and relief, yielded at last the town upon
composition, that all the Soldiers should freely depart with bag and
baggage, which happened the last day of September. And by these means the
passage of the mountains remained in the Kings power. And Daulphine was
limited with his old limits, long bofore fortified by the French Kings during
the wars of Italy.

Nerte day after this yeewing, the lord Diguisiers having understood, that
Monsieur Morges his nephewe had assigned a day to fight fifty against fiftre
on horse back with General Sons, conducted his nephew unto the place
appointed, where he remained with his forces from nine of the clock in the
morning, until three of the clacke in the afternoon, without any appearaunce
of the enenay, but by a Trumpetter, who brought a letter from Sons, the
contents where of were, that upon the (...) he had taken, he thad demaunrded
the Infant her (...) had as yet received no answer.

(...) same day being the first day of October, the lord (...) in attending
the coming of his ennemie, had (...) passage near Iallon, where the enemy had
intrenthed hunselfe, and lodged eight companies of Infanterie, under the
leading and conduct of the General Venust, and perceining by the saws Sons
answer, that there was no more hope of the combat, determined to spend the
rest of the day in assaulting the said place, lying upon the hanging of the
mountain, between Suze and Noualise. And having found means to lodge and
place a hundredth Musquettiers, who battered the enemy upon the side of thest
Skonse, their treuches were forced, and four score of them slain, but he rest
saved themselves by their swiftencsse. The said Venust, Captain Cassard, and
Charband, were slain upon the place, the Captain Villars, and some other
taken prisoners, undfoure commpanies of Senton Master of the camp were so
scattered, that they cams not since together.

From thence the said lord Diguisiers reinrned again to Essiles, and sent
back again the four cannens to Ambrmn, causing at the same time two orrat
peecrs to be drawn from Gap to Barcellona, a place belenging unto the Doke,
and srituated in the County of Nice, the which being befieged with his forces
whom he had sent before, at his arriual with the Canons, battered the town the
Satterday following, And upon the same day a breach being made, the enemy did
parlec, and yielded themselves, their lives saved, unto hun, leaving
nevertheless their armor, colors, horses, and baggage behind them: except
the Captains who were permitted to depart with their Swords upon a backney.
Unto the inhabitants was granted the enjoying of their goods, abiding under
the Kings obedience, as all subjects of his Majesty, upon condition also to
pay fire thousand crowns for the army and freight of the artifllerie. The
Governor called Coreloere, departed from thence the foureteenth day with three
other foreign Soiddiors, and with as many Citizens and Countriemen, who went
to their houses under the Kings safegarde.

The foureteenth day, the saooe lord lasde battery before the Castle of
Metans, which be battered but flenderly ths fifteenth day, only to view the
ennemies rountenaimee, who (being afraid of the cannon shot) next night saved
themselves, except thirty of them that were faken prisoners by the watch. Here
is the summarie of that which to passed in the beginning of this war, where
the lord Diguisires had never above three hundred horses and twelve hundred
shot, having also no greater ennemy then the inaccessible height of the
mountains, where he was forced to pass his cannons, and chiefly in his
fourhey toward Barcellona. But care and daligence did nuercome all
difficulties. The praise whereof be given to God. Amen.

A Godly Prayer and Thanksgiving unto GOD, for his wonderful mercies, in
preserving and maintening the defendors of the truth, and discomforting of the
enemies of the same.
O Heavenly father, the Creator of all creatures, the strength of all armies,
the King of all kings, and the worker of all wonders, we thy distressed
servants do humbly beseech thee to look down upon us from the throne of thy
divine Majesty, and for thy mercies sake to take compassion on us. We
acknowledge (O Lord) that our insolent actions, together with our pride and
wickedness of life, has well deserved thy wrath and heavy displeasure, so that
the continuance of thy wrath these many years upon thy Church, has been no
more then we have justly deserved. Nevertheless (heavenly Father) we presume
upon thy strength, and the multitude of thy mercies, and that therefore thou will save and defend all those that seek to supporte the truth. Let not thy
heart be hardened against us (O Lord) for thou art our father, savior, and
redeemer from the beginning. We have (O Lord) erred from thy ways, and
contrariwise, we have hardened our hearts against thee: for which now we
remain sorrowful. Notwithstanding let the inward sorrows of our hearts (O
Lord) be an occasion to withdraw thy wrath and heavy displeasure from us,
which brings no other then bloodshed, death and destruction upon our selves.
Our enemies (Lord) have long sought to triumph over us, and have grievously
spoiled thy holy Temples, yea they have made havoc of thy creatures, and have
so little regarded us, as though thou had never been Lord over us, yea as
though thy glorious Name had never been called on by us (O Lord) we beseech
thee for thy mercy sake, let the malicious minds of those which seek daily
our confusion, boil away as the water does upon on the fire, that thy
mightines may be thoroughly known to thy enemies, and that they may tremble at
thy wonderful works. Remember (O Father) that we are to thee as clay in the
Potters hands, we are the works of thy fingers, we are thy creatures, and
therefore deliver us (O Lord) from this continual tribulation, where Syon is
turned in to a desert, and Jerusalem into continual desolation. The places of
holy prayer wherein our forefathers have heretofore sou^ded forth thy glory,
are now turned into heaps of fire, and continual harbors for armed men, and
ourland brought to confusion, and the ground made like to a wilderness. Withdraw
therefore (O heavenly Father) the rod of thy wrath from us, and thrust forth
thy merciful hand for our relief. Thou have lately given to us a taste of
comfort in this, that thy capital enemy now living is retired, and by thy
power constrained to fly from among us, whom he intended to dau^t with his
mighty armies, great looks and politic devices, who notwithstanding the
wonderful reports of his mightines durst not hazard his quarrel upon a
pitched field with us, although his forces were three to one. To thee therefore
(O Lord) we render all thanks, and humbly give praise to thy heavenly Majesty
for showing us some comfort, by daunting our enemies, which had it not bin for
thy our stretched arm (O Lord) we had remained in great danger, nay, we had
bin trodden under foot like chafe, and made food for the fowls of the air.
But thou have been our defendor and only comfort, thou have strengthened us
that were but weak, and weakened them which in show are very strong.
Continue, we beseech thee, this thy goodness to us for thy mercy sake, bless
our friends and welwillers: comfort our distressed estate, and suffer not our
enemies to prevail against us: give us grace (O Lord) daily to endeavor our
selves to laud and magnify the holy name of thee, who live and raignest
world without end, Amen.

FINIS:

