AVRORA. Containing the first fancies of the Authors youth, William Alexander
of Menstrie.

printer's device of Richard Field (McKerrow 192): "framed device of an anchor
suspended by a hand from the clouds" ANCHORA SPEI


LONDON, Printed by RICHARD FIELD for Edward Blount. 1604.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS Lady, the Lady Agnes Douglas Countess of
Argyle.
MADAME, when I remember the many obligations which I owe to your manifold
merits, I oftentimes accuse my self to my self, of forgetfulness, and yet I am
to be excused: for how can I satisfy so infinite a debt, since whilst I go to
disengage my self in some measure, by giving you the patronage of these
unpolished lines (which indeed to their many errors, had need of a respected
Sanctuary) I but engage my self further, while as you take the patronage of so
unpolished lines. Yet this shall not discourage me, for always I carry this
advantage, that as they were the fruits of beauty, so shall they be sacrificed
as oblations to beauty. And to a beauty, though of it self most happy, yet
more happy in this, that it is thought worthy (and can be no more then
worthy) to be the outward cover of so many inward perfections. So assuring my
self, that as no darkness can abide before the Sun, so no deformity can be
found in those papers, over which your eyes have once shined. I rest

Your Honors most humbly devoted, William Alexander.

AVRORA.
Sonet 1.
Whilst charming fancies move me to reveal
The idle rauings of my brain-sicke youth,
My heart does pant within, to hear my mouth
Unfold the follies which it would conceal:
Yet bitter Critickes may mistake my mind;
Not beauty, no, but virtue raisd my fires,
Whose sacred flame did cherish chaste desires,
And through my cloudie fortune clearly shined.
But had not others otherwise aduisd,
My cabinet should yet these scroles contain,
This childish birth of a conceitie brain,
Which I had still as trifling toys despisd:
Pardon those errors of mine unripe age;
My tender Muse by time may grow more sage.
Sonet 2.
AS yet three lusters were not quite expired,
Since I had been a partner of the light,
When I beheld a face, a face more bright
Then glistring Phoebus when the fields are fired:
Long time amazed rare beauty I admired,
The beams reflecting on my captived sight,
Till that surpised (I wot not by what flight)
More then I could conceive my soul desired,
My takers state I longed for to comprise.
For still I doubted who had made the rape,
If it was a body or an airie shape,
With feigned perfections for to mock the eyes:
At last I knew it was a most divine creature,
The Crown of The Earth, th'excellencie of Nature.
Son. 3.
THat subtle Greek who for t'aduance his art,
Shaped Beauties Goddess with so sweet a grace,
And with a learned pensill limn'd her face,
Till all the world admired the workmans part.
Of such whom Fame did most accomplished call
The naked snowes he severally perceived,
Then drew the Idaea which his soul conceived,
Of that which was most exquisite in all:
But had thy form his fancy first possessed,
If worldly knowledge could so high attain,
Thou might have spared the curious Painters pain,
And satisfide him more then all the rest.
O if he had all thy perfections noted,
The Painter with his Picture straight had doted.
Song. 1.
O Would to God a way were found,
That by some secret sympathy unknown,
My Fair my fancies depth might sound,
And know my state as clearly as her own.
Then blessed, most blessed were I,
No doubt beneath the sky
I were the happiest wight:
For if my state they knew,
It ruthlesse rocks would rue,
And mend me if they might.
But as the babe before the wand,
Whose faultlesse part his parents will not trust,
For very fear does trembling stand,
And quakes to speak although his cause be just:
So set before her face,
Though bent to plead for grace,
I wot not how I fail:
Yet minding to say much,
That string I never touch,
But stand dismayed and pale.
The deepest rivers make least din,
The silent soul does most abound in care:
Then might my breast be read within,
A thousand volumes would be written there.
Might silence show my mind,
Sighs tell how I were pined,
Or looks my woes relate;
Then any pregnant wit,
That well remarked it,
Would soon discern my state.
No favor yet my Fair affoords,
But looking haughty, though with humble eyes,
Does quite confound my staggering words;
And as not spying that thing which she spies.
A mirror makes of me,
Where she her self may see:
And what she brings to pass,
I trembling too for fear,
Move neither eye nor ear,
As if I were her glass.
Whilst in this manner I remain,
Like to the statue of some one that is dead,
Strange tyrants in my bosom reign,
A field of fancies fights within my head:
Yet if the tongue were true,
We boldly might pursue
That Diamantine heart.
But when that it is restraind,
As doomed to be disdaind,
My sighs show how I smart.
No wonder then although I wrack,
By them betrayed in whom I did confide,
Since tongue, heart, eyes and all gave back,
She justly may my childishness deride.
Yet that which I conceal,
May serve for to reveal
My feruencie in love.
My passions were too great,
For words to express my state,
As to my pains I prove.
Often those that do deserve disdain,
For forging fancies get the best reward:
Where I who feel what they do feign,
For too much love am had in no regard.
Behold by proof we see
The gallant living free,
His fancies does extend:
Where he that is overcome,
Rained with respects stands dumb,
Still fearing to offend.
My bashfulnesse when she beholds,
Or rather my affection out of bounds,
Although my face my state unfolds,
And in my hew discouers hidden wounds:
Yet ieasting at my woe,
She doubts if it be so,
As she could not conceive it.
This grieves me most of all,
She triumphs in my fall,
Not seeming to perceive it.
Then since in vain I plaints impart
To scornful ears, in a contemned scroule;
And since my tongue betrays my heart,
And cannot tell the anguish of my soul:
Henceforth I Will hide my losses,
And not recompt the crosses
That do my joys orethrow:
At least to senseless things,
Mounts, vales, woods, floods, and springs,
I shall them only show.
Ah unaffected lines,
True models of my heart,
The world may see, that in you shines
The power of passion more then art.
Son. 4.
ONce to debate my cause whilst I drew near,
My staggering tongue against me did conspire,
And whilst it should have charged, it did retire,
A certain sign of love that was sincere:
I saw her heavenly virtues shine so clear,
That I was forced for to conceal my fire,
And with respects even bridling my desire.
More then my life I held her honor dear,
And though I burned with all the flames of love,
Yet frozen with a reverent kind of fears,
I durst not pour my passions in her ears;
Lest so I might the hope I had remove.
Thus Love marred love, Desire desire restrained;
Of mind to move a world, I dumb remained.
Son. 5.
NO wonder though that this my bliss dismaies,
Whilst rendered up to neuer-pleas'd desires,
I burn, and yet must cover cursed fires,
Whose flame it self against my will bewrayes.
Sometimes my fair to lance my wound assayes,
And with the occasion as it seems conspires,
And indirectly often my state inquires,
Which I would hide whilst it it self betrays.
If that a guilty gesture did disclose
The hideous horrors that my soul contained,
Or wandering words derived from inward woes,
Did tell my state, their treason I disdained:
And I could wish to be but as I am,
If that she knew how I conceal the same.
Sonet 6.
HVge hosts of thoughts imbattled in my breast,
Are ever busied with intestine wars,
And like to Cadmus earth-borne troops at iarres,
Have spoiled my soul of peace, themselves of rest.
Thus forced to reap such seed as I have sown,
I (having interest in this doubtful strife)
Hope much, fear more, doubt most, unhappy life.
What ever side prevail, I Am still orethrowne:
O neither life nor death! o both, but bad
Imparadiz'd, whiles in mine own conceit,
My fancies straight again imbroyle my state,
And in a moment make me glad and sad.
Thus neither yielding quite to this nor that,
I live, I die, I do I wot not what.
Son. 7.
A Flame of love that glaunceth in those eyes,
Where majesty with sweetness mixed remains,
Does pour so sweet a poison in the veins,
That who them viewes straight wounded wondering dies.
But yet who would not look on those clear skies,
And love to perish with so pleasant pains,
While as those lights of love hide beauties train
With iuorie Orbs, where still two stars arise:
When as those crystal Comets whiles appear,
Eye-rauish'd I go gazing on their rays,
Whilst they enriched with many princely prays,
Ore hosts of hearts triumphing still retire:
Those planets when they shine in their own kinds,
Do boast t'orethrow whole monarchies of minds.
Son. 8.
AH what disastrous fortune have I had!
Lo still in league with all that may annoy,
And entered in enimitie with Joy,
I entertain all things that make me sad,
With many miseries almost gone mad:
To purchase pains I all my pains employ,
And use all means my self for to destroy,
The tenor of my star has been so bad.
And though my state a thousand times were worse,
As it is else past bounds of all belief:
Yet all Pandora's plagues could not have force,
To aggrauate the burden of my grief:
The Occasion might move mountains to remorce:
I hate all help, and hope for no relief.
Son. 9.
ALthough that words chained with affection fail,
As that which makes me burst abasht t'vnfold,
Yet Lines (dumb Orators) ye may be bold,
Th'inke will not blush, though paper does look pale,
Ye of my state the secrets did contain,
That then through clouds of dark inventions shined:
Whilst I disclosed, yet not disclosed my mind,
Obscure to others, but to one ore plain.
And yet that one did whiles (as the end may prove)
Not mark, not understand, or else despise,
That (though misterious) language of mine eyes,
Which might have been interpreted by love.
Thus she, what I discovered, yet concealed:
Knows, and not knows; both hid, and both revealed.
Elegy 1.
EVen as the dying Swan almost bereft of breath,
Sounds doleful notes and drearie songs, a presage of her death:
So since my date of life almost expired I find,
My obsequies I sadly sing, as sorrow tunes my mind,
And as the rarest Bird a pile of wood does frame,
Which being fired by Phoebus rays, she falls into the flame:
So by two sunnie eyes I give my fancies fire,
And burn my self with beauties rays, even by mine own desire.
Thus the angry Gods atlength begin for to relent,
And once to end my deathfull life, for pity are content.
For if the infernal powers, the damned souls would pine,
Then let the^ send them to the light, to lead a life like mine.
O if I could recount the crosses and the cares,
That from my cradle to my Bear conduct me with despairs;
Then hungry Tantalus pleased with his lot would stand:
I famish for a sweeter food, which still is rest my hand,
Like Ixions restless wheel my fancies roll about;
And like his guest that stole heavens fires, they tear my bowels out.
I work an endless task and loose my labor still:
Even as the bloody sisters do, that empty as they fill,
As Sisiph's stone returns his guilty ghost t'appall,
I ever raise my hopes so high, they bruise me with their fall.
And if I could in sum my several griefs relate,
All would forget their proper harms, and only wail my state.
So grievous is my pain, so painful is my grief,
That death which does the world affright, would yield to me relief.
I have mishaps so long, as in a habit had,
I think I look not like my self, but when that I am sad.
As birds fly but in the air, fishes in seas do diue,
So sorrow is as th'Element by which I only live:
Yet this may be admired as more then strange in me,
Although in all my Horoscope not one clear point I see.
Against my knowledge, yet I many a time rebel,
And seek to gather grounds of hope, a heaven amidst a hell.
O poison of the mind, that do the wits bereave:
And shrouded with a cloak of love do all the world deceive.
Thou art the rock on which my comforts ship did dash,
It Is thou that daily in my wounds thy hooked heads do wash.
Blind Tyrant it is thou by whom my hopes lie dead:
That whiles throws forth a dart of gold, and whiles a lump of lead.
Thus often thou woundest two, but in two diffrent states,
Which through a strange antipathy, the one loves, and the other hates.
O but I err I grant, I should not thee vpbraid,
It Is I to passions tyrrannie that have my self betrayed:
And yet this cannot be, my judgments aims amiss:
Ah dear Aurora it is thou that ruined have my bliss:
A fault that by thy sex may partly be excused,
Which still does loath what proferd is, affects what is refused.
Whilst my distracted thoughts I strived for to control,
And with feigned gestures did disguise the anguish of my soul,
Then with inuiting looks and accents stamped with love,
The mask that was upon my mind thou labordst to remove.
And when that once ensnared thou in those nets me spide,
Thy smiles were shadowd with disdaines, thy beauties clothd with pride.
To reattaine thy grace I wot not how to go:
Shall I once fold before thy feet, to plead for favor so?
No, no, I Will proudly go my wrath for to assuage,
And liberally at last enlarge the raines unto my rage.
I Will tell what we were once, our chaste (yet fervent) loves,
Whilst in effect thou seemed t'affect that which thou did disprove.
Whilst once t'engraue thy name upon a rock I sat,
Thou vowed to write mine in a mind, more firm by far then that:
The marble stone once stamped retains that name of thine:
But ah, thy more then marble mind, it did not so with mine:
So that which thral'd me first, shall set me free again;
Those flames to which thy love gave life, shall die with thy disdain.
But ah, where am I now, how is my judgment lost!
I speak as it were in my power, like one that is free to bost:
Have I not sold my self to be thy beauties slave?
And when thou take all hope from me, thou take but what thou gave.
That former love of thine, did so possess my mind,
That for to harbor other thoughts, no room remains behind.
And the only means by which I mind t'auenge this wrong,
It is, by making of thy praise the burden of my song.
Then why should thou such spite for my goodwill return?
Was ever god as yet so mad to make his temple burn?
My breast the temple was, whence incense thou received,
And yet thou set'st the same a fire, which others would have saved.
But why should I accuse Aurora in this wise?
She is as faultlesse as she is fair, as innocent as wise.
It Is but through my mis-lucke, if any fault there be:
For she who was of nature mild, was cruel made by me.
And since my fortune is, in woe to be bewrapt,
I Will honor her as often before, and hate mine own mishap.
Her rigorous course shall serve loyal part to prove,
And as a touchstone for to try the virtue of my love.
Which when her beauty fades, shall be as clear as now,
My constancy it shall be known, when wrinkled is her brow:
So that such two again, shall in no age be found,
She for her face, I for my faith, both worthy to be crowned.
Madrig. 1.
WHen in her face mine eyes I fix,
A fearful boldness takes my mind,
Sweet honey love with gall does mix,
And is unkindly kind:
It seems to breed,
And is indeed
A special pleasure to be pined.
No danger then I dread:
For though I went a thousand times to Stix,
I know she can revive me with her eye;
As many looks, as many lives to me:
And yet had I a thousand hearts,
As many looks as many darts,
Might make them all to die.
Sestin. 1.
HArd is my fortune, stormy is my state,
And as inconstant as the wauing sea,
Whose course does still depend upon the winds:
For lo, my life in danger every hour,
And though even at the point for to be lost,
Can find no comfort but a flying show.
And yet I take such pleasure in this show,
That still I stand contented with my state,
Although that others think me to be lost:
And whilst I swim amidst a dangerous sea,
Twixt fear and hope, and looking for the hour,
When my last breath should glide amongst the winds.
Lo to the seaman beaten with the winds,
Sometimes the heavens a smiling face will show,
So that to rest himself he finds some hour.
But naught (ay me) can ever calm my state,
Who with my tears as I would make a sea,
Am flying Silla in Charibdis lost.
The Pilote that was likely to be lost,
When he has escaped the furour of the winds,
Does straight forget the dangers of the sea.
But I unhappy I, can never show,
No kind of token of a quiet state,
And am tormented still from hour to hour.
O shall I never see that happy hour,
When I (whose hopes once utterly were lost)
May find a means to re-erect my state,
And leave for to breath forth such dolorous winds,
Whilst I my self in constancy do show
A rock against the waves amidst the sea.
As many waters make in end a sea,
As many minutes make in end an hour:
And still what went before the effect does show:
So all the labors that I long have lost,
As one that was but wrestling with the winds,
May once in end concur to bless my state.
And once my storme-stead state saved from the sea,
In spite of adverse winds, may in one hour
Pay all my labors lost, at least in show.
Song 2.
Whilst I by wailing sought
To Have in some sort asswag'd my grief,
I found that rage gave no relief,
And carfulness did but increase my fears:
Then now I Will mourn for naught,
But in my secret thought,
Will thesaurize all my mischief.
For long experienced woe well witness bears,
That tears cannot quench sighs, nor sighs dry tears.
To calm a stormy brow,
The world does know how I did smart,
Yet could not move that marble heart,
Which was too much to cruelty inclined:
But to her rigor now,
I lift my hands and bow,
And in her grace will claim no part:
I take great pains of purpose to be pined,
And only mourn to satisfy my mind.
How I my days have spent,
The heavens above no doubt they know;
The world has likewise seen below,
Whilst with my sighs I poisoned all the air:
Those streams which I augment,
Those woods where I lament,
I think my state could clearly show:
By those the same rests registered as rare,
That such like monstrous things used to declare.
The trees where I did bide,
Seemed for to chide my froward fate:
Then whisling wail'd my wretched state,
And bowing whiles to hear my woeful song:
They spread their branches wide,
Of purpose me to hide:
Then of their leaves did make my seat:
And if they reason had as they are strong,
No doubt but they would join t'auenge my wrong.
The beasts in every glen,
Which first to kill me had ordained,
Were by my privilege restrained,
Who indenized was within those bounds:
I harbor'd in a den,
I fled the sight of men,
No sign of reason I retained.
The beasts they fly not when the hunter sounds,
As I at mine own thoughts when Cupid hounds.
This moves me, my distress
And sorrows sometime to conceal,
Lest that the torments which I feel,
Might likewise my concitizens annoy.
And partly I confess,
Because the means grow less
By which I should such harms reveal:
Which I protest, does but preiudge my joy,
That still do strive my self for to destroy.
All comfort I despite,
And willingly with woe comport,
My passions do appear a sport;
I take a special pleasure to complain:
All things that move delight,
I with disdain acquit.
Small ease seems much, long travels short,
A world of pleasure is not worth my pain,
I will not change my loss with others gain.
Here robbed of all repose,
Not interrupted by repair,
My fancies freely I declare:
And counting all my crosses one by one,
I daily do disclose
To woods and vales my woes.
And as I saw Aurora there,
I think to her that I my state bemone,
When in effect it is but to a stone.
This my most monstrous ill,
Compassion moves in every thing:
When as I shout the forests ring;
When I begin to groan, the beasts they bray:
The trees they tears distill,
The rivers all stand still,
The birds my Tragedy they sing;
The woeful Echo waits upon my way,
Prompt to resound my accents when I stay.
When wearied I remain,
That sighs, tears, voice, and all do fail,
Discolored, bloudlesse, and grown pale,
Upon the earth my body I distend:
And then overcome with pain,
I agonize again:
And passions do so far prevail,
That though I want the means my woes to spend,
A mournful meaning never has an end.
My child in deserts borne,
For griefe-tun'd ears thy accents frame,
And tell to those thy plaints that scorn,
Thou plead'st for pity, not for fame.
Son. 10.
I Swear Aurora, by thy starrie eyes,
And by those golden locks whose lock none slips,
And by the Coral of thy rosy lips,
And by the naked snowes which beauty dies,
I swear by all the jewels of thy mind,
Whose like yet never worldly treasure bought,
Thy solid judgment and thy generous thought,
Which in this darkened age have clearly shined:
I swear by those, and by my spotless love,
And by my secret, yet most fervent fires,
That I have never nurc'd but chaste desires,
And such as modesty might well approve.
Then since I love those virtuous parts in thee,
Should thou not love this virtuous mind in me*
Son. 11.
AH that it was my fortune to be borne,
Now in the time of this degener'd age,
When some, in whom impiety does rage,
Do all the rest discredit whilst they scorn.
And this is grown to such a custom now,
That those are thought to have the brauest spirits,
Who can feign fancies and imagine merits:
As who but for their lusts of love allow.
And yet in this I had good hap, I find,
That chanced to chain my thoughts to such an one,
Whose judgment is so clear, that she anon
Can by the outward gestures judge the mind.
Yet wit and fortune rarely wait on one,
She knows the best, yet can make choice of none.
Son. 12.
SWeet blushing goddess of the golden morning,
Fair patroness of all the worlds affairs,
Thou art become so careless of my cares,
That I must name thee goddess of my mourning.
Lo how the Sun part of thy burden bears,
And whilst thou do in pearly drops regrate,
As it were to pity thy distressed state,
Exhales the Crystal of thy glistring tears;
But I pour forth my vows before thy shrine,
And whilst thou do my loving zeal despise,
Do drown my heart in the ocean of mine eyes;
Yet daign'st thou not to dry these tears of mine,
Unless it be with the Aetna of desires,
Which even amidst those floods does foster fires.
Son. 13.
LO how that Time does still disturb my peace,
And has his course to my confusion bent;
For when The Occasion kindly gives consent,
That I should feed upon Auroraes face:
Then mounted on the chariot of the Sun,
That tyrant Time does post so fast away,
That whilst I but advise what I should say,
I Am forced to end ere I have well begun:
And then again it does so slowly fly,
Whilst I leave her whom I hold only dear,
Each minute makes an hour, each hour a year,
Years lusters seem, one luster ten to me.
Thus changing course to change my state I know,
In presence time proves swift, in absence slow.
Son. 14.
WHen first I viewed that ey-enchanting face,
Which for the world chief treasure was esteemed,
I judging simply all things as they seemed,
Thought humble looks had promised pity place;
Yet were they but ambushments, to deceive
My ouer-rash heart that feared no secret fires:
Thy bashfulnesse emboldned my desires,
Which seemed to offer what I was to crave.
Can cruelty then borrow beauties shape?
And pride so deck it self with modest looks?
Too pleasant baits to hide such poisoned hooks,
Whose unsuspected slight none can escape.
Who can escape this more then devilish art,
When golden hairs disguise a brazen heart?
Son. 15.
STay blubring pen to spot one that is so pure;
She is my love, although she be unkind,
I must admire that diamantine mind,
And praise those eyes that do my death procure:
Nor will I willingly those thoughts endure,
That are to such apostasy inclined.
Shall she, even she in whom all virtue shined,
Be wronged by me? shall I her worth iniure?
No, rather let me die, and die disdained,
Long ere I think, much less I speak the thing,
That may disgrace unto her beauty bring,
Who ore my fancies has so sweetly reigned.
If any pitying me will damn her part,
I Will make th'amends, and for her error smart.
Son. 16.
Love so engaged my fancies to that fair,
That whilst I live I shall advance her name,
And imping stately feathers in her fame,
May make it glide more glorious through the air:
So she in beauties right shall have her share,
And I who strive her praises to proclaim,
Encouraged with so excellent a theme,
May rest inrold amongst those that were rare.
O if my wit were equal with her worth!
The Antipodes all ravished by report,
From regions most removed should here resort,
To gaze upon the face which I set forth:
Or were my wit but equal with my will,
I with her praise both Titans bow^^s should fill.
Son. 17.
I Saw six gallant Nymphs, I saw but one,
One stained them all, one did them only grace;
And with the shining of her beauteous face,
Gave to the world new light when it had none.
Then when the god that guides the light was gone,
And ore the hills directed had his race,
A brighter far then he supplide his place,
And lightened our horizon here anon.
The rest pale Moons were bettered by this Sun,
They borrowed beams from her star-staining eyes:
Still when she sets her lights, their shining dies,
And at their opening is again begun:
Phoebus all day I would be bard thy light,
For to be shined on by this Sun at night.
Son. 18.
Praiseworthy part where praises praise is placed,
As th'Oracle of The Earth believed below.
I Will to the world thy beauties wonders show,
O unstained Rose, with Lillies interlac'd:
But what a labor has my Muse embraced?
Shall I commend the coral, or the snow,
Which such a sweet embalmed breath did blow,
That th'orientall odours are disgraced?
Mouth moistened with celestial Nectar still,
Whose music often my famished ears has fed,
With softened sounds in sugared speeches spread,
Whilst pearls and rubies did unfold thy will.
I wish that thy last kiss might stop my breath,
Then I would think I died a happy death.
Son. 19.
LEt some bewitched with a deceitful show,
Love earthly things unworthily esteemed;
And losing that which cannot be redeemed,
Pay back with pain according as they ow:
But I disdain to cast mine eyes so low,
That for my thoughts over base a subject seemed,
Which still the vulgar course too beaten deemed;
And loftier things delighted for to know,
Though presently this plague me but with pain,
And vex the world with wondering at my woes:
Yet having gained that long desired repose,
My mirth may more miraculous remain.
That for the which long languishing I pine,
It is a show, but yet a show divine.
Song 3.
WHen as my fancies first began to fly,
Which youth had but englar'd of late,
Enamored of mine own conceit,
I sported with my thoughts that then were free;
And never thought to see
No such mishap at all,
As might have made them thrall.
When lo, even then my fate
Was laboring to orethrow my prosperous state:
For Cupid did conspire my fall,
And with my honey mixed his gall,
Long ere I thought that such a thing could be.
Love after many stratagems were tried,
His grief to his mother did impart,
And praid her to find out some art,
By which he might have means t'abate my pride.
And she by chance espide
Where beauties beauty straid,
Like whom straight ways arraid,
She took a powerful dart,
Which had the force t'nflame an icie heart:
And when she had this slight assaid,
The time no longer she delaid,
But made an arrow through my bowels glide.
Then when I had received the deadly wound,
And that the goddess fled my sight,
Inueigled with her beauties light:
First having followed ore the stable ground,
Unto the deep profound,
My course I next did hold,
In hope the truth t'vnfold.
If Thetis by her might,
Or some sea-nimph had used the fatal slight:
In th'Hauen I did a bark behold,
With sails of silk, and oars of gold,
Which being richly decked, did seem most sound,
In this embarked when from the port I past,
Fair gales at first my sails did greet,
And all seemed for the voyage meet;
But yet I sailed not long, when lo a blast
Did quite oreturne my mast;
Which being once thrown down,
Still looking for to drown,
And stricken off my feet,
Betwixt two rocks I did with danger fleet:
Whilst seas their waves with clouds did crown,
Yet with much toil I got a town,
Whereas I saw her whom I sought at last.
What were my joys then scarcely can be thought;
When in distress she did me spy,
My mind with fortunes best to try,
She to a chamber made of pearl me brought,
Where whilst I proudly sought,
In state with Jove to strive;
A flame which did arrive
In twinkling of an eye,
The chamber burned, and left me like to die:
For after that, how could I live,
That in the depth of woes did diue,
To see my glory to confusion brought?
But with prosperity yet once again,
(To try what was within my mind)
She on my back two wings did bind,
Like to Jove's birds, and I who did disdain
On the earth for to remain,
Since I might soar ore all,
Did th'airie sprites appall,
Till through fierce flying blind,
I was encountered with a mighty wind,
With which through the air tossed like a ball,
Even as a star from heaven does fall,
I glided to the ground almost quite slain.
Then (as it seemed) grown kinder then before,
This Lady for to cure my wounds,
Did seek ore all the nearest bounds,
To try what might my wonted state restore,
And still her care grew more;
Of flowers she made my bed,
With Nectar I was fed,
And with most surged sounds,
Often luld asleep betwixt two yuorie rounds,
Whose dainty turrets all were cled
With Lillies white, and Roses red,
The leaves of which could only ease my sore.
When I was cured of every thing save care,
She whom I name (without a name)
Did lead me forth t'a mighty frame,
A curious building that was wondrous fair,
A labyrinth most rare,
All made of precious stones:
That which in Candie once
Did hide Pasiphaes shame,
Was not so large, though more enlarged by fame:
There whilst none listened to their mones,
A world of men shed weighty groans,
That tortured were with th'engines of despair.
As Forth at Sterling, glides at it were in doubt,
What way she should direct her course;
If to the sea, or to the source,
And sporting with her self, her self does flout:
So wandered I about
In th'intricated way,
Where whilst I did still stray,
With an abrupt discourse,
And with a courtesy, I must say course,
My beauteous guide fled quite away,
And would not do so much as stay,
To lend me first a thread to lead me out:
Through many a corner whilst I staggring went,
Which in the dark I did embrace,
A nymph like the other in the face,
But whose affections were more mildly bent,
Spying my breath near spent,
Played Ariadnes part,
And led me by the heart
Out of the guilefull place.
And like th'vngratefull Theseus in this case,
I made not my deliverer smart:
Thus often afraid my panting heart,
Can yet scarce trust to have escaped some bad event.
If any muse misterious song,
At those strange things that thou have shown,
And wot not what to deem;
Tell that they do me wrong,
I am my self, what ere I seem,
And must go masked, that I may not be known.
Son. 20.
Unhappy ghost go wail thy grief below,
Where never soul but endless horror sees,
Dismaske thy mind amongst the myrtle trees,
Which here I see thou art ashamed to show;
This breast that such a fiery breath does blow,
Must have of force some flood those flames to freeze.
And o that drowsy Lethe best agrees,
To quench these evils that come, because I know
Since she whom I have harbored in my heart,
Will grant me now no portion of her mind,
I die content, because she lives unkind,
And suffers one whom once she graced to smart:
But I lament that I have lived so long,
Lest blaming her, I ere I die do wrong.
Son. 21.
IN this cursed breast, borne only to be pined,
Some fury has such fantasies infused,
That I though with her cruelties well used,
Can daigne my self to serve one so inclind.
Such hellish horrors toss my restless mind,
That with beguiling hopes vainly abused,
It yet affects that which the Fates refused,
And dare presume to plead for that unkind:
Then traitorous thoughts, that have seduced my sense,
Whose vain inventions I have often times wail'd,
I banish you the bounds, whereas ye failed
To live from hence, exiled for your offense.
But what auailes all this, though I would leave them,
If that the heart they hurt again receive them?
Son. 22.
WHilst nothing could my fancies course control,
To Have matchless beauties matched with matchles love,
And from thy mind all rigor to remove,
I sacrificed the affections of my soul:
And Hercules had never greater pains,
With dangerous toiles his step-dames wrath t'asswage,
Then I, while as I did my thoughts engage,
With my deserts t'oreballance thy disdaines:
Yet all my merits could not move thy mind,
But furnished trophies for t'adorne thy pride,
That in the furnace of those troubles tried
The temper of my love, whose flame I find
Fined and refined too often, but faintles flashes,
And must within short time fall down in ashes.
Son. 23.
Erst stately Juno in agreat disdain,
Her beauty by ones judgment but injured,
T'auenge on a whole nation often procured,
And for ones fault saw many thousands slain:
But she whom I would to the world prefer,
Although I spend my sp'rit to praise her name,
She in a rage, as if I sought her shame,
Thirsts for my blood, and says I wrong her far.
Thus ruthlesse tyrants that are bent to kill,
Of all occasions procreate a cause:
How can she hate me now (this makes me pause)
When yet I cannot but commend her still?
For this her fault comes of a modest mind,
Where fond ambition made the goddess blind.
Sonet 24.
A Country Swain while as he lay at rest,
Near dead for cold a serpent did perceive,
And through preposterous pity straight would save
That vipers life, whose death had been his best:
For being by his bosoms heat revived,
O vile ingratitude! a monstrous thing,
Not thinking how he strengthened had her sting,
She killed the courteous Clown by whom she lived.
I in this manner harbored in my heart
A speechless picture, destitute of force,
And lo attracted with a vain remorce,
I gave it life, and fostred it with art;
But like that poisnous viper being strong,
She burned the breast where she had lodged so long.
Son. 25.
Clear moving cristall, pure as the Sun beams,
Which had the honor for to be the glass,
Of the most dainty beauty ever was;
And with her shadow did enrich thy streams,
Thy treasures now cannot be bought for money,
Whilst she drank thee, thou drank'st thy fill of love,
And of those roses did the sweetness prove,
From which the Bees of love do gather honey:
Th'ambrosian liquor that he fills above,
Whom The Eagle ravished from th'inferior round,
It is not like this Nectar (though renowned)
Which thou did taste, whilst she her lips did move:
But yet beware lest burning with desires,
That all thy waters cannot quench thy fires.
Son. 26.
I Will give thee leave my love, in beauties field
To rear red colors whiles, and bend thine eyes;
Those that are bashful still, I quite despise
Such simple souls are too soon moved to yield:
Let majesty armed in thy countenance sit,
As that which will no injury receive;
And I Will not hate thee, whiles although thou have
A spark of pride, so it be ruled by wit.
This is to chastity a powerful guard,
Whilst haughty thoughts all servile things eschew,
That spark has power the passions to subdue,
And would of glory challenge a reward:
But do not fall in love with thine own self;
Narcissus erst was lost on such a shelfe.
Son. 27.
THe thoughts of those I cannot but disprove,
Who basely lost their thraldom must bemone:
I scorn to yield my self to such a one,
Whose birth and virtue is not worth my love.
No, since it is my fortune to be thrall,
I must be fettred with a golden band;
And if I die, i will die by Hectors hand:
So may the victors fame excuse my fall;
And if by any means I must be blind,
Then it shall be by gazing on the Sun;
Often by those means the greatest have been won,
Who must like best of such a generous mind:
At least by this I have allowed of fame,
Much honor if I win, if lose, no shame.
Son. 28.
THen whilst that Lathmos did contain her bliss,
Chaste Phoebe left her Church so much admired,
And when her brother from that bounds retired,
Would of the sleepie shepherd steal a kiss,
But to no greater grace I crave to clime,
Then of my goddess whiles whilst she reposes,
That I might kiss the stil-selfekissing roses,
And steal of her that which was stolen of him;
And though I know that this would only prove,
A maimed delight, whereof the one half would want,
Yet whilst the light did Morpheus power supplant:
If that my theft did her displeasure move,
I render would all that I robbed again,
And for each kiss I take would give her twain.
Son. 29.
I Envy not Endimion now no more,
Nor all the happiness his sleep did yield,
While as Diana straying through the field,
Sucked from his sleep-seal'd lips balm for her sore:
Whilst I embraced the shadow of my death,
I dreaming did far greater pleasure prove,
And quaff'd with Cupid sugared draughts of love,
Then Ioue-like feeding on a Nectar'd breath:
Now judge which of us two might be most proud;
He got a kiss yet not enjoyed it right,
And I got none, yet tasted that delight
Which Venus on Adonis once bestowed:
He only got the body of a kiss,
And I the soul of it, which he did miss.
Son. 30.
ASpiring Sprite, fly low, yet fly despair,
Thy haughty thoughts the heavenly powers despise.
Thus balanced lo betwixt the earth and the air,
I wot not whether for to fall or rise;
Through desperate dangers whiles I scale the skies,
As if that naught my courage could restrain,
When lo, anon down in the Center lies
That restless mind, which th'heau'ns did once contain;
I toil for that which I cannot attain:
Yet fortune naught but fickleness affoords:
Where I have been, I hope to be again;
She once must change, her common course records.
Although my hap be hard, my heart is hie,
And it must mount, or else my body die.
Elegy 2.
LEt not the world believe th'accusing of my fate
Tends to allure it to condole with me my tragic state:
Nor that I have sent forth these stormy tears of rage,
So by disburd'ning of my breast, my sorrows to assuage.
No, no, that serves for naught, I crave no such relief,
Nor will I yield that any should be partners of my grief.
My fantasy to feed I only spend those tears:
My plaints please me, no music sounds so sweetly in my ears,
I wish that from my birth I had acquainted been
Still with mishaps, and never had but woes and horrors seen:
Then ignorant of Joys, lamenting as I do,
As thinking all men did the like, I might content me too.
But ah, my fate was worse: for it (as in a glass)
Sh^w'd me through little blinkes of bliss, the stare wherein I was.
Which unperfected joys, scarce constant for an hour,
Were like but to a watrie Sun, that shines before a shoure.
For if I ever thought or rather dreamed of Joys,
That little lightning but foreshew'd a thunder of annoyes:
It was but like the fruit that Tantalus torments,
Which while he sees and naught attains, his hunger but augme^ts.
For so the shadow of that but imagined mirth,
Called all the crosses to record, I suffered since my birth,
Which are to be bewailed, but hard to be redrest:
Whose strange effects may well be felt, but cannot be expressed.
Judge what the feeling was, when thinking on things past,
I tremble at the torment yet, and stand a time aghast.
Yet do I not repent, but will with patience pine:
For though I mourn, I murmr not, like men that do repine.
I grant I wail my lot, yet I approve her will;
What my souls oracle thinks good, I never shall think ill.
If I had only sought a salve to ease my pains,
Long since I had bewailed my lot along the Elysian plains:
Yet mind I not in this selfe-louer-like to die,
As one that cared not for her loss, so I my self were free.
No, may ten nights annoyes make her one night secure,
A day of dolors unto her a moments mirth procure:
Or may a years laments rejoice her half an hour,
May seven years sorrows make her glad, I shall not think the^ sour,
And if she do delight to hear of my disease,
Then o blessed I, who so may have the occasion her to please:
For now the cause I live, is not for love of life,
But only for to honor her that holds me in this strife.
And ere those vows I make do vnperform'd escape,
This world shall once again renuerst resume her shapelesse shape.
But what? what have I vowed, my passions were too strong,
As if the mildest of the world delighted to do wrong:
As she whom I adore with so deuote a mind,
Could rest content to see me starve, be glad to see me pined.
No, no, she wailes my state, and would appease my cares,
Yet interdited to the fates, conformes her will to theirs.
Then o unhappy man, whom even thy Saint would save,
And yet thy cruel destiny does damn thee to the grave.
This sentence then may serve for to confound my fears,
Why burst I not my breast with sighs, and drown mine eyes with tears?
Ah, I have mourned so much, that I may mourn no more,
My miseries pass numbering now, plaints perish in their store.
The means t'vnlode my breast does quite begin to fail;
For being drunk with too much dole, I wot not how to wail.
And since I want a way my anguish to reveal,
Of force contented with my Fate, I Will suffer and conceal.
And for to use the world, even as my love used me.
I Will use a countenance like to one, whose mind from grief were free.
For when she did disdain, she showed a smiling face,
Even then when she denounced my death, she seemed to promise grace.
So shall I feeme in show my thoughts for to repose,
Yet in the center of my soul shall shroud a world of woes:
Then woeful breast and eyes your restless course control,
And with no outward signs betray the anguish of my soul.
Eyes rain your shoures within, arrowze the Earth no more,
Pass drown with a deluge of tears the breast ye burnt before:
Breast arm your self with sighs, if ore weak to defend,
Then perish by your proper fires, and make an honest end.
Song 4.
O Bitter time that do begin the year,
And do begin each bitter thing to breed!
O season sour, that season'st so with gall
Each kind of thing, in thee that life does take;
Yet cloak'st thy sowrenesse with a sweet-like hew,
And for my share do make me still to pine,
As one that is robbed of rest.
Now when through all the earth the basest brire,
In sign of joy is clothed with Summers weed,
Even now when as hills, herbs, woods, vales and all,
Begin to spring, and off the old ruins shake,
Thou but begin'st mine anguish to renew;
O rigor rare, to banish me from mine,
When birds do build their nest.
By these thy fierce effects it may appear,
That with the Bull the Sun soiournes indeed.
What savage Bull disbanded from his stall,
Of wrath a sign more inhumane could make?
Ore all the Earth thou powr'st down pleasant dew:
But with despair do all my hopes confine,
With tears to bath my breast.
Now when the time to increase is drawing near,
Thou in my breast of sorrow sow'st the seed,
And those old griefs thou go for to recall,
That fading hing and would the stalk forsake.
Thus how can I some huge mishap eschew,
Who killed with care, all comfort must resign,
And yield to th'amorous pest?
The heaven of my estate grows never clear,
I many torments feel, yet worse do dread:
Mishaps have me inuiron'd with a wall,
And my heart sting with pains that never slake:
Yet to the end I Will to my Dear be true;
So this sharp air my constancy shall fine,
Which may come for the best.
I Will write my woes upon this Pine Tree here,
That passengers such rarities may read,
Who when they think of this my wretched fall,
With sighs may sing those evils that make me quake,
And for compassion wail, while as they view,
How that I there with such a savage line,
A tyrants Trophies dressed.
This time desired of all I Will to hold dear,
And as that all things now to flourish speed:
So moving on this sea-inuiron'd ball,
Forth tears to bring mine eyes shall ever wake:
And whilst even senseless things my sorrows rue,
I shall not spare no part of my ingine,
My self for to molest.
The sourest herbs shall be my sweetest cheer,
Since to prolong my pains I only feed;
Some dungeon dark shall serve me for a hall,
And like a king I shall companions lake.
Though never Envy do my state pursue,
Of wormwood bare I mind to make my wine,
Thus shall I be distressed.
For since my Fair does not upon me rue,
My hopes set in the west.
Son. 31.
MY fairest Fair advise thee with thy heart,
And tell in time if that thou think to love me,
Lest that I perish whilst thou think to prove me,
And so thou want the means to act thy part:
For I account my self so done accursed,
That from despaires refuge I scarce refrain.
The daintiest colors do the soonest stain,
And the most noble minds do soonest burst.
Why should thou thus thy rarest treasure venture?
Lo, all the weighty thoughts, the burd'nous cares,
And every horror that the health impaires,
Draw to the heart, as to the bodies Center:
And it ore-ballanc'd with so great a weight,
Does boast to yield unto the burden straight.
Son. 32.
THe turret of my hope which never falls,
Did at the first all Cupids power despise:
But it t'orethrow while as thou armed thine eyes;
Thy looks were Canons, thy disdaines their balls:
I brau'd thy beauties in a gallant sort,
And did resist all thy assaults a time:
But ah, I find in end, (my wrack thy crime)
That treason enters in the strongest fort.
Thou seeing thou wast like to lose the field,
Unto my thoughts some favor did impart,
Which like bribed Orators informed the heart,
The victor would prove kind, if I could yield:
And o, what can this grace thy beauties strains?
It Is no true victory that treason gains.
Son. 33.
O If thou knew'st how thou thy self do harm,
And do preiudge thy bliss, and spoil my rest:
Then thou would melt the ice out of thy breast,
And thy relenting heart would kindly warm.
O if thy pride did not our joys control,
What world of loving wonders should thou see!
For if I saw thee once transformed in me,
Then in thy bosom I would pour my soul,
Then all thy thoughts should in my visage shine.
And if that ought mischanc'd thou should not moan,
Nor bear the burden of thy griefs alone;
No, I would have my share in what were thine.
And whilst we thus should make our sorrows one,
This happy harmony would make them none.
Son. 34.
WHat uncouth motion makes my mirth decay?
Is this the thing poor martyred men call Love?
And whilst their torment does their wits dismay,
As those that rave, do for a god approve?
Although he bring his greatness from above,
And rule the world according to his will,
Yet does he even from those all rest remove,
That were devoted to his deity still.
Can that which is the original of ill,
From which does flow an Ocean of mischief,
Whose poysnous waves does many thousands kill
Can that be love? no, it is the source of grief.
And all those err that hold this vain conceit;
Then I err too, one in this same estate.
Sestin. 2.
WHile as the day delivers us his light,
I wander through the solitary fields,
And when the evening has obscured the earth,
And has with silence lulled the world asleep:
Then rage I like a madman in my bed,
Which being fired with sighs, I quench with tears.
But ere Aurora rise to spend her tears,
Still languishing again to see the light,
As the enemy of my rest, I fly my bed,
And take me to the most deserted fields:
There is no soul save I but gets some sleep,
Though one would seek through all the peopled earth.
Whiles the Aetna of my fires affrights the earth,
And whiles it dreads, I drown it with my tears:
And it is suspicious-like, I neither sleep,
When Phoebus gives nor gathers in his light:
So many piles of grass not cloth the fields,
As I devise designs within my bed.
Unto the time I find a frostie bed,
Dug within the bowels of the earth,
Mine eyes salt floods shall still oreflow the fields:
I look not for an abstinence from tears,
Till first I be secluded from the light,
And end my torments with an endless sleep.
For now when I am purposed to sleep,
A thousand thoughts assail me in my bed,
That often I do despair to see the light:
O would to God I were dissolved in earth;
Then would the savage beasts bemone with tears,
Their neighbors death through all th'vnpeopled fields.
Whilst ravished whiles I walk along the fields,
The lookers on lament, I lose my sleep:
But of the Crocadiles those be the tears,
So to persuade me for to go to sleep;
As being sure, when once I leave the light,
To render me the greatest wretch on the earth.
O happiest I in the earth, if in the fields,
I might still see the light and never sleep,
Drinking salt tears, and making stones my bed.
Son. 35.
WHen I behold that face for which I pined,
And did my self so long in vain annoy,
My tongue not able to unfold my joy,
A wondering silence only shows my mind:
But when again thou do extend thy rigor,
And wilt not daigne to grace me with thy sight,
Thou kil'st my comfort, and so spoil'st my might,
That scarce my corpse retains the vital vigor.
Thy presence thus a great contentment brings,
And is my souls inestimable treasure:
But o, I drown in The Ocean of displeasure,
When I in absence think upon those things.
Thus would to God that I had seen thee never,
Or would to God that I might see thee ever.
Sonet 36.
LOyr, witness thou what was my spotless part,
Whilst thou amazed to see thy Nymphs so fair,
As loath to part thence where they did repair,
Still murmuring did thy plaints t'each stone impart:
Then did mine eyes betake them to my heart,
As scorning to behold all those, though rare,
And gazed upon her beauties image there,
Whose eyes have furnished Cupid many a dart:
And as devoted only unto her,
They did disdain for to bestow their light,
For to be entertained with any sight,
Save only that which made them first to err.
Then famous river through the Ocean glide,
And tell my love how constant I abide.
Son. 37.
I Cannot comprehend how this does come,
Thou whose affections never yet were warm,
Which cold disdain with leaden thoughts does arm:
Though in thy self still cold, yet burn'st thou some.
Even as the Sun (as th'Astrologian dreams)
In th'airie region where it self does move,
Is never hot, yet darting from above,
Does parch all things that repercusse his beams:
So thou that in thy self from fires art free,
Who eye's indifferent still, as Titans stays,
Whilst I am th'obiect that reflect thy rays:
That which thou never had, thou workst in me.
Since but below thou show that power of thine,
I would the Zodiac be whence thou do shine.
Son. 38.
MY tears might all the parched sands have drenched,
Though Phaeton had undone the liquide frame:
I Will furnish Vulcans furnace with a flame,
That like the Vestals fire was never quenched.
And though the infected air turmoil'd remain,
It by my sighs and cries may be refined:
And if the body answer to the mind,
If no earth were, mine might make the earth again:
Though all the savage flocks lay dead in heaps,
With which the Arabian deserts are best stored,
My breast might many a fiercer beast afford,
If like themselves all clothed with monstrous shapes:
And thus within my self I create so,
A world with all the Elements of woe.
Son. 39.
MVst I attend an unrelenting will,
Which never any sign of favor show?
Ah, why should thou Aurora thus pursue
An innocent, that never did thee ill?
I did not with the Greek conspire to kill
Thy son, for whom thou shed'st such floods of dew:
But I as one that yet his destine rue,
For to condole with thee, huge tears distill;
And like the loving birds that came each year,
Upon his tomb to offer up their blood:
So shall I too power forth a skarlet flood,
And sacrifize a heart that holds thee dear:
That since my life to make thee love lackes force,
At least my death may move thee to remorce.
Son. 40.
THy cruelties (fierce Fair) may be excused:
For it was I that gave thy beauty power,
And taught thee when to smile, and when to lowre,
Which thou have since still to my ruin used:
As he that others purposed was to pine,
And for his brazen bull a guerdon claimed,
Was tortured first with that which he had framed,
And made the experience of his cursed engine:
So in this manner do thou me torment,
Who told thee first the force of thy disdaines:
But ah, I suffer many greater pains,
Then the Sicilian tyrants could invent:
And yet this grieves me most that thou disgraced,
Art in the rank with such like tyrants placed.
Son. 41.
IF that so many brave men leaving Greece,
Durst erst aduenter through the raging depth,
And all to get the spoils of a poor sheep,
That had been famous for his golden fleece.
O then for that pure gold what should be sought,
Of which each hair is worth a thousand such!
No doubt for it one cannot do too much.
Why should not precious things be dearly bought?
And so they are, for in the Colchik guise,
This treasure many a danger does defend:
Of which, when I have brought some one to end,
Straight out of that a number does arise:
Even as the Dragons teeth bred men at arms,
Which (ah) t'orethrow, I want Medeas charms.
Son. 42.
Often with that mirror would I change my shape,
From which my Fair asks counsel every day,
How she th'vntainted beauties should array,
To the end their fierce assaults no soul may escape.
Then in my bosom I behoou'd t'imbrace
That which I love, and whilst on me she gazed,
In her sweet eyes I many a time amazed,
Would woo my self, and borrow thence a grace.
But ah, I seek that which I have, and more,
She but too often in me her picture spies,
And I but gaze too often on those fair eyes,
Whence I the humor draw that makes mine sore.
Well may my love come glass her self in me,
In whom all what she is, the world may see.
Son. 43.
NOw when the Siren sings, as one dismayed,
I straight with wax begin to stop mine ears;
And when the Crocadile does shed forth tears,
I fly away, for fear to be betrayed.
I know when as thou seem to wail my state,
Thy face is no true table of thy mind:
And thou would never show thy self so kind,
Were not thy thoughts are hatching some deceit:
Whilst with vain hopes thou go about to fill me.
I wot whereto those drams of favor tend;
Lest by my death thy cruelties should end,
Thou think by giving life again to kill me:
No, no, thou shall not thus thy greatness raise,
I Will break the trumpet that proclaimed thy praise.
Son. 44.
O Now I think, and do not think amiss,
That the old Philosophers were all but fools,
Who used such curious questions in their schools,
Yet could not apprehend the highest Bliss.
Lo, I have learned in th'Academe of Love,
A Maxim which they never understood:
To love and be beloved this is the good,
Which for most sovereign all the world will prove,
That which delights us most must be our treasure:
And to what greater joy can one aspire,
Then to possess all that he does desire,
Whilst two united souls do melt in pleasure?
This is the greatest good can be invented,
That is so great it cannot be augmented.
Son. 45.
I Wonder not at Procris raging fits,
Who was afraid of thy entangling grace:
O there be many sorcerers in thy face,
Whose Magic may enchaunt the rarest wits.
To Cephalus what would thy looks have bred,
When thou while as the world thy sight pursude,
As blushing of so many to be viewd,
A vale of roses ore thy beauties spread:
Then ever gazing on thine yuorie brows,
He wounded with thy Christall-pointed eyes,
Had reared a Trophee to the morning skies,
Not mindful of his Hymenean vows.
But I am glad it chanced not to be so,
Least I had partner been of Procris woe.
Son. 46.
Love swore hy Styx whilst all the depths did tremble,
That he would be aueng'd of my proud heart,
Who to his Deity durst base styles impart,
And would in that Latona's impe resemble:
Then straight denounced his rebel, in a rage
He labored by all means for to betray me,
And gave full leave to any for to slay me,
That he might by my wrack his wrath assuage:
A Nymph that longed to finish Cupids toils,
Chanced once to spy me come in beauties bounds,
And straight orethrew me with world of wounds,
Then unto Paphos did transport my spoils.
Thus, thus I see, that all must fall in end,
That with a greater then themselves contend.
Song 7.
A Longst the borders of a pleasant plain,
The sad Alexis did his garments tear,
And though alone, yet fearing to be plain,
Did maime his words with many a sigh and tear:
For whilst he leaned him down upon a green,
His wounds again began for to grow green.
At last in show as one whose hopes were light,
From fainting breath he forced those words to part:
O dear Aurora, dearer then the light,
Of all the worlds delights mine only part:
How long shall I in barren fields thus ear,
Whilst to my sad laments thou lend'st no ear!
O what a rage does boil in every vain,
Which shows the world my better part's not sound:
And yet thou let'st me spend those plaints in vain,
T'amaze the world with many a mournful sound:
And whilst that I to grief enlarge the raines,
A shoure of sorrow ore my visage raines.
Ah, what have I whereon my hopes to found,
That hoped to have had repose within thine arm,
Yet have not any sign of favor found,
Thy marble mind such frozen fancies arm:
For when in humble sort for grace I pray,
Thou triumph'st ore me, as thy beauties pray.
I that transported once was near gone wood,
Now with long travels growing faint and lean,
While as I wander through the defart wood,
My wearied body on each tree must lean:
And whilst my heart is with strange Harpies rent,
I pay to sorrow the accustomed rent.
And whilst I wander like the wounded Dear,
That seeks for Dictamne to recure his scarre,
And come to thee whom I hold only dear,
Thou do (fierce Fair) at my disaster scarre:
And make me from all kind of comfort barred,
Live in the deserts like a raging Bard.
Ah, be there now no means t'vndo the band,
That thou have framed of those thy golden locks!
I Will range my fancies in a desperate band,
And burst asunder all thy beauties locks:
Then to thy breast those fiery troops will lead,
There from about thy heart to melt the lead.
But ah, I boast in vain, this cannot be,
Although my self to many shapes I turn:
I only labor like the restless Be,
That toils in vain to serve another turn.
My hopes which once winged with thy favors rose,
Are falling now, as does the blasted rose.
That those my torments cannot long time last,
In my declining eyes the world may read,
Lo wounded with thy pride I fall at last,
As does before the winds a beaten reed:
And this my death with shame thy cheeks may die,
Since sacrificed to thy disdain I die.
Son. 47.
WHen whiles I hear some gallants to give forth,
That those whom they adore are only fair,
With whom they think none other can compare;
The beauty of beauty, and the height of worth,
Then Jealousy does all my joys control,
For o I think, who can accomplished be,
(There is no Sun but one) save only she
Whom I have made the idol of my soul;
And this suspicion wounds my better parts:
I rage to have a rival in my light,
And yet would rage far more, if any might
Give her their eyes, and yet hold back their hearts;
Too great affection does those passions move,
I may not trust my shadow with my love.
Son. 48.
WHen as I come to thy respected sight,
Thy looks are all so chaste, thy words so grave,
That my affections do the foil receive,
And like to darkness yield unto the light;
Still virtue holds the balance of thy wit,
In which great reason ponders every thought,
And thou dear Lady never staind in ought,
Thus ore thy self do as an Empress sit.
O what is beauty if not free from blame,
It have the soul as white as is the skin,
The froth of vanity, the dregs of sin,
A wrack to others, to it self a shame;
And as it is most precious if kept pure,
It is as much abhorred if once impure.
Song 6.
WHen silence luls the world asleep,
And stars do glance in th'Azure field,
The mountains making shadows ore the plains,
All creatures then betake themselves to rest,
And to the law of nature yield,
Save I, who no good order keep,
That then begin to feel my pains;
For in the Zodiac of my breast,
The Sun that I adore her light reuiues,
Whilst wearied Phoebus in the Ocean dives.
The worlds clear day was night to me,
Who seemed asleep still in a trance,
And all my words were spoken through a dream:
But then when the earth puts on th'vmbragious mask,
My passions do themselves advance,
And from those outward lets set free,
That had them erst restrained with shame,
Do set me to my woeful task:
Then from the night her privilege I take,
And in dispight of Morpheus I will wake.
But straight the Sun that gives melight,
With many duskish vapors cled,
Does seem to boast me with some fearful storm;
And whilst I gaze upon the glorious beams,
Lo metamorphos'd in my bed,
I lose at once my shapher sight;
And taking on another form,
Am all dissolved in bitter streams,
Where many monsters bathe themselves anon,
At which strange sight the Faunes and Satyrs moan.
But whilst I seek mo springs t'assemble,
My waters are dride up again,
And as the mighty Giant that Jove tames:
I wot not whether, if thundered or thundering,
Against the heavens smokes forth disdain,
And makes mount Aetna tremble.
So I send forth a flood of flames,
Which makes the world for to stand wondering,
And never did the Lemnian furnace burn,
As then my breast, whilst all to fire I turn.
At last no constancy below,
Thus plagued in two diverse shapes,
I Am turned into my self, and then I quake,
For this I have by proof found worst of all:
Then do my hopes fall dead in heaps,
And to b'aueng'd of their overthrow,
Strange troops of thoughts their musters make,
Which toss my fancy like a ball:
Thus one mishap does come as th'other's past,
And still the greatest cross comes ever last.
To tell the stars my night I pass,
And much conclude, yet questions do arise;
I harrengues make though dumb, and see though blind,
And though alone, am hemmed about with bands:
I build great castles in the skies,
Whose tender turrets but of glass,
Are straight oreturn'd with every wind,
And reared and razed, yet without hands;
I in this state strange miseries detect,
And more devise then thousands can effect.
My Sun whilst thus I stand perplexed,
The darknsse does Igaine control,
And then I gaze upon that divine grace,
Which as that I had viewed Medusaes head,
Transformed me once; and my sad soul,
That thus has been so strangely vexed,
Does from her seat those troubles chase,
The which before despair had made,
And all her power upon contentment feeds,
No joy to that which after woe succeeds.
And yet those dainties of my joys,
Are still confected with some fears,
That well accustomed with my cruel fate,
Can never trust the gift that the enemy gives,
And only the end true witness bears:
For whilst my soul her power imployes,
To surfeit in this happy state,
The heaven again my wrack contriues,
And the worlds Sun envying this of mine,
To darken my loves world begins to shine.
Son. 49.
I Think that Cipris in a high disdain,
Barred by the barbarous Turks that conquered seat,
To re-erect the ruins of her state,
Comes ore their bounds t'establish beauties reign;
And whilst her greatness does begin to rise,
As sdaining temples built of baser frame,
She in those rosy snowes t'enstall her name,
Reares stately altars in thy starrie eyes,
Before whose sacred shrine deuinely fair,
Breasts boiling still with generous desires,
Fall sacrificed with memorable fires;
The incense of whose sighs endeers the air,
In which thy same vnparagond does flee,
Whilst thou by beauty, beauty lives by thee.
Son. 50.
ONce Cupid had compassion of my state,
And wounded with a wonderful remorce,
Vowed that he would my cruel fair enforce,
To melt the rigor of her cold conceit:
But when he came his purpose to fulfill,
And shot at her a volly from the skies,
She did receive the darts within her eyes;
Then in those cristall quiuers kept them still.
Who vaunt before they win, often lose the game;
And the presumptuous mind gets maniest foiles.
Lo he that thought to have triumphed ore her spoils,
But come with pride, and went away with shame:
And where he hoped to have helpd me by this strife,
He brought her arms wherewith to take my life.
Son. 51.
I Dreamed the Nymph that ore my fancy reigns,
Came to a part whereas I paused alone;
Then said, what needs you in such sort to moan?
Have I not power to recompense your pains?
Lo I conjure you by that loyal love,
Which you profess, to cast those griefs apart,
It Is long dear love since that you had my heart,
Yet I was coy your constancy to prove,
But having had a proof, I Will now be free:
I am the Echo that your sighs resounds,
Your woes are mine, I suffer in your wounds,
Your passions all they sympathize in me:
Thus whilst for kindness both began to weep,
My happiness euanish'd with the sleep.
Son. 52.
SOme men delight huge buildings to behold,
Some theaters, mountains, floods, and famous springs;
Some monuments of Monarkes, and such things
As in the books of fame have been inrol'd:
Those stately towns that to the stars were raised,
Some would their ruins see (their beautie's gone)
Of which the worlds three parts, each bosts of one,
For Caesar, Hanniball, and Hector praised:
Though none of those, I love a sight as rare,
Even her that ore my life as Queen does sit,
Juno in majesty, Pallas in wit;
As Phoebe chaste, then Venus far more fair:
And though her looks even threaten death to me.
Their threatenings are so sweet I cannot fly.
Son. 53.
IF now clear Po, that pity be not spent,
Which for to quench his flames did once thee move,
Whom the great thunderer thundered from above,
And to thy silver bosom burning sent,
To pity his coequall be content;
That in effect does the like fortune prove,
Thrown headlong from the highest heavens of love:
Here burning on thy borders I lament,
The success did not second my dissigne,
Yet must I like my generous intent,
Which cannot be condemned by the event,
That fault was fortunes, though the loss be mine;
And by my fall I shall be honored often,
My fall does witness I was once aloft.
Son. 54.
GReat God that guides the Dolphin through the deep,
Look now as thou did then with smiling grace,
When seeking once her beauties to embrace,
Thou forced the fair Amimone to weep:
The liquid monarchy thou can not keep,
If thus the blustering God vsurp thy place;
Rise and against his blasts erect thy face;
Let Tritons trumpet sound the seas asleep,
With thine own arms the wind thy bosom wounds,
And whilst that it thy followers fall contriues,
Thy Trident to endanger daily strives,
And desolate would render all thy bounds:
Then if thou think for to preserve thy state,
Let not such storms disturb thy watrie seat.
Son. 55.
I Envy Neptune often, not that his hands
Did build that lofty Ilions stately towers,
Nor that he Emperor of the liquid powers,
Does brook a place amongst the'immortall bands,
But that embracing her whom I love best,
As Achilous with Alcides once,
Still wrestling with the rival earth he groans,
For earnestnes t'ouerflow her happienest:
Thus would he bar me from her presence still,
For when I come a field, he faun'd my sails,
With mild Zephires fair yet prosperous gailes,
And like to Ulysses gave me wind at will:
But when I would return, O what deceit
With tumbling waves thou barr'st the glassie gate!
Son. 56.
LO, now reviving my disast'rous style,
I prosecute the tenor of my fate,
And follow forth at dangers highest rate,
In foreign Realms my fortune for a while:
I might have learned this by my last exile,
That change of countries cannot change my state:
Where ever that my body seek a seat,
I leave my heart in Albions glorious isle;
And since then banished from a lovely sight,
I married have my mind to sad conceits,
Though to the furthest part that fame dilates,
I might on Pegasus address my flight;
Yet should I still whilst I might breath or move,
Remain the monster of mishap and love.
Sonet. 57.
Whilst th'Apenin seems clothed with snows to vaunt,
As if that their pure white all hues did stain,
I match them with thy matchless fair again,
Whose lillies have a luster, that they want:
But when some die, trained with a pleasant show,
In their plaine-seeming depths, as many do,
Then I remember how Aurora too,
With lovely rigor thousands does orethrow.
Thus is it fatal by the effects we know,
That beauty must do harm, more then delight:
For lo the snow, the whitest of the white,
Comes from the clouds, t'engender ice below:
So she with whom for beauty none compares,
From clouds of cold disdain, raines down despaires.
Sonet. 58.
Fear not, my Fair, that ever any chance
So shake the resolutions of my mind,
That like Demophon changing with the wind,
I thy fames rent not labor to enhaunce:
The ring which thou in sign of favor gave,
Shall from fine gold transform it self in glass:
The Diamond which then so solid was,
Soft like the wax, each image shall receive:
First shall each river turn unto the spring,
The tallest Oak stand trembling like a reed,
Hearts in the air, Whales on the mountains feed,
And foul confusions seize on every thing;
Before that I begin to change in ought,
Or on another but bestow one thought.
Son. 59.
WHilst every youth to entertain his love,
Did strain his wits as far as they might reach,
And arming passions with a powerful speech,
Used each patheticke phrase that served to move:
Then to some corner still retired alone,
I, whom melancholy from mirth did lead,
As having viewed Medusaes snakie head,
Seemed metamorphos'd in a marble stone:
And as that wretched mirror of mischief,
Whom erst Apollo spoiled, does still shed tears,
And in a stone the badge of sorrow bears,
While as a humid vapor shows her grief:
So whilst transformed as in a stone I stay,
A fiery smoke does blow my grief away.
Son. 60.
THe heavens beheld that all men did despise,
That which the owner from the grave acquites,
That sleep, the belly, and some base delights,
Had banished virtue from beneath the skies;
Which to the world again for to restore,
The gods did one of theirs, to the earth transfer,
And with as many blessings following her,
As erst Pandora kept of plagues in store.
She since she came within this wretched vale,
Does in each mind a love of glory breed;
Bettering the better parts that have most need,
And shows how worldlings to the clouds may scale:
She cleares the world, but ah has darkened me,
Made blind by her, my self I cannot see.
Son. 61.
HOw long shall I bestow my time in vain,
And sound the praises of that spiteful boy;
Who whilst that I for him my pains employ,
Does guerdon me with bondage and disdain?
O, but for this I must his glory raise,
Since one that's worthy triumphs of my fall;
Where great men often of such have been made thrall,
Whose birth was base, whose beauty without praise.
And yet in this his hatred does appear,
For otherwise I might my loss repair.
But being as she is exceeding fair,
I Am forced to hold one that is ungrateful dear:
These euerchanging thoughts which naught can bind,
May well bear witness of a troubled mind.
Son. 62.
WHen as the Sun does drink up all the streams,
And with a fervent heat the flowers does kill;
The shadow of a wood, or of a hill,
Does serve us for a targe against his beams:
But ah, those eyes that burn me with desire,
And seek to parch the substance of my soul,
The ardour of their rays for to control,
I wot not where my self for to retire:
Twixt them and me, to have procured some ease,
I interposed the seas, woods, hills, and rivers;
And yet am of those never emptied quiuers,
The object still, and burn, be where I please:
But of the cause I need not for to doubt,
Within my breast I bear the fire about.
Son. 63.
Often have I heard, which now I must deny,
That naught can last if that it be extreme,
Times daily change, and we likewise in them,
Things out of sight do straight forgotten die:
There is nothing more vehement then love,
And yet I burn, and burn still with one flame.
Times often have changed, yet I remain the same.
Naught from my mind her image can remove:
The greatness of my love aspires to ruth,
Time vows to crown my constancy in the end,
And absence does my fancies but extend;
Thus I perceive the Poet spoke the truth,
That who to see strange countries were inclined,
Might change the air, but never change the mind.
Son. 64.
I Wot not what strange things I have designed,
But all my gestures do presage no good;
My looks are gastly-like, thoughts are my food,
A silent pausing shows my troubled mind:
Huge hosts of thoughts are mustring in my breast,
Whose strongest are conducted by despair,
Which have inuolu'd my hopes in such a snare,
That I by death would seek an endless rest.
What Fury in my breast strange cares enroules,
And in the same would rear stern Plutoes seat!
Go get you hence to the Tartarian gate,
And breed such terrors in the damned souls:
Too many grievous plagues my state extorse,
Though apprehended horrors bost not worse.
Song 7.
O Memorable day, that chanced to see
A world of loving wonders strangely wrought,
Deep in my breast engrau'd by many a thought,
Thou shall be celebrated still by me:
And if that Phoebus so benign will be,
That happy happy place,
Whereas that divine face
Did distribute such grace,
By pilgrims once as sacred shall be sought.
When she whom I a long time have affected,
Amongst the flowers went forth to take the air;
They being proud of such a guests repair,
Though by her garments diverse times dejected,
To gaze on her again themselves erected;
Then softly seemed to say:
O happy we this day;
Our worthless dew it may,
Washing her feet with Nectar now compare.
The Roses did the rosy hue envy,
Of those sweet lips that did the Bees deceive,
That color often the Lillies wished to have,
Which did the Alablaster pillar die,
On which all beauties glory did rely;
Her breath so sweetly smelled,
The Violets as excelled,
To look down were compelled;
And so confessed what foil they did receive.
I heard at lest, love made it so appear,
The fethered flocks her praises did proclaim:
She whom the tyrant Tereus put to shame,
Did leave sad plaints, and learned to praise my dear:
To join with her sweet breath the winds drew near;
They were in love no doubt,
For circling her about,
Their fancies bursted out,
Whilst all their sounds seemed but to sound her name.
There I mine eyes with pleasant sighs did cloy,
Whose several parts in vain I strive t'vnfold;
My fair was fairer many a thousand fold
Then Venus, when she wooed the bashful boy:
This I remember both with grief and joy,
Each of her looks a dart,
Might well have killed a heart:
Mine from my breast did part,
And thence retired it to a sweeter hold.
Whilst in her bosom whiles she placed a flower,
Straight of the same I envy would the case,
And wished my hand a flower to have found like grace;
Then when on her it rained some happening hour,
I wished like Jove to have fallen down in a shower:
But when the flowers she spread,
To make her self a bed,
And with her gown them cled,
A thousand times I wished to have had their place.
Thus whilst that senseless things that bliss attained,
Which unto me good justice would adiudge,
Behind a little bush (O poor refuge)
Fed with her face, I Lizard-like remained:
Then from her eyes so sweet a poison rained,
That gladly drinking death,
I was not moved to wrath,
Though like to have lost my breath,
Drowned with the streams of that most sweet deluge.
And might that happiness continue still,
Which did content me with so pleasant sights,
My soul then ravished with most rare delights,
With Ambrosie and Nectar I might fill:
Which ah I fear, I surfeiting would kill.
Who would leave off to think,
To move, to breath, or wink,
But never irke to drink
The sugared liquor that transports my sprites?
Son. 65.
MY face the colors whiles of death displayes,
And I who at my wretched state repine,
This mortal veil would willingly resign,
And end my dole together with my days;
But Cupid whom my danger must dismayes,
As loath to lose one that decores his shrine,
Straight in my breast does make Aurora shine,
And by this stratageme my dying stays.
Then in mine ears he sounds th'Angelike voice,
And to my sight presents the beauteous face,
And calls to mind that more then divine grace,
Which made me first for to confirm my choice:
And I who all those slights have often perceived,
Yet thus content my self to be deceived.
Sonet. 66.
B. GO get thee heart from hence, for thou have proved
The hateful traitor that procured my fall.
H. May I not yet once satisfy for all,
Whose loyalty may make thee to be loved?
B. I Will never trust one that has once betrayed me:
For once a traitor, and then never true.
H. Yet would my wrack but make thee first to rue,
That could trust none if thou had once dismayed me.
B. How ever others make me for to smart,
I scorn to have an enemy in my breast.
H. Well, if that thou spoil me, I Will spoil thy rest,
Want I a body, thou shall want a heart:
Thus do th'vnhappie still augment their harms,
And thou have killed thy self with thine own arms.
Son. 67.
A. What art thou, in such sort that wail'st thy fall,
And comes surcharged with an excessive grief?
H. A woeful wretch, that comes to crave relief,
And was his heart that now has none at all.
A. Why do thou thus to me unfold thy state,
As if with thy mishaps I would imbroile me,
H. Because the love I bare to you did spoil me,
And was the instrument of my hard fate:
A. And dare so base a wretch so high aspire,
As for to plead for interest in my grace?
Go get thee hence; or if thou do not cease,
I vow to burn thee with a greater fire:
H. Ah, ah, this great unkindness stops my breath,
Since those that I love best procure my death.
Son. 68.
I Hope, I fear, resolved, and yet I doubt,
I Am cold as ice, and yet I burn as fire;
I wot not what, and yet I much desire,
And trembling too, am desperately stout:
Though melancholious wonders I devise,
And compass much, yet nothing can embrace;
And walk ore all, yet stand still in one place,
And bound on the earth, do soar above the skies:
I beg for life, and yet I bray for death,
And have a mighty courage, yet despair;
I ever muse, yet am without all care,
And shout aloud, yet never strain my breath:
I change as often as any wind can do,
Yet for all this am ever constant too.
Son. 69.
What wonder though my countenance be not bright,
And that I look as one with clouds enclosed?
A great part of the earth is interposed
Betwixt the Sun and me that gives me light:
Ah (since sequestered from that divine face)
I find my self more sluggishly disposed:
Nor whilst on that clear pattern I reposed,
That put my inward darkness to the flight.
No more then can the Sun shine without beams,
Can she vncompas'd with her virtues live,
Which to the world an evidence do give
Of that rare worth which many a mouth proclaims:
And which sometime did purify my mind,
That by the want thereof is now made blind.
Son. 70.
SOme gallant sprites whose ways none yet dare trace,
To show the world the wonders of their wit,
Did (as their tossed fancies thought most fit)
Form rare Idaeas of a divine face.
Yet never Art to that true worth attained,
Which Nature now grown prodigal, imparts
To one, dear one, whose sacred several parts,
Are more admired then all that Poets feigned.
Those bordring climes that boast of beauties shrine,
If once thy sight enriched their soiles (my love:)
Then all with one consent behou'd t'approue,
That Calidon does beauties best confine.
But ah, the heaven on this my ruin sounds,
The more her worth, the deeper are my wounds.
Son. 71.
FOr eyes that are delivered of their birth,
And hearts that can complain, none needs to care:
I pity not their sighs that pierce the air,
To weep at will were a degree of mirth:
But he (ay me) is to be pitied most,
Whose sorrows have attained to that degree,
That they are past expressing, and can be
Only imagined by a man that is lost.
The tears that would burst out yet are restrained,
The Imprisoned plaints that perish without fame,
Sighs formed and smoother'd ere they get a name,
Those to be pitied are (o grief unfeigned)
Whilst sighs the voice, the voice the sighs confounds,
Then tears mar both, and all are out of bounds.
Son. 72.
O My Desire, if thou tookst time to mark,
When I against my will thy sight forsook:
How that mine eyes with many an earnest look,
Did in thy beauties depth themselves embarke:
And when our lips did seal the last farewell,
How loath were mine from those delights to part.
For what was purposed by the panting heart,
My tongue cleau'd to the throat, and could not tell.
Then when to sorrow I the raines enlarged,
Whilst being spoiled of comfort and of might,
As forced for to forgo thy beauties light,
Of burning sighs a volley I discharged:
No doubt then when thou spid'st what I did prove,
Thou said within thy self, This man does love.
Madr. 2.
BEheld'st thou me look back at our goodnight:
O no good night,
Dismal, obscure and black:
Mine eyes then in their language spoke,
And would have thus complained:
Thou leau'st the heart, makes us depart;
Cursed is our part,
And hard to be sustained.
O happy heart that was retained:
Alas, to leave us too, there is no Art:
It in her bosom now should nightly sleep,
And we exiled, still for her absence weep.
Son. 73.
WHen whiles thy dainty hand does cross my light,
It seems an yuorie table for Loves story,
On which th'impearled pillars, beauties glory,
Are reared betwixt the Sun and my weak sight.
Though this would great humanity appear,
Which for a little while my flame allayes,
And saues me vnconsum'd with beauties rays,
I rather die, then buy my life so dear.
Often have I wished whilst in this state I was,
That th'Alablaster bulwark might transpare,
And that the pillars rarer then they are,
Might whiles permit some happening rays to pass:
But if Eclipsed thy beauties Sun must stand,
Then be it with the moon of thine own hand.
Son. 74.
LO, in my Fair each of the Planets reigns:
She is as Saturn, ever grave and wise,
And as Jove's thunderbolts, her thundering eyes
Do plague the pride of men with endless pains:
Her voice is as Apollo's, and her head
Is ever garnished with his golden beams,
And o her heart, which never fancy tames:
More fierce then Mars makes thousands to lie dead.
From Mercury her eloquence proceeds,
Of Venus she the sweetness does retain,
Her face still full does Phoebe's lightness stain,
Whom likewise she in Chastity exceeds.
No wonder then though this in me does move,
To such a divine soul, a divine love.
Son. 75.
MY faithful thoughts no duty do omit;
But being fraughted with most zealous cares,
Are ever busied for my loves affairs,
And in my breast as Senators do sit,
To my hearts famine yielding pleasant food.
They sugared fancies in my bosom breed,
And would have all so well for to succeed,
That through excessive care they naught conclude:
But ah, I fear that their affections try
In end like th'Apes, that whilst he seeks to prove
The powrefull motions of a parents love,
Does often embrace his young ones till they die:
So to my heart my thoughts do cleave so fast,
That o, I fear they make it burst at last.
Son. 76.
WHat fortune strange, what strange misfortune erst
Did toss me with a thousand things in vain,
Whiles sad despaires confounded did remain?
Whiles all my hopes were to the winds dispersed?
Erected whiles, and whiles again renuerst?
Whiles nurc'd with smiles, whiles murdered with disdain,
Whiles borne aloft, whiles laid as low again?
And with what state have I not once been verst?
But yet my constant mind which virtue binds,
From the first course no new occurrence draws:
Still like a rock by sea against the waves,
Or like a hill by land against the winds:
So all the world that viewes that which I find,
May damn my destiny, but not my mind.
Son. 77.
I Long to see this Pilgrimage expire,
That makes the eyes for to envy the mind,
Whose sight with absence cannot be confined,
But warmes it self still at thy beauties fire.
Love in my bosom did thy image sink
So deeply once, it cannot be worn out:
Yet once the eyes may have their course about,
And see far more, then now the mind can think.
I Will once retire in time before I die,
There where thou first my liberty did spoil:
For otherwise dead in a foreign soil,
Still with my self entombed my faith shall lie.
No, no, I Will rather die once in thy sight,
Then in this state die ten times in one night.
Son. 78.
I Chanced my dear to come upon a day,
Whilst thou wast but arising from thy bed,
And the warm snowes with comely garments cled;
More rich then glorious, and more fine then gay:
Then blushing to be seen in such a case,
O how thy curled locks mine eyes did please,
And well become those waves, thy beauties seas,
Which by thy hairs were framed upon thy face:
Such was Diana once when being spide
By rash Acteon, she was much commou'd:
Yet more discreet then th'angrie goddess proved,
Thou knew'st I came through error, not of pride:
And thought the wounds I got by thy sweet sight,
Were too great scourges for a fault so light.
Madr. 3.
I Saw my Love like Cupids mother,
Her tresses sporting with her face,
Which being proud of such a grace;
Whiles kissed the one cheek, and whiles the other:
Her eyes glad such a means to embrace,
Whereby they might have me betrayed,
Themselves they in ambushment laid,
Behind the treasures of her hair,
And wounded me so deadly there:
That doubtless I had dead remained,
Were not the treason she disdained;
And with her lips sweet balm my health procured:
I would be wounded often to be so cured.
Madr. 4.
ONce for her face, I saw my Fair
Did of her hairs a shadow make:
Or rather wandering hearts to take.
She stented had those nets of gold,
Sure by this means all men t'ensnare,
She tossed the streamers with her breath,
And seemed to boast a world with death:
But when I did the slight behold,
I to the shadow did repair,
To fly the burning of thine eyes;
O happy he, by such a slight that dies.
Son. 79.
THe most refreshing waters come from rocks,
Some bitter roots often send forth dainty flowers,
The growing greenes are cherished with showers,
And pleasant stemmes spring from deformed stocks:
The hardest hills do feed the fairest flocks:
All greatest sweetes were sugared first with sowres,
The headless course of uncontrolled hours,
To all difficulties a way vnlockes.
I hope to have a heaven within thine arms,
And quiet calmes when all these storms are past,
Which coming unexpected at the last,
May bury in Oblivion bygone harms.
To suffer first, to sorrow, sigh, and smart,
Endeeres the conquest of a cruel heart.
Son. 80.
WHen Love spide death like to triumph ore me,
That had been such a pillar of his throne;
And that all AEsculapius hopes were gone,
Whose drugs had not the force to set me free,
He labored to reduce the Fates decree,
And thus bespake the tyrant that spares none:
Thou that wast never moved with worldlings moan,
To save this man for my request agree:
And I protest that he shall dearly buy
The short prolonging of a wretched life:
For it shall be inuolu'd in such a strife,
That he shall never live, but ever die.
O what a cruel kindness Cupid craved,
Who for to kill me often, my life once saved.
Son. 81.
Often have I vowed of none to attend relief,
Whose ardour was not equal unto mine,
And in whose face there did not clearly shine,
The very image of my inward grief:
But so the dest'nies do my thoughts dispose,
I wot not what a fatal force ordaines,
That I abase my self to bear disdaines,
And honor one that ruins my repose.
Often have I vowed no more to be orethrowne,
But still retaining my affections free,
To fancy none, but them that fancied me:
But now I see my will is not mine own.
Then ah, may you bewitch my judgment so,
That I must love, although my heart say no!
Son. 82.
I Rage to see some in the scroules of fame,
Whose lovers wits more rare then their deserts,
Do make them praised for many gallant parts,
The which does make themselves to blush for shame:
Where thou whom even thine enemies cannot blame,
Though famous in the center of all hearts;
Yet to the world thy worth no pen imparts:
Which justly might those wrong-spent praises claim.
But what vain pen so fondly durst aspire,
To paint that worth which soars above each wit,
Which hardly highest apprehensions hit,
Not to be told, but thought of with desire:
For where the subject does surmount the sense,
We best by silence show a great pretense.
Song. 8.
I would thy beauties wonders show,
Which none can tell, yet all do know:
Thou borrowes naught to move delight,
Thy beauties (Dear) are all perfect.
And at the head I Will first begin,
Most rich without, more rich within:
Within a place Minerua claims,
Without, Apollo's golden beams,
Whose smiling waves those seas may scorn,
Where Beauties goddess erst was borne:
And yet do boast a world with death,
If tossed with gales of thy sweet breath.
I for two crescents take thy brows,
Or rather for two bended bows,
Whose archer love, whose white men's hearts,
Thy frowns, no, smiles, smiles are thy darts;
Which to my ruin ever bent,
Are often discharged but never spent.
Thy suns, I dare not say, thine eyes,
Which often do set, and often do rise:
Whilst in thy faces heaven they move,
Give light to all the world of love:
And yet do whiles defraud our sight,
Whilst two white clouds eclipse their light.
The laborinthes of thine ears,
Where Beauty both her colors reares,
Are lawne laid on a scarlet ground,
Whereas Loves echoes ever sound:
Thy cheeks, strawberries dipped in milk,
As white as snow, as soft as silk;
Gardens of lillies and of roses,
Where Cupid still himself reposes,
And on their dainty rounds he sits,
When he would charm the rarest wits.
Those swelling vales which beauty owes,
Are parted with a dike of snowes:
The line that still is stretched out even,
And does divide thy faces heaven:
It has the prospect of those lips,
From which no word vnballanc'd slippes:
There is a grot by Nature framed,
Which Art to follow is ashamed:
All those whom fame for rare gives forth,
Compared with this are little worth,
It Is all with pearls and rubies set;
But I the best almost forget,
There do the gods (as I have tried)
Their Ambrosie and Nectar hide.
The dainty pot that is in thy chin,
Makes many a heart for to fall in,
Whereas they boil with pleasant fires,
Whose fuel is enflamed Desires.
It Is eminent in Beauties field,
As that which threatens all to yield.
T'vphold those treasures vndefac'd,
There is an yuorie pillar placed,
Which like to Maias son does prove,
For to bear up this world of love:
In it some branched veins arise,
As th'azure pure would brave the skies.
I see whiles as I downward move,
Two little globes, two worlds of love,
Which vndiscouer'd, vndistressed,
Were never with no burden pressed:
Nor will for Lord acknowledge none,
To be enstal'd in Beauties throne:
As barren yet so were they bare,
O happy he that might dwell there.
And now my Muse we must make have,
To it that is justly called the wast,
That wastes my heart with hopes and fears,
My breath with sighs, mine eyes with tears:
Yet I to it for all those harms,
Would make a girdle of mine arms.
There is below which no man knows,
A mountain made of naked snowes;
Amidst the which is Loves great seal,
To which for help I often appeal,
And if by it my right were past,
I should brook beauty still at last.
But ah, my Muse will lose the Crown,
I dare not go no further down,
Which does discourage me so much,
That I no other thing will touch.
No not those little dainty feet,
Which Thetis stain, for Venus meet:
Thus wading through the depths of Beauty,
I would have feign discharged my duty:
Yet does thy worth so pass my skill,
That I show nothing but good will.
Son. 83.
THat fault on me (my Fair) no further urge,
Nor wrest it not unto a crooked sense,
The punishment else paffeth the offense:
This fault was in it self too great a scourge,
Since I behoou'd to give the occasion place,
And could not have the means to visit thee.
Could there have come a greater cross to me,
Then so to be sequestered from thy face?
And yet I think that fortune for my rest,
Though for the time it did turmoile my mind
Admit she be (as many call her) blind,
Did for the time then stumble on the best.
To look upon thine eyes had I presumed,
I might have rested by their rays consumed.
Son. 84.
AH thou (my Love) wilt lose thy self at last,
Who can to match thy self with none agree:
Thou ow'st thy father Nephews, and to me
A recompense for all my passions past.
Ah, why should thou thy beauties treasure wast,
Which will begin for to decay I see?
Erst Daphne did become a barren tree,
Because she was not half so wise as chaste:
And all the fairest things do soonest fade,
Which O, I fear thou with repentance try;
The roses blasted are the lillies dye,
And all do languish in the summers shade:
Yet will I grieve to see those flowers fall down,
Which for my temples should have framed a crown.
Son. 85.
SOme yet not borne surueying lines of mine,
Shall envy with a sigh, the eyes that viewed
Those beauties with my blood so often imbrude,
The which by me in many a part do shine.
Those relics then of this turmoil'd engine,
Which for thy favor have so long pursude,
Then after death will make my fortune rued,
And thee despited that did make me pine.
Ah, that thou should, to wrack so many hearts,
Exceed in all excellencies, but love!
That mask of rigor from thy mind remove,
And then thou art accomplished in all parts:
Then shall thy fame ore all untainted fly,
Thou in my lines, and I shall live in thee.
Song. 9.
O Happy Tithon, if thou know thy hap,
And value thy wealth, but as I do my want,
Then need'st thou not (which (ah) I grieve to grant)
Repine at Jove, lulled in his lemmans lap:
That golden shower in which he did repose,
One dewie drop it stains,
Which thy Aurora raines
Upon the rural plains,
When from thy bed she passionatly goes.
Then wakened with the music of the Mearles,
She not remembers Memnon when she mournes:
That faithful flame which in her bosom burns,
From crystal conduits throws those liquide pearls.
Sad from thy sight so soon to be removed,
She so her grief delates,
O fauor'd by the fates,
Above the happiest states,
Who art of one so worthy well beloved.
This is not she that only shines by night,
No borrowed beam does beautify thy Fair:
But this is she, whose beauties more then rare,
Come crowned with roses to restore the light,
When Phoebe pitched her pitchie pauilion out,
The world with weeping told,
How happy it would hold
It self, but to behold
The azure pale that compas'd her about.
Whilst like a palide half-imprison'd rose,
Whose naked white does but to blush begin,
A little scarlet deckes the yuorie skin,
Which still does glance transparent as she goes:
The beamie god comes burning with desire;
And when he finds her gone,
With many a grievous groan,
Enraged, remounts anon,
And threatens all our Hemi-sphaere with fire.
Lift up thine eyes and but behold thy bliss,
Th'heau'ns rain their riches on thee whilst thou sleep'st:
Think what a matchless treasure that thou keep'st,
When thou have all that any else can wish.
Those Suns which daily dazzle thy dim eyes,
Might with one beam or so,
Which thou might well forgo,
Straight banish all my woe,
And make me all the world for to despise.
But Sun-parch'd people loath the precious stones,
And through abundance vilify the gold;
All dis-esteeme the treasures that they hold,
And think not things possessed (as they thought) once.
Who surfeit often on such excessive joys,
Can never pleasure prize,
But building on the skies,
All present things despise,
And like their treasure less, then others toys.
I envy not thy bliss, so heaven has doomed;
And yet I cannot but lament mine own,
Whose hopes hard at the harvest were orethrowne,
And bliss half ripe, with frosts of fear consumed:
Fair blossoms, which of fairer fruits did boast,
Were blasted in the flowers,
With eye-exacted showers,
Whose sweet-supposed sowers
Of preconceited pleasures grieved me most.
And what a grief is this (as chance effects)
To see the rarest beauties worst bestowed?
Ah, why should halting Vulcan be made proud
Of that great beauty which stern Mars affects?
And why should Tithon thus, whose day grows late,
Enjoy the mornings love?
Which though that I disprove,
Yet will I too approve,
Since that it is her will, and my hard fate.
An Echo.
AH, will no soul give ear unto my moan? one
Who answers thus so kindly when I cry? I
What fostred thee that pities my despair? air
Thou blabbing guest, what know thou of my fall? all
What did I when I first my Fair disclosed? los'd
Where was my reason, that it would not doubt? out
What can thou tell me of my Ladies will? ill
Wherewith can she acquit my loyal part? art
What has she then with me to disaguise? a guise
What have I done, since she against love repined? pined
What did I when I her to life preferred? er'd
What did mine eyes, whilst she my heart restrained? rained
What did she whilst my muse her praise proclaimed? claimd
And what? and how? this does me most affright. of right
What if I never sue to her again? gain
And what when all my passions are represt? rest
But what thing will best serve t'asswage desire? ire
And what will serve to mitigate my rage? age
I see the Sun begins for to descend. end
Son. 87.
NO wonder, thou endang'rest lives with looks,
And do bewitch the bosom by the ear:
What hosts of hearts, that no such slight did fear,
Are now entangled by thy beauties hooks?
But if so many to the world approve,
Those princely virtues that enrich my mind,
And hold thee for the honor of thy kind;
Yea though disdained, yet desperately love:
O what a world of hapless lovers live,
That like a treasure entertain their thought,
And seem in show as if affecting naught,
And in their breast t'entombe their fancies strive:
Yet let not this with pride thy heart possess;
The Sun being mounted high, does seem the less.
Son. 88.
THose beauties (Dear) which all thy sex enuies,
As grieved men should such sacred wonders view:
For pomp apparel'd in a purple hue,
Do whiles disdain the pride of mortal eyes,
Which ah attempting far above their might,
Do gaze upon the glory of those Suns,
Whilst many a ray that from their brightness runs,
Does dazzle all that dare look on their light:
Or was it this, which o I fear me most,
That cled with scarlet, so thy purest parts,
Thy face it having wounded worlds of hearts,
Would die her Lillies with the blood they lost:
Thus ere thy cruelties were long concealed,
They by thy guilty blush would be revealed.
Son. 89.
SMall comfort might my banished hopes recall,
When whiles my dainty fair I sighing see;
If I could think that one were shed for me,
It were a guerdon great enough for all:
Or would she let one tear of pity fall,
That seemed dismissed from a remorcefnll eye,
I could content my self vngrieu'd to die,
And nothing might my constancy appall,
The only sound of that sweet word of love,
Pressed twixt those lips that do my doom contain,
Were I embarked, might me back again
From death to life, and make me breath and move.
Strange cruelty, that never can afford
So much as once one sigh, one tear, one word.
Son. 90.
I Wot not what transported has my mind,
That I in arms against a goddess stand;
Yet though I sue the one of the immortal band,
The like before was prosp'rously designed.
To love Anchises Venus thought no scorn,
And Thetis erst was with a mortal matched,
Whom if the aspiring Peleus had not caught,
The great Achilles never had been borne.
Thus flatter I my self whilst naught confines.
My wandering fancies that strange ways do trace;
He that embraced a cloud in Iunoes place,
May be a terror to the like designs:
But fame in end th'aduentrer ever crowns,
Whom either the issue or the attempt renownes.
Son. 91.
ANd must I lose in vain so great a love,
And build thy glory on my ruined state?
And can a heavenly breast contract such hate?
And is the mildest sex so hard to move?
Have all my offerings had no greater force,
The which so often have made thine altars smoke?
Well, if that thou have vowed not to revoke
The fatal doom that is far from all remorce,
For the last sacrifice my self shall smart,
My blood must quench my vehement desires;
And let thine eyes drink up my funeral fires,
And with my ashes glut thy Tygrish heart:
So though thou at my wonted flames did spurn,
Thou must trust those, when as thou see me burn.
Son. 92.
I Wot not which to challenge for my death,
Of those thy beauties that my ruin seeks,
The pure white fingers or the dainty cheeks,
The golden tresses, or the Nectard breath:
Ah they be all too guilty of my fall,
All wounded me though I their glory raised;
Although I grant they need not to be praised,
It may suffice they be Auroraes all:
Yet for all this, O most ungrateful woman,
Thou shall not escape the scourge of just disdain;
I gave thee gifts thou should have given again,
It Is shame to be in thy inferiors common:
I gave all what I held most dear to thee,
Yet to this hour thou never guerdon'd me.
Son. 93.
Whilst careless swimming in thy beauties seas,
I wondering was at that bewitching grace,
Thou painted pity on a cruel face,
And angled so my judgment by mine eyes:
But now begun to triumph in my scorn,
When I cannot retire my steps again,
Thou arm'st thine eyes with envy and disdain,
To murder my abortiue hopes half borne:
Whilst like to end this long continued strife,
My palenesse shows I perish in despair;
Thou loath to lose one that esteems thee fair,
With some sweet word or look prolongst my life:
And so each day in doubt redact'st my state,
Dear do not so, once either love or hate.
Son. 94.
MIne eyes would ever on thy beauties gaze,
Mine ears are ever greedy of thy fame,
My heart is ever musing on the same,
My tongue would still be busied with thy praise:
I would mine eyes were blind and could not see,
I would mine ears were deaf and would not hear;
I would my heart would never hold thee dear,
I would my tongue all such reports would flee:
The Eyes in their circles do thy picture hold,
The Ears conducts, keep still echoes of thy worth,
The heart can never bar sweet fancies forth,
The tongue that which I think must still unfold:
Thy beauties then from which I would rebel,
The Eyes see, the ears hear the heart thinks, and tongue must tell.
Son. 95.
WHile as th'undanted squadrons of my mind,
On mountains of deserts reard high desires,
And my proud heart that evermore aspires,
To scale the heaven of beauty had designed:
The fair faced goddess of that stately frame,
Looked on my haughty thoughts with scorn a space;
Then thundered all that proud Gigantike race,
And from her lightning lights throw'd many a flame.
Then quite for to confound my lofty cares,
Even at the first encounter as it chanced,
Th'ouer-daring heart that to the assault advanced,
Was cou'red with a weight of huge dispaires,
Beneath the which the wretch does still remain,
Casting forth flames of fury and disdain.
Son. 96.
Fair Tygresse tell, contents it not thy sight,
To see me die each day a thousand times?
O how could I commit such monstrous crimes,
As merit to this martyrdom by night?
Not only has thy wrath adiudg'd to pain,
This earthly prison that thy picture keeps,
But does the soul while as the body sleeps,
With many fearful dreams from rest restrain.
Lo thus I waste to work a tyrants will,
My days in torment, and my nights in terror,
And here confined within an endless error,
Without repentance do persevere still:
That it is hard to judge though both be lost,
Whose constancy or cruelty is most.
Son. 97.
Look to a tyrant what it is to yield,
Who printing still to publish my disgrace,
The story of my overthrow in my face,
Erects pale Trophies in that bloudlesse field:
The world that viewes this strange triumphall arc,
Reads in my looks as lines thy beauties deeds,
Which in each mind so great amazement breeds,
That I am made of many eyes the mark:
But what auailes this Tygresse triumph, O
And could thou not be cruel if not known,
But in this meager map it must be shown,
That thou insultst to see thy subjects so?
And my disgrace it grieves me not so much,
As that it should be said that thou art such.
Son. 98.
LEt others of the worlds decaying tell,
I envy not those of the golden age,
That did their careless thoughts for naught engage,
But cloyd with all delights, lived long and well:
And as for me, I mind t'applaud my fate;
Though I was long in coming to the light,
Yet may I mount to fortunes highest hight,
So great a good could never come too late;
I Am glad that it was not my chance to live,
Till as that heavenly creature first was borne,
Who as an Angel does the earth adorn,
And buried virtue in the tomb revive:
For vice ouerflowes the world with such a flood,
That in it all save she there is no good.
Sonet, 99.
WHilst curiously I gazed on beauties skies,
My soul in little liquid ruslets run,
Like snowie mountains melted with the Sun,
Was liquified through force of two fair eyes,
Thence sprang pure springs and neuer-tainted streams,
In which a Nymph her image did behold,
And cruel she (ah that it should be told)
VVhiles daign'd to grace them with some cheerful beams,
Till once beholding that her shadow so,
Made those poor waters partners of her praise,
She by abstracting of her beauties rays,
With grief congealed the source from whence they flow:
But through the ice of that unjust disdain,
Yet still transpares her picture and my pain.
Son. l00.
AVrora now have I not cause to rage,
Since all thy fishing but a frog has caught?
May I not mourn to see the morning matched,
With one that is in the evening of his age?
Should hoary locks sad messengers of death,
Sport with thy golden hairs in beauties Inn?
And should that furrowed face foil thy smooth skin,
And bath it self in th'Ambrosie of thy breath?
More then mine own I lament thy mishaps;
Must he who jealous through his own defects,
Thy beauties unstained treasure still suspects,
Sleep on the snow-swolne pillowes of thy paps,
While as a lothed burden in thine arms,
Does make thee out of time wail curelesse harms.
Son. 101.
ALL that behold me on thy beauties shelfe,
To cast my self away tossed with conceit,
Since thou will have no pity of my state,
Would that I took some pity of my self:
For what, say they, though she disdain to bow,
And takes a pleasure for to see thee sad,
Yet there be many a one that would be glad,
To bost themselves of such a one as thou.
But ah their counsel of small knowledge savors,
For O poor fools, they see not what I see,
Thy frowns are sweeter then their smiles can be,
The worst of thy disdaines worth all their favors:
I rather (dear) of thine one look to have,
Then of another all that I would crave.
Son. 102.
WHen as that lovely tent of beauty dies,
And that thou as thine enemy fleest thy glass,
And do with grief remember what it was,
That to betray my heart allured mine eyes:
Then having bought experience with great pains,
Thou shall (although too late) thine error find,
Whilst thou reuolu'st in a digested mind,
My faithful love, and thy unkind disdaines:
And if that former times might be recald,
While as thou sadly sitst retired alone,
Then thou would satisfy for all that is gone,
And I in thy hearts throne would be instald:
Dear, if I know thee of this mind at last,
I Will think my self aueng'd of all that is part.
Elegy 3.
IN silent horrors here, where never mirth remains,
I do retire my self apart, as rage and grief constraines:
So may I sigh unknown, whilst other comfort fails,
An infranchised citizen of solitary vales;
Her privilege to plain, since naught but plaints ca^ please,
My sad conceptions I disclose, diseased at my ease.
No barren pity here my passions does increase,
Nor no detracter here resorts, deriding my distress:
But wandering through the world, a vagabonding guest,
Acquiring most contentment then when I am rest of rest.
Against those froward fates, that did my bliss control,
I thunder forth a thousand threats in th'anguish of my soul.
And lo lunaticke-like do dash on every shelfe,
And conuocate a court of cares for to condemn my self:
My fancies which in end time does fantastic try,
I figure forth essentially in all the objects by:
In every corner where my recklesse eye repaires,
I read great volumes of mishaps, memorials of despaires:
All things that I behold, vpbraid me my estate,
And often I blush within my breast, ashamed of my conceit.
Those branches broken down with mercie-wanting winds,
I Object me my dejected state, that greater fury finds:
Their winter-beaten weed dispersed upon the plain,
Are like to my renounced hopes, all scattred with disdain.
Lo wondering at my state the strongest torrent stays,
And turning and returning often, would scorn my crooked ways.
In end I find my fate over all before my face,
Enregistred eternally in th'annales of disgrace.
Those crosses out of count might make die rocks to riue,
That this small remanent of life for to extinguish strive:
And yet my rockie heart so hardened with mishaps,
Now by no means can be co^mou'd, not with Jove's thunder claps:
But in huge woes inuolu'd with intricating art,
Surcharged with sorrows I succomb and senslesly do smart;
And in this labyrinth exiled from all repose, breath,
I consecrate this cursed corpse a sacrifice to woes:
Whilst many a furious plaint my smoking breast shall breath,
Eclipsed with many a cloudie thought, aggrieu'd unto the death:
With th'eccho placed beside some solitary sourse,
Disastruous accidents shall be the ground of our discourse.
Her maimed words shall show how my hurt heart half dies,
Consumed with corrosiues of care, caractred in mine eyes.
My Muse shall now no more transported with respects,
Exalt that evil deserving one as fancy still directs:
Nor yet no partial pen shall spot her spotless fame,
Unhonestly dishonoring an honorable name.
But I shall sadly sing, too tragickly inclined,
Some subject sympathizing with my melancholious mind.
Nor will I more describe my daily deadly strife,
My public wrongs, my private woes, mislucks in love and life:
That would but vex the world for to extend my toiles,
In painting forth particularly my many forms of foiles.
No, none in special I purpose to bewray,
But one as all, and all as one, I mind to mourn for ay.
For being justly weighed, the least that I lament,
Deserves indeed to be bewailed, til the use of the eyes be spent;
And since I should the least perpetually deplore,
The most again though marvelous, ca^ be bemon'd no more
Son. 103.
TO yield to those I cannot but disdain,
Whose face does but entangle foolish hearts;
It is the beauty of the better parts,
With which I mind my fancies for to chain.
Those that have naught wherewith men's minds to gain,
But only curled locks and wanton looks,
Are but like fleeting baits that have no hooks,
Which may well take, but cannot well retain:
He that began to yield to the outward grace,
And then the treasures of the mind does prove:
He, who as it were was with the mask in love,
What does he think when as he sees the face?
No doubt being lim'd by the outward colors so,
That inward worth would never let him go.
Son. 104.
LOng time I did thy cruelties detest,
And blazed thy rigor in a thousand lines;
But now through my complaints thy virtue shines,
That was but working all things for the best:
Thou of my rash affections held'st the raines,
And spying dangerous sparks come from my fires,
Did wisely temper my enflamed desires,
With some chaste favors, mixed with sweet disdaines:
And when thou saw I did all hope despise,
And looked like one that wrestled with despair,
Then of my safety thy exceeding care,
Showed that I kept thine heart, thou but thine eyes:
For whilst thy reason did thy fancies tame,
I saw the smoke, although thou hidst the flame.
Son. 105.
SHould I the treasure of my life betake,
To thought-toss'd breath whose babbling might it mar,
Words with affection winged might flee too far,
And once sent forth can never be brought back:
Nor will I trust mine eyes, whose partial looks
Have often conspired for to betray my mind,
And would their light still to one object bind,
While as the furnace of my bosom smokes:
No, no, my love, and that which makes me thrall,
Shall only be entrusted to my soul,
So may I stray, yet none my course control,
Whilst though orethrowne, none triumphs for my fall:
My thoughts while as confined within my breast,
Shall only privy to my passions rest.
Son. 106.
A Wake my Muse, and leave to dream of loves,
Shake off soft fancies chains, I must be free,
I Will parch no more, upon the myrtle tree,
Nor glide through the air with beauties sacred doves;
But with Jove's slately bird I Will leave my nest,
And try my sight against Apolloes rays:
Then if that ought my ventrous course dismaies,
Upon the Olives boughs I Will light and rest:
I Will tune my accents to a trumpet now,
And seek the Laurel in another field,
Thus I that once, as Beauty means did yield,
Did diverse garments on my thoughts bestow:
Like Icarus I fear, unwisely bold,
Am purposed others passions now t'vnfold.
Song. 10.
FArewell sweet fancies, and once dear delights,
The treasures of my life, which made me prove
That vnaccomplish'd joy that charmed the sprights,
And whilst by it I only seemed to move,
Did hold my ravished soul, big with desire,
That tasting those, to greater did aspire.
Farewell free thraldom, freedom that was thrall,
While as I led a solitary life,
Yet never less alone, whilst armed for all,
My thoughts were busied with an endless strife:
For then not having bound my self to any,
I being bound to none, was bound to many.
Great God that tam'st the gods old-witted child,
Whose temples breasts, whose altars are men's hearts.
From my hearts fort thy legions are exild,
And Hymen's torch has burned out all thy darts:
Since I in end have bound my self to one,
That by this means I may be bound to none.
Thou dainty goddess with the soft white skin,
To whom so many offerings daily smoke,
Were beauties process yet for to begin,
That sentence I would labor to revoke:
Which on mount Ida as thy smiles did charm,
The Phrigian shepherd gave to his own harm.
And if the question were referd to me,
On whom I would bestow the ball of gold,
I fear me Venus should be last of three,
For with the Thunderers sister I would hold,
Whose honest flames pent in a lawful bounds,
No fear disturbs, nor yet no shame confounds.
I mind to speak no more of beauties Dove,
The Peacocke is the bird whose fame I Will raise;
Not that I Argos need to watch my love,
But so his mistress Juno for to praise:
And if I with his eyes, then it shall be,
That I with many eyes my love may see
Then farewell crossing joys, and joyful crosses,
Most bitter sweets, and yet most sugared sowers,
Most hurtful gains, yet most commodious losses,
That made my years to flee away like hours,
And spent the spring time of mine age in vain,
Which now my summer must redeem again.
O welcome easy yoke, sweet bondage come,
I seek not from thy toiles for to be shielded,
But I am well content to be overcome,
Since that I must command when I have yielded:
Then here I quit both Cupid and his mother,
And do resign my self t'obtaine another.
FINIS.

