The Gentleman's Academie. OR, The Book of S. Albans: Containing three most
exact and excellent Books: the first of Hawking, the second of all the proper
terms of Hunting, and the last of Armorie: all compiled by Iuliana Barnes, in
the year from the incarnation of Christ 1486. And now reduced into a better
method, by G. M.

LONDON Printed for Humfrey Lownes, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
churchyard. 1595.

To the Gentlemen of England: and all the good fellowship of Huntsmen and
Falconers.
GEntlemen, this Book, intreting of Hawking, Hunting and Armorie; the
original copy of the which was done at Saint Albans, about what time the
excellent Art of Printing was first brought out of Germany, and practiced here
in England: which Book, because of the antiquity of the same, and the things
therein contained, being so necessary and behouefull to the accomplishment of
the Gentlemen of this flourishing I Will, and others which take delight in either
of these noble sports, or in that heroical and excellent study of Armory, I
have revived and brought again to light the same which was almost altogether
forgotten, and either few or none of the perfect copies thereof remaining,
except in their hands, who well knowing the excellency of the work, and the
rareness of the Book, smothered the same from the world, thereby to enrich
themselves in private with the knowledge of these delights. Therefore I humbly
crave pardon of the precise and judicial Reader, if sometimes I use the words
of the ancient Author, in such plain and homely English, as that time
affoorded, not being so regardful, nor tying my self so strictly to deliver any
thing in the proper and peculiar words and terms of art, which for the love
I bear to antiquity, and to the honest simplicity of those former times, I
observe as well beseming the subject, and no whit disgraceful to the work, our
tongue being not of such purity then, as at this day the Poets of our age have
raised it to: of whom, and in whose behalf I will say thus much, that our Nation
may only think her self beholding for the glory and exact compendiousnes of
our longuage. Thus submitting our Academy to your kind censures and friendly
acceptance of the same, and requesting you to read with indifferency, and
correct with judgment; I commit you to God.

G. M.

The manner to speak of Hawks from an egg till they be able to be taken.
TO speak of the first original beginning of Hawks, first they be eggs,
after they be disclosed they are Hawks, and most commonly Goshawkes be
disclosed as soon as they chough, or kadow, and in some places more timely,
according to the hot climate of the country, which the rather infuseth a
timely breeding. And we ought to say, that Hawks do eire, and not breed in
the woods or rocks: also that they draw, when they bear that wherewith they
build their nests, and that in their love or courting humor they call and not
kanke, and that in the action it self they tread: when they are disclosed and
begin to feather in any ample manner, by a natural instinct and kind they
will draw somewhat out of the nest, coveting to clamber upon the boughs, and
then come to the nest again, and they be called Bowesses. After S. Margarets
day they will fly from tree to tree, and then they are termed Branchers, at
which is the most conuenientest time to take them, and seven nights before
saint Margarets day, and seven nights after is the best time for taking Sparrow
hawks.

How you shall take Hawks, with what instruments, and how you shall kidde them.
What gentleman or other whosoever will take Hawks he must have nets which are
called vrines, and they must be made of good small thread, which would be died
either green or blew, for fear of the Hawks espying of the same, then must
he have needle and threede for the inseeling of such Hawks as are taken, and
in this manner they must be inseeled: take the needle and threede and put it
through the upper eye lidde of the one side, and so likewise of the other, and
make it fast under the Hawks beak: so as she may not see at all, and then she
is inseeled as she ought to be: some use to inseele Hawks by the nether eye
lidde, fastening it above the beak almost upon the head, but that is approved
ill, for by all reason the upper eye lidde closes more justly than the
nether, because that it is much larger: when you have seeled your Hawke, and
brought her home, cast her on a perch, and let her stand there a night and a
day, and on the next day toward evening, take a knife, and with great care
see you cut the threedes insunder which inseele her, and take them away softly
for fear of breaking her eye liddes, then begin in gentle manner to feed
her, and use all the lenity and meekness you can unto her until she will
sit quietly upon your fist, for by much striving you shall hurt her wings which
were not a little dangerous: and then the same night after the feeding, watch
her all night and all the next morrow from any sleep or rest, which will
occasion her to be reclaimed with less difficulty: yet note, that the first
meat which she shall eat be hot, and let her take enough thereof without
troubling.

When your Hawke may be drawn to reclaim, and the manner of her diet.
If your hawke be hard penned, she may be drawn to be reclaimed, for the while
she is tender penned, it is hurtful to reclaim her. And if she be a goshawke
or a Tersell which shall be reclaimed, ever feed them with washed meat at the
drawing and at the reclaiming, but look that it be hot, and in this manner
wash it: take the meat and swill it up and down in the water, and then wring
the water out and feed her therewith if she be a brancher, but if it be a
Iesse, then must you wash your meat much cleaner than for a brauncher, and
wiping it with a linen cloth so feed her, and evermore the third day give her
casting: if she be a Goshawke or Tersell in this sort, take new flannell cloth,
and cut five pellets thereof of an inch long at the least, then take the flesh,
and cut five morsels, and with your knifes point cut a hole in every morsel,
and put therein the pellets of cloth, then lay them in a dish of fair water,
and take your hawke, and give her a bit of warm meat so big as half her
casting, then take one of them which lies in the water and give it her, and so
one after another, and then feed her for all night.

How to feed your hawke and know her infirmities.
A sparrow hawke would always be fed with unwashed meat, and her casting
would be plumage: and have an especial care that the ground be clean under
her perch, whereby in the morning you may the more readily find her casting
when she has cast, by which you shall know whether she be sound I or no, for
some casting will be yelow, some green, some clammie, and some clear: and if
it be yellow, then she engendereth the frounce which is a canker which rises
in the mouth or cheek, and if it be green it betokens the rye, the
property of which evil is this, it will arise in the head and make it swel,
her eyes will be heavy and dark, and but it have present remedy it will fall
into the legs and make them impostume, and if it reuert from the legs unto
the head again, then is it mortal: if it be clammie and roping, then is it
the apparent sign of a disease called the Cray, which causes a hawke that she
cannot mute: but if it be clear and bright, then is there great assurance of
her soundness.

When your Hawke shall bathe.
Once in three days during the Summer let not your hawke fail to bathe, and
once a week in the winter, if the weather be fair and convenient, and not
else, and every time your hawke batheth give her a bit or two of hot meat
unwashed, of what kind soever your hawke be.

How to make your hawke flee with a courage in the morning.
If you have a determination that your Hawke shall flee in the morning, then
feed her the night before with hot meat, and wash the same meat in urine
and wring out the water clean, and that shall add unto her a lust and courage
to flee in the next morning to your contentment.

How to make a Hawke flee well which is full gorged.
If your hawke be full gorged, and yet notwithstanding you would feign have a
flight, take three corns of wheat, and put them in a morsel of flesh and
give it unto your hawke, and immediately she will cast all that is within her,
which as soon as she has cast, look you have a bit or two of some hot meat
to give her, and then you may boldly flee her: this medcine also is excellent
for a Hawke that is ouergorged.

The true Terms and Titles belonging to Hawks.
The first true Term and Title a Falconer ought to learn, is to hold fast
at all times, and especially when she batteth, or strives to flee away. It is
called batting, in that she batteth with hirselfe without cause: the second is,
rebate your hawke to your fist, and that is when she batteth the least moving
that you can with your fist will rebate her back again upon your fist: the
third is, feed your Hawke, and not give her meat: the fourth is, a Hawke
smites or seweth her beak, not wipeth her beak: the fifth, your hawke
iouketh, and not sleeps: the sixth, your hawke pruneth, and not piketh, and
she pruneth not but when she begins at her legs, and fetches moisture
like oil at her tail wherewith she imbalmeth her feet, and strikes the
feathers of her wings through her beak: and it is called the Note then when she
fetches the oil: and note, that in any wise a Hawke ought not to be troubled
whilst she is in pruning of her self, for, when she pruneth she shows her
self to be lusty and in courage, and when she has done she will rowze her
self mightily: sometimes your Hawke countenances as she piketh her self, and
then she pruneth not* wherefore you must say, she reformeth her feathers: the
seventh, your Hawke collieth, and not beaketh: the eight, she rowzeth and not
shakes her self: the ninth, she streineth, and not clitcheth or snatcheth:
the tenth, she mantleth, and not stretches when as she puts her legs from
her one after another, and her wings follow after her legs, for then she
does mantle her, and when she has mantled her, and crosses both her wings
together over her back, you shall say your Hawke warbleth her wings, which is
a term most proper for that purpose: the eleventh, you shall say your
Hawke-mutesseth, or muteth, and not skliseth: the twelfth, you shall say, cast
your Hawke to the perch, and not set your Hawke upon the perch.

Terms to commend sundry properties in a Hawke.
First you shall say, this is a fair Hawke, an huge hawke, along hawke, a
short thick hawke, but not that she is a great Hawke: also you shall say,
this hawke has a large beak, or a short beak, but call it not a bill: an
huge head, or a small head fair seasoned: you shall say your Hawke is full
gorged, and not cropped, and your Hawke puts over and endueth, and yet she
does both diversely, as thus: she puts over when she remooueth her meat
from her gorge into her bowels, and thus you shall know it: when she puts
over she trauerseth with her body, and chiefly with her neck as a crane does,
or an other bird: she endueth never as long as her bowelles be full at her
feeding, but as soon as she is fed and rests, she endueth by little and
little, and if her gorge be void, and the bowel any thing stiff, then you
shall say she is embowelled and has not fully endued, or, so long as you can
feel any thing in her bowels it is dangerous to give her any meat. You shall
say an Hawke has a long wing, a fair long train with six bars out, and
stands upon the seventh, this hawke is enterpenned, that is to say, when the
feathers of the wings be between the body and the thighs, this hawke has an
huge leg, or a flat leg, a round leg, or a fair ensered leg.

To know the Maile of an hawke.
Hawks have a white Maile, canuas maile or a red maile, and some call a red
maile an iron maile, a white maile is easiest known, a canuas maile is
between a white maile and an iron maile, and an iron maile is exceeding red. A
goshawke or tercell in their soreage have not their mailes named, but it is
called their plumage, and after that cote it is called their maile, and if your
hawke flee for reward you shall say, cast the Hawke thereto, and not let flee
thereto.

Nommed or seized.
And if your hawke nomme a foul, and the foul break away from her, she has
discomfited many feathers of the foul, and is broken away, for in true
Falconers language you shall say, your Hawke has nommed or seized a foul, and
not taken it.

Why a Hawke is called a Rifler.
It happens many times through eagerness or foolishness, that a hawke when
she should nomme a foul, she seaseth but on the feathets only, whereby her
flight is effectlesse, look how often she so does, so often she rifleth, and for
that cause such hawks are called Riflers.

Diverse proper names to the feathers and other parts of an Hawke.
The foremost bearing out feathers of a hawke are called the breast feathers,
the feathers under the wings are called plumage, those under the beak are
called the barbe feathers, and those which are at the joint of the hawks knee,
and stand hanging and sharp at the ends, those be called the pendant feathers,
the feathers of the wings next the body are the flagge or flags feathers, the
long feathers of an hawks wing are the beam feathers, and those that some call
the pinion feathers of an other foul, are in a hawke called the sercell
feathers. Besides this, you shall understand if a hawke be in the mew that same
sercell feather is always the last that she will cast, and til that be cast she
is not absolutely mewed, yet it has been sometimes seen that hawks have
cast it first (as report makes mention) but the other rule is most general:
and when she has cast her sercels in the mew, then, and not before it is time
to feed her with washed meat, and to begin to inseam her: which word inseame
in a hawke betokens grease, and but it be taken away by feeding with washed
meat and otherwise as it shall be mentioned hereafter, she will gather a
pannell which may turn to her utter confusion: moreover, if she do flee
therewith and take blood and cold it is present death, there are also certain
feathers which close upon the sercelles and they are called the couerts or
covert feathers, and so likewise are all the feathers termed which are next
over the long beam feathers and the flagge feathers upon the wings, the
feathers upon the back are called the back feathers, the Hawks beak is the
upper part which is nooked, the nether part of the beak is called the Hawks
clappe, the holes in the Hawks beak are called her nares, the yellow between
the beak and the eyes is called the Sere: Hawks have long small black
feathers l^ke hairs about the sere, which are properly called Crynits.

Of the soreage of a Hawke.
The first year of every Hawke whether she be called brancher or eyesse, that
selfsame first year is always called her soreage, and during that year she
is called a Sore Hawke, for and if she do escape that year all impediments,
with good feeding and orderly regarding, she is likely to endure long.

How to reclaim a hawke.
If you will reclaim your Hawke, you must part one meal into three meals,
till such time that she will come to reclaim, which when she does to your
contentment, then increase her meals every day better and better: and have
chief regard that ere she come to reclaim, by no means she soar, for albeit
she be perfitly reclaimed, yet it may happen she will soar so high into the
air, as you shall neither see her, nor find her: and as a general principle
if your hawke fly at the partrige, look that you enseame her before she fly,
whether she be brauncher, eyesse, or menod hawke.

Why a Hawke is called an eyesse.
An Hawke is called an eyesse of her eyes, for a hawke that is brought up under
a Bussard, Puttocke or Kite, (as there be many) they always have watery eyes,
for when they are disclosed and kept in form until they be full summed, you
shall know them most assuredly by their waterie eyes, neither will her look
be so quick, lively, and sharp as a brancher is: and thus because the best
knowledge is by the eyes, all such hawks as are extraordinarily brought up not
under their own dams, are called Eyesses: Again, you may know an eyesse by
the palenesse of her seres of her legs, and the sere over her back, and also
by the taints upon her tail or wings which taints come for lack of feeding
when they be eyesses.

What a Taint is.
An ataint is a thing which goes overthwart the feathers of the wings and of
the tail, like as if it were eaten with the worms, and it begins first to
breed at the body in the pen, in such sort that some pens will fret in sunder
and fall away through the same taint, and then is the hawke disparaged for all
that year ensuing.

An outward sign to know when your hawke is enseamed.
This rule is infallible and most certain, look how long your hawks feet be
blackish and rough, so long she is full of grease and glut, but ever as she
enseameth so her feet will wax yellow and smooth.

How to demean your self when your hawke is ready to flee.
When you have enseamed your hawke and reclaimed her, and she is ready to flee
to the partrige, take then a partrige in your bag, and go into the field, and
there let your spaniels range for a couey of partriges, and when they are put
up and begin to scatter, look that you have about you well eied markers to
some of them, then couple up your spaniels, which done, let some one of your
company privily take the partrige out of your bag, and tie it by the leg in
a pair of creance, then cast it up as high as he can, which as soon as the
hawke shall perceive she will flee thereunto, if your hawke sease the partrige
above give her a reward therefore, and go after that by leisure to the
partriges which were marked, and do thus as I will teach you: If you have a
chased spaniel which will be rebuked and is a good retriuer, uncouple him and no
more of the spaniels, then go to a single partrige of the couey so dispersed,
and be as nigh as you can unto the rising thereof, and if your hawke desire
cast her unto it, which if she take, then is she made for that year, and of
the same partrige which she thus kills reward her in manner as here follows.

How you shall reward your Hawke.
Take a knife and cut the head and the neck from the body of the partrige, and
strippe the skin away from the neck, then give the same to the hawke and
cover the body of the foul with a hat or other garment and lay the same head
or neck thereupon, and if so be she will forsake the foul she plumeth upon and
come to the reward, then secretly take away the partrige, and reward your hawke
with the brain and the neck, but have heed she eat no bones, for they be
exceeding evil to endure, and they will take from her lust and courage in
fleeing, and in this manner reward her of as many as she shall kill, only have
that discretion, that her rewards be not too great, for fear you make her
full gorged, and then can she flee no more for that day.

How your Hawke shall rejoice.
When your Hawke has to your contentment killed a foul, and is by you
rewarded (as above said) let her not by any means flee again til she have
rejoiced her, which is to say, till she have sewed, suided, or cleansed her
beak, or else rowzed her, and when she has done any of these or all: then
may you boldly at your pleasure flee her again.

How you shall do that you rebuke not your hawke when she killes.
Learn one thing perfitly, and have great heed thereof, that is, when your
hawke has nommed or killed a partrige, stand a good way off and come not too
nigh her, and be sure to keep back al your spanielles for fear of rebuking
her, for many hawks cannot endure spaniels, and also many spaniels will tear
the game from the hawks foot, which is an extreme mischief: and whilst
your hawke plumeth, come softly toward her by little and little, but if you
see she leave pluming, and fix her eyes upon you, then stand still and check
her and whistle her till she plume again, and in this manner do till you come
close unto her, then leasurely and without trouble fall down upon your knees,
and privily whilst she plumeth put under your hand, and be sure of her guess,
for, having that sure, you may rule all things else at your own pleasure,
which if you ouerslip or forget, then the least fear will make her endeavor to
carry away her game, or else forsaking it let it ascape, which is but loss
both to your self and your hawke.

An opinion of Ostrengers.
Ostrengers hold opinion, that if you feed your Hawke continually with Porke,
with Iaies, with Pies, or bear her abroad much in rainie weather, she will
undoubtedly prove lousy.

Of Ostrengers, Speruiters, and Falconers.
Because that now I have spoken of Ostrengers, you shall understand, that they
be called Ostrengers which are the keepers of Goshawkes or Tercelles, and those
which keep Sparrow hawks or muskets are called Speruiters, and those which
keep any other kind of hawke being longwinged are termed Falconers.

Of the Guess, Lewnes, Tyrrits, Bewits, Creance, and how they are fastened.
All hawks have or should have about their legs guess made of leather, and
many times some of silk, which should be no longer than that the knots of
them should appear in the midst of the left hand between the long finger and
the least finger, because the lewnes should be fastened to them with a pair of
tyrrits, which tyrrits, should rest upon the lewnes, and not upon the gesses
for fear of fastening or hanging upon trees as she flies, and those same
lewnes you shall fasten about your little finger slackely in compassing the
same in four or five fould like to a bow string which was never used, and the
tyrrets serve to keep her from winding when she battes. Lastly, those
somewhat broad leathers to which her belles are put unto, and so buttoned about
her legs, you shall call Bewits. The Creance is that line to which you fasten
your hawke when you call her to reclaim of what sort soever it be.

How a man shall take a Hawke from the Eyree.
Whosoever will take a hawke out of the eyree, it behooves him to be very
circumspect in bringing it up easily, and to keep it from cold or hurting of
the bones, for they are first very tender and must have great rest, neither may
they have stinking or filthy air, but as sweet and good as is possible, and
evermore must you give them clean meat and hot, and a little, yet often, many
times changing their meat, yet always so as it be hot, let the same meat be
cut into little morsels, for they ought not to tire on bones till they be of
ability to flee. But when as they begin to pen, and plumeth, and spalcheth
and picketh themselves, put them in a close warm place into which no fulmerds,
weesels or other vermin can come, neither wind nor rain can annoy, and then
she will soon some her self, yet evermore give her hot meat, for it is
better for a man to feed his hawke while she is tender with hot meats, and so
make her good with some cost, than to feed her with evil meat and make her
naught with no cost, and as soon as she is sommed then let her bathe.

When to put you Hawke in the mew.
If you have a love or care of your hawke, keep her well, and put her not late
in the mew: whosoever for covetousness of his hawks fleeing pleasure loses
the time of her mewing, he may after put her in the mew at adventure, and have
her mew at insufficient leisure: the best time therefore to put a hawke into
the mew, is in the beginning of Lent, for if she be then well kept, she will be
mewed by the beginning of August.

How to dispose and ordain your mew.
Dispose your mew so as it be free from weesel or poulcat, or any other
vermin, and that it be not annoyed either with wind or cold, or extreme
heat, yet let one part of the mew stand so as the Sun may come in for the most
part of the day, let also the situation be so appointed as your hawke may not
be troubled with much noise nor tumult of men, neither let any person come
unto her, but only he that feeds her: provide to have in your mew a feeding
stock for your hawke, and a long string tied thereunto to make her meat fast
withal, for else she will carry it about the house, and soil it with dust, and
many times hide it til it stink and be unwholesome, insomuch as it may occasion
her death, and therefore when it is bound to the feeding stock, neither in the
feeding, nor in the tiring, neither at her lighting down, nor at her rising up
shall she do her self any hurt or prejudice, then when as she has fed,
take away whatsoever she shall leave, and at the next time give her fresh and
sweet meat, for stale and long kept meat engendereth many evil and mortal
sickenesses, and look that you never go to your mew, but when as you do
intend to give her meat, or bring her water wherein she may bathe, neither
suffer any rain to wette her at any time for diverse causes: and for her
bathing, that shall occasion her to mew well.

The manner how to put a Hawke into the mew.
First before you put your hawke into the mew, have an especial care, that if
she have any sickness or infirmity in her, you cure her before you put her
into the mew, for it is an infallible principle, a sick hawke shall never mew
well, or if she do mew, yet shall she not endure any longer than whilst she
is great and fat, for as her estate wastes, so her life consumes. Some men
without any medicine will invent how to mew their hawks, some will put
their hawks into the mew at high estate, some when they are very low, some
when they be full, some when they are empty and lean, and some when they are
miserably lean, but of al it is no great matter so she be sound:
nevertheless, this is my opinion, both as I have seen and learned, whosoever
puts a goshawke, a tercell, or sparrowhawke into the mew, so high as she
can possibly be no higher, she will hold her long in the point before she
will mew any feather, and who so puts his hawke in lean, she will be as long
ere she be remounted, and whosoever puts her into the mew too hungry, and too
lean, if she have meat at will she will eat too greedily, and so through
surfeit die ere she come to any mewing. But whosoever will have his Hawke endure
and mew kindly, my best counsel is, that she be neither too high nor too low,
neither in great distress of hunger, but in such case or plight as she should
be when she is at her best flying: this observed, observe after, that the first
day she comes into the mew she eat not too much, until such time as her
stomach be made stanch, which perceived you may then give her such meat as I
shall set down here following.

How to feed your hawke in the mew*
With what meat she has been most commonly used to be fed, with the same feed
her eight days continually, and in those eight days give her birds enough both
morning and evening, and let her plume upon them well, and take casting of the
plumage which will cleanse her and make her have an exceeding good appetite:
also it will scower her bowels, which being scowred, you may after adventure to
give her what meat you will, so it be clean and fresh: yet the best meat for
to make a hawke mew soon without medicine is the flesh of a kidde, of a young
swanne, or of a chickin, but above al, the flesh of a ratte, goslings are good,
or any such like, which are of themselves hot: if you take gobbets of great
fresh eeles, and principally that next the naurll, and dippe it in the hot
blood of a mutton, it will make a hawke mew soon, and all other things, it
will make her white after her soreage: these meats before mentioned are the
best to mew a hawke with, and to keep her in good state, but it must be your
care that she have some every day, so that she rather leave some thing then
want any thing, and every third day let her not fail to bathe if she be so
disposed: and when she is almost firm, then give her hens flesh, fat porke,
or dogs flesh, any of these three is good. An hawke is not full firm or
ready to draw out of the mew till such time as her sercell be full grown, yet
have I seen some men take them out of the mew when the sercell was but half
appeared, but I am against it, and think it perilous, because they are not
then hard penned: some men use when a hawke has cast her sercell to begin and
wash her meat, and feed her so in the mew with washed meat a month or six
weeks before they draw her, but I am not of that opinion.

To know when a Hawke tireth, feeds, gorgeth, beaketh, rowseth, endueth,
muteth, pearcheth, ioiketh, puts over, pruneth, plumeth, warbleth, and
mantleth.
A hawke she tireth upon rumps, she feeds upon all manner of flesh, she
gorgeth when she fills her gorge with meat, she beaketh when she seweth,
which is to say, she wipeth her beak, she rowseth when she shakes al her
feathers and her body together, she endueth when her meat in her bowelles
falls to digestion, she muteth when she auoides her ordure, she percheth when
she stands on any manner of bough or perch, she ioiketh when she sleeps, she
puts over when she auoyds her meat out of her gorge into her bowels, she
proineth when she fetches oil with her beak out of her tail and annoints
her feet and her feathers, she plumeth when she pulles off the feathers from
any foul, or from any other thing and casts them from her, she warbleth when
she draws both her wings over the midst of her back, and there they meet
both, and softly shakes them, and lets them fall again, and she mantleth when
she stretches one of her wings along after her leg, and afterward the other
wing, which most commonly she does before she warbleth her.

The true names of a Spar-hawke, as Ostrengers, and Speruiters have thought.
There is a question whether a man shall call a sparehawke, a spere-hawke, or
an aspere-hawke, to which Ostrengers and Speruiters answer she may be called by all the three names for three reasons* first, she may be called a spere-hawke,
for of all the hawks that are she is most spear, that is, she is most tender to
keep, for the least misdiet or disorder whatsoever kills her. Secondly, she may
be called an asper-hawke, by reason of the sharpnes of her courage, and her
quick look, and also of her fleeing, for she is most aspere and sharp in all
things which belong unto her more than any other hawke. Lastly, she may be
called a sparehawke for two reasons, one is, she spares goshawkes and tercels
both, such as be in their soreage until such time as they may be reclaymed
and made ready to flee, as also all goshawkes or tercels which are not fully
mewed till such time as they may be clean ens^amed and ready to flee, for all
the while they be unable the sparehawke occupies the season of the year, and
kills the partrige excellently well, which is from Saint Margarets day till
Lammas, and so forth in the year, she will also flee well at young fesants,
young heath cocks in the beginning of the year, and after Michaelmasse when
partriges through greatness pass their danger, I have then seen them made,
some to fly the pie, some the teale upon rivers, some to fly the woodcocke,
and some for the black bird or the thrush: the flight at the woodcocke is a
cunning flight, and asks great craft, therefore when you come to a wood or a
quetch of bushes, cast your sparrowhawke into a tree, and beat the bushes,
then if any woodcocke arise she will assuredly have it* yet you must first
make her thereunto, or to any other foul casting one first in a string out of
the bushes whereby she may know her pastime, and she must sit aloft as when she
is made for the partrige: again, (as before I have said) you may call her a
sparrowhawke for this other reason, which is, if there were a ship laden full
of hawks and nothing else, and if there were one sparrowhawke amongst them
there should be no custom be paid because of her, and so for the most common
name they are called sparrow hawks, as prove the reasons before mentioned.

How a hawke flies.
An hawke flies to the river diverse ways, and kills the foul diversely,
that is to say, she flies to the view, to the beak, or to the toll, and all
is but one, as you shall know hereafter, she flies also to the qu^^^e, to
the creep, and no other way, and she nymmeth the foul at the fere iuttie, or
at the iuttie fere.

To know what Huffe, Iuttie ferry, Mount, Randon, Creep, Ennewed means.
A Goshawke or a Tercell that shall flee to the view, to the toll, or to the
beak, is taught in this manner* you must find a foul in the river or in a
pit, and then set your hawke a good way off upon a moll hill, or on the ground,
and creep softely toward the foul, and when you come almost where the foul
lies, look backward toward the hawke, and with your hand make sign for your
hawke to come to you, and when she is a coming and comes low by the ground
almost at you, then smite your hawks poule, and cry huffe, huffe, huffe, and
make the foul to rise, which when she shall see, doubt not her forwardness in
fleeing, but if she nyme or take the further side of the river or pit from
you, then she slaieth the foul at fere iuttie: but if she kill it on that side
that you are on your self as many times it chances, then you shall say she
killed the foul at the iutty ferry if your hawke nime the foul aloft, you
shall say she took it at the mount, or at the sonce, but if the foul rise not
but flee along close by the river and the hawke nyme it, then you shall say, she
killed it at the randon: when you have your Hawke on your fist, and creep
softly to the river or to the pit, stealing softly to the brinke thereof, and
by that means slay a foul, then you shall say it was killed at the creep
either at the fere iuttie, or iuttie fery as is above mentioned, but if it
chance, as it does many times, and most often, that the foul for fear of your
hawke rise and falls again into the river ere the hawke can sease upon her,
and so lies she and dare not rise, you shall say then your hawke has endewed
the foul into the river, and so you shall say also if there be more fowls in
the river than that the which your hawke nymeth, if they dare not arise for
fear of your hawke.

A thief.
You shall understand, that a goshawke ought not to flee at any foul upon the
river with belles at her feet in any wise, by which means a goshawke is
called a thief.

Querre.
If you see store of mallards separate from the river and feeding in the
field, if your hawke flee covertly under hedges, or close by the ground, by
which means she nymeth one of them before they can rise, you shall say, that
foul was killed at the Querre.

Mark this term Draw.
There be many Falconers which do misuse this term Draw, and say that their
hawks will draw to the river, where that term Draw is properly assigned to
that hawke which will kill a rooke, a crow, or a raven sitting upon a land,
wherefore it must be said, that such an hawke will draw well to a rooke.

How a man shall make a hawke to the Querre.
Take a tame mallard and set him in a fair plain, and let him go whither he
will, then take your hawke upon your fist and go to that plain, and being a
good distance off hold up your hand, and see if your hawke can epsy the
mallard yea or no by her own courage, and if you find she have discerned the
foul and desire to flee thereto, let her kill it and plume well thereon, and in
this sort serve her three or four times, and doubt not but she is perfitly
made to the Querre: I have known gentlemen, that whenever and wheresoever
they see any tame duckes, and if their hawks would desire to them, they would
let them flee, which they found encouraged their Hawks to be well fleeing to
the Querre an other time.

A pretty deceit to take an hawke that is broken out of the mew, or any foul
that sits in trees.
Look where an hawke pearcheth for all night in what place soever it be, and
softly and leasurely clime up to her with a sconce or lantern which has but
one light in it, and let that light be toward the hawke, so as she see not your
face and in that manner you may come to her, and take her either by the legs
or any other part, for she will not in any wise move from the light, and in
this sort may you take any other foul.

Of Hawks belles.
The bells which your hawke shall wear, look in any wise that they be not too
heavy, whereby they ouerloade her, neither that one be heavier than an other,
but both of like weight: look also, that they be well sounding and shrill, yet
not both of one sound, but one at least a note under the other: also, that they
be whole and not broken, and chiefly in the sounding place, for if they be
cracked, there the sound will be dull and naught, of spar-hawkes belles there is
choice enough, and the charge little, by reason that the store thereof is
great: But for goshawks sometimes belles of Millaine were supposed to be the
best, and undoubtedly they be excellent, for that they are sounded with silver,
and the price of them is thereafter, but there be now used belles out of the
low Countries which are approved to be passing good, for they are principally
sorted, they are well sounded, and sweet of ringing, with a pleasant
shrilnesse, and excellently well lasting.

To what Honor all Hawks do belong, and first to an Emperor.
First, there is an Eagle, a Bawter, and a Melowne, the worst of these three
will kill an hind calfe, a fawn, a roe, a kidde, an elke, a crane, a buzzard,
a storke, a swanne, a fox in the plain ground: and these are not enlured
neither reclaimed, because they be so exceeding ponderous to the perch
portatiue, and these three by their proper natures belong to an Emperor.

What to a King.
Unto a King belongs at his pleasure tributaries a Gerfalcon, and a tercell
of a Gerfalcon which is most commonly called a Gerkin.

To a Prince.
There is a Falcon gentle, and a Tercel gentle, and both of them belong every
way to a Prince.

To a Duke.
There is a Falcon of the Rock, and that belongs (in the opinions of all
Falconers) to a Duke.

To an Earl.
There is one other falcon, and that hawke is called a falcon peregrine, which
by the best iugements is bequeathed to an Earl.

To a Baron.
To a Baron and his degree belongs a Hawke which is called a Bastard.

To a Knight.
There is a Sacre and also a Sacret, and both the one and the other do belong
unto a knight.

To an Esquier.
The Lanar and the Lanret, hawks of exceeding hardness do both belong to an
Esquier.

To a Lady.
There is an Hawke called a Merlin, both Jack and Formale, and they belong
unto a Lady.

To a Yongman.
To every Yongman is due the Hawke called the Hobbie, and these be all the
long-winged haugs or hawks of the Tower, and all these are by lure both called
and also reclaymed.

Of short winged Hawks.
Of short winged hawks, which are hawks of another kind, there is first a
goshawke the which is for a Yeoman.

There is a tercell of a Goshawke which is for a poor man.

There is a Sparre-hawke which is for a poor man.

There is a Musket, which is (as old Authors have entitled them) for a holy
water Clarke: and these be the short winged hawks, of an other kind from the
former, for they flee to the Querre, and to fere iuttie and iuttie ferry.

Thus ends the process or discourse of Hawking, and now follows the most
excellentest approved receipts and medicines belonging to all manner of diseases
and other impediments in Hawks whatsoever.
How the Frounce comes, and a medicine therefore.
THe Frounnce comes not by any thing sooner than by feeding your hawke with
vile and naughty meat, as with porke, or else with cattes flesh, which is the
worst of all: the cure thereof is thus, take a silver spoone and put the small
end in the fire til it be hot, then having your hawke held fast, open her beak
and burn the sore, then anoint it with the marrow of a goose which has lain
so long till it stincke and it will soon be whole, but if the frounce be waxed
as great as a nut* then shall you find a worm therein, wherefore then you must
cut it with a razor in this manner, let one hold the hawke and slit the sore,
and you shall find there as if it were the maw of a pigeon, take it all out
whole, and take a pair of sheares and cut the hole of the sore, and make it
as clean as you can with a linen cloth, wiping the blood clean away, then
anoint the sore place with balm four days together, and afterward with
populion till it be whole.

How the rye comes, and the cure thereof.
The want of hot meat, and ignorance, not suffering your hawke to tire much,
is that which occasioneth the rye: the cure is, take dasie leaves and stamp
them in a mortar and wring out the iuise, then with a pen put it in the hawks
nares once or twice when she is small gorged, and immediately thereupon give her
tiring and she will be sound: or else take parcely roots and serve her with
them in the same manner, and when she tireth hold rue in your hand with the
tiring, and that will make her void the naughty humor, but it is dangerous
to use it too often for fear the juice spirt into her eye and hurt her.

How the Cray comes, and the cure therefore.
The Cray comes by giving your hawke meat washed in hot water when you want
hot meat: it comes by means of threeds in the flesh that the hawke is fed
withal, for though you pick the flesh never so clean, yet you shall find
threedes therein: the cure is, take and chafe with your hands the fundament of
your Hawke with luke warm water a long time, and after that take the poulder
of saxifrage or else the poulder of rue, and a quantity of May butter, and
temper it well together till they be well mingled, then put it in a little box
and close it fast, and as often as you feed your hawke a whole meal anoint
her meat a little therewith, and that shall make her love the meat the
better, because of the ointment, and it will keep her from the Cray, and from
diverse other sickenesses which engender in a hawke. If you take the hot heart
of a swine or of a pigge and feed your Hawke therewith two days together it
will cure her.

Also, if you take porke and dippe it in the hot milk of a cow and feed
your hawke therewith, it will help the cray, and make her mute clean.

Again, porke with the marrow of the bone of the buttocke of a swine, being
given both together shall make her mute well and clean.

Also, if you use her now and then unto fresh butter, you shall find it
passing good for the cray.

Also, one meal, or two at the most, of the hot liver of a pigge will make
her mute well, but beware you give her not too great a gorge thereof, for it is
a perilous meat.

Also, take the white of an egg, and beat it well with a spoone till it be
like water, then let the meat which shall be for your hawks supper lie in
steep therein all the day before, and at night feed her therewith, and that
which shall be for her dinner in the morning, let it lie all night and if the
meat that is so steeped be porke, it is much better, for so it has been
approved.

Medicines to enseame your Hawke.
Take the root of rasue and do it in clean water, then lay the flesh therein
to steep a great while, and after give it to your hawke to eat, and if she do
eat thereof, doubt not but it will take away her grease, neither shall she
much bate therefore.

Also, take puliall and garlike, and stamp them well together, and wring out
the juice into a dish, and then wet the flesh therein and feed your hawke there
with, and within four days without all fail it* will cleanse and enseame your
hawke, but be sure every day to make new juice, and always when you feed
her, wet your meat therein. Also take the juice of parcelie moris, otherwise
called parcelie roots, aad the juice of hysope and wash your flesh theeein,
and your hawke shall be enseamed kindly without any great abate to your
hawke.

Some use to lay their flesh in water almost a day, and to give the same to the
hawke at supper, and that which so lies all night to give to her in the
morning, and thus to feed her in the mue before she be drawn about a month or
six weeks, and so to enseame here ere she come to the fist, which is very
good, and when she has cast her sercell then is the time to begin to feed
her in that manner.

A medicine to make a hawke cast which is troubled with casting in her body.
Take the juice of Saladine, and wette a piece of flesh therein to the bigness
of a nut, and give that piece to the hawke, and it will presently make her cast
the old casting, and save the hawke.

A medicine for a hawke that will soar.
Wash the flesh that your hawke shall feed with in the juice of fenell, and it
will take away that pride from her, and make her to leave her soaring, whether
she be lean or fat, and many times a hawke will soar, only for want of
bathing.

A medicine for a hawke that is lousy.
Take quickesiluer and put it in a basen of brass, and put thereto saladine
and ashes and mingle them well together til the quick silver be slain, and
mix therewith the fat of bones, and annointe the hawke therewith, and hang
it about her neck till it fall away, and that shall kill the lice. Also powder
of orpment blown upon a hawke with a pen will kill the lice.

Also take a piece of a rough blanket unshorn, and hold it to the fire till it
be through warm, and then wrap the hawke therein, and hold her softly for
hurting her in your hands, and all the lice will creep into the cloth.

Also hold her in the sun in a fair day, and you shall see the lice creep
out upon her feathers, then take a knife and wet the one side of the blade
thereof with your mouth, and always as they appear lay the wet side of the
knife upon them, and they will cleave thereto, and so you may kill them.

A medicine for a hawke that will cast flesh.
Put the flesh that your hawke shall eat in fair water, and feed her
therewith three days, and she shall hold her flesh at the best.

A medicine for an hawke that has lost her courage.
An hawke that has lost her courage, a man may know if he will take good
heed, for this is her manner, when she is cast to a foul, she flies a
wayward, as if she knew not a foul, or else she will pursue it a little way,
and immediately give it over, then for such a hawke, this is a good and an
approved medicine: take of oil of Spain, and temper it with clear wine and
the yolke of an egg: which being done, put biefe therein, and give to your
hawke thereof five morcels and then set her in the sun, and at the evening
feed her with an old hot dove, and if you do but feed her thus three or
four times, you shall find that the hawke was never more lusty, or of better
courage in her life, then she will be. Others make a powder of meckles, which
stincketh, and puts the powder on the flesh of a peacocke, and mingles the
blood of the peacocke with the powder, and so gives it to the hawke.

A medicine that a hawke lie not in the mew for vnlustines.
Take fern roots which grow on an oak, and oak apples, and make a juice of
them, and feed your hawke therewith three or four times, and she will leave
her lying.

A medicine for a hawke that has the teyne.
An hawke which has the teyne is easily known if a man take heed, for this is
her manner, she will pant more for one batting, then an other hawke will for
three, and if she should but fly a little she would loose her breath, whether
she be hie or low, and always she is of heavy cheer, the cure whereof is
thus, Take a quantity of the rednes of ^assell with the powder of a rasne, and
peper, and somewhat of ginger, and make thereof with fresh grease three
pellets, then hold the hawke to the fire, and when she feels the heat,
make her to swallow those pellets by force, then knit fast her beak that she
cast them not out, and in doing this thrice, she will be sound.

Also take rasne and rubarbe, and grind them together, and make a juice
thereof and wet your hawks meat therein, and give it her to eat, and it will
cure her. Also take Alysaunders and the root of a primrose, and sees them in
butter, and give your hawke three morsels every day until she be whole.

A medicine for a hawke that cast worms at her fundament, what worms soever
they be.
Take the lymaile of iron and mingle it with the flesh of porke, and give it
your hawke to eat three days together and it will cure her.

A medicine for the Aggrestine.
When you see your hawke hurt her feet with her beak, and pulls her train,
then she has the aggrestine, the cure is, take merde of a dove, and of a
sheep, and of an allow, and strong vinegar, and do all softly, in a brass
basin and mingle them well together, so as they may serve three days together,
and give her the flesh of a coluer or stock dove with honey and the powder of
peper, and then set her in a dark place, and do so nine days, and when you
see new feathers come in her tail let her bathe, for she is sound.

A medicine for the crampe, and how it comes.
For the crampe in a hawks wings, take a white loaf of bread somewhat
colder then it comes out of the oven, and holding the hawke softly for fear
of hurting her, cut the loaf almost thorough out, and displaie her winge
easily and hold it between the two parts of the loaf, and let it be so
held the space of half a quarter of an hour and she shall be eased. The
crampe comes to an hawke by taking of cold in her soreage, wherefore it is
good to keep a hawke warm both when she is young and old: and this medicine is
approved good at all times whether she be young or old.

A medicine to make a hawke mew timely without hurt.
There are in woods, or in hedges worms called adders, which be by nature
read, and there are also snakes of the same nature, and they are very bitter,
take two or three of them, and cut off their heads and the ends of their
tails, then take a new earthen pot which was never used, and cutting them
into small gebbets, put them therein, and in leasurely sort let them sees a
good while, and let the pot be close covered so as no air may come out, or go
in: and let those pieces seethe til they be all turned to grease, then cast it
out and do away the bones, and gather up the grease and put it in a clean
vessel, and as often as you feed your hawke, anoint her meat therewith, then
let her eat as much as she will, and by means of that meat, she will mew
at your pleasure.

Also take wheat, and boil it in the broth that the Adders were sodden in,
and when you see it begin to break, take it out and feed hens and chikens
therewith, and with such hens and chikens feed your hawke.

A medicine that a hawke fall none of her feathers.
Take powder of canell, and the juice of frankcost, with the juice of paranie,
and wette therein three or four pieces of flesh, and make your hawke to
swallowe them, and in using this often, it will prevail.

Also take the skin of an Adder or a snake, and cut it into small pieces and
temper it with hot blood, and make your hawke many times to feed thereon, and
she will not mew.

For the gowt in the throat.
When you see your hawke blow many times, and that it comes not of batting,
then may you be assured that she has the gout in the throat: the cure
whereof is, take the blood of a peacocke and incense Mirabolana, and cloue
gilleflowers* canell and ginger, and take of all these a like, and mingle them
with the peacockes blood, and sees it till it be very thick, and thereof make
morcels, and give your hawke thereof every day at midmorne, and at noone.

For the gout in the head and reins.
When you see your hawke cannot endue her meat, nor remount her estate, then
it is like she has the gout in the head, or reins: the cure whereof is, take
momyan, otherwise called momy of the appoticaries. And the skin of an hare,
and give it to your hawke to eat nine times with the flesh of a colt, and if
she can hold that meat it will cure her.

A medicine for the falera.
When you see your hawks talents wax white, then is it a sign she has the
falera, the cure is, take a black snake and cut away the head and the tail,
and take the middle and fry it in an earthen pot, then take the grease and
save it, and anoint the flesh of a peacocke therewith, and give it to the
hawke for to eat eight days together, but if you have not a peacocke, take a
stock dove, and after the eight days end, give her a chicken, wash a little
chiefly the tenderest part of the breast, and she will be whole.

For the crampe in the thigh, leg, or foot of a hawke.
When you see your hawke lay one foot upon another, then is it a sign she
has the crampe, the cure thereof is, draw her blood upon the foot which lies
upon the other foot, and upon the leg also, and it will extinguish the
crampe.

For the cough, or pose.
For the cough, take powder of bays, and put it upon the flesh of a
stockedoue, and giving it to your hawke it will help her.

For the podagree.
When your Hawks feet are swollen she has the podagree, the cure is, take
fresh May butter and as much of oil olive, and of allume, and chafe them well
together at the fire, and make thereof an ointment and anoint her feet four
days together, and set her in the sun, and give her the flesh of a catte,
and if you see it avail not, (...) the cutting of a vine, and wrappe it about
the swelling, and let her sit upon a cold stone, and anoint her with butter
till she be whole.

For inward sickness unseen.
A man may know by the cheer and unpleasantness of an hawke this infirmity,
but yet it is strange to know things which a man can not see, in what
sickness or what manner they be grieved, and chiefly when a man knows not
whereof it comes, the cure is, feed your hawke well upon a hen, and then
make her to fast two days after to empty her bowels well, the third day take
honey sodden, and fill her body full, and bind her beak that she cast it not
out again, and then set her out in the sun, and when it draws toward
evening, feed her with some hot foul, for I have heard my masters say, if
this help her not, then nothing will.

For the passion which go shawkes have fasting.
Take the root of small rushes and make juice of them* and moistening your
flesh therein, let your hawke eat it.

For Hawks that are wounded.
Take away the feathers from about the wound, and take the white of an egg and
oil olive and mingle them together and anoint the wound therewith bathing it
in white wine, but if you see any dead flesh arise then put into the sore
Escome salt till it be eaten away, after take insence and wax, as much of the
one as of the other and mix them together on the fire, and when you will
anoint the sore, warm it, and then anoint the place with a pen till it be
clean skinned, but if the dead flesh increase, lay venecreeke thereon, and it
will cure it sound.

For the Artetike.
When you see your hawke fat about the breast, it is an undoubted sign she
has the artetike, wherefore let her blood in the original vein, and after
give her a frogge to eat, and it will help her.

For a Hawke that is troubled in her bowelles.
When your hawke is troubled in her bowels, you shall know it by her eyes, for
they will be dark, and she will look unpleasantly, and her muting will defile
her fundament: the cure is, anoint her meat with the poulder of cammell and
fern, let her eat it and no other.

For the gowt in general.
Give your hawke three or four meals of a new slain vrchine and it will
instantly help her.

For mites.
Bathe your hawke in the juice of wormewoode, and it will kill all her mites.

To make a hawke flee craftily all the year.
When you go to the field in the latter end of hawking, and desire that your
hawke shall flee craftily, use her in this sort, let her kill a foul, and let
her plume it as much as she will, and when she has plumed enough, go to her so
as you fright her not, and reward her on the foul, and after that you may cast
her on a perch, and by that encouragement she will use her craft all the
year.

For the stone.
Anoint her fundament with oil and with a holow straw put in the powder of
alum: also take an herb which is called Castis lardder, and annoint the
inside of her mouth, and it will help her. Also take small flam^s roots and
polipody, and the nerves of spinach and grind them well, and sees it in
butter, and strain it through a cloth, then make three pellets as big as a
nut, and put them in your hawks mouth in the morning, and look that she be
void, and then let her fast till the evening, then feed her by little and
little till she be whole.

A medicine for vermin.
Bathe your hawke in the juice of fennel roots, and it will kill vermin of
what sort soever.

For the rheum.
When you see your hawke shut her eyes and shake her head, then has she the
rheum in her head, therefore give her the larde of a goat the first day, and
the second give her epatike with the flesh of a chicken, and it will help her.

A medicine to keep hawks moist that are dry.
Take the juice of horehound, and wet your hawks meat therein, and feed her
therewith once or twice, and then she will be moist enough inwardly.

For sickness in the intrailes of Hawks.
A hawke whose intrailes are ill is more than ordinarily sick, for if she hold
not her meat, but cast it, it is a token of foul glut or surfeit of feathers
taken in her youth, and appears when she comes to much fleeing she will
have much desire to rest, and will sleep when she puts over her meat, and
the flesh which she has in her gorge if she cast it, will look as if it were
sodden, she will many times assay to put over her meat, but cannot: wherefore,
if she cast it, she may be helped, if not, she dies: the cure is, take the
raw yolks of eggs, and when they be well beaten, put thereto Spanish salt and
honny, and wet therein the flesh which your hawke must eat for three days, but
if she refuse to eat it, then holding her, enforce her to swallow three or
four morsels every day: or else use this, take honey at the changing of the
moon, and a keen nettle, and thereof make fine poulder, and when it is well
ground, take the breast bone of a hen, and an other of a stockedoue, and hacke
them with a knife. then do away the skin, and lay thereon the poulder, and all
hot with the poulder feed her, do thus thrice, and it is enough.

For swelling.
If your hawke have a felon swollen on her that a man may heal it, and keep
the hawke from death, do thus, take the root of comfory and sugar, of each a
like quantity, and seethe it in fresh grease, with a third part of honey, and
then draw it through a cloth, and lay it to your hawke and it will help her.

For blaines in hawks mouths called frounches.
The frounce is a dangerous disease in hawks, and brings her to death
withholding her strength, and men say it comes of cold, which does hawks
great hurt, making fleugme fall out of the head, her eyes will swell and look
dead, and if she do want speedy help, nothing will kill sooner: take therefore
of fennel, mariall, and kersis, of each a like quantity, then seethe them,
and strain them through a cloth, and now and then wash the hawks head
therewith, and chiefly the roof of her mouth, and it will forthwith help her.

For a hawke that has the agrum.
When your hawke has her mouth and cheeks blubbed, then she has the agrum,
therefore take a silver needle and heat it in the fire, and burn her nares
throughout, then anoint her with oil olive till she be whole.

How to make a hawke great and fat.
Take a quantity of porke, honey, butter, and clarified grease, and seathe them
al together, and anoint flesh therein and feed your hawke therewith and it
will fat her, or else take the wings of an eued and feed her and keep her
from travel, and it will fat your hawke though you use nothing else.

For botches in the Iaw of a Hawke.
Cut the botches with a knife, that the matter may have issue, and then mix
them and fill the hole with the poulder of arneme^t Ibrent, then on that powder
do a little larde which is raised and it will heal it.

For a hawke that will not reclaim.
Take fresh butter and put thereto sugar, and put it in a clean cloth, and
reclaim her to that, and keep it in a box in your bag.

For a hawke that is refrained.
When you see your hawke neezing, and casting matter through her nostrils or
her nares, then doubtless she is refrained: the cure is, take grains of
shaffelgree, and of pepper, and grind it well, and temper it with strong
vinegar, and then put it into her nares and into the roof of her mouth, then
give her hot meat to eat and she will be sound.

A medicine for hawks that have pains in their croups.
You shall take fair Morsum, and the poulder of gelefre, and mingle them
together, and give them to your hawke to eat, and if she hold it past the
second day she will be sound.

For the stone in the fundament.
When your hawke cannot mute then she has the sickness called the stone, for
cure whereof take the heart of a swine, and swines grease, and mixing it with
the heart let her eat it.

A medicine for the dry frounce.
For this sickness take the root of polipody which grows upon oaks and
seethe it a great while, then take it from the fire and let it stand until it
be luke warm, then wash your flesh therein, and feed your hawke three times
and she will be perfitly sound.

A medcine for the worms called Anguellis:
Take pressure made of a lamb which was yeaned untimely, and make thereof three
morsels, and put it in a gut of a stockedoue and feed her therewith, and look
the hawke be void when you give her this medicine.

Also take juice of Dragons and put full the gut of a pigeon, then cut it and
part it so as a hawk may swallow it, which done, close up her beak for fear
of casting it up again: also, give her the dowsets of a bucke, as hot as they
can be cut out, and make poulder of the pizle, and cast it upon the flesh of a
cat, and feed her therewith and it is a present remedy.

FINIS.
A TREATISE of Hunting.

LONDON Printed by Valentine Sims for Humfrey Lownes, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's churchyard. 1595.

As before in the book of Hawking, is truly noted and set down the skill
appertaining unto a Falconer or Ostringer: so in the same manner, in this Book
is duly and precisely taught the Terms belonging to that noble sport of
Hunting or Venery.
Beasts of Venery.
THere be only four beasts of Venery: the Heart, the Hare, the wild Roe, and
the Woolfe: and these and none other by the ancient laws of Sir Tristram you
may only call Beasts of Venery.

Beasts of the Chase.
There be five beasts which we call beasts of chase: the Buke, the Do, the
Fox, the Marterne, and the Roe: all other of what kind soever, term them
Rascal.

And first because of all other beasts, of Venery be the most worthy, the Heart,
and (as we may term him) is the most noble and takes the first place, we will
speak of the terms belonging to him: At the first year you shall call him a
calfe. The second year a brocket. The third year a spayad. The fourth year a
stagge. The fifth year a great stagge. The sixth year you shall call him a Heart.


To know the head of a Heart.
Thou shall call the head of a Heart Auntelere, Riall, and Surriall, and when
you may know him by the top, you shall call him forked a Heart of ten: and
when he bears three in the top, you shall call him a Heart of twelve, and when
he bears four, you shall call him summed a Heart of sixteen: and from four
forward you shall call him summed of so many as he carries, how many soever
they be.

Of Heart, Hind, Bucke, and Do, you shall ever say, a heard: of Roes you shall
ever term a beuie: of wild Swine a sounder: of Wolves a rowt.

Either of red dear or fallow you shall call upon the view twenty a little or
small heard: forty you shall call a middle heard: and four score you shall
ever call a great heard, be they male dear, Hindes, or Does.

Upon the view of a heart, if he be a goodly dear, you shall never call him
fair, but a great Heart: and so likewise a great Hind, a great Bucke: but
only of a Do, you shall term her a fair Do: ever have a great care of
this as you will be counted a perfect Woodman.

A beuie of Roes.
Six Roes or under is ever called by Huntesmen, a small Beuie, betwixt six and
ten is a middle Beuie: twelve is a great Beuie: And still the greater the
number is, the greater is the Beuie.

A sounder of Swine.
Twelve or some lesser number be called a Sounder of wild Swine: sixeteene is
a middle Sounder: but twenty may very well be termed a great Sounder.

Of the Roe hunting, breaking, and dressing.
When you shall hunt the Roe, you shall say, He crosses and tresones before the
hounds, or if you say, he doubles, it is not much amiss, although by the
laws of sir Tristram it is hardly permitted, you shall not say, This is a
great Roebucke, but a fair Bucke, and a fair Do. Dressing of the To is
called the Herdlenge of a Roe by the terms of Venerie which you shall perform
in this sort: you shall lay the head between the two farther legs: then take
the two hinder legs, and crossing them put them on the two contrary farther
legs, fastening them by the loosning of the former joints, only taking out
the bowels with the blood, and cutting off the feet wherewith you shall reward
your hounds, dividing each foot into four pieces with your fawchon or
woodknife, and putting them amongst the bowels and blood: And this of the Roe
is termed a Reward.

Of the age and undoing of the Bore.
Now to speak of the Bore, the first year he is called a pigge of the
Sounder, the second year he is called a hog, the third year a hog stere,
the fourth a Bore, for then, if not before he departs from the Sounder, and
then he is termed a Singler. When you have the Bore, you shall undo him, first,
not taking off the skin, and in dressing him orderly divide the flesh into
two and thirty breades, as we term it in Venerie: if he be slain by the
strength of the hounds, you shall give them the bowelles in the place upon the
ground where the Bore was slain: and this is likewise called a Reward.

Of the Hare.
The Hare is the King of all the beasts of Venerie, and in hunting makes best
sport, breeds the most delight of any other, and is a beast most strange by
nature, for he often changes his kind, and is both male and female. And this
is a strange thing in the female, and only peculiar to this beast of all
other: after she has taken the Bucke and comes to kindle she brings
forth two leuerets rough and in perfect shape, and retains two other in her
still, which she brings forth before the two first be well able to
relieve, and she is knotted for her third leueret, and all this at one time: we
term the place where she sits, her form, the places through the which she
goes to relief, her muset, and when we find where she has gone, we call it
the pricking of the Hare: her deceits and shifts before the hounds we term,
her doubling: we term her feeding her relief. The Hare bears sewet and
grease, she fimasheth, crottises, and rounges, although amongst the Huntsmen
of these latter times these terms be worn out of use, only we say, she
crotises: when the Hare is gone to her form, we say ever she is gone to her
seat: and we say the hare sits, where speaking of other beasts we say, they
lie, and the reason is, because she ever hucketh upon her legs, as though
nature had taught her to have her feet ever in a readiness, of all the other
beasts being most watchful. And she naturally desires to run up the hill,
because her legs be shorter before than behind: and her sewet and grease
which she bears lies over the leine between the chine and the tail.

The terms of a Huntsman to the kennel according to the French, from which
they were at first only derived.
When the Huntsman comes to the kennell in the morning to couple up his
hounds, and shall iubet once or twice to awake the dogs: opening the kennell
door, the Huntesman uses some gentle rating lest in their hasty coming forth
they should hurt one an other: to which the French man uses this word Arere,
Arere, and we, sost ho ho ho ho once or twice redoubling the same, coupling
them as they came out of the kennell. And being come into the field, and having
uncoupled, the Frenchman uses, horse de couple auant auant onse or twice with
soho three times together: we use to iubet once or twice to the dogs crying,
a traile a traile, there dogs there, and the rather to make the dogs in
trailing to hold close together striking upon some Brake cry soho. And if the
hounds have had rest, and being ouerlustie, do begin to fling away, the
French men use to cry, swefames swef, redoubling the same, with Arere ames ho:
now we to the same purpose use to say, sost ho, here again ho, doubling the
same, sometimes calling them back again with a iubet or hallow: poynting with
your hunting staff upon the ground, saying soho.

And if some one of the hounds light upon a pure scent, so that by the manner
of his eager spending you perceive it is very good, yet shall the same hounds
crying, there, now there: and to put the rest of the cry in to him, you shall
cry, ho auant auant, list a Talbot, list list there. To which the Frenchman
uses, Oyes a Talbot le vailant oyes oyes, troue le coward in the same manner
with little difference. And if you find by your hounds where a Hare has been
at relefe, if it be in the time of green corn, and if your hounds spend upon
the troile merrily, and make a goodly cry, then shall the Huntsman blow three
motes with his horn, which he may sundry times use with discretion: when he
sees the hounds have made away: A double, and make on toward the seat: now
if it be within some field or pasture where the Hare has been at relefe, let
the Huntsman cast a ring with his hounds to find where she has gone out,
which if the hounds light upon, he shall cry, There boys there, that tat
tat, hoe hicke, hicke, hicke auant, list to him list, and if they chance by
their brainsicknesse to ouershoote it, he shall call to his hounds, ho again
ho, doubling the same twice. And if undertaking it again, and making it good,
he shall cheer his hounds: there, to him there, that's he, that tat tat,
blowing a mote. And note, that this word soho is generally used at the view of
any beast of Chase or Venerie: but indeed the word is properly saho, and not
soho, but for the better pronuntiation and fulness of the same we say, soho, not
saho. Now the hounds running in full chase, the Frenchman uses to say, ho ho,
or swef alieu douce alieu, and we imitating them say, There boys, there auant
there, to him there, which terms are in deed derived from their language: now
we find the old and ancient Huntsmen had diverse terms upon the view of the
pricking of the Hare, which although I find not very needful, yet for the
love I bear unto Antiquity, I will not omit: as when the Hare has gone over
some grassie place where her pricks cannot be seen, but only by straying the
grass, or by breaking some loose mould, we say she sorths or resorths: but
these terms I will leave to the indifferent opinion of the skilful Huntsman.

Now the reason why they say, the Hare fumaies and crottes or crottiseth is
this, we say the Hare fumaies, because he bears sewet, and crottiseth,
because he bears grease, and because she croucheth on the houghes when she
lets it go: so that we say all beasts that bear tallow, and stand upright
remain as they go, all that crouch or stoop do.

The hounds reward.
When your hounds by force have killed the hare you shall reward them with the
shoulders and the side, with the head, and with all the intrailes saving the
gall: which being dealt them, is called the hallow of all good Huntsmen, but
the loins is most excellent meat in mine opinion, being finely dressed is the
most dainty venison that England has: And to tell what manner of beasts
relefe, this is a thing worthy to be noted of all good Huntsmen, that the Heart
from the Annunciation of our Lady till Saint Peeters tide, is said to relefe
as well as the Hare.

Of flaying and stripping of beasts.
When beasts are slain which shall be flaied and which stripped according to
their natures and kinds, know ye, that all that bear sewet and rounge,
according to the old English, or chawe, shall be said to be flayed, only the
Hare excepted, which shall be said to be stripped or cased, which terms shall
be used to all beasts of relefe.

Now of the Roebucke.
The first year he is a kid sucking on the damme: the second year he is
called a gerle: the third year a hemule: the fourth year a Roebucke of the
first head: the fifth year a Roebucke. He uses to cast his horns at Saint
Andrews tide, and his nature is to hide them in some moore or some marsh, that
they are very seldom found: at Saint James tide he ever goes to the Roe,
which when he does, we say, he goes in his turn: and if you kill a Roebucke
which is hie in grease, you shall dress the venison as of a Heart or a Hind:
we use to say a Heart bellows, a Bucke groans, a Roebucke kelles, which they
use in the time of their rutte, and we use to say the Fox and the Woolfe do
bark and howl.

The season of all sorts of Venery.
The time of grease begins at Midsummer day, and lasts till Holy roode day.

The season of the Fox from the Nativity till the Annunciation of our Lady.

The season of the Robucke lasts from Easter til Michaelmasse.

The season of the Roe begins at Michaelmas, and lasts till Candlemasse.

At Michaelmasse begins the hunting of the Hare, and lasts till Midsummer.

The season of the Woolfe is as the Fox.

The season of the Bore is from the Nativity to the Purification of our Lady.

Now in the hunting of the heart being a princely and royal chase, it gives an
exceeding grace unto a Huntsman, to use the terms fit and proper unto the
same, which I here set down as received from Antiquity. First, when we see
where the Heart has gone, we use to say here, he breaks: and when the Heart
enters a river or poole which we call the soil, we say, he descends, and
when we find where he has leapt into the river we say, he profereth,
because we are uncertain whether he goes out at some other place, or
returns the same way again, and if he turn again the same way, he
reproffereth, and when we find where he has come out of the other side of the
river, we call it the soil, and being come out of the water which filles his
footesteppes we call it defouling.

How you shall undo a Heart.
After his fall, and that the Huntsmen be come in together, and have blown the
death of the Heart, you shall lay him upright upon his horns, which we call
suing of the Heart, then let the best man in the company, or some personage of
account take the assay before the assembly: then first cut off the coddes:
then begin at the jaws, and slitte him down to the assay, and directly to
the place of the coddes: which being done, begin first to slit the left leg
before, and next the left leg behind, which you must not forget in any hand
before you go to the right side, which you must perform next in the same
manner: the which being done, begin at the cheek on the left side, from
which directly take off the skin down to the breast, and so down to the
assay, and to the place of the cod: then begin at the other side and do the
same in like manner, but cut not the tail of the beast away in any hand, but
cut off the skin, and let it remain to the haunches: then spreading the skin
abroad, let the body be laid open upon the same, and begin first to make the
erbere, then cut off the shoulders, opening the belly and take out the sewet
which is most excellent and needful for Surgeons. Then putting in thy hand
under the breast bone take out therber, and turning out the panch take away the
rate filling it with the blood and sewet, having a needle and a threede ready
to sow it up with, then searching into the small guts take out the maw: And
next, the liver, laying them upon the skin, next after these the bladder:
then going to the vmbles, first loosen the auanters which lean to the neck,
and taking the throat and wesant, loosen the fillets charily which falls to
the vmbles, and must be gathered and stripped upon the wesant with the same
with the naues, and sewet, and the flesh along the midriffe, then take the
midriffe from both the sides, and so like a Huntsman make up the vmbles with
all these together, only keep the lights upon the skin and bid the querry:
This being done, slit the skin wherein the heart is infolded, and take away
the hairs which grow about the same, in keruing the heart you shall find a bone
therein, which has the virtue to cure the malady and grief of man's heart:
then cutting away the loose skertes and fill them with blood to save the
melting of the grease: then cut away the neck from both the sides, and take
the head away from the neck, taking out the tongue and the brain, laying them
with the lights, the small guts and the blood upon the skin to reward the
hounds, which is called the querry. The left shoulder of the Heart is his fee
which dresseth him, the right is the Forresters fee.

Of the terms of the vmbles of a dear.
That part of the vmbles which cleave unto the throat-bole is called the
Aduancers, and the hinder-most part of the vmbles be called the Forchers, the
other called the Crookes of the vmbles: now in the heart the chief part and
substance is called the Gargilon, and the other part be called Crookes and
Rundelles.

To undo the wild Bore.
You shall make two and thirty breades of the Bore, the first and principal
is the head, the next to that is the choler which is the best of the swine:
then two sheelds and the two shoulders, and divide each side of the swine into
three parts, the pestles, and the gambones accounting as two: then the two
fillets, the legs and the feet divided into eight parts, dividing the chine
in four sundry pieces: then put the grease of the Boore into his bladder, and
preserve the same as a thing passing medicinable.

Of the vauntlay, the lay, and relay, with forloining terms used in Venerie.
This is properly called a Vauntlay in hunting, when the hounds are in chase
of a Heart, and that you either doubt their speed, or find them far cast
behind, you do uncouple fresh hounds, and hallowing them in to the dear, force
him to more speed than before, which may be a means to cast off the other
hounds which be behind. An alay is this, when the Heart is in full chase, thou
lying near to some covert, do so shake off some fresh hounds into the cry,
to supply and make it the stronger, if some ouerhaled dogs should happen to
sink in the latter end of the chase. A relay is, when you shall uncouple some
fresh hounds and cheer them, when as the rest of the dogs be already gone
away with the Heart, and almost out of the hearing of the cry, and this is
called a relay. Forloyning is when thou find any chase within some covert,
and some mewet or light cunning hounds fall in with the same, being stolen out
of the covert, this is called forloyning, when they drive the chase so fast on
before as the Huntsmen can not lay the rest of the cry in with the same.

Of the descreuing of a Bucke.
The first year he is a fawn sucking upon his damme, the second year a
pricket, the third year sorrel, the fourth a sore, the fifth a bucke of the
first head, the sixth year a great bucke.

Of the horns of a Bucke.
The horns of such a fallow dear must be summed or ever he be a Bucke, he
must have two palmed branches, and four and twenty espelers, which when he
has, you may well term him a very great Bucke.

And this we see, that often in hunting of the Heart or the Bucke: the hounds
toward the fall of the chase hold together and come strongly, the reason is
this, and for three causes which makes the hounds continue, and incourageth
them much: the first is, that when the Heart or Bucke begins to be imbosted,
he casts out of his mouth a froth which is wonderful sweet to the hounds,
which he leaves upon the herbs and bushes: the second is, when he sweateth,
the sweat comes down from his body to his cleis, which the hounds finding
know well he sincketh: the third is, that by reason of his laziness and
toil, the scent is very strong and hot, and easily enters the noses of the
dogs which maruellously incourageth them to his death.

Certain proper terms belonging to all chase.
A heard of Hearts. A heard of all manner of Dear. A beuie of Roes. A sounder of
Swine. A rowt of Woolues. A trip or heard of Goats. You shall say, an Heart
harbors. A Bucke lodges. A Roe bedeth. A Hare seated or fourmed. A Conie
sits. A Fox kenelleth. An Other kenelleth. A litter of Cubbes. A nest of
Rabbets. You shall say, the Dear is broken. The Fox is cased. The Hare is
cased. We say, dislodge the Bucke. Start the Hare. Vnkennell the Fox. Rowze
the Heart. Bolt the Conie.
(...) THE BOOK of Armorie.

LONDON Printed by Valentine Sims for Humfrey Lownes, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's churchyard. 1595.

The Book of Armorie The Preface.
HEre in this book following is expressed the genealogy of coate-armors and
how a perfect Gentleman shall be known from an imperfit clown, both how
bondage began in angels, and after succeeded in mankind, as insueth in the
stories of the children of Adam and Noah, with the division which Noah made of
the world in three parts, to his three sons, also of the three colors in
arms figured by the nine orders of angels, and in the colors is made mention
which is royal, and which worthy, and of royalties which is noble, which is
excellent. In this discourse shall not be omitted, the virtues of Chivalry,
nor any other notable or famous thing, fit for the pleasures of renowned
persons, as the Work, not my report shall witness: therefore who so likes,
let him read, and leave to read when he leaves to like, the gray hairs this
works aged tropheis, shall promise grave matter, no light delight, therefore for
his age do him reverence, and for thy profit love: In whose conclusion shall
follow the blasing of all manner of arms in Latin, French, and English.

Jncipit Liber Armorum.
BEing worthy to bear the honor of Arms, by royal, noble, or gentle blood,
from the highest to the lowest degree, come hither, and be instructed by me to
disseuer gentleness from ungentleness, light from darkness: and in that all
gentleness which is excellency, comes from the great good of heaven, I will
therefore with heaven begin, where were in the beginning nine orders of
Angels, and now are resident but nine in the knowledge of coat armors,
crowned full high with precious stones, whereas Lucifer with millions of angels
fell out of heaven into hell, and other places, where they are held in a
continual bondage, yet all created in heaven, and of gentle nature. A bondsman,
pesant, or churl will say, that all are issued of Adam, therefore all alike
for excellency: so Lucifer may say with his company, all we are come from
heaven, therefore all heavenly: but the wise know to the contrary. Adam, the
beginning of mankind, was as a stock vnspread, or vnflorished, in whose
branches is discovered rotten and green boughs.

The difference twixt Churles and Gentlemen: Noah's division of the world.
There was never gentleman, nor churl ordained, but he had father and mother:
Adam and Eve, had neither father nor mother, and therefore in the sons of
Adam and Eve, first issued out both gentleman and churl. By the sons of Adam
and Eve, to wit, Seth, Abell and Caine, was the royal blood divided from the
rude and barbarous, a brother to murder his brother contrary to the law, what
could be more vngentlemanly or vile, in that therefore became Caine and al his
offspring churles, both by the curse of God, and his own father? Seth was made
a Gentleman through his father and mothers blessing, from whose loins issued
Noah a gentleman by kind and lineage. Noah had three sons truly begotten,
two by the mother, named Cham and Sem, and the third by the father called
Iaphet, even in these three after the worlds inundation, was both gentleness and
vileness discerned, in Cham was gross barbarism found toward his own father
in discovering his priuities, and deriding from whence he proceeded. Iaphet
the youngest Gentlemanlike reproved his brother, which was to him reputed a
virtue, where Cham for his abortiue vileness became a churl both through the
curse of God and his father Noah. When Noah awoke, he said to Cham his son
know not thou how it is become of Caine the son of Adam, and of his
churlelike blood, that for them all the world is drowned save eight persons,
and will thou now begin barbarism again, whereby the world in after ages
shall be brought to consummation? well upon thee it shall be, and so I pray
the Great one it may fall out, for to thee I give my curse, and withal the
north part of the world, to draw thine habitation unto, for there shall it be
where sorrow care, cold, and as a mischievous and unrespected churl thou
shall live, which part of the earth shall be termed Europe, which is the
country of churles* Iaphet come hither my son, on thee will I rain my
blessing, dear insteede of Seth: Adams son, I make thee a gentleman, and thy
renown shall stretch through the west part of the world, and to the end of the
Occident, where wealth and grace shall flourish, there shall be thine
habitation, and thy dominion shall be called Asia, which is the cuntrie of
gentlemen. And Sem my son, I make thee a gentleman also, to multiply the
blood of Abell slain so undeservedly, to thee I give the Orient, that part of
the world which shall be called Africa, which is the country of temperatenes:
and thus divided Noah the world and his blessings. From the offspring of
gentlemanly Iaphet came Abraham, Moses, Aaron and the Prophets, and also the
king of the right line of Mary, of whom that only absolute gentleman Jesus was
borne, perfect God and perfect man, according to his manhood king of the land
of Judah and the Jews, and gentleman by his mother Mary princess of coat armor.

How long coat armours began before Christ's incarnation.
Iaphet was the first that ever made target, and therein he made a Ball in
token of all the world, and afterward two thousand eightene years before the
incarnation of Christ, coat armor was made, namely at the siege of Troy, where
the first beginning of the law of arms was seen, as is proved in the Book
called Gesta Troianorum, and that law was begun before any law in the
world* but the law of Nature, and before the ten commandments of God. And
this law of Arms was grounded upon the nine orders of Angels in heaven,
crowned with nine several precious stones, differing in colors and virtues,
nine several ways, from which are taken the nine colors in Arms, as shall
follow.

Of the first stone called Topasion, signifying gold in arms.
This stone Topasion is a semi stone and is called gold in arms, the virtue
thereof is, that gentleman which shall leave this stone in his arms, shall be
a sure messenger to his king in the day of battle because this stone was
reserved in the angels crown which was a true messenger and firm in the
heavenly battle against Lucifer.

Of the second stone.
The second stone is called Smaragdus, and is called vert (that is, green) in
arms the virtue thereof is, the gentleman which bears it in his coat armor
shall be valiant, stout, and coragious in his kings battle, the which stone
was reserved in the archangels crown, which was most puissant in the conflict
with Lucifer.

Of the third stone.
The third stone is called an Ametise, and it is Bruske in arms, the virtue
thereof is he which bears it in his coate-armour shall be fortunate to
conquest in his kings battle, which stone was reserved to the virtuous
crown, which was fortunate and virtuous in the heavenly combat against
Lucifer.

Of the fourth stone.
The fourth stone is called a Margaret, a cloudie stone, and is called in arms
plumby, the virtue thereof is, whosoever leaves it in his coate-armour, he shall
have great government in his kings conquests, the which stone is reserved in
the potestates crown, which were the commanders in the heavenly battle
against Lucifer.

Of the fifth stone.
The fifth stones is called a loys, and in arms sanguine or synamer, the virtue
thereof is, the gentleman which bears it in his coat armor shall be mighty
of power in his kings battle, the which stone was reserved in Dominations
crown that were only powerful in the king of heavens battle against Lucifer.

The sixth stone.
The sixth stone is called a ruby, and is in arms gules, the virtue thereof is,
the gentleman which bears it in his coat armor, shall be hot and full of
vigor in his kings battle, the which stone was reserved in the principallest
crown, who were fiery hot in heavenly battle against Lucifer.

Of the seventh stone.
The seventh stone is called a Saphyr, and in arms Azure, the virtue whereof
is, the gentleman which in his coat armor bears that stone, shall be wise
and virtuous in all his actions in the battle of his king, which stone was
reserved to the crown of the thrones which were wise and virtuous in the
heavenly battle against Lucifer.

Of the eight stone.
The eight stone is a diamond a black stone, and called sable in arms, the
virtue thereof is, the gentleman which bears it in his coat armor shall be
durable and vnfainting in his kings battle, which stone was kept in the
Cherubins crown, which never fainted, or shrunk in the war against Lucifer.

Of the ninth stone.
The ninth stone is called a carbuncle, a shining stone, and in arms is called
silver, or argent, the virtue thereof is, what gentleman soever bears it in
his coat armor, shall be doughty, glorious, and shining in his kings battle:
which stone was reserved to the Seraphins crown who were full of might,
glory, and brightness in the kings battle of heaven against Lucifer.

Of the nine colors which is worthy, which royal.
Of these nine sundry colors due to coat armors, there are five worthy, and
four royal, the five worthy are these, Gold (otherwise called Or) Vert,
Brusk, Plumby, and Sanguin, and the four royal are these, Gules, Asure,
Sable, and Silver. But now according to the blasers of arms there are but
six colors of the which two are metal, and four colors, gold and silver
for metal, vert, gules, asure, and sable, for colors, and no other used.

Of the nine stones, which noble, which of dignity.
Of the nine precious stones before spoken of, five of them are noble, and
four of dignity, the five noble stones are these, the Topasion, Smaragdus,
Amatis, Margaret, and Aloys, the four of dignity are the Ruby, Saphyre,
Diamond, and Carbunckle.

Of the orders of Angels.
Of the nine orders of Angels, there are five Ierarchy, thronely, the five
Ierarchy, are Angel, Archangels, Virtues, Potestats, and Dominations the four
thronely be these, Principalles, Thrones, Cherubins and Seraphins.

Of the dignities of Regaltie.
There are nine dignities of regaltie, five noble, and four excellent, the
five noble are these, gentleman, squire, knight, barron, and Lord: and the
four excellent are, Earl, Marquess, Duke, and Prince.

Of the nine virtues of precious stones.
There are nine virtues of precious stones, five general, and four special,
the five general are these, a sure messenger, valiant and stout, fortunate to
conquest, great in government, and mighty in power, the four special are,
hot in courage, wise and virtuous, durable, and vnfainting, and doughty, and
glorious.

Of the four virtues of chiualry.
Chiualry has four virtues, the first, just in his actions, cleanenes of his
person, pity to the poor, gracious in prison, reverent and faithful to his
God: the second is, that he be wise in battle, prudent in his fighting,
having his wit always in a readiness: the third is, that he be not slow in
his wars, regard that his quarrel be true, thank God ever for his victory,
and to have measure in his sustinaunce: the fourth, to be strong and steadfast
in his government, to hope of victory, not to fly the field, nor shame his
coat armor, also that he be not boasting proud of his manhood, look that he
be courteous, lowly, and gentle, and without ribawldry in his language.

Of the nine articles of gentry.
There are nine articles of gentry, of which five are amorous and four
sovereign, the five amorous are these, lordly of countenance, sweet in
speech, wise in answer, perfitte in government and cherefull to faithfulness:
the four sovereign are these few, oaths are no swearing, patient in
affliction, knowledge of his own birth and to fear to offend his sovereign.

Of nine vices contrary to gentlemen.
There are nine vices contrary to gentlemen, of which, five are indeterminable,
and four determinable, the five indeterminable are these, to be full of
sloth in war, to brag of his prowess, to be cowardly to his enemy, to be
lecherous in body, and to be always drinking and ever drunk. The four
determinable are, to revoke his own challenge, to kill his prisoner with his
own hands, to run away from his colors in the field, and lastly to tell
his sovereign untruths or lies.

Of the nine inestimable reioynings in arms.
These are the nine inestimable reioynings in arms, first is, for a gentleman
to be made a knight in the field at battle, the second is, liuelyhood of
him to receive after manhood, the third is, chivalry to do before his
sovereign, the fourth embassage to be put unto him for wisdom, the fifth is
prowess of knighthood done before aliens in honor of renown, these in arms as
called the five authentic, now follow the four ending stremitalles
personal, the first, a poor knight to be married to the blood royal, the
second is, to have thanks of his sovereign perpetual, the third is, to keep
his coat armor vnshamed in trial, and the fourth is to keep all the points
of his knighthoode, as Gesta ^royanorum declares.

Of the two orders, wedlock and knighthoode, and how knighthood was made
before coat armor was ordained.
The two first orders that ever were ordained, was first wedlock, and then
knighthood, and knighthood was before any coat armor, for Olibion was the
first and primere knight that ever was, whose father Asteriall came by the
right line of Iaphet, who seeing the people multiply without any governor, and
that the cursed race of Cham warred against them, Olibion being the strongest
and most manfull in those times, the people cried on him to be their master
and governor, there were in those days one thousand multiplied of the line of
Iaphet, whereupon Asteriall made for his sons head a garland of nine
several precious stones, for a sign that he was the governor of a thousand
men: and to this day the name of a knight in latin signifies the governor
of a thousand men, then Olibion kneeled to Asteriall his father and required
his blessing, who took Olibions sword which was Iaphets, Fawchion made by
Tuball before the flood, and smote flatling nine times on the right shoulder of
Olibion in token of the nine virtues of the foresaid precious stones* and gave
him his blessing with a charge to keep the nine virtues of charity which
hereafrer follow.

The articles which knights should keep, to wit, five temporal, and four
ghostly.
Charity has nine virtues, five temporal, and four ghostly, the five
temporal virtues are these: the first, he shall not turn his back to his
enemy for to fly: the second, he shall truly keep his promise to his
friend, and also to his foe: the third, he shall be bountiful in hospitality
and those about him: the fourth, he shall maintain and uphold all maidens
rites: and the fifth, that he defend widows from oppression: the four ghostly
are these, the first, he shall honor his father and mother: the second, he shall
not wrong the poor: the third, he shall be merciful: the fourth, he shall
mainetaine the statutes of the great God of heaven. This done, Asteriall gave
Olibion a target of Olive tree, with three corners triangular, two above his
face, and one down to the earth: in token that Olibion was the chief of all
the blood of the three sons of Noah, by the olive tree he meant victory to
win by the point of his target to the ground-ward the cursed brother Cham, by
the corners of his target above, the further signified Sem, that next him the
true gentleman Iaphet, of whom God and man issued by the right line.

Of the several manners of Knighthood.
There is two manner of knighthoods, one with the sword, the other with the
bath* but the bath is worthiest, because of four royalties, one is when a young
Prince is made knight, or to be crowned king: the second is, when a King or an
Emperor is crowned: the third is when a Queen or an Empress is crowned, the
fourth when a King or an Emperor talk with Ambassadors of foreign Countries.

Of nine sorts of gentlemen.
First, there is a gentleman of ancestry and blood.

A gentleman of blood.

A gentleman of coat armor, and those are three, one of the kings badge,
another of lordship, and the third of killing a Pagan.

A gentleman vntriall: a gentleman Ipocrafet: a gentleman spiritual and
temporal: There is also a gentleman spiritual and temporal, and all these
are better set down hereafter.

The diverse manners of gentlemen.
There are four manner of gentlemen, to wit, one of auncestrie which must
needs be of blood, and three of coate-armour, and not of blood: as one a
gentleman of coate-armour of the Kings badge, which is of arms given him by an
Herald: an other is, to whom the King gives a Lordeshippe, to a Yeoman by
his letters pattents, and to his heirs for ever, whereby he may bear the
coate-armour of the same Lordeshippe: the Hind is, if a Yeoman kill a
gentleman, Pagan, or Sarazen, whereby he may of right wear his coate-armour:
and some hold opinion, that if one christian do kill an other, and if it be
in lawful battle, they may wear each others coate-armour, yet it is not so
good as where the Christian killes the Pagan. And again if the King make any
yeoman knight, that same knight is a gentleman of blood by the royalty of the
king and knighthoode.

Of a gentleman spiritual.
A churles son being made a Priest is a gentleman spiritual to God but not
of blood: but if a gentleman's son be made a priest, he is both a gentleman
spiritual and temporal: Christ was a gentleman by his mothers side, and bare
coate-armour by auncestry: the four Evangelists are testimonies of his works
in the Gospel, together with the Apostles, they were Jews and issued from
Gentlemen by the right line of that famous Conqueror Judas Machabeus, but that
through the ruin of times their kinreds fell to poverty after the destruction
of Judas Machabeus, whereby they fell to labor, and were esteemed for no
gentlemen: and the four doctors of the holy church, saint Jerome, saint
Augustine, Ambrose and Gregory were Gentlemen of blood, and of coat armor.

Of the nine divisions of coat-armours.
There are nine divisions of coate-armours, five perfect, four imperfect: the
five perfect are these, Terminall, Colaterall, Abstract, Fixall, and Bastard:
and of these five I will speak more largely, with their differences.

Difference Imbordring.
Terminall is called in Arms all the brethren of the right line either by
father or mother, may bear the right heirs coate-armour, with a difference
called Imbordring.

Difference Iemews.
Colaterall is called in Arms, the sons of the brethren of the right heir
bearing the coate-armors of their fathers with a difference Iemewes.

Difference Mollet.
Fixall in Arms is called the third degree by the right line from the right
heir by line male, they may bear their fathers coate-armour with a difference
Mollet.

Difference Countertreuis.
The bastard of Fixall shall bear his fathers coat armor Countertreuis, that
is to say, whatsoever he bears in his field, he shall bear in the same
several colors, and no more.

Of the four coat-armors imperfit.
Four coate-armours there are imperfit, and are borne without any difference,
the first coat-armor is if a Lordship (as before said) be given under pattent
by the King, if he died without heirs his coat armor dies with him: the
second is, when the King gives a coate-armour, if he die without heir his
coat dies also, and if either of these coate-armours have issue, the fifth
degree of them bearing line by male, are Gentlemen of blood by law of arms:
the third being the coate-armor of a Pagan, if the christian die without heir
his coate-armour dies, but if he have issue also, the fifth degree in like sort
after him are gentlemen of blood* the fourth coat armor, of the chief blood
if he die without any issue, then the whole coate-armour is lost, and
becomes a coate-armour of the imperfect. All the bastards of all the
coate-armours, shall bear a fesse, or (as some call it) a baston of one of the
four dignities of colors, except the bastardes of the fixialles, the bastard
of the brethren of the chief blood, where the inheritance is divided to every
brother alike, these bastards shall add more badgie unto his arms, and take
away a badgie of arms.

Who shall give coat armours.
Not one of the nine orders of royalty, but only the sovereign King shall
give coate-armour, for it is impropriat to him by law of Arms: and yet the
King shall not make a knight without coate-armor before: and every knight
chief general in the field may make a coate-armour knight.

Where a Knight may only be made.
In five several places may a knight be made, as in musters in the land war,
in marching under baners, in listes of the bathe, and at the sepulcher.

A laced coate-armour is on the mothers side.
A laced coate-armour is called the coat of a gentlewoman married to a man
having no coat-armor, her son may wear her coat with a difference of Arms
during his life by the courtesy of the law of Arms, but his son shall bear
no coate-armour, except that the gentlewoman be heir, or the next of blood to
the coate-armour, or else do derive her birth from the blood royal, and then
shall her heir bear her coate-armour.

How Churles are made gentlemen, and called Vntriall, and Ipocrifat.
Churles are made two sorts of gentlemen which are neither of blood, nor
coat armor, one is called in arms a gentleman vntriall, which is to say, made
up amongst religious men, as Priors, Abbats, or Bishops, the other is called in
Arms a gentleman apocrifat, that is to say, made up, and so entitled by the
livery of a gentleman or man of honor.

Of the six differences in Arms.
There be six differences in Arms, two for excellent, four for the Nobles,
Labell, and imborduring, for excellent, Iemews, Mollets, flower de luce, and
Quintfoiles for nobles.

Of nine Quadrats in blazing Arms.
In blazing of Arms are nine quadrates, five quadrates finiall, and four
royal, the five finiall are Gereri, Gerundi, Fretly, Geratly, and Endently,
Gereri is called in Arms when coate-armours have nine quarters diverse colors:
Gerundi is called in arms when the coat is of nine several colors, and a
fusi-target within the coat of what color soever it be. Fretly is called in
Arms when the coat is counterseised. Geratly is called in Arms when the
coat armor is powdered: but the blazer shall not say, he bears ermin, silver
powdered with ermin, but he shall say, he bears ermin, or else in some Arms
he must say demi ermin, which is to say, whitly ermin. And now for that in the
fifth quadrate finiall, it is determined touching the signs of arms: before I
proceed unto it I will show what manner of signs a man may wear, for a
gentleman may not wear signs of Arms but of stayning colors, that is to
say, his coat armor ynyat or else gerat* Gerating has nine badges of
coate-armours, first with croslets, and of them there are four sorts, namely,
cross fixily, cross paty, cross croslets, and cross flory: the second badge
is flower de luce: the third is croslets: the fourth is primerose: the fifth is
quinfoiles: the sixth is diaclis: the seventh is chaplets, the eight is mollets,
and the ninth is cressents, which is half moons, and these are the powders of
coat-armours.

The fifth quadrate is called Endently of three several ways, which is
Bebally, Lentally and fiesly: Bebally is called in arms when a coate-armour is
endented of two several colors in the length of the coate-armour: Lentally is
called in arms when the coate-armour is endented with two several colors in
the breadth of the coat: fiesly is called in arms three manner of ways, fessy
badge, fessy target, fessy general: fessy badge is when signs of arms are
disseuered from the chief of the coate-armour to the right spleier in the
field* fessy target is when a scutchion is made in the midst of the coat-armor:
fessy general is called in arms when the coat armor is endented with two
several colors, from the last point of the coate-armour to the spleyer, the
chief is called in arms the midst of the coat of the right side: Quadrate in
arms is called when the field is set with some token of arms: a quadrate
finiall is called in arms when the field is discolored with signs of arms,
having no beast in the field: a quadrate royal is when the field occupies
the sign of a beast, or any other sign set within the coate-armour to the
number of five: the first quadrate is a token of arms only set: the second
quadrate royal is bearing in his coat three things called the signs of
arms, that is to say, three flower de luces, three fiscialls, three roses,
three chaplets, three libbards, three lions: and so the fourth quadrate royal
is to bear a beast rampant, bebally, lentally, and fessely.

What coats restriall be, and where the Blazer shall begin to blaze.
There are three coats called restriall in arms, one is when a coat is barry
of diverse colors to the point, and what color the point is, of that color is
the field, and there the blazer shall begin: the second coat restriall is,
when a coat is paly, of diverse colors to the point, then what color the point
is, the same is the field, and there shall the Blazer begin: the the third
coat restriall is called in arms when a coat is sentry of diverse colors to
the point, and what the point is, that is the field, and so the Blazer shall
blaze from that color to the next color on the left side of the coat and
blaze the color sentry.

Of diverse words of Art in Arms.
A senter in arms is called staker of tents:

Fixiall in arms, is called milne pickes:

Mangis in arms are called a sleue: gorgis be called in arms water
budgettes: Elynelles be called in arms four quadrates trucholles: Oglis in
arms are called gunnestones: tortlettes are called in arms Wastell: Diaclys
are called in arms scopperilles: Myrris are called in arms mirrours or
glasses: Feons are called in arms broade-arrowe heads: Tronkes are called in
arms any beasts heads, or necks: Demi in arms is called half of any
thing: Countertreuis is called in arms, when half the beast is of one color,
and the other half of an other. Every coat that bears a cross to the
point, the point is the field, as Saint George bears gules four anglettes
of silver, but against this rule there are some heraldes repugnant, as shall be
showed in the book ensuing* These three terms, of, and, with, shall not be
rehearsed in arms but cure any of them.

Of the diverse bearings of fields.
There be diverse bearings of fields: as one is bearing whole field, and
that is called in arms Claurie. The second is bearing two fields, and it is
called in arms countlie. The third is bearing two fields in four quarters,
and it is called in arms quarterlie.

Of three coat armors grittie.
There are in arms three coats grittie, one called checkie, that is, when the
field is checked with sundry colors: the second is called windy, that is,
when as the field is made like waves of one or of diverse colors. The third
is called verrie, when the field is made like goblettes of sundry colors.

In arms are two pinions, also what claurie, counterlie, and quarterlie is.
There are in arms two pinions one is when the field is a saultire, or Saint
Andrews cross which may be claurie counterlie, or quarterlie: claurie is
called plain of one color, counterlie is when colors quarterlie be two
colors set in two quarters.

The second pinion is called cheffrounce, that is, a couple of sparis, and,
that may be claurie, counterlie, quarterlie, gerery, or byallie.

Gerery is when three cheffrounce be together or more.

Byall is when a bar is between two cheffrounce.

Here ends the most special things of the book of the genealogy of coat
armours, the true insearcher, to displaie gentlemen from churles, and now
shall follow, the exact book of blasing of all manner of arms whatsoever, both
in latin, french, and english.

Explicit prima pars.
The title of Barons grown in England by descent to the daughters and heirs
thereof.
FIrst the ancient and laudable custom of this Realm agreeable to the Realm
of France and Spain, and their Dominions where women are capable of the
Feodales, and that the husbands in right of their wives passes their Feodall
dignities, styles and titles.

That custom is a sufficient and the chiefest rule to determine this question,
is proved by the common principle, Consuetudo in vnaquaque regione estomnium
dignitatum and iurisdictionum origo firma et principium. And by Baldwine
Consuetudini standum est disponendi de nobilitate, et consuetudines loci
faciunt quem nobilem qui alias non esset nobilis.

To prove the antiquity and continuance of that custom in this Realm,
appears by an Abstract of many examples in every kings reign, choosing (of
many) one person, having the dignity of a Baron by the right of his wife, as
follows in every Kings government since the conquest.
William Conqueror: John Talbot a Norman came into England with William the
Conqueror, and married Mawd daughter and heir of Richard Lord Talbot of
Longhope in England, in whose right the said John was Lord Talbot of Longhope,
of whom the Earl of Shrewsbury is descended.

William Rufus: Eustace fitz John the son of Monoculus Lord of Knaresburgh
married Beatrice daughter and heir of Yuan Lord Vescy, in whose right the
said Eustace was Lord Vescie, of whom the Earl of Cumberland is descended,
and writes himself Lord Vescy.

Henry the first: Ioceline son to the Duke of Brabant married Agnes daughter
and heir to William Lord Percy, in whose right he was lord Percy, of whom the
Lords of Northumberland are descended.

King Stephen: Morice fitz Harding married Alice daughter and heir to Robert
Lord Barkeley, of Whom is descended the Lord Barkeley.

Henry the second: John Molton knight married Mawd daughter and heir of William
Meschines Lord Egremond, in whose right he was Lord Egremond, whose heir
general was married to the L. Fitzwater, of whom is descended the Earl of
Sussex, and writes himself Lord Egremond.

Richard the first: Adam de Port lord of Basing married Isabell daughter and
heir of Robert Lord Haya of Haluna, of whom descended the lord Saint John of
Basing auncester to the marquess of Winchester.

King John: John de Placetis married the daughter and heir of Walleram Earl of
Warwick, in whose right he was Earl of Warwick, which John died without
issue, after whose death the said countess of Warwick was married to Master
Mandret baron of Haushap, who also was Earl of Warwike in her right, of whom
are descended the Earls of Huntington, warwick, Leycester, and others.

Henry the third: Henry hastings knight, married Ione daughter and heir of
Master Cantilyp Lord of Aburgauenie, in whose right he was Lord of Aburgauenie.

Edware the first* Roger Lord Clyfford married Isabell daughter and heir of
Robert Dipount Lord of Westmerlande, in whose right he was Lord of Westmerland.

Edward the second: Sir John Charlton knight married Auis daughter and heir of
Owen ap Griffith Lord powys, in whose right he was Lord Powys.

Edward the third: John Fitz Allen son to Richard Earl of Arundell married
Mary daughter and heir of John Lord Matrauers in whose right he was Lord
Matrauers.

Richard the second: Sir Warrin Gerard knight, married Isabel daughter and heir
of John Lord Lile in whose right he was Lord Lisle.

Henry the fifth: Sir William Louel knight married Elinor daughter and heir of
John Lord Morloy, in whose right he was Lord Morley.

Henry the fifth: John Tuchet married Ione daughter and heir of Nicholas Lord
Awdley, in whose right he was Lord Awdley.

Henry the sixth: William Bourchier married Margaret daughter and heir of
Richard lord Barnes, in whose right he was Lord Barnes.

Edward the fourth: John Gray Knight, married Elizabeth the daughter and heir
of John Talbot, Vicount Lysle, in whose right he was Vicount Lysle.

Henry the seventh: George Lord Stanley married Ione the daughter and heir of
John Lord Strange, in whose right he was Lord Strange.

The names also of diverse persons (taken out of an infinite number) within
other realms which in right of their wives have enjoyed all manner of noble and
princely titles.
Otheline earl of Burgoin was in right of his wife Earl of Artoys.

Philip the Long, in right of Jane daughter to the said Otheline was Earl of
Burgoine.

King Henry the second of England, was in right of Elenor his mother, Duke of
Guyenne, and Earl of Poictow.

Endo Duke of Burgoine was in the right of Jane his wife daughter and heir to
Philip the Long, and Jane his wife Earl of Burgoine.

Philip the son of Eudo was in the right of Jane his wife Earl of Artois and
Boloigne.

William Godfrey, in the right of his wife was Earl of Tholous.

Philip le Grand Earl of Flanders was in the right of Elizabeth his wife Earl
of Vermandois.

Bauldwine Earl of Henault in the right of Margaret his wife sister and heir
to Earl Philippe was Earl of Flanders.

Fernand son of Sanctiz King of Portugal, in the right of Jane his wife was
Earl of Flanders.

Thomas of Sauoy second husband to the said Jane, was in her right (although
he had no issue by her) Earl of Flaunders.

Maximilian Archduke of Austria (before he was elected emperor) was in right
of Mary his wife, the heir general of Charles duke of Burgoine and Isabell of
Burbon duke of Burgoine, of Zotnih, of Brabant, of Limbourgh, Earl of
Flaunders, Artoys, Burgoyne, Henault, Holland, Zeland, Lord of Salignis, and
Malignis.

Philip of Burgoine by Bona his wife was earl of Ew.

Godfrey Duke of Bullen, in the right of Mawde his wife was head Lord of
Ieturia, Marquess of Antona, Pisa and Luques.

Hugh son to Henry the first King of France, was in the right of his wife
Earl of Vermandois: and Ralfe his son was by his mother Earl after him.

Peter Earl of Alanson, in the right of Mawd his wife was earl of Bloys.

Hugh Earl of Saint Paul, by the right of Marie his wife was Earl of Blois,
and John his son earl of the same after him.

Hambert surnamed Blandemaine Earl of Britain, and so was Geffrey
Plantagenet in the right of Constance his wife.

Guy earl of Spain, was in right of his wife earl of Neuers: and so Adolfe
Duke of Cleue Earl of Neuers by his wife.

Charles the second of France, was in right of Susan his wife Duke of
Burbonnois, of Auuergne, earl of Cleriust, visast of Charlot and Marrot, lord
of Beumolois chair and chamberlain of France.

Emanuell Philibert now duke of Sauoy in right of his wife Spannage is duke of
Berry.

The Prince of Orange by his wife while she lived was earl of Buer: and their
son now Earl by his mother.

Now, after these examples both at home and abroad follows the particular
proof by matter of record, viz. that the aforesaid custom has ever taken
place in the Baronies of Willoughby and Eresby, etc.
ANd that sir Richard Wells son of the Lord Wells was Lord Willoughby in
the right of Ione his wife daughter and heir of Robert lord Willoughby.

And also sir Richard Hastings knight in the right of Ione his wife daughter
and heir of the said Richard Wells and Ione, was both Lord Wells and L.
Willoughby reputed, called, and written immediately after the death of Richard
Wells lord Wells and Willoughby before any parleament called or summoned, as
appeared in their Court rolls and other evidences.

And if the said sir Richard Hastings had been called thereto by Writ, he could
not after the form of the writ be summoned, but by denominatio^ of one of the
baronies, who using both the titles of the Baronies, then he must of necessity
be reputed to hold the other in right of his wife.

And if sir Ri. Wells and Rich. Hastings had bin created, then should the
dignity have descended to the heirs of Wels and Hastings, and not reuerted to
the house of Willoughby, neither could Christopher Willoughby the grandfather,
neither William lord Willoughby father of the duchess nf Suffolk have used as
they did (and may be proved by evidence, and matter of record) the style of L.
Willoughby before they were called by Writ to parleament.

Furthermore, after the death of William L. Willoughby, the said duchess as
his sole daughter and heir enjoyed the title and style of Lady Willoughby,
descended to her from her father, at which time sir Christopher Willoughby
knight, younger son of lord Christopher, and brother to the lord William
Willoughby claimed the dignity as heir male and the claim being heard, the
title was adjudged to the lady Katherine now duchess.

Here begins the Blazing of Arms.
I Have showed to you in the former Book how Gentlemen began, and how arms
were first ordained, and how many colors there be in coate-armours, and the
difference of coate-armours, with many other things which here are needelesse,
to be rehearsed. And now I entend to proceed to coats carried in Arms, and
the blazing of all arms: But by the way, should I stand upon all sundry
devises borne in Arms, as the Peacocke, the Pie, the Dragon, the Lion, the
Dolphine, with leaves and flowers, I should rather cumber and tire the Reader
with frivolous circumstance, than any way instruct him in that which I
undertake: Therefore I shall shortly and truly teach you to blaze all Arms:
if you give diligent intention to the rules that I do prescribe which shall
not be many, but passing effectual: And because the Cross is the most worthy
coat or mark which is carried in Arms, I will begin with the Cross, in
which the renowned and valiant Prince king Arthur had such great trust, so that
he left his arms which he bare of the three dragons, and another coat he bare
of three crowns and took to his arms, a Cross of silver in a field of
vert, and on the right side an Image of the virgin Mary with her Son in her
arms, and under that sign of the cross he achieved many great and
wonderful conquests: of which our Chronicles at this day make mention: also I
have read this sign of the cross to be sent from God to that blessed man
Mercury, as Vincentius says in his Speculo historiali of the marvelous and
strange death of Julian the apostata emperor lib. 15. says, that an Angel
brought to the aforesaid Mercury, al armor necessary, with a shield of azure,
and a cross flouery with four Roses of gold in this manner as is here set
down: blazon or coat of arms and I never heard that ever any Arms came from
heaven, but in them was the sign of the Cross, except only the Arms of
France, which Arms were sent by an Angel from heaven, three flowers in manner
of swords in a shield of azure, which Arms were given to the King of France in
sign of euer-lasting trouble, that he and his successors should ever be
punished with wars and civil broiles. blazon or coat of arms

Of Arms in which are carried the sign of the Cross.
Now I turn again to the sign of the Cross and ask a question, how many
Crosses be borne in arms? To which question, under any certain number I dare
not answer, for Crosses innumerable are now borne daily: but descending to
every Cross which I have seen before, and here mean to set down, the
plain cross shall be first described, of which cross more doubts be made
than of many other Crosses. Forasmuch as wise men in blazing of Arms hold for
a certain rule that you must begin to blaze at the lowest point of the shield.
If the point be of one color: and so that color that is in the point of the
sheelde is the field of the arms.

But in that rule to remove away all doubts ye must very diligently observe,
that that same rule is true with a little addition, that is to wit, that in
Arms to be blazed, it is always to begin at the point of the shield, if the
point be of one color, then that is true: if the color of the point be more
copious or greater in those Arms, and then without doubt you shall begin
there, or else not. And when the colors be equal parted, either in length or
overthwart, then evermore you shall begin to blaze those Arms in the right
side, and in that case you shall have no respect to the point.

And if it be asked, how bears Saint George? it is to be known that he
bears: Portat vnum scutum de argento cum quadam cruce plana de rubio. in
French, Il port d'argent un cross plain de gules, in English, he bears a
field of silver with a plain Cross of gules, as here appears in these
Arms. blazon or coat of arms

And in the same manner all Arms, having a plain Cross, are to be blazed:
Therefore they that say S. George bears the field of gules with four
quarters of silver do err, for by those reasons a plain Cross should never
be found in arms, nor well nie any difference in arms.

Of a Cross of an equal length in every part.
A plain cross is found in arms differing from the first: and it is of an
equal length on every part, as it appears here: blazon or coat of arms and
these arms be harder than the other to blaze, for the ends of this cross
touch not the hemmes or utter part of the shield in no part, in which you shall
say, that he that bears these arms, in Latin Ille portat de asuro cum vna
cruce plana aurea aequalis longitudinis ex omni part: in French, Il port
d'azure un cross plain d'un longre per tont: in English he bears azure with a
plain cross or of equal length on every part. And this is the difference in
blazing, that the ends of this cross are in equal length, which cannot be
said in the plain cross before where the foot is the longest part if it be
well made. And this difference shall appear better in a coate-armour then it
does in a shield, And this is the evident difference between the crosses
aforesaid.

Of a plain cross straight.
There is an other cross equaller straight in the midst then in the ends, as
in this coat with open corners, and not touching the border and utmost part of
the sheeld in any part, and it is called a cross patent. blazon or coat of
arms And you shall blaze it in this manner in Latin, Ille portat vnam crucem
argentatam patentem in campo nigro: in French, Il port de sable un cross pate
d'argent, in English, he does bear sable a cross paty of silver.

Of a cross patent fixible.
This cross patent is made sharp in the foot of the same: and it is called a
cross patent fixible, because it may be fixed in the earth, in the which
cross three parts are open in the corners and broader than in the midst:
and the foot thus pointed to be fastened in the earth: blazon or coat of arms
thus to be blazed, in latin, Portat de rubeo cum vna cruce fugitiua de albo:
in French, Il port de gules un cross patee fichie argent, in English, He
bears gules a Cross paty fixible of silver: And there be many crosses which
may be made fixible, as it shall be showed to you in diverse examples hereafter
following.

Of a plain Cross cordid.
Amongst other Crosses one is found called a corded cross, as is showed in
this coat ensuing, which is called a corded cross, for it is made of cords,
the which I lately saw carried by a noble man, whose auncester indeed was of
mechanical trade, and a Roper by his occupation, as he himself reported unto
me: the which Arms I do blaze thus in latin, Ille portat gules cum vna
cruc^ plana cordata de argento, in French, Il port de gules un cross plein
cordee d'argent, in English, He does bear gules a Cross plain corded of
silver. blazon or coat of arms

Of a Cross plain perforated.
There is an other cross which differs maruellously from the cross of Saint
George. And here it is to be noted, that the opinion of such is to be
reprehended, which do affirm, that this coat is checkered, for Arms may not
be checkered, but at the least in the number of four, but more usual in a
greater number, as hereafter shall be showed. blazon or coat of arms
Therefore this coat is to be blazed thus, in Latin, Ille portat vnam crucem
argenteam perforatam in campo nigro, and in French, Il port de sable un cross
d'argent partee, in English, he bears sable a cross perforated of silver.

Of a besanted Cross.
We have another cross carried in Arms which is called a besanted cross, for
it is made of all besants: as for besant in this coat: blazon or coat of arms
And the color of example shall not be expressed in blazing, for it is
needless to say, a besant of gold, for except they be of gold they be not
besants: Therefore such a coat is thus to be blazed in Latin, Ille portat
vnam crucem talentatam in campo rubeo: in French, Il port de gules un cross
besantee* in English he bears gules a cross besanted.

A cross floury fixible.
Now follows an other cross floury which is so called, because it has
flowers on the point of every of the crosses, and this cross flourie is
sometime borne in arms, fixible as in this coat, and then we properly call it
a cross floury fixible, for in three of his ends he is flourishing, and in
the foot pichable or fixible. blazon or coat of arms Therefore we truly blaze
it, in Latin, Portat vnam crucem auream floridam in campo a sur^o, in French,
Il port d'azure un cross floritee d'or, in English, he bears azure a cross
flourie of gold.

Of a cross floury patent in arms.
Now follows a cross which is called a cross floury patent: and it is so
called, because it has the ends open, and in the midst of every end appears
a thread in manner of a flower, as is showed in this coat: blazon or coat of
arms therefore it shall be said, that he which bears these Arms bears in
this wise, in Latin, Portat vnam crucem floridam patentem in campo asureo, in
French, Il port d'azure un patee floritee d'or, in English, he bears azure
with a cross patent flouerie of gold.

Of a cross wauie or vndie.
Moreover you shall understand that there is another plain cross which is
called wauy or vndy, for it is made in the manner of water troubled with the
wind, as is showed in this coat here set forth: blazon or coat of arms
Therefore he which bears this coat shall be said to bear it thus, in Latin
Portat vnam crucem planam vndosam de argento in campo rubeo, in French, Il port
de gules un cross plain vndee d'argent, in English, he bears gules a plain
watery cross of silver: or a plain cross vndy of silver.

Of the cross inuecked.
In arms also there are found crosses of colors inuecked or indented, as here
in this coat appeeres, and it is called a cross inuecked, because it has two
colors one put or lincked within another: blazon or coat of arms and of him
that bears these Arms it shall be said he bears thus, in Latin, Portat
vnam crucem planam inuectam de coloribus albis and nigris in campo rubeo, in
French, Il port de gules un cross plein verre d'argent et sable, in English, he
bears gules a cross of silver and sable inuecked.

Of the cross croslet.
Now follows an other cross which is called a cross crosset or croslet, and
he is called crosset because at every end he is crossed as appears by this
coat: blazon or coat of arms but this cross is not borne so often in arms by
himself as other crosses nevertheless many times it is borne in diminutiues,
that is to say, in little crosses crosset, and then the arms are poudred with
little crosses cruciated and of him which bears these arms you shall say, he
bears thus, in Latin, Portat vnam crucem cruciatam de argento in campo
asureo, in French, Il port d'azure un cross crocee d'argent, and in English, he
bears azure a cross crosset of silver: and when such crosses diminutiues are
borne without any certain number, they are called in French Crossets.

A Cross masculet.
There is an other cross which is called a Cross masculet, as is showed in
this coat which here I set down, which is made of masculies, of which I will
speak more at large when I speak of mascules and lozenges: blazon or coat of
arms and thus I blaze this coat, first in latin, Portat vnam crucem masculatam
de argento in campo asureo, and in French, Il port d'azure un cross masculee
d'argent, in English, he bears azure a cross masculet of silver.

Of a cross masculet and perforated.
And this cross masculet is sometime borne perforated in the mascules, as is
showed in this coat, blazon or coat of arms and is thus to be blazed, first in
Latin in this wise, Portat vnam crucem perforatam de rubeo in scuto argenteo.
in French, Il port d'argent un cross de gules masculee persee, in English, he
bears silver with a cross of gules masculet peersed.

Of the Millers Cross or mill Nut.
There is a cross which is called the Millers cross, for it is made in the
proportion of a certain instrument of iron which bears the mil-stone, by
which the stone in his course is born equaly that he fall not, nor decline to
the right side, nor to the left: and has been given to Judges to bear in
their arms, signifying thereby, that as that instrument supporteth the mill
stone equally that it fall not unto one part more than to another, so these
Judges are bound to give equally every one his right. blazon or coat of arms
And thus it shall be blazed in Latin, Portat crucem molendinariam argenteam in
ca^po rubeo, in french Il port gules un crois molein d'argent, in English, he
bears gules a Millers cross of silver.

Of a cross returned.
There is a cross which is called a cross turned, because the ends of this
cross on every side turn back with a kind of bending like to the horn of
a Ram: blazon or coat of arms he that bears these arms is said to bear them
thus, in Latin, Portat crucem vna^ auream reuersam in scute asureo, in French,
Il port d'azure un cross recercilee d'or in English, he bears azure with a
cross reuersed of gold

Of a cross forked.
There be some which bear in their Arms a certain forked cross, and it is
called forked, because the ends of it are cloven and forked. blazon or coat of
arms Therefore he which bears this coat shall be said to bear this, first
in latin, portat vna^ crucem furcotam de auro in campo Asureo, In French, il
port d'azure un cross d'or, in English: he bears Azure with a Cross forked of
gold.

Of a cross engrayled or engraded.
Also there be some which in their coat armours carry a cross engrayled or
engraded, it is called engrayled, because it is endented all over, as well over
the length, as over the breadth, blazon or coat of arms but in the blazing of
Arms we do say, this cross is engrailed, not endented, and thus we blaze
such a coat in latin, portat vnam crucem ingradatam de albo in campo Rubeo, in
french, Il port de Gules un crois ingrailee d'argent: in English, he bears
gules a cross engrailed of silver.

Of a ragged or truncated cross.
There is an other cross borne which is called a cross truncated or Ragged
cross because it is in manner of two lopped trees. blazon or coat of arms
Therefore it is said: He which bears this arms bears thus, in Latin,
portat vnam crucem truncatanum, de argento in campo rubeo, in French, Il port
de gules un crois recompee d'argent, in english, he bears Gules with A cross
truncated of silver.

Of a knottie cross.
There is an other cross borne in Arms which is called a knottie cross,
because on every end of the same cross it has certain knottes in form of
this coat which here I set down: blazon or coat of arms which is thus
blazed, in latin, portat vnam crucem auream nodulatam in scuto Asureo: in
french, Il port d'azure un crois Botone d'or: he bears azure with a cross
knotty of gold.

And this cross is found sometimes fixible, as I have showed in other coats
before.

Of a cross flourie knotted.
There is another cross which is called a flourie knotted cross, as is this
coat which here I set down having both flowers and knots on every end of each
cross. blazon or coat of arms And of him which bears this coat, it is said
he bears thus: in latin, portat crucem* nodulatam, floridam, auream in campo
de asuro, in French, Il port d'azure un crois floritee botone d'or, in English,
he bears azure a cross floury knotty of gold.

Of a cross double parted.
There is also found in diverse coat armours a double partited cross, and it
is so called double parted, for if it be divided or parted after the long
way, or the broad way, yet it is still a double cross as we see here, and
of this cross many doubts have risen, and questions grown of this Armorie,
yet by General opinion at length allowed. blazon or coat of arms Therefore he
which bears these arms is said to bear thus in latin, in campo nigro, in
french, il port sable un cross double petty d'arge^t, in English: he bears
sable, a cross double partited of Silver.

Of a cross double parted flourished.
This cross double parted is varyed sometimes and then it is a cross double
parted flourished as here: blazon or coat of arms nevertheless it is called a
cross flourie, improperlie as some do hold, for it fails in the midst of the
flower, as you shall see in the next arms following which certain midst by no
manner of wise may be in the cross double partited, therefore he which bears
these arms, is said to bear them thus: in latin: portat crucem duplam
partitam auream in campo Rubeo, il port de Gules un crois double party
flouretee d'or: he bears a gules a Cross double partited floury of gold.

Of a cross tripartited flourished.
As before I have showed you the Coat double florised for there fails in the
midst of the cross, by which the cross flourished is made perfect, but as in
this coat amidst put thereto it shall be rightly called a cross
tripartited, flourished, and so it is rightly blazed, for divide it by the
length or breadth, it is every way three fold in the midst of the cross,
and open in the points: blazon or coat of arms and therefore he which bears
these arms, bears thus first in latin: portat crucem tripartitam de argento
in campo de asuro: in french, Il port d'azure un crois trefois partee floritee
d'argent: in English he bears azure with a cross tripartited floury of
silver.

Of the mill nut or millers cross shadowed or vmbrated.
There has been made a doubt of this vmbrated cross, and it is called a
shaddowed or vmbrated cross, because the shadow is evermore of black, of what
color soever the field be of, and the body of the shadow is of the same
color of the field: blazon or coat of arms Therefore he which bears these
arms, is said to bear in latin, portat crucem vmbratam in campo aureo in
french, Il port d'azure un crois molein vmbree: he bears gold with a
millers cross vmbrated or shaddowed.

Of a cross floury Patent vmbrated.
Now this coat I here set down for the vmbration of a certain cross, and
this cross is called, a cross floury vmbrated, as here appears, blazon or
coat of arms but indeed it is no Cross, but a shadow of such a cross, and the
reason is, for the body of the same cross is of the color of the field and so
the color in the field shows by all the body of the said shadow: and he
that bears these arms, is said to bear in latin, portat crucem floridam
patentem vmbratam in campo rubeo, in French, Il port de Gules un crois patee
floritee vmbree, in english he bears Gules, a cross patent floury vmbrated.

Of a cross floury patent vmbrated and perforated.
And also this cross which here I set down is carried in coat armours which
blasing rightly, they say it is floury patent vmbrated and perforated. blazon
or coat of arms And it shall be said, that he which bears this coat, in
latin, portat crucem floridam patentem vmbra am perforatam cum rubeo in ca^po
aureo, in French, Il port d'or un cross patee floritee vmbree partee de Gules:
English, he bears gold, a cross patent, floury shadowed, and perced with
Gules.

Therefore they which will undertake to blaze, must beware of these arms
vmbrated, of which many rules be showed before: for there be many families in
England to this day which bear shadows (diversely in their coat armours) of
the Lion, the Antelop, and other beasts Therefore lest the ignorant or
unskillful should by this mistake the rule mentioned before of colors
transmuted, he which bears such a Lion in his coat, shall be said to bear:
in latin, Portat voum leonem vmbratum in campo aureo: in french, Il port d'or
un leon vmbree, in English, he bears of gold a Lion vmbrated: and there be
some skillful in armorie which are of opinion, that such as do carry these
vmbrated Arms, had their auncesters carrying the same whole, and without
shadow at all, but their possessions and patrimonies descending to other men,
their nephews and kinsemen, only having the honor without the land, bare the
Arms vmbrated, leaving all other differences, disguising their coats in such
sort, thinking it better to bear the arms vmbrated then wholly, until
fortune should again raise them to the estate of their progenitors: bearing it
rather as some diuice or Empreze, then a coat in arms.

Of the hemmed or bordered cross.
There has risen some question, amongst heraldes of the difference betwixt
this cross fimbrated or bordered as here appears, and the foresaid cross
vmbrated, because they are so much like, and at the first sight seem to be
all one. blazon or coat of arms But if a man behold them well he shall find
great difference, for the border of this cross is varied as well from the
color of the Cross, as from the color of the field. And therefore it shall
be said of him which bears these arms in latin, portat crucem nigram
perforatam floridam patentem fimbriatam sieve borduratam cum argento in campo
Rubeo: in french, Il port de Gules un crois floritee patee percee de sable
bordure d'argent: in English, he bears gules with a cross floury patent
pearsed of sable bordered with silver.

Of the Ermine cross.
There is an ermine cross, of which there happened a disputation at London
between a Herald of Britain and one of our nation, betwixt whom it was
proved and determined, that this Cross in arms could be of no other color
than it is here set down: blazon or coat of arms and he which bears these
Arms shall be said to bear them thus, in Latin, Portat crucem erminalem, in
the French. Il port un crois erminee: in English, He does bear a cross
ermines, without other circumstance in blazing of the same, because they must
be only black and white, which is their proper color.

Now that we have spoken sufficiently of Crosses (as before) it follows that
we entreat of diverse Arms quartered as hereafter shall be showed.
ANd to speak of arms quartred, there be some Arms quartered plain, some
engraded, some irrazed, some inuecked, some indented, of the which we will
speak as they fall in their places: and first of arms quartered plain.

Arms may be quartered three manner of ways, the first manner is open, when
two diverse Arms are borne quarterly, as may be seen here in the Arms of
France and England, blazon or coat of arms of which it may be said, Portat
arma regis Franciae et Angliae quarterata, in French, Il port les arms de
Francie e d'Angleterre quartelees, in English, He bears the arms of France
and England quarterly: And it shall not be offensive to any man, that France is
put before England in blazing, for we have a general rule, that whenever in
arms two colors or more be in the point of the shield, then you shall not
begin at the point to blaze them, but in the right side or part of those arms,
though it be not the most worthiest coat, but because of the place you shall
begin to blaze there.

Of Arms quarterly borne.
Now to speak of arms quarterly borne, when four sundry arms or coats be
quartered, as here is showed, blazon or coat of arms it shall be said, in
Latin, portat quatuor arma diuersa quarterata, in french, Il port quater arms
diuerses quarterlees, in English, he bears four coats diversely quartered.
And if it be asked how these Arms must be blazed: The Blazer must begin in
the hiest part of the right side, first blazing the Arms in the right side,
and then to the left: And you must note, that these be plain Arms quartered.

There is an other manner of bearing Arms quartered when as two Arms quartered
be borne quarterly: and it is borne most in Arms of Queens: even so bare that
most Noble Queen of England Queen Anne wife to that royal Prince king
Richard the second which bare the Arms of England and France, and of the
Emperor of Almaine quarterly in sixteen parts, that is to say, in the right
side of the shield: in the first quarter she bare the arms of France, three
flower deluces of gold in a field of azure: in the second quarter three lions
of gold in a field of gules: in the third quarter, a splayed Eagle with two
necks: and in the fourth, a black lion ramping in a field of silver: and so
changeably she bare these Arms in sixeteene quarters, which is seldom seen
in any Arms.

Of Arms quartered and engrailed.
Now to speak of Arms quartered and engrailed, that is to say, when any Arms
in his quarter is engrailed, as it appears in this coat here set down,
blazon or coat of arms and it shall be said of him which bears these Arms
thus, in Latin, Portat de ^uro et rubio arma quarterata et ingradata, in
French, Il port d'or et gules quartilee engralee, in English, He bears gold
and gules quarterly engrailed: and they are called Arms engrailed, because
they be of two colors, yet thus run one into an other, as you see in this
coat.

Of Arms quartered and irrazed.
Of these Arms quartered and rased, as by this coat appears, they be so
called razed, because the colors be irrazed, as one color in blazing were
taken away from another. blazon or coat of arms And it shall be said of him
which does bear these arms thus: in Latin, Portat arma quarterata irrasa de
albo et nigro, in French, Il port d'argent et sable quarterlee irrasee, in
English, he bears silver and sable quarterly irrazed.

Of arms quartered and inuecked.
There be arms quarterly inuecked, or as some say, they be arms quartered of
colors enuecked, as here appears, for in them are two colors quarterly put
the one into the other, and so one color inuecked within an other: blazon or
coat of arms therefore it is said of him that bears these arms, in Latin,
portat quarteratum de asurio et auro inuectis, in French, port quartrelie verre
d'azure and d'or, in English, He bears quarterly inuecked azure and gold.

Of Arms quartered indented.
There be diverse Arms which be quartered indented the two colors one indented
into the other, as is showed you in this shield: blazon or coat of arms and
thus you shall blase such Arms, Portat arma quarterata indentata de rubio et
auro, in French, Il port quartilee indentee de gules and d'or: in English, he
bears quarterly indented gules and gold.

Of Arms parted after the longest way.
I Intend now to speak of Arms divided after the longest way, which is in
sundry manners and sorts: the first partition is of two colors in arms after
the longest way in plain manner.

The second, a parting of Arms of two colors ingraded.

The third, a parting of Arms of two colors irrased.

The fourth, a parting of Arms of two colors inuecked.

The fifth, a parting of Arms of two colors indented.

The sixth, a parting of Arms of two colors clouded or ^ubulated.

The seventh, a parting of Arms of two colors wauie or vndie.

And although there be yet more than here we set down, yet we will only show
these coats at this time.

FIrst, of the plain parted Arms in two colors equally divided as in this
coat, blazon or coat of arms which shall thus be blazed, portat arma partita
secundum longum de asurio et albo, in French, Il port d'azure et argent plein
partee, in English, He bears azure and silver plain parted

Of arms the longest way engrayled.
Of the second sort of Arms engrayled as is said before of arms parted in
colors plain, of which, and the rest of this sort, I will not stand long,
only setting down the Coats with their blazons whereby the manner may easily
be discerned, having had the terms explaned to you before by example in the
quartred coats before going. blazon or coat of arms And it shall be said of
him which bears these arms he bears thus, in Latin, portat arma partita
secundum longum ingradata de argento et nigro* in French* Il port d'argent
ingrailee et sable partee du long, in English, he bears silver and sable
engrayled parted after the long way.

Of arms parted irrased.
The third sort of arms parted of two sundry colors and irrased, as before
of quartered Arms irrased: blazon or coat of arms and he which bears these
arms thus, in Latin, Portat arma partita secundum longum irrasa de argento et
rubio, in French, Il port patee du long d'argent et du gules racee, in English,
He bears silver and gules parted on length irrased.

Of Arms inuecked.
The fourth sort of Arms parted or borne the long way in two sundry colors
be inuecked, as is showed in this coat, blazon or coat of arms which shall
show you how much they differ from the coat before irrased, wherefore it is
said of him which bears these arms, Portat arma partita secundum longum de
coloribus albo and rubio inuectis, in French, Il port partee verre du loin
d'argent et de gules, in English, He bears arms party inuecked in length
silver and gold.

Of Arms the long way indented.
The fifth manner of bearing Arms in this sort is called party endented, as is
showed to you in this coat, in like manner before, as in the quartered Arms
indented: blazon or coat of arms And it shall be said of him which bears
these arms, portat arma partita secundum longum de argento et nigro indentata,
in french Il port partee indentee du loin d'argent et sable, in English, He
bears party indented on length of silver and sable.

Of Arms parted, cloudy, or nebulated.
The sixth part of these Arms borne, parted the long way be clouded or
nebulated, as is showed to you in this scutchion, called so, nebulated, because
the colors are mixed in manner of clouds: blazon or coat of arms Therefore
he which does bear these Arms shall be said to bear this, Portat arma
partita secundum longum de argento asureo in nebulata, Il port partee du loin
d'argent et d'azure innuble, in English, He bears party at length of silver
and azure innebulated.

Of arms parted wauie.
Moreover, besides these Arms aforesaid, yet there are arms borne divided
the long way, which are parted wauy or vndy, the colors bounding one upon an
other like to water troubled with wind, blazon or coat of arms which Arms
shall be thus blazed: portat arma partita secundum longum de argento et rubio,
in French, Il port partee du loin d'argent and gules vndee, in English, He
bears parted of silver and gules vndie.

Now to speak of Arms divided overthwart.
HEre now it follows to speak of arms divided overthwart, the which
partition is done in many and sundry manners, that is to say, plain,
ingrailed, irrased, inuecked, indented, nebulated, and vndated, as in the arms
before quartered, and parted: blazon or coat of arms and first I will begin with
the plain arms of this sort, which I show in this Scutchion, and shall be
blazed in this sort, Portat arma partita ex tra^suerso plana de auro et asureo,
in the French, Il port partee transuersee d'or et d'azure: He bears gold and
azure parted overthwart: now you must know, that here is no doubt of the first
rule that is, that a man should begin at the point of the shield, for here
is as much color of gold as of azure.

Of Arms irrased overthwart.
Now will I speak of an other manner of partition of colors in Arms, as shall
appear by this scutchion of arms overthwart irrased* blazon or coat of arms
and it shall be said of him that bears this arms, in Latin, portat arma
partita ex transuerso, irrasa de auro et rubeo, in French, Il port partee
transuersee irrasee d'or et gules, in English, He bears arms parted
overthwart, irrased of gold and gules.

Of Arms parted overthwart indented.
Of arms indented and parted overthwart I do mean to speak, and they be
called indented, by reason of the intermizture of the colors in such manner of
indentings: blazon or coat of arms and such arms are blazed in this manner,
Portat arma partita ex transuerso indentata de auro et asureo, in French, Il
port partiee de trauers d'or and d'azure endentee, in English He bears gold
and azure parted overthwart and indented.

And now to speak more of Arms parted overthwart, it shall be needelesse
being sufficiently declared before in the rules of Arms quartered and parted,
holding this maxim, inutilis est repetitio vnius ad eiusdem: And I do believe
it shall be hard to find many more Arms parted at length or overthwart than be
here rehearsed, nevertheless, if any be found, the same rules shall be
observed in them as are before rehearsed.

Of Arms borne in a chief.
Now some men there be, who would have these Arms which here I have set down
in this scutchion to be termed parted arms: blazon or coat of arms but in this
they err very much, for that there is no equal partition of colors, nor any
likeness in dividing the same, for in Arms parted, it is always required,
that the colors should be equal in quantity, which altogether fails in
this, because three parts of the sheelde be of one color: therefore this
coat shall be blazed in this wise, Portat de argento et caput scuti de asureo
cum duabus maculis perforatis de auro, in French, Il port d'argent un chief
d'azure et deux mulletties partees d'or, in English, He bears silver a chief
of azure and two mullets perforated of gold.

And moreover, you shall understand, that no Arms can rightly be called parted
Arms: But if they be of two colors, once parted, and no more: for in these
Arms paled, or party paled, as in this scutchion here set down appears,
although they be of two colors: blazon or coat of arms yet for that these
Arms be diversely divided in the form of pales, they be called paled arms,
which coat is truly thus blazed, Portat arma palata de auro et asureo, in
French, Il port palee d'or et azure, in English, He bears pale gold and azure.

Of Arms paly vndated.
Arms paly vndated be often borne when as the pales thus mix themselves with
other colors, wherewith they be borne, with a kind of swelling like unto
waves, as is showed here in this scutchion, blazon or coat of arms which Arms
are rightly blazed thus, Portat arma palata vndata vel vndosa de rubie et
argento* in French il port palee vndee de gules et argent, he bears paly
vndated of gules and silver.

Of arms paled, irrased, or crooked.
And you shall understand, that these paled arms be borne diversely, and in
diverse manners, as is showed in this Book, yet shall you hardly find them in
a stranger sort than in this scutchion which here I set down, when the two
colors paly are mixed in this rased and crooked manner: blazon or coat of arms
Therefore it shall be said of him which does bear this coat, Portat arma
palata tortuosa de nigro et argento, Il port pale daunsete de sable et
d'argent: He bears pale crooked sable and silver.

Of arms plain barred.
As before has already been spoken of paled arms, now I intend to speak of
Arms barred: and you shall understand, that Arms in this sort may be barred
in sundry manner of wise. But first I do intend to speak of Arms plain
barred: in the blazing of the which, it is altogether unnecessary to say, he
bears Arms plain barred. But only in blazing an other coat, to show how
that differs from plain barred arms, for some be blazed with a lion,
greyhound, or other beast, and some be powdered with cross crossets, mullets,
crescents, small birds or other differences. blazon or coat of arms But blazing
the plain Baron, you shall say thus, portat arma barrata de argento et nigro,
in french, Il port bar d'argent and sable: in English he bears barry
silver and sable.

Of barred arms vndated.
As in the coats of arms before declared and spoken of, quartered, parted, and
paled, so have you likewise arms barred vndated, as here is showed to you in
this scutchion: blazon or coat of arms the colors meeting together in the
manner of waves, which coat you shall blaze thus: portat arma barrata vndata
nigro et albo: in french, Il port barri verree de sable and argent: in English,
he bears barri vndated of sable and silver.

Of barred arms inuecked.
Barred arms inuecked are borne of diverse gentlemen with colors inuecked:
how they be borne barry wise, I show you how in this scutchion: and he which
bears these colors in this wise shall be said to bear thus: blazon or coat
of arms Portat arma barrata de coloribus rubio et albo inuectis, in french, Il
port barri verre de gules and d'argent, he bears barri inuecked of Gules and
silver, and I begin with gules because that color is the first in the right
corner.

Of arms barry crooked or sharp.
There be some which bear arms crookedlie barred as appears in this
scutchion, and you shall make the like difference in this, as in the eolours
borne in arms, paled after the same manner, blazon or coat of arms and he which
bears these arms shall be said to bear in this sort: Portat arma barrata
tortuosa de nigro et auro: in French, Il port barri d'auncete du sable and
d'or: he bears barry crooked sable and gold.

Of arms bendi barred.
Now to speak of arms bendie barred so called, because the two colors be
joined together bendy wise, as is showed to you by example in this scutchion,
blazon or coat of arms and therefore it shall be said of him which bears
these arms. In latin, Portat arma bendaria de rubeo et auro. Il port barri
bendee de gules and d'or: he bears barri bended of gules and gold.

And you must be ware and have an especial care in blazing arms paled barred
or bendy, otherwise you may easily mistake, and be deceived in the same, for
that coat is rightly paled in, which the pales of both colors be equal in
number, and if so be they be not equal as I prescribe, you cannot in blazing
term them paled: and I find in diverse coats two pales of one color, and three
of another, as in this scutchio^ which here I set down, where as the gules
seems to be only the field, blazon or coat of arms therefore the gentleman
which bears these arms shall be said to bear this: Portat duos palos
aureos in campo reubio: Il port de gules, e deux pales d'or, he bears gules
two pales of gold.

And you shall commonly and usually find in arms a bar betwixt two little
bars or barrets as we term them in armorie both the lines or little bars,
being of the same color of the great bar betwixt them: blazon or coat of
arms as you perceive by this scutchion which coat shall be thus blazed:
portat vnam Barram et duas Barrulas de albo in campo de Reubio: in french, Il
port de gules un barree and deux barrelettee d'argent: in English he bears
gules, one bar betwixt two little barrets of silver.

Of arms barred with barrets flourie.
And those bars or small lines be sometimes flourished, as here in this
scutchion you may see, and so called flourished, for that they be made in the
manner of flower deluces, blazon or coat of arms which coat shall be blazed
in this manner, portat vnam barram et duas barrulas floridas albas in scuti de
asurio: il port d'azure un barree et deux barrilettes floritees d'argent: he
bears azure, a bar betwixt two barrelets of silver.

Of bends borne in arms.
And now coming to speak of bendes borne in arms, you must understand that
it is called a bend which begins at the right corner of the sheelde and
descends to the left, as here I show in this scutchion which is a note
sufficient to show the difference between a bend, and a fisure or little
staff of which it shall be spoken of hereafter. blazon or coat of arms And of
him which bears these arms it shall be said thus: portat vnam bendam de
Reubeo in campo de aureo: in french, Il port d'or, un bend de gules: he bears
gold a bend of gules.

And as I showed you before of certain little bars borne in arms, in the like
manner are certain little bends borne in arms, and they be called bendils or
bendilets: blazon or coat of arms and where a bend is charged in arms with two
such bendils, as here I show you in this scutchion, you shall thus blase the
coat: portat vnam bendam et duas bendulas de auro in campo de asuro: Il port
d'azure un bend and deux bendilets d'or, he bears azure, a bend between two
bendilets of gold. And these bends be sometimes flourished as is showed before
in the coat of bars and sometimes the bendilets be found inchained, and
sometimes powdered with mullets, and sometimes with other differences which were
needless to be showed here.

Of arms paly bended.
And certainly the best manner of bearing of sundry arms in one shield, is
in these bends especially for him that has a patrimony left him by his father,
and other lands descending to him by his mother, to which lands of his mother
arms are appropriate of old time, and that the Arms with land fall to her
by descent, then may a man being heir if he will, bear the arms of his
father in his shield, and in such a bend bear his mothers arms, in such
form as appears in this, blazon or coat of arms and it shall be said of him
which bears these arms, in latin thus, Portat arma palata de argento et
reubio cum vna benda de nigro, Il port palee d'argent and de gules and un bend
du sable: he bears palee of silver and gules, with a bend of sable.

And sometimes we find these bends charged with three mascules or mullets of
gold.

Of arms bendy fusilled.
Moreover there be found in arms other certain bends much differing from
these as here I will show you in this scutchion, of a bend fuselled of the
manner of which fusels I will speak on hereafter. blazon or coat of arms And
it shall be said of him which does bear these Arms, Portat vnam bendam
fusillatam in campo de asurio: il port un bendee fusillee d'or, he bears
azure, a bend fusilled of gold.

Of borders in arms.
There are diverse and sundry borders found in arms, of which some be plain,
some engrayled, some talented, some plain powthered, some checked, some
gobonetted, some inuecked, of which every one shall be spoken of in order.
blazon or coat of arms But first I will speak of plain borders as appears in
this scutchion, and it is termed a plain bordure where it is of one color
alone. And thus it shall be said of him which bears this coat, portat tres
rosas rubras in campo argenteo cum vna bordura de reubeo, Il port d'argent
trois Rosis de gules and un bordure de gules: he bears silver, three roses of
gules and a border of gules.

Of arms bordered engrailed.
Arms with a border engrailed are usually borne as I shall show you in this
scutchion which here I set down, and it shall be needless for me to show
you what ingrayling in arms is, having sufficiently declared the same in
other coats already blazed. blazon or coat of arms But now coming to speak
of arms with a bordure engrayled, I will blaze this coat which here I set
down, portat arma de auro fimbriata sieve bordurata de nigro ingradata, cum
tribus maculis perforatis de nigro: in french: Il port d'or trois mullettes
perforatees de sable un bordure engraylee de sable: he bears gold three
mullets perforated of sable and a bordure engrayled of sable.

Of arms bordered, tallanted, or besanted.
There are also borne in Arms a Bordure besanted or tallented, as in this
scutchion, which here I set down: blazon or coat of arms but it shall be
needelesse in blazing to express the color of the tallents or lessantes,
because they be ever of gold: therefore it shall be said of him which bears
this coat, Portat vnum signum capitale de rubio in campo albo borduratum cum
rubio talentatium, Il port d'argent un cheueron de gules bordure de gules
talentee, in English, He bears silver a cheueron of gules bordered with
gules talented.

Of arms bordered having two cheuerons.
And oftentimes we find in arms, that bordures are borne powdered in diverse
manners, sometimes with mullets, sometimes with crossets, otherwhiles with
besants, and diverse other changes. blazon or coat of arms And then it is called
a border powdered with that which is in the border, and these signs, as
mullets, roses, and other are not comprehended within any number in blazing
exceeding the number of nine. And thus it shall be said of him which bears
these arms, Portat scutum de Rubio cum duobus signis capitalibus de Albo and
vna bordura puluerisata cum talentis: Il port de gules deux cheuerons d'argent
and un bordure de gules powdree talentee, he bears Gules two cheuerons of
silver and a border powdered with Besants.

Of a border checkered.
We have yet another bordure in arms which is called a border checkered: and
so called, because it is checkerwise in two colors, as here appears in this
scutchion, blazon or coat of arms and it shall be said of him which bears
these arms in this manner: Portat vnam crucem rubinam planam in campo argenteo
cum vna bordura scaccata de nigro et argento: Il port d'argent un crois plain
de gules borduree checkee du sable and d'argent, he bears silver, a plain
cross of gules, a border checkie with silver and sable.

Of borders gobonated.
Moreover and besides the arms which I have spoken of with borders, there is a
border gobonated as in this scutchion next following: and it is called
gobinated for it is made of two colors in quadrats or quadrately of black and
white, and whosoever bears these arms, shall be said to bear thus: Portat
de argento et duas bendas de nigro cum vna bordura de albo et nigro gobinata:
Il port d'argent: deux bendees de sable, and un bordure de sable and d'argent:
he bears silver, two bendes of sable with a bordure gobinated of silver and
sable: blazon or coat of arms and this same bordure bare that noble prince the
Duke of Gloucester, brother to that famous warrior, King Henry the fifth, the
which royal Duke bare in his coat the whole arms of France and England
quarterly with a bordure gobinated of silver and sable, as in this scutchion
set down.

Of bordures inuecked.
There be yet Bordures in arms of two colors inuecked as here in this
scutchion appears, and the reason why it is termed inuecked: I have showed
you in other arms before: then of him which bears these arms it shall be
said thus: blazon or coat of arms Portat arma quarterata de rubee et auro, cum
vna bordura de argento et nigro simul inuectis. Il port quartilee de gules et
d'or ouesque un bordure verre d'argent et du sable: He does bear quarterly
gules and gold with a bordere inuecked of silver and sable.

But of these bordures there has risen some doubt amongst such as have
pretended themselves to be skillful in Herauldrie, as in the arms of the Earl
of March, as here in this scutchion: blazon or coat of arms there has grown
a question, whether this should be called a border or not: but some have
affirmed, that Roger Mortimer Earl of March when as he lived bare Arms in
this manner: Portauit arma palata, barrata, et contraconata de asureo et auro,
cum vno simplici scuto de argento, in French, Il port pale barree girone
d'azure et d'or et un escu simple d'argent, in English, He does bear pale
barrie countercoined of azure and gold with a simple sheelde of silver.

And this opinion before rehearsed in the blazing has pleased many, the which
in no manner of wise can be true, for if these arms (as it is said before)
were countercoined, then the lowest corner or coin of the Arms, that is, the
lowest point of the sheelde should not be of one color as it is of azure.

But besides these proofs before rehearsed, it is certain, that in all arms
countercoyned, all the coins of what color soever they be, meet together by
their points in the midst of the sheelde, as in the next scutchion it shall
be showed: Therefore (in mine opinion) except greater authority can be showed
to the contrary: but they shall thus be blazed, Portauit arma barrata, et caput
scuti palatum et angilatum de asurio et auro, cum scuto simplici de argento, Il
port barree un cheiff palee cunectee d'azure et d'or et un estu simple
d'argent: in English, He bears barrie and a chieffe paly angulated of azure
and gold with a simple sheelde of silver.

Of arms countercoined.
There be diverse families which bear Arms countercoined, as here in this
scutchion appears, blazon or coat of arms and these arms be called
countercoined, because the coins meet all together in one point in the midst
of the sheelde, for every border triangular is properly more of length, then of
breadth wherefore the opinion of such as said that the arms before spoken of
belonging to the Earl of March, were palie barry, and counter-coyned are to be
reproved, because the colors accord not, as of necessity they should accord,
if the aforesaid opinion were true. Therefore it shall be said thus of him
which bears these arms: Portat arma contraconata de asureo et albo: Il port
Girone d'azure and argent* he bears countercoynd of azure and silver.

Of arms pyled.
For as much as we have spoken of arms in which the colors meet together in
the midst of the shield now it follows of certain arms in which three pyles
meet together in one point, blazon or coat of arms as in this scutchion which
shall be thus blazed: portat tres pilas nigras, in campo aureo: Il port d'or
trois piles de sable, he bears gold three pyles of silver.

Of balls in arms.
Nevertheless you must note the difference in the blasing of these arms
before, and those that come after, when you blase them in the latin tongue,
for sometimes this word pila in latin is taken for a piece of timber to be
put under the pillor of a bridge as in the scutchion before, and sometimes this
word pila is taken for a ball such as we play with, then it is called pila
manualis, as in this scutchion, blazon or coat of arms otherwhiles a foot ball
which is in latin pila pedalis, therefore it shall be said of him which bears
these arms in latin, Portat tres pilas argenteas in campo reubio, Il port de
gules trois peletees d'argent: he bears gules three balls of silver.

And you must note this, that such balls have all colors, but the color of
gold, for if they be of gold, you shall term them besants.

Of tortels in arms.
There be also tortelles that be little cakes which be greater than balls, as
in this scutchion appears, blazon or coat of arms which tortelles be ever of
a greater compass than the balls in the Arms before set down: and he which
bears these tortels shall be said to bear this, in latin, Portat tres
tortellas rubias in campo aureo, Il port d'or et trois torteulx de gules, in
English, He hears gold three tortelles of gules. And you must note this,
that Balls, Besants, and Tortelles in Arms are always whole round figures,
and not perforated.

Of Fountains and Wells borne in arms.
There be certain other round figures borne in arms, of white mixed sometime
with azure, sometime with sable vndated, or after the manner of waves, which
marks or figures be called fountains or wells: and therefore carry the color
of that which they represent, like water troubled with the wind: blazon or
coat of arms And of him which bears these arms thus it shall be said,
Portat tres fontes in campo viridi, Il port di vert et trois fountains: he
bears vert three fountains.

Of Rings borne in Arms.
Now after these round figures above rehearsed, there be other which be
perforated as rings or anlets, as is showed unto you in this scutchion: blazon
or coat of arms And of him which bears these arms, it shall be said thus:
Portat tres anulos aures in campo nigro: in French, Il port du sable et trois
anulettes d'or, in English, He bears sable and three rings of gold.

Of Tracts in Arms.
Having spoken before of bordures in arms, now it follows to entreat of
Tracts or lines: and first of a simple tract, as in this scutchion here set
down, blazon or coat of arms and it is called a tract or line because it
drowneth not the color of the sheeld, but that the same appears as well
within the charge as without, as it were representing the bordure of a sheelde,
Portat vnum tractum simplicem planam auream in campo asurio, in French, Il port
d'azure un tracee plein d'or, He bears azure a plain tract of gold.

Of a tract ingrailed on both sides.
A tract or line is sometimes engrailed on both sides, as here in this figure
appears, blazon or coat of arms and it shall be said of him which bears
these Arms in this wise: Portat vnum tractum ex vtraque part ingradatum de
auro in campo rubeo, in French, il port de gules un tracee engraile de chestim
cost d'or, in English, He does bear gules with a tract ingrailed on both
sides of gold.

Of a tract double and flourished.
This tract is sometimes borne double and flourished, as in the arms of the
King of Scotland, and as here in this scutchion appears: blazon or coat of
arms which arms be blazed in this manner, in Latin, Portat duplicem
tractatum cum floribus gladioli contrapositis vno leone rapaci de reubio in
campo aureo, in the French, Il port d'or un double tracee flouretee country et
un lion rampant de gules, in English, He bears a double trace flourished
contrary, and a lion ramping of gules.

Of Tracts triplatite and quadriplatite.
Also you shall find more diversity of these tracts before rehearsed, for
there are some families which bear these tracts triplatite, as in this figure:
blazon or coat of arms and of him which bears this coat in this sort you
shall say thus: Portat tractum tripl^tatum de albo in campo aureo, in french,
il port d'or un tracee triplee d'argent, He bears gold a trace triplatite of
silver.

Of a tract simple of two colors inuecked.
There be other families which bear a tract simple with two colors inuecked,
as here I have set down in this scutchion, blazon or coat of arms and the
possessour thereof shall be said to bear in this wise: Portat vnum tractum
simplicem de coloribus asureo and argenteo inuectis in scuto aureo: in French,
Il port d'or un trace simple verre d'azure et d'argent, in English, He bears
gold a tract simple inuecked of azure and silver.

Of fisures or staves.
Having spoken of Bendes and their differences, now we will speak of fisures
or staves: the which do ever begin at the left corner of the sheelde
beneath, contrary to bendes, which begin at the right and are drawn to the
left: blazon or coat of arms And you shall understand, that these fisures be
borne as many and sundry ways, as bendes be: There be fisures plain,
engrailed, inuecked, and fusillated, as I have said before in the place of
Bendes: And these staves Bastardes are wont to bear, or should bear them:
but most commonly we do call it a fisure, because that it does cleave the
Arms in two parts, signifying thereby, that the bastard is divided from the
inheritance of his father. And such a Bastard is forbidden for to bear the
whole Arms of his father, because of the reverence of blood: Therefore if he
will bear them, he must bear them with this difference, thereby to show his
bastardie, from the natural and lawefull heir of his father: and when you
have any such fisure in Arms ingrailed, inuecked, or fusillated, you shall
blaze the same as is already taught you in the Chapter of Bendes going before.
And the bastard the which bears these Arms shall be said to bear them in
this manner: in Latin, Portat vnam fisuram sieve bacculum aureum in campo
asurio, in French, Il port d'azure un fees d'or, in English, He bears azure a
fisure or staff of gold.

Of Arms borne with a head or a chief.
And you must know, that it is called a head or chief in Arms, when as the
highest part of the sheelde is of one color or diverse, and that it do not
extend unto the midst of the sheelde, as it is showed you in this scutchion.
blazon or coat of arms And this chief is often borne in arms, by reason that
oftentimes men have lands descended unto them by their mothers, and that he
as heir to her may bear the Arms belonging to his mother, the which
oftentimes they do carry in this sort: But if he be a man well descended,
and has inheritance by his father, then may he bear his fathers coat in such
a chief, and his mothers in the lower part of the shield. And in this manner
it shall be said of him which bears this coat, Portat vnum signum capitale
de nigro in campo aureo cum vno capite rubio et tribus talentis in eodem, in
French, Il port d'or un cheueron de sable et un cheef de gules et trois
besantes in le mesmes: in English, he bears gold a cheueron of sable with a
chief of gules and two besants therein.

And there are some noble families which bear in a sheelde of gold (as is
said before) a cheueron of sable, or some other color, and three red roses or
white, or some other devises or marks, as crosses, cressents, birds, flowers,
in a chief some of sable some of other color with mullets or such like, and
there shall every one be blazed in his order, as the field and colors require,
as if some man happily shall bear thus: he bears sable, a cheueron of gold,
three roses of gules in a chief of azure: or three mullets of vert perforated,
and thus of all other differences.

Of arms paly with a quarter or canton of another color.
Now there be some families which do bear in their arms one quarter or
canton of an other differing from the color or colors of the sheelde, as
here you may perceive in this scutchion: blazon or coat of arms which,
whosoever bears shall be said to bear in this manner: in Latin, Portat
arma palata de asureo et auro cum vna quartera ermetica, in French, Il port
palee d'azure et d'or un quater d'ermine, in English, He bears paly azure and
gold with one quarter ermine.

And you must ever be respective to the color of that pale which should ascend
to the right corner of the sheelde, if that quarter were not there, and in that
color you must ever begin to blaze those Arms as if that canton were not.

Of Arms checkered.
Now to speak of arms checkered, as in this scutchion I show you, and they be
termed checkes when they be made of two colors in the manner of a check
boorde, blazon or coat of arms and these arms are borne with many differences,
with chief, quarters, cheuerons, and bendes, as shall be showed you
hereafter, but first these arms are blazed thus, in Latin, Portat arma
scakata de asurio et auro, in french Il port skakke d'azure et d'or, in
English, he bears check of azure and gold.

Or cheuerons borne in Arms.
Now to speak of cheuerons borne in Arms, which in Latin are called, Signa
capitalia vel ligna, and indeed they be a couple of sparres joined together,
as in this scutchion here set down you may perceive, blazon or coat of arms
which signs, as it should seem were first borne of Carpenters or Architects,
and the reason is, because a house is never made perfect until that the
sparres be laid: and sometimes two be borne, sometimes three, and sometimes
four, as it is known: and of him which bears these Arms it shall be said
thus, in Latin: Portat de rubio et dua signa capitalia de auro cum tribus
talentis, in the French, Il port de gules et deux cheurons d'or et trois
talentes: in English, he bears gules two cheuerons of gold with three
besants.

Of a cheueron engrailed.
Also this cheueron is sometimes borne ingrailed, as here in this scutchion is
set down: blazon or coat of arms which then shall thus be blazed, in Latin,
Portat vnum signum capitale ingradatum de albo in campo asurio, in French, Il
port d'azure un cheueron d'argent engraylee, in English, He bears azure a
cheueron of silver engrayled.

Of cheuerons transmuted.
Moreover in these marks or signs of cheuerons there be found borne
transmuted and of diverse colors, as in this scutchion which here I set down
it appears: blazon or coat of arms and the cheuerons borne in this sort shall
thus be blazed, in Latin, Portat arma quarterata de nigro et argento cum vno
signo capitali de dictis coloribus transmutatis, Il port quartilee de sable et
d'argent un cheuron changee loin de laltre: in English, He bears quarterly
fable and silver with a cheueron of the said colors transmuted.

Of cheuerons transmuted or counterchanged the long way.
There be also cheuerons borne in Arms transmuted after the long way, as it
may most plainly appear in this scutchion, blazon or coat of armsand shall be
blazed thus: in latin, Portat arma partita secundum longum de coloribus aureo
et rubeo cum vno signo cvpitali de dictis coloribus transmutatis, in French, Il
port partee du loin d'or et de gules un cheueron changee lun de laultre, in
English, He bears party after the long way two colors gold and gules with a
cheuron of the said colors transmuted.

Now to speak of this coat which here in this scutchion I set down, blazon
or coat of arms I have known some doubt arise about the same among such as
pretended to have great skill in armorie, some holding one opinion, some an
other about blazing of the same: nevertheless, I do not think it a thing
whereof there should grow so great a question: and thus I blaze this coat, in
Latin, Portat duas parts capit^s scuti de reubio and caeteram partem de albo
admodum signi capitalis et tres rosas de coloribus transmutatis, in French, Il
port les deux partees du chief de gules et le troiseme d'argent partees in
maniere de cheuron et trois roses l'un de laltre, in English, He bears two
parts of the head of the sheeld gules, and the third part silver in the manner
of a cheueron, and three roses of the same colors transmuted.

Of fusils borne in arms.
There has sundry noble families borne fusils in their arms: amongst the
number of which my L of Gloucester that noble prince uncle to king Henry the
sixth was one, who bare in his arms three fusils of gules in the manner of a bar
in a field of silver: which arms this Duke bare, by reason of certain lands
belonging to the mount: blazon or coat of arms And here in this same scutchion
I have set down the like coat in form although not in their colors: the
which shall be blazed after this manner, in Latin: Portat de reubio et tres
fusillos de argento, in the French, Il port de gules et trois fusills
d'argent, in English, He does bear gules three fusilles of silver: and
otherwhiles these three or four fusilles be borne in manner of a pale.

And this is to be noted, that if these fusilles do exceed the number of
nine, you shall say evermore, the Arms be powdered with fusilles: and so
generally if any such marks or signs be borne above the number of nine, you
shall say, the coat is powdered with the same.

Of one fusill borne in Arms.
Sometimes one fusill is borne in Arms, as here in this figure it appears:
blazon or coat of arms yet have I heard some Herauldes doubtful thereof:
Nevertheless I know the armory is good, and such a coat is truly thus
blazed: in Latin, Portat de rubio cum vno fusillo de auro, in French, Il port
de gules un fusill d'or, in English, he bears gules a fusil gold.

Of a fusill of diverse colors.
Also these fusilles are sometimes borne of diverse colors, as here in the
scutchion set down appears: blazon or coat of arms but yet it is more
doubtful how these Arms should be blazed than the other: but you shall
blaze them thus, in Latin, Portat arma partita ex transuerso de albo et nigro
cum vno fusillo ex eisdem coloribus transmutatis, in French, Il port party de
trauers d'argent et sable et un fusil de mesmes colors lun de laultre: in
English, He bears arms parted barry of silver and sable with a fusill of the
very same colors transmuted.

Of fusilles in the manner of a bend.
And you shall find, that such fusilles are often times borne in the manner of
a bend, as you shall perceive in this scutchion: blazon or coat of arms which
arms are thus to be blazed, in Latin, Portat vnam bendam fusillatam de auro
in campo rubio, in French, Il port de gules un bend fusill d'or: in English,
He bears gules a bend fusilled of gold.

Of a bar fusilled.
Also you shall find in arms in the manner of a bar fusilled, as in this
scutchion it does appear: blazon or coat of arms and it shall be said of him
which bears such Arms, in Latin, Portat de reubio cum vna Barra fusillata
de argento, in French, Il port de gules vne bar fusillee d'argent: in
English, He bears gules a bar fusilled of silver.

Some have held opinion that such Arms began of Weauers, because this fusill
or spindle is proper to their trade.

The difference betwixt fusils, mascules and lozenges.
And you must understand, that the differences betwixt fusilles and mascules
are these: first the fusils be evermore longer and smaller than mascules, the
mascules be ever broader, and not so long as the fusilles be, as you may
perceive by the mascules in this scuchion, blazon or coat of arms which I blase
in this manner, in Latin, Portat de reubio et sex masculas de auro, in French,
Il port de gules et sex mascules d'or, in English, He bears gules six
mascules of gold, and very often you shall find these mascules perforated.

Also there are Arms borne masculet, as in this figure following is showed
you: and you shall understand that those arms be called masculet, in the which
the aforesaid Mascules begin most plenteously in the right angle of the
shield, and are ended toward the left part, which indeed are paled, and are
divided into three pales, if they be rightly done: blazon or coat of arms and
of him that bears these arms shall be said, Portat arma masculata de argento et
asurio, Il port d'argent et d'azure masculee: he bears silver and azure
masculet.

Of lozenges, and how they be made.
Now to know the true and perfect difference between Mascules and Lozenges,
you must take this for a general information and instruction, that the lozenge
evermore stands upright, so that one of his points is ever directly toward
the top of the sheelde, and his other point toward the bottom or lowest
part of the same, and that both the points of the sides of the lozenge stand
directly toward the sides of the sheelde: and standing rightly in the sheelde
they do stand in the form and manner of bends, as you most plainly perceive
in this scutchion which here I have set down: blazon or coat of arms And
furthermore you must observe, that neither fusilles nor lozenges be ever found
perforated.

Of a Saltary borne in Arms.
There is also a sign or mark borne in Arms which is called a Saltarie, and
it is made in the manner of Saint Andrews Cross, as most plainly it appears
in this scutchion here set down. blazon or coat of arms And this Saltarie was
a thing used in old times in parkes, which was of great compass and
largeness to take Dear or wild beasts in, which being once forced into the
same, they could not get out again. Wherefore in old times these marks were
given unto rich covetous men or great farmours, that in what manner soever they
came by their wealth, could never be forced to part from the same: Which coat
is to be blazed in this wise, in Latin, Portat de asureo et vnum saltatorium
de auro, in French, Il port d'azure un saltiere d'or, in English, He bears
azure a saltarie of gold.

Of a sautory engrailed.
Now you must understand that these sautories be otherwhiles ingrailed, as
here in this scutchion, blazon or coat of arms and then they be caled
sauteries ingrailed: which arms are ever blazed: portat vnum saltatorium
ingradatum de auro in campo asurio, in French, Il port d'azure un saltiere d'or
engrailee: He bears azure a saltary of gold ingrailed.

Sometimes there are many sauteries engrailed in one sheelde, sometimes two,
otherwhiles three, as in this scutchion appears, blazon or coat of arms and
of him that bears these Arms thus it shall be said: Portat vnam barram
planam et tria saltatoria ingradata de auro in campo rubio, in French, Il port
de gules un bar plein et trois saltiers engrailees d'or: in French he bears
gules, one bar plain, and three sauteries engrailed of gold.

Of Crowns in arms in manner of a pale.
And it is diligently to be noted, that speaking of such crowns in Arms, we
must ever have a regard how they be borne: blazon or coat of arms for
sometimes they be borne in the manner of a pale, as you may see in this
scutchion which is thus blazed, in latin, Portat tres coronas de auro palatas
in campo asurio, in French, Il port d'azure trois corones palees, in English,
he does bear azure three crowns of gold paled.

Of crowns borne barred.
These three crowns be sometimes borne barred, as appears in this scutchion,
blazon or coat of arms and you shall blaze it thus: Portat tres coronas aureas
in campo asureo, in French, Il port d'azure e trois corones bars d'or: in
English, he bears azure three crowns of gold barred.

Of three Crowns borne in the corners of the shield.
Now to speak of these three Crowns borne in the corners of the sheelde, as
in the scutchion here set down you must note, that this is the most worthy
form and manner of bearing such Arms, and the most ancient: blazon or coat
of arms therefore you shall say of him that bears these crowns in this wise,
in Latin, Portat de asureo tres coronas aureas, in French, Il port d'azure
trois corones d'or, in English, He bears azure three crowns of gold.

Of Fishes borne in Arms.
NOw to speak of fishes borne in Arms, you must understand, that in times
past there was one Peter de Rupibus Bish. of Winchester, which did bear in his
Arms three roches after his own name: blazon or coat of arms In which arms it
is doubted whether it be enough to say in blazing of them, that he bare three
fishes alone, as in this scutchion: which (in mine opinion) I think not, for
the rule going before: but it shall be said thus of the Arms of the said
Peter de Rupibus, in Latin, Portauit tres pisces argenteos natantes in campo
nigro, in French, Il port de sable et trois roches natantes d'argent: in
English, He bears sable three roches of silver swimming.

And now to speak of the Arms of Galfride Lucie, which here appears in the
scutchion, and carries three pikes or Lucies, blazon or coat of arms it shall
be said thus, in Latin, portauit tres lucios aureos in campo reubio, Il port
de gules et trois luces d'or: in English, he bears gules three lucies of
gold, which blazing is sufficient without any more ado, because these fishes
are borne in the most worthy manner.

And in like manner to blaze the arms of this gentleman, which bears two
barbels turning their backs together, as here appears in this scutchion:
blazon or coat of arms Portat duos barbellos aureos adinuicem terga vertentes,
in scuto azorio puluerisato cum crucibus cruciatis figitiuis de auro, Il port
d'azure powdree des crois croiceles fiches e deux barbeulx dors an dors d'or,
in English, He bears azure poudered with crosses cros^ets fixed, and two
barbels of gold back to back.

Of Frets borne in arms.
A certain noble man, the lord Awdeley of England bare in his arms a frect,
which frects in like manner are borne of diverse gentlemen of great houses in all
colors, as in red, in black, in gold, otherwhiles single, otherwhiles
double, and sometimes triple, and sometimes over all the sheeld: blazon or coat
of arms and you shall find great difference betwixt arms bended, and these
frets wherefore it is to be noted, that in bended arms the colors equally are
divided: but in these frets the field ever abides whole, as in these arms of
the L. Awdley: Portat arma frectata de auro in campo reubeo, in French, Il port
de gules un frect d'or, He bears gules a frect of gold.

Of beasts salient or ramping borne in Arms.
Diverse families bear beasts ramping or salient in their arms, of which as
yet I have made no mention: blazon or coat of arms Therefore to speak of a
Lion or other beast borne in such manner as here in this scutchion is showed,
I will thus blaze this coat, in Latin, Portat de reubio vnum leonem de
argento, in french, Il port de gules un lion salient d'argent: he bears a
lion ramping of silver: and he is properly caled a lion rampant or ramping,
forasmuch as his right foot ascendes to the right corner of the shield: and
this rule is observed in all beasts, having four feet, as lions, leopards,
bears, dogs, and such like.

Of Bars and Labelles borne in Arms.
First note well the arms of a father as in this scutchion, blazon or coat of
arms and then you shall see the difference as it shall be borne by his
children: for we may see many bear Labelles in their Arms, as you shall
perceive in the Coats next following: And you shall know, that such Labelles
are not properly marks or signs in Arms, but differences in those marks or
signs, as when a man has diverse sons, the eldest son shall bear the
whole arms of his father with some little crescent in the same, blazon or coat
of armssignifying thereby, that he is still in hope of augmenting his estate*
or he may carry the coat with some other little difference, as a cross
croslet, a mullet, or the like.

The second brother shall bear the Arms of his father, blazon or coat of arms
with these three labelles to the difference, to signify thereby, that he is
the third which bears those Arms.

Also the third brother in like manner shall bear iiij. labels, in token he is
the fourth that bears those arms, blazon or coat of arms of whom the father
is the first, the heir the second, the second brother is the third, and so the
third brother is the fourth which bears these arms: and for this cause the
third brother shall bear four labelles, as appears in this scutchion: and
so if there be more brothers, you shall increase your labelles after the form
before showed you.

And the sons of those same brothers shall bear the same labels: blazon or coat
of arms and in case that the second brother which bears three labels have two
sons, the elder son of those two which is heir unto his father shall bear
the whole arms of his father, with so many labelles as his father did, with a
little difference, as here appears in this scutchion: blazon or coat of arms
and the second brother shall bear the whole Arms of his father, with the same
labels his brother bare, and no more, with a border, as here in this figure
next ensuing shall be showed unto you, and as it is spoken of before in the
chapter of Borders. And if there be a third brother, then he shall bear his
fathers arms with the same labelles, and a border of an other color for a
difference, as in this scutchion which here I show unto you. blazon or coat of
arms And the children of those men shall bear their differences, not in their
fathers arms, but in borders and divisions diverse.

And like as the children of the second brother, bearing three labels, have
their differences by their signs and borders, so the children of the third
brother, bearing four labels, bear the same arms their father did, and so
many labelles, and they have also their differences by their signs and
borders, as before is rehearsed, and diverse other, as a lion ramping, one part
black, and another part red.

For, of all the marks and signs which be found in Arms, as flowers, leaves,
and other devises, it were too long and tedious to speak of, they be so
innumerable: but for such rules as generally hold in Armourie, observing these
which here I have set down, I doubt not but you shall find them sufficient to
blaze the hardest coat. Therefore take you heed to these rules: and although
they touch not every particular in Armourie, yet shall you find them to
profit much, and show you a near way to some perfection in this knowledge.

And now lastly I will proceed to this question, that is, Whether the Arms by
the grant of a Prince, or other great Lord be of more dignity, than those
Arms which a man takes by his own authority, when it is lawful for him to
take him Arms at his pleasure. By which question you shall well know that we
have Arms four manner of ways.

The first of the which is the Arms which we have by descent from our fathers
or mothers, or our predecessors: the which manner of bearing of Arms is most
usual, and most famous, upon the which I intend not to stand long, being so
well approved.

The second manner we have Arms by, is by our merits, as plainly appears
by the addition of the Arms of France to the Arms of England, won by that
victorious prince Edward the eldest son of King Edward the third then king of
England, after the taking of King John of France in the battle of Poicters,
which Arms are rightly and lawfully borne* and in the same manner may a
private soldier take some great Lord in battle, the same soldier may carry
the Arms of his prisoner* and his heir shall in his fathers right carry the
same Arms.

The third manner is, when we have Arms by the grant of a Prince or some
other great Lord: and it is to be understood, that these Arms which we have
by the grant of the Prince receive no question why a man does bear such a
coat, for the Prince will not that such a question be asked, why he gave to
any man such Arms? Because whatsoever pleases the Prince, has the strength
of the law, so it be not to overthrow the law: except any man bare those
Arms before, because that that which is a man's own by a right title, may not
be taken from him, nor may the Prince do it without doing wrong.

The fourth manner is, when we bear Arms which we take by our own proper
authority, as we see in these days, how many men by their grace, labor,
favor, or deserving, are made gentlemen, some by their wisdom, some by
valor, some by their strength, some by art, some by virtue: and of these men,
many by their own authority have taken Arms to be borne by them and their
heirs, whose names I think it needelesse to repeat: nevertheless I think
those Arms so taken may be lawfully borne: but yet they are not of so great
dignity and authority as those Arms which be granted by the authority of a
Prince or great Lord. And it is the opinion of many, that a Herald of Arms may
give Arms: But I say, if any Arms be given by a Herald, that those Arms be
of no more authority than those Arms taken by a man's own authority.

FINIS.

