THE book of wisdom otherwise called the Flower of Virtue. Following the
Auctorities of ancient Doctors and Philosophers, dividing and speaking of
Vices and Virtues, with many goodly examples whereby a man may be praised or
dyspraysed, with the manner to speak well and wyselie to al solles, of what
estate so ever they be: Translated first out of Italion into French, and out
of french into English, by John Lark. 1565.



Learn my godly children to eschew vice.

And look you tolerne wisdo^e of your fore fathers.

These be the Auctoures of this Book.
Jesus Christ. Saint Paul Saint Peter Saint James, S, John Evangelist Saint
Thomas, S, Matthew, S. Bernarde, S. Gregorye, S, Siluestre, S, Austyn, John
Chrysostom The Master of the Sentences, Salamon. Esaye. Ecclesiasti. Ihesus
Sirac, Sapienti The wise man, Tuly. Sydrac. Alexandre, Senec, Arystotyle,
Socrates, Pithagoras, Bracco, Iuuenall, Plato, Boecius, Hermes, Cato, Orace,
Varro, Ouide, Diogenes, Priscian, Macrobius, Homer, Cassidore, Ephesi, Lucan.
Ipocras, Terence Lungyn, Orygen, Ptholomeus. Plato. Auicen Galicus, Sotorauus,
Barbalicus, Argelycus, Drusyane, Bernicus, Innocent, Sedechyas, Civil, Exodi,
Bid, Galyen.
These puts in many goodlye Examples.

The Prologue.
IT was of Apryll the seven tene day,
In that fresh time when the Rose so gay.
His Flower begins to spread and spryng
And al other herbs and trees take liking
The Birds do sing so merry song,
In the flourishing wodes, the^ selves among
For the swetenes of yt time so comfortable
In the which al things be delectable,
I say for me, which the said day
In my bed al alone as I lay,
I thought in my sleep that I did see
A gooly Medowe, not far from me,
wherein of goodly ladies a great company
Me thought in my dream there should be.
The first of al was Lady Prudence
Which is so full of great Science,
And then Folly, which does not her rese^ble
After that Temperaunce I did espy,
with dystemperaunce, that her went by,
Also I did behold Amors
Which was clothed in four colors,
Then did I see Envy that cruel maistres
Which went next unto Gladness,
Then followed Heauynes full of Robery
Making great argument with Mella^colly,
Then noble Peace apered with great solace
which boldly chased Ire out of that place
Then Chastytye me thought was in sight
Which against Lechery stiffly did fight,
Then Strength apered, and also Patience
Which between them had some difference
Then did I see Suertye and also Fear,
In great dyfference, as they were,
Then the Eunemye full of Defame,
After them Glotonye and Abstynence
Amongst whom was no dyfference,
I saw then Constance that noble dame
with Inconsta^ce that is worthy of blame
Then noble Courage with Vainglorye,
Then did I see, I have it in memory,
Also there was Justice and Iniustyce,
The^ selves beholding with great malice,
And I did se Loyalty and Falshed,
With lyeng and truth in the last stead.
All that great company I did se,
In that same medowe as semyd me,
Every one of them after there nature
Therefore I drew me nere at adventure,
For the better to understand their reason
And under a bushe, in that season,
preuelie me hyd, all things to mark,
which incontinent was in my heart,
Imprynted, and with that I did wake
And pen and Ink then I did take,
The said vycyon trewly to write.
And in order every thing to indyte,
which in this book ye may read
And it receive if ye take heed,
The ground thereof is found in Science,
Therefore I pray you of pacyence
And mine ignorance herein pardon,
For I commyt al to just correctyon
Now no more in Ryme I will use
Take this with the faults, and me excuse.
At the be gynnyng, and first of all
Shall Be treated of prudence the principal.
Thus ends the Prologue.
Here the Auctour shows, how a Man, (or a Woman) ought to be adorned with
virtues. And how that Prudence ought chiefly and first of all: Rule and goue^^
the Creatures. The first Chapter.
Dame Prudence speaks. Sapyence,or Wisdom.
AS by the Sovereign Sapyence, or Wisdom. And high power of god, Genisis. 1.
c.
al things reasonable be create, all the sa^e ought to god to their good and
happy end. And because that the sprites, or souls of reasonable creatures be
create by god, to his own semblaunce and lykenes, it is necessary, that he be
adorned with virtues, by the which they may come to the end, for the which
they were made and create. Prudence is mother and leader of al other virtues,
without the which none of the other Virtues can be well governed. And it is
very nesessarye and convenient, to the spyrytes of reasonable creatures to
have Prudence, and be adorned of the same. For Salamon says in making
mencyon of the same in his Proverbs.

Si intrauerit sapsentia cortuum: Salamon, prouerli. capi.
et scentia anime tue placuerit consiliu^ custodiet te, et Prudentia seruabit
te. How Prudence, is chief buckler, and defense of all Virtues. And of the
great goodness, that may come of the same to all persons, after the auncyente
Philosophers. The Second Chapter.
PRudence called good Wisdom, discrecion, and saigenes, be in. iii. manners and
sorts, after the saying of Tulle, Tulle.
the first is memory that is to say, remembrance of things passed. The second
is, to know that thing that a man has to do, the good from the evil, and the
truth from the falsehed. The third is prouydence or prouysion, that is to say,
for the time to come, of that thing that a man has to do. And these iii.
virtues be formed and ruled, by two other, that is to say, Counsel and
dylidence.

Aristotyle says that counsel, Aristotyle.
is a certain inquysicyon proceeding from one thing to another, dylygence, is
for to have care and regard unto the thing that a man has to do. And these
two Virtues that is to say Dylygence and Prudence may be compared to the Ante,
the which is a little Beast having great solycytude and care, to gatherin
Summer that thing whearevpon he may live in Winter, remembrynge him self of
the time passed, knowing the time present. And prouydynge for the time to come.

Salamon says that the Ante has such manner in him self, Salamon.
that all the grayn and corn that he gathers to gyther in the So^mer, for
his lyuinge in the Winter, he does cleave it by the mids, to the intent
that it do not burgen and spring.

Dauyd says that the beginning David.
of Wisdom is to fear and dread God.

Salamon says that Wisdom is better and more worth, Salamon.
then the riches of the world, for no riches may be compared to saygenes and
Wisdom.

Tulle says that the wise man Tulle.
ought never to say I would not have thought it that such a thing should
have chanced so, for the wise man does not doubt, but has always a sure
trust, and does provide for dangers to come.

Sydrac says that good wynes Sidrac.
and meats comforts and reioyces the body of man, but above al things
saygenes and wisdom does rejoice it.

Senec does say, Senec.
if I had one foot in my grave, yet would I be glad to learn Wisdom.

Tulle says that he which is wise, Tulle.
can never lack nor have great need, nor shall not suffer in any manner. And
says moreover that he is wise that knows him self.

Aristotyle says, Aristotyle.
that the wise man goes always armed in his thought and remembrance against
every man. And says also, yt he is a fool that thinks that fortune and
chance does give either good or evil but that wisdom give it.

Bracco says that the key of Seuerytie is the thought. Bracco
And therefore the old mind and thought causes often times to err.

Alexandre says, Alexandre.
a yt man ought to have in his mind and remembrance in the night, that
thing that he must do in the day.

Salamon says, Salamon.
do all things by counsel, and thou shall not repent thee thereof.

Pythagoras says that there is no counsel so good and faithful, Pithagoras.
as is the counsel which is given in the Sea, whiles a man is in danger
and perylll.

Socrates says that a man governed by the counsel of young folks, Socrates.
has for the most part, evil chance and fortune. And says also that there
be iii. things contrary to good counsel, thai is to say, hastines, Ire, and
covetousness.

Iuuenall says, Iuuenall.
do not show thy mind and will, but to him of whom thou will ask counsel,
for generallye every man does counsel yt thing which he seith does please.

Senec says, Senec
when thou will go to demand counsel of any man, see first how he does
govern him self.

Plato says, Plato.
that science without regard and solycytude of experyence is lytie worth, of
whom it was demanded how and whereby a wise man might be known. And he
answered that the wit of man shows it when he has great and diverse
trybulacyons, and does ouerpasse them mekely and in good patience. The good
Maryner knows him self in fortu^es, for every Maryner in a meek and
peasable time can sail and govern the ship.

Also Plato says that the wise Plato.
man does know him self when he is not angry nor moved for no manner of
iniuryes done unto him, nor when he does not gloryfye him self, to here and
understand him lauded and praised, moreover he says that there be three
things, that makes a man to bewise.

The First is to read many good Books. The Second, to go into diverse
Countries, to hear much of the deeds of other men.

Iuuenall says, Iuuenall.
thou haste gotten great dygnytie, if Prudence be in thee, for he is very
happy that can know the end of causes.

Boecius says, Boecius.
that it is not suffyciente to know the things as a man does see them before
him, but Prudence is that which does measure the end of all things, it was
demanded of a wise man, how a man should behave him self, and what he
should do, that he should not have need of any man. And he answered that
if a man be rich, let him live measurablye, and temperatelye. And if he be
pore, let him labor diligently. And so he shall live without danger, for
dyligence is the mother of Richesse. And says that he ought not to be called
Rich, which gathers much Richesse and gooddes together, but he which does
spend them with reason. And says also that there is no greatter Treasoure in
the world then wit and discrecyon.

Socrates says that Science is gotten by dilygence of man, Socrates.
but Prudence and Wisdom, is the gift of God, and amongst all other gifts
the most excellent.

Hermes says also that there is no greater treasure in this world, Hermes.
then wit and discrecyon, nor greater pouertye then ignorance, nor better
friends then to have good custom and manners. And says also that when a man
is old, every manne can dysprayse his Virtues, and note and mark his Vices.
And says moreover that he that will fly dishonor and shame let him fly and
anoyde the occasyons. Note.
Also he says that the wise man ought not to remember that thing that he has
lost, but ought to think and remember how too keep surely that thing that
he has. There camme once a wise man, (a kynsman of his) and prayed him that
it would please him to lend him a certain sum of money: the which (wise
man) answered, truly my friend I shall not be so evil content with thee,
if I do not lend thee, as I shall be if I lend thee, for afterward I would
recover it of thee, and paraduenter I can not.

Plato says that Prudence and wisdom, Plato.
does decorate and adorn the richesse of man. And says also that the
Prudente and Wise man, does not fear death, for Prudence governs his
understanding, his tongue is the voice of truth, his heart is good will,
pytie and mercy be his armures. And also to seek the wise men, is Wisdom and
Prudence, his power and auctoryte is Justice, his reygne is measure, his laud
and praise is peace, his works be salvation, his chyualrye or Knyghtehead is
the counsel of wise men, his apparel is pacyence, his treasoure is
dyscyplyne or doctrine, the company of good persons is his love. And al his
desire is to fly from sin, and to serve God, and to have his Faith and trust
in him, for without that, no man can please God. As says Saint Paul.

Sine fine impossile est placere Deo. Hebre xi. c.
Exsample of the Virtue of Prudence. The third Chapter.
OF the Virtue of Prudence, Example.
it is read in the Hystories of Rome, that on acertaine day the Emperor of
Rome did ride by a wood. Philosopher
And there did find a Philosopher: the which Philosopher the Emperor caused
to be called, but no manner of answer he would make. Then the Emperor him
self did call him, and yet for all that, nothing would he answer. Example.
And themperoure saying that the would give no manner of answer, came to him,
and asked him what he did. And the philosopher answered, I learn wisdom, I
pray thee (said themperoure, that thou will teach me some thing thereof.
And then the Philosopher did take pen, ink, and paper, and wrote a little Roll
containing this sentence. Sentence.
When thou shall enterprise to do any thing: consider and thynk in thy mind
the end, that may come of it.

The Emperor took this writing and returned again to his palayse at Rome.
And caused the said writing to be set upon the door of his preuye chamber.
So it chanced afterward that on a day: certain of the Barons and Knights of
his Court took their counsel together amongst them, Example.
that they would kill the said Emperor, (for a certain occasyon, the which
should be to long to rehearse.) And they were at a (...) with the Barber of
the said Emperor, and promised him a certain su^me of money, that when he
should shave the said Emperor, that he should cut his throat. And the said
Barons and Knights, promised also to conueye the said Emperor out of the
Palice,. And within short space after that the said Barber came to shave the
Emperor, and to do that thing that he had promised, (that is to say, to
kill him. And did behold the writing, Example.
which was set above the door of the Preuye Chamber, in the which was
contained.

When thou shall enterprise to do any thing: Sentence.
consyore well in thy mind the end that may come of it.

Whearewyth he me ruaylouslye astoyned, and began to wax pale in the vysage.
Example.
And did tremble for fear: the Emperor saying this meruayled greatly what:
should be the cause thereof. And commanded his said Barber to show him the
cause of his fear. The said Barber was so troubled and abashed in his mind,
that he could give no manner of answer. Then the Emperor consyderyng that
he cold not have such a great fear without some manner of cause, did examyne
him. And promised him that if he would tell the truth, he should have no
harm, but should have pardon, what cause soever if were. And then the said
Barber discovered all the matter, and declared the manner of the said treason.
And how that he had promised to cut the throat of the said Emperor in
shauinge his berde. Then the Emperor incontinente did send for the said
Barons and Knights. And did cause them in like case to be examyned, and found
the truth thereof, and finally caused them to suffer cruellye Justice, Example.
according to their deservings. Then he sent for the Philosopher, which had
given him the writing. And after that time would never suffer him to depart
from him.

a;How Follye is contrary to Prudence. And how Follye is divided into many
parts of the man. Also the manner to know the Folly by his deeds, and the wise
man, by his works. The.iiii. Chapter.
Folly is a Vice contrary to the Virtue of Prudence. As Plato says, Plato.
of the which Folly, there is diverse and many sorts and manners. There is
Folly accustomed, as those persons which be Foles from their natyuitie and
birth. And other there be which be lu^atike or frantike for a certain space.
And yet there is another manner of Folly which is less then the other
aforesaid, as of those persons which have lost their wit, The deuicion, of
folly
And this Folly may be divided in four manners. The first is of those persons
which do not regard not think buselye upon those matters that they have to do,
but do al things at adventure without any manner of consyderacyon and reason.
The Second manner of Folly is of them that do not consydre norre guard the end
that may come of the matter, that they have enterprysed, but do al things
sodeinly, as it comes in their mind and will. The third manner of Folly, is
to be to hastye to do that thing that a man has to do. The fourth manner of
Folly, is to be neclygent and slothful in that thing that a man has to do,
and to have no thought nor care for the same but rather necligently to let it
pas. And can not find the manner to begin any thing, And if another man begin,
yet can not be follow, And if a man do pursue and follow, yet can not he find
the manner to make and end, know ye that neclygence is mother and nourishe of
pouertye, And so the man which is neclygent may be reputed for a fool.

Salamon says, Salamon.
meddle not but as little as thou may with a fool, for he will not regard thy
words, except they be after his pleasure.

Senec says that a fool may be compared to the Moldwarpe, Senec
which hears but understands not. And says that the fool lightly byleueth
the good yt a man speaks of him. And hears very gladlye the evil spoken of
another man. And say the also that the wise man does follow ye domages and
harms, And goes not about to find them but that fool takes great pain to
find them. And says if thou will have ye love of a fool fulfill his will and
pleasure, in all things. And says that the love of a fool shall be greatter
damage unto thee, then his evil will. And if it chance that he be Rich, he
shall be proud and presu^pteous, and if he be pore, he will dispeare of the
goodness of God. And And if a man give him any thing he will never thank
him for it if a man tell him any secret matter, he will show it incontinente
to another, if he speak he will be hard and will haise audyence above all men.

And if other men speak he will, not hear nor give audyence unto them, he is
sodeynlye merye and full of Joy without any measure and reason. And
sodeynlye also he is full of Ire, Melancholy and angrye without Reason, if a
man pray him to pardon and forgive any man, he will answer that in no manner
of wise he will so do, he loves better war and decencion then peace. And
falshed and lyeng the^ truth, no man can bring him out of his oppinion. And
commonly he is coueitous in all his business, if he talk with a wise man; he
will never humysate himself, nor skarsly give him he arynge, of thou be rich
he will say thou art an usurer, if thou be poor, he will speak to thee vyse
words, if thou do well and use to do many good deeds, he will say that thou
art an Ipocryte, if thou do evil, he will defame thee, if peradventure he do
accord him self, to truth in any manner of thing that does please him, he will
praise it greatly, but if it be contrary to his pleasure and will, he will
disprayse it. But the wise man is of a contrary oppinion, for he has
counteraunce in Justice, Humylytie and pardon: he can speak well, and also
hold his peace when place and time is, he has measure in his power, he is
lyberall to the demaunders: and also he is a fair speaker, and a fair geuer
of answer, he that shows him his counsel he does keep it secret, if he
give any thing, he gives it merelye and with a good heart, and without any
reproach he does none otherwise to any man, but as he would were done unto him.

If he be rich he will never be ye prouder therefore. If he be pore yet therefore
will not he leave and forsake to serve god, he is not angrye nor displeased to
see an other man better then he, nor he will not dispraise no man worse then
him self, he demands nor claims nothing there where he has no right, he
is agrable and pleasant in all his aunsweres. And faith nothing but that he
knows well, he does not hyde his science, he constrains and accords his
will by force, to truth and right, and he causes him self to be loved of
every man, if he bear wytnes, it shall be true, if he Judge, it shall be right,
and shall never prolonge the causes of any man, he does repute him self a
stranger in this world, and thinks always to depart from it, he does well,
and gives good example to other to do well, for he forbideth ye evil, and
does keep him from it to his power, all his deeds and his sayengs be
concordable, and very pacyently does suffer endure the injuries and opprobryus
words spoken against him, without taking any venegeaunce the wise manne is
always in one mind and courage he is not in diverse opynions, he will not be
let for no manner of thing to tell the truth. And he is very Charytable.
And of this speaks the holy Scripture saying.

Homo sanctus et sapience manet sicut Solstultus sicut luna. How temperaunce is
one of the flowers of Prudence, And how he that has it in him may resist and
withstand many evils after the saienges of the wise men, in ye chapter going
before. The.v. Chapter.
I Emperaunce is a flower of Prudence, for of Prudence, descends and comes
temperaunce. Temperaunce does moderate the Vices, and makes the virtues
perfect, Temperaunce is a fyrme and a stable authority and power the which
does moderate and refrain the will of the heart and courage. And this noble
virtue of temperaunce may be compared to the Camel, for the Camel is a
Beast of such nature that he would go two hundredth miles, to have the natural
company of the femall. And then after that, he has such temperaunce in him
that he (being with his mother, or Systers) will never touch them for no manner
of thing. Tulle.


Tulie says, if thou have temperaunce, thou will use measure in all thing, and
will forsake vain pleasures and volupteousnes.

Senec says, Senec.
that a man cannot have a better nor a greater power and auctorytie, then to
have the power of him self.

Senec says, Senec.
that a man can not have a better nor a greater power and auctorytie, then to
have the power of him self.

Socrates says, Socrates.
that it is a greater and a more virtuous thing for a man, to vanquyshe and
overcome his will then to vanquyshe his enemy.

Plato says that he shall evil overcome his enemy, Plato.
that can not overcome him self. And says that he is to be praised and
honored, which has temperaunce in his living, moreover he says that there is
five manner of temperaunce.

The fystre is to be chaste in young age, Merye in old age, Measure in
haboundaunce of Riches, gentle and humble in prosperity, pacyent in adversity.
Temperau^ce is power of reason against Lecherye, and against all other vices
and sins.

Tulle says that this virtue of temperaunce, Tulle.
is the apparel and adournemente of life, and abusing of all tribulacions.

Orace says, Orace.
eschew the delight and pleasure of the flesh, for ye pleasure is very evil,
whereof the end is full of sorrow. Of this virtue of temperaunce, decende and
come many virtues, that is to say. Measure, shame, abstyne^ce, honesty, and
chastity, Temperaunce is a virtue which refrayneth the proud men.

Saint Austin says that the virtue of temperau^ce refraineth concupiscence,
Saints Austin.
which is contrary to us and does trouble us in the faith of our lord: and of
this speaks the Apostle S. Peter in his first epistle, saying. Saints Peter.


Obseord vos tanquam aduenas and (...) regrinas abstinere vos a carnalibus
desideriis que melitant aduersus animam. How distemperaunce is contrary to
temperaunce: And how it is the pryncypall cause of all evil. The.vi. Chapter.
DYstemperaunce follows the will as it comes.

Plato says that there is no worse vice in the world then dystemperaunce,
Plato.
for of it comes and desendeth all manner of evil.

Varro says that he which follows and pleases his will, Varro
cannot be without vice and sin.

Senec says, Senec
that it is a marvel if riches do come to any person and dure with him, if he
be wilful.

Socrates says, Socrates.
he that will follow his will, his end cannot be but shame and rebuke.

Example of Dystemperaunce, The.vii. Chapter.
OF Dystemperaunce it is read in the life of Fathers, that there was a maiden
called Ianselme, which always had been chaste and of honest conuersasion. And
she being one day amongst other women which did speak of the pleasures of
Lecherye, did purpose in her mind to prove if ye pleasures were so great, as
she had hard them say. And thereupon she did send for a young man which
aforetimes had desired to have his pleasure of her. And he came to her and in
conclusion meddled bodily with her. And socontinued a great space in taking
their pleasures together. And afterward on a certain day this young woman did
remember the great order and vylenes of this sin of Lecherye. And the offense
that she had made unto our lord God. And did remember and see also by yt
reason of a little distemperau^ce she had lost her virginity, the which she
could never recover again, for ye which thing she was so troubled and vexed in
her mind. And had such distemperau^ce in her self that she did hang her
self by the neck, And so ye may see that dystemperaunce is an evil and a
daunrous vice.

How the auctour speaks of Love of Benevolence, and of deliberacion And how
of Love he makes four Chapters, The.viii. Chapter.
Love Beniuolence and Deliberacion, Saint Thomas,
be as one thing, after the saying of Saint Thomas in his su^me. And that the
first mouynge of all manner of Love is the knowledge. Saint Austin
For Saint Angustin says, that a man can not love any thing, if he first
have not the knowledge of the same.

And this knowledge descends and comes of the five corporal senses and
wits of the persons, as the eyes, understanding, and hearing of the Ears,
smell of the Nose, taste of the Mouth, and touching of the Hands, or of the
Sense and Wit which has understanding by Imaginacyon. And this knowledge
is the first mouinge and felinge of Love, but the most part comes of the
Eyes, Aristotyle.
after the saying of Aristotyle for first ye will of persons, by this knowledge
of the memory, does turn into pleasure and into Imaginacion. And by this
pleasure is moved the desire of heart, in desiring that thing that does
please it.

And this pleasure gyuethe hope and trust to the heart, to have the said
thing.

Aristotle says that of this proceeds the souerine virtue of love,
Aristotyle.
the which is foundacyon and gide of all other virtues.

Saint Thomas says that no virtue may be without love. Saint Thomas,
And says that in love there must be order, first a man ought to love God
above all things. And then him self, then his Father and mother. And then his
wife, or the wife her husband, then to love every man after his estate and
degree. And to love better good persons then evil.

Saint Augustyne says that thou ought to love thy self, Saint Austin
but not thy vices. First I will speak of the love of God, which ought to be
about all things, then afterward I will speak of the Love of the Fathers
and Mothers, then of the love of Compaignons, neighbors and Fryendes. And at
the last I will speak of the Love of Women.

How the Love of God, is the Love above all Loves that durethe the longest.
And that without the which the creatures can not be satysfyed nor contented.
The.ix. Chapter.
THe Love of God which is called Charity comes and decendeth by two
virtues, that is o tsaye, by faith, and hope. For a man can not love God: if
first he have not true faith in himself, in beleuinge stedfastlye, that
there is one very god in Trynitie. And then he ought to have hope and and
trust, to come to the glory and Joy, which is everlasting life. And of
these two virtues, is create and engendered in the heart of the person a
dysposycyon to incline him to love God. And all this comes by the virtue and
grace of the holy ghost.

Solomon King of Jerusalem speaking of the love of God, Salamon.
said I have builded Howses, planted Vynes, and trees bearing all manner of
fruytes, I have had great pleasure in all manner of garments and appapell, I
have had great quantytie of gold and silver, and precious stones, I have had
many fair children. And many noble servants. And of all other manner of
people in my Court: I have had Mynstrelles, Players, and Syngers of all
nacyons. I have had great domynyon, power, and auctorytie upon the people. And
great science in diverse manners. And so I have had the greatest honors that
any man might have. And there was never thing that I desired, but my desire
was fullfilled: but when I have Imagined and well considered all these things
that I have done in vain, I have seen clearelye that all is vanity and
falshed, and deceyuynge of the spyrite. And also I have known that there is
nothing in this world, but vanity and pride. And yt there is no man perfect,
but he which is in the love of god. Then I did pray with al my heart, yt he would
send me death. Saint Paul.
Saint Paul says that the wisdom of the world is but Folly. And he yt can
the most, can the least. Aristotyle.
Aristotile says I came into this world naked, and as a fool I have lived:
and at the end I know that I can nothing. Saint Austyne says, Saint Austin
O thou man that demands peace, wylt thou that I do reach it thee, have
stedfastnes, then in all thy heart to love God, for the myserye of this world
is so euydente, and clear, and easy to know, that every man may perceive it.
For no man can be honored, but another shall be vituperat and reputed vile,
nor the one can not be great but the other little: nor the one Rich, but the
other poor. And also this world may be compared to a great and a large
table, whereupon there is a little and a narowe towell, the which the one
plucketh on the one side and discovers the table on the other side, and so
takes al from his compaignon. He that puts his love in this world, he
endurethe much sorrow, for truly all is vanity, but he that does set his
love in God, is all his time merye and Ioyeous. The Love of god, does
maintain it self, by the perseueraunce, as he him self witness saying.

Mathe. x chap.
Qui autem perseuerit vsque in finem hic saluus erit. How the Love of Father
and Mother with other Parents comes, And what reverence and honor we
ought to give to our Father and Mother. And the manner to love his wife and
Children. And to correct and lead them in this world. The.x. Chapter.
THe Second Love proceeds of natural and carnal moving of the courage
which constrayneth the person to love his Parents, that is to say his Father
and Mother, and other his kynsfolkes, as nature does move us. A certain
Philosopher says, do not put thy trust in him, which loves not his father
and his Mother or his Kynsfolkes. For if he do not love them, it is in manner
impossyble that he should love thee.

Salamon says in the Ecclesiastike, Salamon.
In all thy words, in all thy deeds and works, honor thy father and thy
mother. And thou shalt have the everlasting benedyctyon of God. The
benedictyon of the Father mayntaineth and up holds the house of the Son.
And the malediction or curse of the father, does undermine the foundacyon
thereof. God commands ye in the law, honor thy Father and thy mother, to
the intent that thou may live long upon the earth. Saint Mathe.
Saunt Mathewe says that he never se child which did evil entreat his
Father, and his mother: but god did take ve^geau^ce on him in this world.

Plato says, Plato,
know well the man before that thou love him. And when thou shalt know him
well, then love him well, with al thy heart, it is said in degree, that the
love which a man has with a vile and unhonest person, can not be but by
some vile occasyon. And says, that the good man is corrupt, by the company
of the evil. And the evil man does lose his evil name, by keeping company with
more honest and better men then he. And says that thou ought to love
perfectlye thy wife, for saying that thou art her husband, she is one of thy
members, and ye be both one heart and flesh. God does name the woman, the
aid and help of the manne, for when he had made man he said let us make aid
unto him, and did take one of the ribs of Adam, and made thereof the woman, in
saying, for this woman the man shall forsake his Father and his Mother, and
shall Join him only with his wife, and they shall be two flesshes in one.

Saint Paul says. Saint Paul,
Men love your Wives, in like case as Ihesu Christ loves his: which is the
Church. And in another place says love your Wives, as your own body, for
it is the gift of God.

Sydrac says, Sidrac.
that the possessions and Richesse comes and be given by the Father of any
man, but his wife is the gift of God.

Saint Paul says, Saint Paul
the Husband has not the power of him self, but the Wife, nor the Wife of
her self, but her Husband. And says moreover, thou ought not to believe
that it is sin to meddle in all honor with thy Wife: For the Apostelles
say, let every man have his own, to avoid furnicacyon.

Salamon says, Salamon,
that a good Wife, is above all the goods and richesse of this world, for she
is the crown of the man, and the keeper of the house. If thy Wife be evil,
thou ought to supporte and not to blame her, if by no means thou canste
amend her, how be it, give her not to much power of thee.

For as Sidrac says, Sidrac
beware that thou do not move thy wife, so that thou shall cause her to come
to more Ire, and wrath.

Salamon says, Salamon.
that there is no head in the world so full of venyme, as the head of a
Serpent, nor no Ire so great, as the Ire of a Womon.

Tulle says that, Tulle,
that person which is a shamed of the company of his Father and his Mother,
is not worthy to be amongst the Cytezens.

Sidrac says, Sidrac
that he was borne in an unhappy hour, which does forsake his Father, and he
is cursed of God, which is stoburne unto his Mother.

Saint Austyne says, Saint Austin,
that a man ought to honor his Father and Mother in two manners, that is to
say, to bear them reverence And to mynister that thing unto them whereof they
have need.

For Salamon says. Salamon,
Honora patrem tuu^ and gemitus matris rue non obliuiscaris, And says if y^
have sons chastise them, and they shall be comfort unto thy soul, if y^ have
daughters teache them to keep their bodies. And give them not tafaire
countenance, mary thy daughter, for thou do a good deed, it thou marye her
to a wise man.

Senec says, Senec.
chastyse thy children and cause them to fear and dread god, for it is better
for a man to see his children dye, then to see them lvue evil and to be
ingrate.

Saint Bernarde says in his cantikes, S bernard,
that ingratitude is enemy of the soul, and dyminysheth the virtues, and is
perdycyon of merytes and benefytes. The sin of Ingratitude is like the wind,
which dries up the water of the Fountains of pytie, the dew and water of
grace, and goodness of mercy, as the wise manne says.

Ingrati enim spes tanquem hibernalis Proverb, xviii,
glacies tabescet dispariet tamqui aqua super flua. Of the Love of Compaginons
and Fryendes, and how to entertain it, The.xi. Chapter.
THe Third Love, which is called amytie of Compaignons it is to will one
thing together laufullye and honestlye. And this love dyscendeth by three
occasyons, which moves the person to the same. The first is for some
goodness that the person has or trusts to have of him that he loves. The
Second is for the good will and mind that the person has unto his fryend in
desyryng and wysshyng him good. The Third. is that he would be always as
one with his fryende, and partaker with him in all things, for love that he
owes unto him. And these three manners of love be very good and virtuous.

Saint Thomas says, Saint Thomas,
that thou may keep thy fryende three manner of way. The first is to love him
with all thy heart, and that he may know it. The second is to do all thing
to thy power, which thou know does please him. And the third is to beware
that thou do no thing that shall displease him. And says also that by other
three means, thou may keep him thy friend, that is to say, to laud and
praise him in his absence: and to help him at his need.

Salamon says, Salamon.
that there is nothing to be compared to a faith full friend.

Ovid says, Ovid,
that when thou shall be in prosperyty, thou shall find and have many fryendes.
And in thine aduersytie, thou shall be left all alone without any fryendes.

Arystotyle says, Aristotyle,
that the more dygnytie and honor, or richesse, that a man has, the more
need he has of fryendes, for one good thing can not be alone, and with out
another.

And Solomon says, Salamon,
there be three things that be very pleasant and acceptable both to god and
man that is to say, concord and amity of brethere^, love of neighbors. and
the love of the man and his wife, when they love the on the other: and says
that it is a sovereign goodness and gift of God to have a good wife, he that
chau^seth to find a good wife, he finds great good and wealth. And he that
forsakes and chaseth from him a good wife, he chaseth from him his wealth and
profit. And says also yt a good wife does honor the house and riches: and
an evil wife is destruction of al together and the dishonor of her husband.

Salamon wyllyng to blame the women, Salamon,
says many things of them, of the which at this time, I will not speak,
for there is many good reasons, wherefore a man ought to honor the women: and
according to his saying, a man shall not find one good woman amongst a
Thousand. But I believe that he speaks this, as a man angrye and moved for
one woman which did deceive him. For it is read in the old Testamente, that
the same Woman did so much to Salamon, Salamon.
that for the great love that he had unto her, she caused him to forsake God,
and to worship Idolles. And she did lead him so much after her will, that
she caused him to be clothed, and to wear Woman's apparel, she caused him to
spynne, and did order and lead him after her own will, as if he had been a
child. And these things whyth the woman did unto him, he speaks evil of al
other, saying yt amongst a thousand women, a man shall not find one good.
And that the iniquity of the man is better, then the goodness of the woman, but
as I have said before, he speaks there of as it does please him, for it we
will consydre and behold the evil deeds of the men, we shall find them much
greater then those of Women.

How the Love of Concupyscece, comes to Men and Women And of the danger
that do chance and come of the same. The.xii. Chapter.
OF the Fourth Love which is commonly called to be enamoured, is the love of
Concupisence, which is when the man loves the woman, for the pleasure that he
trusts to have of her, As those do commonly, which say I am enamored of such
a woman: The delectacion of this love is all in the corporal and bodily
delectacyon.

Saint Thomas the Apostle Saint Thomas,
says that a man would never love any thing if he had not trust to have some
pleasure and goodness of the same. How be it a man some times supposes that
thing to be full of great goodness, of the which comes evil. Yet it seems to
him that loves such a thing, that there can none evil come thereof. And as it
is so that every love comes by some delectacion corporal or intellectual.
The love corporal comes and descends by the tyue corporal senses, or
wits, as is aforesaid. The intellectual love comes by ye imaginacion of
the understanding. And the delecracion intelectuall is much greater, then the
corporal, so that all the delight of the love of Concupisence is in delectacion
intellectual. And therefore the love of Concupisence may not nor ought not to
be called love.

Plato makes mencyon thereof saying, Plato.
love of Concupisence is not virtue of love, but rather vice of lechery, when
the man leueth his wife only to have his pleasure of her, or the woman her
husband, for to have profyt, this love is very evil.

Tulle says, Tulle.
that perfect love is that which is not by force, nor by fear and dread, nor
for profit that a man trusts to have.

Dyogenes says that the love of Concupisence comes by being Idle. Diogenes.
And that it is a great Vice and sin, the love of Concupisence, And against
the commandment of God, which says, Couyte not the Wife of thy neighbor.

Saint Austyne says, Saint Austin.
that the sin of fornycacyon is perdicion and clear dampnacion of the soul
of the which thing our Lord Jesus christ speaks in the Gospel. Jesus Christ


Qui viderit mulierem ad concupicendum eam iam meatus est in cord suo. Example
of the Virtue of Love The, xiii. Chapter.
OF the Virtue of Love, Example,
it is read in Historyes of Rome, that the king Diomebes would have caused to
cut the head from the body of a woman called Fizolie, for a certain offense,
whereof she was accused: this woman came before the king and required him yt he
would give her pardon and space for. viii. days, that she might set all
things in order, and to provide the better for the health of her soul. And
the king answered that he was content, so that she would give a pledge for
her, that in case that she did not come at the day appointed, that he would
cause to cut of the head of the said pledge. And the woman answered, that
she was very well content. Example.
And that incontynente she would find a pledge, whereof the king meruailed
greatly, for he had thought, that there had been never a person in the world
that would have pledged her. And then she did send for a young man, which was
of an honest stock, the which had loved her perfytlye a long time, and she
him, to whom she told the hole matter. And incontine^t this young man named
Arion did render him self prisoner for her, and bind him under the pain
aforesaid, that in case that she did not come again, that he was content to
loase his head. Example.
And then the said woman went home to her house, and made her Testamente, and
did bequethe her goods, and when ye term drew near, every man mocked this
young man reputyng great Folly in him: but for all that any man cold say unto
him, he would not forget the love of her. And was content to suffer death,
for to alengthen her life, he loved her so feruentlye. So the day of the term
came, in the which she saying the great love of this young man, did render her
self before the King and required that Arion might be delivered: and then
that the King should take his pleasure of her. The King then saying the
perfyte love that was between them, did give her pardon, saying that it wear
great sin to depart so good and perfect love as they had between them, the
one to the other.

How Envy is contrary to the Virtue of Love. And what Euuye is, And also of
the pain, that the enuyous man bears in him self. The.xiiii. Chapter.
Envy which is a Vice contrary to the Virtue of Love, is in two manners, the
First is to be sorry for thewelthe and prosperytye of another Man. The Second
is to be Glad for the evil and Aduersytye of another Man.

Solomon says, Salamon.
be not glad of the evil that happens to another man, for it does dysplease
god. And know ye that he that is glad of the evil of his neighbor shall not
be vnpuneshed.

Saint Gregorye says, Saint Gregorye,
that in the world is not a greater tourmente and pain, then Envy, for when
are Envy is, there can be no love. And says that the greateste vengeance,
that thou canste take of him which bears thee Envy, is to do him all the
good that thou canste.

Plato says, Plato,
that the enuyous man, is never without sorrow and pain, nor the I poeryte
without fear and dread.

Saint Austyne says, Saint Austin,
he that has envy in him can love no man. And says, that it is berter for a
man to keep him from the Envy of his Kynsfolkes and Fryendes, then from the
Envy of his Enemies.

Saint Austyn says, Saint Austin
that envy is to be sorye of the felysyete of another man. And says that the
enuyous person has not only envy at greater then be but at them which be
egali with him, or worse then he. He has Envy at those which be greater or
better then he, because that he is not so good or so great as they be, he
bears envy at those which be egal with him, because that he is not better
or greater the^ they, he has envy also at those which be worse then he for
fear that they become not so good as he, wherefore he has Envy at all manner
of folks.

Orace says that the Enuyous man brenneth within and without, Orace.
And says that the Enuyous person is content to lose money, to do damage to
and her man.

Socrates says that he which Socrates.
bears the vessel of envy shall have everlasting pain, the holy scripture
makes mencyon thereof saying.

Nequam est oculus aduerteus faciem suam. Example of Envy. The.xv. Chapter.
OF the Vice of Envy it is red in the old Testamente, Example.
that Caim seeing that all things of his brother Abell did multyplie, and
bring forth much fruit, he had so great Envy thereat, that he killed the
said Abell his brother, which were the two first brethren upon the earth, And
it was the first blood that ever was shed upon the earth, And all was by
Envy.

How a man ought to take Gladness and Joy. And of what thing. And what
Gladness or Joy is. The.xvi. Chapter.
Gladness or Joy is the effect of Love, Pryscyan.
As Priscyan says, and it is a contenting and rest of the heart.

Sidrac says that the life of man is Gladnesor Joy of heart. Sidrac
And says that for a man to rejoice him self to much of things not
convenient is not virtue, but rather vice.

Saint Austine says, do not rejoice to much in the love of the world,
Saint Austine
for he that to much re^^sech him therein, often times has he uynes thereof. And
says that there is no riches to be compared to the health of the body.

Senec says, Senec.
be not proud in thy prosperytie, nor be not angrye nor out of pacyence, in
thine aduersytie, for in this world is not so Rich a man, as he that has
suffyeyente. And is content with that thing that he has. And says, he
that would demand of me, who is a rich man, I would answer that it is he
that has suffycyente and is content. And that he which desires always
more richesse is poor.

Boece says that nature is content with a little thing, Boece,
if a man will not do it outrageous.

And Arystotyle says (to his Dyscyple Alexaundre, Aristotyle,
) what Anger, Rancoure, or Malice soever that thou haste in thy heat, thou
ought always to show merry and Ioyefull countenance, and there before all
folks.

How Heaviness is coutrarye to Gladness, And how the Wise Man ought never
to put any in his heart, whereof Heaviness and Mellancolly may be engendered.
The.xvii. Chapter.
Heaviness or Pensyfenesse, is contrary to Gladness, after the saying of
Macrobyus, whereof there is three manners and sorts. Macro bius
The first is when the person gives himself more thought and sorrow for any
thing then he ought to do, and this may be called pensyfenes. The second is,
when the person another does, nor says, nor thinks any thing, which is
ferme and steadfast, but is like a dead body. And thereby falls in Idleness
which is a great vice. The third is for certain imagynacyous, when the person
moves him self, with great and excessyfe anger, wrath and Ire, which is
called Mellanchollie, whereof comes dispeayre, which is the greatest vice that
can be, as the Philosopher does say, In pensyfenes or heuines, be engendered
many vices. And amongst all other, is engendered slothe and Idleness, for when
the person is pensise and still of Idleness, it seems that he cares for
nothing.

Solomon says, Salamon.
that in like case as gold is assayed and proved in the fournasse, so the man
is astayed and proved in aduersytits that come unto him.

Plato says that the man which has his health, Plato.
oughthe never to be pensyfe and heavy in his heart. for any manner of
aduersytie, that may chance unto him but ought always to be of good comfort
and arm him self with pacyence.

Socrates says that he which Socrates.
is not angry nor vexed for any aduerfytye that may chance unto him, he
gives him self much rest, and does illuminate his seences or wits. And
says that he is pensyfe and sorrowful which has nothing, but more pensife
and sorowefull is he, which was wont to have, and has nothing. And that he
is happy, tha is not wont to have prosperytye, for he has no pensyfenesse in
him.

How Mellancholly is dangerous And what is Mellanchollye, And how is causes
many to fall in great travail, pains and miseryes, and conseqently, in
great peuertie. The.xviii. Chapter.
MEllanchollye is a thing greatly to be hated of that person which is
entangled and wrapped therein, for of Mellanchollye comes pouertye, afflyctyon
and desperacyon, whereof speaks Saint Bernarde saying, S, bernard,
I had lever dye, then to suffer my self to fall in Mellanchollye.

Senec says Mellanchollye is death, Senec
and the Sepulcher or grave of the life of man, And says for any thing that
may happen or chance unto thee, be not Mellanchollye nor pensyfe. And if thou
can not keep thee from it, yet do not show in deed nor in word, for it
belongs not to a virtuous man, to show it him self Melancholy, for no
manner of aduersytie that may happen unto him, for he that is Mellanchollye and
pensyfe for his adversities he dowbleth them, but a man ought to consydre that
after aduersytie comes consolacyon and prosperytie. And he that does the
contrary is Mellanchollye, and then Idleness does enter into him, And so by the
evil thoughts that he has being Idle, he falls so far in Sloth, that
he cares for nothing nor nothing would do but stepe. And thou ought to know,
that the person being Idle, may fall very soon into many vices, that is to
say, to dystroye his body, and dampue his soul, by evil cogytacions and
thoughts that may come thereof.

Senec says, Senec,
that Idleness is confusyon of the understanding and wit of the person, the
gate of pensyuenesse, and mother of pouertye.

Salamon says, Salamon,
do not love to sleep to much, for fear that poverty do not reygne over
thee.

Arystotyle says, Aristotyle,
that sleep brings much inconuenyence.

And Hermes says, Hermes,
blessed is he that uses good occupacyons in all his time, And says that the
Idle and slothful person, puts al his business at adventure, and says
that Fortune and adventure helps that man which will help him self, And
the Idle and sloth full person, is contrary to him self.

Socrates says, Socrates,
that there be Six manner of folks, which always is in Pensyfenes and
Mellanchollye. The First manner is of him that can not forget iniuryes done or
said unto him. The Second is of the Enuyous persons which dwells and is
conuersante with folks newly come to Riches. The Third is of him, which has been in the place where other have gotten much profit, and cold not profit
there him self. The Fourth manner is of him whithe sometime was Rich and now is
Poor.

The Fyfthe is of him which desires and enforseth him self to come to higher
estate and honor then is mete and conuenyente for him. The Syxte is of him,
which has dwelled long time with a wise man and has nothing learned

Homer says that by great dylygence, Homer
a man comes to perfeccyon. And that dylygence is mother of Richesse, and
health of body, and salvation of soul. And Mellancholly and Idleness is
contrary.

Solomon makethe mencyon thereof in the Bible, Salamon,
saying.

Robusti semper in abundatia, omnis autem piger in egestate erit. Example of
Heaviness, or Pensyuenesse. The.xix. Chapter.
OF Heaviness or Pensytenesse, Example.
it is read in the Book of King Alexandre, that when the said King
Alexandre was dead: his Barons did bear him in a Chase of gold to the
Sepuiture or buryeng. And there was many Philosophers, which went after the
body weeping, and having great Heaviness. And amongst all other there was
one that weoed very fore saying. O good Lord, those that never did see our
King Alexandre did doubt and fear him. Example
And now those that do see him does nothing regard him. And another cried
with great Heaviness. O cruel death which doubts nothing, nor spares
nothing, and which has taken from us that man which governed and ruled all the
world, Exclamacio^s
and the other Philosophers did cry, O justice set aparte. O faythfulnesse
lost. O courtosye chased away. O gladness and joy exyled. O valilantenesse
fled away. O gentleness destroyed. And in this manner they did bear him to
the Sepulture, or buryenge with great sorrow, Heaviness, or Pensyfenesse, and
Mellancholye.

How the Virtue of Peace ought to be mayntayned and keepte. And of the great
goodness that comes of the same, And what peace is. The.xx. Chapter.
PEace (as says Saint Bernarde) is pureness of understanding, S. bernarde.
symplenes of heart quietness and rest of courage, Peace of love. And company
or fellowship of charytie.

Senec says, Senec,
that Peace is above all the goodness and richesse of this world. And says
that he that has not Peace with him. ought to bye it.

The prophet Esaie says, E^^^^
that the evil man does not ear for Peace.

Plato says, (...)
have Peace (...) the Virtues, and war against the Vices.

Saint Austyne says, Say^^ Austen
that in like case as Pride, Discencion and Anger distroyeth a house, so Peace
and Love does nouryshe it. a wise man,
A wise man says thus, if thou wylt have Peace with thee, submit thy self
always to Reason.

The Master of the Sentence says, Master of the sentence
that he is mad, that is in Peace and does seek War. And says that
Peace causethe good to come. And War dystroyeth it.

Orace says, Orace,
that he which does govern his will in Peace, governs a greater Realm,
then he did govern from the East unto the Weste.

Sidrac says, Sidrac
that they be very happy, which does love and seek Peace. And says fly
and eschew those places, wheare thou thynkest that there shall be debate and
decencyon, for to strive with him that is egall and as good as thou, it is.
Folly to strive against thy better, it is great madness. And to strive
against one worse then thou art, it is shame.

Saint Paul makes mency on of this, (...)aul (...)ma,
saying.

Non in conte^tione et emulatione. etc. How Ire is contrary to Peace, and
what Ire is, And how it does destroy and waste the Virtues and bodies of
them that he entangled with the same. And of the evil that does come of it.
The.xxi. Chapter.
IRe is a Vice contrary to the virtue of Peace, whereof the Philosopher
Arystotyle does speak saying, Aristotyle,
that Ire or Wrath is a troublyng of the courage, aleasyng and dystroy enge of
blood, which flies to the heart to thyntente to venge him of Ire. And when
the blood fyndeth the heart, there it does rest all troubeled. And
afterward is converted into malice and hatred. And of these three Vices, that
is to say, Iudygnacyon, Ire, and Hatred, do descend and come Discord and
War.

Solomon says, Salamon,
that when a Fool is moved and troubled, does incontinent show his Ire: but
he that does cover and keep close Ire is a wife man Sand and lead is very
weyghtye and heavy, but the Ire of a Fool is much more heavy and weyghtye.

Casiodore says, Casiodore,
that Ire is mother of all other Vices.

Priscian says that the greatest enemy that thou haste, Pri^cia^
or canste have in this would, is Ire when thou haste it in thee.

Cato says, Cato.
that a man is naturally inclyned to be moved with Ire, but to persevere and
abide in the same does pass nature, and comes of the devil, and therefore
every man ought to eschew it as much as he can.

Aristotyle says that Ire is the Aristotyle,
corruptynge and dystroyenge of all virtues.

Tulle says that a man ought to be very slow, Tulle,
and loathe to be moved with Ire, and very redye to mercy, ferme and steadfast
in aduersites, And wise and moderate in his prosperities.

Senec says, Senec
that Ire is incontinente quenched and dead in a Wise man.

Saint James says, S. James,
that a man ought to be prompte and redye to hear, slow to answer, and
ought not lyghtlie to be angered and moved with Ire.

Saint Austyne says, S, Austyn,
if thou be moved with Ire and wrath against any man, And will thereof take
vengeance, remytte all unto God.

Saint Gregorye says that there is three remedies against the vice of Ire,
Saint Gregorye,
that is to say, meke and gentle answer, Also for a man to hold his peace or
to give few words and the third is, to depart out of the presence of him
that is moved with Ire.

Varro says that Richesse can not abide and endure with him which in full of
Ire and wrath, And says keep thee well from Ire, for it dystroyeth reason, and
troubles the understanding.

Tulle says, Tulle,
eschwe Ire as much as thou canste, for it will not suffer thee to see the end
of things, and says that he is in great rest, that never or very seldom,
does move him self with Ire and wrath, And says, when thou shalt see any
thing, imagined against thee, busy thy self to turn it to thy will and
pleasure, more by gentle words fair means, and equity then by vengeance,
for vengeance is damnable to both parties and equytie is profitable to both.

Plato says, Plato.
that when a man is inflamed with Ire, he is like to a house set on fire, for
by the great violence of the fire, a man can no, there hear nor see. And in
like case as a Ship having a contrary wind, can not well be governed, so
is the courage of man, when he is inflamed with Ire, and can not be well
governed, And without doubt, Ire is a thing so very evil and dangerous,
that a little flame or spark, makes a great fire, yt is to say, of a little
Ire does there come much evil. And as we do se commonly, the women be more
angry and Irefull then the men. And the sick sooner then the hole. And the
young people sooner then the old, by this it may be thought yt Ire comes of a
perverse and an evil courage.

Saint Augustine says, S. Austyn.
that in like case as the evil wine does corrupt the vessel wherein it is
put, so Ire does corrupt the body of the man, if it do tarry there from
one day to another.

And therefore Saint Paul says. Paul Ephe, iiii, c.


Sol non occidat super iracundiam vestram. Example of Ire. The.xxii. Chapter.
OF the vice of Ire, Example
it is read in the old Testament, that David the prophet being in great
love with Barsabe, wife of Vrye, did beget a child of the said Barsave. And
when he did see that she was with child, he did send for her husband Vrye,
the which was at the besegynge of a certain town, which the said king David
caused to be besyeged. And when the said Vrye came, he was informed of the
said king David, yt the child wherwyth his wife Barsabe was great, was of his
begettynge. And so the said Vrye did think and believe none other, but that it
was his own, but when Vrye came amongst his friends, they showed him how y^
king Dauyd had governed his wife, wherwyth he was sore dyspleased both
against King Dauyd, and also against Barsabe hyswyfe. Example,
And after that time would company no more with her. And when David understood
that the said Vrye had forsaken his wife, he was so full of Ire and wrath in
his heart, that he did write a Letter to the Constable of the Host, wherein
Vrye was, which Letter did contain, that he should put Vrye so far forth in
the battle, that he should be slain. And so it was done.

Of Chastytie, and how she ought to be with holden, observed and kept, and
the perils that the wise should fly, for fear to lease such Virtue.
The.xxiii. Chapter.
CHastytie. Tulle.
(As Tulle says,) is a Virtue by the which the will and desire of the flesh
and of Lecherye is refrayned and subdued. And the person that is chaste, may
be compared to the Turtyll Dove, the which for no manner of thing, will make a
fault or offense to her fellow, but will keep her only unto him.

Saint Hierome says, S, Hic rome,
that is soon lost and destroyed in him which will not refrain his tongue,
his eyes, and his heart. In the Sum of Vices, it is read, that he which
will have perfyte Chastytye in him, he must keep him self pryncypallye from
six things, that is to say, from to much and excessyfe Eating, and
Princekynge, whereof is read, in the life of Holy Fathers, Example
that in like case as it is impossyble, to wythholde the fire, that it do make
no flambe, after that it is well lyghted, so it is impossyble to refrain the
will and the desire of Lecherye, after that the body is replete and full of
delycious meats and drynckes. The Second thing which is necessary, to keep
Chastytie is, that the person be not Idle.

For Ouide says, Ouide
that Lecherye dies in him which is not Idle, the third thing is that the
man and the woman be not conversant together.

For Saint Bernarde saethe, S, bernarde,
that the man and the woman to be famylyer together, and to keep them from
sin, is a greater and a harder thing, then to cause the dead bodies to rise
again to life. The fourth thing is, not to be conuersante with Harlottes and
persons of vycyous lyuinge. The fyfte is, not to haunte or to goo to those
places where commonly the sin of Lecherye is used.

For Saint Syluestre says, S, siluestre,
that the sin of Lecherye has the manner of the Ape-whych does all things
that he sees done before him. The syxte is, to keep him that he do not haunte
to much create festes and bankets, for there is most commonly much daunsynge
and singing, many euyland vain words spoken, and many wanton count
naunces, which does engendre the Vice of Lecherye, by the pleasure and
delyght that the person does take therein, I say that the delyght and pleasure
which is in good manner, and in honestye, is much to be praised, but the
delyghte and pleasure, that the person does take therein, for an evil intent
is to be hated and abhorred.

Example of the Virtue of Chastytye, The.xxiiii. Chapter.
IN the life of Holy Fathers it is read, tou, chynge the Virtue of Chastytye,
that there was a certain Nun, which was young and very fair, of whom a
Noble man dwelling thereby, was meruaylous sore Enamoured of. And desired her
many diverse times, that she would consent that he might have his pleasure of
her, but this said Nun would never consent unto him. And refused him with
great abhomynacyon, then this Noble man saying that by no manner of fair
means be cold obtain his purpose, by reason whereof he was full hf
Heaviness, and Mellanchollye, did purpose in his mind, to take her by force.
Example,
And thereupon he came to the Abbey where this Nun was. And there did take her
by Force and Vyolence, intending to lead her home with him unto his Place.
And when this Nu^ne did se that she could not obtain mercy and grace of him.
And that there was no remedy nor no help, and resistenge to be had, she
demanded of him, what was the cause that he had such favor and love unto her
more then to other? For there is (said she,) many better and fayrer in this
Abbey then I am. And this Noble man answered her saying, I am so enamoured of
you, that it seems me, that there is never a Woman in this world, that has so
fair Eyes as ye have. And that is the cause, that I have such Love unto you.
Wherefore purpose your self to come with me. And then she saying, that there
was no remedy but that she should goo with him, she desired him that it would
please him to let her go in to her Chamber to fetch certain stuff that she
had there. Example,
And that she would come to him again incontynente, this noble man said go
your ways and tarry not, for here I will tarry for you. And then she went
into her Chamber and with a knyfe did take both her eyes out of her head.
And this done, she came out of her Chamber all bloudye, and did present her
self as well as she could before this Lord, as she had promised him. And when
this Lord did see her thus dyffygured, and that the eyes were out of her
head. He departed from her, as a man out of his wit. And the said Nun did
continue still in the Abbey, and was better content that she had lost her
Eyes, then to have had lost her Vergynytye.

How Lecherye is contrary to Chastytie. And in how many sorts it is
divided, then is showed the dangers that come thereof, as well to the bodies of
men, as to their Souls. The.xxv. Chapter.
LEchery is a Vice contrary to the Virtue of Chastitye. And as it is red in
the sum of Vices there be four manners and sorts of the same. The First is
fornicasyon, and that is when the man and the woman being not married, do meddle
fleshly together. The Second is Adulterye, and it is when as well the one as
the other be Married. The Third is when a man does meddle flesshlye with any
of his kynswomen. The Fourth manner is such, that it ought not to be named,
for it is so vile, so abhomynable and great a sin.

Saint Gregorye says, S, gre, gory,
that Lecherye consumes and destroys the body, and causes a man to lease
his good name, dampneth his Soul, offends the person, and offends God. And
now a days the world is greatly inclined to the sin of Lecherye,

Senec says, Senec
that he would that all Lecherous persons should be stoned to death, as they
were in the old time, to the intent that a man might beware and keep him
self the better from it. And says yt ableit yt the greatest delight and
pleasure of this world is Lechery. Yet nevertheless if thou dowel consydre
the end and the begin, nynge of the same sin, thou shall find nothing
therein but all myschyefe and wretchedness.

Solomon says, Salamon,
so little time and space as a man might bear fire in his Bosom without
brennynge of him self. So little space might not a man be amongst women
without sin. And says that often times Lecherous Persons do commyt Lechery
by their syghte.

Orace says, Orace,
that Richesse do bring War, and Women do bring Lecherye.

Arystotyle says, believe stedfastlye that Lecherye dystroyeth the body,
shortneth the life, corrupts the Virtues, breaks Gods saw, onsumeth the
Richesse, takes away the strength, kills the soul, dystroyeth, the sight,
brings the person to old age. And sometime does make him paralytike.

Ouyde says, Ouide,
that the Lecherous person being young does sin, but the old Lechoure does
dote,. For an old Lecherous person when he can not do the deed, yet does he
take pleasure in dishonest touchynges. And sath that in battle and war be
men stricken with speres and swerdes. And in peace they be stroke with evil
words, and thoughts.

Hermes says, Hermes,
that the Vice of Lechery does quen she al Virtues. And that there is nothing
more mortal to mankind then Lechery, except it be amongst those persons where
it is lawful, as between the man and his wife, in trust to have Children. S,
grgory,


Saint Gregorye says, speking of Lecherye in a certain hystorye. O Fire of
Lecherye, whereof the mouth is Glotonye, the flame is Pride, the sperkles be
corrupt words, the Smoke is evil name, the Ashes be poverty, the End is the
tormente and pain of Hell.

Whereof Saint Peter speaks saying. ii, Peter, iii,


Voluptatem existimantes diei deliciam coinquinationes et macu le delicis
affluentes in co^niis suis lux vriantes vobiscom. Of Force or Strength. And
what it is. The manners and comparysons of the same, And who may be called
Strong. And of those also which be always Strong. The.xxvi. Chapter.
FOrce or Strength, after the saying of Macrobyus, Macrobius,
is in three manners and sorts. The First is to be Strong by Nature, the
which thing is no Virtue. The Second is not to Fere and Dread peryllous, and
dangerous things. And the Third is Patience, these two manners be good,

Tulle says, Tulle,
thou ought to be strong in Battle, And to sustain and suffer pacyentlye
the aduersyties, and euyle that come unto the.

Senec says, that the man is loved and praised for his Loyalty or
Faythfulnesse, Senec
and for his Valliauntnesse.

Socrates says, Socrates,
that sometime it is better to ^tye, then to dye, notwythstandynge thee, that
Hermes says, Hermes,
that he did see a Knight, which was reputed very hardy, thou doeste fly
from Honorable death, to live with shame and rebuke.

And Socrates says, Socrates,
that there is Valliantnesse in diverse and many sorts and manners, that is to
say of those which be hardy and Vallyante, when they be constrained other to
fight or to die, as those which do fight upon the Sea in their Ships. And
this Valliantnesse is by force and constraint Another manner there is, that
sometime a man is hardye and Valley ante, as when that he knows that he has
the aid and company of other. Of other therbe, which he hardye and Vallyant
when they know, yt those against who^ they do strive, be Cowardes and
ferefull, of other there be, which be stourdye and hardy in all things, and
fears nothing. And this is a beastlye hardynesse. And also all the other be
not perfyte. The First manner is perfyte and Virtuous, as when a man is Hardye
and Vallyaunte to fly shame and dyshonoure. And to do no damage nor outrage to
any person, another in body nor goods. And also to defend his Country.

Socrates says, Socrates,
that the Virtue of Force or Strength, makes the man pardurable when he does
put his strength to resyste Vices, to maintain reason and Justice, And not to
be proud in his prosperytyes. And also to Fight against the desires of the
flesh.

Saint John Euangelyst says in his first Epistle.

Scribo vobis inuenes quoneam John eua^ge list.
fortes estis verbum dei manet et in list. vobis et vicistis malignum. How
Patience causes a man to bear easelye the Pains and Trauayles of this
world, And how many sorts there be of Patience. The.xxvii. Chapter.
PAcyence is a Virtue by the which we suffer in our hearts the aduersytyes
and euilles, that be done and said unto us, whereof the Master of Sentence
does speak saying, master of sentenet.
the virtue of patience is remedy against al aduersyties. And says, that all
the euylles (...) aduersytyes, that thou shall have shall be more light and
easy to bear and suffer if thou have pacyence, thou shalt not be Pacyente so
long as thou art Covetous.

Arystotyle says, Aristotyle,
that the man may be praised, and may be known in three manners and sorts.

The Pacyente is known in his aduersytyes and trybulacyons. The Hardye and
Vallyante manne is known in the Wars, and Battaylies. And the Friend is
known at need.

Socrates says, Socrates,
let us suffer and take in Pacyence that thing which Fortune does give us,
for it is great Folly to strive against it.

Solomon says, Salomen,
that it is better to be pacyent, then to be strong, for he that is Pacyente,
governs him self by great wisdom, as Job did, which had great Pacyence
in all his aduersytyes. And says that the strongest man that is, is he which
can cover and keep secret his pouertye.

Senec says, Senec
that there is two manner of Pacyence in this world, the one is to suffer and
endure Pacyentlye the aduersytyes and trybulacyons that a man has. The other
is, to refrain, and to abstain from his desires and will. And says also
that the Virtue of Patience does order and keep the tongue.

How that Fear and Dread, be contrary to Strength and Vallyantnesse, And
what Fear is and who those be that be Fearful. And for what cause.
The.xxviii. Chapter.
Fear and Dread be Vices, contrary to Strength and Valliauntnes. And they be
three manners, after the saying of Ptholome. Ptholome,
The First is to be fearful in his courage without any occasyon, but only by
Imagynacion. And this is properlye called Fear. The Second is to Fear and
Dread a thing more then need is. And that is a great vileness and shame. And
the Third is, not to be able by Reason of Feblenesse of Courage, to suffer
aduersytyes. And this is called Feblenesse, when the manne is vile of heart,
which is to great a vice. This manne which is so vile of heart, and so
Fearful, may be compared to the Hare, which is the most Fearful Beast
of all other, for the Hare has the condicyon, that when she is laid in the
wode at her ease, if she do but hear the leaves of the trees shake, she does
run away for Fear, many there be that do resemble the Hare in this manner,
which has so vile and feeble heart, that for a little or nothing they be
abashed and afraid.

Solomon says that the one of the causes which causes the man to be
fearful, Solomon,
is the knowledge that he has to be reproved of his evil works.

Tulle says, Tulle,
will thou be without fear, do well, and speak but little. And says that it
is a more cruel thing to fear death, then to die. And that the remedy of a
feeble and vile heart, is not to fear Death.

Cato says, Cato,
do not fear the last end of the Life, for he that does not regard, but
dyspraiseth the end of the life, he fears not death.

Pythagoras says that death can not be boughte, Pithagoras,
nor no man ought to fear it, but such as have done much iniquytye, and
fears to be dampened for their Vices after their death. And says that the
doubt and fear of death, is very well manyfeste, for by it is made
transmutacyon of the transytorye and fynall world, to the everlasting and
perpetual world. Also of the world of Folly and vanytye, to the world of
Wisdom Truethe, and of Reason, of the world of pain and loboure, to the world
of consolacyon and of felycytie. And says, that it is great marvel of
those which fear and doubt death. And do always contrary to their
salvation. And says, that he which lives well and vertuouslye in this world,
ought to trust to make his end well.

And says also that death is good both to good and evil men. To the good
men, to the intent that they may have the reward of their goodness. And to
the evil, that they may commytte no more sin, nor do no more euxll to the
people, And says that it is better dye, then live with shame. And therefore he
said unto a man which did fly from the Battle. Thou do evil to fly from
honorable death, for to live with rebuke and shame.

Socrates says, Socrates,
that he did see his wife weep, when he was taken out of Prison to be led to
his death. And he said unto her, where fore doeste thou weep mine own wife.
And she answered, have not I a good cause to weep, when I see you led to
death with great wrong, and without cause. And then he answered that the
man ought not to fear death, for there is no manner of pain or bitterness in
it, but the fear that a man has thereof. A wise man being sick in his bed,
caused his Son to come before him, that he might talk with him of Death.
And said unto him, my Son have abstynence with thee, and refrain thy will,
for if thou dysprayse the world, and the diverse chances thereof that every day
does run and happen in abstraynge from those things which God has
prohibited, thou shalt desire none other thing but death, Sone speak always
of God, and he shall put in thy mouth good words. Son do not put thy love
in this world, for it is transytorye, and deceyueth all those which do put
their trust in it. Son suffice thy self, and be content with that thing that
god has given thee, And do not coueit the goods of other men. Son use
temperau^ce in thy living. And be conuersaunte with wise folks, And so thou
shalt get wisdom, be meke humble, and be no mocker, dispraise no man, and
do not speak to much, for I have repent me more for my large and to much
speaking, then I have for holdyng my peace, or for little speaking. Son I pray
the beware the cock do not wake erlier in ye morning then thou, doubt and fear
god, and beware of vainglory, if thou have any science, and do not bestow it
in good uses, it shall do the more damage and hurt then profit. Beware that
thou speak no vain and unprofitable words, be not proud for any manner of
Riches, And do not dyspayre for any manner of adversities that may chance unto
thee.

Socrates says that death flies always from him, Socrates,
which do not fear it. And is always nere to him, which does fear and
doubt it. And says in another place, that thing which thou can not eschew,
sustain and suffer it Pacyentlye.

Saint Austyne says, Saint A(...)
that there is nothing so sure as death, for Death has no mercy of the
Poor, nor bears no honor to the Rich, And so spares no manner of folks.

Hermes says, Hermes,
that death is as the stroke of an Arrowe, And the life of a man is in like
case as the stroke, which tarieth a good space or it come. Against the fear to
die, six things do assure us. The first is the death of the body, by the
which every man is right sure to pass. The second is that death makes
end in all things of this world. The Third is, the necessytye to dye. The
fourth is, that we see other dye before us. The fyfthe is, that God him self
did dye. The syxte is, everlasting life that comes after this.

Solomon makes mention there of saying. Solomon,


Memor esto quoniam non tardabit mors. Of Suertye, and how many manners there
is thereof. And how Fear and Suertie do strive together by diverse Languages.
The.xxix. Chapter.
SVertye is not to doubt the domages and hurtes, that may come in the end of
things begone. And there is two manner of Suerties. The one is of Folly, as he
which goes to fight against his Enemies naked without harness, or he which
fears not to sleep by venymous beasts, the other is of wit and of virtues.
The office of Suertie is to give comfort, and resyste evil fortunes, which
come unto the man, for a man ought to trust, that goodness and prosperity shall
come after the aduersyties.

Orace says, Orace
that he which does fyxe his heart in goodness in his prosperytyes, shall be
sure in his aduersytyes. Against this Virtue of Suertye, does strive often
times, Fear in this manner. Fear says to the man: thou shalt dye. Suertye
aunswerethe, it is a natural thing and no pain, I did come into this world
under such covenant, that I should go out of it again, the life of the man is
but a pilgrimage, when he has gone far inoughe, he must return, it is a
great Folly and madness to fear that thing, which can not be eschewed.

Lucan says, Lucan
that Death is the last pain, and therefore a man ought not to fear it, and
says that death is the last term and end of al things.

Senec says, Senec,
that he which prolongeth his life, yet for all that he can not escape from
death. Fear says thou shall die. Suertie answers, I am not the first nor
the last. For there be many gone before me. And all the other shall follow me,
it is the end of mankind. There is nothing that greueth, which comes but
once, for death is common and egall to all. Fear says, thou shall have in
thy life much pain, sorrow and trybulacyon. Suertye answers, to deliver me
from all these euylles, I must dye. Fear says, thou shall dye in a strange
Country, Suertye says, Death is not more grievous without the house then with
in. Fear says, thou shall dye in thy young age. Suertye answers. Death
is common as well to the young, as to the old, and makes there no manner of
dyfference. But I will that thou know, that it is the best dyenge, when a man
has the greatest pleasure to live, it is a very good thing to dye, before
that a man desire death. If death take me when I am young, it shall not take
me in old age.

Iuuenall says, Iuuenall,
that death ought to be so much doubted, as ought to be old age. Fear
says thou shall not be buried. Suertye answers, I do not care, for it
shall be very small damage unto me, when the person is dead, he cares not what
becomes of the body, whether it be burnt or eaten with wild Beasts. I will
that thou know that the Sepulture or Buryeng, was not found to the usage and
profit of the dead bodies, but to the intent that the Caryon of the dead
bodies should be taken out of the syghte of the living persons. Fear says,
thou shall be Poor. Seurtye answers there is no man poor, but such as
thinks that he is poor. Fear says. Alas what shall I do, I have lost my
fryendes, my wife, my children, and all be dead. Suerty answers, he is a
Fool that wepeth, or makes any sorrow and lame^tacyon for those yt be dead,
saying that all must dye, the wise man ought never to take dyscomforte for
the death of any person, nor of his children, but he ought to suffer it as
pacyently as he does look for his own death, and to take comfort in him
self. And more to doubt and fear that which fortune ought to send him.

Lucan says, Lucan
that fear of evil chance, or fortune, does put the person in many great
perils. But he is very strong that can suffer fearful and doubtful
things. For the man is known in his aduersyties.

Senec says, Senec
that there be mothynges which do fear us, then that do hurt us. And we
have often times more fear in the mind and thought of the courage, then of the
work or deed. And therefore a man of good courage ought not to have fear before
the time, for peradventure that whereof he has fear shall never come.

Fear says, thou shall be exyled and cast out of thy country. Suertye
answers, the country is not for bydde me, but the place, for all that which
is under heaven, is my country, as soon shall I find and have my necessities
in other countreies as in mine own, every land is the country of a good man:
as the sea is the country of al fysshes. In this manner fear does always
strive with Suertie, and never gives good counsel.

But Orace says, Orace
the man that has a free and good courage does not doubt Fear, for as it is
before said, fear comes of a feeble heart. And yet many wise men say that
there be many things which a man ought to Fear and doubt, as is contained
in the Chapter following.

How the Wise man ought to doubt, And how by doubt and Fear many times the
men become Virtuous. The.xxx. Chapter.
THe Enemy of Hell ought to be doubted of every wise man.

For Solomon says, Solomon,
that happy is he which doubtteth and fears the Enemy of Hell. And that
the manne ought to beware of him, for if he do, he shall not need to doubt
any peril. And thou ought not to beware and keep the only from thy great
enemies, but also from the least in the world.

Yet nevertheless, Ovid,
Ovid says, that a man ought not to be so doubtefull and fearful that he
make doubt of that thing, whereof no doubt is to be had.

Solomon says, Solomon,
that a man ought not to doubt his enemy for his subtyllytye and craft. And
if he be a Fool, for his mischief and shrewdness. And says, that when thou
shall have a fryende, it is necessary, that thou be a fryende to his fryendes.
And says, keep thy fryend above all things, and considre the loss that thou
should have if thou did lose him. For in lesinge thy fryend, thou shall purchase
and get many enemies. And thou ought to consydre and think, that the least
of thy enemies is greater and of more power then thou art.

Socrates says, Socrates,
that the man which goes about to get his enemies, does travail for his
own dystrucyon, for he which has many enemies, ought to live always in
great doubt and fear of his life. And says, that one of the greatest
wits that a man may have, is to know how to make of his enymye his fryend,
And says that thou ought not to repute thine enemy as a small and a light
thing, for he may hurt thee more then thou do think be he never so small of
power.

And Senec says, Senec
that thine enemies be sometime more profitable to thee, then thy fryendes, for
thou do keep thee from falling into many dangers and Folyes, for fear
of them, and takes pain to keep thine own, for it is better to resyste and
wythstand their will and malice. And says that if it chance thee to speak
with thine aduersarye, beware that thou do not show him thy secret, for then
thou should teach him thy distruccyon.

Pythagoras says, Pythagoras,
that if thou will dysprayse thine enemy, show always countenance, as thou
woldeste him no manner of harm, nor that thou art his enemy.

Solomon says, Solomon,
believe never thine enemy, and if he do humble him self to thee, yet do not
trust to him. For if he see his time to do thee displeasure, he will never
be satisefyed of thy blood.

Saint Austyne says, S, Austyn,
that as in war the Soldiers be never no there day nor night out of their
harness, but always in readiness, and specyallye when they be near to their
enemies. So during this life, we ought not to be void and vnfurnysshed of
virtues, to the intent that we be not as he, which his enemy does find out
of harness, whereof the Gospel makes mention saying.

Dum fortis amatus custodit atrium suum in pace sunt omnia que passider. How
good Fame ought to go before men, And of the goodness that comes of the
same. The.xxxi. Chapter.
GOod Fame, is a Noble Virtue and much ought to be praised and ought to be
preferred above all Richesse, for it is aprobate by the Law and by custom.
And know thou, that for any profit of the world, thou ought not to lease thy
good fame, for the profit that comes of evil renome and Fame, is loss and
not winninge.

Senec says, Senec,
that no man can show in him self, but that which is in him.

Saint Austin says, S, Austyn,
that Ipocrysye is Treason.

Solomon says, Salamon,
if thou will have good renome and Fame, fly and eschew the delites of the
flesh And in anothr place says, if thou will be well renomed and Famed, be
not Lecherous.

Cato says, Cato
that Lecherye and Coueytousnes be contrary to good renome and fame.

Arystotyle says, Aristotyle,
that good Fame makes the man to be very clear and bright in this world, and
to be acceptable in the presence of Princes.

Senec says, Senec,
that the good Renome and Fame of the persons is fear of Sins. And says,
enforce thy self to have good Fame, for it shall endure longer with thee, then
all the treasures of the world.

Solomon makes mention there of saying. Salamon,


Curam habe de bono nomine, magis enim per manebet tibi quam mill thesauri
preciosi. How Glotony is a dangerous vice And of the great evil that
comes thereof to the bodies of men, And how the Virtues of men be distroyed
and corrupt by the same. The.xxxii. Chapter.
GLoto^y, is an inordynate desire and will to eat and drink, and is all
contrary to the Virtue of Abstynence. It is read in the sum of Vices, that
there comes much evil to the persons by the Vice of Glotonie. For that
same Vice does take away the Memory of the person, distroyeth the Senses or
Wits, consumes the Understanding, corrupts the Blood.

Dystroyeth the syghte of the eyes, makes the spyrite feeble, and does stop
and let ye tongue, dystroyeth the body, brings Lecherye, shorteneth the life
of the man. And does engendre many and great syckenesse, which do cause the
person suddenly to dye, or do cause him to live in great pain, and says
that there is mo folks which dye by reason of excessyfe eating and drinking,
and by inordinate living, the^ by other mortalytie. And says that women and
wine do cause many good men to err.

Arystotyle says, Aristotyle,
that he is a very beast which follows the will and appetyte of his mouth.
And says that he which does fill him self full of good meats and
drynckes, that he does seek his death, more then his life. And says that
he which will live clean, and in health, let him beware of to much and
excessyue eating and drynkyng

Ipocras says, Ipocras,
that haboundaunce of wynes and meats distroyeth the body, the soul, and the
Virtues.

Saint Gregorye says, Gregorye
that when the Vice of Glotonye has the domynacyon and power of the person, it
shall cause him to lease all the goodness that ever he did. And that when the
body of the person is not governed by abstynence, all the Virtues of the same
person be drowned.

Whereof Saint Paul makes mencyon saying. Paul,


Quibus finis interitus quoru^ deus venture est, et gloria in confusione eorum
terena sapiunt. How Abstynence is that whereof Glotonye is consumed. And by the
goodness that is therein, And that may come thereof, The, xxxiii. Chapter.
ABstynence is a Virtue, by the which the desire of Glotonye is refrayned and
quenshed.

Solomon says that he which lives by Abstynence, Solomon,
does alengthen his life.

Saint Austyn says, S, Austyn,
that in like case as a man does strain the rain of the bridle to stop the
horse. So ought a man to constrain and refrain him self from the sin of
Glotonye, by the Virtue of Abstynence, a man does get and purchase in this
world the treasoure, which is above all other treasours, that is to say
health of body.

Sidrac says, Sidrac
that there is no riches in this word to be compared to the health of the body.
And by abstinence a man does purchase health, and increasynge of his life, and
does eschew glotonye, that is to say to abstain from excessyue eating and
drinking, for to fill him self full of meats, the stomach is grieved
therwyth. And it does nouryshe (as is aforesaid) many grievous dyseases, and in
especyall the gowte. And does cause the breathe of the person to stynke. And
many other euylles come there of to the person, of the which often time follows
sudden death.

How Constancye and Inconstau^cye, be dyfferent, And how Constaunce is a
Noble Virtue. And what Inconstauncye is, The.xxxiiii. Chapter.
COnstauncye, is to be Ferme and stable in one purpose, without varyenge.

Tulle says, Tulle,
that it is a very great and a good thing for a man to be stable in those
things which he will say or do.

Isydore says, Isidore,
that he is not worthy of praise, which does begin any work, but he
which makes an end thereof. Yet notwythstandynge a man ought not too be so
styffe in those things which he has to do, that he do fall into the vice of
Obstynacye. Obstinacye is, not to change his purpose, for any counsel or
for any thing that may chau^re thereof. Inconstauncye is a vice contrary to
the virtue of Constauncye.

Senec says that Inconstauncye is not to be ferme and steadfast. Senec
And it may be compared to the Swalowe, which does feed and nouryshe him
self, in flieng here and there, and so does Inconstauncye, which does put all
things at adventure.

Of the Virtue of Nobleness of courage of men, And how the men be often times
praised by reason of the same. The.xxxv. Chapter.
Nobleness of Courage, is to head and mind Vallyaunte, Noble, and Virtuous
things. And it may be compared to the Griffon, which is a beast of such nature,
that he would rather let him self dye for hungre, then he would eat of Caryon
and stynkynge flesh.

Saint Austin says, S, Austyn,
in speaking of the highness and nobelnes of heart, that the Lion makes never
war with the Antes, nor the Egle with the Flies.

Tuile says, Tulle,
that the Courage of virtuous persons is known by their great works. And
says that there is nothing so strong and so sharp as the heart and courage of
the man.

Example of Nobleness of Courage. The.xxxvi. Chapter.
OF Nobleness and highness of Courage, it is red in the Historyes of Rome, that
there was a Physician that served a Baron, the which Baron made great war
against the Romans. This Physician came on a day to the Senators of Rome,
and to the Counsalie, and said unto them. If ye will give me a good sum of
money, I will poison my Master, which has done you so much evil. And they
answered, we will not vanquyshe him by treason, but by force and strength. And
then they did show the case to the Baron, to the intent that he might beware of
the Phisycyon.

Of Vain glory, And how many manners there is thereof, And how Vaynglorye is
to be dispraised, The.xxxvii. Chapter.
VAynglorye, is a Vice contrary to Nobleness of Heart. And there is three
manners of Vainglory. The first is when a man does cause him self to be more
esteemed, praised and honored then it appears unto him.

But as Saint Thomas says, S, thomas,
it is no Vice, to have the will to be good or to be well named, and famed, when
he says that good name and fame is better then great Richesse. The second
manner of Vaynglorye is when a man does vaunt, boste, and praise him self for
any manner of thing, for it is a thing not semelye nor conuenyente for a man
to praise him self. The third manner of Vaynglorye is for a man to show him
self Rycher, then he is. And to show himself more virtuous then he is, for
it is Ipocryse. The vice of Vaynglorye, may be compared to the Peycocke,
which is so full of Vaynglorye, that al his dysyre and delyghte, is to show
his feathers, in spreadynge his tail in manner of a whele, for to be praised. In
the Sum of Vices it is red, that when the person shall have overcome al
Vices, yet Vayuglorye does tarry with him.

Cato says, Cato
if thou will please god, eschew Vainglorie.

Plato says do not praise thy self, Plato.
but let another man praise thee.

Saint Gregorye greatly do^^ blame the Vaynglorye of Ipocrytes. And says
that their Vaynglorye, is not but a fantastyke vysyon, which shows outward
lie, that thing which is not within.

Jesus Christ says in his gospel, Ihesu christ,
speaking of Ipocrytes.

Ve vobis hipocrite qui similes estis sepulchris de albatis qui foris apparent
hominibus speciosa: intus vero fuit sunt plena ossibus mortuorum, Example of
Vainglorye, The.xxxviii. Chapter.
OF Vainglorye, Example,
it is red in the life of Holy Fathers, that an Angel, on a certain time
kept company with an Heremite. And as they went together, they passed by a
place where there was a dead Horse, which did stynke very sore, wherefore the
Heremyte did stop his nose: but the Angel did not so, nor did not regard
it. And as they went a little further they passed by a fair gardaine, in the
which there was afayre woman. And rychelye appareled, and very full of
vayneglorye, Example.
And incontinent that the Angel did se her, he did stop his nose, the
Heremyte seeing this, did maruayle very much there of. And said to the Angel,
I do marvel greatly that ye have stopped your nose for this fair woman. And
did pass by the stynkyng caryon that we did find, as ye did not care for it,
nor did not feel no smell, which did stynke so evil, the^ the. Angel said, I
will that thou know, that the person full of vayn glory, stynketh more in the
sight of God, of Angels and of the heavenly company, then all the carry on in
the world.

And as soon as he had said this, he was suddenly banyshed and departed out of
the sight of the Here myte. And then Judged he that should be an Angel. And
therefore he knew well that Vainglory, greatly dyspleased God.

How Justice ought to be done And how it is, that thing that does measure
all things upon Earth. The.xxxix. Chapter.
Justice is a Ferme and a Stable will, to do right unto every man.

Solomon says, Salamon,
desire not to be wise, if thou cannot find in thy heart to do Justice. And
says that there is three things necessary to a man which will do Justice.
The first is that he have auctorytye to do it. The second, is that he know
well what he ought to Judge. The third is that he Judge according to reason.

Hermes says, Hermes.
beware that thou do punyshe no man by Justice, before that thou give him term
to make his defense. And beware, that when thou ought to do Justice, that
thou do not to much defer and prolong it whereby there may come any occasion
to let the aforesaid Justice.

Tulle says, Tulle,
that Justice is the Mother and Lady of al other virtues, For there might
nothing live and dute in this world, if Justice were not.

Arystotyle says, Aristotyle,
that Justice is a measure, that god has stablished in earth, for to lymyte
all things. And says that Justice is none other thing, but to give every man
his own. Thou ought to give to three manner of folks that which is their
own, that is to say, to thy sovereign and superyour, to thy fellow and to thy
subject. To thy soueraygne and superyoure, thou ought to give reverence of
heart, and obedyence of body, to thy fellow, thou ought to give counsel in
teaching him of his Ignorance, and to aid and help him to thy power. To thy
subject, thou ought to defend him, and to instruct and punyshe him, if he
do evil.

Solomon makes mention thereof saying. Salamon


Excogiatat iustus de domo impii, vt detrahat impios a malo Gaudium est iusto,
facere iusticiam, Example of Justice. The.xl. Chapter.
OF Justice it is red in the life of Holy fathers, Example.
that there was an Hermyte which long time had served God and had done great
penance for his sins, to whom god sent afterward great sickness. And
because that he could not recover his health a gayn he began to complain of
god and to murmr in him self. So it chanced on a day, that the Angel of
god appeared unto him, in likeness of a young man, and said unto him, come with
me, for God will that I do show thee of his secret Justice. And did lead
him into the Town, to a Merchants house, which had in a Coffre a great
number of Florences.

And the Angel in the syghte of the Hermyte did take the same Florence, and
did bear them into the house of another man, which they found in sleep, And
the Angel did leave the said Florence at his Chamber door, to the intent
that when he should open the door, that he should find them. And this done,
he led him to the house of another Marchaunte that had a child, the which
child, the Angel did kill, in the presence of the said Heremite. And the,
Heremyte saying all these things, thought that the Angel had been a Devil.
And would feign have departed from him. Example.
The Angel saying that he would depart from him, said voto him, tarry yet
a little, for I will show thee the reason, wherefore I have done these things
in thy presence, know first wherefore that I have take the Florence from the
burges, it is because that he had sold his Heritage, for the said Florences,
and was purposed to give them to certain Murderers, which had promised him
to kill a man for his sake, the which had dyspleased him aforetymes. Example
And the man which he would have caused to be killed, is a man of noble birth,
whereof should have come great inconuenyence, And therefore to resyst the evil
that might have come thereof, and also to let him of his evil, and myscheuous
will and purpose, I have taken the said Florence from him. And when he shall
see him self pore and to have lost his Heritage and gooddes, he will give him
self to the service of god, and where he should have been dampened, now he
shall be saved. The Reason wherefore I have borne the Florence, to the Chamber
door of the other man, is because that he was a Rich Marchaunte which came
from beyond the Sea, and had bestowed in marchaundyce all the gooddes that he
had, and put it in a Ship, the which Ship did peryshe upon the Sea, then
he did remember one day how that he had lost all his gooddes, and had
nothing to live upon, began to fall in dyspayre, and was purposed to hang
him self. And therefore to the intent that he should not destroy, both the
body and the soul. I did bear him the foresaid Florences. The Reason whereof
I have killed the Child, is because that before that the father had him he was
a very good man, and gave much Almous, and did many good deeds, for the love of
god, and sense that he had the Child, he cared for none other thing, but
only to get Richesse, were it by right or wrong. And therefore I have killed
the Child, to the intent that the Father may return to his purpose, do
not marvel nor grudge therefore, for the syckenesse that thou haste, for if it
had not been, thou should often times have thy mind and Courage in Vanytyes
whereby thou should greatly have dyspleased God. And be thou sure, that god
does nothing, but by Reason, but the persons have not knowledge thereof, for
God has not promised it them, but of two euylles, Example
he does always take the less. Ann this said the Angel did depart from
the Heremyte.

And from thenceforthe, the said Heremyte, did never murmr against God, for
any manner syckenesse or aduersyty that he did send him, but rather did thank
God. And always did rejoice him self in his sickness and aduersyties
considering always, that it was of the goodness of God.

How Iniustyce or wrong, is contrary to Justice, and how many manners there
be of Iniustyce, And how Injustice demau^deth Vengeance before god. The.xli.
Chapter.
INiustyce is a Vice, contrary to Justice. And it is in diverse manners and
sorts, The First is to kill any man, and it is caleld murtherynge. The
Second is to speak vyllanye, and opprobryous and slanderous words of any
man. And it is called iniurye. The Third is to do any thing by strength,
and it is called Vyolence. The Fourth is to do damage and prejudice to any man.
And it is called outrage. The Fyft is to take another man's good, and it is
theft. The Syxte is to take a person by Force, and it is called Rapyne.
Iniustyce, otherwise called wrong, may be compared to the Devil, the which
does not love reason. For all his pleasure is to do evil to fryendes. And to
tormente them, which have served him.

Ihesu Christ speaking of Iniustyce says, Ihesu christ,
with such measure as ye shall measure, ye shall be measured. And as ye do to
your neighbor, so shall be done to you.

Solomon says, Solomon,
Judge not the deed of any man, without Reason.

Senec says, that much sorrow and trybulacyon, Senec
is in the Land, whereof the Lord and Governor is a young man, which is
very easy and light to give pardon to mysdoers. And says, that he which
does not punyshe the evil, is consenting to the same. And says that there
is four things which do call the man before god. And the which do sore
dysplease god. The first is the evil, that a man does to an Innocente
person. The Second is to withhold the hire and wages of his servant. The
third is willingly to set fire in a house, or in a town. Aristotyle.
The fourth is murdre.

Arystotyle says, do not shed man's blood without a cause, for it
demands Justice of god. And he that does evil to another man, he has
evil, and does not know how and from whence it does come.

Example of Iniustyce. The.xlii. Chapter.
OF Injustice it is red in the life of holy fathers, Example,
that ye devil bethought him one day, yt he would be married to the intent to have
daughters to marye, and that he might lead their husbands to hell, he did
marye with Iniustyce, of whom he had seven daughters. The first is Pride, which
he married to Lords and noble men. And to them which have outeragyous hearts
by reason of Pride.

The Second is Anaryce, which he gave to the Heads and chyefe of the people.
The Third is Falsenes, which he married to Villains. The fourth is envy, which
he married to ministrelles and crafts men. The fifth is Ipocrysye, which he
married to Relygyous persons. The Sixth is Vaynglorye, which he would give to
no man, for she does mary her self to all men of every degree and estate.
The Seuenthe is Lecherye, which also he did not marye, but left her common.
Some men say, that it is written in the book of Examples, yt ye Deuyil had ten
Daughters, of the which he did marye but. viiii. that is to say. The First is
Pride, which he married to Lords, Example,
and other Noble men. The Second, Sacrylege to Lobourers. The Third Vserye,
to Cytezens. The Fourth Ipocrisie, which he married to relygyous persons. The
fyfte Symonye which he married to Pryestes and Clerks. The syxte deceyte,
which he married to Merchants. The seuenthe Envy, which he married to
Servants. The eighte Covetousness, which he married to old folks. The
nynthe and the tenthe, that is to say, Vaynglorye, and Lecherye, he gave no
man.

Of Loyaltys, And by Loyaltye, the person is greatly, praised, The.xliii.
Chapter.
LOyaltye, terence
as Terence says, is to have a perfyte Faith. And too show him self none
otherwise, then he is.

Longyn says, Longyn,
that a man is praised for three things, that is to say, for Loyaltye in
that thing that he has to do. The second is to keep and fullfyll that
thing that he has promised. The third is to think always to do well.

Senec says that he which does lease his faith, Senec
can not lease a greater thing.

Aristotyle says, Aristotyle,
do not break thy faith to any person, except to a woman, or to a child.

Senec says, Senec,
be Loyal and Faithful to all men. And specyallye to hymth at puts his
trust in thee.

Of Falsehed, what it is, And of the dyfference that is between Suspycyon and
Ielousy. And Treason and Malice. The.xliiii. Cpapter.
FAlsehed is a Vice, contrary to Faculty, and it is to say or think a thing
contrary to his will, and to have desire to do the contrary of that thing,
that he says.

Solomon says, Salamon
be not conuersante with a false person, for he cannot love that thing that
pleases him.

Senec says, Senec
that when any Iniurye, or wrong is done or said to a false man, he feyneth
him self, as he did not care for it, to the intent that he may the more
craftelie and falsely, venge him thereof.

Saint Thomas says, S, thomas.
that the suspycyon of the manne is known in four manners. The First is, the
evil person thynkethe, that all other be all evil as he is. The Second is
that a man does always suspecte that person, which has accustomed to do
evil. The Third is when a man hears evil spoken of another, the which he
would evil, he believes it incontynente. The Fourth is when a man has
proved many things.

Arystotyle says, Aristotyle,
the old persons for the most part do very lyghtlye suspecte, because
that they have proved many things in their time.

Solomon says, Salamon
the evil thoughts do cause the person to depart from God.

Plato says, Plato,
that the first mouinge of the thought, be not in our power, the which we
ought well to tesyste.

The Decre says, Decre,
that the flesh can not be corrupt, if the thought be not corrupt before.
And says, that the person can not have agreater evil, then to be suspectinge.

Alexandre says, Alexandre.
when thou bast consyence, and trust in any man, thou ought not to suspecte
him, except manyfestlye thou find that thing in him, whereby thou may have
suspycon, for the suspicyon that thou should have there, should cause thee to
be moved to do evil. There is dyfference between Suspectyon and Ielousye. For
Suspectyon is to believe evil of another man, (as it is aforesaid.) Ialousye
is to have fear of that thing the which a man loves, do no otherwise then
it ought to do. Jealousy dyscendeth of the virtue of Love. For no person can
be Ielous, but for two reasons. The one is for the fear that a man has that
the thing which a man loves do not otherwise, then ought to be done. And the
other is that it be not the dyshonoure of the person which a man loves.

Iuuenall says, Iuuenall,
that the Ialou sye of a woman is very great, for she can not love the person
which she knows does love her husband.

Plato says, Plato,
that perfyte love is in three things, that is to say, to love, to fear, and
to honor.

Socrates says that person that loves, Socrates,
fears. But al those which do fear, do not love. And says, that the
person which loves, has always fear of that thing which he loves. There
is dyfference between Treason and Malice. Treason is properly to betraye, by
malice, the person which does put his trust in thee. Malice is to Imagyne some
thing for to deceive and there man.

Longin says that in a Traiter, Longyn,
the love is vice.

Saint Austyne says that the Trayter does never swage nor my tygate him
self, S. Austine.
for famylyarytye, nor for poverty, nor for eating and drinkinge, nor for
service, nor for gifts.

Saint Paul makes mencyon thereof saying. Paul,


Erunt hamines cupidi, elati, supervi, proditores, proterui tumidi. Example of
Falsehed, The.xlv. Chapter.
OF Falsehed, it is read in the old Testament, Example.
that by the will of God, there was two Aungelles sent into the Cyfye of
Sodom, Example,
for the abhomynable syn there used, they lodged in the house of a good man,
the seruante of God, called Loath. And they badde him that he should go forth
of the town, for they would brene it, and all the inhabytantes thereof. And as
this said, Loath was upon a mountain, his two Daughters, did imagyne by
falsehed to deceive him, to the intent, that he should meddle Flesshlye with
them. They caused him to drink so much, that he was bronken. And then the
elder of his said two daughters, did ley her self by him. And so moved and
steared him with touchynges and other tokens, that be meddled flesshlye with
her. And so did the younger, in so much that he did get them both with child.

How Truth is to be compared, by Reason to the Perdryche. And how Truth is
that thing which iusty fyeth the man before all persons The.xlvi. Chapter.
TRuethe, as Saint Austyne says, S. Austine.
is to use Verytye or Truth, without any shadow or color of Lyenge. The
Virtue of Truethe, may be compared to little young Perdryches, for the Perdryche
is of such nature. The one will rob the eggs of the other. And sit upon
them, as they were her own eggs, but as soon as the lyfle Perdryches be
brought forth. And that they here their own propre mother cry and sing, they
leave and forsake the old Perdrych which brought them forth of eggs, and go
to their own very mother. And so it is of the virtue of truth, for the man
does cover it so long as the contrari is not known and perceived, but at the
end truethe does always abide and continue in his place.

Aristotile says, Arystotyle,
truth does help him at the end of all his works, and deeds, which does love
it.

Senec says, Senec,
that the person ought always to enforce and constrayne him self, to be
Verytable, or True, for it is the most worthy and honorable thing to a wise
man, that his deeds, may veryfye his sayenges. And he ought to be ware that
he do not lease the being veritable, for if ones he do lease truethe, shall be
no more believed by him. There was a man that demanded of a Philosopher, how
he might be fair spoken. And he said, say nothing but that thou know
well, without addyng there to any lie.

Solomon says, Solomon,
making his prayer to almighty god, good lord I pray thee that all vanytyes
and lies, may absent them, and be far from me.

Saint Paul says, Paul,
God will dystroye the tongue that does lie. And says, that words spoken
iently and peasably be sweter then honye.

Example of the Virtue of Verytye, The.xlvii. Chapter.
OF the virtue of Verytye or Truethe, Example.
it is read in the life of Holy Fathers, that there was a Rich Kynghte,
whythe did forsake his Richesse for to serve God. And went into an Abbey,
where he made him self a relygyous man. And did renounce the world
altogyther. It chanced on a day, that the Abbot, for need of money, purposed
to sell two old Asses, that had been long time in the Abbey. He bethoughte him
that he would send them to be sold by the said new religyous man, for he
thought that he had the practyse thereof. And that afterward he would die
other, that should be younger, this knight did take the charg of them, albeit
parthe against his will. And did not deny it, by reason of obedience, he being
in the market, with one of the lay brethren of the said Abbey, which led the
said Asses, when it was demanded of him if the Asses were good, he answered,
think you that if they were good, that our father Abbot would sell them. The
other demanded of him, wherefore their tails were so pylled, he answered,
they be very old, and do fall many times in the mire. And when a man will lift
them up, he must take them by the tails, and that is the cause that they have
their tails so pylled wherefore they could not sell their Asses, but
brought them home again. The Abbot did demand of the lay brother, how it
chanced that they had not sold their Asses. Example
And he showed him the cause. Then the Abbot caused this relygyous man, to come
before, and did rebuke him, he aunsweryd the Abbot and said that he was not
become a relygyous man, to the intent to deceive any person, nor to Lie, but
that he had forsaken all his richesse, to serve him which was full of all
truth, with the which answer the Abbot was very well content.

How Lyenge is an evil vice, the manners to eschew it, And in what sort, and
which is evil Lyenge. The.xlviii. Chapter.
LYenge is a Vice contrary to Truth. And it is to hyde and cover the Truth
with color of words to deceive another man. There be diverse manners of Lieng,
that is to say, Lyenge which is told in manner of news, there is Lyenge,
which is told for to eschew to speak evil. without prejudice of any person.
And these two be not prohybed in the Scripture. But there is lyenge with
falsehed, which is told to the damage of another, there is Lyenge, as not to
hold and keep promise, there is Lyenge accustomed. These three manners be
prohybed, there be some which lie wyllynglie in swearing, and with their
knowledge do forswear them, which is a very evil Lyenge.

Solomon says, Solomon
that the mouth which does lie, kylleth the soul and that it were better to
be a Thief then a continual Liar.

Of the which Plato speaks, Plato,
saying that he which does afferme that thing which he does not know of
that thing, which he shall know, he shall be holden for suspecte.

And says, that the person which has been accustomed to lie, shall not be
believed when he shall show the truth.

What Mercy is, and of the operacyon of the same. And how Mercy is that
whereby a man obteyneth the Love of God. The.xlix. Chapter.
Mercy, S, Austyne,
(as S. Austyne says) is to have compassyon of his own soul, and of the
myserye and wretchedness of another.

Saint Thomas says, S, thomas.
that the operacyon of Mercy, is to pardon the offenses done unto thee. And to
chastyce and correct him, which has need thereof, to counsel him which
stands in doubt, to comfort them, which be in dyscomforte. And to pray to
god for another.

Plato says, Plato,
that the person can not have a more profitable thing, then the Virtue of
Mercy, that is to say, to vysyte the sick, to feed them that be hungry, to
give them drink, that be thrystye, vysyte the prisoners, clothe the naked,
lodge them that do lack lodging. And to burye the dead persons.

Alexandre says, Alexandre,
that the power, and the might of the man, increases in two manners, that is
to say, to get fryendes by mercy.

Longyn says, Longyn,
that he which shall have mercy of another, he shall ynde mercy for him self.

Our Lord Ihesue says, Ihesu christ,
pardon other gladlye, if thou will have pardon. One of the things yt the
most pleases almyghtye God is, that if a man have offended thee, And that
thou can take vengeance of him for it, that thou do for give him.

Solomon says, Solomon,
that he which gladlye does give to the poor, shall never be in misery and
pouer, tie. And says that he which does stop his ears at the voice of the
poor, shall cry and not be hard, of the mercy of god.

Saint Gregorye says, S, gregorye,
that he which gladlye fulfyllethe the works of mercy, shall not dye of
evil death. And that his prayer shall be herd.

Example of Mercy. The.l. Chapter.
OF the virtue of Mercy, Example,
it is red in the histories of Rome, that there was a thief brought before
king Alexandre. And he demanded him wherefore he did rob, he answered, I rob
upon the sea, and thou upon the earth. I am called a thief because that I am
alo^e, and because thou goeste honestly, and that thou art always accompanied
with many folks, thou art called king. Example,
But know thou king Alexandre, that poverty constrains me to be a thief,
but thou art much worse and a stronger thief then I am, for thou do rob for
coueitousnes, and the more that thou haste, the more thou desire, and if thou
have more, worse thou will do. And I do not rob but for necessity of my liuig.
And when king Alexandre hard his freenes and plainnes, he had mercy of him,
and made him one of his Knights, and one of the best and most faithful of
his company.

Of Crualtye, And how many sorts be thereof. And of the great euylles and
inconuenients, that be done by Crualtie. The.li. Chapter.
CRualtye is a Vice, contratye to mercy.

Arystotile says, Aristotyle,
that there is five manners of crualtie. The first is never to have pytye of
any man. The second is, to bring another man into mysetye. The third is,
not to will to pardon iniuryes done to him. The fourth is, to ponyshe another
more then it does appertain. The fyfte is, to be actyfe of courage. And to
hurt and offend another without reason. Crualtye may be compared to the
Serpente called Baselyke, which is so venomous and so cruel, that he does
kill the folks with his sight. And if he find non other thing to kylle, he
will cause the trees that be nyghe unto him to dry away, and to dye with his
blowynge on them, he has so venomous a wind and breath within him.

Sydrac says, Sidrac
that he is not like to the Lion in his house, which has no mercy of his
Subjects.

Hermes says, Hermes.
give perdon and mercy to the person in his aduersytyes, to the intent that
thou be not occasyon to cause him to despair.

Cassydore says, Cassidore,
that the most outrageous crualtye that can be, is to desire to be rych with
the gooddes of another man.

Senec says, Senec,
that Virtue is the most gracyous thing in the world, for by it a man
knows the evil men, And the good things, for there is not so evil a man
in the world, but that he would have that thing that he has of another
man's, to be right winning.

Of Lyberalytye, how it is contrary to Coueytousnesse, And how a man ought to
be Liberal, and in what manner. The.lii. Chapter.
LYberalytye after Aristotile, Aristotyle,
is largnesse, or it is to give commyssyon to worthy persons, for that which
is given to unworthy persons, is lost. And to give to them which has
inoughe, is to cast water in the Sea. And to give more then a man may bear,
it is not Liberlytye, but it is Prodygalytye. It is read in the Sum of
Vices, that Prodygalytye is to spend his own without measure or reason. And
therefore in the Law, the Prodygall persons, be called Fools. Yet
notwythstandyng, Coueytousnesse is of less profit then prodygalytye after
Saint Thomas. S, thomas.
which does prove it by three reasons. The first is that the office of
Prodygalytye, does accord better with Virtue of Lyberalytye, which is to
give, then does Coueytousnesse, which is to hold. The second is, yt the
prodigal person is more profitable to other, then the Coueytous Person is. The
third reason is, that the Prodygal person does sooner amend and forsake his
vice of Prodigalitye, then the auaricious person his coueitousnes, of
Prodigality discendeth pouertye.

And Job says, Job,
that pouertye is heaviness of heart, shame and dysprayse, and root of al
evil. The Virtue of Lyberlyty, may be compared to ye Egle, which is the most
lyberall Bird that is, for if he be never so hungrye yet will he leave the
half of his pray, to them that come after him. A man lightly cannot see the
Egle fly in sekinge his pray, but there is always some other foul that
dothfolow him, for to have part of that the Egle shall leave.

Solomon speaking of Lyberalytie says, Solomon,
that if thou do a good deed, consydre to whom thou do it, for almos does
quench and kill syn, in like case as the fire is quenched with water.

Alexandre says give, Alexandre.
and another shall give unto thee. And that that thou will give, give it
incontynente, and without any dyfferrynge. For as the wise manne says in
the Proverbs. The Almous which is long dyfferred and looked for, is not
given, but it is sold.

Cato says, Cato,
consydre to whom thou gyueste. And take heed that when thou will demand
any thing, that it be just and ryghtfull, for it is a great folly to demand
a thing unreasonable. And such a thing whereof he shall be lyghtlye denied.

Senec says, Senec,
that a man ought more to consydre and regard the will of him that does give,
then that thing which is given. And he which demands any thing with
fear, gives occasyon to be denied.

Plato says, Plato.
that there is no greater heaviness in the world, then to demand that thing
where with a man ought to live. And says, that pouertye is a very evil
thing. but it is a greater evil for a man to do evil by reason of the same.

Tulle says, Tulle,
that there is not a more comfortable and sweter thing in the world, then for a
man to live of his own, and to have Lybertye. And says, that he which is
content with that thing he has, is not poor.

Sidrac says, Sidrac
beware of poverty, when thou shall have haboundaunce of riches, for in a
little space, the time does change.

Innocent says, Innocent,
that it is great pytie of the misery of the poor man, for if he demand, he
consumes him self in poverty.

Solomon says, Salamon,
that when a man is poor, his brethren do dysalowe and renounce him, and his
fryendes does fly and goo from him.

Solomon prayeng to almighty God says. Solomon,
Good lord I pray thee, grant me two things, the one is that thou defend me
from poverty, the other is, that thou give me not so much riches, that I do
disknowledge and forget thee, by reason of the same. He says that Auaryce is
contrary to poverty, for if the rych man do speak, every man does give him
audience, albeit that he speak much evil and many folish words. And the pore
man, do he speak never so well, yet shall he not be regarded, but shall be
reproved, and shall be constrained to hold his peace.

Plato says, Plato,
it is better for a man to leave his richesse after his death, to his ennemies,
then to demand in his life by reason of pouertye help of his fryendes.

Verro says, that the Rich man does not get his Richesse without
Travail. Verro.
nor does keep them without Fear, nor does not leave them without, Sorrow
and Grief.

How Coueytousnesse is a grievous Vice, Of the euylles that do come thereof.
and of the Insasiatnes of the same. The.liii. Chapter.
COueytousnesse, is contrary to Lybertye. And it is a dysordynate desire to
get temporal goods, and to with hold that which a man ought to give to the
pore. And to misspend, wast and suffer any to be dystroyed, rather then to
give it where it is need.

Saint Gregory says that in all things in the world a measure contenting, S,
erg gorye,
and sufferynge, is found and had, but in coueitousnes which never is
satisfied. Coueitousnes may be compared to the Moldwarpe, which is a beast
that lives only of the earth. And never has inoughe. For she thinkethe,
that it will fail her, and she is always permyrye. Paul


Saint Paul says, that Coueytousnes is the chyefe of all evil. For the
coueytous person is never full. In like case as the weight and charg of the
bourden that the Ass or horse does bear, is to the profit of another, and
to the great pain of the bearer, that is to say of the Horse. So the
coueytous person does get and keep together his richesse by his great pain
and labor, to the profit of those to whom he does leave his said richesse,
the which do make merry with it.

Pithagoras says that the coueitous Pythagoras,
persons may be called Painymes, for the Sarazyns do worship their Idols of
gold and silver, so the auaricious persons, do worship their richesse.

Senec says, Senec
that it is better to spend folyshly, then to get and keep unlawfully.

The Master of Sentences says master of sentence,
that there is no man content with his degree and estate.

Saint Austine says, S. Austine.
that a coueytous person, may be compared and likened to hell, for hell is
never full nor satysfyed. Nor the Coueytous person with all the money of the
world. Marciall,


Marcyall says, that so long as the Coueytous person does live, he never
does profit to any man. Senec
Senec says that coueitousnes is the high way of spyrituall death. And also
often times of the temporal death. Paul


Therefore Saint Paul says.

Radix omnium malorum est cupiditas, Of Humylytye, And in how many manners it
is divided. And of those things which dyscend of it. The.liiii. Chapter.
HVmylytye, Orygyn.
as Orygin says is to refrain the intent of ye will of the courage, there is
diverse manners of Humylytie. The first is to show him self, not so good and
worthy as other. The second, is to be of humble conuersacyon, and
famylyarytye with every man. The third is to repute himself unworthy to be in
the company of great men. The fourth is to believe to have suffycyent and
unable in all things. The fyfte is to fear those things which ought to be
feared. Of Humylytye descend and come four things. The first is honor, that
is to say, to give honor to another manne. The second is to give honor to a
better then him self. The third is to obey them that have auctorytye to
command him. The.iiii. is to knowledge the benyfyte that a man has received.
Of Humylytye do dyscende these virtues mekenes, pytye, devotion, franchysse or
lybertye, contemplacyon, fear of god, simplenes, and equytie.

Solomon says, if a great or noble man do the honor, Solomon,
do not exalte thee therefore.

God says, God,
he that does humylate him self, shall be exalted. And he that does exalte him
self, he shall be made meke.

Saint Gregorye says, S, gregorye,
that the man shall have no manner of virtue except he have first Humylytye.

Aristotile says, Aristotile,
that the evil man waxes proud, when a man does give him. And the wise man
does humylate him self.

Longin says, Longyn,
that as the Birds do streyne their wings, when they fly against the hill.
So a man must constrain him self by humylytie, if he will mount and ascend
into heaven.

Solomon says, Solomon,
do all things by humylytye, and thou shall be loved of every man. And says
that the woman in humblinge her self, does overcome and rule her husband.

Cato says, Cato,
give place to a better man then thy self. And dispraise no man for any manner
of thing, or if the man be poor, yet his virtues may be great, humylitie is a
great virtue, and very conuenyente and necessary, as well to little as to
great.

Solomon speaking of the same says. Solomon,


Quanto mayor es humtlia et ipsum in omnibus et coram ce in uenies graciaw,
Example of Humylytye, The.lv. Chapter.
OF the Virtue of Humylitie, Example,
it is red in the Historyes of rome, that when their was any Lord or Captain
sent by the Romans to conquer any country. And if he returned to Rome
with victory, the Romans made him. iii. honors. and. iii. dishonours. The
first honor was, that all the people of the City, should go to mete him and
receive him.

The second was, that he was set upon a Charet drawn with four white horses.
And all the people about him, bringing him into Rome with Candles and Torches
brennynge.

The third was that all the princes that he had conquered, did come after him,
behind the Charet.

The first dyshonoure was, that there was sytte with him in the Charet, the
most vile and wretched person that could be found in all the City, which
was done to give example to other, to come to such estate.

The Second that before the people. This Vyllayne did give him many great
strokes, and said, thou ought not to be proud for the Honor that is done
unto thee, for I am a man as well as thou.

The Third was, Example,
that during all this day of Tryumphe, every man that would, might say any
manner of Iniuryes to him they would, without any ponyshmente.

Of Pride, and of the vices that descend and come of the same, And how Pride
dyspleaseth god and the world, and how the proud person does torment him
self in this world. Thy. lvi. Chapter.
Pride is a vice, contrary to the virtue of Humyletye.

Arystotile says, Arystotyle,
that Pride is properlye to will to be like to a greater or better then
himself. And there is many sorts and manners of the same, that is ty say,
Pride of hyghnes, as to will to put his self always before all men, and to
take him self for the best. Pride of governing and ruling, as to will by
himself alone, to govern and rule all other. Pride of folly, which is to do
more then a man may. Pride of misknowledg and ignorance, that is to say, to
keep greater estate then does appertain and belong to the person, believing him
self to be worthy thereof. Pride of beastialitie or a beastly pride, as he which
will not honor those persons to whom it does appertain, but will despraise
them. Of the syn of pride decend. iii. things, that is to say, not to bear
honor to a better then him self. The second is Inobedience, as not to obey
the^ that have auctority and power of him The third is Ingratytude, as not to
knowledge the syn of pride. And a man may compare pride to the Faulcon, which
desires to rule and govern. The faulcon is of such condycyon, that there
where he does build and make his nest, he beats all the rivers about him in
such wise that he will not suffer none other bird of pray to haunt and use,
there, but he him self. And will by his great pride be lord of all the River.

Ptholomeus says, Ptholomeus.
that the more that any Lordshyppe, Domynyon, or Rueynge is exalted, the more
peryllous it is, wherefore it is red in the old Testamente, that God did form
and create the fairest Angel of all other. And by his Pride, he thought to be
equal with God. And would have resist him: but God saying his great Malice,
did command Saint Myghell to cast him out of heaven, with al his fellows,
and so it was done.

Solomon says, Solomon,
that there be three vices among all other which do very sore dysplease God,
that is to say, a poor man proud, a rich liar, and an old lecherous person.
And says, that there is always questions, and debate amongeste proud men.

Saint Bernarde says, S, bernarde
I do marvel much of proud men, the which can not be in Peace. And can
not come and ascend into heaven, wherefore they must needs fall into the fire
of Hell, which shall devour them, there is difference between Vayneglorye and
Pride, albeit that Vayneglorye does descend of Pride. For pride does hold it
self within the heart and courage. And vainglory is to show the will of the
courage. And to will to be praised.

Saint Austyne says that the S, austine.
vice of Irreuerence, and Dysobedyence, is a token of Folly and great Pride in
the heart. And says that a man must more fear and fly from Irreuerence,
then from death.

Solomon says, Solomon,
that he which does not give Reverence and Honor to his Father and Mother,
shall be unhappy and all evil and myschyefe shall come unto him.

Senec says, Senec,
that when thou shall do any thing better then another, do not boaste thy
self thereof. Cato,
For if thou do, Cato says that thou shall be dyspraysed thereby.

Saint Austyne says, S, austine,
in the Book of the City of God, that boastynge is an evil and perverse vice
to the soul. He does love praising of man, which does dispraise the very
witness of his own conscience.

Therefore Solomon says. Solomon,


Qui posuit nobis suparbiam, aut diutriarum iactariam, qui contulit nobis.

Orygen says, Orygen.
wherefore and how can or dare the person, being but earth and ashes, be
proud, when he does remember his natyuitie. And how he is come into this
world, or how his life is contained in a feeble Vessel, or what ordure or fylth
he does cast out, by the conduytes of his body.

Saint Gregorye says, S, gregorye,
that there be four manners of Arrogancye, and Pride, in the which all the
swellings of pride be showed.

The first is, if a man think that all the goodness that is in him does come of
him self.

The second is, that if he believe to have it of God. And to judge to have well
deserved it by his merytes.

The third is when he does vaunte and boaste him of goodness and there is none
in him.

The fourth is, when in him self he does dysprayse another, and desires that
a man know the goodness that is in him. And of this the wise man says. The
wise man.


Arroganciam et superbiam et os bilingue betestor. How a man ought to
govern him self, as well of the tongue, as of wit and understanding, for to
speak well and wisely to all folks, and how by words a man is praised or
dispraysed. The.lvii. Chapter.
THou ought to consydre when thou shall speak, order and reason therefore
before that thou do speak, consydre six things, that is to say, know well
what thou will speak, and to whom. And wherefore, how, and in what time, and
what reason. And then beware that thou be not to hastye in speaking, for fear
that thy will do not agree to reason.

Solomon says, Salamon,
that he which can not refrain, and govern his sprytes in speaking, is like
to a town, or City without walls, and is all open. And says that he that
will not consider, what he does speak, shall suffer much evil. And in another
place says, speak little for in much speaking, there is often times much
folly. And says that the fool seems to be a wise man, when he does hold
his peace. It was demanded of a Pliylosepher wherefore he did speak so little,
and whether he did it by reason of wit or solye: and he answered that the fool
could not hold his peace.

Cato says, Cato,
that the chief virtue is, to refrain the tongue.

The Master of sentences says, master of sentence,
that so long as thou do keep the from showing thy secret, it is thy
subject, but when thou have discouert and showed it, thou art then in prison
and subject unto it. It is better and more sure for the to hold thy peace,
then to cry to another that he hold his peace.

Senec says, Sene^
that if thou can not refrain thy self from speaking, how will thou command
another to hold his peace, thou ought to consydre, if he be thy fryende or
enemy, to whom thou do speak, for there is not a swter thing in the
world, then a good frie^de to whom thou may tell and show thy secret, as
to thy self.

Tullie says, Tullie
that although that thy words be not fair and eloquent. Nevertheless if thou do
pronounce themiently, and voith fair manner, they shall be praised, and if the
words be never so good and fair, and thou do not show them ie^tlie, they
shall be blamed.

Sidrac says, Sidrac
that when thou will purpose any thing, beware above al things to speak to
much, for to much speaking and a long tale, dyspleasethe and greueth the
hearers.

Saint Austine says, S, austine
that a man ought to beware to judge any thing against another, for a man can
not tell if he which does the thing, do it for good intent or evil.

Our Lord says in the Gospel, Ihesu christ,
Judge no man, and thou shall not be Judged.

Saint John Crisostome, Cresostome,
speaking against the^ which do judge other folks and says, how do se so
many little faults in the deeds of another man. And does let pas so many great
faults in thine own deeds, thou ought to be dyligent to consydre thine own
deeds, more then the deeds of other men.

For our Lord says in the gospel. Ihesu christ,


Qui autem vides festucam in oculo fratris tui, trabem autem in oculo tuo non
vides. A Philosopher said unto a friend of his, A philosopher,
be evermore glad and wilinger to hear and harke^ then to speak, use thynes
ears more then thy tongue, speak nothing but good, and leave the evil, for
to speak good of another man, it is the beginnynge of love and friendship, and
to speak evil, is cause of great hatred. And a certain Philosopher says,
that good and ientle words do amend the deeds. And says also, that a good
and ientle answer, breketh the Ire and wrath of man. And another says, be
well ware that thou do not speak very often, if thou be not a good and a
fair speaker. And says, that the fool can not but defame him self in
speaking, for he can not stop nor make an end of his words and speaking.

Tulle says, Tulle,
amongst al myschiefes and dangers that be in frendshyp, fla^terynge is the
greatest.

Solomon says, Solomon,
that the person full of flaterynge, is a snare to take the Innocent persons.
And says beware in any case that thou do not incline thy self to flatering
words for they be snares to take thee.

Saint Gregorye says, S, gregorye,
that we ought to have those in great reverence, which do preach the holy
serypture, for they be cursers that go before our lord, and our lord does
follow them. The holy preachinge comes before, and our lord comes after in
the vision of our hearts and courages, the words make the curse before: and
truth is spread abroad in our understanding, to this purpose, God says to
his Apostles. Qui vos audit me audit et qui vos spernit me spernit.

And Socrates says, Socrates.
the tongue of the fool, is the key of his secret. And says, that the tongue
of a man shows and declares his wit and Wisdom, or his folly.

Barbalicus says, Barbalicus.
a man of good diserecio^ ought not to exercise him in things vnuailable, nor
to spend more then his winning is.

Argelicus says, Argellicus.
a man may have but pain and labor in this world.

Orusiane says, Orusiane.
he that cateth not shall die for hungre, and if he eat more then in ough, he
shall be sick, therefore it is a defycile thing to a man to be long in health.

Bernicus says, Bernicus.
trust him not that forsweareth his says for worldely things, And he says,
Idleness engenders Ignorance, and Igneraunce engenders error.

Sedechias says, Sedechias,
in long steping is not profit, but harmer o use it, and says beware that
thou dispe^d not half thy time in Idleness.

Ciuyl says, Cyuil,
the good soul would have no rest in this world: than he that will have a good
soul ought to beware of rest.

Galyen says, gallen
govern the so well that thou keep the from evil doe^g, and suffyse thee with
the good deeds that thou shall do beside for christ's sake.

And Gregory says, S, gregorye,
he that will wit whether his soul be noble and clean, or foul and corrupt,
he ought to consydre in his delectacyon and his conscience, and if he delyghte
him in doeng good and virtuous works, with faith, hope, and charytye, than
his Soul is clean and noble. And if he delyghtethe him in doenge foul and
transytorious things, and of no value, tha^ his soul is foul, for every
thing reioyseth him, with his semblable, the good with the good, and the evil
with the evil.

Socrates says let not to do well though thy good deeds be not known, Socrates,
for well doenge is so good of it self, that it shall be vailable enough to the
at last. And says when thou will chastise or correct any many for his vice,
thou ought to monish and exhort him by good and ientle words. And says, that
the man slaudering with words, is worse then a thief. And says that he is
good and wise, which can rehearse the good deeds of the wise men, and cover
their malice. And it was demanded of him, when the wit of a man is perfect,
and he au^swered, that when he does not speak, but well and discretely, and as
he ought to do. And says that it is better for a man to speak well, then to
hold his peace, and to say nothing: he says refrain thy tongue, and thy evil
will, and it shall be the fairest robe and garmente that thou canest wear.

And therefore the prophet David prayed our lord that he would take heed of his
mouth, David.
and be keeper thereof, and to set a door or a gate at his lips to keep the^
close, to the intent that he should not say not speak any manner of thing, that
should displease God, to whom we shall pray that al things which be aforesaid
may be to his glory, to the which the Father the Son and the holy Ghost
bring us all. Amen.

FINIS.
Here ends the Book of Wisdom, after the sayenges of ancient Philosophers,
and other noble wise me^. Lately translated out of French into English. And
here so (...)eth the Table.
Here begins the Table of this Book.
First the Auctoures names, Follio, 2, The Prologue, fol, 3 The auctoure show
how a man or a woman ought to be adorned with virtues. And how that Prudence
ought chiefly and first of all, rule and govern the creatures,

The first Chapter, Follyo. 5, How prudence is chief buckler and defense of
all virtues, and of the great goodness that may come of the same to al persons,
after the ancient Philosophers. The second chapter, fol 6. Example of the
virtue of prudence. The third chapter, fol, 11. How Folly is contrary to
prudence. And how Folly is divided into many parts of the man. Also the manner
to know the folly by the deeds, and the wise man, by his works. The.iiii
chapter. fol. 13. How Temperance is one of the Flowers of Prudence, And how
he that has it in him, may resyste and withstand many euylles, after the say
enges of the wise men, in the chapter going before. The v. chapter fol 16. How
Dystemperaunce is contrary to Temperaunce And how it is the pryncypall cause
of all evil. The, vi. chapter, fol, 18. Example of Dystemperaunce. The vii.
chapter. fol, 19. How the Auctour speaks of Love of Benevolence, and of
delyberacion, and how of love he makes iiii, chapters. The.viii. chapter. fol.
19. How the love of God, is the love above al loves that dureth the longest.
And that without the which the creatures can not be satysfyed nor contented.
The.ix, chapter, fol. 21. How the love of father and mother with other
parents comes, and what reverence and honor we ought to give to our
father and mother. And the manner to love his wife and children, and to correct
and lead them in this world. The.r. chapter, fol 23. Of the love of
compaignons and friends, and how to entertain it, The, xi, chapter, fol, 26.
How the love of concupicence comes to men and women, and of the great danger
that do chance and come of the same. The.xii, chapter, fol, 29. Example of the
virtue of Love. The xiii chapter. fol 30. How Envy is contrary to the virtue of
Love: and what envy is, and also of the pain that the enuyous man bears in
him self. The xiiii chap, fol 32, Example of envy. The xv chap, fol 33, How a
man ought to take gladness and Joy: and of what thing and what gladness or Joy
is. The xvi chap, fol 34. How heaviness is contrary to gladness, and how the
wise man ought never to put any in his heart, whereof heaviness and mellancholly
may be engendered, The xvii chap. fol 35, How mellancholly is dangerous, and
what is mellancholly: and how it causes many to fall in great travail pains
and miseries, and consequentlye in great poverty, The xvii chap, fol 36.
Example of heaviness, or pensiuenes, The xix chap, fol 39, How the virtue of
peace ought to be mayntayned and kept, and of the great goodness that comes
of the same, and what peace is, The xx chapt, fol 40, How Ire is contrary to
peace, and what Ire is, and how it does destroy and waste the virtues and
bodies of them that be entangled with the same, and of the evil that does
come of it, The xxi chapter, fol 41, Example of Ire, The xxii cha, fol 43, Of
chastytye, and how she ought to be withholden, observed and kept, and the
perils that the wise should fly, for fear to lease such virtue, The xxiii chap,
fol 45 Example of the virtue of Chastytie, The xxiiii chap, fol 46, How lechery
is contrary to chastity and in how many sorts it is divided, the^ is showed
the dangers that come thereof, as well to the bodies of men as to their souls,
The xxv chap, fol 48, Of force or strength, and what it is, the manners and
comparisons of the same, and who may be called strong, and of those also which
be always strong. The xxvi chap, fol 50, How patience causes a man to bear
easelye the pains and travails of this world, and how many sorts therbe of
pacyence, The xxvii chap. fol 52. How fear and dread, be contrary to strength
and valliantnes, and what fear is, and who those be that be fearful and for
what cause, The xxviii chap, fol 53. Of suerty and how many manners there is
thereof, and how fear and suertye do strive together by diverse languages. The
xxir chap, fol 57. How the wise man ought to doubt, and how by doubt and fear
many times the me^ beco^e virtuous. The xxx cha. fo 60 How good Fame ought to
go before men, and of the goodness that comes of the same. The xxxi chapt. fol
63. How glotony is a dangerous vice and of the great evil that comes thereof
to the bodies of me^, and how the virtues of men be distroyed and corrupt by
the same. The xxxii chap, fol 64. How abstinence is that whereof glotony is
consumed, and by the goodues that is therein, and that may come there of, The
xxxiii chap, fol 65, How Constancy and Inconstancy be dyfferent, and how
constancy is a noble virtue, and what Inconstauncye is, The xxxiiii chap, fol
66, Of the virtue of noblenes of courage of men, and how the men be often times
praised by reason of the same, The xxxv chap, fol 67, Example of Noblenes of
Courage, The xxxvi chap, fol, 68, Of vainglory, and how many manners there is
thereof, and how vainglory is to be dispraised, The xxxvii chap, fo 68, Example
of Vain glory, fol. 69. How Justice ought to be done, and how it is yt thing
that does measure al things upon earth, The xxxix chap, fo 70 Example of
Justice, The xl chap, fo 72 How Injustice or wrong, is contrary to Justice,
and how many manners therbe of Iniustyce, and how Iniustyce demands
vengeance before god, The xli chap, fol 74, Example of Iniustyce, The xlii
chap, fol 76, Of Loyaltye, and by Loyaltye the person is greatly praised, The
xliii chap, fol 77, Of falsehed, what it is, and of the difference that is
between suspycion and Ielousye, and treason and malice. The xliii chap. fol
78. Example of falshehed. The xlv cha, fo 80, How truth is to be compared by
reason to the perdryche, and how truethe is that thing which iustyfieth the man
before al persons, The xlvi chap, fo 81, Example of the virtue of Verytye, The
xlvii chap, fol 82, How lyeng is an evil vice, the manners to eschew it, and in
what sort, and which is evil Lyenge, The xlviii chap, fol 83, What mercy
is, and of the operacyon of the same, and how mercy is that where by a man
obteyneth the love of God, The xlix chap, fol 84, Example of mercy, The l cha,
fo 86. Of Crualtie, and how many sorts be thereof, and of the great euyls and
inconueuients that be done by crualtie, The li chap, fol 86, Of Lyberalitye,
how it is contrary to coueitousnes, and how a man ought to be lyberall, and in
what manner, The lii chapt, fol 87, How Coueytousnes is a grievous vice, of the
evils that do come thereof, and of the Insasiatnes of the same. The liii chap,
fol, 90, Of humilyty, and in how many ma^ers it is divided, and of those
things which descend of it, the liiii chap, fol 92, Example of Humylytye, The
lv chap, fol 94, Of Pride, and of the vices that descend and come of the same,
And how Pride dyspleaseth god and the world, and how the proud person does
torment him self in this world. The lvi, chap, fol 95, How a man ought to
govern him self, as well of the tongue, as of wit and understanding, for to
speak well and wisely to all folks, and how by words a man is praised or
dispraised. The lvii chap. fol. 98.
FINIS.
IMPRINted at London in Fletestreate, beneathe the Conduyte, at the sign of S.
John Euangeliste, by Thomas Colwell. (?)


