A SERMON OF CONFIRMATION, PREACHED IN OXFORD, AT THE FIRST Visitation of the
Right reverend Father in God, John Lord Bishop of Oxford. September, 27. 1619.

By Edward Boughen, Chaplain to the Lord Bishop of Oxford.

Fidem nos neque nobis recentiorem ab aliis conscriptam acceptamus: neque ipsi
mentis nostrae faetus aliis obtrudere audemus: ne humana putentur pietatis
verba: sed quae a patribus edocti sumus, ea nos interrogantibus annuntiamus.
Basil. Epist. 60. ad Eccles. Antioch. LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, for
Elizabeth Adams, and are to be sold at her shop, in Paul's Churchyard. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN God, John Lord Bishop of Oxford, my very good
Lord.
Having heretofore (Right Reverend) preaehed this Sermon at your Lordships
appointment, and since enlarged it (by your advice) with some necessary
additions; I have now also according to your directions, and by public
authority committed it to the press, but not without your Lordships name;
entreating you to undertake the patronage of it, which had not been, much
less been preached, if it had not received encouragement, and life from you.
And I the more willingly publish it under your name, because it is a doctrine
of the ancient, primitive, and Apostolic Church, whereof you have been a
constant defender for many years; I doubt not therefore, but you will be now
as ready and willing to avouch, and maintain this holy and authenticke
doctrine, as you were at first to enjoin the Text. If there be any worth in
me, or in this Sermon, to you (next under God) I owe it; he then that owes
himself, and his little lear^^ng to your Lordship, dedicates both himself,
and his ^^^ple labors to whom he owes them; beseeching God to bless your
Lordship with a long and healthful life for the good of his Church; and so to
bless me with his gifts and graces, that I may ever delight in those good and
ancient steps, which you long have trod. In these desires I rest

Your Lordships dutiful Chaplain. Edward Boughen.

A SERMON OF CONFIRMATION.
Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost. Act.
8.17.
YOu may (peradventure) esteem this to be no visitation text, as not serving
directly, either ad informandos, or reformandos mores, to put you in mind of
your duties, or to redress what is amiss: but if you shall consider that
there is an holy duty to be performed by the Bishop in his trienniall
visitation, Can. 60.
and enjoined him by the Canons of the Church, then will this text be found apt
and fit for our meeting: which gives occasion to prove that, which the Canon
affirms: viz. Ibid.
that Confirmation is a solemn, ancient, and laudable custom in the Church of
God, continued from the Apostles times to this present day: and (we hope) it
may in part make way to remove that serious complaint, Hooker Eccles. pol. lib.
5.. 66.
which Master Hooker made of the deep neglect of this Christian duty, almost
with all those, to whom by right of their place and calling, Confirmation
belongs: which deep neglect has wrought that ill effect amongst us, that
William Bishop of Paris observed in his time, Quod propter cessatione^
Confirmationis tepiditas grandior est in fidelibus, and fidei defensione, since
confirmation grew out of use, Getson de Exterminat. schismatis.
our zeal waxes cold, and we are become faint in the defense of our faith.

2. Wherefore that you (my brethren of the ministry) may the better be
encouraged, to perform that your duty of seasoning the younger sort of your
parishioners with the Principles of true religion, thatt hey may be made fit
for that holy Imp^sitions of hands by the Bishop, and worthily partake the
fruits thereof, I received in charge (from him, who may command) the handling
of this point, and text; wherein I observe these parts.

3. First, the Antiquity of Confirmation: it was used sub ipsis Apostolis in
the Apostles age: 2. The Ministers of confirmation, Apostoli, they were no
less then Apostles, S. Peter, and S. John. 3. The Persons confirmed, Super
illos upon them, And who were they? 1. Samaritans. 2. Believing Samaritans. 3.
Baptized Samaritans. We must be first baptized, and then confirmed.

4. Fourthly, the form of confirmation. 1. Oration, prayer. They prayed for
them, ver. 15. 2. Manuum impositio, Imposition of hands; They laid their hands
on them, as in my text: and hence is it called Imposition of hands from the
manner of performing it.

5. Fifthly, the effect, Et accipiebant spiritum sanctum, They, the Samaritans
received the holy Ghost; which was the gift the Apostles prayed for, ver. 15.
There they prayed, that the Samaritans might receive the Holy Ghost, and here
after Imposition of hands they receive the Holy Ghost; they are confirmed by
the Holy Ghost: and hence it is na^^^d Confirmation, ab effectu, from the
effect, and virtue that ^^ has.

6 Begin we with the Antiquity of Confirmation, which we deduce from hence:
from the place (I say) and people here mentioned, where it was first practiced,
even from the Samaritans in Samaria, wh^ are here confirmed before the
conversion of the Gentiles. For next of all to Jerusalem and Jury, Samaria was
to be instructed in the glad tidings of the Gospel, in the blessed Sacraments,
and religious ceremonies of the Church of Christ.

7 This was that very order our Savior himself prescribed after his
resurrection, for the propagation of the Gospel: and they were the last words,
those memorable words he spoke before his ascension. After the Holy Ghost is
come upon you, Act. 1.8.
you shall be witnesses unto me (says he) both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea,
and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth: so that the
progress of the Gospel was to be from Judea to Samaria, and so to the Gentiles
universally.

8 And this division of the world into Jews, Samaritans, and Gentiles (which
is there set down shortly after that general commission, Euntes docete omnes
gentes, Mat. 28.19.
go and teach al nations) was formerly made by our Savior in his limited
commission, when as yet they were but punies, and not fit for so general a
license to preach. Go not (says Christ) into the way of the Gentiles, Mat.
10.5.
and enter not into any city of the Samaritans, but go rather to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. Here that is prohibited by a retrograde order of
Gentiles, Samaritans, and Jews, which is commanded in a direct order Act 1.
Jews, Samaritans, Act. 1.8.
and Gentiles.

9. The reason why Christ set down this order, why he appointed the Apostles
to preach to the Samaritans in the second place; and not to the Gentiles, but
reserved them for a third work, was because there was a greater affinity
between the Jew, and the Samaritan, both in religion, and in place, then was
between Jew and Gentile: and therefore they were more easy to be wrought
upon, more likely to receive the Gospel from the preaching of the Jews, at
the first revealing it to the world. I say, more likely, in consideration of
the principles of their Religion, Ioh. 8.48. Ioh. 4.9.
though perhaps not in regard of their extreme dislike, and disunion in
affection the one from the other.

10. For the province of Samaria was sometimes inhabited by the tribe of
Ephraim, and the half tribe of Manasses, men sprung from the same line, and
trained up in the same religion: but they were rooted out by the Assyrians, who
after the captivity of Assyria sent others to plant a Colonie in that country.
2. Reg. 17.25.
These indeed were Idolaters, and feared not the god of Israel; and yet God so
wrought for them, that they were instructed in the true religion. Look into
the second of Kings 17. And you shall see, how the Lord sent Lions amongst
them, who slew that Idolatrous nation; whereupon complaint being made to the
King of Assyria, he sent them a Priest of the Jews, who instructed them in
the ways of the Lord, and taught them how they ought to f^^re the true God of
Israel.

11. From that Pr^^st they received the Pentateu^ the five books of Mos^^ and
only them; but witha^ they retained their Idols, and worshipped their false
Gods: Moreover, they were strangely corrupted (as Epiphanius and S. Jerome
note) and deeply infected with diverse and dangerous errors by a runne-agate
Jew; Epiphaer. 9. Hieron. cont. Lucifer.
and by this means they were accounted of amongst the Jews, as heretics and
schismatickes are esteemd of amongst Christians: so that the very name of a
Samaritan grew odious and ignominious amongst the Jews, Ioh. 8.4^
in so much that when they thought most to disgrace Christ, they reviled him by
the name of a Samaritan: and such was the intestine hatred between those two
nations, that there might be no commerce, Ioh 4.9.
no acquaintance, no intercourse at al betwixt Jew and Samaritan.

12. Yet by this means, by entertayning the five books of Moses, they became
far more capable and pliable to receive the Gospel, then the Gentiles, who
denied the Pentateuch and all. Being therefore next in place, and not
altogether different in manners and religion, our Savior took order, that
next to the Jews the Gospel should be preached to these Samaritans, who
received it more readily, and cheerfully then the Jews themselves, Act. 1.8.
as appears plainly by the woman of Samariaes discourse concerning the
expected Messiah, Ioh. 4.25.
and the entertainment she gave to Christ: as also by that Samaritan leper,
Luc. 17.18.
who often that were cleansed, was the only man that glorified God, and
returned to give thanks to his and our Savior.

13. Now when the Apostles, after the descending of the holy Ghost upon them,
had stayed so long in Jerusalem, and had preached the Gospel so long unto the
Jews, as our Savior had appointed them, presently after the Martyrdom of
that Proto-martyr St. Stephen, (whose death God turned to a blessed purpose,
even to the dispersion of the Apostles, and Disciples into all other Nations)
they first sent Philip one of the seven Deacons (as S. Cyprian notes) to
preach to the Samaritans, Act. 8.1. Cypr. Epist. 73 ad Iubaian.
and to baptize them, before the Apostles thought it lawful to preach to the
Gentiles, Act. 11.1.
as may be seen Act. 11. And no sooner had Philip performed his office, but S.
Peter and S. John followed after to confirm them.

14. Thus we find Confirmation to be of a more ancient standing, then
preaching to the Gentiles: and to have set footing in the Church of Christ, if
not with, yet presently after the Sacrament of Baptism.

15 In the second chapter of this Book we read the first practice of Christian
Baptism, after Christ's ascension; Tertul. de Pudi^itia c. 11.
for (as Tertul. says) Petrus primus in Christi baptismo reserauit aditum
coelestis regni, S. Peter was the first of the Apostles, that by Baptism made
entrance, and opened (as it were) the passage to the kingdom of heaven: for
there in that chapter, presently after that notable Sermon of his, diverse were
baptized by him, and put in hope of receiving the holy Ghost and his gifts, as
the Apostles had received them on the day of Pentecost. Be you baptized (says
S. Peter) in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye
shall receive the Holy Ghost. Act. 2.38


16 These last words are not to be understood of the gifts of the Holy Ghost,
which are bestowed in Baptism, though they follow after remission of sins,
the propper effect of Baptism, as Calvin teaches Who in that place (upon
these words, Et accipietis donum Spiritus sancti, and you shall receive the
gift of the Holy Ghost) tells us, Calvin. in Act. Apost. 2.38.
that because the auditors of Saint Peter were touched with admiration, when
they saw the Apostles speak suddenly with other tongues, Petrus eiusdem doni
ipsos fore compotes dicit, si ad Christum transierint, Saint Peter says, that
they also shall become partakers of the same gifts of the Spirit, if they will
turn to Christ, and become Christians: The chief gifts indeed (says Calvin)
were remission of sins, and newness of life (which belong to Baptism there
mentioned) but that promise, Et accipietis donum Spiritus sancti, and you shall
receive the Holy Ghost, erat velut accessio, vt Christus aliquo dono visibili
suam in illis virtute^ exercret, it was (as it were) an addition to the grace
in Baptism, that so Christ might manifest his power in them by some visible
sign.

17 So then (as Calvin concludes) this place is not to be understood of the
grace of sanctification, which is generally given to all the faithful in
Baptism; but of another gift of the Holy Ghost, whereof a specimen or token
was then given in the diversity of tongues. Ideo hoc proprie ad nos spectat,
therefore does this promise properly belong to us, says Calvin. For though the
Holy Ghost is not bestowed upon us, that we may speak with tongs, that we may
prophecy, that we may cure the sick, and work miracles: Ibid.
yet is he given us for a better end, that with the heart we may believe to
justification, that our tongues may make a good confession, that we may pass
from death to life; that we may stand invincible against the world and the
devil. Thus far Calvin upon those words, wherein Saint Peter makes promise
of a farther gift of the Holy Ghost to all those, that would be baptized, as a
means to draw them to be baptized; and here we see the actual performance of
that promise, for the baptized Samaritans received (says my text) the Holy
Ghost, and that by the ministry of S. Peter and Saint John, who were sent from
Jerusalem to Samaria (which was near about thirty miles) that they might pray
for the baptized Samaritans, and lay their hands upon them, that so they might
receive the Holy Ghost.

18. Neither was this done at that time only, and there an end of it; but the
same order which was here taken by Saint Peter and Saint John, Saint Paul
observed, Act. 19.5. and 6.
Act. 19. First he baptized the Ephesians, ver. 5. and then he confirmed them,
ver. 6. He laid his hands upon them, and the Holy Ghost came down upon them.
From their example the Church learned this practice, and has continued it to
these days, as may be seen by the whole course of Ecclesiastical writers.

Bucolceri Chronol.
19 Saint Clement (Bishop of Rome the ninety fourth year after Christ) in the
third of those Epistles which are usually ascribed unto him (though perhaps not
his, Clem. Epist. 3. Iu^to and Iuliano Episcop:
yet very ancient) wishes every man sine mora renasci Deo, and demum
consignari ab Episcopo to be baptized out of hand, and then to ^^^ confirmed by
the Bishop: and he gives his reasons for it. Because (says he) we are
uncertain of life; and adds, This phrase is explained ^ 28.29. and 89.
that unless each of us be Confirmed by the Bishop) with the seuen-fold grace
of the holy Spirit, perfectus esse Christianus nequaquampoterit, he cannot
become a perfect Christian. This was the opinion and phrase of that author, who
passes under the name of Clement: but the phrase you shall have explained
hereafter. Tertull, de Baptismo. cap: 3:


20 Tertullian shows the continuance of it in his time, Egressi delauacro,
etc. (says he) When we have ascended out of the bath of regeneration, that is,
when we have been baptized, and those Ceremonies performed, which are used in
baptism, Dehinc shortly after, manus imponitur, per benedictionem aduocans, et
inuitans spiritum sanctum, hands, holy hands, (as he calls them in the same
place) are laid upon us, calling and inuiting the holy Ghost, by blessing us
to come down upon us.

21 In Saint Cyprians age this custom of Confirmation was continued in the
Catholic Church. The Samaritans (says he) were baptized by Saint Philip:
therefore were they not to be rebaptised, hauig received full, lawfull^ and
Ecclesiastical Baptism: but quod desuerat, that which wanted, was performed
by Saint Peter and Saint John. Cypr. Epist. 73. as Iubaianum. The meaning of
this phrase Quod defuerat is manifested, 29.
And what was that? Vtoratione pro eis habita, and manu imposita, inuocaretur,
and infunderetur super eos spiritus sanctus: that by prayer and Imposition of
hands the holy spirit might be inuoked for for them, and infused into them. It
seems then, that imposition of hands was required after Baptism.

22 Neither was this a prerogative peculiar to the Apostles only, or proper to
their times: no, (says that worthy Father) Nunc quoque apud nos geritur, Ibid.
you may see the same practice observed amongst us: they that are baptized in
the Church, are brought again, Vt per Praepositos Ecclesie offerantur, that
they may be offered, or presented to God by the Governors of the Church (he
means the Bishops, whereof he was one) et per nostram orationem, ac manus
impositionem spiritum sanctum consequantur, that by our prayer, and imposition
of hands they may receive the Holy Ghost; and signaculo dominico consummentur,
and be made perfect by the Lords sign; for so they called the sign of the
Cross.

23 Here you may see all the circumstances confirmed, that I derived from this
my text; number them, and you shall find them here. First the Samaritans were
confirmed by Saint Peter and Saint John, says Saint Cyprian: there is the
Antiquity of Confirmation, in his judgment. Secondly. The Ministers of
Confirmation in his time were Praepositi Ecclesiae, the Governors or Bishops of
the Church. Thirdly: The persons capable of Confirmation, qui in Ecclesia
baptizantur, such as are baptized in the Church of Christ. Fourthly: The form
of Confirmation used in Saint Cyprians age, was oratto, ac manus Impositio,
prayer and imposition of hands. Fifthly, By prayer, and Imposition of hands
Spiritum sanctum consequuntur, they receive the Holy Ghost, there is the
effect. And here is one Ceremony more added (as it seems) by the Church,
before Saint Cyprians time, namely, to conclude Confirmation with the sign of
the Cross.

24 A sign so generally received in Saint Austins time, that he makes it a
wonder, if any man should be ignorant of it. Quid est, Aug. tract. 118 in Io,
Euan.
quod omnes nouerunt (says he) signu^ Christi, nisi crux Christi? What is
that, which all the world takes notice of? That sign of Christ, what is it but
the Cross of Christ? And so highly was it esteemed by him, and the holy men of
that age, Ibid.
that he professes, unless it be added sieve frontibus credentium, sieve ipsi
aquae, quare generantur; sieve olco, quo Chrismate vnguntur: unless (says he)
the sign of the Cross be used in Baptism and in Confirmation: nihil eorum
rite perficitur, none of them are rightly performed: that is, according to the
orders and rites of the Church.

25 So Saint Austine. The Cross therefore, upon this or the like
consideration, is enjoined to be used in Confirmation, in the book of Common
Prayer set forth, and allowed in Edward the sixts reign: and I find it not at
any time revoked; but it is left (as it seems) to the Bishops discretion to
use, or not use the Cross in Confirmation.

26. Neither do we deduce the antiquity of this ceremony of the Cross, from
S. Austins, or S. Cyprians age only; but we go higher to the times, wherein
Tertul. and Clemen. Alexand. flourished: Tertullian says, Tertul. de Resur.
carnis.
Caro signatur, Vt and anima muniatur; the body is signed with the Cross (in
confirmation,) that the soul may be fenced against all temptations: and Clem.
Alexand. (as Eusebius notes) observes not only the practice of Confirmation in
S. John time, but withal this Ceremony of the Cross, whereby this Sign
seems also to be Apostolic: for S. John the Apostle having newly constituted
a Bishop in Asia, Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 20.
delivered him a goodly proper young man, (whom he had a great liking to) to
be trained up by him in Christian religion. The Bishop took him, and brought
him up with great care and diligence, (...), and at last he enlightened him;
that is, baptized him. Dionys. Eccles. literar. c. 2.
For the ancient Fathers, and Dionysius call Baptism (...) illumination,
because in Baptism a man is enlightened in the faith of Christ. And this phrase
they seem to borrow from Saint Paul, Hebr. 6 (...), etc. It is impossible,
that they, Heb. 6.4.
who have once been enlightened, that is bapt^zed, Ver. 6.
Rursus renouari ad poenitentiam, should be renewed unto repentance; that is,
(as S. Augustine says) should be baptized again with that Sacrament of
repentance. Aug. de vera and falsa poenitentia. c. 3.

27. Well, the Bishop having thus baptized this young man, committed and
commended to his charge, he had such are over him, he gave him so good, and so
Christian education, that at last he added (...), Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 3. c.
20.
the Seal of the Lord, meaning Confirmation (which was finished with the sign
of the cross) which was (...) as a defense, or safeguard from those powerful
enemies sin and the Devil, (so Chrysostom uses the word) or as an Antidote
against poison, (so Physicians call it:) and (...), the last, Dionys. Eccles.
hierar. c. 3.
the most perfect defense, he could add unto him; which was Confirmation, and
therefore called (...) the perfection of a Christian.

28. Not as though children being baptized were not fully Christians, not so:
Common prayer. book
for (as our Common Prayer book saves well) Children being baptized, have all
things necessary for their salvation, and be undoubtedly saved; yet shall we
find a different perfection in Confirmation, from that perfection, which we
receive in Baptism. Baptismus perficit in suo genere, true it is, that
Baptism perfits in his own kind, but Confirmation in another kind. Will you
see the difference? The holy Ghost at the font plenitudinem tribuit ad
innocentium, Tho 3. q. 72. 1. c ex Melchiade. P. can. 2. de consecr. did. 5.
gives us innocence at full, but in Confirmation Augmentum praestat ad
gratiam, he grants us an increase in grace: in Baptism regeneramur ad vitam,
we are regenerated to life, but by Imposition of hands, Confirmamur ad p^gnam,
we are strengthened to fight the Lords battles. So then these things, which
are of the substance of a Christian are not given in Confirmation, but in
Baptism; for in Baptism we receive those things, quae sunt de planitudine
sufficie^tiae, which are of the fullness of sufficiency, which are fully
sufficient to bring us to salvation: but in Confirmation those things are added
to us, quae sunt de plenitudine abu^dantiae, which are of the fullness of
abundance, Su^rez in 3. Tho. q^^. 12. Disp. 38. Sect. 1.
which make our passage to heaven the more easy: and these ought not to be
accounted simpliciter necessaria, (say the schools) simply necessary to
salvation. And for this cause (it seems) Clem. says, that he, who
carelessely and wilfully omits Confirmation, cannot become a perfect Christian:
and yet he denies not but a man may be a true and just Christian without
Confirmation: both which he is by Baptism. For in Baptism we receive perfect
justification: but in Confirmation our sanctification is in some good measure
augmented, and is daily increased in us more and more by the blessed Eucharist,
and other religious actions.

29 Will you accept of a Simile? An infant newly borne is a man, a perfect man
quoad essentiam, according to essence, but he is not perfect quoad molem in
quantity and stature: neither can an infant perform those actions, which are
required of man, unless age and strength make the addition. I will leave the
aplication to your selves, and tell you Tertullians opinion. He says, that in
Baptism we receive illum Dei spiritum that spirit of God, Tertul. ad. Baptis^.
o. ca. 5.
which Adam received from God in his creation, and lost afterward by his fall.
So then Innocence we receive by Baptism, but with Adam we want the spirit of
Confirmation, and therefore are we easy to be seduced, as he was. Wherefore
a supply is to be made: dehinc (says he) manus imponitur, shortly after
follows Imposition of hands, Ibid e 8.
that thereby receiving strength we may be the better able to withstand the
assaults of the world, the flesh, and the devil: and this is (...), that
perfection, which we receive by and in Confirmation.

30 Neither was this only a matter of practice in in the Apostles times, but
it was an especial point of doctrine also; wherein the Neophyti newborn
Christians were primarily informed even by the Apostles themselves. For there
were in those days (...) some newborn babes, and some of perfect age, 1.
Pet. 2.2. 1. Cor. 2.6.
(...) perfecti; and as there was milk for young Catechists, so was there also
strong meat for the elder professors of religion. Sapientiam loquimur inter
perfectos: it was a rule Saint Paul himself observed, to speak of high
mysteries only to and amongst those, 1. Cor. 2.6.
who are well instructed in Christianity.

31 So then, that every one might be informed in that doctrine, which was
fitting for him, there was in the Apostles times (...) the doctrine of the
beginning of Christ, or (as we now read) The principles of the doctrine of
Christ, that is, a Catechism for those little ones, which contained a brief
summarie of those principles which were necessary for every Christian to
learn. Amongst these principles Confirmation was one, Heb. 6.2.
as is to be seen. Heb 6.

32 Therefore saying aside (says the Apostle) the principles of religion or
Christianity, ad perfectionem feramur, let us go forward to perfection: let
us leave Catechismes, Heb. 6.1.
and haste to matters of a deeper reach, we will entreats of high mysteries, of
Melchisedech, and his Priesthood, and how he was a type of Christ. etc.

33 Now these (...), this Catechism, these principles of this Catechism,
which the Apostle for that present would say aside, are thus reckoned by him.
First, Repentance from dead works. Secondly, Heb. 6.2.
Faith toward God. Thirdly, The doctrine of Baptism. Fourthly, Imposition of
hands, that is, Confirmation. Fifthly, The article of the Resurrection from the
dead. And lastly, the certainty of Eternal Judgment. These were the chief,
the maine points of the Apostles Catechism, and in these chiefly were the
younger sort of those times instructed: English marg. notes.
and therefore the English marginall notes fitly term them the first
principles, the first rudiments of Christian religion, the Catechism, that was
then in use. Whereby we gather, that all these are fundamental points of
religion, every one of them. And (it seems) they were so generally, so
faithfully received, believed, and practiced at that time, that Saint Paul had
no need to incite them to the embracing of these articles.

Heb 6.2. Calvin. Comment^m H^b. cap: 6.2^
34 And that you may not doubt, that Confirmation is meant by imposition of
hands in this place, Calvin plainly tells us, that Vnus hic locus abunde
testatur, huius Ceremoniae originem fluxisse ab Apostolis. This one only place
does fully testify, that this Ceremony (of Confirmation) took his beginning
from the Apostles themselves; which Ceremony (says he) was afterward
superstitiously abused, for they fained it to be a Sacrament.

35 These Articles mentioned Heb. 6. or some such like, Heb. 6 2.
were (no doubt) that (...) that form of doctrine, that manner of Catechizing,
In quam (says S. Paul to the Romans) traditi estis, whereunto you were
delivered, or (as we read) which was delivered to you. Romans 6.17.
It is not (I confess) so proper a phrase in English, or Latin to say, To this
form of doctrine or Catechizing, you were delivered, as, This form of
doctrine was delivered to you: but yet the Apostle expresses it so, (...), in
quam traditi estis: and Catetan observes well, that the Apostle changed the
ordinary phrase ratione mysterij, because of the mystery; for hereby (says
he) is signified, Caiet. in Romans 6:
quod non tam Euangelicae doctrinae forma tradita est hominibus, quam quod
homines traditi sunt formae doctrinae Euangelicae; that, not so much the form
of religion was delivered to men, as that men were delivered to the form of
religion; that so by this means religion might be known to have authority and
power over man, but not man over religion.

36 Now, that Confirmation was reckoned inter initia fidei amongst the
rudiments, and grounds of faith in the Apostles times, and so held, and
practiced in the next succeeding ages, we need not seek far for proof: the
practice may be gathered from my Text; the doctrine, whereon we may settle our
faith, is clearly taught in that Catechism, Heb. 6.2.
Heb. 6. which (it seems) was very early on foot, and in use amongst
Christians. There in the Apostles Catechism it is called fundamentum
impositionis manuum, (and he knew what he spoke) the foundation of Imposition
of hands, as being a fundamental point of religion. Heb. 6.2.
The phrase of the holy Spirit is well worth the marking, (...), the foundation
of Imposition of hands. He then that takes away Confirmation, shakes a
foundation of religion, he remoues one of the ground-stones of our says.

37 In S. Paul's judgment then it is a fundamental point of faith; English
marg. notes.
and as the marginall notes say, one of the first rudiments of our religion:
and it might well be delivered in that (...) to the Romans. Rom.6.17.
For Tertul. relating the faith of the Church of Rome (which in his time was
statu foelix Ecclesia, Tertul. de (...). c. 36
as he calls it, an happy, and blessed Church) tells us, how she believed in God
the Father, God the Son, etc: and then he adds, Aquae signat, Sancto
Spiritu vestit, Eucharistia pascit, she signs with water (in Baptism,)
clothes with the holy Spirit (in Confirmation,) feeds with the blessed
Eucharist (in the Communion,) and then those that are thus armed, thus well
provided, martyrio exhortatur, she exhorts to Martyrdom, and aduersus hanc
institutionem neminem recipit, she receives no man into the Church without
these conditions.

38 Neither was this the doctrine of the Church of Rome only, but it was
common to her with other Churches, Tertul. Ib.
Cum Aphricanis quoque Ecclesijs (says Tertullian) hanc, fidem contessarauit,
all the Churches of Affricke joined with her in this faith, and not only
Affricke, but also Achaia, Macedonia, and Asia.

39 For we may well suppose, that in the Apostles times, and practice,
wheresoever Baptism went before, Confirmation followed after, and where
mention is made of the conversion of the Jews, or Gentiles, and their faith in
Christ Jesus the son of God, there the whole (...), the form of doctrine,
the Apostles Creed, and their Catechism (we spoke of) were believed and
entertained also. For the Eunuch whom S. Philip baptized, said no more (for
ought we read) but this, I believe, that Christ Jesus is the son of God,
Act. 1.37.
and in that profession was presently baptized. Number ergo placet (says S.
Austine) vt hoc solum homines respondeant, August. de Fide and Operibus. c. 9.
and continuo baptizentur? Does this therefore content, and please you? Think
you this sufficient, that men should make this answer only, and be presently
baptized, and yet confess nothing of the Catholic Church, nothing of
remission of sins, and those several articles, which are named in the
Apostles Creed? Well, if this Eunuchs brief answer were sufficient to procure
present Baptism, and license to depart: why do not we take the same course
(says Saint Austine) and in case of necessity, cum ad baptizandum vrget
temporis augustia, when the straitness of time urges us to baptize, why do
not we take away those questions, and interrogations, which we hold necessary
to express at the time of baptism? Why certainly (says Saint Austine) si
Scriptura tacuit, Aug. Ibid.
atque intelligenda admisit caetera, if the Scripture passed if over the rest
in silence, and left them to be understood; then surely, when the Scripture
tells, that Saint Philip baptized the Eunucu, in co intelligi voluit impleta
omnia, in that one word it would have you understand, that all things were
performed, which are requisite to Baptism.

40 In like manner, when we read, that the believers were baptized in every
country, where the Apostles came, we must think, that confirmation followed
after, Aug. Ib.
and the holy Eucharist, etc. quae licet taceantur in Scripturis gratia
breuitatis tamen serie traditionis scimus implenda, which though they be
omitted in Scripture for brevity sake, yet we know by the continual practice
of the Church of Rome, Affricke, Achaia, Macedonia, Tertull. de praeser. c. 36.
and Asia, (as Tertullian notes) that they were to be performed. Hoc est enim
Euangelizare Christum non tantum dicere (aut docere) quae sunt credenda de
Christo, Augale Fide and operibus. c. 9,
sed etiam quae obseruanda ei, qui accedit ad compagem corporis Christi: this
is to preach Christ aright, not only to confess or teach those things, which
are to be believed concerning Christ, but those also, which must be observed,
and performed by every man, that is to be ingrafted into the body of Christ.

41 Thus you see, that wheresoever Saint Peter, S. John, and Saint Paul came,
and consequently the rest of the Apostles, there the doctrine of Confirmation
passed for current. And (which is worth the observation) in all the Fathers
writings Confirmation takes his place next to Baptism, as being ever to
succeed Baptism. This course the Apostles began, and the Fathers followed
their steps, as you have heard out of Tertullian, Cyprian, and Saint Austine,
who ever give confirmation the next place to Baptism.

42 This were sufficient to prove the Antiquity of this Ceremony, or Mystery,
if we were fully persuaded that this were the true and native sense of those
places, which have been cited. But some, who in their church-gouernment admit
no Hierarchy, and so consequently deny the order of Bishops, must not admit of
confirmation, nor of those received interpretations of Scripture, which make
for confirmation. Quibus enim suit propositum al^^er docendi, Tertull de
praeser. c. 38.
eos necessitas coegitaliter disponendi instrumenta doctrinae: they that were
resolved not to admit of Bishops, were of necessity to interpret those places
otherwise, which make for confirmation, because it is a service performable by
Bishops only: and therefore these new Doctors labor and strive to elude the
testimonies and practices of the blessed Apostles, by false and friuoulous
expositions, such as were never heard of till these latter times. Tertull. Ibid.
Sed illic et Scripturarum, et expositionum adulteratio deputanda est, vbi
diuersitas inuenitur doctrinae: but for certain there is the adulterating both
of Scripture, and the expositions of Scripture, where there is a diverse
doctrine from the Apostles, and the primitive times.

43 Behold here a late doctrine, a strange exposition of holy writ. These
expositors tell us, that this Imposition of hands was extraordinary, and given
only to the Apostles, as a gift proper, and peculiars to those times; not for
the increase of grace, or strength of faith, no; but for the gift of tongues,
prophesiying, and such like strange miracles, which were then requisite for the
propagation of the Gospel in the beginning, but soon after ceased, and so the
effect of Imposition of hands (it seems by them) was only gratia gratis data,
and not gratia gratum faciens, a glorious, not a gracious gift. For if these
two gifts be well considered, the former will appear to be chiefly given for
the good of others, in gloriam gratiae, to set forth the glory of that grace,
which came by Christ into the world: and he that has this gift may be a
tinckling Cymball, and no more: but the latter, 1. Cor. 13.1.
that same gratia gratum faciens, that excellent gift is infused into us for
our own good in gratiam gloriae, that so being partakers of grace in this life,
we may be heirs of glory in the life to come: for by this grace the Spirit
bears witness with out spirit, To. 8.6.
that we are the sons of God.

44 But this evasion is repugnant to the true genuine sense of holy Scripture:
for that of Christ to his Apostles, Luc. 24.49.
Luke 24. Sedete in ciuitate, donec induamini virtute ex alto, Tarry in the
city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from above,) did not only,
imply those external and glorious gifts of miracles, tongs prophesiyng, and
the like, which they had ad incrementum Euangelti, for the increase of the
Gospel; but other internal and comfortable graces also of the holy Ghost
which they had infused into them, ad incrementum fidei, and sanctitatis, for
their own peculiar sanctification. Otherwise those external gifts might have
been but fallacious, fruitless symboles, glorious shows, vanishing shadows,
and (the truth is) had little, or nothing avayled themselves.

45 But if we look well into the text, we shall find there, that on the day of
Pentecost, when the Apostles received those goodly miraculous gifts,
simulinduebantur virtute ex alto, they were also endued with power from above,
not only that they might speak with tongs, sed vt loquerentur linguis
magnalia Dei, but that they might speak the wonderful works of God: Act. 2
11.
nor that only, to edify others, and to be as bells to tole others to Church,
and be nere the better themselves: but so to confirm, and strengthen them in
their own particulars, vt cum fiducia loquerentur verbu^ Dei, Act 4.31. and, 33.
and vt virtute magna redderent testimonium resurrectionis Christi, that they
might speak the word of God boldly, and with great power bear witness of the
resurrection of Christ. Before they were orphani (as our Savior terms them)
orphans, comfortless, fearful orphans: Ioh. 14.18. Mat. 26.70.
S. Peter denied his master to silly maid; but being once confimed by this
Comforter, having received the holy Ghost, they become potentes ad praelium,
mighty in the battles of the Lord, the worthies of Christ, 1. Cor. 4.9.
the wonder of the world; men and Angels stand amazed at their constancy and
courage. So then they received not only outward, but inward gifts and graces
also, by the descent of the holy Ghost upon them.

46 As for those external gifts of the H. Ghost, though they have long since
ceased, and are not now conferd by imposition of hands, yet they continued in
Irenaeus time, Iren. 12 c 5.
as himself witnesses; (and he lived 178 years after Christ and we find not any
where, Bucol. Chron.
that those miraculous gifts were conferred by any, save only Bishops, the
Apostles successors for a time even in that power.

Aug. cont. Donat l. 3. c. 16.
47 But howeuer those wonderful gifts, and miraculous graces are now abolished,
yet the inward gifts of sanctification, of fortitude, of love, and charity,
are at this day continued in the Church, by the ministry of Bishops in
Confirmation. So Saint Austine.

Ber ser. 1. in Pentecost
48 And a long time after him Saint Bernard speaking of those two distinct
graces of the holy Ghost, tells us concerning the former, that Nobis illa
manifestatio potius, quam Apostolis facta est, the gift of tongues, prophesing,
etc. was rather for our good, then the Apostles benefit; they took the pains,
we reap the profit: but there was (says he) another manifestation of the
spirit in cis in them, which concerned themselves most, et haec vsque body fit
in nobis, and this latter at these days is wrought in us.

49 Some there are, (I know) that make question, whether by Imposition of hands
we receive the holy Ghost, seeing we receive not those external gifts of the
holy Ghost. But Saint Austine takes up such questionists very roundly. Aug.
tract 6. in Epist. Ioh.
Numquid (says he) quia miracula non edunt, what, because they work no
miracles, because they speak not with tongs, because they prophecy not, ita
peruerso cord aliquis vestru^fuit, is any man amongst you of so perverse a
disposition, so froward a spirit, so incredulous, that he dare affirm, that
these confirmed christians have not received the holy Ghost? Will thou know
certainly, whether thou have received the holy Ghost or no? Aug. Ib.
Interroga cor tuum (says that worthy Father) look into thy heart, ask thy
soul and conscience, and that will tell thee, if perchance thou have received
Confirmation, and not the benefit of Confirmation: for it is in this holy rite,
as in the blessed Eucharist, Recipitur ad modum recipientis, it is received, as
the receiver is disposed, whether well or ill. Receive it therefore
cheerfully, reverently, and thankfully, and without all doubt, you shall be
endued with power from above, which shall help you forward in the way of
salvation.

50 This S. Austine makes evident against the Donatists; for he shows the^,
that there are three things to be observed in confirmation. One is the
Sacrament it self; Aug de Bapt. cont. Donat. l. 3. c. 16. Aug de Doct. Christ.
l. 3. c. 9. Aug. Epist. 118 ad lanuar. Hook, Eccl. po. l. 5.. 66
as he calls it ( a Sacrament not of that excellency, as to be ranked with the
blessed Eucharist, and Baptism, as is to be seen in his 3. book de doct.
Christ. and in his 118. Ep. but as M. Hooker terms it, a Sacramental
complement) which Sacramental complement (says S. Austine) etiam Simon Magus
habere potuit, Simo^ Magus might have had for he was baptized. The 2. is
operatio quaedam spiritus a certain kind of operation of the, same Spirit,
wrought by imposition of hands, quae in malis hominibus etiam fieri solet,
which was usual even in bad men; as the gift of prophecy, 1. Reg. 10.
which king Saul had even at that time, when he persecuted David: and those
gifts of miracles, which Simon Magus would have bought for money, Act. 8.18.
and are now ceased. The third is operatio eiusdem spiritus, the high
operation, even the gifts and graces of the same spirit, to strengthen and
confirm Christians in the true faith; to maintain and increase love and
charity amongst professed, and believing Christians.

51 Of the first all Christians are capable, that is, of Confirmation, both
then, and ever since: of the second, viz. the operatione of miracles, all were
capable, both good and bad in those days, Aug de Bap con. Dona l. 3. c. 16.
as it pleased the spirit to dispose those gifts: of the third, that is, the
good and blessed work of unity and charity, and the increase of grace,
neither heretic nor schismaticke is capable; but only those, who live
quietly and peaceably in the Catholic Church.

52. Hereby it appears first; that not only those external gifts of
miracles, tongues, etc. were given by Imposition of hands: but the external
graces also of the holy Ghost, who promised to continue with the Church to the
end of the world. Ioh. 14.16.
For when our blessed Savior made that promise of sending the holy Spirit, he
not only said, I will pray the Father, and he shall send you another a
co^forter: (...). 16.1.17 10
but he makes the same prayer, (...) for his Apostles and Disciples, who were
then present, and generally for all those, that should believe in his name
through the Apostles, and Disciples preaching. And Saint Peter prophetically
(before he knew it belonged unto the Gentiles) expounds this promise to be made
to you (Jews) and to your children, and to all that are a far off, even as
many, as the Lord our God should call. And this could not possibly hold true,
if it were only spoke of these glorious gifts, which are manifest to the
outward eye, and are now ceased.

53. Secondly, That this promise of the holy Ghost made by our Savior, aimed
not merely ad gratias gratis datas, at the external miraculous gifts; but
chiefly ad gratiam sanctificantem at that invisible sanctifying grace, witness
our Savior himself, Expedit vobis, vt ego vadam, John 16. It is expedient for
you, that I leave you; for if I depart not from you, Ioh. 16.17.
that Comforter will not come unto you; but if I go, then will I send him to
you. Now if the holy Ghost were not given ad corroborandum, et sanctificandum,
to confirm their faith, and sanctify their conversation, then might these
gifts serve rather ad inflandum, to puff them up by miracles, tongues,
prophesying, etc. which would sooner breed a conceit of glory, then any
increase of grace; and are more for the behoof of others, then the receivers
benefits; as I noted before out of Saint Bernard. Ber. Ser. 1. in Pentecost.
And then were not those gifts of so great worth, that they should be preferred
before the corporal presence of our blessed Savior; unless it were by Simon
Magus or some such vainglorious hypocrite.

54 Thirdly, those miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost were not common alike to
all believers, but the Spirit distributed them at his pleasure, as he thought
best, ad dilatanda Ecclesiae primordia, for the good of the Church, and
increase of Christianity: Aug. de Bap. cont. Donat. l. 3. c. 16.
but this gift (we now treat of) was given to all the faithful by Imposition
of the Apostles hands: for the Apostles laid their hands upon those that were
baptized. Act 8 17. Act 19.6.
Acts 8. and Acts 19. both Samaritans, and Ephesians, and all these received
the holy Ghost; yet all wrought not miracles: So S. Paul. 1. Cor. 12. Are al
Apostles? are all Prophets? 1. Cor. 12.29.
are all teachers? are al workers of miracles? Have all the gifts of healing?
Lyra in locum 4.
do all speak with ^ongs? do all interpret? As if he should say, no, they do
not. So Lyra.

55. Fourthly, when the Apostle reckons imposition of hands amongst the
principles of Christian religion, Heb. 6.2.
and those fundamental points of faith, wherein the younger sort was, and is to
be trained up, it cannot possibly be imagined, that it belongs only to those
visible, and miraculous signs (for then were it no fundamental point of
religion, and to what end should children be instructed in it?) but it belongs
rather (as Saint Ambrose notes) ad confirmationem vnitatis in Ecclesia Christi,
Ambros. in Heb. 6.
to the confirming of unity in the Church of Christ, Au^. q^aest 44. i^. Non.
Test.
and this (says he) post baptismum a Pontificibus fieri solet, was usually
done after (not before) baptism, by the Bishops; and only by the Bishops,
says S. Austine.

56. Finally, it is a reason sufficient to prove, that Imposition of hands
wrought not wonders only, because what the Apostles did here to the
Samaritans, the same form of blessing has ever since continued in the Church:
and the effect, the blessing it self has (I doubt not) been derived to us by
the Bishops, and only by the Bishops, the Apostles only successors in this
office: Melch. Can. 3. de consecr. Did 5. L^^ Epist. 37. Dom Episc. Rauenna c.
2.
for which cause it was named heretofore Manus impositio Episcoporum, and
Episcopalis manuum impositio, as at this day it is called Bishopping with us,
showing by the very name, that our ancients held it the proper, and peculiar
office of the Bishop. Optatus therefore proving that Macharius was no Bishop,
brings this for a maine argument, Optat. Mileuit. ^^ht. P^^m. l. 7
Nec in of ficio Episcopali versatus est, nec manum alicutamposuit, he
performed not the office of a Bishop, he used not imposition of hands, and
therefore he was no Bishop.

57 The Apostles only did it in their times, not the Disciples, not Deacons,
not Philip, no (says Saint Chrysostom) he might not do it: neque enim
facultatem habetat, Chrysostom, hom. 18 in Act. Apost.
for he had no such power, no such authority, but Saint Peter and Saint John
(who were Apostles) they might they did confirm: Chryso. Ibid.
Hoc enim donum (says Chrysostom) solorum Apostolorum erat, this gift
belonged to the Apostles only: and the truth is (as the same Father professes)
Hoc erat in Apostolis singular, this authority was singular in the Apostles:
the Apostles, and only the Apostles could bestow this gift of the holy Ghost in
confirmation; Hier ad Marc-cp. 54. aduersus Montanum. Cypr. ad Iubianum: Epi.
73.
and apud nos (says S. Jerome) Apostolorum locum tenem Episcopt, in Churches
orthodoxe (such as S. Jerome lived in) the Bishops hold the Apostles room: and
therefore S. Cyprian tells us, that the Apostles did that in their days, quod
nu^c geritur, which was practiced in his time, and S. Aust. relating how the
Apostles prayed, and laid their hands on the Samaritans, that the H. ghost
might come down upon the^, ads instantly, Aug. de Trin. l. 15. c 26.
Quem more in suis Praepositis etiam nunc seruat Ecclesia, which is the same
with S. Cyp. naming also the Ministers of this blessing, Praepositos, the
Bishops of the Church. And this is no more then Call. acknowledges in his
Instit. Hic mos olim fuit, this was a custom long since (says Call. Calu.
Instit. l. 4. c. 29. ^ 3.
) that Christians children, when they come to years of discretion, should be
brought before the Bishop to be confirmed: and this he calls solenne^
benedictione^ a solemn benedictio^ and then he brings in that of S. Iero^^,
Hierom. cont. Lucifer. c. 4.
who avowes it to be Apostolicam obseruationem, and Apostolic observation, or
institution: howeuer he seems not very well pleased with that Father for
affirming it.

58 Thus you see, how we have deduced the Antiquity of Confirmation from the
Apostles themselves, and then (...), if from them, sure from God: for every
ordinance Apostolic we take to be the action of the holy Ghost: Calvin.
Instit. l. 1 c 9.. 6.
and by Caluins consent, we are no way to be blamed, so long as we imitate an
example Apostolic: but they are rather to be condemned, who forsake this
holy, and Apostolic Institution. Zanchius therefore speaking of Imposition of
hands, acknwoledgeth, what we all confess, that we have no precept for it,
Zanch. in 4. praecept.
interim (says he) exempla Apostolorum, and veteris Ecclesiae vellem pluris
aestimari, notwithstanding I could wish, that the example of the Apostles, and
of the ancient Church might have better esteem amongst us: immo deberent nobis
esse instar legis diuinae, yea (says he) their examples should be to us as a
divine precept.

59 For continuance of Confirmation in the Church (if I were ambitious in this
kind) I could pass through the Church History, Councels, and Fathers to this
present day: but much has been spoken concerning it already, and I will not
clean tire out your patience, I will only allege two or three notable
instances, which make much for the present purpose.

60 I will begin with Cornelius, who was Bishop of Rome 250. yea^^s after
Christ. This worthy Martyr writing to Fabian Bishop of Antioch, concerning
Nouatus the Puritan heretic, (for Eusebius Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 42*
notes him to be the ringleader of all those, qui mente inflati seipsos puros
esse profitentur, who are the only pure men in their own conceits) reports,
how he was possessed with a Devil (as all heretics are little better) and
being delivered by the exorcists of those times, not long after he fell
dangerously sick; and (to be brief) Baptismi infusionem accepit, etc. he was
baptized, as he lay sick in his bed ((...). Eusebius. Ib.
) if a man may say, that such a fellow were capable of Baptism: but after his
recovery (says Cornelius) he received not those blessings, Quae iuxta
Ecclesiae Canonem consequi oportebat, which he ought to have received
according to the Canons of the Church. And what were they? Obsignationem ab
Episcopo collatam, Eusebius. Ibid:
Confirmation from the Bishop, that he wanted. And then he infers, Quum autem
illa potitus non sit, How this phrase of Cornelius ought to be understood, see.
65. etc. and. 71
quomodo (quaeso) Spiritum Sanctum adeptus est? Since he wanted Confirmation,
by what means did he obtain the Holy Ghost?

61 Out of which words we may gather two notable observations. 1. That by a
Canon of the Church in the more perfect times, Confirmation was appointed to
follow after Baptism, (...) (as Eusebius has it) to be signed and crossed by
the Bishop. 2. That Confirmation was held the ordinary means, whereby we
receive the holy Ghost, ad augmentum, and robur, to the encease, and strength
of faith.

62 But me thinks I hear, some one or other say, Durum est, absurdum ^st,
ferri non potest, this an hard, an absurd saying; and not to be endured: for it
is much prejudicial to Baptism, and seems to derogate from the power of that
Sacrament: and a man may (perchance) now (as some in former times) object
against Confirmation, in behalf (as it were) of Baptism, Eusebius. Emis. hom. in
Pent. ad Populum,
Quid mihi prodest post mysterium baptismatis ministerium confirma^tis? What
profit have I by Imposition of hands? What use is there of Confirmation after
Baptism, and the mysteries of Baptism? Quantum video non totum de font
suscepimus, si post fontem adiectione nout generis indigemus? as far as I
perceive, we have not received our Christendom fully from the font, if after
Baptism we need the addition of some new grace: which (it seems) we do, if
certain graces and gifts of the holy Ghost be ascribed to Confirmation as
proper to it.

63 We confess indeed in Saint Austins phrase, non toleratur, nisi
intelligatur; that phrase of Cornelius is not to be endured, unless it be
rightly understood: let us hear therefore Eusebius Emis. (who lived within the
first five hundred years) and see whether he has given a sufficient
exposition of it, and an answer to this objection. Behold, he tells us, that
this addition of Confirmation does no way derogate from baptism, Emis. hom. in
Pent.
or the virtue of Baptism. Sic enim exigit militaris or do, this course, this
order is observed amongst military men, (and the Church is militant here on
earth) when the General of an army has entertained a fresh Soldier into his
company, ^^n solum signat recepsum, sed etiam armis competentibus inst^^uit
pugnaturum: He does not only sign him with his badge, or colors, but he
furnishes him too with such weapons, as are fitting for a man of arms. So
(says he) to a man, that is signed with Christ's colors, that is baptized
before, Ibid.
benedictio illa that blessing of Confirmation, munitio est, is a guard or
defense, and serves instead of armor against the enemy. Have thou pressed, have
thou signed (says he) a soldier for Gods battles? Give him also those
necessaries, which are requisite for such a service. Is it enough (think you)
for a father to leave his infant child a goodly portion, if he labor not also
to provide him a faithful guardian? Ibid.
Paracletus regeneratis in Christo and consolator, and tutor est: the holy
Ghost (says Emis.) is both a Comforter and a guardian to all those who are
regenerate in Christ Jesus, and these offices he exercises in and by
Confirmation.

64 The holy Ghost therefore bears his part both in Baptism and in
Confirmation; but with diverse effects, Spiritus enim sanctus, qui super aquas
Baptismi salutifero descendit illapsu, Emis. Ibid.
for the holy Ghost (who descends upon the waters of Baptism with a saving
grace) gives fullness of innocence at the Font; but in Confirmation he gives
strength and increase of grace. In Baptism he regenerates us to life; after
Baptism he Confirms, he arms us for the battle. In baptism he does
nourish us, after Baptism in Confirmation he does strengthen us. And so the
blessings of Baptism are sufficient for all those, who are ready to depart
this mortal life: but for them, that live longer, the assistance of
Confirmation is very necessary. Baptism of it self (without Confirmation)
saves them, who are instantly to be received into the peace of heaven; but
confirmation does furnish, and arm all those, who are reserved for the bitter
agonies, and dangerous battles, which are sought in this vale of misery, Ibid.
this world of temptation. But he which after Baptism dies immaculate in the
innocence acquired in Baptism, has his confirmation in death, confirmatur
morte, quia iam non potest peccare post mortem, he is confirmed in death,
because after death he can sin no more. Thus far Emissenus.

65 This was the opinion of those primitive times, and this gave occasion to
Cornelius Bishop of Rome, to say of that heretic Nouatus, who was never
confirmed, Cum illa potitus non sit, etc. since he enjoyed not Confirmation
(that is, would not be confirmed) by what means (think you) did he receive
the holy Ghost (as he is given in confirmation?)

66 For although the effects of the holy Ghost be very admirable, and divine in
Baptism, yet in especial manner the H. Ghost is appropriated to Confirmation.
For in Baptism our regeneration is especially attributed to Christ, by whose
blood we are washed, and cleansed from our sins; but in Confirmation the
especial effects thereof are ascribed to the holy Ghost. Not but that the
whole Trinity works both in the one, and in the other: but that we might the
better distinguish, and discern the diversity of graces, and acknowledge the
distinction of persons, therefore Confirmation is expressed by Imposition of
hands, and giving the holy Ghost, and Baptism by washing (through the blood of
Christ) in in the name of the Father the Son, and the holy Ghost.

67. For (as Gregory Nazianzen notes excellently) when the Son of God (the
second person) had bin conversant amongst us (...) corporally: fit it was also
that the holy Ghost (the third person) should appear unto us (...) in a bodily
shape; Greg. Naz. Orat. in Peut.
and when the Son of God departed from us, then it behooved the holy Ghost to
descend unto us, that so the H. Ghost and his blessed operations might be
known to the world no less, then our Savior was, and his marvelous and worthy
effects, and both distinguished the one from the other; which caused the
Fathers to make difference of the effects in the means and working of our
salvation, ascribing especially the effects of Baptism to Christ, and the
effects of confirmation to the H. ghost, esteeming both convenient, and
requisite, for every Christian, before he be admitted to the holy communion.

68 Euthymius therefore treating upon those words of our Savior ( Si non
abiero, Paracletus non veniet ad vos, Euthym. in Ioh. 16.
etc. Unless I go from you, the Comforter will not come unto you: but if I
depart from you, Ioh. 16.17.
I will send him to you) tells us, that it was decreed by God from al eternity,
that every one of the 3 persons in the Trinity should do something for the
procuring man's salvation: and perform (as it were) a several office every one
of them. The Father sent the son and drew diverse to the son; the Son
taught, redeemed, and set man at liberty: the holy Ghost daily perfits,
confirms and sanctifies man. Suas cuique vices fuisse, Euthym. Ibid.
suum cuique tempus suam quemque egisse personam: In this great business of
our salvation every person had his turn, every one his time, and every one
acted (as it were) his own person. For although the whole Trinity (says
Schlusselburge) does jointly work the redemption of man (as holy Scripture
teaches) tamen cuiusque personae proprietas obseruatur, Schlussel. de Stancar.
p. 52.
yet in this general work the particular propriety of every person is
observed, and the Son only is ordained our Mediator and Redeemer: thus in
like manner, though the grace of Confirmation is wrought in us by the whole
Trinity, yet (we see) the holy Ghost is termed in Scripture our Comforter and
Confirmer. To the one both Scriptures, and Fathers attribute the virtue of
Baptism, to the other the validity of Confirmation: and hence (it may be) it
is, that Saint Luke says, Act. 8.16.
that the holy Ghost was come down on none of the Samaritans, but they were
baptized only in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Whereby he distinguishes
the proper effects both of the Son and of the holy Ghost, attributing the
effects of Baptism to the Son, and the grace of Confirmation to the holy
Ghost: and yet we know by Scripture, that the holy Ghost was, and is given both
in the one, and in the other: and the Samaritans baptism in the name of the
Lord Jesus was not void of the holy Ghost.

69 This diversity of receiving the holy Ghost in Baptism and in
Confirmation, Tertullian observes, and distinguishes in this manner. In
Baptism (says he) Recipit quis illum Dei spiritum, etc. man receives that
Spirit of God, Tertul. de Bapt. c. 5.
which in the creation he received from the breath of God, but lost afterward
by his fall. Non quod in aquis (says Tertullian) Spiritum sanctum consequamur,
sed in aqua emundati, Ibid. c 6.
sub Angelo spiritui sancto praeparamur: not that we receive the holy Ghost in
the waters of Baptism, but being cleansed by water, we are prepared by the
Angel to receive the holy Ghost. He has reference to the Angel in the poole
of Bethesda, Ibid c. 5.
which was a type of our Christian Baptism; as he notes before.

70 After this, speaking of confirmation, he says, Dehinc manus imponitur,
per benedictionem aduocans, Ibid. c. 8.
et inuitans spiritum sanctum, after Baptism follows Imposition of hands
(that is, Confirmation) by benediction, and blessing us, calling and inuiting
the holy Ghost to come down upon us: and then expressing the manner by a
pretty simile of some wind and water instruments (but to me as yet somewhat
obscure) he concludes the point with this question: Ibid.
Non licebit Deo in suo organo per manus sanctas sublimitatem modulari
spiritalem? Is it not lawful for God to modulate, or tune in man (who is his
own organ or instrument) an high and spiritual note by Imposition of holy
hands? He means the gifts of the holy Ghost, which are given in a sublime and
high measure in Confirmation.

71 We must not conceive either by those words of Cornelius concerning Nouatus,
Eusebius hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 42.
( Cum obsignatione ab Episcopo non sit potitus, etc. since the Bishop never
confirmed him, how could he receive the holy Ghost?) or by these of Tertullian,
Tertu^. de Baptist c* 6.
( Non in aquis spiritum sanctu^ consequimur, we receive not the holy Ghost in
Baptism) that the presence, power, or effects of the H. Ghost are secluded
from Baptism; (God forbid, we should think so;) but we must consider, that
in these, and the like words of those reverend Fathers, there is only a
diversity noted of the operations of the holy Spirit: which (as they thought)
were more obseruable in confirmation, confirmation adding a farther degree of
grace to the grace received in Baptism. This is plain by certain passages of
Tertul. for he calls the waters of Baptism, pristinam sedem spiritus sancti,
the ancient seat of the he holy Ghost, as may be seen in the same book: Ibid.
c. 8.
where he says, Tunc then, that is, in confirmation after baptism, ille
sanctissimus spiritus super emundata, et benedicta corpora libens a patre
descendit, the most H. spirit descends willingly from the Father upon those
cleansed, and blessed bodies by baptism, et super baptismi aquas, tanqua^
pristina^ sede^ recognoscens, conquiescit, and settles himself upon the waters
of baptism (that is) upon the^ that are baptized, acknowledging (as it were)
his ancient and former place. This (though perchance Tertul. had a farther
reference) may be understood as well of these waters of baptism, whereby all
Christians are cleansed, as of the waters of Jordan, wherein Christ was
baptized: for that indeed is priftina seeds the first and ancient seat of the
H. Ghost, which is still continued in the Church of Christ by the waters of
Baptism.

72 Now Caiet. is of opinion, that the H. Ghost descended twice upon our
Savior, Caict. in Euan Ioh. c. 1.
once in Baptism, and once after Baptism, and Barradius says, it had bin a
very probable opinion, Barrad.
so he had brought authority for it out of Scriptures, or Fathers. First
(says Caiet.) the holy Ghost descended upon Christ in or at the time of
baptism. Io. 1. for the coming down of the H. Ghost and resting upon him,
was the token which was given S John, Ioh. 1 32.
whereby he should know Christ sensibiliter et determinate sensibly in
particular, whom before he knew only intelligibiliter et in generali, in his
understanding by some general notions; Caiet. and. Lyra in locum.
that such a one there was amongst the people, he knew before; but which
particular man was he, till now he knew not: and yet it is plain Mat. 3. that
the Baptist knew Christ, when he laid his hands upon him to baptize him; for
Saint John put him back, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, Mat.
3.14.
and come thou to me? By which words it appears evidently, that S. John knew
Christ at the instant of baptising him: and Pererius professes, Perer. in c.
1. Euan Ioh. Disput. 48:
that the Baptist knew not Christ otherwise, then by the holy Ghost lighting
and remaining upon him. The holy Ghost therefore descended visibly upon Christ,
before Saint John knew him to be the Christ; and that descending was in, or at
the time of his Baptism.

73 2. After baptism the H. Ghost descended upon Jesus, as is to be seen in
three former Evangelists, for there it is said, that the holy Ghost came down
upon Jesus, when he was come out of the water, Mat. 3.16. Mar. 1.10. Luc. 3.22.
after he had been baptized, And this latter coming down of the holy Ghost
seems to be instead of confirmation; which is not any new imagination, but is
grounded upon Optatus opinion, who was (in S. Aust. judgment) Venerabilis
memoriae, et Catholicae co^munionis Episcopus, Aug. cont. Ep. Parmen. l. 1. c.
3,
a Bishop of reverend memory, and of the Catholic communion or religion. And
this Catholic Bishop Optatus says, Optat Milcu cont Parm. l. 4
Apertum est coelum D^^ patre vngente, spiritale olcum descendit in imagine
columbae, et insedit capiti eius, et perfudit eum: The heavens opened, God the
Farher annoynting him, Ioh. 1.
the spiritual oil descended in the shape of a Dove, and sat upon his head,
and over sprinkled him, or (if I may so say) ouershadowed him. And then he
adds, Cui ne impositio manus desuisse videretur, Ibid.
vox audita est Dei de nube dicentis, Hic est filius meus de quo been sensi:
lest Imposition of hands should seem to be wanting to Christ, the voice of God
was heard from the cloud, saying: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. Mat. 3.17.
Which voice was heard (according to Caietan) at the second apparition of the
holy Ghost. Which double apparition (it may be) is the same with that of Saint
John, Ioh. 1.
descending, and remaining. Whereby it may seem, that Jesus himself was both
the Author, and partaker of those three great and blessed mysteries, Baptism,
Confirmation, and the holy Eucharist.

74 So then (you see) according to Optatus opinion, Confirmation is not only
more ancient then preaching to the Gentiles (as heretofore has been
manifested) but it has the beginning not long after Baptism, and before
Christ's preaching to the Jews; for he was baptized before he preached; Mat. 4
17.
that's plain.

75 But to return, it is evident also by another place of Tertullian, that he
held, that the holy Ghost was given in Baptism: for disputing against Marcion
he says, first, that Baptism is the Sacrament of Faith. Secondly, The
remission of sin. Thirdly, Tertul. cont. Marcionem. l. 1. c. 38.
the absolution from death. Fourthly, the regeneration of man: and lastly,
Consecutio spiritus sancti, the obtaining of the holy Ghost. Hereby it
appears, that Tertullian verily believed, that the holy Ghost was first gotten
in, or given by Baptism: whose operation though it were auayleable in
Baptism, yet in Confirmation it was held more effectual for some other ends,
Tert. de Baptis. cap. 8.
sublimitatem modulando spiritalem, by stretching forth his gifts to higher
strains.

76 And this high conceit of the fruits and effects of Confirmation so
prevailed in those times, that Saint Cyprian (as it seems) ranked Baptism and
Confirmation in the same order, Cip. Epist 76 ad Steph.
calling them both Sacraments, or mysteries in a large sense, and held them
both necessary for a Christian, if both might be had conveniently: for having
occasion to speak of such, as returned from heresy to the Catholic Church,
and maintaining, that they ought to be rebaptised (which at that time was the
African error) when some other thought it sufficient, to have them confirmed by
Imposition of hands, without rebaptising them: he would not yield unto it, but
said, Tunc demum plene sanctificari, and esse filii Dei possunt, si Sacramento
vtroque nascantur, then may these heretics be fully sanctified, and become the
sons of God, if they be borne again of both the Sacraments (namely of
Baptism, and confirmation:) for he held the Baptism of heretics to be no
Sacrament.

77 The same sentence was delivered by Nemesianus one of the Bishops, who were
present at the Council of Carthage, where this question was ventilated of
rebaptizing heretics: Apud. Cyp. de haeret baptisandis.
Manifestumest (says he) vtroque sacramento debere eos renasci in Ecclesia
Catholicae, It is manifest, that all they, who return from heresy, must be
borne anew of both the Sacraments (meaning Baptism and Confirmation) in the
Catholic church. For, Hooker Eccl. pol. l. 5.. 50.
in the writings of the ancient Fathers, as Master Hooker well observes, all
the articles which are peculiar to Christian faith, all duties of religion
containing that, which sense, or natural reason cannot of it self discern,
are most commonly named Sacraments: and so I understand Sacraments through all
this sermon. For though the Fathers, Bu^^ in Ephesians. 4 tract. Quid sit Ecclesia.
and some late writers call Confirmation a Sacrament, yet it is not a Sacrament
rightly so called, as Baptism, and the Lords Supper are; because there is
wanting verbum et elementu^ ex institutione domini, the word and element set
down by the institution of Christ, which the other two have: and therefore we
term those mysteries (but not properly Sacraments) which have a Ceremony, but
not an element, neither verba formalia express formal words appointed by our
Savior; both which are necessarily required (as Thomas teaches) to a
Sacrament rightly, and properly so called. First, there must be Verba
determinata (says he) positive words determined by Christ, Tho. 3 c. 66. 7. c.
which are (as it were) the form of the Sacrament. Secondly, there must be res
the matter (as it is called) of the Sacrament and that must be determinata,
Ibid 5. c.
such only as has been instituted and enjoined by Christ himself. We
esteem not therefore any other element (though named by the Fathers, and used
in the primitive and Apostolic times) fit to be called a Sacrament, Ib q 72.
1. 1.
when it is consecrated by words of our Savior; for that also must be res
determinata, a determinate matter, or element selected by Christ for that holy
end; in whose power only it is to constitute a Sacrament, and to appoint both
matter and form, that is both word and element; without both which Sacramentum
proprie dictum a Sacrament properly so called cannot stand.

78 This consideration moved some of the more ancient schoolmen (as Cassander
observes) to number only two Sacraments, which they call Sacramenta proprie
dicta, namely, Baptism, and the Lords supper, Cassan, consul. art. 13.
because they two only have verbum and elementum ex diuina institutione
determinata, both word and element ordained by Christ, who is both God and man.
The first, that ever reckoned (says he) upon seven Sacraments, was Peter
Lombard; Ibid.
and since that time the Schoolmen are become iurati in verba magistri, so
wedded, and (as it were) sworn to that fond opinion of the Master of the
Sentences, that they forget their grounds, and contradict their own principles,
as might be showed at large. But (I fear) I have already digressed to much,
Nunc itaque recurrat stylus ad suam materiam, Bern. de consid ad Eugen. l 2. c.
1.
(as sometimes Saint Bernard said) and in eo quo proposueramus, suo tramite
gradiatur oration, let us now therefore return to the matter we had in hand,
and see (as order requires) what reason Saint Cyprian gives for his opinion,
concerning the necessity (which he seems to imply) of Confirmation.

79 The reason he gives, is that saying of our Savior, John 3.5
Nisi quis renatus fuerit, etc. Except a man be borne again of water, and of
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God: which he interprets thus;
Except a man be borne again of water (in Baptism,) and by the Spirit, or the
holy Ghost, (in Confirmation) he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. This
sense seems to have been received in those times, and continued long after in
the Church of Christ; for you may read the same interpretation in a sermon of
Eusebius. E^^s. ^^n. in do (...) Post Me^^s,
Emis. who lived about 200. years after S. Cyprian.

80 And S. Aust. proving against the Nouatians; that S. Peter was baptized,
seems to favor the same interpretation: for he says, that S. Peter and the
rest of the Apostles were baptized before the time, that S. Peter denied his
Mr. but nondum confirmati, A^ Epist 1^^ (...).
etc. they were not as yet confirmed by the holy Ghost, who appeared unto them
on the day of Pentecost; neither were they confirmed by that inspiration of our
Savior, when he breathed on them, saying, Receive the holy Ghost: Vnde recte
dici potest, (...). 12.
from whence (says S. Austine) we may safely conclude, that when S. Peter
denied his Mr, Nondum fuerant Apostoli baptizati, non tamen aqua, sed spiritu
sancto, the Apostles were not then baptized; baptized they were with water, but
they were not baptized with the holy Ghost, (that is, Confirmed) And yet S.
Austine is of opinion, that the Apostles were baptized with the baptism of
Christ. A. ^. Ib.


81 This exposition of S. Cyprian (upon those words of our Savior, Nisi quis
renatu, fuerit, etc. though it be not now commonly received, is far more
probable, and much more agreeable to the Analogy of faith, Cip. Epist 76 ad
Steph.
and practice of the first Church, then that late construction of some
Nouelists; who take water in that sentence of our Savior by a Metaphor, or
borrowed speech for the spirit of God, the effect whereof (say they) it shadows
out; so that, as by water and the spirit some understand Baptism only, these
men understand not baptism, but the Spirit of God only, which cleanses the
filth of sin, T. C. l. 1. p. 143
and cools the boiling heat of an unquiet conscience, as water washes the
thing that is foul, and quenches the heat of the fire. So Cartwr. that he
may discredit the use, and necessity of private Baptism. But we hold it for
an infallible rule in exposition of Scripture, Hooker Eccles. pos l. 5.. 59,
that where a litterall construction will stand, the farthest from the letter
is commonly the worst. And those Fathers had for their defense the phrase of
Scripture, which under the name of water only (without adding the Spirit)
sometimes signifies the Sacrament of Baptism; Ioh. 3.5.
as when we are said to be borne anew, and that (...) even of water: for S.
Paul teaches us, Ephesians: 5.26,
that God by water does purify, and cleanse his Church, (...) purging with
water by the word: viz. In the name of the Father, the Son, and the H. Ghost.
But they had most especially these words of Saint Peter for their warrant,
Repent and be baptized, etc. for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive
the gift of the holy Ghost. Act. 2.38.
Where by the word Baptized is signified the Sacrament of baptism; by Remission
of sins justifying grace: and by the gift of the holy Ghost Confirmation is
meant; or some such gift, or gifts, as were given at the Pentecost, and were
received post baptismum per manus Impositionem, Caiet. in locum
(as Caietan notes) after baptism by Imposition of hands: which place seems
to be parallel with that John 3.5. but yet that usual interpretation of those
words of our Savior (Nisi quis renatus fuerit, etc.) is most Catholic which
expounds it of Baptism only: where in is both water, as a duty required on
our parts, and the spirit as a gift, which God bestows for his part on all
those, that are baptized. This latter exposition is generally received, and
constantly embraced by the whole Church: and that interpretation of Saint
Cyprian, which seems to imply, that Confirmation is necessary to salvation, is
thus mollified by the Schools.

82 Confirmation (say they) is necessary, quia sine ea non habetur finis ita
conuenienter, Tho. 3. q. 65. 4 c.
because we cannot attain our proposed end, which is eternal life, so
conveniently without it. Others tells us, that it is not simpliciter necessaria
simply necessary: Suarez. in 3. ^ho. c. ^. 1. co^, 8 ib. in 12. E^up. 38. lect.
1
but yet it is necessaria ad melius esse necessary for our better being in
Christianity, that is, valde vtilis est ad salutem, and ad perseuerandum in
fide, Confirmation is very commodious to make us persevere in the true faith,
and very profitable to further our salvation. Some other again say, that
Confirmation is of necessity in this sense to salvation, (...) 12. Mat. ^. 7.
18.
Non quod per illud conferatur aliquid, sine quo non sit aditus ad
vitamaeternam, not that any thing is bestowed in and by Confirmation, without
which the entrance is barred to eternal life: for that grace is already
conferred in Baptism, quae facit dignos vita aeterna, which makes us worthy of
the kingdom of heaven; sed est necessitatis, id est, necessarium est, vt non
contemnatur, quia si contemnitur, non est aditus ad vitamaeternam: but though
Confirmation be not of necessity in that sense, yet it is so necessary, that
it may not be contemned, for if we contemn it, contempt will cut off our
passage to everlasting bliss. Some such sense as this our Church entertaineth,
which requires Confirmation to be had, before we receive the holy Eucharist,
according to the custom of the Primitive times: which custom being joined
with the law of our Church makes the practice thereof necessary, and the
contempt very dangerous: for, as Saint Bernard says, Contemptus in omne specie
mandatorum paripondere grauis, and communiter damnabilis est, De Praecep. and
Dispen, c: 12.
Contempt in all kind of precepts (whether they be the precepts of God or
man, says he, whether they be fixed or mutable) is alike weighty, and commonly
damnable. He speaks of all such precepts, as are not contrary to the word of
God: and though he holds the contempt of these constitutions to be damnable,
yet he esteems the neglect to be but culpable: and his reason is, Ibid. c. 14.
because neglect proceeds often times from ignorance, or weakness, but the other
aut odiosae pertinaciae est, aut contumaciae non ferendae, contempt breaks
forth either from odious pertinacie, or intolerable contumacie: and then
(says he) non peccati species, sed peccantis intentiopensatur, the offense it
self is not so much to be regarded, as the intent of the offender to be
respected. Shortly after concluding this point, he resolves thus, Si volumus,
and non possumus, securi sumus; si possumus, et nolumus, Ib. c. 15.
superbi sumus; If we would perform those duties, which are required at our
hands, and cannot, our desire secures us; but if we can, and will not, we are
proud: and you know how dangerous pride is by the fall of Lucifer.

83 And that the holy Ghost may be given in diverse measure, and to diverse
purposes: first, in Baptism: Secondly, in Confirmation: and thirdly, at taking
of Orders, may appear by the diverse manner, and measure, and seasons, and
ends, wherein, and whereto the Apostles received the holy Ghost. Greg. Nazian.
says, that the holy Ghost was given to the Apostles three sundry times, Greg
Naz. orat. in Pent.
and withal in three sundry measures: 1. Before Christ's passion. 2. After his
resurrection; and lastly, after his ascension.

84 1. Before the passion, when our Savior gave them power to cure diseases,
and to cast out Devils, which they performed (...) (says Nazian. Ibid.
) not without assistance of the holy Spirit. Or else he was given them (as some
think) in their Baptism; which appears by that of our Savior, who said to
his Apostles, Io. 13.10:
Qui lotus est, etc. He that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet, but
is clean every whit: for so S. Austine understands that text, Aug. Epist. 108.
ad Seleuc.
viz. of the holy Ghost cleansing the Apostles by Baptism.

85. 2. After his resurrection, when he breathed on them, Ioh. 20.22.
and said unto them, Receive the holy Ghost: at which time he sanctified
them, but did not perfect them. Thirdly, After his ascension in the Pentecost,
when that promise of Christ was fulfilled, which he made Act. 1. (ye shall
receive virtutem superuenient is spiritus sancti, the power of the holy Ghost,
which shall come on you) which is understood not only of the gift of miracles,
and tongues, Leo epist. 37 c. 2. Leoni Epis. Raven.
but of other gifts and virtues especially, which are given in Confirmation:
for Leo says, Per Episcopalem manuum impositionem virtus spiritus confertur,
the virtue or power of the spirit is conferred by Episcopal imposition of
hands, that is, in Confirmation.

86 The first of these times (says Nazian. Greg. Naz. Orat. in Pentec-
) (...) the holy Ghost was but (...) obscurely in the Apostles, at the second
time (...) more expressly, more manifestly: but in the third time (...) more
perfectly: for now he was not only (...) present in in them by his efficacy,
and power as he was before, but (...) essentially: which he himself
excellently expesseth in this manner, (...), as if a man should say, that the
holy Ghost was conversant with the Apostles as a familiar acquaintance, and
that he joined with them in governing the state of the Church.

87 And as Nazianzen, so Saint Austine also acknowledges a threefold manner,
and measure in imparting the holy Ghost to the Apostles: one manner was
inuisibly at their Baptism, as he is now given to us: but the other two were
visibly, and manifestly: Manifestam enim impertionem spiritus sancti (says
Saint Austine) non semel sed bis numero Dominus egit, Aug. tract. 14. in Euan.
Johan.
the Lord wrought the manifest bestowing of the holy Ghost, not once only, but
twice, at two several times: once when he breathed upon them after his
resurrection: which (as some say) was only visibili modo after a visible
manner: but the other, at the Pentecost, was visibiliter, in a visible form:
for the holy Ghost was seen to descend upon them visibly in cloven tongues.

88 And to these sundry manners, were joined sundry measures of imparting the
holy Ghost, and therefore a man may say very truly (distinguishing the times,
and measures) that the Apostles had the holy Ghost (when they were baptized),
and yet they had not the holy Ghost, before our Savior breathed on them (after
his resurrection) quia quantum habendus fuerat (says Saint Austine) nondum
habebant, because they had him not as yet in that measure, as they were to have
him. Habebant itaque minus, dandus erateis amplius they had him indeed in a
less manner, Aug. Ibid.
but he was to be given them in a larger measure: habebant occulte, accepturi
erant manifest; they had him hiddenly, but they were to receive him
minifestly: for that was one gift of the holy Ghost, to make it manifest unto
the^, that they had the H. Ghost: and thefore the H. Ghost was promised, not
only to them, that had him not, but to those also, Ibid.
that had him already, and that non incassum not in vain; non habenti quidem
vt habeatur, habenti autem, vt amplius habeatur, to him that has not the holy
Ghost, that he may have him; and to him that has, that he may have the holy
spirit in a greater measure: thus in baptism the holy Ghost is given to him,
that has him not, that so he may have him: but in Confirmation he is given to
him, that has him already, that he may have him more.

89 For except there were diverse measures of receiving the holy Ghost, the
Prophet Elizeus would not have said, spiritus, qui in te est, duplex sit in
me, 2. Reg. 2.9.
let the spirit, which is in thee, be double in me. Ioh. 3.34.
When Saint John Baptist said, God gives not the Spirit by measure, he spoke
it of the Son of God, to whom the spirit was not given in any measure,
coloss. 2.9:
because in him all the fullness of the Deity inhabited. But to all other the
holy Ghost is given in a certain measure, and after he is once given, is added
again, and does superuenire come again upon them in confirmation, as he did
superuenire come again upon the Apostles, when Christ breathed upon them: and
again at the Pentecost. Thus is he given again and again, Aug. tract. 74 in
Euang. John
and added unto us, donec vnicuique pro modo suae perfectionis propria me^sura
compleatur, until every man's proper measure be filled, according to the
manner of his perfection; and therefore when we say, that confirmation is
(...), or that it gives us perfection, we mean not absolute perfection, but
such a perfection, as we are capable of; To. 12:3:
which is after one measure in one, and in a diverse measure in another.
Wherefore the Apostle exhorts us not to think more highly of our selves,
then we ought: but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man
the measure of faith (or of the H Spirit): not that the H. Ghost is parted
amongst us, neque enim ipse diuiditur Spiritus, sed dona per Spiritum, for the
Spirit cannot be divided, but the gifts are divided, or diversely bestowed by
the spirit: and therefore the same Apostle says; that there are diuisiones
donationum diversity of gifts, 1. Cor. 12.3:
but one spirit only. This is the doctrine of Saint Austine.

90 From this diversity of the gifts, and operations of the holy Ghost in the
same persons, at the participating of several mysteries, the school seems to
have borrowed that acute distinction of three sundry measures of those gifts of
the holy ghost, which are bestowed in the Church of Christ: for (say they)
there is Spiritus sancti Infusio, Rich de S. Vr d^^^. Sermon. de Spirit. S.
Diffusio, Effusio, Infusion, Diffusion, and Effusion of the holy Spirit. 1.
Infusion is, when less liquor is put into a vessel then it will contain:
thus the holy Ghost was infused into the Apostles in Baptism, as namely to the
making of them clean both from original, and all former actual sins. 2.
Diffusion is, when liquor is powered in so long, till no part of the vessel be
left empty; thus the holy Ghost was diffused into the Apostles after Christ's
resurrection, Ioh. 20.23.
when he breathed upon them and filled them as full (if I may so say) of the
Spirit of God, as they were in the beginning of the Spirit of life: when
besides the remission of their own sins received in Baptism, they could
remit, and retain other men's sins ministerialiter, as the Ministers, and
officers of God ordained for that purpose: Quorum remiseritis peccata (says
Christ) Whosoever sins ye remit, Ioh. 20.23.
they are remitted unto them: and whosoever sins ye retain, they are
retained. 3. Effusion is, when the vessel is so replenished, that it runs
over again, and may serve to be imparted to others. In this manner the Holy
Ghost was effused, Act. 2.
or powered out upon the Apostles at the Pentecost; Tit. 3.6.
(...) (says S. Paul) quem effudit, whom God powered out abundantly upon us;
Caietan. in locum.
tam abunde (says Caietan) vt in alios deriuetur, so abundantly, that they
could ministerially, and by certain effects give him to others too: as when
they not only received the holy Ghost to work miracles, to speak with
tongues, etc. but to give that miraculous power to others likewise by their
ministry; as also those admirable effects, which attend Confirmation, and
Orders, which have ever been given by the Apostles, and the Bishops their
successors, since our Saviors ascension.

91 But to conclude this matter: the holy Ghost is given not only in Baptism,
and after that in Confirmation, etc. but sometimes also before Baptism (so
that it cannot seem to be tied to it) as plainly appears. Act. 10. For when
Cornelius the Centurion, Act. 10.44. and 46.
and his family were fervent with the heat of faith, and believed in God with
all their hearts; the Holy Ghost fell on them, and they praised God with diverse
tongues, and languages; which was before they were baptized by S. Peter: but as
soon as it was evident, that the gift of the Holy Ghost was powered upon them,
Apostolica magisteria, (says Saint Cyprian) the Apostles, Cypr. Epist. 76 ad
Steph.
or the Apostolic magistracy (which are now the Bishops) per omnia diuini
praecepti, atque Euangelij legem seruabant, observed the Evangelical law, Act.
10.48.
and divine precept in all things, both in baptizing, and confirming those
Gentiles. And thus much is spoke by the way (yet much to our purpose) that no
offense may be taken at the saying of Cornelius, who wondered how Nouatus could
have the holy Ghost, Eusebius. hist. Eccles l. 6. c. 42
seeing he was never confirmed by the Bishop.

92 And now Illuc vnde abij, redeo, I return to my proposed course, viz. to
show, that as the use of Confirmation (according to the Church History) was
continued by many particular chief Bishops, so it has been likewise
confirmed by many particular and famous Councels. I will pass over many later,
and instance in one or two of the more ancient: the former is Conciltum
Elebertinum, the Council of Eliberis, which was about the time of the first
Nicene Council. There we read in the 38. Canon Fidelis aliquis, Council.
Eleber. Can. 38.
etc. qui lauacrum suum integrum habet, A Christian, that has perfect Baptism
(I think it means Confirmation after Baptism) posse baptizare in necessitate
infirmitatis positum Catechumenum, may baptize a new convert in case of
necessity: but so that after Baptism, if the party baptized recover, Ad
Episcopum eum perducat, he must bring him to the Bishop. And why so? vt per
manus impositionem perfici possit, that by Imposition of hands he might
receive perfection, as in those days it was called: not that Baptism should
receive perfection thereby, but the baptized; which very phrase the Fathers
sometimes used, as also this Council does in the alleged Canon, and Canon 77.
Si quis Diaconus regens plebem, ^t. Can: 77:
etc. If a Deacon having cure of souls shall baptize any without a Bishop, or
Priest, Episcopus eos per benedictionem perficere debebit, the Bishop must
perfect them by his bl^ssing, that is, by C^nfi^mation.

93 My second instance shall be in the Council of Laodicea, held either in the
time of Liberius, or of Damasus Bishops of Rome: where we read thus, Oportet
baptizatos, etc. Council. Laod. Can. 48.
They who are baptized must receive holy Chrisme, that is, Confirmation, (as
appears by the circumstances of that place) and become partakers of the
kingdom of heaven. Aug. trac. 118: in so. Euang.
This name of Chrisme both Counc^^s, and Fathers give to Confirmation; but we
use neither name, nor element, because we find neither in the book of God.

94 From History, and Councels we descend to Fathers, and in their writings
we find the use, and continuance of Confirmation very frequent, whether we
consult the Greek, or Latin Fathers. We have touched upon diverse of them in
this passage; it shall suffice therefore now to urge a place of Saint Jerome
only, because many of the circumstances fit this present text and occasion.

95 Saint Jerome speaking in the person of a Luciserian, says, An nescis
Ecclesiarum hunc esse morem, Hieron. ad verse. Lucifer: c: 4.
vt baptizatis postea manus imponantur? Know thou not, that it is the
custom of the Church after Baptism to use Imposition of hands, and to inuoke
the H. Spirit for those, that have bin heretofore baptized? Will you have
authority for it? Act: 8: and Act. 19.
Turn over the Acts of the Apostles (says he) there is authority sufficient:
and yet if there were no text of Scripture for it, the consent of the whole
world in this case instar praecepti obtineret, were in stead of a precept, and
sufficient to approve it. And though this were the speech of an heretic
concerning the practice of the Church in those days; yet the Orthodoxe, who
bears the other part in the Dialogue, allows of it, with a Non quidem abnuo,
I deny not, but this is the custom of the Church, that the Bishops ride abroad
to confirm, to Bishop those, who have been heretofore baptized by Priests,
Chemnit. Exam. Council. Trid. l. 2.
and Deacons. And Chemnitius speaking of this custom out of this place of
Saint Jerome, says, that it was absque dubio bona, and vtilis consuetudo,
without all doubt a good and profitable custom. In like manner Cartwr. T. C.
p. 197.
in effect confesses, that Confirmation is very ancient, and that it has
been well instituted; for he says, that it now differs, and is degenerate
from the first institution.

96 This holy Canon, or Custom of the Church has continued inviolable since
the Primitive times until our age, in all Churches, where the Hicrarchie of
Bishops has continued: Theod. haeret. fab. l. 3. in Nouat.
only I find in Theodoret an observation worthy the remembrance. The
Nouatians (the Puritan heretics of those times) used not Confirmation;
Council. Load. Can. 7:
and therefore the Fathers of the Laodicean Council, enacted in their seventh
Canon, that all those Nouatians, who returned to the Church, Symbolum fidei
docerentur, et sancto Chrismate inungerentur, should be taught the Creed, and
then Confirmed, and so admitted to the holy Communion. Howeuer then these
Heretics neglected Confirmation, yet if they returned to the Church, the
Church ever made this Canon good upon them, and confirmed them.

97 If Confirmation have been depraved, if it have received any superstitious
Ceremonies, or additions, from the Church of Rome, we renounce the abuses, and
reform Confirmation (according to Caluins desire) to the first Apostolical
practice, and institution, Calvin. Inst^^: l: 4. c: 19.: 13 and Comment. in
Heb: 6.2.
that is to Prayer and Imposition of hands. For there is no reason, why the
holy, ancient, Ecclesiastical, Apostolical constitutions should utterly be
abolished for some abuses crept in. By this heady preposterous course, the
Church would rather become deformed, then reformed; by this means we should
not have so much as a Sacrament left us.

98 When therefore some one, or other of the Reformed Churches (who have pulled
down the Aristocracie of Bishops, and have erected the Anarchie of a confused
lay-presbyterie, and so consequently cast off the sacred use of Confirmation,
which cannot stand without a Bishop) shall resolutely tell us (whom in this
point, and many other they esteem no better then Papists) etiamsi
vetustissimam hanc esse obseruationem, and multorum saeculorum consensu
firmatam ostendatis, nihil tamen efficitis, though this observation and
practice be never so ancient, though it be confirmed by the consent and
continuance of never so many ages, it is to little or no purpose; then cauete,
take heed I pray you, Aug. tract. 6. in Euang. Iohannis.
and excipite verba contradicentium respuenda, non transglutienda, et
visceribus danda, and entertain these speeches of contradicting Spirits, as
words to be rejected, not to be chewed, much less to be disgested. Do as
Christ did, when they offered him the bitter potion. He tasted it, and spit it
out: so do you, Hear these words, and loath them: and thus (it seems) has
the Reformed Church of Bohemia done. For in that Church after Baptism gratiam,
Harmon. Confess. p. 94.
quam Baptismus complectitur, impositione manuum in ipsis testatam faciunt, the
Governors of the Church testify unto the world by Imposition of hands, the
grace which is given in Baptism: ad militia^ fidei eos confirmant, (mark, I
beseech you) they confirm, strengthen, and arm them for the warfare of faith;
and so in a convenient, and holy manner, by the use of pure, and significant
ceremonies ad Sacramentum coenae domini adducunt, they bring them to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: which is one, and the same practice with the
Church of England; as you may see it expressly set down by way of Canon, or
Constitution in the Book of Common Prayer: where we read, that None shall
be admitted to the holy Communion, Common prayer book.
until such time, as he can say the Catechism, and be confirmed. This is the
constitution of the Church of England (I say) and confirmed by Act of
Parliament with the rest of the Book, and stands in full force still, if it
should please our Prelates to exact it. If you require Antiquity for it, we
shall find this Canon as ancient as Saint Austine; for he tells us, that this
was dogma Ecclesiasticum, an Ecclesiastical Canon in his time, Manus
impositione, Aug. de Eccles. dogmat, (...).
and Chrismate communiti, Eucharistiae mysterijs admittantur: Let those, who
are confirmed by Imposition of hands, be admitted to receive the blessed
Eucharist. And this Canon we have seen approved, Council. Laod, Can. 7.
and confirmed by the Council of Laodicea.

99 So then neither we, nor this Reformed Church of Bohemia borrow this
practice of Confirmation (as some falsely give forth) from the Papists, or
Popish decretalls, no; T. C. l. 1. p. 199
but as our Communion Book truly says, Common prayer Book.
It is agreeable with the usage of the Church in times past. This was the
custom of the old, the Primitive Church, Tertul aduers. valent. c. 4.
E^^lesia authenticae regulae sic tenuit, the Church of the ancient, and
authenticke rule held thus, and thus hold we. Tertullian thought this a
sufficient answer to stop the mouth of Valentinus, that gross giddie
Heretic: and the Church of Bohemia laboring to prevent all objections gives
this reason only for her doings, Harmon. Confess. p. 94.
Huius rei in prima Ecclesia indicia, atque exempla etiam extant manifesta,
there are manifold testimonies, and examples of Confirmation yet extant in the
Primitive Church. And whereas some say, that the practice of the Primitive
Church is nothing to us, unless we prove it out of Scripture; the same Church
of Bohemia auerres, Ibid.
that Prima Ecclesia est posterorum vera, and optima magistra, et praecundo
ducit nos, the Primitive Church is the true and most excellent Mistress of all
later Churches, and leads us the way; and we may fafely follow her, for she
followed the Apostles steps, and borrowed this practice from my Text; as
before I noted out of Saint Cyprian, Saint Jerome, and Saint Austine.

100. If their authority be denied, and some newfangled interpretations be
lately fancied, framed, and received by a few vainglorious nouelists, to make
void the honor and privilege proper to the Bishops, (the Fathers, and
Governors of the Church,) whom they would shoulder out, and with them almost
all good order: the question must no longer be, Whether Confirmation be found
in Scripture; but, Whether the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church were
more likely to interpret the Scriptures truly, or some late Nouelists; who to
maintain some odd fancies of their own brain, have forged new and strange
glosses, contrary to Antiquity, the understanding of Fathers, and other
Reformed Churches; for those Churches, that follow Luthers reformation, use
Confirmation with so many of these circumstances, as that Discipline can admit.

101 Certainly our Church has taken the safer course; for we profess manente
forma (Confirmationis) in suo ordine, so long as that form and order of
Confirmation is observed, and no other, then was used in the Apostles times,
and by the Apostles themselves, quantumlibet quaerant, Tertul. de Praescript.
c. 14.
and tractent, and omnem libidinem curiositatis effundant (to use Tertul.
phrase) let their brains work, and their teeming wits bring forth some rare
inventions, such as were never heard of, never dreamed of before, such as may
discover their various itching curiosities: yet (we hope) the Church of England
will, as hitherto it has, ever continue constant in the same course; we doubt
not, but it will only imitate the practice, and embrace the enterpretations of
those ancients, who, by the confession of the whole Church of God, were gratia
scientiae donati, endowed with an extraordinary grace, and gift of knowledge to
understand, and interpret the will of God delivered in the Scriptures.

102. For as there was in the law before Christ liber Propheticus (as Saint
Ambrose calls it) the book of the Law and the Prophets, Ambr. de Fide ad
Gratianum l. 3. c. 7.
which contained the types and prophesies of Christ, which book was signatus
sealed up so firmly at that time; that neither Elders, nor Powers, nor Angels,
nor Archangels durst offer to unfold it, the prerogative of opening, and
explayning it being reserved only to Christ himself: so was there also in the
primitive times succeeding Christ, Liber Sacerdotalis, that is the Scriptures,
and the received sense of Scriptures penned by the Fathers, Doctors; and
Bishops in their several ages, of so great authority in the Church, that Saint
Ambrose speaking of them says, Quis nostrum resignare audeat? What man amongst
us is so hardy, as to offer violence unto them? Who dares break open those
Seals, or infringe the credit and authority of this Sacerdotall book, seeing
it was signatus a confessoribus, and multorum iam martyrio consecratus signed
by the reverend confessors of Christianity, and sealed up with the blood of
many a worthy Martyr?

103. And yet after so many hundred years, behold there was one of late
amongst us, who adventured himself so far, as to confront the Fathers in
this doctrine, T. C. l. 1. p. 119. and l. 3. p. 232.
to oppose his fancy against the judgment of the Church, to call the practice
of the Apostles into question, to set a new construction, a strange gloss upon
a manifest text: that so he might raze out a fundamental point of religion,
wherein both Fathers, and Church, and Apostles, and Scriptures have agreed
(...) with one joint consent for fifteen or sixteen hundredth years together.
If any man be left amongst us of his temper, or rather of his distemper, I will
only say to this new-bred doctrine, Tertul. ad^^ Valent. ^8.
what Tertullian says to Valentinus new brood of Gods, (...). Whether it be
(...), or (...), I know not well my self, for I am much in doubt, whether I
should more wonder at their pride, or laugh at their folly.

2. Cor. 11.16.
104 Sure I am, Non habemus talem consuetudinem, nec Ecclesiae Dei, We have no
such custom, nor the Chuches of God, nor may we (I pray God) ever grow to that
height of madness, as to prefer our own fond conceits before the practice
of the Apostles, the consent of Fathers, and custom of the Church. We desire
to be of no new cut, but with the Fathers of the First Nicene Council, Council.
Nicen Can. 7.
our prayers are (...), that the old custom may stand, that it may ever
prevail.

105 Seeing then Confirmation is of such Antiquity in the Church of God, that
it has the universal Catholic Church, Fathers, Councels, Apostles, and
Scripture text it self to grace, to uphold, to settle it in the Church, let us
honor Confirmation, and the Ministers of Confirmation; let us have them in that
reverence, which we owe, and they deserve; and desire of God, that they may
ever continue of full force, to the glory of God, and the good of his Church.

106 I should pass on to the parts eusuing, but (I fear) I have been too too
troublesome already; and I shall have diverse occasions to speak of the other
parts, every one of them being sufficient to yield matter for a several
Sermon: but lest I should seem to leave imperfect, what in my division I
proposed, may it please you to perfect the other circumstances out of that,
whieh has been spoke; for from thence may be deduced sufficient proof for
the remainder of my text.

107 The next point I observed, were the Ministers of Confirmation, Apostoli,
Apostles they were, 2. part.
and their successors the Bishops and no other. So you heard from Clement
Epist. 3. Saint Cyprian Epist. 73. Cornelius apud Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 6. c.
42. Melchiades Can, 2. de Consecr. Did. 5. Council. Eleber. Can. 38, Saint
Ambros. in Heb. 6. Saint Jerome aduer. Lucifer. c. 4. Saint Chrysostom. Homil.
18. in Act. Apost. Saint Aust. de Trin. l. 15. c. 26. And Quaest. 42. in Non.
Test. Leo Epist. 37. c. 2 Calvin. instit. l. 4. c. 19.. 4.

108 And S. Jerome gives a good reason, Hieron, aduers. Lucifer. c. 4. Bucer.
in Ephesians. 4 Tract. Quid fit Eccles.
why the Bishops are the only Ministers of this blessed action. The power of
this blessing (says he) is given to the Bishops only, in honore^ sacerdotii
for the honor of their Prelacy: and fitly (says Bucer) do the Bishops only
confirm us in our Faith, since unto the Bishops is committed the chief care of
the Church: and so consequently the main charge of our souls. And if
Confirmation be (...), who so fit to confer it, as the chief of Priests?

109 The third circumstance was, the Persons that were Confirmed, 3. part.
super illos upon them. And who are these, that are capable of Confirmation?
surely such only as are baptized. This was the custom (you heard of the
Apostles Act. 8. and Act. 19. to confirm thoe only that were baptized: and
the whole Church has ever since carefully observed the same practice, as you
have seen sufficiently manifested by Saint Clem. Epist. 3. Tertul. de
Baptismo. cap. 6. and 8. Cypr. Epist. 73. Ambros. in Heb. 6. Ierom. aduer.
Lucifer. cap. 4. Aust. quaest. 42. in N. Test. Emiss. Homil. in Pentecost.
Coucil, Laod. Can. 48. Bohem. Confess. p. 94,

4 part.
110 My fourth observation was the form, and that is Prayer and Imposition of
hands: my text tells you so much: and the practice of the Church has ever
retained this form. No blessing is bestowed at any time in and by the church
without prayer, neither is the H. ghost given ad robur to confirm us (I speak
of the ordinary means) without Imposition of hands. For this you have had good
evidence, Act. 8. and Act. 19. Heb. 6. Clem. Ep. 3. Tertul. de Bapt. cap. 8.
Cypr. Epist. 73. Melchiad. Can. 2. de Consecr. Did. 5. Council. Eleber. Can.
38. Jerome aduer. Lucifer. c. 4. Aust. quaest. 42. in Nou. Testament. And Aust.
(or Gennadius) de Eccle. dogmat. c. 52. Leo Epist. 37. Confess. Bohem. p. 94.
Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 19.. 4 and Comment. in Heb. 6.2.

111. The effect (which is my last part) is the receiving the holy Ghost in
obsignatorem, 5. Part. Eras Sancer. apud Marlor. in Act. Apost. 8.17.
and confirmatorem (as Erasmus Sarcerius says) to seal our religion, and to
strengthen us in the true faith, and fear of Christ: besides many other gifts,
and graces (as he affirms) of the holy Ghost, which we receive in
Confirmation.

112 This the Fathers (it seems) considered, Tertul. de Bap. c. 8.
and therefore they had this blessing in so high and reverent estimation, that
Tertullian says, that by this blessing the hand does inuit, and call down
the holy Ghost: and this being done, sanctissimus spiritus super emundata, et
benedicta corpora libens descendit, the holy ghost descends willingly upon
those cleansed and blessed bodies; cleansed (by baptism) and blessed (by
Confirmation): and in his book de Praescriptionibus he tells us, Tertul. de
Prae. c. 36.
that the Church by this means does cloth us with the holy Spirit; as before
you heard. Neither is this to be understood of an outward clothing, no;
Infunditur (says Saint Cyprian) he is powered into us, Cypr. Epist. 73. ad
Iubai.
and he is powered after a plenteous manner, Infunditur super, in and upon us,
inside and outside, both soul and body are made partakers of this admirable
blessing. Ric de Sto: Vic. ser de spirit. sancto.
Yet lest the holy Ghost may seem to be given in Confirmation infusiue only
(according to the school distinction) in some small measure, Tertul. tells us,
that he is given effusiue, abundantly in Confirmation: his words are these,
Signari populos, effuso pignore sancto, Tertul aduer^ Marc. l. 1. Cat. c. 3.

Mirandae virtutis opus.


The people being signed, or confirmed, the holy Ghost is powered out abundantly
upon them, which is a work of marvelous virtue. And fitly does Tertullian
term it a work of virtue, or power, since Christ promises his Apostles, that
they shall receive (...): Act. 18.
the power of the Spirit, (as we read); and and Leo professes that by
Episcopal Imposition of hands virtus spiritus confertur, Leo Epist. 37. c. 2.
the virtue and power of the Spirit is bestowed. Saint Austine therefore says,
that the Apostles had the holy Ghost before Confirmation, Aug tract 74. in
Euan. Ioh.
but they had him minus in a less manner, where as in Confirmation he (that is
his gifts) was given them amplius in a larger measure: because Confirmation
added to the former grace by strengthening and perfiting it.

112 This doctrine the very letter of the text affords us; for if it please you
to confer the places, where Christ gives, and where he promises the holy
Ghost, you will acknowledge (I am persuaded) a great difference in the manner,
and measure of bestowing the holy spirit. Behold John 20. Christ said to his
Apostles, Accipite (...), Ioh. 20.22.
there he gives them the holy ghost: and yet after this he makes promise. Act.
1. that they shall receive the holy ghost. Act 1.8.
There (...) receive; here (...), ye shall receive: there (...), receive the
holy Spirit; here (...), he makes promise, that they shall receive, not only
the Spirit, which they had received before but (...), the power of the Spirit,
and (...), virtutem spitus superuenientis, the power of the Spirit, not only
coming (...) upon you (the Apostles), but superuenientis coming upon (as it
were) to be an addition to those gifts, and graces, which they had before:
which is excelle^tly expressed by (...), and (...), First, the power of the
Spirit is given the^, who had the Spirit before: and secondly, the spirit does
superuenire come upon, and make an addition to his former gifts, and thereby
gives an increase of grace, and a greater power, then they had before: for (as
it is observed) the word (...) sometimes violentiae significationem inclusam
habet, has violence, or power included in it; Scapula.
and the word is seldom used in the New Testament, but where it denotate a
greater power, a more especial gift then was given before: or rather an
additon to a former gift. As namely, when that great promise is made to the
blessed Virgin, it is said, Luc. 1.35.
(...), the holy Ghost shall come down upon thee, and yet (without doubt) she
had the holy ghost before, for by the Angels report she was (...) full of grace
before, and (...), Luc. 1.28.
the Lord was with her: but now the holy Ghost was to come down upon her, and
upon the former gifts in a greater measure, (...), superueniet, and (...) super
te, Luc. 1.35. and Act. 1. 8.
two (...), two super's in both places, and (...) power comes along with both,
in both; to show, that the holy Ghost was to come down in greater power, and
for a more powerful effect, then he came before, not only to come down
super eos upon them, but superuenire to come upon his former graces with a new
supply.

113 And therefore Luc. 11. we find (...) used, where it is manifest, that a
greater power came upon the former with a kind of violence, (...), Luc 11.22.
though a strong man holds possession, yet when a stronger then he comes upon
him, he will conquer him, and take his possession from him. Thus the case
stands between opposites; but where the same spirit bestows his gifts, and
does (...), superuenire, come upon the former, and so come upon them, vt
accipiant virtutem spiritus, that they, who had the spirit, should now have the
power of the Spirit, he does not only settle and confirm his former gifts in
them, but he bestows upon them more powerful gifts then they had before.
Which may not be understood, as though this power, and powerful gifts of the
spirit consisted only in speaking of tongues, working of miracles, etc. (as
some would have it); but the spirit was given them chiefly to be Paracletus
their Comforter, to confirm them in the true faith, and so to strengthen them,
that they might stoutly resist temptations, vndantedly pass thorough
persecutions, and constantly bear witness of Christ, and his blessed actions:
as may be seen, (...) 26. (...). ^b. 1.2.3 Io. 14 16.
John 15. and for this end, and purpose is he promised to continue with us to
the end of the world. John 14 Saint Cyril therefore speaking of these two
several giuings of the holy Ghost, affordes us this good observation. Cyril
Hieros. Ca^^hes. 17.
Nunc accipite ex part, tunc accipietis perfect, Christ faith John the
twentieth: Receive now the holy Ghost in part, but Acts 1, he promises, that
they shall receive him perfectly and hence (it may be) from this perfect manner
of receiving the holy Ghost, is Confirmation called perfection, and they, that
have received Confirmation, are styled perfect Christians.

114 Will you know then the benefits which we daily receive by Confirmation, by
this effusion of the holy Ghost, and his virtue? 1. Animae spiritu illuminatur,
Tertul. de Resur. carnis c. 8.
(says Tertullian.) The soul is enlightened by the holy Spirit. 2. (as before
you heard) Sancto spiritu vestitur, the soul is clothed with the holy Spirit.
Tertul. de Praescript. c. 36. which is the same with induebantur, Luke 24.49:
when the Apostles were confirmed at the Pentecost. 3. The soul receives
augmentum ad gratiam, increase to grace. Melchiad. Can. 2. de Consecr. Did. 5.
and Emissen. Homil. in Pentecost. 4. Confirmatur ad pugnam (so Melchiad. Ib.
and Emiss. Ib.) it is confirmed for battle; that is (as the Bohem. Confess.
Bohem. Confess. p. 94.
expresses it) ad militiam fidei, for the battle, or warfare of faith. Not to
live at variance amongst our brethren, or quarrel about religion. 5. therefore
Saint Ambrose says, that one branch of this strengthening is confirmatio
vnitatis in Ecclesia Christi, to strengthen us against the enemy, Ambros. in
Heb. 6.
and to confirm us in the unity of the Church of Christ. 6, By this means
(says Saint Austine) cordibus diuina charitas inspiratur, Aug de Bapt. cont.
Donat. l. 3. c. 16.
divine charity is inspired into our hearts and souls. And finally, (as that
ancient Author bearing the name of Clement, Clem Epist. 3:
says) Septemplici Spiritus gratia confirmamur, we are comforted, and
confirmed with the seuen-fold grace, with the seven gifts of the holy Spirit;
which are the gifts, the Bishop entreates God to increase in us, before he
lays his hands upon us: as you may see in the Common Prayer Book.

115 So then (it seems) by Confirmation we receive the especial gifts, Leo
Epist. 37. c. 2. Leoni Episcopo Raven.
and (as Leo says) the virtue of the holy Ghost: and if it be so, that we
receive so many blessings, such virtue by Confirmation, we may cease wondering
why Saint Cyprian says, Cypr Epist. 73 Council Eleb. can. 38. Clem. Epist. 3.
that we are consummated; and the Council of Eliberis, that we are perfited
by Confirmation: and no marvel then, if S. Clement upon this consideration
affirm that without Confirmation we cannot become perfect Christians. For, if by
Confirmation our souls are enlightened and clothed with the H. spirit: if by
Confirmation we receive grace, and are strengthened against the temptations of
the enemy; if by Confirmation we are settled, and confirmed in the unity of
the Church, and heavenly charity is inspired into our souls; if we receive
the seuenfold grace of the holy Spirit in Confirmation; if this be the public,
and ordinary means (for ought we know) to procure these blessings from God;
then must we needs acknowledge, that we reap much perfection by and in
Confirmation, and we have great cause to desire, and seek after Confirmation,
that so we may be clothed with these perfections.

116 And that we may not doubt, but that this effect does follow Imposition of
hands, mark what evidence Calvin affords us. Preces sequitur manuum impositio,
After prayer follows Imposition of hands; whereby (says he) the Apostles
testify, that the grace of the Spirit is not included in the external
Ceremony; and yet they neglect not this Ceremony, which was given them
diuinitus from God above, for this end and purpose, (viz. for the bestowing
this effect: Calvin. in Act. Apost. 8.17.
) and quia non temere vsurpant (says he) simul annexus est effectus, and
because they use it advisedly, the effect is annexed to the Ceremony. And then
he concludes the point thus. Haec signorum est vtilitas and efficacia, quod in
illis Deus operatur, and tamen vnus manet gratiae author, this is the benefit,
and effect of signs (or Ceremonies) that God works in them, and yet there is
but one Author of grace, God himself.

117 Thus you see, the I have proved, what I undertook, by the Catholic, the
general consent of grave Antiquity. If any man reprehend me, as if I erred in
this point, patiatur me (quaeso) errare cum talibus, I must entreat him in S.
Ieromes words, Hieron.
that he would give me leave to err with such men as these; and cum me error
is mei multos socios habere perspexerit, ipse veritatis suae saltem vnum
(antiquum) astipulatorem proferre debebit, and since he sees me to have so
many companions of my error, fit it is, that he bring forth at least one
ancient maintainer of his truth. But surely he (who ever he be) is so far
from it, that if you will stand to the judgment of Antiquity, veritas nobis
adiucabitur, the truth must needs be adjudged to us, to be on our sides, qui in
ea regula incedimus, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis, Tertul de Praescript. c. 37.
Apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo tradidit, who proceed constantly according
to that rule, which the Church delivered from the Apostles, the Apostles from
Christ, and Christ from God.

118 Constat itaque ratio propositi nostri, the reason therefore of our proposed
discourse stands firm, wherein we prove, that Confirmation, and the Ministers
of Confirmation ought ever to be retained in the Church of God; from whose
hands mediatly we receive so great gifts and blessings of the holy Ghost;
without which blessed gifts (says Saint Austine) we can neither love Christ,
nor keep his commandments; both which we are able to do tanto minus, Aug.
tract. 74. in Euang. Ioh.
quanto illum percipimus minus, and tanto amplius quanto illum percipimus
amplius, so much the less, by how much less we receive the holy Ghost, and
so much the more by how much we receive him the more, by the means of our
Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, and other sacred mysteries, whereby the
gifts and graces of the holy Spirit are daily given, and increased in us:
whereof God grant, that we may all labor to become worthy partakers, to our
Comfort, and his glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor, etc. Amen.

FINIS.

