AN EXPOSITION UPON THE PROPHET JONAH.

Contained in certain Sermons, preached in S. Mary's Church in Oxford.

By GEORGE ABBOT Professor of Divinity, and Master of University College.

JOHAN. 9.4. The night comes when no man can work. ANCHORA SPEI.
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Imprinted by Richard Field, and are to be sold by Richard Garbrand.
1600.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY VERY Especial good Lord, Thomas Baron of Buckhurst,
Lord high Treasurer of England, one of the LL. of her Majesty's most honorable
Privy Counsel, Knight of the honorable Order of the Garter, and Chancellor
of the University Of Oxford.
IT is now more then a whole year, Right Honorable, since that according to the
slenderness of that ability, which God has given unto me, I brought to an
end these few Lectures upon the Prophet Jonas. In all which time being
doubtful, whether I should publish this small Treatise to the view of the
world, or no; and sometimes in mine own mind resolving for it, and sometimes
against it, I have at the last adventured to let it see the Sun, by an open
imparting thereof unto other. Wherein my assured hope and confidence is, that
the same holy and gracious Spirit which first moved me to undertake this
work, and by little and little has enabled me to bring it to this pass, will
also give that blessing thereunto, that it shall not be utterly unprofitable to
the Church, but that such as are indifferent Readers, may some in one kind,
and some in another, reap such fruit, as that thereby they may be strengthened
to continue on their journey to everlasting happiness. For the better
accomplishing whereof, according as the text has yielded me occasion, I have
labored severally: sometimes to inform the ignorant, sometimes to comfort the
weak, sometimes to settle the doubtful, some other times to encorage on to
virtue, and oftentimes to beat down vice and iniquity, which in this later
age every where abounds. To which purposes as God did diverse ways make me
know in the first uttering thereof, that it returned not altogether frutelesse,
so I trust that it will please the same guide of heaven and earth farther to
bless it, that in this course now intended by me, it may yet also be a means,
to multiply and increase the Lords service in some persons more plentifully.

But being now to commend it to the consideration and perusing of many other,
I do first present it to the good and favorable acceptance of your Lordship,
as having the principal and most special interest therein: for besides that
it had his birth and growth in that University, whose stern under our most
gracious Sovereign your Lordship does with great wisdom rule, and therefore
may challenge it for the places sake, as belonging in a general regard to your
Lordships protection: The Author thereof is in duty so specially and
particularly bounden to your Lordship, that in right he must acknowledge the
continuance and progress of his studies, for these many years to have rested
and relied solely on your Honorable favor. In which respect he amongst many
others, has great cause to give praise and thanks to the Almighty for your
Lordships high advancement in this State; in as much as he apparently finds,
and by experience knows, that after a desire to do faithful service to her
sacred Majesty, to administer justice to the Subject, and to be as a father in
hearing the complaints of the poor, it is not the least care which your
Lordship has, to help and prefer in Church and Commonwealth, such as have
or do depend upon your Honor. Amongst whom I should be very forgetful and
unthankful, if I did not to my uttermost let all men understand, with how
honorable regard your Lordship has been pleased now for diverse years to
look upon me, and of your Lordships own disposition, at every first occasion
so to think on my preferment, as I had no reason in my conceit to look for,
or any way expect. But in this as in many other matters, your Lordship does let
the world see, that there is nothing more proper to personages truly honorable,
then to do honorable deeds: and thereupon it is, that with this extraordinary
respect your Lordship has both intended and affected not a little for my good.
An example for the matter very rare, in this barren age wherein we now live:
but to the manner of the happy accomplishing thereof both my self and diverse
other are so privy, that we must confess it to be a singular consideration of
your Lordship, so to begin and consummate the same, that all men might see the
thanks, only to belong to your Lordship, and that no second person has had
any finger, in that which hitherto I have received.

In grateful representation of my remembrance herein, I bring this little gift:
and as thereby I conceal not from any, how deeply under God and my
Sovereign I am obliged to your Honor, so otherwise I shall ever be ready with
all my power to do your Lordship service, thinking my self happy, when I may
perform any thing, which may testify my respective and dutiful affection.

God Almighty long preserve her most gracious Majesty, the only fountain
upon earth of all our felicity. God Almighty bless your Lordship, that the
Commonwealth for many years may enjoy such a Counselor, and this University
so Honorable a Patron.

From University College in Oxford this tenth day of October, In the year of
our Lord 1600. Your Lordships Chapleine in all duty bounden, GEORGE ABBOT.

The chief points in the first Lecture.
2. Jonas was not the son of the widow of Sareptha, 5 Neither had a Prophet
to his father. 6 The taking away of the word is a grievous plague. 10 Gods word
must be a direction to the Minister: who is not to gad up and down. 11 Divines
of the University may preach in parishes adjoining. 13. Niniue a great City.
17. Why crying is used in Scripture. 18 The Eastern curious arts likely to be
in Niniue. 19 But certainly robbery and oppression.

JONAH 1.1.2. The word of the Lord came also unto Jonah the son of Amittai
saying, Arise, and go to Nineveh that great City, and cry against it, for
their wickedness is come up before me.


THat which Hierome said to Paulinus concerning the seven Catholic or General
Epistles (for so they are called) of James, Hieron. ad Paulinum. Breues pariter
and longas: breues in verbis, longas in sententijs.
and Peter, and John and Jude, that they are long and they are short, short in
words, long in substance; may I think be well spoken of this Prophecy of Jonas,
that it is long, and it is short: short if we respect the smalnesse of the
volume, but long if we regard the copious variety of excellent observations,
which are therein to be found. As, the horriblenesse of sin, which was able
within forty days to pluck down an utter desolation, on so famous a city
as Niniue was. Gods love in forewarning them who dwelt in that place, that they
might be spared: the Prophets foul fall, and his strange punishment for it:
his of-wardnesse from God, and Gods favorable inclination evermore to him: the
regard which the King of Niniue and his people did bear to Gods judgments
when they were denounced: the free pardon of the Lord, and his remitting of
their sin upon their earnest repentance. The subordinate circumstances do
yield as good doctrine as the maine story it self, and from them both, this
thing of note is collected, that our Savior Christ in two several matters,
does take occasion to draw his similitudes or comparisons from this Prophecy;
which is not observed of far greater books. Luke 11.32.
The one of them is in the 11. of Luke, The men of Niniuy shall rise in
judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it, for they repented at the
preaching of Jonas, and behold a greater then Jonas is here. The other is in
the twelfth of Matthew, As Jonas was three days and three nights in the whales
belly, Math. 12.40.
so shall the son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth. Here our Prophet was a figure of the Redeemer of the world, and in that
did lively express him. And some think that another thing in him, did as
lively paint out a second matter in our Savior Christ, that as Jonas preaching
long to the people of Israel, and doing little good there, by reason of the
stubburnnesse of that nation, was sent unto Niniue a city in Assyria, to men
strangers from the covenant; so Christ by himself and by his Apostles, laying
open to the Jews the will of his father, and finding nothing but
unthankfulness to be the fruit of his pains, should turn away his love and
affection from them, and bestow it on the Gentiles. Now as this may agree with
the analogy of faith, and may be deduced not unfitly out of the text, so to
think that all the prophecy may allegorically be applied unto Christ,
(wherein some of the old fathers were too too much credulous) were to strain
the story too far, and indeed it may not be, as Hierome has well noted on
the third verse of this Chapter. Hieron. in Ion. 1.3. Jonas propheta non absque
periculo interpretantis, totus referri ad Dominum poterit.
And therefore in that proceeding which God shall send unto me in the opening
of this Prophecy, my purpose is to follow the letter of the text, and to lay
down the doctrine of it with convenient application, but without allegories
Origenicall or wrestings at all.

2 The time wherein our Prophet did live, should seem to be soon after the
death of Elizeus, in as much as he did prophecy of Jeroboam the later, the
son of Ioas, that he should restore, or recover again the coasts of Israel
which were lost. Jeroboam restored the coast of Israel, 2. Reg. 14.25.
from the entering of Hamath to the sea of the wilderness, according to the
word of the Lord God of Israel which he spoke by his servant Jonah the son of
Amittai, the Prophet which was of Gath Hepher. From which words, a foolish
tradition that is among the Jews, may well be refuted: for the Rabbis of that
people, who with their Talmudicall vanities, and Cabalisticall subtilties have
perverted much of the Scriptures, do teach, and have long so taught, that this
Jonas was the son of the widow of Sareptha, 1. Reg. 17.17.
whom Elias did raise up from death to life. Which opinion has gone so
current, that among our Christians also, some of the new writers have accepted
it for a truth, Lyra in Ion. 1.

Isidor. in 7. Etimolog. Epiphan. de vitis Prophe. Hieron. in Praefat. in lib.
Ion.


but among the old far more, as Lyra upon this place, and Isidore in the
seventh of his Etimologies. Nay those who were very ancient, and very
learned withal, have rehearsed it uncontrolled, as Epiphanius, and S. Hierome
in his Preface to this Prophecy. Thus an opinion once begun, does go from hand
to hand, received without discussing, and from error in one man grows error
in another.

3 For if there were no more but that God himself has co^cealed it, not naming
any such matter in the Scripture, (where notwithstanding is oftentimes speech
of Jonas) it were a probable argument against that their assertion. For when
the master is silent, why should the servant speak? When God says no such
matter, why should any man affirm it? especially since to utter it, had been
for a solemn remembrance of Gods glory, and it might have procured to Jonas,
far greater observance among the people, to whom he was to preach, that he
should be known to be son to that woman, who was picked out by the Lord
himself, to be a nurce to that reverend man Elias, in the time of bitter
famine, and that this preacher should be the self same person, who was raised
from death to life. But in my judgment the point is fully answered, when he is
said to be of Gath Hepher, and not of Sareptha. For Gath Hepher, or as it is in
the Hebrew, In vulgata editione. Iosuah. 19.13.
Gittah Hepher, which to S. Hierome are both one, was a city in the land of
Israel, in the tribe of Zabulon, as we may read in Iosuah. But Sareptha was not
in Israel, as Christ himself very evidently does signify in S. Luke, Luke
4.25.27.
Many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias, but unto none of them was
Elias sent, save into Sareptha a city of Sidon, unto a certain widow. Also
many leapers were in Israel in the time of Elizeus the Prophet, yet none of
them was made clean, saving Naaman the Syrian. As if he should say, that in
those places strangers were preferred before the children. Nay he adds more,
to Sareptha of Sidon, 1. Reg. 17 9. Joseph. Anti. lib. 8.9.
or a city of Sidon. And Josephus also tells us, in the 8. of his
Antiquities, that Sareptha is a city between Tire and Sidon: where speaking
of Elias, of the widow, and her son, he has not a word of Jonas. And left it
may be thought that Gath Hepher did stand near to this city of Sareptha, and
so that our Prophet for the nearenesse of the places, may be said to be of
both, it was the tribe of Asser, and not the tribe of Zabulon which was nearest
unto Sidon. Joshua. 19 28.
Then our Jonas being taken from the tribe of Zabulon, and therefore being an
Israelite, he was fit to preach to the Israelites, as to his own countrymen.
Which course the Lord did take commonly in sending of his own to those which
were his own, as Jews to the tribe of Judah, and Israelites to the other ten
tribes; which he had not here observed, if Jonas had been son to the widow of
Sareptha.

4 I have opened this error, as principally occasioned by the person of our
Prophet, with whom I am here to deal; so secondly to show the boldness of the
Jews, who dare on naked conjectures grounded on weak foundations, (as is
this, that because his mother who was raised up by Elias, 1. Reg. 17.24. (...)
Vide Hieron. in Proaemio comme^tarij in Ionam.
used a word in Hebrew like to the name of Amittai, therefore Jonas the son
of Amittai must of necessity be her son) give out assertions boldly; boldly
I say, but falsely, and that in their own Prophets, and that in their own
Scriptures. Very endless is their folly which they use in this behalf, and
it is not to be wondered at by us, who know their malice in denying of Christ
Jesus to be the true Messiah; in perverting of such scriptures as in their own
books are written of him; Epiphanius Haeresi. 29.
in cursing of the Christians daily in their assemblies, under the name of
Nazarites; in vilefying the new Testament, but in magnifying their Talmud that
irreligious book, with such celestial praises, Lodou. Viues de Veritate
fidei. lib. 3.
that as Viues writes of it, they hold this for an opinion, that God himself
bestows the first four hours of every day, in reading of that book, like a
scholar at his task. Nay more, that when the Temple at Jerusalem was destroyed
by Titus the Roman, that then the Lord did sit reading upon that book within
three or four cubits of the place; belike so busy at that, that he could not
have any leisure to think on the overthrow of the Temple, which you know was
but a trifle. Let all men take heed of their errors; and let us that be
Preachers of the word, especially take heed, how we credulously reach any
thing, that unadvisedly comes from them.

5 The widow of Sareptha was not Jonas his mother, but himself does let us
know that Amittai was his father; where also another fable may justly be
reproved, Lyra in Ion. 1.
which Lyra writing upon this place, reports to be broched by the self same
Jews; to wit, that our Prophet was son unto another Prophet, because his
fathers name is here mentioned, for so (say they) are all the Prophets, whose
fathers are named in the Scripture. Mark their worthy reason for it. Amos.
7.14.
Amos says of himself, that he was no Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet, and
if you will look in his book, you shall see that his father is not mentioned. A
reason most inconsequent, and not worthy to be refuted. Amos was not the son of
a Prophet, and his father is not named, Ergo they whose fathers are named,
Hosea. 1.1. Joel. 1.1.
had Prophets to their fathers. Hosea was the son of Beeri, and Joel the son of
Pethuel; but no signification is there in their writings, that their fathers
were also Prophets. Zephaniah was the son of Chuzi, Zephan. 1.1.
who was the son of Gedaliah, who was the son of Amariah, who was the son of
Hizkiah. If this their reason were good, there should here the^ be no less,
the^ a whole generation of Prophets. But I rather approve of the reasons of
Arias Montanus, Arias Mont. in prolegom. in minores Prophetas. Luke 2 36.
who says that they are named, either because their fathers were men famous,
and well known in their times; or else for distinctions sake, to make them
differ from some other of that name. The new Testament does yield us examples
of both in other persons; as when aged Anna is said to be the daughter of
Phanuel of the tribe of Aser, it may probably be imagined that Phanuel when he
lived, was a man of reputation, well known to very many. But in the Epistle of
Jude, the title which is there given unto the Apostle, not from his father, but
from his brother, Judas the servant of Christ, Iud. 1.
and brother of James, was to make him differ from Judas Iscariot, who did
betray Christ. And having thus touched the person of our Prophet, and the time
wherein he lived, let us come a little near unto the words of the text. Not
forgetting notwithstanding, that this whole book by many is divided many
ways, but I shall use no curious partition of it, and therefore do only note,
that the four Chapters

The word of the Lord came also. Also.
6 Tremelius and Iunius do expound the Coniunctiue Hebrew particle, (...) Quum
fuisset verbu^ Iehouae.
which is used in the beginning of this book, by the time when. The Septuagint
and all other whom hitherto I can find, both Translators and Expositors, do
read and or again or also, and thereby do intend, that when Jonas before had
preached in Israel, and done little good there, the word of the Lord came a
second time to him, to send him elsewhere, to the City of Niniue. Wherein Gods
purpose was, to take away his word together with his Prophet, from those who
long had it, and brought forth no fruits accordingly, and to give it unto
other who were aliens from the covenant, and strangers from the promise. And if
that these Ninevites should have that grace, as by hearing a message, to
fructify in great abundance, they might then exprobrate ingratitude and
grievous rebellion, to the people of Israel, because these being but once
preached unto, did apparently repent, but the other hearing often, did still
increase their sin. This is a fearful judgment, when God remoueth his word
or ministers from a nation, and gives them to other. For where there is no
vision, Pro. 29.18. 2. Chro. 15.3.
where prophecy ceasseth, the people decay. Azariah the man of God could tell
the people of Judah, that for a long season they had been without the true God,
without priest to teach, and without the Law, as signifying that these curses
do jointly go together, that where is neither Priest nor Law, there also is not
God. It is threatened as a plague to the people of Jerusalem, Ezech. 3.26.
that the Lord would make the tongue of the Prophet to clean to the roof of his
mouth, that he should not exhort the^, that he should not reprove them. Apoc.
2.5.
Except thou amend says Christ the son of man to the Angel of Ephesus, I
will remove thy candlestick out of his place, I will take away thy ministry.
It is a fearful sentence from the mouth of Christ him self, The kingdom of
God shall be taken from you, Matthew. 21.43.
and shall be given to a nation which shall bring forth the fruits thereof.

7 The miseries which follow this, are unspeakable discomforts to such as are
able aright to conceive them. To be blind, and have no guide, and yet to walk
there, where treading awry is the tumbling into hell: to be hungry and to
famish: to suck, but on dry breasts: to be pined, and not perceive it, which
is an evil of all evils. For there is no truer misery, then not to know a
man's own want, or if he do know it, not to be of power to help it, Amos 8.12.
but to wander from sea to sea, and from the North even to the East, to run to
and fro, and not be able to amend it. But when Jonas like a Dove (for so his
name does signify) must fly or must go from Samaria to Niniue, when what the
Jew must lose, that the Gentile must win, when the elder is disinherited and
the younger made the heir, no marvel then if grief possess the very soul.
Genesis 27.34.
What marvel if Esau a natural man, did grudge and would not cease, did
weep and could not hold, when he saw that what he lost his brother Jacob
should gain; that the falling of the one was the rising of the other, the
service of the elder was the reigning of the younger? The children of Abraham
did contemn the whole world, in respect of their prerogative in the sanctified
seed: they could have been contented, that the very crummes from the table,
should not have fallen to the Gentiles. If the Prophet had been sent from the
ten tribes to the two, or contrariwise from the two unto the ten, from Judah to
Israel, or from Israel to Judah, the matter had been less: but must Jonas go to
Niniue? We can conceive no otherwise, 1. Sam. 18.29.
but that it was a great grief to Saul, that himself must lose the kingdom;
but that David must have it, his subject who lived under him, his servant that
attended him, was a mighty vexation, even a grief to the death. There Gods
anger was the greater, who preferred the servant before the master: here his
displeasure was the hoter, that the Prophet must leave his country, 1. Sam.
4.18.
and go to callhome other strangers. When old Eli did hear that the Ark of the Lord, the presence of his grace, was first gone from the Israelites, and
then taken by the Philistines, his whole strength was gone; his heart did faint
and die.

8 The kingdoms and nations who have tasted of the Gospel, may bethink
themselves here. The benefit is inestimable which God has affoorded them, in
giving them the bread of life, and his stewards to break it, his ministers to
teach it. Now if in recompense thereof, Isa. 5.2.
in steed of grapes they should bring forth wild grapes; if for figs they
should yield thistles; if their justice should be but gall, and their judgment
but wormwood; if his word should be neglected, and his ministers be despised,
let them fear least that befall them, which has happened unto others. Romans
11.24.
Those which were but wild branches and are now graffed into the Olive, can
they be dearer unto God, then those branches which by nature appertained to
that tree? If he spared not his own, which by a peculiar calling were
appropriated to him, for so the Jews were in comparison, will he spare those
which in a second place, and but only for default of the former, were adopted
by him? Saint Paul does let us know, 21.
that without doubt he will not. The light was great which Gods Churches once
had in Asia the lesser, when John the Evangelist, and Polycarpus and other
scholars to the Apostles, did live and die there. The same may be said of the
Cities of Graecia, which did hear Saint Paul preaching, did read Saint Paul
writing. For some hundreds of years after him, many excellent lamps did burn
in those parts, which gave light to their neighbors. But for the sins of
the inhabitants, is not their candlestick since removed into the West? are not
their lamps extinguished? Yes, their Ionasses are dead, or sent to other
nations. Their temples are now made a cage of unclean birds: Apoc. 18.2.
filthy spirits do possess them. The Turk with his Curaam, and Mahomet with
his Alcoran are Lords of those places. The City Rome was once the eye of the
West, the sanctuary of religion, the anchor of true piety. This continued
many years after that Paul had said in his time, that their faith was
published throughout the whole world. Romans 1.8.
But when Rome once proved Babylon, the holy City an harlot, when idolatry and
security had once poisoned her heart, her light was removed into the Northern
parts, and among them unto us: where God grant that it may continue, till his
Son do come to judgment, Exodus 10.21.
that the horrible and palpable darkness of Egypt, may neither come on us, nor
our seed, nor our seeds seed after us. It were a fearful curse, if Gods
glorious Gospel should be taken from us, and given to the Tartarians, a wild
people in the North, or unto the Moors, profane men in the South. Our fathers
in their times had experience of the like; for after the free passage of Gods
word, in the days of king Edward of blessed memory (whose soul does rest with
the Lord) for the sins of our nation, and the careless abusing of so gracious a
benefit, there came such a time as that Jonas might not stay in Israelit he
would: either Jonas must fly, or Jonas must die. Then Geneua, or Basile, or
Franckford, or some other parts of Germany, were thought fitter places to
receive the Lords Prophets, then our England was.

9 That short time of mercy which God had showed before, had but a short time
of chastisement succeeding it. Since those days God has showed longer love,
and powered it on us more plentifully. If in steed of long lent graces, we will
not pluck upon us long plagues, and grievous punishments, let us esteem his
word as a jewel of price; let us esteem his messengers, as the ministers of
God, Heb. 13.17.
weak men, but in great trust, who do watch for their souls to whom they do
preach, and would be glad to see men prease unto Christ with cheerfulness. It
were a thing to be lamented bitterly, if by wanting we should know, what it
were to want that, Plutarch. in Demosth.
which by enjoying we know not. Demosthenes perceiving the true danger of that
case, could remember the Atheniens, that if the dogs were gone, by a
composition with the wolves, the sheep would soon pay for it; the cruel wolves
would rage at pleasure. If the Orators were once yielded, Athens would soon to
wrack. Zachar. 13.7.
If the shepherd be once stricken, ye know what follows after, the sheep
will be soon scattered. If the Preachers be removed, men's souls will run to
ruin. The walls of Hiericho could not be overthrown (as Origin says writing
on the book of Joshua) but by the trumpets of the Priests. Origin in Ios.
Homil. 7.
So the fortresses of Satan, of iniquity and sin, cannot be laid along, but
by the teaching of the Priest, the preaching of the Minister. Therefore make
much of your Ionasses, whosoever you be, and keep them while you have them.

10 But in Israel at this time it might not be so. There comes a message to
the Prophet, a commanding iniunction, and gives him other instructions. The
word of the Lord came unto Jonah. This is it whereupon the Prophets should
evermore depend, for their sitting or for their rising, for their moving or
their resting. They are not to run upon a fantacie or humor of their own, and
speak they know not what, neither care they to whom, but for their message
which they utter, they are rather to take it then to make it. Exodus 3.11. Ier.
1.6.9.
Moses would not go to Pharao, till he had learned his lesson perfectly. Jeremy
is but a child, and knows not how to speak, till God stretches forth his
hand, and puts his word in his mouth. Ezech. 3.17.
The Lord does tell Ezechiel, that he should hear the word at Gods mouth, and
give the people warning from him. Nay the true Prophets all in general
remembered this well enough, when so often they end their sentences with these
words, Thus says the Lord. Saint Paul writing to the Corinthians does take
this course in the matter of the Sacrament, I received of the Lord that which I
also delivered unto you. 1. Cor. 11.23.
Otherwise, as he is a traitor to his Prince, who takes on him to coin money
out of base metal, yea although in the stamp he for a show does put the
image of the Prince; so he that shall broch any doctrine that comes not from
the Lord, whatsoever he say for it, or what gloss soever he set upon it he is
a traitor unto God, yea in truth a cursed traitor, although he were an Angel
from heaven, Galat. 1.8.
as Saint Paul tells the Galathians. Earthly kings are offended, if their
subjects shall do from them, or in their names, such messages as they send not;
or if their Ambassadors being limited by aduertisements what they shall do and
what not, should entreat of contrary causes. Then should the Minister be
careful in a very high degree, that he speak not but according to his
commission, least he offend a Lord of more dreadful majesty, who is more
jealous of his glory, and more able to punish. The visions are now ceased;
revelations are all ended; such dreams are past and gone, as did inform in
old time: Now it is Gods written word which must be to us, as the thread of
Ariadne, to lead us through all laberinths. The Law of the Lord is perfect,
Psalm. 19.7.
converting the soul, the testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom
to the simple, says David. Tertullian could say of the written word, I do
adore the fullness of the Scripture. Tertul. cont. Hermogene^ Adoro Scripturae
plenitudinem.

Vinc. Ly^in. contra haeres. cap. 27. Depositum custodi.

Quod tibi creditum est, non quod a te inuentum, quod accepisti non quod
excogitasti, rem non ingenij sed doctrina.

Ita doce, vt cu^ dicas nou e non dicas noua.


This full Scripture, this perfect Law of God, is it which must be the guide,
and as the loade-starre unto us. Vincentius Lyrinensis in his little book
against heresies speaks elegantly to this: O Timothy, do thou keep fast thy
charge. What is it that is thy charge? That which thou have received, not that
which thou have devised: that which is committed to thee, not what is invented
by thee: a matter not of thy wit, but rather of thy learning, wherein thou art
no author, but only a keeper, not a leader, but a follower. And a little after,
Do thou so teach, that when thou speak after a new manner, yet thou do not
speak new matter. Thy order may be new, thy method may be new, but the
substance of that which thou speak must be old. This is an argument very
copious to be handled: and thereunto may be joined the just reprehension of
some fantastical Anabaptists, who have taken on them in our time, to cross
this written word, by illuminations and revelations of their own. But I leave
the one and the other, till God send further grace to wade more into this
Prophecy. That which I rather gather here is this; that if Jonas would not go
from one place to another, without the express commandment of God, who is
Lord over heaven and earth, and rules all at his pleasure, and that also the
other Prophets did evermore observe this rule, that then in the examples of
Gods ancient servants, there is no protection or warrant for such men, who
sometimes in our Church, do flit from place to place, without staying in any.
It is one thing to be sent, and for a man then to go; another thing to run
first, and not at all to be sent. Feed the flock says Peter, 1. Pet. 5.2.
but it follows in the text, which does depend upon you, Hier. gregem qui in
vobis est. (...).
or which is committed to you, for so the best translate it, although to the
letter it be, the flock which is among you. The Apostles indeed did go
throughout all the world, Mat. 28.19.
but they had their passe-port for it: Go ye and teach all nations. But besides
that, the immediate presence of Gods Spirit did still attend them, and told
them what they should do, and again what they should not do; so that they were
not at their own liberty. Acts. 13.4. chap. 16.7.
When they were let go by the Spirit, they came unto Seleucia. And, they would
have gone to Bithynia, but the Spirit would not suffer them. These men of whom
I speak are not Apostles: that dispensation is ceased, as all Gods Church
does know. It were rather to be wished, that they did not come much nearer to
the name of Apostataes, for reuolting from the approved rule of the Christian
faith, while they use that profession which is sacred in it self, but as
pretenced piety, to cover unhappy shifting, yea sometimes an ungodly life. I
do not speak of all: among bad may be some good: and circumstances oftentimes
do make whole causes differ. But for many of them, I could wish that experience
had not taught us, to the slander of the Gospel, that such fond admiration as
they procure in the pulpit, among the ignorant multitude (who are easily
deceived) is quitted with some infamy, which from town to town does follow
them, and from country unto country, or with some actual cosinage, or with
lustful carnalitie, or one bad trick or other.

11 Their calling in the mean time is not warranted in the word, although
Jonas went to Niniue. Ours is a stable profession, it is no gadding ministry.
And yet I doubt not, but that we who are children of the Prophets, and have a
home in this place, and therefore are different from them, to exercise our
selves against such time as God shall send us charges, or especially to win men
to Christ, may sometimes in this town, and sometimes in the villages which are
here about adjoining, even with a free will offering bestow our little talents.
Scribendo disces scribere.
By writing we learn to write: by singing men learn to sing: by skirmishing
we shall learn to fight the Lords great battles. The people in the mean time
are won to Jesus Christ: the faithful are increased: ignorance is well
expelled: idolatry is defaced; Satan and sin are conquered. The very crummes
of our tables, would keep many souls from staruing: the lost hours of our
idleness, would help many poor to heaven. God grant that the burying of
those talents in the ground, which he in his great love has given unto us, be
not laid to our charge, in that dreadful and terrible day. If ignorance, or
idolatry, or iniquity did not rage, if the enemies of the Gospel to hold up
their Romish Antichrist were not busy to pervert, we might keep our selves in
our cloisters, but if all these do fret, and daily consume like a canker, let
us sometimes look about us. Theodoret reports in his Ecclesiastical story,
Theodoret. Hist. Eccles. lib. 4.24.
that when Valens the Emperor with his Arrian opinions, had bee-postered much
of the world, and by that means the flock of Christ stood in great danger,
Aphraates a Monk, a holy man of that time, contrary to his order and usual
profession, came forth out of his Monastery, to help to keep up the truth.
And being asked by the Emperor who was offended at him, what he did out of his
cell? I would (says he) have kept it, and did keep it so long as Christ's
sheep were in quiet; but now that tempests do come on, and storms bring them
in danger, every stone is to be turned, every means is to be sought, to free
them from this peril. He goes on: If I were daughter to any man whatsoever,
and according to my sex as decency would require, were kept up in a closet, or
in some secret chamber, and inner part of the house, yet if my fathers dwelling
were on fire, should I not be very careless, if I would not then come forth to
help to quench the fire, or give direction for it? So if now I should not
help to teach true faith in Christ, by coming out of my Monastery, I should do
much amiss. Let us remember the like, in these most perilous times: so we
shall discharge our consciences, we shall disburden our souls, and God
himself will reward it, by one means or another, although men do not requite
it: for do not look for that: if you do, they will deceive you. And thus
having showed the reason why Jonas went from Israel, I come to the second verse.

Arise.
12 It should seem that our Prophet having long preached to his countrymen,
and little prevailed, had now discouraged himself, and even set him down,
which case does often befall the Minister, through that weakness and frailty
which is in humane nature. For the preventing whereof in his servant Ezechiel,
God himself does foretell him, that he sends him to such as are a rebellious
house, Ezech. 3.9.
and will not hear his voice. Notwithstanding the Prophet is enforced to do
his duty, and leave the success to God. That is it whereunto the Minister
should look, perform all which the Lord requires, and leave the event to
him. For we are not in Gods place, to alter and change, and mollify men's
hearts; 1. Cor. 3 6.
Paul planteth, and Apollos waters, but God gives the increase. In the
mean time, the labor of the faithful Minister, whether it speed or miss, is
accepted of the Lord. August. contra Crescon. Grammaticum, lib. 1.
For as he (says Saint Austen) who persuades to evil, (as to heresy or
treason) is punished accordingly, although he do not prevail, yet because he
intended it, because he did labor it; so he that does his best to win men to
heaven, although he effects not what he desired, finds his reward with God.
And he adds in the same book, that when Christ did lament over his own
City Jerusalem, Matthew 23.37
and said that he would have gathered the Jews together, as the hen gathers,
or clucketh her young ones under her wings, and they would not; that perhaps he
did encourage us by his own example, that if we should not obtain when we have
spent our labor, yet we should not dismay our selves, because no more
befalls us, Matthew. 10.24
then did betide Christ. And the disciple as we know, is not greater then his
master. If such a drowsinesse or sleepiness were now upon Jonas, after his
small success in preaching to Israel, God bids it be shaken off, when he
wills him to Arise, that is, pluck up his spirits, and rouse up himself, and
make speed in his message.

And go to Nineveh that great City.
13 Although God in ordinary did tie himself to his people of Israel, yet at
this time (for so was his good pleasure) he shows that himself is Lord over
all the earth, and takes care of all and punishes all who do sin against
him; in as much as he did send his Prophet to Niniue, which was a City in
Assyria, and the Metropolis of that country, and justly in this place said to
be a great City. By that which is written of it, it may be judged, that Niniue
was then the greatest City that was upon the earth. When Moses does mention
it, he gives that testimony of it, Genesis 10.12. Ion. 3.3.
This is that great City. In the third chapter of this present Prophecy it is
said to be a great and excellent City of three days journey. That in those
days this was no strange thing, in the Eastern countries, to have some places
very huge, we may somewhat judge by Babylon, Aristoteles politicorum. lib. ^.
which Aristotle sets down to have bin so big, as that when some part of it
had been taken by the enemy, some other quarters of it, did not hear of any
such news, till within three days after. But for Niniue thus much more: In
the last chapter of this Prophecy it is put for the conclusion of the book,
Ion. 4.11.
that there were in it six score thousand persons that could not discern
between their right hand and their left hand: which imports that they were
children of small age and understanding.

14 This City by profane writers is called Ninus, Herod. lib. 1. Strabo. lib.
16 Plin. lib. 6.13. Tacit. Annal. lib. 12.
as by Herodotus in his Clio, by Strabo in the sixteenth of his Geography, by
Pliny in the sixth of his Natural history, by Tacitus in the twelfth of his
Annals. And by some of them it was supposed to be builded by Ninus the great
Monarch of Assyria, and husband to Semiramis, Aug. de Ciu. Dei. lib. 16.3.
which is also the opinion of Saint Austen, in his books De ciuitate Dei. Some
argument why we should believe it to be so, may be gathered from the name,
being termed of Ninus the king, Ninus, and Nineveh in the Scripture. But see
whether that in this case, Augustinus Epist. 19. Gal. 2.13.
a man may not say as Austen said to Hierome (about that great controversy
between Paul and Peter; whether Peter sinned or sinned not, and dissembled
with the Jews in deed, or but in show) that although Hierome had more
witnesses in number to prove his assertion, the^ Austen could bring, yet that
S. Paul who had Gods Spirit, and thereby did write, was in steed of all the
rest, nay in truth above all: So although both Heathen and Christians, and
among them S. Austen do say, that this City was built by Ninus, yet see
whether Moses who had the immediate Spirit of God, be not in steed of all, Genesis
10.11.
or rather beyond all. And he does tell us that this City was built by Assure.
Neither does the Hebrew name import ought to the contrary, if it be as some
suppose, not Nineveh of Ninus, but Nineveh of Nauah the Hebrew word, (...)
and so signifying beautiful or goodly, or fair, or fit to be inhabited. But
this controversy may be ended, Munsterus Cosmograp. lib 5.
if that opinion be true which Munster does deliver unto us, that some think
that both Assure and Ninus are one man, called by diverse names in diverse
languages. He does not specify in that place, who they be that so reconcile
this doubt; neither yet have I found any that be of that mind.

Diodorus Siculus Antiq. lib. 3.1. Plin. Hist. nature. 6.3. Herod. lib. 1.
15 But to let that go, this City is described by Diodorus Siculus (in the
second of his Antiquities as Stephanus will have it, as some other in the
third) to stand upon Euphrates, I think he means Tigris, for so all consent
has it, and Babylon on Euphrates: to be built with four sides, but not equal
or square, for the two longer sides had each of them one hundred and fifty
furlongs, the two shorter sides had each of them ninety, which arising in the
whole number to four hundred and four score furlongs, the compass of the
City did amount to thirty French leagues, or threescore Italian miles. The
walls says Diodorus were in height an hundred foot, the breadth of the
walls, that three carts might go together: the towers which were about it,
were one thousand and five hundred, the height of the towers was two hundred
foot in each. This City being built, to show the magnificence and royalty of
the founder, was without doubt populous for the proportion; the country
yielding food to sustain so great a multitude, and they having water at will by
the nearenesse of the river. The fertility of the soil was such in old time
about this place, although not for other things in like measure, yet for corn,
that Herodotus writing of it does speak of his own knowledge, that the
ordinary fields did return the seed sown in them two hundred fold, the better
places three hundred: three hundred bushels for one, or at least three hundred
grains of one corn.

Seneca in consolatione ad Narciam. cap. 16. Tiberiu^ Gracchu^ and Caium qui
bonos viros negauerit, magnos fatebitur.
16 Our Jonas is to go by Gods commandment to this City, which if any will
deny to be good, yet he must confess to be great, as once it was said of the
Gracchi in Rome. He needed not to find fault that he had nothing to do, who had
Niniue for his charge, and whose business was to preach to such an auditorie
where were so many and so mighty. If he stood upon his credit, as it seems
that he did too much, (which hereafter may be showed) here was a place of
reputation for him, if any were upon earth. Tullie was no great warrior, for
ought that I can read, Tull^ Epist. lib. 2. Ep. 10. ad Caelium. Vt mihi ad
summam gloriam nihil de^it nisi nomen oppidi.
and I think that himself thought so; yet in one of his Epistles, he tells
that he did besiege a little town, Pindinessus he calls it, with such
egernesse, that there was nothing wanting to him of the top and height of
glory, for his good service there, but the name of the town. His town did
want a name. He means that it was but base, and not known to men in Rome.
Our Prophet in his preaching need find no such fault: his charge has a name:
it is Niniue that great City, which ruled over the earth, the seat of the
Empire, the Lady of the East, the Queen of nations, the riches of the world,
where more people did inhabit, then are now in some one kingdom. Seen. in
Suasoriar. 2. Ingenij confus^ and turbulenti qui cupiebat grandia dicere.
Credatis mihi velim non iocanti, eo peruenit insania eius, vt calceos quoque
maiores sumerit, ficus no^ esset nisi mariscas. Concubina^ ingentis staturae
habebat.
I do read in Seneca, that there was once a man of a turbule^t wit, called
Senecio, who would speak none but great words, would have none but great things.
His servants were all great, his silver vessels and plate were great. Nay,
believe me (says Seneca) his folly grew so great, that his shoes were still
too big for him, he would not eat figs, but Mariscas, a kind of gross great
figs. He had a concubine of a huge and mighty stature. He had all things so
big, that the surname, cognomen, or rather cognomentum as Messala did term
it, was set upon him of Senecio Grandio. If this Grandio had been sent on such
a message as Jonas was, it may be supposed that he would have been a proud man.
But our Prophet was not so, as in the next verse hereafter we shall find.

17 Well, God goes forward with him, Arise and cry against it. The Lord
tells him all the circumstances, which must be done in this message, least he
should be to seek, and so do somewhat amiss: and again to make him more
careful in performing of that, wherein God himself was so desirous to inform
him in particular. He must cry against Niniue, not whisper in the ear as if
it were to one; not speak softly as to a few: but cry as unto all: this is a
general proclamation. This word Cry is used in Scripture when men are fast
asleep and lulled in their sins, and awake not with a little, so that as
Eliah said to the Baalites, that they were to cry alowd, 1. Reg. 18.22.
because Baal might be sleeping, and must be awaked, so the Minister must cry
aloud, that men may be raised from their drowsinesse in sin. When the
iniquities of Israel, and transgressions of Jacob began to grow great, the
Prophet Esaias is called upon to cry alowd and not to spare, Isa. 58.1.
yea to lift up his voice as if it were a trumpet. In like manner, when, as it
should seem men being drowned in security did forget their own mortality,
Chap. 40 6.
A voice said Cry: The Prophet asks what shall I cry? All flesh is grass,
and the beauty thereof as the flower of the field. So the voice of John the
Baptist who bad men repent, because the kingdom of heaven was near, is called
the voice of a crier. Matthew. 3.3.
Again this word Cry is some other time used, when some thing else cries
first, and makes such a noise in the ears of the Lord, that it calls for
vengeance of him; and in the ears of the committers, that they cannot hear
any thing unless it be loud. In such cases men are not moved at all with low
words, as the whistling of the wind is not perceived at all, in the blowing of
trumpets or the ringing of belles. Those things which are violent, must be
driven forth with such other things as are violent. It is said of blood that
it cannot be satisfied but with blood. It is known of love, that it cannot be
recompensed or requited but with love. Even so the cry of sin cannot be
stopped, but by crying out against sin, and condemning it openly. But that
sins do cry we read often in the Scripture. Abels blood did cry, Genesis 4.10.
Chap. 18.20. Deuteronomy. 24.15. Iac. 5.4.
that is indeed, the murder of Cain did call to God for vengeance. The cry of
Sodom and Gomorrha was great. The detaining of wages from the laborer and
hired servant, does yield forth a cry. And here in this place the wickedness
of Niniue comes up before God: and with what but with a cry? As if he should
say, that it was now grown so great, that the earth was no longer able to hold
it, but both the air and the heaven too, did ring of the same. Exceeding force
of sin, which will thus call for vengeance. Genesis 19.13.
This was it which once plucked down fire and brimstone from heaven upon
Sodom and Gomorrha. This was it which caused that universal flood in the
days of Noe. Chap. 6.12. Number. 16.1.
This made Corah and his company to be swallowed up by the earth and go down
quick into the grave. This brought an incredible destruction upon Jerusalem,
which sometimes was Gods own City. Nay this very place Niniue, although now it
were spared upon their apparent repentance, yet when afterward they returned to
their malice, as a dog to his vomit, it was destroyed, as Nahum the Prophet had
foretold. Nahum. 3.1.
Those other Monarchies of the old Babylonians, of the Medes and the Persians,
of the Greeks and Romans did speed after like sort. Their sin ascending
upward, rebounded again upon them, with a fearful desolation. But what now
may we imagine that those sins were, which are said in this place to lie so
grievously upon them.

18 It is likely that such general sins were in Niniue, as are said by
Ezechiel to have been in Sodom, Ezech. 16.49
that is, Pride and fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness, and that she
did not stre^gthen the hand of the poor and needy; but I think that in
particular some falts may be picked out, which were great in that place. As
first, witchcraft and enchantment, and sorcery and necromancie, and divination
by the stars, which were exercised beyond measure, in all the Eastern parts
where Niniue stood. When the true wisdom of Salomo^, 1. Reg. 4.30.
is in the scripture compared with men's counterfeit wisdom, it is said that
his wisdom excelled all the wisdom of the children of the East, that is,
their Philosphers and Diuiners, Matthew. 2.1. (...).
and all of that sort. There came to adore Christ, wise men as they are called,
Magi, Diuiners or Soothsayers, and it is said in the text, that they came out
of the East. In the second of Daniel, what a rabble of such are reckened up to
be in Babylon, a city not far from Niniue, Dan. 2.2.
Inchanters, Astrologians, Chaldeans and Sorcerers? and how does God himself
deride, and scoff at the^ by his Prophet Esaias, Isa. 47.9.
for entertaining of such, and for retaining of so many? In one word, the
censure that is set on the Chaldaeans, men not far from Niniue, Tull. de
Diuinat. lib. 2. Tacitus Hist. lib. 1.

Annaliu^ li. 6. Tiberius scie^tia Chaldaeoru^ artu.

Herodot. li. 5.


by Tully in the second of his Divination, and by Cornelius Tacitus in the
first of his History, (where that by his Mathematicians he means Chaldaeans,
or the scholars of them, may be well gathered from that which elsewhere he has
of Tiberius, who as he says was skilled in their Arts) together with the
Narration of the Magi in Herodotus, who would have had the kingdom after the
death of Ca^byses, do make this most plain, that in the East country these
Arts were used much, and therefore likely so in Niniue. But how odious these
sins are in the sight of God, whosoever does read the Scriptures, can not be
ignorant. In the tenth of Jeremy the least of these faults are called the way
or customs of the heathen, Ierem. 10.2. Number. 23.23.
and therefore are they unfit for Gods people. Balaam could say, there is no
sorcery in Jacob, nor soothsaying in Israel. God himself does give charge that
among his people should be none that uses witchcraft or a regarder of time,
Deuteronomy. 18.10.
or a marker of the flying of fowls, or a sorcerer, or a charmer, or that
counsels with spirits, or a soothsayer, or that asks counsel at the dead,
and the reason is there assigned, because all that do such things are an
abomination to the Lord. Nay, God does so hate these, as that all such who
seek to them, are odious to him, 1. Sam. 28.7. 2. Reg. 1.1. 1. Chro. 10.13
as by Saul and Ahaziah may most plainly appear, who for seeking unto such,
lost their kingdoms and their lives. The audaciousnesse of men who are
acquainted with these arts, may be seen by those enchanters of whom we read
in Exodus, Exodus 7.11. Plinius Hist. Not. lib. 26.4. Regulus auspiciae curauit,
and captus est. Mancinus religione^ tenuit, and sub iugum missus est. Pullos
edaces habuit Paulus Cyprian de Idolorum vanitate. Zozom. Hist. Eccles. 2.22.
Theod Hist. eccles. li 3.21 Mulierculam capillo suspensam, m^mbus exte^sis,
cuius ventre dissecto.
who at Pharaos entreaty, did dare not only to brave, but to resist God and
his servant Moses. Pliny himself although he were but a heathen man, does
laugh at and deride the vanities of such. S. Cyprian does describe their
unfruitful superstition: Regulus says he, observed the flying of birds, and
yet he was taken by the Carthaginians. Mancinus kept their religion, yet was he
sent under the gallows, sub iugum, a token of disgrace to him self and his
army. Paulus had the birds eating lustily, which they held as a sign of good
luck, yet was he slain at the battle of Cannae. But the execrable custom of
some who be of this kind may partly be learned by that, wherewith Athanasius
sometimes (although falsely) was charged, that he in his Magic should use the
hand of a dead man, which by experience in our time has been declared to be a
practice, of some who use those trades. And partly by the example of Julian the
Apostata, who not long before his death, going to war in Persia, did cause a
woman to be hanged up by the hair of the head, to have her hands stretched
abroad, her belly to be ripped open, that, as the author iesteth at it, her
liver perhaps being cut up, he might thereby divine what should be the end of
that his voyage, and whether that he should safely return again. As it may
seem he him self was ashamed of that deed, Non obserari solum sedetia^
obsignari.
for he caused the church or chapel wherein this fact was done, not only to
be locked, but to be sealed up also, and watchmen continually toward there,
that no man might come in. Yet afterward it was discovered, when report came of
his death. No marvel if such sins did come up unto the Lord, or any other
which draw in this line, Basil in Hexae mero. Homil. 1.

Astrologia indiciaria negotiosissima vanitas.


if they were to be found in Niniue. Let Christians still take heed of these
most filthy crimes, yea and of all curious arts, and among them of that too,
which, whatsoever be said for it by many who are young, and delight in
experiments, is truly said by Basil, to be nothing else but a busy tickle
vanity.

19 A second sin in Niniue was robbery and oppression. That in some sort may be
gathered from their large and mighty government, which could not be
maintained but by somewhat, and indeed was vp-held and born out, with the
spoils of other. But the Prophet Nahum does put the case beyond question, when
he calls it a bloody city, Nahum. 3.1.
full of lies and robbery, from whence the pray departs not. They had then
conquered a great part of the inhabited world. The tributes and exactions which
they had of them whom they conquered, could not choose but be great. And for the
beautifying of that their City, which for a thousand years and more, was
mistress of the world, and chief seat of the Empire, it may well be
supposed, that they took the self same course, which afterward was taken up
by the Romans, who to garnish and adorn Rome, did take away from all places,
whither their authority and sovereignty did stretch, not only gold and silver,
but images and pictures, and painted tables, and hangings of tapistrie, and
plate, and armor, yea whatsoever else was precious in their eyes. Liuius lib.
25
So did that great Marcellus at the sacking of Syracusa, and other in other
places; who feared not to spoil many towns, to make one trim and glorious.
Now God who loves justice, and in justice hates oppression, and the robbing
of other men, can not like of this. How sped Pharao with his people, for
dealing hard with the Israelites? If he shall be cast into the fire says Saint
Austen, Augustine. de Sanctis, Sermon 38.

Putas vbi mittendus est qui tulit ali^num?


being moved as it seems by that place of the 25. of Matthew, who did not
give his bread to the hungry, where think you shall he be put, who has taken
away the bread of other men? If he shall be thrown into the fire who clothed
not the naked, whither shall he be cast who has unclothed the clothed? If he
be condemned with the Devil who has not affoorded his house to strangers,
where do you think is he to be put, which takes away that house which in right
is another man's? All which things oppressors do. Here let those men take heed,
who grind the face of the poor, of the fatherless, and the widow, if this
sin yield forth a cry, not only in this world but in another also. Theater
du monde. lib. 2.
It was a spiteful trick and in no sort to be commended, but much less to be
imitated; and it was a saying much abused out of Athanasius his Creed: but yet
the meaning was very shrewd, when the people of Sicilia did write upon the
tomb of a dead Viceroy of theirs, who was a great oppressor, and cruel over
that country Qui propter nos homines
Et nostram salutem
Descendit ad inferos.
Athanasius in Symbolo.
Who for us men
And for our better safety
Is gone down into hell.
They meant that this polling and exacting governor was lodged in hell.

20 If all things which are written, be written for our learning, then let the
cry of Niniue be a warning unto us, and to all men in general, that we fly
from their cruelty. And remembering that of the Prophet, Habac. 2.11.
The stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall
answer it, Woe unto him that builds a town with blood, and erecteth a City
by iniquity, let us be wary in our Colleges, that it be not truly said of
us, that robbery and oppression, and bribery and extortion, go not out of their
streets. The keeping back of the poor, for the speeding of the rich to gain
friends to our selves, or to be enriched with money, comes near within this
compass. Friendship which is so gotten, is not friendship with the Lord, nor
friendship for the Lord, but friendship against the Lord. Money which is so
had, as it is cursedly gotten, so it is often spent leudly. It is put as the
Prophet speaks, Agg 1.6.
into a broken bag; the Lord does blow upon it; and yet we will not see so
much. A reckening must be made, as how we spend our money, so much more how we
get it. If such sins should be among us, they may be accounted far greater,
then they could be in Niniue, because we have had many Ionasses, who have long
cried out against them. That God who is slow to anger, will strike so much the
heavier, when he is forced to strike. That wrath which is deferred will in the
end prove most grievous. Thus you see what Jonas was, and again what he was
not, and who sent him from Israel, and who bid him go to Niniue, and that
Niniue was a great City, but a City of great sin. It follows in the next
place how he did discharge this duty: but that must be deferred unto some
other time. In the mean while God send us understanding in all things. To this
God be praise for ever.

THE II. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 1. The verity of the Scripture appears in that the
writers thereof do declare many things against themselves. 6 Reasons which
might move Jonas to fly to Tarshish, and the insufficiency of them. 12 Where
Tarshish was. 13 The vocation of the Ministry is not to be relinquished. 16
Men are more free to spend money about evil things then about good. 17 What it
is to fly from Gods presence. 19 Comfort and instruction to the Minister.

JONAH. 1.3. But Jonah rose up to fly into Tarshish from the presence of the
Lord, and went down to Iapho: and he found a ship going to Tarshish: so he
paid the fare thereof and went down into it: that he might go with them into
Tarshish from the presence of the Lord.


JONAS has received his charge to go to Niniue, with a message of much
importance; which he might do the better, because he came with authority, and
not as a common person, to chide and brawle about injuries, or bad reckenings
which fall out between man and man, but with a proclamation of weight from the
eternal God. Here a natural man would look, that since Jonas is to write
this story of himself, (for no man I think makes doubt thereof) he should
speak for his own credit; with what diligence and audacitie he performed this
message; how he spared not the king of Niniue, but told him his own; or if he
had failed to do that which was enioined to him, or for want of wit or will, had
missed in his designement, a worldling would judge, that for his reputation, he
should have concealed it: let others if they would have spoken their pleasure of
him, but not he of himself: or if needs he must have spoken, he would have told
the better part, and left out the worst. But if Jonas would be naught, and err
as fowly in penning, as he did before in practice, he has here met with his
master, who well can keep him from it, even the mighty Spirit of God, which
deals with him in this place as it did with David in his one and fiftieth
Psalm, that is, makes him to confess that against God, Psalm. 51.4.
against him only he had sinned, and done evil in his sight, that the Lord
might be justified when he did speak, and pure when he did judge, that God
might have his true honor, and man bear his deserved blame. This here makes
our Prophet say so much against himself, and lay open his own infirmity, yea
his grievous disobedience, that himself was a runagate, Jonah. 1.5.
and fugitive from his God, yea a very careless rebel: that he slept in the
ship-bottome, when all other were praying, for fear lest they should be
drowned: Chap. 4.5.
that he crosses the Lord always, wishing vengeance upon Niniue, when God
would have mercy; Chap. 4.1.4.9.
yea that as the testiest man who ever did live, he did fret and scold with
God, and for anger would be dead; and lastly that chiding hand-smooth with his
maker, he did justify his wrath, that he did well to be angry.

2 This course (not only here but through other scriptures also) of inculcating
and redoubling their faults, whom the books do most concern, Job. 3.1. 2. Sam.
11.17 1. Reg. 11.3. Number. 11.11. Chap. 20.12. Ierem. 20.14.
as the impatiency of Job, the murder of David, the idolatry of Solomon, the
discontentednesse of Moses, by Moses himself, and Gods punishment on him for
it, that he came not into Canaan; so by Jeremy himself, the fretting of
Jeremy, because all things were not well, does argue to the reader some thing
very supernatural that is in these books; since contrary to the course of
humorous ambition, which delights in her own glory, and either openly or
secretly, by some insinuation does aim still at her own praise, they which
are the Spirits secretaries, should discover themselves, and display their own
ouersights. Among other that follow in the process of this Prophecy, this is
an excellent argument, against those wicked ones of our age, who call the
Scripture in question. If they, who in the way of carnalitie to magnify
themselves, and make their words seem glorious, dare oppose their wits
against heaven and earth, against Jews and Gentiles, against God and men,
could remember the endless wisdom of the word of life, they might
plentifully admire their spirit, who to give God the glory, 2. Cor. 12.5.
do rejoice in their infirmities, and proclaim their own follies. And if they
would compare the manner of these writers inspired with the holy Ghost, with the
works of other men of what sort soever, they must either shut their eyes or
confess a great difference.

3 For the writers of this world, howsoever against enemies they speak all and
more then all, as Zozimus did against the Christians; or for their friends and
countrymen set all at the highest, Salust. in prae fatione Coniurat. Catil.
as Salust does observe that the Athenien and Greek writers did long before
his time; yea howsoever sometimes they speak truth where it comes to their
notice, or touches not themselves, or their partial friends; yet in them we
find few examples of laying open the errors of themselves, or of their friends,
especially when in any sort it may be concealed. Let Tully be a witness, of
whose faults we do not read in any thing of his own; Tull. Offic. 1.
but that Rome was saved by him from the fury of Catiline; that when he was
Consul he did more then good service to the commonwealth, his tongue and his pen
have never done. What learned man has not heard of his Cedant arma togae,
concedat laurea linguae.
In the Commentaries of Caesar a book worthily penned, may we find any thing
which makes against himself, yea in his civil wars? Hirtius de bello Hispa.
But in his friend Hirtius, what is there to be read that does not make for
him? The writings of Mahomet, I mean such as are written of him, do make him
the only Prophet in the last age of the world, the great servant of the
Highest, having messages from above, and oracles from heaven, yea and such a
one as was able bodily to rise again from the dead, but that must be after
eight hundred years (he takes a pretty time for the trying of that
conclusion, John 2.19. Lod. Viues de veritate fidei lib. 4. Ioh. 16.7.
whereas Christ took but three days) yea as Viues observes, that he was the
Co^forter whom Christ promised to send into the world after his ascension: and
that it was written in the Gospel of Saint John, I will send you a Comforter,
and that shall be Mahomet, but that those last words concerning Mahomet, were
razed out by the Christians.

4 By these we may judge of the rest. But it is so far off from men, who are
but natural men, to be detectors and discouerers of their own falls to
posterity, that they cannot with patience endure, that they should be opened by
other. For that is a common fault and not proper to one, which Pliny reports
of one in his time. And that was, that whereas according to the custom of that
age, a certain writer had read and rehearsed in the presence of diverse a
piece of a book, which truly deciphered the faults of some men, and said that
he would reserve the rest until the next day to be heard, Plin. Junior Epist.
lib. 9. ad paternu^. Tantus a^die^di quae feceru^t pudor quibus nullus faciendi
quae audire erubescunt.
the friends of one party who was touched in that book, and not without
desert, came in the mean while to the Author, and most earnestly entreated him
in their friends behalf, that he would forbear to read of that matter any
further. Which made Pliny to infer this, in one of his Epistles, Such shame
is there of hearing such things as are done, by them who shame not to do that
which they blush to hear. What his friends could not endure, himself would
much less, and what to hear had been grievous, to write had been ashame. The
Prophets and penmen of the Spirit of God, by a peculiar prerogative are
singular in this kind, to show that their books are the books of their
Master: and so by that one means among other, Aug. Epist. 7. Secu^das parts
habeat modedestiae qui primas non potuit habere sapie^tiae.
to stop the mouths of blasphemers and miscreants, who measure God by
themselves, and piety by their profaneness. Jonas was better taught, not to
give the glory to himself, but to God, having learned that lesson which Saint
Austen afterward did mention, that he who has failed in the first degree of
wisdom, that is virtue and obedience, should betake him to the second, that
is, modesty in confessing and acknowledging his fault. Hear now therefore
what he did, and how he performed his message.

He arose to fly into Tarshish.
5 Jonas thus far was obedient, to arise when he was bidden, but he might as
well have sat still, for any good which he did. He rouzeth up himself, as if
he intended to fall hardly to his matters; but after the first step, he trod
not one foot right. He should have rose to cry, and he arose to fly: he
should have gone East to Niniue, and he went Westward to Iapho. But even clean
contrary. A lively example of the infirmity of man, that without Gods grace we
very soon plunge into all manner of sin, without measure or mean, when a
Prophet so experienced in the mysteries of salvation, could play so foul a
part. But there is no man that sins not, 1. Reg 8.46.
as Solomon says, And the just man does fall seven times, Hieronym. Epist. 46.
Si cadit quomodo iustus, si iustus quomodo cadit? Jacob. 3.2.
whereof although Hierome ask, If he be just how does he fall, and if he fall
how is he just? yet he answers himself, that he loses not the name of a
righteous man, who arises by repentance, and we may say further, he falls by
nature, and arises by grace, he falls by sin, and is righteous by faith.
In many things we sin all, says S. James: not you only who be the people,
but we also the Apostles. And if that there should have come any other after
the Apostles, that should not have sinned, it is very likely that our Savior
in the midst of his wisdom, wherewith he governs his Church, would have
appointed for them some other prayer, then the ordinary Lords prayer: Matthew.
6.12.
they should not have said, forgive us our trespasses, because they had none.
This is a cooler both to the Pharisees and Nouatians, who were wont to despise
sinners. If Jonas fall, and Job, and Noe, and Lot, and David, whom the
scripture calls just and righteous persons, and after Gods own heart, let
other men take heed of presumption, and trusting in themselves. Yet this is a
comfort to sinners in the weakness of their souls. If God forgave Jonas
repenting and believing, he will forgive us also, if we believe and repent.
Therefore let not despair devour our wounded consciences. Yet let not this be
an encouragement to offend in any wilfulness. Many will fall with David, but
they will not arise with David. Our Prophet at the length amendeth, but his
fall was great the while. Let us first see the reasons that moved him to his
flight, and then the manner of it.

6 We need not to doubt, but Satan who is ever at hand to promote bad causes,
could yield reasons enough for the hinderance of this work. He had cause to
fear, that by the means of Jonas many souls in Niniue might escape his net.
Perhaps 1. Sam. 21.13
This was one part of David's fear, when being with Achis he feigned himself
mad, because among strangers out of his own country, he had none on whom he
might repose him self, as on his familiar and fast true friend. But a meaner
man then a Prophet, might here have answered Satan, that the whole earth is the
Lords, Psalm. 24.1. Genesis 12.10. Ruth. 1.1.
and all that therein is, the compass of the world and they that dwell
therein. He who kept Abraham in Egypt, where he was but a mere stranger, and
Naomi in Moab, could keep Jonas here also. It may be that the tempter would 2.
Reg. 6.16.
were more in number then all the enemies which were against them. Where God is
and his Angels, there man is not alone. He could not but know, 2 Pet. 2.5.
Exodus 3.10. Exodus 32.20.
that a time had been, when one Noe was to preach to all the world, one Moses
to Pharao and all the land of Egypt. The same Moses had stood against all the
tribes of Israel, when he came down from the Mount, and found the people
dancing about the golden calfe. Number. 14.6.
It was but one pair, when Joshua and Caleb resisted all the people, who
murmured upon the return of the spies out of Canaan. Therefore as no reason
should stop the mouth of the Minister, or detain him from his charge, so this
should least of all other. They who never knew God, have gone as far as this:
as Phocion among the Atheniens, of whom it is written, Plut. in vita Phocionis.
that when Apollo by his Oracle at Delphos, had given an answer, that one man
did disagree, although all the rest of their City consented; Desinite
solicit inquirere quisnam is sit vir* ego sum de quo quaeritur: soli enim
mihi nil eorum quae aguntur probatur.
and they were much troubled to know who that one was, Phocion of his own
accord stepped forth and said, give over to wonder or enquire too carefully,
who that man is: I am he of whom the question is, for indeed I like of nothing
that you go about. Jonas might have been as bold as ever Phocion was, for he
had a far better theme to speak upon.

7 It might be that our Prophet might have a conceit, that for bringing such a
message as the destruction of Niniue, he might be murdered, or at the least be
much abused; and that therefore 1. Reg. 19.1. Chap. 13.1.
Elias could hardly escape the fingers of Iezabel, and another Prophet could
scant get away from idolatrous Jeroboam, what might not be well feared among
Gentiles, and proud bloody people? If it were but to be imprisoned, or rayled
at, or spit on, who would ever come there, that might keep himself thence?
yet this was a carnal reason, if the Prophet so thought. Plutarch. de Exilio.
Ridemus eum qui dixit meliorem Athenis esse lunam qua^ Corinthi.
It was noted for folly in him that could say, that there was a better Moon
at Athens then any was at Corinth. It sauoured of infidelity in him that
should think, that God was not as strong at Niniue, as he had been in Israel.
But Jonas would thou not adventure an abusing, to win unto the Lord so goodly
a City as Niniue was? such a king, and such a people? enlarge heaven with so
many? A Philosopher after thee, Diogenes Laer^ius in vita Aristippi.
Aristippus by name, in a desire that he had to gain Dionysius but unto moral
virtue, could endure that the tyrant whose good he did seek, should rail and
spit on him. And he could say for himself, that if fishermen for the getting
of a little fish, could be well contented to soil and foul themselves in the
mud and mire, why should he refuse to endure any disgrace, if he might catch
such a great fish as Dionysius was. The king of Niniue and his people, had been
as the taking of a whale, in comparison of Dionysius, although a king in
Sicilia. But if it had been worse, Jonas, that thou must have lost thy life,
woldst thou have stuck thereat? To bestow thy life on God, who bestowed it on
thee? to yield it when he called for it, who might call for it when he would?
Could not he have restored it in this world, if it had pleased him? or could he
not make recompense in the kingdom of heaven? Thou could not but know,
Jonas, that his Son afterward, should for thy sake lose his life. Was the
servant above the master? How many for their Princes? how many for their
countries have willingly died? Shall men do that for men, which thou will not
for thy God? It was many years after thee, Eccles. 1.10.
(but the saying of Solomon in specie is true, that there is no new thing, and
so the like might be before thee) that at the siege of Auaricum a city of
France by Julius Caesar, Caesar. Comment. lib. 7.
one frenchman being slain, by the stroke of an engine in war called a
Scorpion, a second comes in his place, and when he was slain, a third, and
when he was dead, a fourth, they so entering certain death for the safeguard of
their country. Shall soldiers do more for the keeping of a City, then a
Prophet will do for the kingdom of heaven? This yet therefore is no reason:
let us hear a little further.

Romans 3 2.
and to whom were committed the oracles of God, and knew what belonged to all
these, what should be expected of ignorant persons? of superstitious idolaters?
He who had lost one labor in so large a sort spent, would hardly endure to
lose another. As good sit still at home, or do something else, as go so far
and do nothing. This objection yet was worldly, for how could he tell what the
Lord would do? Romans 11.33. Matthew. 3.9.
Had he diued into those counsels which are so unsearchable, and those ways
which are past finding out? God was able of stones to raise up children to
Abraham. He could make the rough ways plain, and set the crooked things
straight. Who should be of power to soften and mollify the heart, of flintie
to make it fleshie, but he who made the heart? Howsoever let the Minister do
his duty, and leave the rest to him. Paul planteth, 1. Cor. 3.6.
Apollos waters, but God gives the increase. But if God be not pleased to
give any increase, yet let Paul plant, and let Apollos water. The resolution
which Ioab sometimes did bear speaking to the Israelites, should be the
resolution of the Minister, 2. Sam 10.12.
Be strong, and let us be valiant for our people, and for the cities of our
God, and then let the Lord do what seems good in his eyes. So should Jonas
have said. In an unknown country God might have sent him fruit, who found
none in his own. Joseph. Anti. lib. 16.6.
It is noted of Herod the great, by Josephus, that he who at home was a man
most unhappy in his wives and his children, was abroad a man most happy, for
his great friends and acquaintance and much other prosperity. So it might
have been with the Prophet. Therefore this yet is no reason.

9 It may be that he stomaked it, that the Gentiles should We have Abraham to
our father. Matthew. 3.9. Ioh. 8.39. Act. 10.44.
In respect whereof, when Peter had preached to the Gentiles, and the gifts of
the holy Ghost had fallen on Cornelius, and those which were with him; they of
the Circumcision did challenge the Apostle, Act. 11.2.
that he had gone in to me^ uncircumcised. So the Prophet being sick of his
country-mens disease, might murmr that the Ninevites should be preferred
before the ancient people of God, his word being taken from these, and given
to the other, as if they had better deserved it. This might in time bring in
the refu^all of the Jews, and the calling of the Gentiles so spoken of by Noe,
Genesis 9.27. Chap. 49.10. Deuteronomy. 32 21. Psalm. 68.31.
so told of by Jacob, so fore-prophecied by Moses, so fore-written by David,
all which more then apparently did aim at such a matter. But is it come to
this pass that the axe shall lead the workman? or shall man teach his God
what people he shall choose? Hiram although a Gentile, 1. Reg. 5.8.
yet had a finger in the Temple of Solomon; so Niniue of the Gentiles might be
a part of Gods spiritual temple. If Israel were to be rejected, they might
thank none but themselves for that loss, who had the custody of so precious
a treasure, as the Arc was and the Cherubins, which signified Gods presence,
and lost all the fruit of them and many blessings besides. But by many words
of the old Testament, that time could not yet be come, nor the general calling
of the Gentiles, till that Messiah did appear, who was far enough from
Jonas. Therefore as the rest, so this was no pretense for the Prophet, to fly
away from his charge.

10 Thus have I touched such causes, as sense and reason yield, and the
expositions on this place. The text does not contrary these, and it is not
unlikely, that all or diverse of them, were tumbling at that time in the
working head of Jonas. But Ion. 4.2.
Jonas stood on his reputation, that he was the Lords messenger, and therefore
was to speak nothing but truth. He imagined that it might be his gross
discredit, to be taken in a lie; and he thought it might be a means, that Gods
name might be reproched, and the Lord be blasphemed. For I know says he, that
thou art a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness,
and repentest thee of the evil. Thus the man is so straight laced, that rather
then him self would lose a word, he cares not if a million of men do lose
their lives; if that goodly glorious city were ruinated to the ground; if the
innocent sucking infants were devoured up by destruction. A preposterous zeal,
and furious, and which wants no ignorance also. For he should ha^^ learned to
distinguish between Gods absolute word, and his conditional threatenings. Some
things are without any condition, ^e will have them to be so: some other
things are with an If, as, if they do not repent. It was an absolute speech:
The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head. Genesis 3.15.
But it is a word with condition, The Lord will not forsake his people, that
is, if they do not first forsake him, which manner of intended, or included
condition if Jonas had remembered, when he was to utter his speech, That Niniue
should be destroyed, Verum est, if they repented not, and called for grace, God
might have done his pleasure, and his servant have said true also.

11 This reason of the Prophet wherefore he should fly from Gods service, is
more grievous then the rest. For would he shorten the Lord of his mercy? Would
man that was a sinner, and must be saved by a pardon, envy that other sinners
should have their pardon also? Matthew. 20.15.
Was Jonas his eye evil because Gods eye was good? Then welfare Saint Paul
writing to Titus, whom he would have to remember his charge, and the people
whom he taught, Tit. 3.2.3.
to show meekness to all men, and he lays this down as one cause, for that
we our selves also were in times past unwise and disobedient. Tullius pro M.
Marcello.
Tully was of better nature, who would have Marcellus spared, because himself
before had by Caesar been spared. But he reprocheth it unto Tubero, that he
would offer to accuse Ligarius of that, Pro Q. Ligario.

August. Homil. 6. Tomo 10.

Quia Deus extendit pontem misericordiae suae vt tu tra^sire posses, hoc vis vt
iam subducat ne alius transeat?


wherein himself and other had been guilty. S. Auste^ in the sixth of those,
which are only called by the name of his Homelies, does by a secret inclusion
compare this mind of man, to one who is to pass over a ditch, or stream of
water, (where if he pass not he dies, and if he plunge in, he drowneth) and
there does find that favor to have a bridge or planke of timber laid cross
to help him over: but when other do come after, who are in that state as he
was, he would have it withdrawn from them. When God says he has stretched
out his bridge of mercy that thou may go over, will thou that he shall
withdraw it, least some other do come that way? This is a cruel position, and
should not be in the child of God. Grave Seneca does acount it a great fault in
Lysimachus, Senec. de Ira. lib. 3.
that whereas himself upon Alexanders displeasure, was cast unto a Lion to be
devoured, and happily escaped by killing that Lion, yet he carried so furious
and cruel a heart toward another man, as to cut off the ears and nose from
Telesphorus Rhodius, whom in former time he had entertained as his friend, but
then afterward kept him being so mangled, in a cage, as if he had been some
strange beast. He should have learned by his own example to have pitied
another man. That verse of Dido is good, Non ignara mali miseris succurrere
disco. Virgil. Aeneid. 1.

I who have tasted of sorrow, have learned thereby to pity those whom I see to
be in misery. That party who has found mercy, should not grudge mercy unto
other. Our Prophet has forgot this. Nothing else but thunder and lightening,
and fire from heaven would serve the turn, if he must go to Niniue. A humor
very ambitious, which to feed it self in his fancies, cares not if other
perish. This is a grievous fault wheresoever it be found. The magnifying of one
man, and the loftiness which he conceiueth, should not be the ruin of many.
What is the cause says Saint Bernard of such fury many times? Nothing else
says he but this, Bernardus Epistol. 126. Luc. 2.14. Displicet mortalibus
Angelica illa partitio qua gloria D^o and pax hominibus nu^ciatur: and dum
gloriam vsurpant, turbant pacem.

Augustine. de verbis Dom. Sermon. 15.


that the division of the Angels does not please mortal men. For they say,
Glory to God on high, and peace to men: but while men do seek the glory
they do disturb the peace. The Prophet in this place, is sick of this
disease. Let Niniue and ten Niniues sincke, burn, or do what it will: he had
leifer have his mind satisfied, then all the world besides. Whereof because he
fears that he shall fail, he will take such a course, as in the end proves
little to his own ease. He arises as God bad him, and away he goes with
haste; but better that he had halted, so it had been in the right way, then to
run with speed in a wrong way. And thus now having heard the reasons which are
by any supposed to put him besides his duty, let us see the course which he
takes.

He went down to Iapho, etc.
Septuagint. (...). Hierony. in hunc locum.
12 The Septuagint translate it, he went up to Iapho; but Hierome does dislike
it, being moved thereto both by the Hebrew word, and by his own experience.
For living long, as he did in the holy land as we commonly call it, he saw that
Iapho did stand low, and therefore to be more fit for descending then
ascending. It is a haven town in Palestina standing upon the Mediterrane sea,
and it is the same which is called Ioppa in the tenth of the Acts, Acts. 10.15.
whither Cornelius sent for Peter. This is one of those towns, which the
Christians sometimes in their voyage to the holy land, Roger. Houeden in
Richardo primo. Guliel. Neubringens. Hist. 4.27. Arias Mont. in hunc locu^
Hieron. in Ezec. 27.12.
did recover from Saladine the great king of Egypt: and it had afterward been
regained by him, but that Richard the first then king of this land, being
returning on his journey for England, did bring back his army, and succor it
at need, as Neubringensis writes. From this Iapho our Prophet would go unto
Tarshish, which some have thought to be the old city Carthage, and Hierome
himself though not in this place yet in the seven and twentieth of Ezechiel
does read Carthaginiens, where as we read, men of Tarshish. Yet because we
are not sure, that Carthage was then built, (for this Prophecy is ancient,
and Salomons time more ancient, when Tarshish was right famous, which I think
Carthage was not) I therefore follow them who take it for Tarsus a town of
Cilicia in Asia the lesser, Gualther. in hunc locum.
which was nearer to the Jews, and well known among them, as may be gathered
by Paul's speech, saying that he was borne there, and calling it a famous city
in Cilicia. I am the more induced hereunto, Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 9.11.
because Josephus reciting this story says expressly, that Jonas meant to fly
to Tarsus in Cilicia. And I suppose this to be the place, whither Solomon did
send for things of pleasure, and of profit, when it is said that he sent unto
Tarshish for gold and silver and iuorie and Apes and peacockes. 1. Reg. 10.22.


13 This City then being a place of great traffike, whither merchants did
frequent, to buy and sell wares, does yield probable conjecture, although no
necessary inference, that Jonas not liking his message to Niniue, would now for
worldly respects, leave his calling and become a merchant. It would well have
becommed him, to renounce his vocation, and fallen to merchandising. His
sanctified gifts would have well served to that purpose. That calling in it
self is certainly not unlawful, but yet not lawful to every man. There are
in it, as by men it is commonly used, great occasions of abuses, and those so
great, that Syracides says of it, Eccles. 26 30. Chap. 27.2.
A merchant cannot lightly keep him from vvrong. And, As a nail in the wall
sticks fast between the joints of the stones, Herodotus in Clio. Non extimui
^nquam homines illos, quibus locus est in media vrbe vacuus ad quem collecti
mutuis ipsi s^bi iuramentis imponerent.
so does sin stick between the selling and buying. Cyrus the king of Persia
did note great fraud and deceit to be in the Greeks, when he could say of
them, that he feared not such men, as had a place empty in the midst of their
city, to the which they gathering every day, beguiled one another with oaths
and swearing. These words says Herodotus did Cyrus cast forth against all
the Greeks, because they had large market places wherein they used their
traffiking, as among us might be a Bource or Exchange. Let this rather be a
fault of the persons then of the things, since God has ordained that trade to
his glory, to the use of navigations, to the discovery of countries, to the
communicating of commodities in one nation to another, to the bringing in of
such things as are comfortable to man; yea serviceable in religion, as wine to
us Northern people, to be used in the Sacrament, as the best representation of
the blood of Christ Jesus. But howsoever for a Prophet, to leave his preaching
in the name of the Lord, and fall to marchandising (if we will take it so) was
a fault in the highest degree, to run from God to men: from heaven unto earth.

14 I find in the new Testament, that from towl-gatherers and fishers men came
to be Apostles; and I know that after their sanctifying, Ioh. 21.3. Act. 18.3.
for a need they did use their occupations, as the Apostles went a fishing, and
Saint Paul did make tents; but these things were but as hand-maidens to the
study of Divinity, and to the Mistress the word; but that preaching was left
for any of these, I think a man may turn the whole Bible over, and over
again, 2. Tim. 4 10.
and find no such example. Only this, it was small praise to Demas as here it
is to Jonas, that he left S. Paul, and embraced this present world. In our
time let me^ take heed, who^ God has blessed with very good gifts, that it be
not laid unto their charge, that they with Jonas have chosen to do something
else, as to be farmors, or graziers, or husbandme^ in the country, rather then
to preach the word, whereunto in former time they were in show selected. I
speak not in bitterness, but rather do grieve at it. The Church has had a
wound by it. If when they did teach before, they preached and were not called,
that were a grievous fault, to run and not be sent. If they formerly were
called, then who has now recalled the^? Those things about which they faint
and fall, are not of that moment, as is the preaching of the word. I do not yet
find any thing, either expressly or by consequent, directly to be drawn
throughout the whole book of God, for the leaving or refusing of this or of
that garment, and so of other circumstances, which sometimes were in question,
but I am sure that I find this plainly, 1. Cor. 9.16.
woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel. I do judge no man's conscience, but
leave that to the Lord. Yet to speak mine opinion, I do fear that it ca^ be
but small comfort, to the heart of a true Christian, in so glorious a time of
the Gospel, as we have (and the Lord make us thankful for it) to say that in
England he is persecuted for preaching of the Gospel. Less comfort to be said
truly, to be a cause to himself, of stopping his mouth from preaching of the
Gospel. But least of all, with Jonas to go from Niniue to Tarsus, from being a
Prophet, to be a merchant, or follow some other calling. Jonas by it sped but
il, let the^ look to themselves. I desire that all should be well.

He found a ship going to Tarshish.
15 God does many times suffer those things to be ready, by the which we may
fall, that we may learn that in our selves there is no measure of iniquity,
if God once do give us over, or leave us for a time. Whereupon we have need to
pray, not only as some pray, Matthew. 6.13. (...).
that he will not suffer us to be led into temptation, but that he will not
lead us into temptation, by causing us to see enticements, and if he do, that
then he will deliver us from evil. That is, if he try us, that he will not
suffer us to fall: if he lay a burden on us, that he will give us grace to
bear it. But that is another matter. He finds a ship ready, and like a man
that meant to travel, having money in his purse (so the Prophet is not
threadbare, he has money in his purse) he pays the fare of her. He may be
thought in this, to be a man of good conscience, that such as labored for him,
should have the price of their pains. A lesson worth the learning, for those
which have to do with laborers, and poor workmen, that they do not detain
their wages. Matthew. 10.10.
The labourer says our Savior, is worthy of his hire. God has diverse
sayings in his Law, that the wages of such persons as are hired, Leuit. 19.13.
Deuteronomy. 24.14.
should not be detained from them, least in anguish of their soul the men cry
unto the Lord, and he take it not well. The rich men that do this, are bidden
by Saint James to weep and howl for the miseries that shall come upon them.
Iac. 5.1.3.
And it is added, Your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall
be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. The
Prophet howsoever in other things he deal carelessly, yet in this he will not
offend. He will rather break with God, then crack his credit with men. If
they work they shall have money.

16 But may we not rather collect something here, which makes against the
Prophet, that so firily he is set, and so hotely enflamed to run from his
duty, that rather then fail, his purse shall go for his passage? Here is
earnestness with a witness; he cares not for his company, be they Gentiles,
or infidels, or idolaters as they were, (for that will appear by it which
follows) he cares not so that he may be gone. So that he may do amiss, he
will not spare his money. See the corruptnesse of our nature. They who are
otherwise straight-handed enough, in promoting that which is good, will spare
no cost at all to further that which is evil. I do not find that the Priests
were very liberal to the poor, especially out of the common treasury: yet
that Christ may be betrayed, Matthew. 26.15. Chap. 27.57.
Judas shall have for his part thirty pieces of silver. Let Joseph of
Arimathea bestow cost if he will, on burying Christ crucified; the rulers will
none: but so that it may be rumoured, that his Disciples came by night and
stole him away, Chap. 28.12.
the soldiers shall have large pay. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. 3.12.
The Apostata Julian was eger enough to get money from the Christians, by
exactions and oppressions, but when he bad the Jews build the Temple at
Jerusalem, in spite of Jesus Christ, Chap. 17. Ammian. Marcel. li. 23.
who had told before that it never should be reedified, it is certain that his
purse, as well as his tongue, did go in that bargain. Our age has too many
of such men as these be. Such as be of good place, if they be solicited by
their honest neighbors, to help forward a Lecture, for the teaching of the
people of God, their own children and servants, yea perhaps themselves too
(who are most ignorant of all) or to maintain an able Minister; they have not
a penie, their charge is so great, and so many ways they are burdened: but to
disturb their Preacher, or call him in question, or make him stand in law for
his tithes and due maintenance, they have money enough. For the using of Gods
gifts to the honor of his name, they have other business: but to use them
against God or any of his good children, they have store and will enough.

17 He pays that he may be gone, and he tells the other circumstances, that
he may confess his sin to be more grievous before God. But twice in this
verse it is named that he would fly from the presence of the Lord. In the
beginning and in the end. But might that be done Jonas? Can any withdraw
himself from the sight of the Lord? Is not he ruler as well of the sea, as of
the land? Can a man see himself any where, where God can not see him? Psalm.
94.9.
He who framed the eye shall not he see? or he who made the ear, shall he not
hear? Surely Jonas could not be ignorant, that this was not the matter. We
will not do such wrong to him, as to think that a Prophet had not read David's
Psalms. And if he had done that, then he well might remember that excellent
Psalm of David; Psalm. 139.3.
Thou compassest my paths and my lying down, and art accustomed to all my
ways. There is not a word in my tongue, but lo thou know it wholly o Lord.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I fly from thy Then the
caves of the earth, the secrets of walls, the darkness of the night, the
distance of the place either by land or sea, cannot detain from Gods presence.
Perhaps Adam and his wife, for want of experience (for they had never fallen
before) might think that by running among the trees of Paradise, Genesis 3.8.
they might hide themselves. But when God had once found them (which was not
long to do) they might be out of that opinion. Their posterity which came
after them, and had read the Scriptures, might be resolved for that matter.
Acts. 17.28.
For in God we move and live and have our being. And therefore wheresoever we
do move, or wheresoever we do live, or wheresoever we have our being, there God
is by his power, there God is by his presence. It shall be then but a bad shift
for the miscreants of the earth, to cry in the day of vengeance, to the
mountains and the rocks, Apoc. 6.15.
fall on us and hide us from the presence of him that sits on the throne,
and from the wrath of the Lamb. They cannot escape his sight, they cannot
avoid his judgment. Diodor. Sic. Bibliothecae lib. 12.
When Pericles once was sad, about yielding an account of much money to the
Atheniens, which he possibly could not discharge, his nephew Alcibiades did
help him with this good counsel, that he should not beat his brains, how he
might give a reckening, but he rather should devise how he might give no
reckening. He took this course indeed, and by plunging the Atheniens into a
grievous war, he did avoid the account. Before the Lord of heaven this will
not serve the turn: he knows all things and sees all things. Jonas could
not be so gross as to run so from his presence.

18 But if that thought were in him, or if any man will so take it, he went the
worst way to work for himself, that ever man did. For he that would be so
blockish, as to think he might fly from God, and would go to sea to do it,
were worthy to be registered, for a man most unadvised. This is as much, as if
to avoid some heat, that comes by an ague, the patient should run into the
fire, as it is said that Hercules did being troubled with a frenzy: Seneca in
Herc. Octaeo.
or if another to avoid a shower of rain, should leap into the river: for if
Gods hand any where do evidently appear, or if any where it be fearful,
Iuuenalis Satyra 12. Digitis a morte remotus qua. tuor aut septem si sit
latissima taeda.
it is in being at sea, where, as the Poet speaks, a man is still within four
or at most seven inches of his death: where storms that be impetuous do cause
them to pray, who scant ever prayed before; where rocks, and sands, and gulfes
are ready still to devour. The remembrance of this made David speak so
sufficiently, They that go down to the sea in ships, Psalm. 107.23.
and occupy by the great waters, they see the works of the Lord and his
wonders in the deep. Paul found this by experience, Acts. 27.18.
when he endured such a storm and wrecke too, in the Mediterrane sea. He who
would see more of this, let him read in Virgil, Virgilius Aeneid. 1.
what a tempest is described to have befallen Aeneas in the Sicilian sea. So
then if God be present any where to punish or preserve, it is in the huge
Ocean. That if a man would have wished to be followed as with a fury, he
should do as Jonas did. Plin-Iunior lib. 6. Epistolarum. Erant qui metu mortu
morte^ precarentur.
When Pliny the elder was choked, in going to see Vesuuius a hill which burned
in Campania (as Aetna oftentimes does in Sicilia) the sight thereof was so
terrible, that the beholders were all amazed at it. But there were says the
younger Pliny among them some, who were so afraid of death, that they wished
themselves to be dead. They so feared that which they feared, that they wished
for that which they feared. If our Prophet did desire to escape away from the
Lord, he did just as these other: for to fly away from Gods presence, he
runs into Gods presence.

19 Therefore we will not imagine that Jonas was so ignorant, to think thus to
get from the Lord: but his going from Gods presence, does signify in this
place a departing from his duty, and from the execution of his office. For
they are said in the Scripture, to be in the Lords presence, or to stand before
the Lord, who do execute their ministry or function as they should. So the
Lord separated the tribe of Leui, Deuteronomy. 10.8.
to bear the Arc of the covenant of the Lord, and to stand before the Lord,
which is expounded there, to minister unto him and to bless in his name to
this day. 1. Reg. 17.1.
So as the Lord God of Israel lives says Elias before whom I do stand, that
is, whom faithfully I do serve, there shall be neither deaw nor rain these
years but according to my word. The very self same phrase does Elizeus use,
in another place to Naaman the Syrian. 2. Reg. 5.16.
The contrary of which speech is uttered by that wicked Cain, Genesis 4.14.16
who did never serve God: From thy face I shall be hid. And afterward, Cain
went out from the presence of the Lord. He was not in his grace: he would not
be in his service. Such was our Prophets flight from the presence of the Lord.
When he should have performed his calling, and upon occasions, continually have
taken direction from the voice of God speaking to him, he did forsake his
charge, and could have been well contented, if God would never more have spoken
to him. But his master will not leave him so. This is an excellent comfort to
the Ministers of the Gospel, that as long as they do their duties they stand
before the Lord, who does protect and preserve them from the rage of bloody
tyrants, from the tempests of the world, from the mischief of cruel enemies.
Neither can the rage of Satan lay any thing more upon them, then God gives
them grace to bear. And again in as much as in this life they are spectacles
to men, in preaching and in living, they are spectacles to Angels, they are
spectacles to God, they are warned that they discharge their function with
sincerity, remembering this good lesson, 2. Cor. 2.17.
that they be not as many, who make merchandise of the word of God, but as of
sincerity, but as of God in the sight of God, speaking in Christ.

20 In these most perilous times, wherein Satan fretteth and rages; wherein
Papisme is little weakened, but Atheism waxes strong, and the sins of men do
cry; but on the other side pity waxes thin, and charity grows cold, This
should be a lively motion to stir up the Spirit of God in us, that with
alacrity we may go forward, to the building up of Gods house, and not to be
wearied in well doing, or withdraw our selves from the work. In the fifteenth
of the Acts, Acts. 15.38.
although Barnabas were more mild, and did not take the matter so hainously,
yet Paul did so dislike it in John Mark at Pamphylia, that he would not go
with them about the Lords service, that he refused his company afterward.
Surely God looks for much of them, whom he has singled out to be the
messengers of his glory. If with Jonas we should leave him, and turn away
from his presence when he has use for us in the field, let us fear least a
greater judgment befall us, then did unto Jonas. Which what it was, in the
next by Gods grace I shall show. In the mean time Jesus send* us due
consideration of our calling, that not following wordly reasons which often
draw men to Tharsus when they should go to Niniue, but attending Gods
commandment, we may with joy run our course, and so possess that inestimable
crown of justice, which the righteous Lord has laid up for all those that
love his coming. To this God be praise for ever.

THE III. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 2. The punishment of the Prophet may well fright other from
sin. 4. All tempests depend of God. 6. Yet Satan and his instruments, by Gods
permission have sometimes a finger in them. 10. How the sin of one brings
punishment upon many. 13. Bad company is to be avoided. 14. The description
of the tempest. 16. Life is dearer then goods. 18. Affliction drives to
devotion.

JONAH. 1.4.5 But the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a
mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken. Then the
mariners were afraid and cried every man unto his God, and cast the wares that
were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it of them.


Our Prophet as a man who would very gladly be rid of his master, has gotten
him to the sea; the land cannot hold him: but his master not so willing to
part with his servant, sends such a message after him, as will bring him back
again, or make him do far worse. He would not have his messenger run so to
his own ruin, and lie obdurate in his sin; he would not have his purpose of
preaching at Niniue, be utterly relinquished; but rather because it has so
long bin deferred, he by whom the stay has bin made, shall hear of it with a
witness. Here follows such a tempest, to bid him welcome to the sea, that if
such should be common, it needed not be noted to be the speech of a wise man,
Cato.
that he wondered that any one would come twice at the sea: having seen the
peril of it, would come at it again; for every wise man would so say. The wind
does now so blow, the waves do so beat, the sea does so work, the ship is so
endangered, the seamen are so afraid, Jonas so by a lot is singled out to
death, that drowning was the least that could befall unto him. We need make no
doubt, but all this was done for Jonas his sake. For the question is here true,
Habac 3 8.
which a Prophet elsewhere asks: Was the Lord angry against the rivers? or
was thine anger against the floods? or was thy wrath against the sea? No, it
was against the sin of Jonas, that all this came as vengeance, and that God
so sent his messengers of wrath and of displeasure.

2 He desires that his Prophet should be warned, for all the days that he was
to live in the world, to play no more such parts: for what end should the next
have, if he sped so ill with this? And he would have other men to take example
by him, that they run not, no not with his own servants, to gross notorious
crimes, least they smart for it with his servants. For if the green wood so
burn, Luc. 23.31.
what shall become of the dry? if a leader do such penance, what shall a
common man? if a Prophet do so pay for it, how shall a mean body escape? By
this example the presumptuous heart of such is broken, as when they have sinned
wilfully, in steed of asking pardon by confession and repentance, can sooth
themselves in their follies, saying that the best men have offended; and why
should it be strange for them to go astray, since Gods Saints have done worse?
Not only Jonas here forsakes his vocation, Genesis 9.21. Chap. 19.33. 2. Sam. 11
4. 1. Reg. 11.1.
but Noe offends in drunkenness, and Lot in worse, even in incest, and David
in adultery, and Solomon that wise king in marying many infidels. The gross
falls of all which men, are not proposed unto us in the holy book of God, to
encourage us to transgression: (for that were a Spiders property to suck such
poison from them) but rather, Augustine. de Doct. Christ. lib. 3.
as S. Austen teaches us, to put us in mind of that warning of the Apostle,
that he who stands should take heed least he fall: to humble us to obedience,
not to puff us up to pride. But withal if they could remember, that although
the Lord did cover the infirmities of his children, with the skirts of his
Sons mercy, least they should finally perish; yet to show how he hates
sin, even in the best of his people, he sends them in this world, whipping
with temporal rods enough: they may very well find, that there is small
reason why they should be in love with the bargain. Genesis 9.25.
For was there not a Cham to deride his father, and so far to move the
patience of that righteous preacher Noe, as in bitterness to curse him? Was
there not an Absolon ready so with all kind of contumely to scourge offending
David, 2. Sam. 16.22.
as to abuse his fathers concubines, and to seek his fathers life? 1. Reg.
11.14.23.26. Chap. 12.20.
Here was a Hadad, and there a Rezon, and a Jeroboam in the third place, to
vex wife-doting Solomon, that he could not rest in his old age: and afterward
his son Roboam did lose ten tribes of twelve.

3 And as for the Prophet here, he bestows on himself a whole Chapter, to
show the fruit of his fall, that other might forbear to offend, by the
example of that grievous punishment which he sustained. If he had been as
nimble to have excused his fault, as these be in our days, he might have made
some Apology for himself, or at least have concealed his penance which befell
him* that when no man had been frighted by his case, other might have walked in
his steps; and the commonnesse of the fault might have excused the crime.
Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 4.26. Caesar Baronius hoc falso proditum a Socrate
dicit. Annal. Eccles. Tomo 4. Anno Domini 370.
For when multitudes do as we do, we think that they do ease our burden, as
the Emperor Valentinian imagined, (if Socrates report truth of him) when
having one wife of his own called Seuera, whom he was unwilling to leave, he
was in love also with another virgin called Iustina, and he married her too. And
least this fault should seem most gross, if he alone were noted for so
scandalous behavior, by a law of purpose made, he gives leave to all that
would to marry two wives a piece: thinking that when many transgressed he
should be more free from blame. Our Jonas is so charitable as to take another
course, not to induce men to the like by himself, but to terrify them much
rather, by recording how he sped. To fall, because the Patriarchs and Prophets
have often fallen, Diogen. Laertius. lib. 2. Plato in Phaedone.
is as much as willingly to taste of poison, because Socrates once drunk
poison, which were but a foolish trial. His poison was his death: And so had
sin been death, to the holiest, if God had not given repentance, to expel
the force of iniquity. But what man is he who can promise to himself
repentance, or rising when he is fallen? Many hope for it but few have it;
Augustine. in Psalm. 51. Non cadendi exemplum propositum est, sed si
cecideruresurgendi. Attend ne cadas.
many speak of it, but few use it, which makes that worthy saying of S.
Austen to be true, Many will fall with David, but they will not arise with
David. No example of falling is in him proposed to thee, but of rising if thou
have fallen. Take heed thou go not down. Let not the slip of the greater, be
the delight of the lesser; but let the fall of the greater, be the trembling of
the lesser. Thus that holy father speaks. If the greatest fall thou may
fall, therefore do not presume: but if the greatest be punished, then fear
Gods righteous judgment. You shall hear how Jonas sped.

The Lord sent out a vvind.
4 It is well said by David, Psalm. 11.6.
that God rayneth on the wicked fire and brimstone and stormy tempest. But more
fitly to my purpose, that fire and hail, Psalm. 148.8.
and snow, and vapors, and stormy vvind do execute his word. For these and
other meteors, are his creatures made by him: his subjects that live under him:
his messengers sent from him to punish or to help, to execute his will. The
voice of the Lord is upon the waters, Psalm. 29.3.
the God of glory makes it to thunder. If it do hail in Egypt, where it
raineth very few times, Exodus 9.23. Deuteronomy. 11.10. Exodus 10.13.19.
God sends that hail on Pharao. If an East wind bring in grasshoppers, and a
West wind drive them out, Moses tells us in Exodus, that both come from the
Lord. The wind and the tempest depend not on chance, or any blind fortune,
but on the sovereign power of the Almighty Creator. If nature be here used,
or the ordinary course of Sun, and Moon, and stars, to attract ought or
beat it back again, these are but Gods hand-maidens, Flauius Vopiscus in
vita Cari.
to work his designements. If Carus the Emperor be blasted to death with
lightening, it is the Lords doing. If Theodosius have the sky to war against
his enemies, and the winds as his sworn servants to help forward his
victory, some Claudian must sing, Claudian. de 3. consolatu Honorij. O nimium
dilecte Deo cui militat ether. Et co^iurati vemunt ad classica venti. Anno.
1588.
that he or his son Honorius who was then present with him, is much beloved
of God, O ninimium dilecte Deo. If our Spaniards when they are beyond Scotland,
be brought back again by Ireland, and when men look not after them, winds
and waves do pursue them in miraculous sort (in which I fear lest we offend,
that we speak not of it oftener, and parents tell it not unto their children)
if we would do as we should do, we must sing with S. Ambrose, Te Deum laudamus.
We praise thee o God. Who so walks by the land, or passes by the sea, if
winds promote his business, or hinder his purpose, and disquiet him in his
enterprise, let him assign it to his providence who rules all with power, who
sent that tempest here to Jonas; for from him they do all come.

5 Those Ethnickes who knew little or nothing of true piety, did yet aim at
this even by the very light of nature; when by the glimsing sight of reason,
they laid it down that a divine substance did govern these creatures,
(although they missed much of his majesty) when Neptune for the sea was Lord
of the waves, and Aeolus for the air was master of the winds. People ruder
then the Greeks and more barbarous then the Romans, have gessed at such a
thing, and had such a like conceit; I mean the Western Indians, Petrus Martyr
Decade. 3.2.
the dull people of America, who thought that thunder and lightning and tempest
were sent by the Sun, whom they reputed for a God as Peter Martyr lets us
know. The more absurd the while, were the Thurij in my judgment, a people of
Italy where both learning and civility did grow. Aelian. Hist. lib. 12.61.
For as Aelian writes of them, when Dionysius the tyrant of Sicilia came up
against them with three hundredth sail of ships, intending to destroy them,
they being almost oppressed with his violence, yet had this good hap befallen
unto them, that a great Northre^ wind blew, and so wracked those ships, that
they were spilled almost all. In remembrance whereof, they by a common consent
made this North Wind a God, admitted him into their City, incorporated him
among them, appointed him an house and goods of his own, and every year
besides did sacrifice unto him. These men looked too low: they were too too
much base minded, when they made the wind a God, whom nature and reason had
taught other Gentiles to be but a Gods servant. The wind obeys, and rules
not: it is not at pleasure to do what it would, if there were a will in it: it
has a master; not Aeolus, but one that fitteth far higher.

6 Yet the question is here offered, De hac quaestione vide Nicolau Remigium
Daemonolatriae. lib. 1.25.
whether that inferior creatures do not sometimes stir up tempests, as wind,
or rain or thunder, for I put them in one degree, and consider them as being
of like nature, concerning this point. Whether Satan by him self, or the
ministers of Satan, enchaunters or witches, or necromancers and coniurers,
cannot stir up such things? and if they can, how they then are said to be
wrought by Gods finger? That learned man Seneca did think it so plain that
nothing could be plainer, Sen^c. Not. Quaest li. 4 7 Rudis adl^uc antiquitas
credebat. Quorum nihil posse fieri tam palam est. Wierus de praestigi^s
Daemonu^, in Apologetico Co^c. Bre^tij. Impioru^ est opinio, diabolu^ maleficas
and lamias grandinemciere. Justin, Mart. quaest. 31. ad orthodoxos incredibile
dicit, posse imbres per inca^tame^ta prouenire.
that te^pests could not be raised by any inchauntments, when he speaks on
this sort, Antiquity being yet rude, did believe both that rain could be
brought and driven away too by charms; of which things that neither can be
done, it is so manifest, that for this matters sake no school of any
Philosopher is ever to be entered. No doubt, there be many also of the
Christians, and those very learned men who are altogether of that opinion. In
that book which Wierus has written De Praestigijs Demonum, is a sermon which
Brentius made by occasion of a great hayle, that fell in some parts of Germany
and did much hurt to the corn and vineyards. And therein are these words, It
is the opinion of wicked men, that the devil and witches and sorceresses do
stir up hayle, and therewith do hurt and destroy wine and corn. To these
may be added more. And yet on the other side, that such graceless people do
challenge to themselves a power in these cases; that they attempt to stir up
thunders; that they try to raise up winds, to cross things at sea, or to
effect things at land; and that they affirm that they can do thus, may be well
known to any, who either in experience shall confer with such offenders, or
else read such matters as are written of them. To say nothing of the one, that
is, what they assume; but to speak to the other, I am satisfied that in
Poetry that speech is too much, Virgil. Egloga 8.
Carmina de caelo possunt deducere Lunam.
Charms and enchantments can fetch the very Moon down out of heaven, and
other like in that place: for that is a thing impossible, and only delivered
from an old imagination or rather boasting of the Thessalian women, who were
much addicted to that wickedness. But the saying of Medea in one of the
Tragedies of the younger Seneca has some more reason to confirm it. Seneca in
Medea.
Et euocaui nubibus siccis aquas.
I have forced rain out of the clouds which before were dry. The
soothsayers of Hetruria, Sozom. Eccl. Hist. lib. 9 6.
as Sozomen does write, would have made men believe, that they could raise up
thunderbolts to drive away their enemies. The story is notable which Dion has
of Sidius Geta a Roman leader. Dion Histor. lib. 60.
This Captain, says he, pursuing the Moors in the hot country of Affrike,
had both himself and his army almost perished for want of water. One of the
confederate Moors, comes in this extremity unto Sidius, and wishes him
that by Art Magike he would procure down some rain, or at least suffer it so
to be, professing that him self had oftentimes made trial thereof, and had
never failed in his attempt. This was done, and immediately such store of rain
did follow thereupon, as both relieved his men and frighted his enemies, as if
heaven it self had now conspired against them. I might add more examples of
grave and learned writers, who think that such meteors come oftentimes by such
means.

Iouianus Po^tanus lib. 5. Rerum suo tempore gestarum.
7 Iouianus Pontanus in the fifth book of the Acts of his time, has a
Narration to this purpose, but a judgment to the contrary. In that mighty
quarrel between the kings of Arragon, and the house of Aniou in France for
the kingdom of Naples, Ferdinandus king of Arragon did besiege Mont-dragon a
town and castle in old Campania, where because the town stood high on the top
of a rock, and the season was exceeding dry, he hoped that ere long, for want
of water he should win it to his pleasure. Now the inhabitants thereof being
almost dead for thirst, being advised thereunto by certain Priests, most wicked
and ungodly persons, did try this conclusion, then the which there have been
few more irreligious or impious. Stealing down in the dark of the night,
through the watch which was set by the enemy, they crept along the rocks even
to the sea side, and all the way drew with them a Crucifixe (the resemblance of
Christ crucified, and hanging on the cross) which first they cursed and
banned, with many enchanted speeches, but afterward with most execrable words
they threw it into the sea, using imprecations against the heaven, and earth,
and water, so to wring from them a tempest. In the mean time the Priests being
as wicked men as lived, to satisfy the soldiers who set them on work,
brought an Ass to the church door, and sung a Dirge to him as to a man now
dying; then they put into his mouth, their Sacrament of the Altar, and so with
funeral hymns, did bury the Ass alive before the church door. This ungodly
solemnity was scant ended, but the air was full of clouds, the sea was
stirred with the wind, the heaven did roar with thunder, the earth did flash
with lightening, trees were plucked up by the roots, the stones did rent in
pieces, and there fell such abundance of rain, that from the top of the rock
whole streams did run of water. So the king missed of his purpose. The
Author which writes this, confessing the whole matter, and describing it as I
have done, does think that their Magic did not cause the rain, but that it
came naturally, so much wet falling after so long a drowth. His reason is, that
for such villainy and blasphemy as was then used toward himself, God would not
send a benefit unto men to help them at their need, but would rather suffer
them to fall into destruction.

8 But that reason is not sufficient: for God oftentimes does suffer the
reprobate to have worldly things at their pleasure, to harden them the more,
and that the delusions of Satan, may be so much the stronger in them, to their
final confusion. It is therefore most probable, that their wickedness did so
extraordinarily stir up that rain. For when Satan has liberty from the
Lord to do things, either to blind the reprobate, or to chastise the elect
being fallen into sin, or to try the faith of the best, he imparteth his
power with his ministers, special instruments of his glory, these
necromancers and coniurers, and other such like. The sorcerers who showed such
sights to Pharao in Egypt, do prove both these grounds to be true, first that
Satan oftentimes yields his power unto his servant, and secondly that God
suffers the wicked to have their desire in many things, to their greater
overthrow. To turn a rod into a serpent, and rivers into blood, Exodus 7. and
cap. 8. cap. 7.22.
and to make the fish to dye, (for that may be collected, because the text
says that the enchaunters did likewise) so, to bring up frogs on the sudden,
were these in truth or in show, do show the great power of Satan, which he to
delude the wicked, co^municateth with his folowers. He who had leave for the
one, may sometimes have leave for the other. In the 2. to the Ephesia^s, Satan
by the Apostle is called the prince that now rules in the air, Ephesians. 2.2.
which name although it may note to us some other thing besides, yet it does
also inte^d (as all that write of this argument do use to expound that place)
that in winds, and rain, and thunder he bears sway in the air, when God
will give him license. But for the point of the question, this is put out of
controversy, by that which we read in Job, Job. 1.16.19.
where it is set down, that by the hand of Satan (whether by witch or no, I
stand not to dispute, for the text does not reveal it) Gods leave going
before, a fire fell out of the air, and burnt up Jobs sheep and servant,
and such a wind came from the wilderness, Gregor. Moral. Lib. 2.9. Satan a
Domino semel accepta potestate, ad vsum suae nequitiae etia^ eleme^ta concutere
praeualet. Gregor. Moral. lib. 32.19. Greges abstulit, igne^ de coelo deposuit,
perturbato aere ventos excitauit, domu^ concutie^s s^bruit.
as at one time striking all the corners of the house, destroyed Jobs sons
and daughters. He has not read the chapter, or little has considered it, who
makes doubt whether Satan there did such things or no. Gregory upon that
place positiuelie lays it down, that the devil having once received power of
the Lord, that is, leave being given him, to the bringing about of his
naughtiness is able to stir the elements, by which word he means the
moving of the fire, or disturbing of the air. And elsewhere interpreting that
Behemoth spoken of in Job to be Satan, he has these words, This Behemoth who
is the beginning of the ways of God, when he had leave to tempt that holy man
meaning Job, stirred up people against him, took away his herds of cattle,
fetched down fire from heaven, troubling the air stirred up winds, shaking
the house overthrew it. And that is the judgment of Saint Austen writing on
these words of the seventy and eight Psalm, Psalm. 78.49. August. in eu^
Psalm. Brentius in concione apud Wieru^. Supra dictum est, Deu^ grandinis
authore^ administratoremque esse, and vt grandinem euocet, diabolo propter
peccata nostra permitti Petrus Mart. Decad. 1.4. Be^zo in noua noui orbis
historia. Lib. 1.10.
He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, indignation, and wrath, and
vexation by the sending out of evil Angels. He there says, that Satan was he
who sent down the fire on Jobs cattle, and more generally tells us, that
both good and evil Angels, by the permission of God, may use these visible
elements to their purposes. Yea Brentius himself in the Sermon which I named
before, yields such things to be done by the Devil, saying that God is the
author and governor of the hail, and yet that for our sins, it is permitted
to the devil that he may raise hail. What he did in former times, and
especially to Job, he can do now also if he have commission for it.

9 When Columbus and the Christians with him, arrived first in the Western
Indies, and began to plant themselves in Hispaniola and the Islands, (as the
authors do agree, Peter Martyr, Benzo and other) there arose such mighty and
incredible tempests, as that the like were never seen or heard of in that
country. There may be some other reason hereof, (for such things are secret to
all, but only to God) yet it is no sin to suppose fitly to this present
question (as some the^ did conceive) that foul spirits stirred them up, to
show their detestation to the name of Christ, grieuing that to those brutish
creatures, who had long lived in ignorance, he should in some sort be preached
(although not yet so well as he ought) that the Gospel of the kingdom might
be taught through all the world. Matthew. 24 14
If it were thus, yet neither does this example, nor that forenamed in Job,
impeach our first concluded doctrine, that God does send the thunder, that he
is Lord of the winds, that he sends down the hail and rain; for he does
these things of his absolute power; by the singleness of his own will; by the
sufficiency of his nature, without reference to any other: But Satan and his
factours work their exploits by limitation and by leave, for they depend on
the Lord, and as if they were tied in a chain, they cannot exceed one
hairebredth of that which is granted unto them. And therefore we are not to
think, that so oftentimes as men will report it, such tempests are caused by
means of ill members in any common wealth, for then it should be very often,
(our common sort herein err, and are very credulous, or light of belief) but
sometimes this is done by them, both at sea and at land, not universally but in
such special places, and causes too, as the Lord will permit. And some learned
men say, Vide Daemonologia^ per I. R. Scotice editam. lib. 2. cap. 5.
that these storms of their raising, may be easily distinguished from natural
tempests arising from meteors, both because they begin most suddenly and
violently, and because they endure but a very little time. Again we are not to
imagine that these things fall out so often, as the devil and his agents do
desire, for they are wondrous full of mischief; but the^ they are, when it
pleases God, in some measure to grant the dispensation of them, either to
cross the godly, as to vex them in their bodies, or disquiet them in their
minds, or afflict them in their substance, but never to touch their souls, for
that is not within their compass; or else to plague the reprobates, and the
infidels in their bodies and their souls, to their everlasting perdition. He
that would see more examples of the working of sorcerers in this kind, Olaus
Magnus. lib. 1.1. and lib. 3.14.
let him read some places of Olaus Magnus. And so I leave this question.

10 Not Satan in this place, but God sends the storm on Jonas; and the
circumstances afterward, do make proof to the full, that it was a very great
one. It is termed a mighty tempest, the ship was almost broken: the mariners
are afraid: they cry every man to his God, they throw the wares into the sea,
which I shall touch more largely anon. In the mean time the note here is, that
Jonas is the sinner, but all the ship smarteth for it: the mariners and the
master, who were not at all accessarie to this foul deed of the Prophet, yet
are pursued as well as he. What had these poor men sinned, who after the
custom of their trade, did let him in for his money as a passenger, but meddled
not with his message: they understood not of his prophesying; yea it may be
that they had never so much as heard of Niniue. Shall many smart thus for one?
the mariners for a stranger? Here is now another question. But learn here
Gods hate to sin: learn the patience of the third he will have to be tried,
and so forward in the rest: in all he seeks his glory; his honor in the
wicked, his true fear in the good. If all these be whipped at once, he does no
wrong to any. He that has not sinned with Jonas, yet has sinned in somewhat
else. For what man is he that drinks not in iniquity as the water, and is
not found so to do, if he be once brought to his trial before God? All the
difference then is this, that their faults have several places, but their
punishment shall have one. Thieves are brought out of diverse quarters, and at
sundry times they have trespassed, and in causes ver^e contrary; yet they are
imprisoned in one iayle, and punished in one day, and suffer all on one tree. I
doubt not for these seamen, but if all of them had been drowned, they had
sufficiently deserved it, although they had never heard of Jonas. God need not
be unjust in his punishments toward man: he need not seek occasion, or pick a
quarrel against him.

11 Piso one of the Roman Generals, Senec. de Ira lib. 1.16.
(as Seneca De ira writes) to show the bloody humor which was in him,
commanded that a soldier should be put to death, for returning without his
fellow, with whom he went from the camp, saying that he had killed him. The
Captain who had the charge to execute this poor soldier, when he saw his
fellow coming, which had been missed before, did spare the first man's life.
Upon this Piso found matter to take away the lives of all three. Hear his
worthy reason for it. You are a man condemned says he unto the first, my
sentence was passed on you, and therefore you shall die. Then turning him to
the second, You were the cause quoth he, wherefore your fellow was condemned
unto death, and therefore you must die. And to the third, You Centurion, because
you have not learned to obey the voice of your General, for company shall die
also. Excogitauerat quemadmodu^ tria crimina faceret, quiae nullum inuenerat.
He devised says Seneca how he might make three faults, because he found not
one. The just judge of the sky need not deal so with us, neither needed he
with these seamen. No beating of his brains to invent an accusation: our
thoughts, and words, and deeds, do yield him cause enough. His wisdom it is
to strike many for many ends. In one place, and with some one who is notorious
for a crime, to punish those whose faults have bin in diverse places. His
justice goes with his wisdom; for he never does wrong to any, although our dull
eyes do not see it. For the saying is very true, that Gods judgments,
although many times they be secret, yet evermore they are just.

Joshua. 7.1.21.
he alone did steal the gold: he alone had touched the silver and Babylonish
garment. Yet for the wicked fact of Achan, there were six and thirty of the
Israelites slain by the men of Ai. These did perish in their own sin,
although they perished with his fault. His crime stirred up a vengeance, which
they had deserved before, but received now in his company. Afterward his
sons and daughters, his oxen and his asses, were burnt or stoned to death.
This is no example for the Magistrate to follow, to punish one for another:
this was Gods own immediate deed, who himself is perfect justice, and therefore
cannot err. But observe withal his hatred to iniquity, which is so far off
from sparing the man grossly offending, that he destroys all that are near
him, because they will keep company with so stained a person. Number. 16.26.
Many of the Israelites had felt this another time, if they had not fled from
the tents of Dathan and Abiron. The companions of Jonas were sure that they
tasted of it. And it seems that either by the light of nature, or by some
sea-obseruation, they thought that they had one or other, whose room might be
far better then his company was unto them, when they fell to casting lots,
Jonah. 1.7.
to see for whose sake it was, that all this came upon the^. That such things
are thought on at sea, and that by natural men, let Horace be my witness, who
can say this for himself Horat. carm. Lib. 3. Od. 2.
Vetabo qui Cereris sacrum
Vulgarit arcanae, sub ^sdem
Sit trabibus, fragilemque mecum
Soluat Phaselum.
I will forbid that man who has revealed the mysteries of the Goddess Ceres
which heathen men thought to be a very heinous sin, to come under the same
beams, or sail in the same ship with me. The speech of Juno in another Poet
does give some light hereunto. Pallasne exurere classem Virgil. Aeneid. 1.

Argirum, atque ipsos potuit submergere ponto,
Vniu^ ob noxam and furias Aiacis Oilei?
Could Pallas bur^^ a whole fleet of the Greeks, and drown the men in the
sea, and that for one man's fault, and the fury of Ajax Oileus? The infidels
and Ethnickes have thought these things at sea, either noting them by
experience, or borowing them by tradition from the Jews, as they did many
other matters, which hereafter I may observe. He that would see more of this,
let him read what Tully has written of that Atheist Diagoras. Tull. de Not.
Deoru^. lib. 3.


13 This matter is true at land, as well as it is at sea. Our God is Lord of
both. Thereupon it is a good warning to all, that they look with whom they
sort. For as the pestilent person does send forth infected poison to such as do
come near him, to the killing of their bodies, so does a grievous sinner bring
wrath on his companions, to the ruin of their souls. A good lesson for young
gentlemen, that they fly a blasphemous swearer. A good lesson for all
Christians, that they avoid an infamous heretic. When Cerinthus came into the
bath, John the Evangelist got him out, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. 4.13.
and called to his fellows, that they should come away with have, from the
company of the heretic, left the house should fall upon them. He thought that
house might be guilty, which received a man that was guilty: and that the
place was in danger, which received a man in peril. Here let them look about
them, who not only without all care, do sort them selves with all comers, not
fearing the faults of others, but when they do know their wickedness, they are
glad that they have such companions, Psalm. 50.18.
and do assent to their evils, if they see a thief, they run with him, and
are partakers with the adulterers. If any man teach a trick of fraud, they
will learn that of him: if any use unclean speech, that filthiness is for
them. If to be with the naught be naught, what is it then to be naught? If
company do bring danger, as you see it did by Jonas, how fearful is
consent? It is better to fear too much, then to presume but a little. Our God
is of fearful majesty. You shall discover that by the tempest, which he
sends upon the Prophet, and those which be in the ship.

There was a mighty tempest.
Vide Caesaris reditum in Italiam. Lucan. lib. 5.
14 To such as use navigations it is a verity undoubted, that there be at sea
many tokens and prognosticates of great te^pests, gathered from the Sun and
Moon, and waves and winds and clouds, and other things, the use whereof our
Savior Christ himself disliketh not, so that men go not too far, or be not
too peremptory in them. Matthew. 16.2.
When it is evening, you say, fair weather: for the sky is red. And in the
morning you say, To day shall be a tempest, for the sky is red and lowering.
Such tokens of the weather are not hastily bred, neither do they break in a
moment. The cloud which appeared to Elias his servant, 1. Reg. 18.44.
was first but as a man's hand, yet afterward there followed much rain. My text
tells of no token, that appeared here to the mariners: it comes upon the
sudden, and therefore this storm is supernatural; besides it comes with
such violence, that it seems, that they had seen few like it. The Prophet
spares no words, to describe the rod which now did beat him. The Lord sent
forth a wind, not a little one, Virgil. Aeneid. 1.
but a great one. Vna Eurusque Notusque ruunt. The East and South wind blow
together, as it is in the Poet. A tempest follows after, which he calls a
mighty tempest. As men that live in the middle of a great continent, scant
know whether there be any Ocean, as learned men do observe, so we that live
still at land, scant conceive their storms at sea. They mount up to the heaven
and descend to the deep, Psalm. 107.26.
so that their soul melts for trouble. They are tossed to and fro, and
stagger like a drunken man, and all their cunning is gone. The ship was almost
broken. The keele be it never so strong, the ribs be they never so stiff, the
cleets and clamps of iron, be they never so fast set on, are like to fly in
pieces. If a joint crack, all is hazarded: if a planke shoot up, all is gone.
This makes the mariners quake, who are not moved with a little: now they stand
for their lives; now they are ready for that choice, either to sink or
swim. But alas, what swinning was there in such a storm? The ship shakes at
every blast, as if it would into shiuers; every wave does so affright them,
as if still they were dying. It makes them fall to praying, who in likelihood
prayed not often. It makes them think of their Gods, for there was no help
now from men: help heaven, for sea and winds, and waves, are all against us.
Yea more, because their hands should go as fast as their tongues, they will not
lie still and cry, but the carriage of the ship shall out into the water; the
wares are cast into the sea, to lighten the ship withal. Her burden might
make her sink, and therefore ease her of it. In what a case were these poor
men for harboring such a guest? As the host who has lodged a traitor, and
because he seemed a man of fair conditions, has used him very kindly, does
not know what he has done, til the Sheriff come and seize his guest, and
himself to the Princes mercy, so was it here with these mariners. These men
had money of Jonas, to let him come into their vessel, Jonah. 1.3.
but by this time I think they could have wished, that they had given him money
to keep him farther of. Jonas, thou might have gone to thy Niniue, and
saved them from this pain, and thy self too from this hazard.

15 You see the words are not many; three or four lines at the most: but what
more can be said of a tempest, then is here said in the text? The seamen are
afraid, a stiffer kind of men then other people are, and who do not regard a
small thing: they had borne many brunts before, and of likelihood escaped many
dangers: they were acquainted with the working of the sea, and the egernesse of
the wind: An hot storm and away: after a tempest comes a calm. A man who
were new come thither, and perhaps at first were sea-sicke, might be aghast at a
little, his heart might be in his mouth, to feel but a little rocking. But that
this trembling fear should take these old beaten soldiers, it does import a
vehement danger. The passengers must needs quake, when the mariners did so
dread. If Ovid had been there, he would once again have said that his Elege
quite to the end, Ovid. Trist. lib. 1.2.
Dijmaris and coeli, quid enim nisi vota supersunt? Surely effeminate Ovid
would have betaken him to his devotions, when these forgetful mariners, who
think not often of their maker, did fall so fast to their prayers. It were to be
wished that our Christians in all their nauigations, would more remember true
godliness, pray oftener, and play less, use better rule at their going out,
and fewer sins at their landing. Doubtless, they which fear God are
careful; but an ill name goes of many of them.

16 I should here touch that circumstaunce, that these idolatrous persons cried
every man on his God, but in the next verse following the text yields that
again, and I do defer it thither. I will ad the other argument of the
greatness of the tempest, that is, the throwing out of the wares. This is
never attempted, but when there is danger indeed. As it seemed unto man's
reason, there was no way but one, when the mariners among who^ Paul was, Act.
27 18.19
did first throw out their carriage, then the tackling of the ship. For how
far are men driven, when with their own hands, they must rob themselves of
their helps, of their comfort, and of their wealth? Many had as willingly dye,
as be put from that which they have. As good to lose life as living. A speech
which is often used, but very few times performed. A man will give much for
his life, which Satan knew well enough, when he could say in Jobs case, Job.
2.4.
Skin for skin, and all that ever a man has will he give for his life. For
money may be recovered, by industry or Gods blessing, or by some other means,
but so can life be never: for now we look not for miracles. This makes so
many ransomes, to redeem from death with money, yea to give incredible
su^mes, to the impouerishing of the parties, and of their friends, nay sometimes
of a whole State, Gul. Neubringe^s. 4 35. Memoires du Bellay. lib. 3.
Guicciardin. Hist. lib. 16. Q. Curtius. lib. 4.
as Richard the first of England once knew well, in his return from the holy
land, and so did Fra^ces the Great that king of France, when after his
captivity, he was ra^somed from Charles the 5. then Emperor. Here the fellows
of Jonas being put to very hard shifts, do choose the less of two evils; their
lives rather without wares, the^ to lose both wares and lives. When Alexa^ders
soldiers were to pass the swift river Tigris, by the violence of the stream
many of the^ lost their packes; and striving there for their fardels, to take
them up again, they were almost drowned in the water. The king who saw their
folly, bid the^ look to their lives, to hold their armor fast, and let the
rest go, he himself would make the^ recompense. The wise captain thought it far
better, to lose the Accide^t then the substance. That which nature teaches all
men, these mariners did here practice.

17 But that the text does give a reason, that it was to lighten the ship, it
might be thought, that their casting of the wares Nebrissens. Decad. 2. lib.
3.1.
king of France, did in his deathbed restore two Counties to the heirs of
John the king of Arragon, to the which in all his life time before, he would
never condescend. Yet the^ his conscience so wrought with him. Or else it may
Erasmus in Colloquijs.
when they do fear a wrack, as Erasmus in his Naufragium does wittily let us
know. They vow much and pay nothing; but these idolaters here throw out much
and vow nothing, unless it be afterward, as it is in the end of the chapter.
Or else it might be imagined, that they threw in their most precious Ingens
telum necessitas.
which will pluck from men any thing that does not immediately concern their
being, rather then all shall run to ruin. Plutarch. in Dione.

Idem in Po^peio.

1. Cor. 11.14. Caesar de bello. civilly. li. 3.


Apparel, and wealth, and bravery, and house, and land, and bewty shall away
if need require. Dionysius leaves his kingdom. Po^pey forsakes his country,
being urged both by necessity. Although nature do teach the contrary, as Paul
writes to the Corinthia^s: yet rather the^ the citisens of Salonae will yield
to Octauius, the hair of their women's heads shall be cut of, to help make
engines for them, Iosephi vita per ipsum conscripta.
and devises in the wars. Josephus tells of one Clitus an eminent
malefactor, that being in fear lest he should be put to death, or at least
lose both his hands, did at the first word willingly cut off his own left
hand, that he might preserve the other. Judge now at length for this tempest,
whether it were not a sound one, when it put such men as these, unto such
shifts as these: men that adventured their lives for money, to part from wares
which would yield them money: men bold, to be stricken with such fear: men
careless, to be driven to such devotion, and praying unto their Gods. Jonas
thou can not say, but thou art followed for thy sin, not as with a fury
from hell, but with justice from above. But of that may be more hereafter.

18 But here I may not forget this, in these idolatrous persons (because it
does yield unto us, the best of all these instructions) that these Ethnicks who
here are actors, did never fall to their calling upon their heathenish Gods,
till that danger did grow upon them. Their mind did run at randon, till
affliction as a spur did quicken their strong oblivion. Sea-daungers have
that force above all other dangers, to make men cry with earnestness, when
nothing is to be seen, but heaven above and water below, Virgil Aeneid. 3.
Psalm. 107.28.
Coelum vndique and vndique pontus. David did well note this, when after the
description of a storm, he adds this for a conclusion, Then they cry unto
the Lord in their trouble, and he brings them out of their distress. There
is trouble, and distress, and crying to the Lord. Violent motions of the air
generally cause a fear. Psalm. 29.8.
In them the voice of the Lord makes the wilderness to tremble: the renting
of the clouds, the cracking of the air, Philo Iudaeus de legatione ad Caium.
Suetonius in Calig. cap. 51 Senec. de ita. lib. 1.16.
do much affright the wicked. Caligula the Roman Emperor, would needs be
reputed for a God, and there was no measure of folly with him; yet if he had
but heard a clap of thunder, he would wink or hide his head, or run perhaps
under a bed. Now fear in all men who have sense, does enforce unto religion,
or at least to superstition. As long as Gods hand is over us, we fear, and so
by a consequent are careful. If we were as dull as that Ass, Number. 22.22.
whereon Balaam used to ride, yet if an Angel hold out a sword, it will make
us stagger at it. But as soon as the sword is sheathed, so soon we will
forget it. It is the cross of Christ, which makes a man a true Christian, it
keeps us in obedience, and howsoever the flesh repineth, the spirit is
bettered by it. Sickness, or plague, or famine, or war, or any great
judgment, makes more prayers in a day, more seeking to God, and that
feelingly and heartily, then otherwise are ordinary in a week.

19 I do find in Agathias, Agathias Hist. lib. 5.
that when on a time, the City of Constantinople was shaken with a very
terrible earthquake, many houses were overthrown, and with the fall thereof
great store of people perished. Herewith the whole City was so frighted, and
every man so remembered to think on God, that solemn supplicatio^s and
public prayers were had, the Churches every day were full, and all men for a
while were much amended. The poor folks were relieved: justice was well
administered: there was no fraud the^ in bargaining: yea it was become a very
holy place. But when God once held his hand, they also held their prayers;
when his rod ceased, then ceased their piety too. That which he did observe
concerning Constantinople, may be noted of other places. Yea Historians do
observe it. In the first late civil war in France, which arose now more
then thirty years agone, Edictum Ianuarij. Anno 1561.
after the putting forth of that Edict, which is commonly called the Edict of
January; and in like sort in the second and third of those wars, such as
were of the Religion, then groaning under the cross of poverty, Co^mentarij
Reli. and Reip. in Gal. lib. 10. Tanta erat Religiosorum taediosa curiosita^
and tam t^pidus zelus, vt vix ordinariae doctrinae sermone^ quasi minus
eloque^tem, nec satis aulicum plurimi Religiosi ia^ minime tolerarent. Anno.
1572.
of oppression and war, were very devout toward God, very careful toward
to the world, glad to hear any preach the word, glad to receive the Sacrament:
but when the third peace was concluded, which seemed a very sound peace, and
the rod was now thought to be removed far of, such carelessness and security
did ouergrow the hearts of all, and in the Protestants there was so cold a
zeal, nay rather such a tedious curiosity (as a French man terms it) and
that within less the^ two years space, that a Sermon sou^dly made, with good
grounds of divinity, was not thought to be worth the hearing, unless it were
spiced with eloquence, or flourished with dainty phrases, such as were fit for
the Court. But immediately afterward, this contempt of theirs was pursued with
that great massacre, that bloody and horrible massacre, like to which the
Sun scant ever did see any thing; and then the mariners in the ship with
Jonas, did not cry more hotely on their Gods, then the French men our
neighbors, did cry unto the true Lord of heaven.

20 Might it please our God, that we by their example could learn to be
thankful in prosperity, as well as to be crying when misery hangs on us.
In Queens Mariesdayes, when the fire devoured the flesh of Gods saints, what
prayers were then made, for the faithful congregation, by many within the land
and without? Coldness has since benumbed some hot ones of that time. The
Spaniard threatened war not many years agone; Anno. 1588.
the piety of our land exceeded for that time, young and old then came
together into the courts of the Lord: the Sabaothes were then sanctified: the
week days were well spent: we had prayers extraordinary, and lectures twice
a week, as this place does well know. But with the cold of the winter our
holiness waxed cold, and many months had not passed, but as in few things
we were better, so in some things we were worse. Good God, that thy great
mercy, should make thee to be loved the less. One year is not passed over,
since (besides many other quarters) the chief City of our kingdom, Anno.
1593.
being visited by Gods messenger the pestilence, which destroys as well by
night as by day, Psalm. 91.6.
did hang down her head for sorrow. I have heard that since that time, it is
very much forgotten in buying and in selling, in bargaining and deceiving. God
sent us here a warning, Pestis in vna aut altera domo, in ipso Oxonij vmbili^^.
Anno. 1593.
and then another warning in the very heart of our City. I think that we, and
other, did in that time more think of devotion toward the Lord, of purging of
our souls, of true mortification, of preparing our souls to Christ, then we
have done many times since. It is not well, if it be so. It is a reproach to
some, no penie, no Pater noster; It is a reproach to us, no plague, no Pater
noster, no punishment, and no prayers. Let it not be noted of us that we are
like to those Gentiles, who only when the tempest raged, did cry unto their
Gods. Let us fear the Lord for his love, and love him for his mercy: let us
not provoke him to strike us, because otherwise he cannot awake us: but let us
watch to him, that his anger may sleep to us.

21 If our Jonas have offended by wilful disobedience, let us dread to do the
like: if he were punished for that, then let not us presume to sin by his
example: if God sent a tempest against him, he can use his rods against us: if
Satan be sometimes the instrument of Gods justice, let us fear to come in his
fingers: if the Lord so hates iniquity, that the companions of the wicked are
often punished for their sakes, let us hate sin as a serpent, and fly from the
profane: if heathen men prefer their lives before their wares, let not us
adventure our souls, to get temporal trash on earth: if idolaters serve their
Gods once, when they be in danger, let us serve our God ever, to keep us free
from danger: if they pray when they have need, let us pray every day,
because every day we need. Lord guide us still with thy grace, and bring us
unto thy kingdom. To thy name be praise for ever.

THE IIII. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 1. The drowsinesse of Jonas in his danger. 2 Sin
breeds sin. 4 Satan is desirous to make us secure. 6 A superuising
diligence should be in all that have charge. 10 The ship-maister teaches the
Prophet. 11 Idolaters had many Gods, and their usage toward them. 14 One man is
more acceptable to God the^ another. 15 Danger of praying to many Gods. 16
Heathen men know there is a God. 17 In crosses it is good to suspect that there
is some sin. 18 The use of lots, and diverse circumstances in them. 23 Sin
will be discovered.

JONAH. 1.5.6.7. But Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship, and he lay
down and was fast a sleep. So the ship-maister came unto him, and said unto
him, what meanest thou o sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God
will think upon us, that we perish not. And they said every man to his
fellow, Come and let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil
is upon us. So they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah.


WHen Alexander the Great, Seneca de Beneficijs. Lib. 7.3.
with his happy temeritie as a Philosopher does call it, but by the providence
of God, F^^ix tem^ritas.

Daniel. 8 5. Q Curtius. lib 4.

Plutarch in Alexandro, and Arrianus. lib 6. appellant Gaugamela.


as Daniel does describe it, had proceeded so far, as that after one great
overthrow given to Darius in person, in the straights of Cilicia, he was now a
second time in the fields near Arbela (or as the best writers have, in the
fields near Gaugamela) to join battle against him: whereas many things
should have enforced him to look about him, as the smalnesse of his army, the
strength of his adversary, the wideness of the field, where he had none
advantage, his distaunce from his own home, and no place to fly unto: yet
when it was far day, that very morning when the battle was to be tried, and
by that time his army should have been ordered and raunged into array, the
enemy coming forward, the General Alexander who otherwise did stir with
the foremost was fast asleep in his tent. Parmenio and his Nobles, who for no
cause of their own, but for his sake and his honor, there adventured their
lives, were troubled above measure; they were in a sea of cares, and scant knew
which way to turn them: only he whom all concerned, and whose making or
marring, depended on that days trial, and for whom and whose sole sake they
endured all things which they were then to sustain, as a man that knew not of
it, or one that took no care which end went forward, lay in his bed soundly
sleeping. The Prophet in this place, shall be no whit behind him, but rather
much beyond him. He has listes to enter with the very wrath of God: his life
does lie upon it, and his soul too, if his God should not deal kindly with
him: the air is now disturbed, and yields a mighty tempest; the waves they
froath and roar; the winds they beat and blow; the sea is moved exceedingly;
the ship is almost broken; the seamen are afraid; happy man that can pray
fastest: the burden of the ship, be it costly or be it necessary, it must out
into the water, and all for Ionahs sake; his cake it is that is baking; the
event concerns him only: and he alone as the man who of all other did know
least, and was a stranger to the action, does seek a secret corner, the inner
sides of the ship, where he may lie and rest. Oh Jonas, thou who should be a
man beyond a many, even the Prophet of the highest, thou art now short of a
man, thou art now below thy self, sleeping and snorting then, when all the
powers of thy spirits, were too few to look about thee.

2 If the man had not liked of Niniue, Supra^ in versu 3.
for reasons which once I named, but yet would still have kept his calling, and
would have held on his preaching, his sin had weighed the lighter: he might have
bestowed his talent at Tarshish when he came there, and done some good on the
merchants; and by the way going thither, he might have given exhortation to his
fellow travelers, to serve the true God of Israel. If he had not had so many
auditors as were in Niniue, Act. 2.41.
or so many as S. Peter had, when at one sermon he won three thousand souls to
Christ, yet he should have had some hearers: if it had been but one Plato to
have attended Socrates, Jacob. 5.20.
he had not utterly lost his labor: he who has converted one sinner from
going astray out of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of sins, which either the converted, or conuerter has committed.
But it is not for this cause that our Jonas goes to the sea: his preaching is
turned to sleeping. Let the world go how it will: he is got away from his
master, and will think no more of the matter. See what the best man on earth
is, if God withdraw his Spirit, and eclipse his grace but a moment. We are
desperate to all wickedness, but beetles and blocks to goodness. Here is an
obdurate sinner: a hard brawne is over his heart; a thick skin and insensible:
let the sea roar, and the mariners cry, and tumble out their packs; our Jonas
takes a nap in very supine security, and makes no more of it. Oh the
stubburnnesse of iniquity, and man's auersenesse from his maker. But when we
have once passed the lines of duty and obedience, and gross sins have taken
hold upon us; then we must justify our actions: we will run we care not
whither: from the shoes up to the shoulders, yea sometimes over head and ears.

3 Sin steals on us by degrees, but commonly the last step is the deepest. 2.
Sam. 11.2.
David being idle had spied out Bethsabe: there, idleness was the beginning:
then did his eye as the window of his mind, let in concupiscence into his heart.
Of idleness comes concupiscence. Thereof follows adultery. Mark how these
sins do multiply, and one ingendreth another. Murder makes up the measure.
And when all this put together would have troubled the strongest heart in the
world, yet without remorse of conscience, without jot of co^punction, David
swaloweth it and deuoureth it, and for the better part of a year, never
considers of it. How far is the conscience of the reprobate and malignant
seared, if Gods children do thus fall? No marvel if a Pharao add drunke^nesse
unto thirst, Matt. 2.3.16.
that is, heap sin on sin; or Herod do join to his ambition, a cruel
massacring mind; or Nero abou^d in wickedness, and link villainy unto mischief.
When the bowels of Gods elect shall be so filled and possessed with carelesnes,
what shall refrain the wicked, from proving to be some Judas or some Julian?
Afflictions, threatenings, counsels, and the holiest exhortations, (as S. Austen
in another case does make comparison) are but as a blast of wind, Augustine.
Epist. 22.5.
which in a vehement fire does keep down the flame for a puff, but it rises
again so much the stronger. Or as a draught of cold water, to a man in a
burning fever, which eases him for an instant, but he is the worse for it
afterward. There is no measure with the wicked, when the best sin in so great
measure.

4 It is old Satan's policy, so far as lies in him, to bewitch the hearts
of Gods children, that when they are filled with iniquity, they may be drowned
in security, even as a man who has fed in gluttony, is overtaken by some
drowsy sleep. And then it fares with the sinner, as it does with the
Crocodile, when his belly is stuffed with some pray. Plinius Hist. not. lib.
8.25.
For then as Pliny writes, does he yield himself over to sleep, and leaves
his mouth open, of purpose that a little bird called Trochylus, may pick his
teeth and make them clean. But thereupon does the Ichneumon a kind of serpent
take occasion, to creep into the belly of the Crocodile, and being once in, he
never ceasseth there to gnaw, till he has eaten through his panch. Thus does
Satan deal with us; for amidst our idleness, and forgetfulness of that
horror of evil which hangs upon us, he takes possession of our souls, and
if a stronger then himself do not drive him from the same, he will eat them
out to damnation. As therefore by the counsel of the Wise man, Syrac. 25.27.
we should give the water no passage, no not a little, so we should give as small
entrance unto Satan, as possibly we may. But let us not so prostitute unto him,
the whole sense of our soul, that like to a frentike person, when we be at
worst, we imagine our selves to be in a most happy estate. He who will not
start in danger, is in case to suffer any thing; but he that will sleep in
danger, when easily he may be awaked, forgets himself beyond measure. When
our Savior Christ was now ready to be taken, and Judas was at hand, so that
the shepherd was to be stricken, and the sheep thereupon to be scattered,
Peter and James and John, were justly reproved for their sleeping, What? Matthew.
26.40, 45.
could ye not vvatch with me one hour? And afterward, sleep henceforth and
take your rest, meaning that it would not belong, but they should thoroughly be
awaked.

5 They slept when the peril was to their master, and them selves had less
cause to fear; but our Prophet does take his rest, when he alone was to smart,
and the ruing of other men was only for his sake. Tullius Philippica. 13. O
miser cum re tum hoc ipso quod non sentis quam miser sis.
O wretced man says Tullie against Anthony, as in deed, so in this also, that
thou do not understand how wretched a man thou art. Here is one far
exceeding Anthony. Gods immediate wrath does follow him, and he does not
conceive it: he is in the midst of evil, and does not understand it. Here is
evidently seen the great heaviness of our nature, who neglect those maynest
matters, Lod. Viues de tradendis disciplinis. lib. 4.
which nearest of all do press us. Viues that worthy learned man, does wonder
at some Physicians, that they could possibly be covetous and greedy upon the
world, in as much as both in their speculatiue study, and their practice, they
behold every day how tickle a thing life is; how soon the breath is gone; how
the stro^gest dye in a moment, and the youngest fall on the sudden, and by a
consequent that the use of riches is so uncertain, so transitory and so
short. I would to God that our Physicians of the soul, were not sick of this
disease. We who know that flesh is grass, Isay. 40.6.
and the grace of it but a flower, that our breath is but a vapor, Jacob. 4.14.
and our life but as a bubble, who speak much of mortality, and preach other
men's funeral Sermons, yet in the midst of our studies of contemning the world,
we are in love with the world, and too much embrace this Mammon. Thus we are
like to the fishes of the sea, who living in salt water, yet are most fresh.
And as Jonas in the midst of danger, we sleep in it and pass by it; we say
it, and do not see it. The storms by right should have stirred up Jonas, and
his conscience should have quickened him: so our knowledge should rowze us up,
and the fraud of the world should awake us. Thus far you have heard of a most
careless man; now harke^ to another person of a clean contrary disposition,
who looks well to his charge, and for his part amendeth that fault which is
found in the former.

So the ship-maister came to him.
6 As by occasion of the tempest, it lay upon the governor of the ship to
bestir him, so it well seems that he was not idle. He is sometimes above the
board, and sometimes underneath, he comes down under the hatches. Caesar de
bello civilly. Lib. 2. and 3.
Caesar did never more lay about him, in his great fights against Pompey, where
sometimes he plays the captain, and other sometimes the soldier, here he
speaks, there he strikes, and goes from one rank to another; then the
master does in this place. He looks whether any planke were rift or splint
in two. And perhaps with his vigilancie and care, doing his best, and seeing
all to be but in vain, he is glad to speak with any other, to see if there
might be help in him, or any good word of comfort. Hieron. in Ionae. 1.
Natural est vnumquenque in suo periculo de alio plus sperare.
For as Hierome notes on this place, it is natural unto every man, in
extremity of danger, to hope better of another, the^ he does hope of himself,
and therefore in such cases men do meet, and as the brutish cattle, run
together. This master knew his fellows to be as bad as himself, yea perhaps
a great deal worse, and therefore he goes to this stranger. Saint Hierome
does intimate this to be the reason; but indeed because he so rebukes Jonas,
and ratleth him for his drowsinesse, I rather impute his going to the corners
of the ship (for the Prophet lay in one of those places) to his diligence and
carfulness, to see the charge which was committed to him, that like a
circumspect governor, his eyes might see those things, his eyes might see
those persons, which were now under him.

7 This heathen man gives instruction better then Jonas did, to those which
are householders, (for a ship is like to a house, many cricks and corners in it)
to tutors over scholars, to governors over Colleges, to Magistrates over
others, that they look to those which are under the^, and trust not the eyes of
other: the blind swalloweth many a fly: he that knows his charge but only by
relation, does swallow many a gogeon. Sons dare to do what they should not; and
she who lies in the bosom, is incroching and usurping on the authority of her
husband: watching is when there should be sleeping: taking where should be
none: open doors when they ought to be shut; ill deeds when it should be
otherwise. A just and watchful guide, though he cannot hinder all, yet he
crusheth many a sin. But where is a wilful winking in many things that are
gross, as it is but too too often, that can not excuse it self, that bears a
heavy burden with it. For when we will not see faults, it is all one, as if
we did see and suffer them. Tullius pro S. Roscio Amerino.
Tully could say in excuse of Silla, that it was a thing impossible, but that
he who had a great family, should have some bad servants in it. He who had so
much business on him, as that he could scant breath freely, should have some
retaining to him, who would so watch their time, that if their master looked
but aside, they would dare to misuse one or other. Who knows not this to be
true? But if Silla should understand, that his servant Chrysogonus did deal in
filthy actions, and would not take notice of it, but pass by it, as if there
were no such matter, then Silla must bear the burden. Or if Silla will not
remit some of his ambitious humor, to look down under hatches, or to see to
that which concerns him, he shall bear the maine fault of Chrysogonus; God
and men will lay it on him. Here that has place which Dion once said of the
Emperor Galba, whose attendants did use many very badly, but the blame was
laid on him: Although it be enough for a private man, Dion lib 64. Principe^
prouidere oportet ne caeteri faciant.

Nihil interest eorum qui iniuriam patiuntur a quo ^am acceperint.


that he do no wrong to any, yet a Prince ought to take order, that other men
do no injury. For those who fuffer the wrong do not stand much on that, from
whom they do receive it. If from any, it is too much, but they look who it is
that should hinder it.

8 Then as it is the eye of the master, which feeds the horse, so it is that
also which keeps good order. The like may be said of the magistrate. If
Miphiboseth cannot stir, because he is lame in his feet, and David have
other business, then to examine things to the full, 2. Sam. 16.1.
Ziba will play his part, he will abuse his Prince; he will defraud his
master. It is a remembrance to noble men, and magistrates in great places,
that they look on such as attend them, and suffer not their approches to be
ill spoken of, for the behavior of other men. This ship-maister would see every
one who was in the ship about him. David knew his household people, Psalm.
101.4.5.
when he said that none but the righteous should be with him as his servant;
that no deceiptful person should dwell with him in his family. This is a good
lesson for all Princes, who sit as at the stern of kingdoms and
commonwealths, that they do as David did; that they do as our Master here,
that as their hands be long, so their eyes be quick of sight, to look on that
which concerns them. By occasion that Augustus a man severe enough, did not
know the exceeding wantonness of Iulia his own daughter, and her open
audacious boldness, it is noted in the story of his life, Dion. lib. 55.
Principes omnia facilius qaom sua cognoscunt, neque clam suos qui^quam agunt.
that Princes for the most part do best know those things which are farthest
from them, and not that which nearest belongs to them: that they do nothing
but their family understands it well enough; but the deeds of their own
household are concealed from them. It is a blessed case for Church and
commonwealth, where these things are not so. Long may she live and reign
happily, unto our farther comfort, who in this exceeds her self, and goes
beyond her sex, which loves to have a hand in matters of importance; have an
eye who be her Bishops, have a care who be her Judges: remember them of their
duties before they go to their countries, provide evermore for peace, yet
think sometimes of war, regard the ends of her kingdom, yea take a personal
notice of such things as be fit.

Plutarch. An seni sit gere^da Resp.
9 Plutarch writes of one Attalus, who was a king in Asia the less, that his
study was only to be idle, and to intend to nothing that appertained to his
government. In the mean time, Philopaemen one of his pretended friends, did
fat and cram him up, to make him dull and heavy, that himself might rule the
roast. Some of the Romans who perceived it, Rexne apud Philopaemenem aliquid
posset?
took it up as a jest, to ask of such as came out of Asia, whether the king
were in any grace with Philopaemen or no? whether he could obtain any thing of
him? The Lord be praised for it, our neighbors jest not so at us; but another
manner of care is had, God make us thankful for it. Then by the example of our
betters, or of this Ethnicke here, let every man look about him, and see over
whom he has charge, that he take not good for evil, and evil sometimes for
good, and a slander for a truth, and a flatterer for a friend, and a person
which is pernicious, to be a right sound member: that he may praise as it
deserves, and rebuke where needs rebuke, as this ship-gouernor does here. As
follows now in the next circumstance.

What meanest thou o sleeper? Arise call upon thy God.
10 If the man had been full of choler (as danger soon stirs up choler)
here had bin a good occasion, to warm himself over with chiding. To see a man
lie so carelessly, when such fright was among them, and neither with the cries
of one, nor the tumbling of packs by another, to raise himself from his rest.
If Jonas himself who fretted so testily and so egerly, when God destroyed his
gourd, Jonah. 4.9.
had bin in place of this mariner, I think he would have come over him, with
many an angry word. But it being before intended by his provident
circu^spection, that the man was wise in his kind, Eccles. 2.14.
(and as Solomon does tell us, it is the part of a wise man to have his eyes in
his head, to see what is convenient to be spoken, and what is not fit to be
uttered) he rouzeth him with no more, then O sleeper what do thou mean?
thou sleepie drowsy fellow, what do thou think upon? what, do thou not
regard that thy self and we all do perish? He does very justly call him sleeper,
for it seems that he slept with a witness: and if his eyes were open, yet it
seems that he still slept, like the drunken man mentioned in the writings of a
certain Orator (but S. Hierome does not name him) who could not sleep because
he was stirred, Hieron. in 5. ad Galatas. Pulchre quida^ non ignobilis Orator,
cum ebriu^ de somno describeret excitatum, ait Nec dormire excitatus, nec
vigilare ebrius poterat.
and could not awake because he was drunken. I mean his soul did sleep, so
that when his eyes were open, he stared, he did not awake. For what else does
this declare, when he must be put in mind by a simple infidel, who knew not the
God of Israel, that he must fall to his prayers, Arise call upon thy God. Here
the world is turned vpside down. Jonas should teach them their duty, and they
must teach him his: the Prophet is now an auditor, and the ship-maister is the
Prophet. Here the sheep leads the shepherd, the patient cures the
Phisitio^, the scholar does teach the master. Al makes against thee Jonas,
that this heathen man should be more devout in his superstition, then thou in
thy true religion; that thou should forget that which an Ethnic could
remember. I pray God the old Gentiles, Aristides, Plato, Socrates condemn not
us in that great and terrible day, because they thought of many things whereof
we make no reckening. Despise the words of none, although thou be a Prophet,
since a mariner may teach a Preacher. If thou be not come so far as to be a
Prophet, then do thou less refuse the words of any, for the proverb is most
true, Saepe etiam est olitor verba opportuna locutus.
The gardener or herbe-seller oftentimes has spoken a word in due season.

11 This man does give good counsel, although as one in the dark, he sees not
what he does, Call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, Jonah.
1.5.
that we perish not. The Gentiles and idolaters did dream of more Gods then
one, as these did in the fifth verse. Many Gods for many matters; Minerua she
was for learning, and Venus she was for love, and Aeolus for the wind, and
Bacchus for the wine, either devils reputed Gods by men, or men esteemed as
Gods, for some benefits done to mankind. And as these were Gods at large, so
many several countries had Protectors for themselves. The fire was the God of
the Persia^s, whom the Sun did represent; so Hercules was for the Tyrians,
and Dagon for the Philistines, 1. Reg. 11.5.
and Astaroth for the Sidonians, and Milcom for the Ammonites, and Chemosh for
the Moabites. Yea they had Gods for their cities, Semidei. Penates. Tutelaria
numina. Augustine de Ciuitate Dei lib. 4.8.
and demigods for them selves, household Saints and tutelar powers, to whom
they cried in distresses. Yea superstition was so endless, as Austen does
observe, that they had a God for every thing, yea many oftentimes for one
thing. As, for their corn Segetius, and Proserpina, and Volutina, and Tutelina
and other; one for it under the ground, another when it was sprung up: this
when it was in the blade, that when it was in the ear, another for the barn.
The place in Saint Austen is worth the reading. The Jews followed this pretty
well, when they offered their incense under every green tree; Ierem. 11.13.
when the number of their Gods was to the number of their cities; when there
was in every street, an altar to sacrifice to their idols. The Church of Rome
thinks scorn, Vide Zacharia^ Lippeloo de rebus gestis martyru^.
for idolatry to come short of either of them, when for every day in the
year, they have an he Saint or a she Saint, as appears in the common
Calendar, for their swine a Saint, and another for their horses, for Spain a
Saint as Saint James, for us a Saint as Saint George; yea special men,
Campian. in quada^ Epist.
special Patrones; many women John the Evangelist, M. Campian John the
Baptist.

12 So wretchedlie do men run without the word of God: such amassed blindness
is in the eyes of idolaters, yea such tickle uncertain giddiness, is in the
life of their understanding. The vilest of Gods creatures, shall be to them for
Gods. The Egyptians as Origene writes, Orig. contra Celsum. lib. 3.
did adore their dogs, and goats, and apes, and Crocodiles. No doubt S. Paul
did allude to them, when speaking of the unbelievers, Roman. 1.23.
he said that they turned the glory of the incorruptible God to the similitude
of the image of a corruptible man, and of birds and four footed beasts, and of
creeping things. Diodor. Siculus. lib. 2.4.
Yea they made such account of cats, as I find in Diodorus Siculus, that when
once a Roman had killed one of them against his will, the people could not be
stayed, either with the fear of the Roman soldiers, or with reverence to
their king, from running on him to kill him. This is the less to be wondered at
in them, when we shall compare it with the testimony, which Olaus Magnus gives,
Olaus Magnus. lib. 3.2.
of some Northren people at this day. Those are the Barbarians in Lapland and
Scricfinnia, and the parts adjoining, whose manners he might the better know,
for that he was a neighbor, not very far distant from them. But of these he
reports, Pro numine fideliter adorare.
that it is their custom to worship faithfully for a God, until the evening
of the same day, whatsoever liuing-thing, in the air or earth or water does
in the breaking of each day appear unto them, be it bird or beast, or fish,
yea very serpents and worms. Nay besides those base but yet living things,
what should I say, that among idolaters the quick do bend unto the dead, and
do adore the works of their own hands, as the Israelites once did, saying to
the golden calfe, These are thy Gods o Israel, Exodus 32.8.
which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt? What, that they make of
their Gods, some helpers and some hurters, Gel. Noct. Attic. lib. 5. 12.

Arnob. lib. 5. co^tra Gent. Plutarch. in Numa.


Laeua Numina, hurting powers, as Gellius notes out of Virgil? What, that some
of their holiest and most religious men, did deride their greatest God? For as
Arnobius writes, and Plutarch has the very same, Numa the first author of
the Roman devotions, asking of Jupiter, by what means some places might be
purged, which were blasted not long before with lightning, Respondit Jupiter
capite^ tu^ Numa caepitio. Ru^sus Jupiter, humano^ respondit rex, sed capillo.
^mo Deus contra, anima: subiecit Pompilius, piscu.
received this answer, that it must be with a head, meaning the head of a man;
but Numa gives him the head of an onion. That which I would have says Jupiter
must belong unto a man. Yea says Numa, but it shall then be the hair; nay
quoth Jupiter I do require a life; the other answered, then it must be of a
fish. Thus durst he whom they accounted for the founder of all their
ceremonies, deride their high God Jupiter. But to leave these things thus in
general.

13 Our mariners in this place with a co^ceipt fit for idolaters, thought one
God to be stronger, or better the^ another, or more willing, or more at
leisure, and now they would try the best. Cry thou man to thy God, and I will
cry to mine, and he shall cry to his: among many, one may regard us. If none
should harken to these suppliants, then it might fall out that he who made him,
may mar him too for his Godhead. Perhaps grow to cursing of him for his
neglect, Surius in commentar. Anno. 1535.
as if Surius do say true, Barbarossa did, a General of the Turks being
overcome in battle by Charles the fifth in Afric, where he often reviled his
Mahomet, and in exceeding bitterness did curse him. Perhaps shuffle out that
God, and choose some other in for him, Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 2.15.
Plutarch. in Silla.
as Licinius did in his battles, when he was overcome by Constantine. When his
old Gods in whom he put his trust had deceived him, he sought out new ones to
worship. At least take it unkindly, as Silla did at the hands of his Apollo.
For whereas his custom was, as often as he went into any battle, evermore to
bear in his bosom, a little image of gold representing that God, being on a
time in danger of an overthrow, he drew it out and kissed it, and used these
words unto it, How now Apollo Pythius, will thou who have prospered and
advanced that happy man Cornelius Silla, in so many foughten battles, now
destroy him and his fellow citisens, eue^ at the gates of Rome? Thus when men
make Gods to themselves, or do single out each man one, they are the bolder
with them. An action of unkindness may be easily entered against them; perhaps
there shall be a reuiling of them, it may be, a plain renouncing.

14 The company of our Prophet is not yet come so far. As you see they will
fall to their prayers. Who knows whether this man's God be a greater God then
ours is? whether that this sleepy fellow, be more accepted of him? for it was an
opinion entertained eue^ by heathen me^, that one person was more loved by
their Gods the^ another was: that the prayers of some were better accepted, as
of their Priests, or their Prophets, a Helenus or a Calchas; and these knew
not, whether Jonas might in such sort be more gracious with his God, or no. The
truth is, that he might have been, if he were not, if he had but kept his
own. For we find in true divinity, that the prayers of a few holy and
sanctified me^, are at al times more acceptable to the everlasting Lord, then
the requests of ten thousand sinners. In so much that he bestows upon such,
their own lives, and the lives of others. It seems that God in former time
did use to hear Jeremy, Ierem. 11.14.
when once so precisely he forbad him, to entreat for the people. There were
given unto Lot, Genes. 19, 12.
his wife and his daughters: and his sons in law, if they would, might have
had their portion in that favor. How much did the Lord love and tender
Abraham, Chap. 18.32.
when he yielded to his prayer, that for ten just men's sakes, he would spare
the City Sodom? But unto my purpose this is most agreeable, that when there
was great danger of a wreck, that time that S. Paul was sailing toward Rome,
Act. 23.23.24.
the Angel of God did stand by the Apostle in a vision, and told him that the
Lord had bestowed upon him, all that were in the ship (who were to the number
of two hundred and ^euentie and five) that not one of all these should perish,
for Paul's sake his good servant. But alas the case is otherwise in this ship,
then it was in the other where the Apostle sailed, for here he that should have
helped all, hurted all: the Prophet now is become a runagate, not a preacher
but a sleeper: he alone is pursued with vengeance, and the other poor folks
are free.

15 Yet call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we
perish not. Look what ignorance on the one side, and necessity on the other,
could enforce them to do. It might have bin a harm unto them, to pray to so
many Gods. For when such a number should be sought to, and yet some other
should be left out (as it was impossible for them to think on all) some one
master God who was of the better sort might be angry, and drown them all, in
despite that he should be omitted, and not be had in account. I should think
that our simple Romanists, the simpler sort I say, who have little in their
own knowledge, should stumble much at this stoue; least while they are
creeping and crooching to some one Saint, some other should take it in dudgeo^,
that any should be preferred, or sought to before themselves. But I think that
to amend the matter, their Church has taken the pains, Festum omniu^*
sanctorum. Festum omniu^ Animarum.
to put All the Saints in one day together, to keep them quiet, and All the
souls in another, least the first should not be sufficient. Gods grace is more
upon us, since he has let us know, that one Lord, and only he is to be
worshipped; that Christ is our mediator, and diligent intercessour, and not
any other creature; that prayer is a sacrifice peculiar unto him, and that the
Saints in heaven are to be imitated of us, for their faith and good example,
and not to be called upon. And yet God has dealt better with those Romanists,
and better with these seamen, then with some lewd ones in our time, who being
in all their actions and conversation most profane, are so far from praying
with the heathen to many Gods, that they rather say there is none. These
idolaters under error of religion or devotion, know that something is to be
adored; the light of nature has taught them that; but these devils come not so
far. I give that name unto them, because in this although not in all things,
Jacob. 2.19.
they are worse then devils, for the devils believe that there is a God, albeit
they quake and tremble at it. What other name should I give them? fools? nay
these exceed the fool, Psalm. 53.1.
for the fool has said in his heart, there is no God, as we may read in
David. But these go one degree beyond David's fool, for they say it too with
their mouths.

Aug. Tract. 2. in Johan. Sic est quasi videat quisqua^ de longinqu^ patria^,
and mare interiaceat: videat quo eat sed non videat qua eat
16 These poor souls never coming where piety or goodness grew, conceive by
a general apprehension, that there was a power, or powers who ruled all
things, though they knew not what it was. They were as men in darkness, like
those of whom S. Austen speaks, who know that they have a country, but the
sea does lie between: they willingly would go to it, but they do not know the
means; whither they would go they guess, but which way they cannot tell. They
know that there is something, but they know not how to conceive what it should
be; they cannot tell how to yield it his right reverence; or whether it be one
or many. But all coasts and all countries accord, that there is somewhat. The
West Indians had certain spirits, whom they named their Zemes, and accounted
them their Gods, evermore in extremities crying and calling to them. But what
should I name any particulars, Tullius de legibus. lib. 1.
when Tullie can say for all, that there is no nation so barbarous, no people
so rude, but knows that there is a God; although they cannot tell who.
Tullie, it shall be easier for thee in the day of judgment, and for thee
Plato, and for thee Seneca, then for many who live not in Ethnicisme or
Barbarism, but in a civil nation, in the clear light of the Gospel, in a
country of good learning, and yet do make dispute of the being of their
Creator. But I leave these wicked Atheists, and return to our idolaters, who
did not stay at these prayers, but went yet one step farther. They fall to
casting lots.

And they said every man to his fellow, come and let us cast lots.
17 They see that there was some thing in it, beyond the common course of
nature. The sodainnesse of the tempest, and the violence of the storm, showed
some God to be angry. It may be that other ships which were at sea, did go
quietly, or the wind did beat and strike most of all upon this ship. But
without doubt they saw it to be extraordinary, and thereupon their hearts by
and by did give them, that in all likelihood it was for sin, they knew not what
nor in whom, but for sin they were well assured. Which may be a memorial to
us Christians, that if any cross do come straungely, or if any noted thing
do befall us (whereof our own hearts may best of all be judges) that
straightway with fear and trembling we examine our selves, and enter into our
consciences, and sift them in sincerity, as in the sight of God, whether sin
do not pluck that on us. It troubled the Israelites much, Iudic. 20.26.
when going in a good cause, to take vengeance upon the Beniamites, for the
abuse of the Levites concubine, there perished of them in two days no less
then forty thousand. They went and wept before the Lord, and fasted till the
evening, to know what the cause was. But when they who came before presuming
upon their multitude, had learned to humble themselves, they obtained that
which they desired. If any thing should happen straungely, as while we be in
this mortality, we may very well expect, we can take no better course, then
with these ship-men presently to fear, least iniquity be the author of it.
But we must not always follow their means; for they fell to casting lots.

18 The use of lots is ancient, wherein the custom was in causes of great
importance, to take sticks, or stones, or shells, or to write names in a paper,
or to draw strawes or cuts, so to determine that, which otherwise without
strife could not be accorded, or to put that unto God which me^ could not
decide. Augustine. in Psalm. 30.
So S. Austen does describe it, A lot is such a thing as in the doubts of men
does show the will of God. So when men knew not who it was, that had taken the
excommunicate thing, Iosuah. 7.18.
the lot showed it to be Achan: for so the most do expound it. So when no man
could tell Saul, that Ionathas was the man, 1. Sam. 14.42
who so contrary to the rash oath of Saul, had tasted of the honey, it was
found by lot who it was. Least strife should arise, Act. 1.26.
and parts be taken, about Joseph and Mathias, which of them should be admitted
into the room of Judas, Homer. Iliad. 7.
the Apostles made the trial by a lot. So Homer does report that Nestor gave
the counsel, that it should be determined by a lot, which of the nine
worthiest of the Greeks, should fight in combat with Hector. Each man marked
his lot, and put it into the helmet of Agamemnon. The first turn fell to Ajax.
But whereas according to the rules of divinity, these lots should be used but
in special causes, and that with great judgment and meditation, (because it
is a trying of God in a kind of sentence, and we are not to tempt him rashly)
in some men superstition, in some other a hope of gain, and a sort of
deceiving fraud, have wrought great abuses in them. Proud Haman in the book
of Hester, Ester. 3.7.
made lots to be drawn before him, from the first month to the twefth, to see
what month or day should be fortunate, to attempt the moving of his great
matter, the murder of all the Jews. O Haman, in that thy lot, thou wast blind
as well as bloody. Caesar. Com^ient. lib. 1.
Caesar tells in his Commentaries, that the women among the Germans, did use
to divine by lots, what days were good to fight on, or to begin a battle.
This is heathenish superstition. Some casting lots to get money, have made a
profession of it, as the counterfeit Egyptians in telling of fortunes. The
laws contra sortilegos were made by worthy Princes, against such kind of
men, and other of much like quality. God sometimes does suffer these in very
truth to hit, that themselves and such as follow them, attending to strong
delusion, may make up their own damnation. These abuses have made some to
think all lots unlawful, and not to be used at all. Hieron. in Ion. 1. Nec
statim debemus sub hoc exe^plo sortibus credere. Priuilegia singulo^u^ no^
possunt lege^facere communem. Prou. 16.33. Cap. 18.18. Augustine. in Psalm. 30.
De Genesi ad literam. lib. 10. Epistol. 180.
Yea Hierome speaks somewhat doubtfully of them, who upon this place says,
that this deed of the mariners should not be drawn to an example, of
attributing any thing to lots, neither should any in holy Scriptures, because
they were special motions and events, given by God to special men, and not by
other to be attempted or put in practice.

19 But the Scripture is not so straight; the lot is cast into the lap, but the
whole disposition thereof is of the Lord. And elsewhere it is commended. The lot
causes contentions to cease, and makes a partion among the mighty. So S.
Austen does teach, that there is no evil in the lot. And in another place,
Those things which are given by lot, are given unto us by God. And in his
hundredth and eightith Epistle, disputing that question of the flying of a
Minister in the time of persecution, and supposing that there be diverse
pastors in one congregation, whereof some are to depart for a time, and some
to stay; if it cannot be agreed, says he, who shall do the one, and who shall
do the other, Epistol. 119.
let it be decided by a lot. Indeed he does not like that lots should be made
of every thing, as of the leaves of the Gospel, (which it seemed that some in
his time used to do) because he thought it not to be fit, that divine matters
should by a superstitious custom, be applied to profane uses. There the abuse
is in the manner of doing, not in the thing. But the question which arises
from this difference of judgment, may easily be resolved, by considering the
several sorts of lots, which are found to be three. For there are either lots
appointed to divide, Sorts diuisionis, consultationis, diuinationis.
or intended to consult, or used of purpose to divine. The first of these three
is, lawful; that is, to divide lands or goods, or any like thing, when
otherwise contention would arise, Prou. 18.18. Iosuah. 16.1.
as Solomon does import in the place which I named before. In this kind did
Iosuah part out the land of Canaan by lot, to the people of Israel. The second
is not unlawful, that is, to consult what shall be done, when matters stand in
an equality of reason: so that there be no offending in the circumstances: And
of this may be understood that other place of Solomon. Prou. 16.33.
By this, choice may be made of persons to be sent, or of things to be
accomplished, where otherwise by diversity of opinions there would be no
agreement. But to divine is utterly unlawful, as if a man should take a white
lot, and a black lot, and if I draw the white lot, then I may well go this
day, if the black, I will not go: I shall have an unhappy journey. That of
Haman before spoken of, does come within this compass. We hold this for a
great abuse.

20 Here the lot is consultatorie. They took it a thing granted, that one or
other among them had committed some wicked offense, and because they could not
tell, who it was that had done the deed, they will put it to their Gods. This
shows the mighty fear which did possess their souls. Men can hardly like
it in other of their acquaintance, that they should be culled out to be
murdered; but that any should consent to throw the dice on himself, to
endaunger his own life by it, is a matter which is not common. This is like
one of those cases among the Romans, which would make the hearts of all the
beholders to quake; That was, when after some cowardly fearfulness, or
mutinous sedition, or stubburne rebellion in the army, the General for
punishment thereof, would tith his soldiers, every tenth man to the block,
Liuius. lib. 2.
as Appius dealt with his legio^s. Or as if in some grievous famine, cuts
should be drawn, who among a company should be slain to relieve his fellows.
In what a state was Josephus, Joseph. de bello Iudaico. lib. 3.14.
when his fellows in a desperate mood, enforced him to yield to the throwing
of lots, so to know which of them should be first killed, and which of them
last? but all of them must be slain. Necessity has no law; it must be done
in this place. The only comfort is, that every man has this hope, that it
wilt rather fall to another then happen to himself. We can sooth our selves of
our selves, either in foolish presumption that we are not the worst of all,
some are more bad then we be; or in a weening fancy that we may escape in a
multitude; we are but one of a many: but so between both, we will hope the
best for our own parts, Corn. Tacit. in vita Iulij Agricolae. Imquissima haec
bellorum conditio est: prospera omnes sibi vendicant: aduersa vni imputantur.
and let the lots go on other. As Tacitus says of war, This is the misery
of it: if any thing fall out well, every one chalengeth that to himself: but
if it fall out ill, every one slippeth his neck out of the collar, the blame
shall be laid upon one, so in such cases as these, happy man he that is
farthest off; but if the lot be to be drawn for any good thing, the better
leg shall be set before. Why should not we hope to speed, as well as the best
amongst us?

21 But the lot here is to take one, who must die for all his fellows. Why one
for all, ye mariners? what man is there among you, that had not deserved to
die? This is a branch of that root of hypocrisy, which possesses the hearts
of all the sons of Adam. Genesis 3.12. 1. Sam. 15.21.
It was not Adam but the woman, who had touched the forbidden fruit. When the
best of the cattle of the Amalekites was saved, it was the people, says
Saul, which spared the^. So here I warrant you, the most part of those which
were in the ship, were so clean from any such gross crime as now was in
question, that there could be but one sinner. David was in another mind, Psalm.
130.3.
If thou o Lord straightly markest iniquities, o Lord who shall stand? All
these had deserved death, and merited to be served as Jonas was: but the Lord
indeed upon a present occasion, had singled one out to this strange punishment;
because as in part he would teach his companions, by his example, so especially
he meant to make that one man know, how highly he had offended. God expected
much more of him, then he did of ordinary persons. To whom the most is
committed, of him most is required. Jonas had been inspired with a Prophetical
spirit: he had visions and revelations from his God: he should have been a
light to other. But the simple seafaring men, never came to any such height of
knowledge. He was singular in comparison of them: he was as a white garment;
and therefore a little spot in him, would cause a great deformity. But when he
did take this precious vesture, and with lying down in it, did soil it every
whit, God in his justice cannot endure that in him.

22 The lots therefore are cast, and the danger falls upon Jonas. That Lord
who rules over all his creatures, great and small, so disposed it, that the
sinner should be deprehended, and the more innocent should go free. Iosuah.
7.18.
His state was like to Achan: he cannot escape the judgment, which is coming
toward him. The lot fell surely on him. It is not unlikely, but that they threw
it diverse times, and still it proved that he was the man. For they who were so
careful not to drown him, after that they had discovered him, Iona. 1.13.14.
would not hastily be induced, to single out a stranger, who never immediately
had offended them, to make him die for all. Being drawn then once or often, it
fell undoubtedly upon Jonas. It was not possible for him to escape, where such
a one had the handling of it, as is Lord both of heaven and earth. Tullius lib.
2. in Verrem.
Tully does tell of Verres, sometimes deputy for the Romans in Sicilia, that
as otherwise he was excellent to bring about to his purpose, all things which
might yield credit or commodity, so very earnestly desiring, to have his
friend Theomnastus, to be chosen Jupiters priest, an office of some moment in
that country, he wrought a pretty feate for him. For whereas by the order of
the election, three men should be named to the place, and three several lots
be appointed, with the names of the three competitors, written upon the lots,
and he whose lot should be first drawn, should have the priesthood: Verres to
make sure work, made three lots indeed to be appointed, but he wrote upon
every one of them, the name of his friend Theomnastus, and so being sure to
hit, he sped his man of the priesthood; for it could not be otherwise. This was
a trick of fraud, and fit for such a deceiuer, as Verres showed himself in
Sicilia. He that would have Jonas taken, needs not to use any such
leger-demaine: his creatures be at commandment: they do as himself inioyneth.
So Jonas did find it here: so the wicked shall find it ever.

23 An instruction hence may be gathered for all persons, that they look unto
their ways, and plunge not into ungodliness, under hope not to be disclosed.
For nothing is so secret but it shall be opened. Eccles^ 10.20
He that curses the king, although it be in his most private chamber, shall be
discovered by the fowls of heaven, and one dead thing or other shall declare
it. Some letter perhaps or writing. The adulterer who does think himself
safely concealed, in the dark, or by the close and hidden walls, yet cannot
escape his sight, whose eyes are said to be ten thousand times brighter then
the Sun. He that wishes ill to his brother, is well known to that majesty,
which tries the hearts and reins. In one word what can escape him, who has
such prerogative of power, Apoc. 20.11.
as to sit so upon a throne, that heaven and earth fly before him, the graves
give up their dead, and the sea does yield up hers; that the books shall be
laid open, and men's consciences be detected, and the mountains cannot cover
them, nor the rocks cannot keep them from him. It is a good meditation, Heb.
10.31.
to fear his angry judgment. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God. If we serve him he will love us, if we fall from him, he
will find us. Lord direct us so with thy Spirit, that if we should fall with
Jonas, we sleep not in sin with Jonas, but as the careful ship-maister,
looking in all sincerity through the corners of our hearts, we may raise up
our selves, and call to thee the true God, to help us in all extremities, to
stand by us in all temptations, that the lot fall not on us, to be cast away
from thy favor: but that we may reign with thee, in thy most blessed
kingdom, to the which bring us o good father, for thine own son Christ his
sake, to whom with thee and thy Spirit, be glory for evermore.

THE V. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 2 Many questions import egernesse to know. 4.6. In doing
justice due examination should go before. 5 Men's hard hearts to strangers. 7
Some trades used are odious to God. 8 As usury. 10 It is not fit to come in
all places. 11 Some people are not acceptable to God. 12 Confession of a fault.
14 What is meant by fearing. 15 Two sorts of fear. 16 The horror of sin.
17.22. The power and being of God showed against the Atheist. 19 Authorities of
heathen men, and reasons proving the creation. 23 Four questions to the
Atheist.

JONAH. 1.8.9. Then said they unto him: Tell us for whose cause this evil is
upon us? what is thine occupation? and whence come thou? which is thy
country? and of what people art thou? And he answered them, I am an Hebrew,
and I fear the Lord God of heaven, which has made the sea and the dry land.


BEcause our Jonas has a great deal more mind, to go to Tarshish by sea,
then to Niniue by land, rather about his own pleasure, then the business of
his master, he is so well preferred, as of a Prophet to become a prisoner,
first arrested by a tempest, then discovered by a lot, to be a malefactor; in
what place or cause, it does not yet appear, but allow time only, and that
shall be revealed. In this my text he is brought to his examination, not in a
court of magistrates: but a company of mariners, must be his Inquisitours.
Being arraigned he is convicted, and by his own mouth condemned, but by them
afterward he is brought to answer, which is in the latter verse; both of them
yielding to us very good instruction, if I be not deceived, as may appear in
order.

2 Saint Hierome does observe the manner of the words, Hieron. in Ion. 1.8.
Notanda breuitas qua^ admirari in Virgilio solebamus
that there should be within so small a compass, so many questions, and those
so significant and effectual. And as he was a miracle of the world for
learning, and that for humanity, as well as Divinity, so it puts him to
remember, the excellent concisenesse of the Poet Virgil, who in a manner right
compendious, is accustomed to enclose many questions in very few words. He
cites that one place, -- Iuuenes quae causa subegit Virgilius Aeneid. 8.

Ignot as tentare vias? quo tendit is inquit?
Qui genus? vnde domo? pacemne huc fertis an arma?
Young men, what cause has brought you into these unknown ways? whither go
you? of what kindred are you? where do you dvvell? bring you hither war or
peace? But the matter of the words, is rather the ground whereon we are to
stand, every question including some thing of importance, to this present
purpose. These mariners being followed with so strange a tempest, as made them
quake for danger of their lives, and cry with importunity to their heathen
Gods, and disburden their ship of such wares as were in it, and cast lots for
their lives, who should die for all his fellows; may justly be supposed to be
in such a fright, that if any thing extraordinary should appear unto them,
what might be the reason of their danger, or how they were to be eased, and
put away from their ^eare, he by whom or in whom it might be coniectured to be,
should be plucked, and tugged, and haled, by one and by another, as a Bear
that were to be bayted, to know what was the reason of this terrible danger,
or what secret he could open. What art thou? whither will thou? whence come
thou? what do thou? how comes all this about?

3 For men in such extremities can not satisfy them selves, but either in
strange news, or any mighty peril, will so run question upon question,
that it is scant in man's wit to make a ready answer. When the Romans had
sustained that deadly overthrow at Cannae, Liuius lib. 22. Quae fortuna
co^sulum atque exercituum sit, siquid Dij immortales, miseri imperij reliquum
Romano nomini fecerint, vbicae copiae sint: quo se Hannibal post praelium
contulerit, quid paret, quid agat, acturusque sit. Luc. 16.27.
by Hannibal the Carthaginian, and their City was grown into that
perplexity, as it never was in almost before, that wise Fabius Maximus,
causes scoutes to be sent forth, with demands upon demands, to such as they
should meet; in what case the armies were; in what estate were the Consuls?
what the Gods had left remaining to the Romans? where the remnant of their
army did abide? whither Hanniball was now gone? what he intended? what he did?
what he purposed to attempt? Thus danger affrighteth the wisest, and makes
the simpler sort oftentimes, to run tongue before the wit. In the sixteenth of
Luke, the rich man is brought in, making request to Abraham, that he would send
Lazarus to his fathers house, to give warning to his five brethren, that they
by the wickedness and retchlesnesse of their lives, came not into those
torments, which he then with much pain endured. If that should have been in
deed, which is there but in a parable described, and he who had come from the
dead, should have had but some few hours allotted him to stay, imagine you
(for this is but a supposall) among a multitude, what preassing there would
have been about him; what plucking by one elbow, and holding by another, what
doubled interrogations: how does such a one, or such a one? my father or my
friend? is he in heaven or hell? in lesser or greater joy? in more or milder
torment? Jonas coming from under the hatches, (where he slept but a little
before) like Lazarus from his grave, is beset among these mariners, with a
multitude of such questions. What is the cause that this storm is in this sort
upon us? fellow, whence do thou come? what countreyman art thou sir? what
is thine occupation?

4 Thus the place must be understood, if we respect the egernesse of men in
such perplexity, or the have which danger breeds, or the manners of common
mariners. But in very deed I see more in it. Here may be noted to us a
proceeding much more sober, and judgment with discretion. That which goes
before will well bear it, that which follows, will more enforce it. The
fearfulness whereunto they were grown, by hazard of a shipwreck, was of
force to allay their heat: it made them amated with it: their devotion to
their Gods, did put them from their choler: the master is supposed to be a man
wise and careful, as not long since you have heard: the casting of their lots
does intend a slaking stay: their mild entreating of Jonas, when the crime
appeared to them: their referring of all to him: the desire which they had to
save him: the grief which they had to drown him, are presumptio^s of much
sobriety. These circumstances import a just kind of inquiry, which was used
upon the Prophet, so to wring out by co^iectures, or by plain declaration,
what was this grievous crime, which plucked such a tempest down from heaven,
how Gods wrath was to be satisfied, what punishment should be taken, if
punishment must be taken. It were much to be suspected, that if this case which
is here among these Gentiles, should come to trial among many Christians, the
man should find hard justice. For now upon how light occasions, are many
inflamed to wrath? what bitterness? what reuiling? what blasphemy even to
God, with swearing and with tearing, if for another sake men's lives should be
indaungered? if they should be enforced, as these were here, to throw their
wealth and substance, with their own hands into the sea? Call to mind, that
if any negligence have raised a fire in a town, and harm be done to their
building, how little it is remembed, that it is a cross from God, sent on them
for their sins, or to teach them patience, or to make trial of their faith;
but the next immediate cause, that presently is looked too, seethe villainy of
this boy, see the cursednesse of this wenche; see the diuellishnesse of this
fellow, that should have taken care of this fire, if he had his desert, how often
should he dye for it?

5 But if it were a stranger, an outlandish man as Jonas was, who brought this
scathe upon them, how many Crucifiges should he have tumbling on him? A French
man as I take it, (although some other men be of another opinion) even greeuing
in his soul at the unkindness of our nation, I mean in the common sort,
Anno. 1572. Eusebius. Philadelphus Dialogo 2.
has by occasion of the ha^dling of their last great Massacre, noted it to
posterity, that by a most inhospitall kind of phrase, our Englishmen use to
term them, no better then French dogs, that fled hither for Religion, and
their conscience sake. Unto this join the many conspiracies, which by some of
the meaner people, in one City of our land, have been oftentimes intended
against outlandish folks: and the disposition of men in this point, will well
appear. Those which are wise and godly, make use of those aliaunts as of
brethren, considering their distresses, with a lively felow-feeling, holding it
an unspeakable blessedness, that this little Island of ours should not only be
a temple, to serve God in for our selves, but an harbor for the
weather-beaten, a sanctuary to the stranger, wherein he may honor the true
Lord: remembering the precise charge which God gave to the Israelites, to deal
well with all strangers, Leuit. 19.33.
because the time once was, when themselves were strangers in that cruel land
of Egypt: not forgetting that other nations to their immortal praise, were a
refuge to the English, in their last bloody persecution in Queen Mary's
days: and in brief recounting, that by a mutual vicissitude of Gods
chastisements, their case may be our case: which day the Lord long keep from
us. These mariners with that humanity which beseems all men of reason,
reproach it not to the Prophet, that he an outlandish aliaunt, should bring such
trouble on them, should put them to such loss, or thrust them into such
danger, but in very good course of justice, they desire to be informed, and
take notice of his cause. The presentnesse of the peril, or the have which
they had to be satisfied, could not stay them from doing justice: they will
attend his answer.

6 Such persons as through whose hands the lives of others pass, be they
Judges or be they iusticers, yea be they but common Jurors, may hearken to
these heathen, and the manner of their proceeding, and learn so much; as that
they shall not dare, rashly to destroy, or take away the life of their
Christian brother. Life is a most precious thing: it cannot be made by men, but
it may be marred in a moment. And if it be once marred, there is no benefit on
earth, whereby it may be requited; as Alexander once told his own mother
Olympias, Ammi. Marcellin. lib. 14.
when she desired him to execute an innocent harmless man; and that she might
the more prevail with him, remembered him that her self for the space of nine
months, had carried him in her womb, and for that reason he must not say her
nay. Ask says he my good mother, Aliam paren^ optima posce mercede^* hominis
enim salus nulio beneficio pensatur.
some other gift of me, for the life of a man can be recompensed, by no good
turn that can be done. Before that death be inflicted, let truth appear if it
may be. Stay the asking of many questions, and the scanning out of all doubts,
ere the last sentence come. Certainly God knew the wickedness of Sodom and
Gomorrha, as he sat above in heaven; Gene. 18.21.
yet meaning to destroy them, he says, I will go down now, and see whether
they have done altogether according to that cry, which is come unto me, and
if not, that I may know: thereby teaching all governors, that they pass not
otherwise to the death of any, but with very mature aduisement. It is a wise
law in the mean time, Mu^ster Cosmograph. lib. 4.
which Munster reports to be put in practice, in a town called Clagea
belonging to Carinthia; where if any be taken suspicious of theft, he is by and
by hanged up, and some two or three days afterward, inquiry is made upon him,
wherein if he be found guilty, he is let to hang till he rot away peece-meale,
but if he be found innocent, then he is taken down, and buried with some
solemnity. This is contrary to the common rules of humanity, but much more
repugnant to divinity. In cases of less importance then life and death, all
Magistrates ought to afford that measure to their people, which these mariners
did to Jonas, that is, to sift out the whole truth by demands, before that
they give any judgment. Moses could say of himself to the Israelites, I
charged your Judges the same time saying, Deuteronomy. 1.16.
Hear between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and
his brother, and the stranger that is with him. First hear and then judge.
Job. 29.16.
Job professes thus of himself, I was a father unto the poor, and when I
knew not the cause, I sought it out diligently. The speech of Nicodemus to the
Pharisees was good, Does our law judge a man before it hear him, John. 7.51.
and know what he has done? Act. 24 23.
So Felix could tell Saint Paul, that he would not judge his cause, Ammi.
Marcell. lib. 18. Ecquis innoce^s esse poterit, si accusasse sufficient?
before that he had heard it perfectly. Otherwise, the accused person should
have a hard bargain by it: for as Julian the Apostata once answered very
wittily, If it be sufficient to accuse, shall any man be an innocent? The Poet
therefore said well, Seneca in Medea.
Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera,
Aequum licet statuerit, hand aquus fuit.
He who determines any thing not having heard both the parties speak,
although he have decreed the right, yet himself has not been just, that is,
he has done it wrongfully, because he should hear both. And this is the
general doctrine, which may be derived here, from the examination of these
mariners over Jonas. Let us gather a little nearer to the particular words.

Tell us for whose cause this evil is upon us? what is thine occupation?
whence come thou? Verse. 7.
7 I have in part before touched, that these men imagined, that some sin
plucked this wrath upon them. But when the lot fell upon Jonas, they gessed him
to be the sinner. Now to know the particulars, they asked him of his trade,
for, good men, they little dreamed of a Prophet: they demand of him for his
country, and the place from whence he came. For both Rhetorike and experience,
Natio, educatio, fortuna, studia, in personis sunt quaerenda. Omphalius in
Nomologia.
and divinity most of all, do show that good conjectures, and presumptions for
any thing in question, may be drawn from the life which in former time has
been led, from the company and familiarity which has been entertained, from
the country and habitation where any has abode. Then what is thine
occupation? and the course of life which thou use? wherein do thou spend
thy time? If thou be a robber or a rouer, no marvel if some strange
punishment do pursue thee at the heels. If a sorcerer or a necromancer, the
same may be thy doom. Horat. Epist. 1.15. Scurra vagus non qui certum praesepe
teneret. Impransus non qui ciuem dignosceret host. Quaelibet in quemuis
opprobria fingere sae^us.
If a stewes-maister or a broaker for uncleanness of the body, it is very
likely that wrath may follow thee. If a flattering hungry iester, who waytest
upon a trencher, and make no kind of conscience, to taunte any man that
displeases thee, vengeance may drop upon thee. So these simple men did
perceive, that there was some kind of life unlawful and ungodly, which
because it was contrary and adverse, either unto piety, or humane charity,
it might well offend that power which rules all mortal creatures.

8 I marvel what the usurer could have answered in this case, who lives on
the sweat of others, and makes a gain of their losses. Genesis 47.3.
It was no shame for Jacobs sons, to tell the king of Egypt, that their
father and his children were shepheardes. Neither was it any disgrace to Amos,
Amos. 7.14.
to say that he was a heardman, and a gatherer of wild figs: but to say I am
an usurer, one who live upon my money; is but a blushing speech. David asks a
question and answers himself, Psalm. 15.1.5.
Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? who shall rest in thy holy
mountain? He that gives not his money unto usury. Ye in some places of this
land, (for I must not imagine, that any interest is to be found in Oxford: we
have scant money for our necessities) such as have their hands polluted, with
extortion in this kind, will come into the tabernacle, and sit them down in
the Temple, be at Church as soon as any, and be as intent and earnest upon the
preacher, as if there were no such matter. If speech be of the inheritance
which is on Gods holy hill, they will urge as far as the farthest. How can
this hang together? the breaking of Gods commandments in a wilful professed
sort, and the true fear of the Lord? But this were a greater woe, if it should
be found in the Levites, and the Priests, even such as serve in the Tabernacle.
Romans 2.21.
Thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? says Saint
Paul, do thou spoil? It was the speech of Apollonius in Eusebius, against
the Montanist Prophets, Eusebius. Eccl. Histor. lib. 5* 17.
does a Prophet color his hair? or annoint his eyes with stibium? does a
Prophet put money to usury? If it be thy portion which was given thee by thy
father, or some money which thou have gotten, or a stock left in thy trust,
for the widow or for the fatherless, which thou art loath should be idle, this
or that, or whatsoever, doubtless it is not well, since no carnal pretense
^an serve to violate the everlasting law of God, and men should have tender
consciences, fearing to exercise that, which by so many places of Scripture,
the judgment of all the ancient fathers, the Canon and civil laws, the
constitutions of most good commonwealths, the reasons of heathen
Philosophers, the consent of the schoolmen, and opinion of the greatest part
of our late Divines, is condemned as an uncharitable, and most unchristian
practice. All those things which may be objected, that thy case is not common;
that there be many sorts of interest, a biting and not biting usury: that
learned men of great fame in some causes do permit it: that the laws of our
land wink at it: that now it is much frequented, and many good men do use it,
great gentlemen in the country, as well as Citizens and merchants: that thou
may do good to another, and he shall gain by it as much as thou: nay a
thousand excuses more, cannot answer that one place, Deuteronomy. 23.19.
Thou shall not give to usury to thy brother, as usury of money, usury of
meat, usury of any thing that is put to usury. And whereas thou would
shroud thy factes, under the skirts of some few reverend men's writings, if thou
love them, and the Religion which they professed, then cover that their
oversight, proceeding from humane infirmity, Genesis 9.22.
and do not as wicked Cham, discover the nakedness of those, who were fathers
in the faith, to many in this last age. Do not wrestle against thy conscience.
With Matthew leave to be a Publican; Matthew. 9.9. Luc. 19.2.
with Zacheus to gather tribute: it is not for a Christian to be of this
occupation: relinquish it to the Jews.

9 If I be not deceived, this question for the trade of life, insinuating that
some arts are not pleasing to the Lord, should stumble a great many men. If in
the lawfulness of a calling, Gods immediate glory, and the benefit of his
Church, or at least the good and service of the common wealth, in humane
society, be evermore to be respected, what comfort can such persons, who
indeed are but a burden to a land, or the City where they dwell, take to go
on forward to their graves in in that, which to speak of it most moderately,
is but doubtful? I can hardly be persuaded, that the consciences of such men,
do always content and satisfy themselu^^. I am sure, that according to the
proportion of their calling with his, they are not able to say as the Apostle
Paul said a little before his death, 2. Tim. 4.7. (...). Certamen illud
praeclarum certani. Beza.
I have fought a good fight, or as Beza reads it, I have fought that
excellent fight, I have finished my course, and so take joy in their calling.
Such men who make a life of playing upon a stage, may bethink themselves in
this reckening. If you will, put unto these our common dauncing-maisters, and
others of like sort. Mistake me not in these words, as if I did condemn all
honest recreation. I dare not to do so. I know the privilege and prerogative is
great, which men above all the creatures of God have, if we do not abuse our
liberty; but it is one thing for one man, after his honest labor in that
trade wherein the Lord has placed him, to use fit and moderate recreation; and
other thing for another, to have no other kind of life, but to make of such
exercises an occupation. Many kinds of business, are warranted both by the
laws of God and men apparently, but these at least may come under question.

10 The next demand here made to our Prophet, is from what place he did come?
presuming that a man may draw from some places such a stain, as cannot be
washed off but with vengeance. He that touches pitch, Syrac. 13.1. Genes. 42.15
shall be defiled with it. Holy Joseph being among the Egyptians, had learned
new devised oaths: he could swear by the life of Pharao. Cap. 19.26.
Lots wife did so well like the company which she had in Sodom, that she
longed to be there again, although for her labor, it cost her the turning
into a pillar of salt. Apoc. 18 4.
Some places are hateful to God: his people must out of Babylon. The
companions of the wicked, are supposed to be wicked. It may well be feared,
that the young man was a sinner, Prou. 7.6.9.
of whom Solomon tells, that he went to the house of the harlot, entering in
thither at the twilight, and coming out perhaps at the midnight. Surius in
commentar. Anno. 1566. Meretricis coactae su^t discedere: interim tame^
nonnullae in vicis ignobilibus ob peiora vitanda relictae sunt. Meretricibus
quas in vnum vrbis angulum reiecit seueriter praecepit ne per vrbem vagentur.
It could be no great credit for Demosthenes, to be seen to come from the
house of Lais. It is a case well known, that there be at Rome whole streets
of Curtisans. Only Surius to extenuate the filthiness of the matter, says
they be but the baser streets, and lanes of less account, where these honest
folks do inhabit. And he holds it for a great praise to Pope Pius the
fifth, that he brought it to that pass. This multitude must have money, to
maintain the^ in their abuses, whereby it may be collected, that many and that
frequently resort unto them. Now if Christ should ask of those who return
from those places, whence come you? where have you been? they might right well
quake with Jonas and fear his heavy judgment. But if it be but his
holiness, the Vicar or vicegerent of Christ upon earth, the successor of
Saint Peter, as he merrily terms himself, Si meretrices ab vrbe
excluderentur, magnum id Reip. annui quaestus dispendium allaturum. Apoc. 17.1.
Henric. Stephanus, in Apologia pro Herodoto, Gallice edita. cap. 12.
there needs no great dread for the matter. From a known place of your
City: from that which yields you money: which you permit for tribute. Rome,
how rightly wast thou termed by the name of the whore of Babylon, which
suffer such abuses in open professed sort, and thereby give encouragement
to some, to embrace that sin? For whereas in the days of our old
forefathers, the ignorant did account it a crime to keep a concubine, now when
they see that even at Rome, in the very eye of his holiness, in the chief
City of residence for Christ's Vicar, such matters be maintained, they may
think that now to keep two or three, is a work meritorious, and the more,
the more meritorious. But to leave them to their filthiness, if it do so much
touch our Prophet, to be asked from whence he came, those of the younger sort,
who come to this place for learning, for virtue and good instruction, may
reuolue this over and over. If any day in the evening, when they should be at
home in their beds, or else quiet in their studies, or if upon the Sabbath in
service time, or while other are at the sermon, a tavern should be their rest,
(which does not well agree with a long gown) how far should they be
forgetful, or blush to hear that question, whence come you? where have you
bin? Genes. 3 9.
or as God spoke to our forefather in the bushes, where art thou Adam? If there
should be any such (as God be praised, that custom is well left) how will they
hereafter lament, that those good hours, which should and might by the Lords
good blessing, be well employed, are ill and fruitlessely spent? that idleness
and unthriftiness, yea peradventure drunkenness also, should be that
whereunto they bend their study, when in the mean while, knowledge and
precious learning might adorn them? Time foolishly wasted can never be
recalled: and it is hard to call back our selves, when we are once grown to a
custom of any evil.

11 The ship-maister and his fellows, yet have not enough of Jonas: some more
questions for their money. They ask him of his country, and from what people
he did come. God sometimes is angry with a whole la^d, for the wickedness of
the inhabitants. The goodly fields of Sodom do find that unto this day. This
also is witnessed unto us by the barrenness of Palestina, which was sometimes
the holy land, sometimes the happy land flowing with milk and honey, which now
answers in no measure, to the fertility of ancient time. When sin has
ouergrown a country, each inhabitant feels a woe; even the good in temporal
punishments do smart as well as the wicked. For the iniquity of their nation,
Dan. 1.3.
both Daniel and the three children, together with the rest of their
countrymen, were led into captivity. Some kind of people, even almost in
general, are displeasing to the Lord. Deuteronomy. 23.3. Exodus 17.14.
The Ammonites and the Moabites, were little accepted of him. But Amelechs name
was so cursed, that the Lord would have the remembrance of them to be rooted
out from under the heaven. Matthew. 27.25.
Above all the people who live upon the earth, the Jews do demonstrate this
doctrine to us, whose children and childrens children, have for many ages been
blinded, with the gross and grievous sin of their fathers, who put Christ
cruelly to death. Other nations had their faults, and so might be hateful to
men who bordered near upon them, and they might also provoke wrath from God.
S. Paul did observe out of the Poet Epimenides, Tit. 1.12. (...).
that the Cretians were great liars. Now least some such general sin, of
parentage or country, should hang upon the Prophet, his company asks him,
from what nation he did come? of what people he was borne? By these and the
like interrogatories, they desired to know the truth, that the fault might lie
on him who had deserved it, and that they might be freed from the danger of
suffering shipwreck. And thus have you the first verse, the demands which
were made to Jonas. Now let us come to his answer.

And he answered them, I am an Hebrew, and I fear
Jehovah the God of heaven.
12 When the whip of God, and the rod of his justice, had peccaui; contrition
and confession come now tumbling upon him, yea to make up his full penance,
there shall be satisfaction, Psalm. 32.6.
if his life can make amends. Now with David he will confess his sins
against him self, in ingenuous manner no concealing, no excusing, no pleading
for himself. It is I, who by my folly, have wrought you all this danger.
Wreake your anger upon me. Virgil. Aeneid. 9.
Me, me, adsum qui feci, in me conuertite ferrum
O Rutuli, mea fraus omnis.
It is I, it is I, here I am who did it, turn your swords against me: all
the fault is mine, as Nisus says in Virgil, to save his friend Eurialus. To
display my transgression, and condemn my self the more, I will tell you the
whole matter. I should be a man of some skill in Gods service, I should be able
to know good from evil, and practice it accordingly, for I am an Hebrew, (he
speaks that with an Emphasis) no idolater, no infidel, no ignorant person,
but an Hebrew, trained up in understanding and piety: therefore my fall is
most filthy; I am ashamed of my self. The name Hebrew was given to the people
of God, Genes. 11.14
(which the^ was the only sanctified seed) of Heber who descended from Sem
the son of Noe, from whom by succession those came, who were at that time the
sole sons of adoption, called Hebrews of Heber, as the Jews afterward took
their name of Judah, Genes. 32.28.
one of the twelve Patriarchs, and the Israelites of Jacob, whom the Angel
after his wrestling called Israel. This I think to be the true deriuation of
that name.

13 These Hebrews instructed their children in the service of the highest,
even as Moses and David commanded unto them, that they should teach their
sons Gods miracles, Deuteronomy. 6.20. Psalm. 78.4. Deuteronomy. 11.10.
and their children his precepts. The walls of their houses, and the posts of
their doors, could remember them of his statutes. The most unlearned persons
among them, even their children, could as well rehearse the laws given down
by Moses, as they could recite their own names. Joseph. co^tra Apione^. lib. 2
For Josephus against Apion, does give that testimony of them: wherein I
suppose that he means the ten commandments, and not the whole law. Then for
a man and a Prophet, Nostroru^ que^libet si quis leges interroget, facilius
quam nomen suu^ recitat.
to forget that which a child or any unlearned one, could not choose but think
of, to wit, his precise duty, does argue a great fault, and he who
acknowledges this, does not spare himself at all. He adds this more, in his
words to them, that he fears the Lord Jehovah, the God of heaven: he
belongs to his service, and therefore should be expert in each thing that is
good. Jehovah, is that name, wherein the Lord appeared only to the Israelites;
and not to all them neither, not to Abraham, nor to Isaac, Exodus 6.3.
nor to Jacob, and the old Patriarchs, but first of all to Moses. This was that
name, which the Jews reputed to be his dreadful name, the ineffable name of
God, the unspeakable name of the Lord, which they dared not so much as to
utter: that appellation, by which he was distinguished from all other heathen
Idols, Psalm. 82.1. (...)
from Princes and from Magistrates, to whom the name of God in some sense is
permitted. But Jonas to make him known, John. 10.34.
does give him another title; Jehovah the Lord of heaven, who alone does rule
the sky, who alone possesses the firmament: not many as you do suppose (but
he alone rules the heaven. No doubt but this God had some one time or other,
been specified to these mariners; Jonah. 1.3.
they used to go to Iapho a haven town near Palestina: and very likely it
is, that there about they had heard of the miracles, which this God had done
before in Egypt, what work he made in Canaan. His name was a name of fame,
over all the world. And perhaps the word Jehovah was not wholly unknown to
them. ^he Romans which were also heathen men, and lived much farther of, as I
think did take some notice of that word, when they called their great God
Jupiter, in some cases, Iouis, and Iouem, which might roaue at the name
Jehovah. But this is but a conjecture, and it was some years afterward.

14 But to let this go, he fears the Lord God of heaven, that is, either he
dreadeth his judgment, for the grieuousnesse of his sin, or else, he
belongs unto him as a servant, he reuerenceth him, Psalm. 111.10. Prou. 1.7.
and owes duty to him. For oftentimes in the Scripture, the fear of the
Lord imports his honor or his service, and so Saint Hierome does expound it,
writing upon this place. August. de Ciuitate Dei lib. 1.19.

Si adultera Lucretia, cur laudata, si pudita cur occisa?


But as Saint Austen says of Lucretia, if she were an adulteress, why is she
commended by those that write the story of her, and by common report, if
chaste, why was she slain, why did she kill her self? So might not I say to
Jonas, if thou serve the Lord Jehovah, why then do thou fly from him? or if
thou run from him, how do thou serve him? Jonas thou should have served
him, but thou did not, and that was thy heavy fault. Indeed it was his fault,
as you have heard often before, and himself does now confess it. For he who
gives true honor to him that is his maker, should be obsequious to his will,
and obseruant of his word, in all things great and small, much more in things
important, as Niniue was to the Prophet. He that should withdraw from thee,
Joseph. de bello Iud. lib. 7.4.
that daily food which thou put into thy belly, should be reputed of thee
for an enemy: and can the Lord, think thou, take it well, that thou should
withdraw from him, that obedience which thou owe unto him? Cyprian. contra
Demetrianum. Homo homine^ obedire tibi and parere compellis: and cum sit nobis
eadem. sors nascendi conditio vna moriendi, corporum materia consimilis.
That speech which Saint Cyprian has, is very excellent to this purpose: Thou
requirest a duty of thy servant, and whereas thou art but a man, thou forcest
another man to be obedient to thee. Yea whereas there is between thee and him
but one sort of being borne, one condition and quality of dying, one substance
of your bodies, yet thou beatest him with the whip, thou correctest him with
the rod. And when thou will thus exercise dominion over another, vvilt thou not
acknowledge one, to be a Lord over thee, and do thy best service to him? God
does expect this at thy hands: for says he, if I be a father, where is mine
honor? if I be a master where is my fear? If Jonas were now his servant, it
was but in name only: he did in truth little regard his master. At this time
then, he has much more occasion, to stand in awe of his punishment, and in
that sense he might well say, Jonah. 2.4.
that he feared the God of heaven. He who looks on the next Chapter, shall
see this to be most likely.

15 The horror of sin is such, even in the hearts of the best of Gods
children, that if faith do sleep but a little, and the resolved assurance of
mercy in the Savior, be eclipsed but for a moment, it makes their souls to
tremble in such sort, as if diffidence and despair should swallow them up by
and by. How was David dismayed, Psalm. 51.11.
when he cried out, Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thine holy
Spirit from me? What did Job imagine of his own desert, Job. 42.6.
when he thus professed, I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes? In
what an horrible anguish was Peter, Matthew. 26.75.
when he went out and wept bitterly? But our Prophet of all other, fearing the
dreadful burden of sin upon his shoulders, and gessing at the strange
punishment, which should follow him immediately, with some measure of servile
fear does tremble at his Lord. His fear should have been before that he had
not run wilfully into sin, for as it is noted in one of those Epistles,
Ambros. lib. 10. Epistolar. Ep. 84.

Aliud est timere quia peccaueris, aliud timere ne pecces.

Timor filialis and seruilis. August. in Psalm. 119 and Epistol. 120. Illa dicet
Timeo virum ne veniet. Ista Timeo virum ne discedet. Illa, timeo virum ne
damnet. Ista timeo virum, ne deserat. Pone haec in animo, and inuenies timorem,
quem for as mittit charitas, and alium timorem castum permanentem in secula
seculi.


which are in the works of Ambrose, although not thought to be his: It is one
thing to fear, because thou have offended; another thing to fear least that
thou should offend. In the one is a dread of punishment, in the other is a
carfulness that thou may obtain the reward. Saint Austen does describe
this slavish quaking fear in one, and childs fear in another (as the
schoolmen do call it) by a comparison drawn from a good wife, and a harlot.
The adulterous wife, and the chaste wife, says he, do both fear, if the
husband be away. The one fears and the other, but ask the reason of both,
and you shall see an apparent difference. The bad wife stands in fear of
her husband, least he should come to her, The good wife is in fear, least her
husband should go from her. This fears least he should condemn her, because
she has deserved it, That fears least he should forsake her, because she
loves him dearly. Remember these things, says Austen, and so thou shall find
a bad fear, whom charity drives forth, and another chaste fear, which
abides for ever and ever.

16 Jonas who was accustomed, in his cogitations of God, to join a love with
his reverence, as toward a father, now thinks on him no otherwise, then as of
a Lord, ready to take strong vengeance, upon him as on a prisoner deputed to
death. This is the best fruit of ungratefulness, and of negligence in our
duties; to come as unto a judge, astonished and amassed, and trembling to see
his face, or almost to remember his name; whereas we might come as to a father,
or as to a brother; with confidence and boldness, as to the throne of grace.
Fie filthy sin, that for thy sake we should thus disable our selves, we
should so disgrace our souls, that when we might live, even in this world,
with a daily deaw of sweet influence, distilling upon our hearts, from the
holy Spirit of God, to revive us and refresh us; and whereas Paradise could not
yield greater comfort to our eye, then the presence of the Trinity, Apoc. 3.20.
dwelling and supping with us would do unto our minds; and whereas we might dye
in rest, as having that joy of conscience, that perfect peace of God, which
passes all understanding, resigning up with gladness, our spirits unto our
maker; yea that whereas either living or dying, we may rest our selves on that
rock, that evermore we are the Lords, belonging to his election, and sealed
up with his adoption; to that end, that we may enjoy sin for a season, and
the wantonness of this flesh, the vanities of this earth, and the foolerie of
this world, which are scant worth the naming, to a man that has heard of
wisdom; which leave us and live not with us, we should plunge our selves into
that horror, which wayteth upon the reprobates, and be perplexed in our
thoughts, in our understanding dazeled, discouraged in our life, discomforted
in our end, thinking of hell and judgment, and wrath and fearful vengeance,
which makes men live in misery, with sobs and many a sigh, and dye without
hope of mercy. Let us raise up our selves at length, and with sober meditation
contemplate upon this matter. Let our soul be dearer to us, even that soul,
which Christ has bought with his blood, with his precious heart blood, then
sin with his tail of a scorpion, who departs not without stinging. Better
to love God as Jonas should, then to quake at God as Jonas did.

The God of heaven who made the sea and the dry land.
17 But here I must not forget the last words of my text, because they yield a
special doctrine, most fit for these present times. In this speech, Jonas does
entitle his master to all the world: he is first the God of the heaven; and
then he did create the sea, and the dry land. Heaven oftentimes by a general
name, contains all things above us, be they elements, or be they other
bodies: so then God did make this whole frame. The heaven is as his seat: the
earth he made from which, the sea he made to which the Prophet did here fly.
Be it wet, or be it dry, be it passable, be it nauigable, be it above or below,
this maker did create it. Nehem. 9.6.
So Nehemiah witnesses: Thou art Lord alone: thou have made heaven and the
heaven of all heavens with all their host, the earth and all things that are
therein, the seas and all that are in them, and thou preseruest them all, and
the host of the heaven vvorshippeth thee. Job. 26.7. Psalm. 33.6. In symbolo
Apostoloru^.
So Job speaks, so David testifies. So the Articles of our faith do teach us
to believe on the maker of heaven and earth. Whereby it is plain, that he does
renounce the grounds of Christianity, who does deny this doctrine. Yet the
world has hatched such monsters, even of the seed of Christians, as who make
no bones thereof. But young ones abash not at it, nor abash not at it old ones,
for it is no more the^ we look for. S. Peter long ago foretold it, 2. Pet. 3.1.
that in the last days there should come such deriders, as should laugh at the
speech of Christ's coming, and at the day of judgment, maintaining that there
shall be an eternal continuance, of all things in such sort, as now they are.
Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers dyed, all things
continue alike from the beginning of the creation. These will not believe, that
ever the heaven and earth were not, but they receive it, that they have stood
from all eternity, and shall so continue. They see no reason for the
contrary, and they will not believe the Scripture.

18 Lodouicus Viues has well observed, Viues de veritate fidei. lib. 1.

Ne attingatis vitru^, tenuissimum, falsum, inane, leuissimo contacti^ statim
friatur. Nostra religio intus est quam extra formosior, solidior, firmior.

Genesis 1.1.


that Iudaisme and Mahometisme^, and all other whatsoever superstitions or
devotions, are, but like to the glass; but on the other side the Christian
faith, by us may be compared to the gold. The glass is bright, but brittle: it
cannot endure the hammer. The gold is another kind of metal; do you melt it,
or do you rub it, or do you beat it, and it shines still the more orient.
So it is with our faith: so it is with this doctrine, of the creation of the
world. It does not fear the touchstone. We are taught in the very first words
of Genesis, that in the beginning God made the heaven and the earth, that all
before was as nothing, vnfigured and unformed. This is affirmed by Moses, and
it may be a Machiauel does deny this. Now whether of these two shall we
believe? Either Machiauel an Italian, and therefore by the abundance of his
wit, most fit for evil, if God do withdraw his grace; a Secretary to the state
of Florence, a professed politician, whose precepts closely couched, have
filled the world with the devil; who made no kind of conscience of any thing
which he taught, who lived in this present age, within one hundred years: or
Moses, who is of the standing of three thousand, and in all that time has been
famous, among both Jews and Gentiles: of whom Iustine gives testimony, Justin
Hist. lib. 36.

Iuuenalis Saryr. 14.


although it be obscured with some heathen minglings, and Iuuenal the Poet when
he says of the Jews, Romanas autem soliti contemnere leges,
Iudaicum ediscunt ^c servant ac metuunt ius,
Tradidit arcano quodcunque volumine Moses.
They being accustomed to neglect the Roman laws, do learn and keep the
Jewish, and stand in fear of that law which Moses has delivered down in his
secret books. Justin. Martyr. in coho^^atione ad Graecos.
And Justinius Martyr names many Ethnicke men's works, which being extant in
his time, did mention both that Moses, and the bringing of the children of
Israel out of Egypt by him, as was to be seen in the writings of Polemon, and
of Apion the son of Possidonius, of Ptolomoeus Mendesius, of Hellanicus and
Philochorus, who wrote the Athenien story, as also of Castor and Thallus, and
Alexander Polyhistor, Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 12.2.
besides the two renoumed Jews, Josephus and Philo. This Moses was he, whose
books were so accounted of by Ptolomee, the great king of Egypt, a man of so
much antiquity, a man of such love to learning, who to his mighty charges, did
cause those volumes to be translated, by seauenty and two of the Israelites,
into the Greek, and laid up in his famous library. This was he whose
sacrifices to the true Lord, were the sole and only (...), (...) exemplar ex
quo simili facimus.
that is, first pattern to all the services of the heathen, toward their idol
Gods, whose books have been preserved, through so many generatio^s; whose
writings are brought to us, not by our friends, but by our enemies, the Jews
who do detest us. To compare these two together, this Moses and that Machiauel,
will seem to men that be indifferent, Hominibus contra Deum credunt, qui
contra ^omines Deo non credunt. Cypr. sermon. de Lapsis.
a very unequal match. But what equality or equity should we look for, of
such men as these be, who are so far from all reason, that as Cyprian writes
of the like, they will believe men against God, who will not believe God
against men, so they would have us to believe them speaking against the Lord,
but we must not believe the Lord, though with such power and evidence of the
spirit, he demonstrate against them. But let us come to the issue.

19 Set aside the Hebrew stories, and the writers of holy Scripture, and what
reason can they assign (for these men do all by reason) saving that evermore,
2. Esd. 4.35.
the truth shall, and must, and will prevail, that such as knew not God, were
haters of the Jews, and never heard of the Christians, yet by an uniform
consent, and by a good conspiracy, should acknowledge the creation of the
world? Hesiodus in Theogonia. Ovid. Metamorph. 1.
How is it that Hesiodus, so ancient a Poet does lay it so plainly down? Look
on the beginning of Ouids Metamorphosis where he has the very words, Primaque
ab origin mundi, from the first beginning of the world, and see whether that
his chaos, (which I think he boroweth from Hesiode) be not like to that in
Genesis: his forging unto Gods framing. They do agree in substance. Yet
remember that those are Poets, and that the drift of their book, is but a
frivolous fable. Plato was a Philosopher, and therefore of more judgment: and
he in a tale describes the making of mankind. Lucretius is accounted both a
Philosopher and a Poet, yet a Philosopher of the Epicures, and therefore so
much the worse, and yet he impugneth the perpetuity of the world, giving this
reason of his opinion, Praeterea si nulla fuit generalis origo Plato in
Protagora. Lucretius lib 5.

Terrarum and caeli, semperque aeterna fuere,
Cur supra bellum Thebanum and funera Troia
Non alias alij quo queres cecinere Poetae?
If there were no general beginning of the earth and heaven, but that they
have been from everlasting, why then have not the Poets mentioned any thing
more ancient, then the war of Thebes, and the sacking of Troy? The world did
begin in time, because nothing is recorded in the writings of any authors, but
for a little time. Macrob. in Somn. Scip. lib. 2.10.

Quis non hinc existimet mu^dum quandoque caepisse, nec longam retro eius
aetatem.


The same argument is used by Macrobius, a grave heathen man, who speaks in
this sort, who may not hereupon think, that the world once did begin, and that
the antiquity of it is not very great, since there is no story in the Greek,
of the admirable memory of things beyond two thousand years. For beyond Ninus,
of who^ some think that Semiramis was borne, there is no exellent thing set
down in writing. And as these have aimed at the beginning of the world, so
there have been other, who have spoken of the end. One of the Sibyls (for I
take the words to be hers) does foretell the dissolution of all things, and
that they shall perish with the fire; both heaven and earth and all; which
while Ouide in the middle of his ignorance, did not truly understand, he
applies it to the fire of Phaeton. Ovid. Metamorph. 1.
Esse quoque in fat is reminiscitur affore tempus,
Quo mare, quo tellus, conuexaque regia caeli
Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laboret.
He remembers that by destiny it is appointed, that there shall come a time,
wherein both sea and earth and heaven shall burn, and the whole frame of the
world shall be endangered. The Poet Lucane did more then guess at this,
Lucanus lib. 7.
when speaking of those, whom Caesar left unburied, at the battle of
Pharsalia, he brings in this, -- Placido Natura receptat
Cuncta sinu, finemque sui sibi corpora debent.
Hos Caesar populos si nunc non vsserit ignis,
Vret cum terris, vret cum gurgite ponti.
Communis mundo superest rogus, ossibus astra
Nisturus.
Nature receives all things into her own lap, and bodies do owe to themselves
the end of themselves. O Caesar, if fire do not now consume these slain men,
yet it shall hereafter burn them up, together with the earth and the sea. For
there remains to come, one bone-fire which shall be common to all the world,
and shall mingle the stars in heaven, with their bones on earth. Over and
above these men of learning, Peru the South part of America, does yield to us
an ignorant people, Surius in commentar. Anno. 1558.
who by the light of nature, and by a general apprehension (for God knows
they had nothing else) do believe that the world shall end, and that there
shall be then a reward, for the good and for the evil, according to their
desert. An end does suppose a beginning, as the learned do well know. A marring
intends a making. He who drowned the earth by water, can dissolve the heaven
by fire. But the deluge of Deucalio^, Ovid. Metamorphos. 1.
so much song of by the Poets, does witness that there was such a flood, in
the days of Noe, and that all things were spilled by the water; which could
not have been, but by him who made both the earth and the water. Thus the Poets
do roaue at that, in their fables, which Moses teaches us, in our most sacred
Bible.

20 Add some reasons to authority. If the world were not created, and man had
not once a beginning, how comes it about that all things, which make us live
like men, appear to have their original, in time and place, we know where an
when, and that but as yesterday to eternity? Genes. 4.20.
I must not here speak of Moses, which tells us who first made tents, who
made the Harp and the Organ, who first did work in brass; because he is now
in question. Polydor. Virgil. de Inuentoribus rerum.
But I bid you rather look on Polidore Virgil, who has written a large tract,
of purpose to show by whom, the most matters which be of excellency were
invented. There is no greater grace to a man, then knowledge and the arts of
learning. But Mercury as some say, August. de Doctr. christiana. lib. 2. Vide
Polyd. Virgil. de Inuentor. lib. 1.6.

Eusebius. de Praepar. Euangelica. 2.1.


as some other, the Phaenicians are reported by the Gentiles to have invented
the first letters, and others are said afterward to have added to them. But we
know that the Hebrew letters were before their time, even in the days of
Moses, who as Eusebius says, in that admirable work of his, De praeparatione
Eua^gelica, was more ancient the^ the Gods of the Greeks, for that they began
but after the days of Cadmus, who came much short of Moses. Notwithstanding
allow it to the Gentiles, that there men were the authors of letters: it must
follow thereupon, that before the birth of those persons, there was no kind of
Grammar. Pol. Virg. lib. 1.16.
How are we beholding to Zeno, and Socrates and Aristotle for the use of
Logic? We know well when these lived. Aristotle was schoolemaister to
Alexander, and Plato unto Aristotle, and Socrates unto Plato, some 400 years
before Christ. Zeno was little beyond the^. For Philosophy, Phythagoras is
thought to be one of the most ancient. Yet he came into Italy, Liuius lib. 1.
Lib. 44.
after that Rome was built. Astronomy should be supposed to be as old as any.
Yet how lately were the Eclipses of the Moon, which are things so well known
in nature, most fearful to the armies of the Graecians, and the Romans, as in
the war against Perseus? Was not the year brought to the orderly course of the
Sun, Plutarch. in vita Caesaris*
by Julius Caesar? How long have kings been on earth, Genesis 10.8.
when Nimrod as Moses calls him, or Ninus as other term him (for these two
are thought to be one) was one of the first among all nations? What laws were
among the Greeks, before the days of Lycurgus? Joseph. co^tra Apione^. lib. 2
Josephus against Apion writes, that in the time of Homere, the name of law
was not so much as known, and that in all the works of Homere, there is not,
the word (...), but that they were the^ ruled, by the speech and commandment
of Princes. Nay what do I speak of these things, when the very food of men,
in any civil sort, had his beginning but of late? for among the Ethnicks is
not Bacchus said, first to have found out the vine, Genesis 9 20.
(we know that Noe was the man) and of the vine comes the wine. How comes it
about, that Ceres is canonized among them for a Goddess, but for showing their
forefathers the first use of corn? All these and a thousand more imply, that
as things with us are in good perfection, so not long since they were rude, and
not long before that they were nothing, because all things were nothing. For
the world had his beginning: and these in the world their beginning.

21 My text speaks of the sea. I would know of this proud disputes, what
reason he can assign, that the sea in diverse places, should be higher then
the land, and yet not ouerflow the banks? Basil. in Hexaemero. Homil. 4.
Saint Sasile in his Hexaemeron, does excellently show it, and confirms it to
be so. This may be found to be thus, by instruments Geometrical, or otherwise
by the eye, Leuius in nauigatione in Bresilia^. ca. 2.
as Leuius has observed, and that of his own knowledge, sensibly discerning
it in the Atlantike sea, near the coast of Mauritania. Nature can yield no
reason for this: their best is but a cavil. But divinity ends this doubt.
God has tied it within his limits, as a Lion fastened in a chain. Thou says
David speaking of the waters in the sea, Psalm. ^04.9.
have set them a bound which they shall not pass: they shall not return to
cover the earth. So God says to Job: Job. 38.8.
Who has shut up the sea with doors, when it issued and came forth as out of
the womb, when I made the clouds as a covering thereof, and darkness in the
swaddling bands thereof. When I stablished my commandment upon it, and set
bars and doors, and said hitherto shall thou come, and no farther, and here
shall it stay thy proud waves. My text speaks of the land, and that has so
great alterations, as in time will bring a ruin. Hear the judgment of a
Gentile upon this. Aelian. Hist. lib. 8.11. Aetnam aiu^t ij qui mare nauigant,
multo minori part videri, qua^ antea conspici solita sit. Ide^ etia^ in
Parnasso and Olympo accidere. Ite^que qui se totius vniuersi natural tenere
profite^tur, aiunt mundum etia^ ipsum periturum.
Aelian in the eighth book of his history tells us, that not only the
mountain in Sicilia Aetna, (for thereof may be given some reason, because of
the wasting and consuming of it by fire) but Parnassus and Olympus, did appear
to be less and less, to such as sailed at sea, the height thereof sinking as
it seemed. Whereupon he does give that note, that men most skillful in the
secrets of nature did say, that the world it self should perish, and have an
end. I know to whom I do speak, that is, to men of great understanding: As
therefore I name but a few things, so you see, I dwell not on them.

22 To that position of those who oppugn this doctrine, of the creating and
continuing of all by God, by saying that it is Nature, who produces every
thing, I might answer that there is no such matter as Nature, taking it in
that sense which they foolishly do imagine: but only it is a course,
proportioned out by the will of God, to run and hold on, in the creatures.
And so much can a natural man inform unto them, Seneca de beneficijs. l. 4
Natura inquis haec mihi praestat. Non intelligis te cum haec dicis, mistare
nomen Deo? quid enim aliud est natura quam Deus and diuina ratio toti mundo and
partibus eius inserta? John. 4.24.
I mean Seneca, who with a better spirit speaks on this manner. Thou
say, Nature does yield these things unto me. Understand thou not, that
when thou speak this, thou do but change the name of God? for what other
thing is Nature then God, and an order from his Godhead, inserted into the
world, and all the parts of the same? Now that there is such a Godhead,
although they do not see it, I may answer them in this manner. His substance
is invisible; his nature is insensible, because he is a spirit. And yet we see
him and feel him, and know him by his effects. If we look on the heaven above
us, or behold the earth below us, the standing fast of the one, the running
round of the other, the concord of things in discord, their orderly
interruption, and interrupted order, every creature does cry and proclaim that
there is a God. Athanas. oratione contra idola.
That worthy man Athanasius does very well urge this argument: As if thou
should see a city consisting of many and several men, great and small, and
rich and poor, and old and young, and male and female, to be governed with
good order and straight discipline, and those who live there, although they be
different among themselves, yet to agree in mind, so that neither the richer do
bend against the poor, nor the great against the small: nor the young against
the old, but all of them do maintain peace with an equality of right: If we
should see these things it cannot be but we must imagine that by the presence
of the Prince there, this concord is cherished, although he do not come abroad
to be seen, because disorderlinesse is a sign that the common wealth is
without an head, but order on the other side does show the care and
government of the Prince. And as when we see in the body an agreement of
the members among themselves, and that the eyes do not vvrangle with the
ears, nor the hands make a mutiny against the feet, but every one does his
own business without brawling, we do immediately thereupon conceive, that
there is a soul in that body, which does so direct and dispose all things,
although that soul be not visible to the eye. So in this order and harmony of
the whole world, it must needs be that we consider that there is a God,
who is the Prince and governor of all, and that but one God and no more. Now
if thou be such a one, as that this do not suffice thee, by reason of the
stubburnesse of thy heart, but thou must be like Saint Thomas, John. 20.25.
August. in Psalm. 73. Animam tuam quis videt? cum ergo corpus tuu^ solum
videaetur, quare non sepeliris?
that is, see or else thou will not believe, then let me ask of thee as Auste^
does of one. Have thou a soul or no? and by a consequent art thou alive? Can
thou see thy soul, or feel it? If not, the^ by thine own reason thou have no
soul, and therefore thou art dead; and I pray thee why art thou not buried? If
because thou would not be buried, thou will say, that by signs and tokens
thou conceiuest, that there is a soul in thee, because thou see and
speak, and mouest up and down, which a dead corpse cannot do; then have thou
answered for me: for so it is with thy Creator: Psalm. 19.1.
the heavens declare his glory, the firmament shows his work: thou see
him in his creatures. Many arguments might be drawn, from the bowels of very
reason, to show this point in question: as that every thing which moves must
have something to move it, which is verus primus motor, but the heaven is ever
in motion: as that lesser things have a governor, the bees and herds of
cattaile, and fishes in the sea, therefore there must much more be a governor,
to this mighty frame of the world. But who so doubts of these things, or of
any such matter now in question, let him either read Saint Austen De ciuitate
Dei, D. Georgius Morus, in Demonstratione Dei ex operibus eius. R. Personius in
2. editione Resolutionis.
or Lodouicus Viues de veritate fidei, or Philip Mornay that noble Frenchman
discussing those points largely. And unto those may be added, the works of
some of our own countrymen, who also are not to be defrauded of their due
commendation.

23 If I should farther say any thing, it should be in this brief manner. If
now any do rule all things, it intends that he is Almighty: if Almighty
then a Creator. But many things are so done, as whereof no reason can be given,
save only the providence of a God, Almighty, and our maker. For first I would
Matthew. 16.24. 2. Tim. 3.12.
If any man will follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up his cross,
and follow me. And, all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution. In this case what reason can be given, why men of great
understanding, not blocks and fools, Viues de veritate fidei. lib. 1.
like the Saracens and Turks, who have no learning, and may not so much as
dispute of any point of their Religion, and so do believe on their Mahomet,
most grossly and stupidiously, but Philosophers and rare scholars, men
completed with all good knowledge, should put their trust in one who was
crucified, yea should dye for him, who was before dead, and put into a grave?
Secondly what reason is there, to reform Religion, and profess so far for
the truth, things being as they then were, when she came first to her scepter:
very little sound at home: very much amiss abroad; in the known hate of the
Pope, in the secret hate of the Spaniard: in the neutralitie of the French, to
speak most mildly of it: in the ticklenesse of the Scot, in the ^icklenesse of
the Irish. Yet that still she should go forward, and maintain her Church and
estate, in great pomp and high majesty, very lovely to her friends, very
dreadful to her foes. I might urge her perpetual happiness, and those many
dangers, which by Gods blessing she has escaped. Anno. 1593.
each seuennight cut off a thousand, yea sometimes a great many more, Anno.
1594.
in one City of our land, by the infection of the plague; since that time the
note has returned not one, or so few that it is as if it were nothing?
Remember that the spring was very unkind, by means of the abundance of rain
which fell: our Iulie has been like to a February, our June even as an
April, so that the air must needs be corrupted: God amend it in his mercy,
and stay this plague of waters. But yet the pestilence is now ceased. I hold it
a thing impossible, out of the grounds of Machiauell, to answer to these
questions in simplicity and synceritie, as beseems reasonable men, and not
with cauilling and quarrelling, which is for boys and brabblers. But out of
the grounds of true divinity, these and a thousand more are answered in one
word, Psalm. 118.23.
This was the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. He who (as Jonas
says) is God of heaven above, and made the sea and the dry land, he decrees
it, he continues it. Then let us carry this mind toward him, what we know in
him, to love: what we know not, to admire, as men amassed with his Majesty:
rather to think our selves most weak and bas^ in understanding, then once to
suspect his power in creating, or his providence in governing. To him be praise
and honor, and majesty now and ever.

THE VI. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 3. Confession of a fact satisfies men that are doubtful.
4. Idolaters scoff at their Idols. 5. We should inform, and reform our
selves by the suffering of others. 9 Sin is most grievous in them who have
had most teaching. 10. Blind guides displayed. 11. It is a shame to be justly
reproved by a multitude of inferiors. 13. The mariners are unwilling to shead
blood. 15. Malefactors are to yield themselves to death with patience. 16.
Good men would not have other punished with them. 17. The question is handled
whether any man may lawfully kill himself.

Jonah. 1.10.11.12. Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him,
why have thou done this? (for the men knew that he fled from the presence of
the Lord, because he had told them.) Then said they unto him, what shall we
do unto thee, that the sea may be calm unto us? (for the sea wrought and was
troublous.) And he said unto them, Take me and cast me into the sea: so shall
the sea-be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest is
upon you.


THe answer of the Prophet to those manifold questions, which were proposed
by the mariners, does include a confession of error, and wilful disobedience
in himself, whereof if there should be made a doubt by any man, it is put out
of controversy, by that which now follows, that the men knew he fled from
the presence of the Lord, because himself had told them. This telling was
confessing: this affirming to them, was informing against himself. These
words although they be not so placed, yet by order of the narration, are the
first words of my text, that being set before by an Hysteron Proteron, which
should follow after, and that coming after, Verse. 9.
which should be before. He said that he was an Hebrew, and feared the God of
heaven, as it is in the ninth verse, but yet he was fled from his presence, as
it is in this tenth verse, which when the men had known, because himself told
them, they were exceedingly afraid, and asked him, why did thou so? And this
I propose, as the order of connection in these words. To show that he did
confess, were now a needless labor. The violence of the tempest, the
discovery by a lot, the examination of the mariners, did wring it out from the
Prophet. I have opened that already. And to tell what he did confess, may in
as few words be ended, that he fled away from Gods presence, that is, did
neglect his service, of going to preach at Niniue. I have also handled that, in
the third verse of this chapter. The mariners they give credit, to the tale
which they had heard, and accordingly do proceed. And so also must I.

2 Some things, are very slightly attended by men: some things hardly
believed: Esaias. 28.10.
therefore precept upon precept, and line after line, here a little and there a
little, must be doubled and ingeminated, to an obstinate people, that as drop
after drop does pierce the hardest stone, so teaching after teaching may sound
the hardest heart, even of the most flintie nature. To some men says Seneca
remedies are only to be showed, Seneca Epistol. 27. Quibusdam remedia
monstranda, quibusdam inculcanda sunt.
it is enough to point them out, to some other they are to be inculcated, and
many times repeated. The ignorant do yield apparent proof of this, when they
can very hardly, be reclaimed from their customs: no persuasions can remove
them. So, although not ever, yet oftentimes the children of such who live in
Popish darkness do confirm this doctrine to us, who hear and will not
hear, who give no kind of credit, to often repeated truths, out of the book
of God. Besides, a supine carelessness is general in all men, so that many
things wisely uttered, do breed but small effect* because they are little
regarded. But here is such a seal set, upon the company of Jonas, as which
takes such impression, that it needs not to be often doubled. The wind which
blew above, the sea which wrought below, did put them past peradventure, that
some thing was amiss: that some great sin waamsong them. The lot showed
Jonas to be the man, whom judgment did pursue, and vengeance did so follow. It
needed not to be told them often, that this party had offended.

3 But when the words of the Prophet, had passed against himself, and above
all other signs which might afford conjecture, his confession was come
forth, to accuse and condemn himself, then his hearers had great reason, to
know what the matter was. For in such cases as are doubtful, if any one do
speak for himself, and urge his own condemnation; wisdom and sound advise,
bids the auditour make a pause, before that lightly he do believe it. For
who is he, whom nature has not taught that lesson, to say the best for
himself? Again, in cases of complaint, if another man should accuse, justice
and Christian charity bids the hearer make a stay, and not give credit
hastily. For if every thing should be true, which every one reports, what man
should not be a devil? shall not Christ himself be a Beelzebub? Matthew. 10.25.
But when presumptions great and many shall go before, and withal, the
offending person shall open himself, then sense and reason do teach, that of
likelihood he is guilty. Iudic. 17.1.
When Micah brought the silver, which was stolen away from his mother, and said
plainly that he had taken it, his mother had great reason to think that he was
the man. When Rechab and Baanah, 2. Sam. 4.8.
brought the head of Isboseth the son of Saul to David, and professed that
they two had slain him, he took it for a truth, and rewarded them thereafter;
that is, he destroyed them with the sword. The idle and careless servant, Luc.
19.22.
of whom we read in the Gospel, that he folded up his talent in a napkin; and
hid it in the ground, had this doom for his labor, Luc. 22.71.
afterward that he had confessed it, Of thine own mouth I will judge thee, o
evil servant. The Jews did roau^ at this, although they failed in their
ground (for Christ did not speak blasphemy) when they could reply upon him,
what need we any farther witness? for we our selves have heard it of his
own mouth. The commonnesse of which argument, does so enter the heart of all,
that these mariners enquired no farther, when Jonas had once made his
declaration against himself. Upon a firm persuasion of the truth of all his
tale, they fall into great fear, they grow to farther counsel. So that this
believing of the Prophet, is the foundation of all that follows after, which
may it please you for order sake, to reduce

Then were the men exceedingly afraid.
4 These idolatrous heathen, are here taught one lesson more, then they ever
learned before, and that is, that there was a God, who in fearful manner could
take vengeance on offenders, and did use to follow after them as well by sea as
by land, in a wonderful sort: and therefore if their heart did now ache, if all
their joints did quiver, if their limbs did shake for fear, and their knees
beat together, it was not to be marvelled at, since at this time, they were in
trial of wrath above them, and wrath under them, and wrath every way about
them. Before, they had been used to vain and idol Gods, whose threats did
little move them. The knowledge was so light, and the certainty so uncertain,
which the heathen generally had of their Gods, either for their power, or for
their bounty, that they feared not to bestow iestes upon them, as upon their
fellows. Timaeus as Tully says, Tullius de Natura Deorum. lib. 2. Adiunxit,
mi nime id esse mirandum, quod Diana cum in parta Olympiadis adesse voluisset,
abfuisset domo.
is to be commended for his wit, that whereas he had said in his history, that
the self same night wherein Alexander was borne, the Temple of Diana at
Ephesus was on fire, he added withal, that it was no marvel, for the
mistress thereof was a great way from home, in Macedonia with Olympias, as a
midwife attending her, who then was in travel: for that was said to be the
charge of Diana. The adulteries which we read in the books of Homer, and
Ovid, that Jupiter and his fellows, are said to have committed, do show the
high conceit, and the goodly reverence, which the Gentiles in old time, did
bear to their Painim Gods. They did not only, says Saint Austen, Augustine.
Epistol. 5.
write such matters in their fables, but represented them in their threaters,
and played them on their stages, where many times were to be seen, plura
crimina quam numina, more great faults then good Gods. Yet bewitching
superstition had so possessed their souls, that they would after a sort adore
somewhat, although they adored it but at their pleasure: no true fear, no due
reverence.

5 The case is altered here: they see that the God of Israel does carry another
sway: no jesting with his Majesty, no playing with his power: if his servant do
run from him, he can fetch him back again: if he sleep soundly, he can waken
him: if he will not return in time, he can send such a tempest after him, as
will make his bones to shake, and his very marrow to tremble. The lightning and
the thunder, the wind and hail and storm, are all at his commandment. Then
it is a fearful matter to fall into his hands, to undergo his wrath. How then
must the conscience of these poor sinners needs work? If a Prophet were so
punished, how should a private man be lashed? Luc. 23.31.
If it were thus in the green wood, how should it be in the dry? If one who
had that place of honor with his God, as to be employed from him as a
messenger, to so worthy a place as Niniue, yet should for one sin, be
endangered with so great a weight of displeasure, what should become of them,
who in all likelihood were polluted with many enormous crimes? If God should
meat to them such measure, as he did to Jonas, how doleful and lamentable would
their state be? This is a true effect of the just consideration of Gods
punishments upon others. First to know them to be terrible, and with a kind of
amasednesse to take full notice of them. Behold says the Lord to Samuel, 2.
Sam. 3.11.
I will do a thing in Israel, whereof whosoever shall hear, his two ears
shall tingle. Next to apply it to our selves, and make a benefit of it, by
descending into our souls, and sifting of our hearts, acknowledging that if God
should deal with us in judgment, verily t^^t should be our reward, Hieron. in
Psalm. 93. Solent aliqui dicere, ille qui occisus est, non occideretur nisi
fornicator esset, aut aliquod pecca^u^ habuisset.
which is now befalle^ unto others.

6 It is a perpetual fault, evermore annexed unto flesh and blood, that if any
punishment in strange sort, do be fall to our brother, or neighbor, by and by
with a precipitate headlong judgment, we condemn him, as a sinner, if not
notorious, yet in some secret manner more grievous then other me^. Hierome
observes this (if that work be S. Hieromes) on the 93. Psalm. Some use to
say, he who is killed had not been slain, unless he had been a fornicatour,
or stained with some gross sin. He had not been quelled with the ruin or
falling down of a house, unless he had been wicked: he had not suffered
ship-wracke, unless he had been profane or a mighty malefactor. But what says
the Scripture? Psalm. 94.21.
They shall condemn innocent blood. The innocent they shall suffer such deaths
as well as other. The Savior of the world does reprove this rash conceit,
when he bids, Luc. 13.1.
that men should not think, that those Galileans whose blood Pilate had
mingled with their own sacrifices, were greater sinners then all other
Galileans, or those eighteen, on whom the Tower in Siloam fell, and slew them,
were sinners above all men that were in Jerusalem: but says he unto them, I
tell you, except ye amend your lives ye shall all likewise perish. Whereas they
and we are ready to exorbitate, by looking on other men, he sends us back to
our selves, that by scanning of our own ways, and viewing our own paths, we
may see that unto us belongs shame and confusion. The hand of God upon other,
should be a glass to us, to see our own deformity. 2. Sam. 24.17.
When the Angel destroyed so many of the Israelites with the pestilence, David
cried out, Behold I have sinned, yea I have done wickedly: but these sheep
what have they done? let thine hand I pray thee be against me, and against my
fathers house. David took all to himself, because all the fault was his. We
are not free from all, and therefore if we suffer any thing, let us bear it
with patience. If nothing, let us acknowledge that it is the mercy of God, and
not the merit of man, that we all are not consumed.

7 And by the smart of other, let us fear to offend the Lord. Every action
which was in Christ, should be to us an instruction: every passion which is in
other, should bring to us information. The Jews once were the spouse and
belo^ed of the Lord, the people whom he embraced, the nation whom he singled
out from all the men on earth. Sion was his delight, and Jerusalem was unto
him, as the apple of his eye. When they began to be wanton, and as the untamed
heyfer, to refuse the yoke of all piety and service toward God, his love was
turned to hatred, and as before he had magnified them beyond all other nations,
so afterward he made them vile, and abject below all other. Their Temple was
ruinated, and not one stone left upon another; their City was ransacked, their
old men died with famine, their young were slain with the sword, the remnant
as accursed, do wander on all the face of the earth, without a king, Roman.
11.17.
without Priest, without Prophet. Thus the natural Olive branches were broken
and cropped off, and we wild ones were graffed in. When we read this, and
feel the sweetness of it, are we to presume, and puff up our selves by and
by? Saint Paul has taught us otherwise, Be not high minded, 20
but fear. And in another place, 1. Cor. 10.12.
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall. As these mariners
were fearful, at our Jonas his example, so ought we in these Jews to be
afraid, and dread Gods justice. Apoc. 2.1. and 3.1.
Those seven Churches to which John wrote his Epistles, mentioned in the
beginning of the Revelation, and those Cities to which Paul preached, being
sometimes great lights and lamps of the East, are now the residence of the
Turk, and a sincke of filthy Maumetry. Let us stand in awe, least our sins
pluck on us such a judgment.

8 We ask of news in France, and enquire of the alterations, which the Low
countries yield. Curiosity for the most part is the cause why we demand such
questions. Perhaps we think upon them, and their troubles sometimes, with a
little pity. But there is a farther use, if our dim and dark eyes could see
it. Ab anno. 1562.
When for two and thirty years, France has been the very cockpit, for all
Christendom to fight in: when with so many civil furies, the inhabitants
sheath their swords one in the bowels of another: Anno. 1573.
when for twenty years since and more (for so long it is since the States, and
the Prince of Orange with them, did put forth their supplication, unto the
king of Spain Philip the second, which is a declaration to other Christian
Princes, of the reasons wherefore they took up arms) an army has been
continued by the Spaniard, against those Provinces which now term themselves
United, so that there is little safety, but what stands in the sword, or in
their walled towns: we might remember our selves, and that with much fear and
trembling, that our sins have cried for vengeance, as loud as theirs did
ever; that our fields are fit for the sickle, not so white unto the harvest, as
ready dry to the fire, Bernard. de considerat. ad Eugenium. lib. 2. Vide
regiones si non sint magis siccae ad ignem, quam albae ad messem.
as Bernard speaks to Eugenius: that it is but a little labor, for God to
reach his hand over our narrow seas, and to give us a taste of that here in this
small Island, which the Continent has long felt, and sowerly has smarted for
it. And if he have held his hand, it is his exceeding mercy, whereof we are
able to make no recompense: only our thankfulness from the bottom of our
hearts, is the best. Such a sober meditation upon the afflictions of our
neighbors, or those with whom we live, would put us from that iolity, wherein
we too much take delight, from the flaunting of this world, and our unbridled
appetites. The losses of others should be our terror: what is theirs may be
ours; if other smart let us quake: when Jonas is to be punished, the ship-men
are afraid.

And they said unto him, wherefore have thou done this?
Luc. 12.48.
it had been so much the lighter, and he deserved fewer stripes. But to whom
much is committed, of him much is required: he might the more be wondered at. 1.
Sam. 2.27.
God reprocheth it to Eli, that whereas himself had appeared unto his fathers
house, and chose both them and him, to stand before his Altar, and offer up
incense unto him, he had kicked against his sacrifice, and honored his
children, more then he did that God who made him. If any men, then the
Ministers and Prophets of the Lord, Matthew. 5.14.
should respect their solemn duty. A City set on an hill, is in the sight of
al. The Priest is the eye of the body, to guide the steps of other. If
darkness be on the hill, what darkness is in the vale? if dimnesse be in the
eye, how dark is all the body? In the Minister, each known fault is reputed
for a crime, because he is so conspicuous, and visible to all; even as a small
wound in the face is eminent, and therefore noted. In the countenance of a men,
Si vnum radatur supercilium qua^ propemodum nihil corpori, and quam multum
detrabitur pulchritudini? Aug. de Ciu. Dei. li. 11.22.
if one eyebrow should be shaven, how little is taken away from the body, but
how much from the beauty? They are the words of Saint Austen. Then we should be
very careful, to pass the days of our pilgrimage in sincerity and integrity,
that we may not be wondered at, by mariners and mean men, why we should do
this or that, when we do grossly offend.

10 Among the unlearned Pastors, and blind guides of the Papacy, transgressio^
or iniquity needs no such wo^dring at. Their ignorance answers for them:
for how should they do any thing but ill, Aue^t. de reb. Turcicis, part. 3.

Si praelati isti plebeij essent homines, nem^ facile ipsis haram committeret:
in isto vero statu, and arae and animae hominum ipsorum fidei creduntur.

Buch. Hist. Scotic. lib. 15. Nouitatis nominae offensi co^tenderunt nouu^
Testamentum nuper a Martino Luthero fuisse scrip^u^ ac vetus Testame^tu^
reposcerent.

Ioh. Foxus in Histor. Scotic. inter annos. 1540. and 1543.

Robert. Step. resp. ad censur. Theolog. Paris. in Prae fat.


who never learned to do otherwise? If they decline from their duty, and be
scandalous unto other, and any man should come upon the^, as these his
companions did upon Jonas, Wherefore have you done this? Can you, whose life is
spent in reading of the Scriptures, in expounding them to other, in informing
the peoples consciences, forget your selves in such manner, as to be notorious
sinners? They may put this wondering from the^, and answer it in a word: you
mistake your self in us: we are not men so expert; the law and the testimony
is unto us as a sealed book. You should rather marvel at us, if we should do
any thing otherwise then ill. I should judge that this answer, would well fit
those Priests and Prelates, of whom Johannes Auentinus speaks, that they are
so base and rude, that if they had been lay men, they should scant have been
counted fit to keep swine, which notwithstanding in his time, both throughout
Germany and all Christendom, had Churches and souls of men committed to their
charge and custody. I am sure it had very well agreed to those Scottish
Priests, who as Buchanan their own country man reports of them, in the late
reformation of religion in that kingdom, were so blockish and so blind, that
the very name of the New Testament was much offensive to them: they thought it
to be new devised, and invented by Martin Luther, and asked for the old again.
Which is the more likely in their ordinary Curates, when we read of a Bishop
of theirs, called the Bishop of Dunkelden, who replied on a Minister, which
said that he had read the Old and New Testament, I thank God I never knew what
the Old and the New Testament was. The very self same does Bobert Stephanus
avouch of the Sorbonistes in Paris, who take upon them to be men of more
admirable learning, and to be Divines of the deepest. He aduoucheth, that when
himself had many conflicts and disputations with them, they would tell him
that they knew not, what the new Testament was. It is no sin to imagine, that
the life of such was like their learning. And if in their often ouersights, it
should have been asked of them, And why do you this, being teachers and
disputers, or at least Pastors over others, and therefore men of knowledge? of
likelihood these good creatures, would have shaped some worthy answer. I hope
that we have none in England, so buried in filthy ignorance: yet my heart often
times does ache, and my very soul does tremble, to think what guides be over
souls yet in many places; I say over the souls of men, which are the most
precious substances, that God has made under the heaven, and for the ransoming
of which, Christ Jesus came down from his glory. Sin has not yet worn out
that unkind brood, which the Papacy did hatch up to our nation, and since those
days Ieroboams Priests, 1. Reg. 13.33.
the basest of the people (so contrary to our good laws) have filled not their
heads with knowledge, but their hands with money, and so have crept into Gods
temple.

11 But I will not pursue this argument. These words here of the seamen, which
to some do seem a marvel, how a Prophet could fall so fowlly, seem to other
to be an increpation or rebuke unto our Jonas. Wherefore have thou done this?
an Hebrew, and a Prophet, and fly away from thy master? what marvel if
vengeance follow thee? what wonder if wrath pursue thee? If it were no more but
so, this were a gawling speech to an ingenuous mind, that men of so base
behavior, should come over him in this manner, with a true and just rebuke.
Genes. 20.16.
It was a shame to Sara (the text says that she was reproved) and no great
praise to Abraham, when Abimelech king of Gerar, a man that knew not the Lord,
did justly blame the co^cealing of Sara to be his wife, by which means he had
like ignorantly to have fallen into adultery. But when sin apparently is
committed, how impudent is that person, which blusheth not to be reproched for
it by a multitude? Those in whom the love of virtue, and the sound fear of the
Lord is, will never cease to pray, that God will so guide, and direct their
steps perpetually, that they may not give a just occasion, to the enemies of
the Gospel, or to the haters of their persons, to insultouer their falls: for
the malice of spiteful hearts, would be glad to see the slippes of them, whom
God does bless. Therefore the faithful do pray so much the more against it,
as David does many times. But the careless and disobedient, because they little
fear it, do suddenly fall into it, and so by open wickedness, draw upon
themselves open shame: not only to have as Jonas had, his companions to check
him, but passengers to deride them, and children to nodde their heads at them;
yea sometimes taunting Rimes, and broken Ballads on them, peradventure the
executioner, the vilest among ten thousands, with his Rhetoric for to scorn
them.

12 God appoynteth this, as a judgment for such as are ouer-growne, with a hard
skin over their hearts, so that they fear not the prick of sin. Yea
sometimes he suffers this rod to fall on his own children, to whippe them
here with shame, so to save their souls by the bargain. Perhaps the Judge,
he shakes them, and ratleth them up in austeritie: it may be that penance is
done, and the wicked triumph upon them. At least they with whom they live, (or
else they are exceeding happy men) will have this one cast at them, which
these ship-men had at Jonas, Why have you done such a deed? what carelessness
or forgetfulness, or unthankfulness brought you to it? But a greater woe then
this, does oftentimes fall on the wilful sort of sinners, which indeed fear
not the Lord, as upon great persecutours, or rebellious bloody traitors. Their
fame is turned into infamy, and they are registered to posterity, as a byword
of the people. The judgment which does follow them, even after they be in
grave is, that songs of defa^ation be as Epitaphes on their deaths. Let Bonner
and Story and Parrhy, be witnesses in this cause. A good conscience which does
walk with sincerity, in that calling wherein the Lord has placed him, does
little fear these matters. Hieron. in Marc. 14. Ignis sine materia deficit.
And if slanders should arise, yet to him this is the comfort of it, that as
fire without wood does dye, so does ill speech without just matter. I note this
from the reproof used by these mariners.

What shall we do unto thee that the sea may be calm?
13 The third thing which now follows, is the question which they put to him,
or the counsel which they ask of him. The raging of the sea, is not slaked
all this time: while the Prophet both slept and waked, while the lot was
thrown upon him, while that he was examined* and made all his confession, the
sea wrought and was troublous. The sea wrought and was troublous. Those words
because they be again in the thirteenth verse, I do defer them thither. But
these persons which were in danger, and had their mind on the point, that is,
to save their lives, would willingly know the way, how to escape the peril.
What shall we do unto thee? Hieron. in hunc locum. Interficiemus te? sed
cultor^m Domini. Seruabimus? sed Deum fugis. Exposuisti causam morbi, indica
sanitatis.
This is the doubt says Hierome. Shall we kill thee? but thou art the servant
of the Lord. Shall we save thee? but thou art a runne-away from thy master.
Thou have showed us thy disease, show the remedy how to cure it. A little
before he has this also, That great was he who fled: but greater was he that
followed. They dare not deliver him, they know not how to conceal him. So
there is as it seems a great wrestling in the minds of these poor men, what
they should do, or should not do. They now know that he was a Prophet; a man
reverend in his calling, and therefore they were loath to lay any violent hands
upon him. They would rather suppose, that he who was so contrite, and had made
such an acknowledgement of the fault which he committed, would proceed to let
them know the means, to escape from drowning.

14 Many graceless ones in our days, would have taken another course. A
runne-away so pursued: a fugitive so made after: we will soon ease our selves
of the fear; we will quickly free our ship from the danger: what should so
vile a person be roosting in our vessel? Perhaps without many words, he might
have gone over board; he might have diued under water: they would never have
stood to ask, what they should do unto him. So much does the inciuilitie, and
barbarous behavior of our age, pass the manners of rude men in old time. But
they had a good remembrancer, to keep them in moderation, even their reverence
unto God, whose hand they did find upon them, as knocking at the door. On the
one side how could they tell, least by sufferance and impunitie toward Jonas,
they should incur the displeasure of the Almighty? And on the other side,
how could they tell, least in punishing and taking away his life, the reward
which belonged to murderers, might be laid upon them? Jonas for his refusing
to go to preach at Niniue, was chased with wrath from heaven. Then what
vengeance might befall them, in a greater fault, as in cruelty, and in
shedding of his blood, who never had offended them? Thus they fear to spill
his life, although they see show of very fit occasion. They ask advise of him.
The maine note from this place, is the care which men should have, to destroy
the life of none, that they should be auerse from blood, which because it is
the full subject of those verses, Verse. 13. and 14
which follow next after my text, I do defer it thither. And so I come to the
answer of Jonas, which is my second part.

And he said unto them, Take me and cast me into the sea, etc.
15 It seems that the Prophet, is now as far in his penance, Iosuah. 7.19.
when he willed him to confess, and give God the glory: and by a consequent,
endure his death with patience. An instruction which we can never too much
teach to prisoners, and such as are to suffer, by iugdement of law, that they
should bear with mildness, and quietness of behavior, that which they
wilfully have deserved. The conscience of their sin, the astonishment at
their judgment, the fear of violent death, the shame of such a suffering, is
enough to amaze their thoughts, and ouerwhelme resolution. Whereas on the
other side, the putting of them in remembrance, that at one time or another,
they must be content to die, and the urging that God does lay such temporal
punishments upon malefactors, for the saving of their souls, and the
recounting of that benefit, which arises from Christ's passion, to wit, a
pleading before his father, to get pardon for all that be repentaunt, does
settle the disquieted and affrighted mind right well. I would to God that our
English were as backward to transgress, as in this case they are forward, to
satisfy even with their lives, the extremity of the law, and that in a
peaceable and resolved sort. I impute it to nothing, but to the ordinary
passage of the word of God among us, which is every way able to quiet and
settle the penitent sinners heart. Other nations do admire it in our men, as
the Italians most of all, and the French, as we may see it observed, He^ricus
Stephan. in Apologia pro Herodoto Gallice edita Luc. 23.43.
in the defense of Henry Stephanus for Herodotus. It shows a right firm
constancy, and sure hope in Christ Jesus. And as those two brought the thief,
which dyed with Christ into Paradise, so no doubt but that many with us, go by
execution into heaven, who if they were not recalled by violence and by law,
would prove firebrands of hell.

16 I remember the patience of our contrymen, by the quietness of Jonas
here, who alone desires to dye, because he alone had offended in the sin
which now is in question. He would not that other innocent men, should perish
by his means. This is the course of Gods children, to have remorse upon other,
and not to entangle them in their plagues. It is I says David, 2. Sam. 24.17
that have offended, not these sheep, alas what have they done? But
contrariwise the reprobate, if destruction must befall them, would have all
other to take part in that their judgment, that themselves might not be
singular. They would have company to hell. If they needs must from hence, they
care not if all the world come to ruin, together with their fall. They
earnestly desire, that other men should be partakers of their smart. The name
of Herod the great, is very odious in this respect, who laid a plot, Joseph
Antiquit. 17.8.
that when he dyed, many other might dye with him. And gave express
commandment, that one of every noble family in his kingdom, should be
slain, that by that means, his death might of necessity be lamented, if not
for love of him, which the tyrant had no reason to expect, yet for the loss of
others. Such are the unnatural passions, of cruel and bloody miscreants. But
the blessed sons of God, be of another spirit: they would rather purchase peace
to others, by their losses, then hurt others by their errors. Jonas would dye
alone, because he alone had offended.

17 Here now is it worth the discoursing, why the Prophet in this manner should
urge, and hasten himself to death. Was it, as Arias Montanus thinks, Arias
Montanus commentar. in hunc locum.
because yet he is so obstinate, that in no case he will to Niniue, but rather
dye in a frowardness, then teach them, who afterward should work harm to his
people? No: his confession before handled, does keep me from that opinion. I
hold him now very careful to commit no farther sin. He feels the weight of
the former, enough and too much on him. Is it then for a fretting indignation,
which he bears unto himself, or for hatred of his life, because his
conscience did now prick him, as the conscience of the wicked uses to do,
when some villainy is committed, as Judas was pricked in his heart, after his
treason practiced on our Savior, when he went out male-co^tented, and hanged
himself in despair? No: I hold the reason of it to be another matter, as anon
I shall show unto you. This had been a sin, more fearful then any that went
before. For murdering of himself, whereof he had been guilty (if for that
intent he had spoken it) though other men's hands had done it, is a sin so
grievous, that sca^t any is more heinous unto the Lord. This shows a graund
and solemn possession, which Satan has in a man, a distrust of all Gods love,
when a man grows to the summitie of such malice against himself, as that
natural affection, and the account to be given, of all our deeds upon the
earth, is quite exiled out of memory. A doctrine which I take to be nothing
besides the purpose, if largely it be discoursed of, in the iniquity of these
times, wherein wretchedness has so fearfully prevailed in some persons, and
almost daily does prevail, that they dare to plunge themselves, into this pit
of terrible destruction.

18 Our God in his ten commandments, has set this down for one, Exodus 20.13.
Genes. 9.5.6.
thou shall commit no murder. He is so precise upon blood, that he not only
has said, at the hand of a man, even at the hand of a man's brother, will I
require the life of man. And who so sheddeth man's blood, Numer. 35.31.
by man shall his blood be shed. And, ye shall take no recompense for the life
of the murderer, which is worthy to dye, but he shall be put to death: But the
very Ox, Exodus 21.28.
that goreth a man or woman that he dye, this ox shall be stoned to death, and
his flesh shall not be eaten. He that slew a man unwillingly at the wood, Deuteronomy.
19.5.
with an axe flying out of his hand, should loose his life for his labor, if
the pursuer did so follow him, as that he ouertooke him, before he came to the
city of refuge. This was to make men the more vigilant, that they did no such
mischaunces, as we commonly do term them. But if it were wilful murder, the
offender was to be taken, from the very horns of the altar, 1. Reg. 2.29
and slain, as Ioab was served, a man of so noble birth, a man of such service
before. These are the laws which were made, concerning the murdering of other
men. And does not the law of God, and the explication of it by Jesus Christ his
son, originally require of us, that all fit things which we owe to other men,
should be done by our selves to our selves? Mat. 22.39.
Thou ought to love thy neighbor, but as thou love thy self. The example
of thy charity, is drawn from thy self at home. Thy soul, thy preservation,
the good wished to thy self, should be the true direction of thy deeds unto
thy neighbor. But thou must not lay any bloody and murdering hands upon
another, therefore much less on thy self.

19 God has placed thee in this world, as in a watch or a standing, from
whence thou must not stir thy foot, till he bid thee to remove. He has
imprinted a most passionate love, between thy soul and thy body, that they
grieve to leave one another. The mind will have many inventions, the body will
bear many stripes, before that either from other of them, do willingly depart
and be dissolved. Wise men have no greater reason of persuasion to induce, that
the parting with any friend, or the loosing of the nearest and dearest, must be
borne with patience, then that a dearer couple, the nearest that this world
has, that is our souls and our bodies, must depart and fly a sunder. The
affection is so entire, the conjunction is so inward, which the one of these
has to the other. God would have our nativity to be bitter to our mothers,
Erasmus in funere in Colloquijs.
that they might love us the dearer, but he would have our death to be sour
unto our selves, that we might the more fear to hasten it. And therefore
although the spirit may be willing in any man, yet surely the flesh is weak,
in the laying down of the life, for a good conscience, and the Gospel. What
one is he, whom Gods spirit has not in great measure mortified, that feels
not in himself oftentimes, an horror and a quaking, to think of this
dissolution, that he who in some sort may yet be called the image of God,
should become dust and clay; that the goodliest of those creatures, whom the
Almighty has framed under the heaven, should prove a rotten carcass: that
he who has seen the stars, and beheld the heaven in his beauty, yea has
meditated on the highest, and contemplated on the Trinity, should be put into
a grave, and tumbled into the earth, to be amongst worms and vermin, in
darkness and corruption: all which a natural man does loath, he could wish
that it might not be. Now, when our own hand shall hasten that, which nature
does so far hate, which our heart does so dislike, which God does so detest,
how wicked is our wickedness?

20 Egesippus in his third book of the destruction of Jerusalem, Egesippus de
excidio Hierosol. lib. 3.
rehearses a worthy Oration (although in some other words, then I find it in
Josephus himself) which Josephus that great and learned Jew, made to his
soldiers in a cave, where they lay hid, after the loss of the city Iotapata,
which Vespasian the Roman General took. There his own men would take no
nay, but that they must murder down one another, whereupon he uses a
speech, Joseph. de bello Iudaico. lib. 3. Thesaurum nobis optimum dedit, atque
inclusum in hoc vase fictili, and consignatum commisit nobis custodiendum. Quis
nos admittet ad illa sanctarum animarum consortia?
which in my judgment is most patheticall. The Almighty God has given unto us
our life as a most precious treasure: he has shut it and sealed it up, in this
earthen vessel, and given it us to be kept, till that himself do ask for it
again. And were it not a fault now, as on the one side to deny it when he
shall require it again: so on the other side to spill and cast this treasure
forth, which was thus committed to us, before he do demand it? And after a few
other words he goes thus forward: If we should kill our selves, who is he that
should admit us into the company of good souls? Shall it not be said to us, as
once it was said to Adam, Where art thou? so where are ye, who contrary to my
precept are come where you should not be, because I have not yet loosed you
from the bonds of your bodies. This is a Christian speech out of the mouth of a
Jew, which caryeth such matter with it, as is worthy to be reuolued. It was
not well with Adam, when he who should have been in the plain, was crept into
the bushes: his misery then began. And without Gods exceeding mercy, whereof
no man can presume, nay great and mighty prejudice is to the contrary, it will
be most ill with them, who do adventure upon such deeds: they do rush
themselves into torments.

21 Let heathen men be famous for such factes if they will. Let Calanus and his
wise Indians, hate to dye a natural death, but end their days by burning
themselves in the fire. Curt. lib. 10.
Let the scholars of that Philosopher Egesias Cyrenaicus, Tul. Tusc. quaest.
lib. 1.
so far believe their master, disputing of the immortality of the soul, that
to the end that they might be deprived of life, and enjoy that spoken of
immortality, Tit. Liuius lib. 26.
they go home and kill themselves. Let Vibius Virius in Capua, profess that he
has poison for himself, and all his friends, which is able to free the^ from
the Romans, from punishment and from shame: and let him drink and dye. Yea
let the younger Cato a man held to be admirably wise, Plutarch. in Catone
minore. Cornel. Tac. Annal. l. 15. Senec. epist. 24. and 71. and 82.
be a butcher to himself, rather then endure to see Caesar, who was then
become a Conqueror. Yea let Seneca himself, try the manner of Cato his death,
although in another sort; after that himself, a Philosopher, a mirror of
heathen wisdom, had so often and so highly commended that deed of Cato, that
it was not blood, but honor which gushed out of his side. Yea let ten thousand
more, Virgil. Aenei. 4. Liu. lib. 1.
with Dido and Lucretia, be recorded in Gentile stories: yet all these are no
warra^ts for Christians: we have a better master, who has taught us a better
lesson. That adversity and bitter affliction, must be born with patience: that
we must expect Gods end, in misery and calamity, and not hasten the issue in
our selves; that true fortitude is in bearing the sorrows, which are assigned
and allotted out for our portion, and that to fly from the^ fearfully, is
cowardice. Where is valor, but in sustaining the greatest crosses with
constancy? and where is timiditie, but in this, to kill thy self, that thou
may be freed from that which does not like thee? Augustine. de ciuitate Dei.
19.4.
What daunting force, says S. Austen, had those evils which constrained Cato,
a wise man as they accounted of him, to take that away from himself, Sibimet
auferre quod hom^ est.

Ita sibi esse amicus, vt esse se animal, and in hac coniunctione corporis and
animae viuere velis. Cyprian de duplici martyrio.

Aut infirmitas erat morte quaerens dolorum finem, aut ambitio aut dementia.


that he was a man, whereas men say, and that truly, that it is after a sort,
the first and greatest speech of nature, that a man should be reconciled to
himself, and therefore naturally fly death: so be a friend to himself, as
that earnestly he should desire to be a living creature, and to continue in
this conjunction of the body and soul. He did not resist, and stand strong
against his evils, but indeed fainted as a coward: he sunk under his burden.
I may conclude of him, and of all that do tread his steps, with that learned
man, who wrote the treatise De duplici Martyrio, which is commonly called
Cyprians. If we read that any have killed themselves valiantly, it was either
weakness which by death did seek an end of sorrows, or ambition or madness.
So far, in truth, are they off from any just commendation in Christianity
and Divinity.

22 Nay, what if it were held a thing unlawful among the very Gentiles? See
the Poet Virgils judgment of it. When Aeneas came down to hell, as the Poet
there does devise, he sees in a several and disiunct place, such as had made
away themselves. He makes their estate to be so woeful, as that gladly they
would do any thing, to be alive again. Virgil. Aeneid. 6.
-- quam vellent aethere in alto
Nunc and pauperiem, and duros perferre labores?
How gladly now would they be content to endure poverty, and take hard pains
in the world? Tullius in Somnio Scipionis.
See the judgment of Tully concerning this, in his Somnium Scipionis. When
Scipio upon the tale of his father, being grown into admiration, of the glory
of men which are dead, asked, What do I then upon earth, why hasten I not to
dye? his father makes him answer, with a very divine speech, Nisi enim cum
Deus is, cuius est templum hoc omne quod conspicis, istis te corporis custodys
liberauerit, huc tibi aditus pater^ non potest.
although he were but a heathen man: No son, thou may not have any passage
hither, but when that God whose temple all that thou see, is, shall free thee
out of this body. For men are borne to that purpose, and have souls given them
to that end, (to rest themselves on this earth) which souls they must keep
safely within the ward of their bodies. And they are not to flit from this life
without his commandment, least they should seem to fly that duty of a man,
which is assigned them by God. I might add to these, the judgment of
Aristotle in his Ethics, Aristotel. Ethic. lib. 3.7.
where he says, that to kill a man's self for the avoiding of infamy or
poverty, is not the part of a valiant man, but of a coward. But I leave these
foreign testimonies.

Hieron* in hunc locum.
23 Some among the Christians, have thought that maidens, for saving and
preserving their virginity inuiolate, might kill themselves. An opinion void
of any shadow of warrant, out of Gods word. Romans 3.8. Vide infra in Ionae* 4.3.
For ought we to do evil, that good may come thereby? Shall we adventure the
greater sin, for the avoiding of a less evil? Nay is it a fault in a virgin
at all, that she is defloured by force? 2. Sam. 13.1. August de ciuitate Dei.
lib. 1.19. Tarquinius and Lucretia duo fuerunt and adulteriu^ vnus admisit.
August. lib. 3. contra Cresconiu^ Gra^maticum. Theodorer. in compe^dio
haereticarum fabularum.
Was Tamar to be condemned, because Amnon did defile her? It is consent that
makes iniquity. Tarquinius and Lucretia were two bodies, says Saint Austen,
but there was but one adulterer. I add no more of that matter. The Donatistes
and furious Circumcellions in old time, because they were restrained by the
civil sword of the Magistrate, from the exercise of their heresies, and
keeping of their Conuenticles, would cast themselves from the rocks, and
break their necks, by the fall, they would drown and kill themselves.
Thereupon Theodoret has a very pretty narration, concerning them. Many of them
on a time, met a young man on the way, and giving him a sword, commanded him
to wound them, and threatened him that if he would not, they would kill him for
refusing. The young man being put unto his shifts, told them that he durst not
do it, because he had just cause to fear, that when some of the^ should see
their fellows slain, the rest would turn on him for doing it, and murder
him. But if they would first suffer him, to bind the^ all fast and sure, he
would tell the^ another tale. They liked well of this motion, and in their
senseless stupiditie, yielding to be bound, the young man got good store of
rods, and shrewdly swinged them all, and so went his ways and left them. They
imagined, that God did well accept of their murtherings, in this or the like
kind, and carried an opinion, that now they were become martyrs of Jesus Christ.
Gaudentius their Bishop, writes in defense of the deeds of these Donatistes,
2. Match. 14.41
and in behalf thereof, urges the example of Razias in the Machabees, who when
he should be slain, in maintenance of the religion of the Jews, to save
himself from the infidels, first ran upon his sword. And when that would not
serve the turn, he threw himself from a wall, and when all this could not
kill him, he ran to the top of a rock, and there plucked out his bowels, and
threw them among the people. That holy man Saint Austen, August. contra
secu^dam Gaude^tij Epistol.

Cyprian. de duplici Martyrio.

Non suppliciu^ sed causa facit Martyrem.


the most judicious of all the fathers coming to answer these things, first
disclaimeth them from being Martyrs, They who live not the lives of Christians,
cannot dye the death of Martyrs. And he also uses that maxim of Cyprian, Not
the punishment, but the cause does make the Martyr. Secondly he shows out of
the Scripture, that a man in no case should kill himself. Thirdly he does so
handle the example of this Razias, that he makes it to be no warrant, to
attempt any such like deed. Hear his reasons.

24 First the Jews do give no credit unto the books of the He was a lover of
the City, and a man of good report, and therefore was commonly called a father
of the Jews. But heathen men, says Saint Austen, have gone as far as this.
He offered to spend his body for the Religion of the Jews. So would other,
says Saint Austen, Romans 10.1.
who had a zeal as Saint Paul speaks, but not according to knowledge. Such
men as were earnest holders of the traditions of the Jews, but did not
accept the Messiah. He desired that his bowels might be restored in the
resurrection. But that shall be common to the wicked as well as to the just.
He dyed nobly, says the author, but better, says Saint Austen, if it had
been reported that he dyed humbly. He dyed manfully says the author, and I
do not say, quoth Saint Austen, that he did dye vvomanly. Thus he scanneth all
the words of that narration. Thirdly he adds, If he had done well, 2. Match.
7.1.
of whom we read in that book. He should not have thrust himself upon
death, but whatsoever had been imposed by the persecuting tyrant, he should
have endured that with patience and humility. Wherefore since he could not
suffer his humbling amongst his enemies, he showed himself an example, not of
wisdom but of folly, not to be imitated of Christ's martyrs, but of Donatist
circumcellions. This is the round and apparent christian judgment, of that
most learned Father. Iudic. 16.30.
He does answer the place of Samson, as anon I shall show unto you. For he
also killed himself. In the mean time, I may with him lay down this general
doctrine, that none should spill the blood, or destroy the life of himself,
for any cause whatsoever, because that is a deed most unchristian, most
damnable, and most wicked.

25 I cannot deny, but Gods mercy wherein he is exceedingly rich, does
sometimes show it self, in the very pangs of death. Inter ponte^ and fontem.
That between the bridge and the water, between the knife and the dying,
between the rock and the ground, repentance may be suggested to the heart,
in a moment or twinkling of an eye, but especially where poison being taken,
does not kill upon the sudden, or where death does not follow presently, there
may be some remembrance. Notwithstanding, who is he that dares to presume upon
such mercy? God is loving, but he is just: he is kind, but he is dreadful: he
likes not to be tempted. It were folly to break thy neck, to try the skill
of a bone-setter, to try the will of a surgeon. It is monstrous in Divinity, to
preasse upon such iniquity, with hope of that, wherein thou have such
threatenings to the contrary. God would have us to lay down our lives, if need
be for his sake, if a tyrant will take them from us; but we must not leap out
of the^, for any thing of our own. Nay we should be so careful, that we should
not rashly hazard them, or bring them into peril. In forbidding sin, God
uses to forbid all the inducements, which lead unto that sin. I would that
such could remember this, who think that they are not men, unless they make a
braule, or enter into a combat, Bernard. ad milites templi.

Si in voluntate alterum occidendi te potius occidi contigerit, moreris
homicida.


for every fond word or speech. By that means they provoke the Lord, and if
they happen to be slain, they are accessaries to their own deaths. That which
S. Bernard speaks of iniust war, is not unfit to be rehearsed in this
place, If in thy fighting, thou have a mind to kill another man, and then art
slain thy self, thou dyest a murderer: if thou prevail and kill the other,
then thou live a murderer. But whether thou live or dye, be a conqueror or
conquered, it is not good to be a murderer. Theodoret does commend the good
mind of Honorius, Theodor Histor. Eccl. lib. 5.26.
sometimes Emperor of Rome, because he took quite away out of that City, the
fightes of the Gladiatores, or sword-players in Rome, wherein to show sport to
other men, and make trial of their manhood, oftentimes they killed one
another. I pursue this matter no further, but only add this, that howsoever
an opinion has prevailed to the contrary, true manhood is not in quarrelling,
and brabling for private injuries, but in maintenance of Gods honor, in
preserving thy allegiance to thy Prince, in safegarding of thy country, in
defending thy self from thieves, and such other just occasions.

26 I forget not my Jonas here, from whom as the original, this question of
doing violence to our selves did arise. Neither do I forget Samson, whom I
reserved to this place, because there is some similitude between him and our
Prophet. In that place which I named before, August. contra secu^dam Gaudentij
Epistolam.
Saint Austen briefly, but yet notably does determine this deed of Samson.
When he plucked down the house on himself, he slew himself and his enemies.
But the reason of it was, that since he could not escape, because they meant to
slay him, he would destroy them also with him, even the Princes of the
Philistines. Neither did he this of himself, mark the words of the learned
father, but by direction of Gods spirit, which used him to do that which
otherwise without the strength of that spirit, he could never have been able to
do, that was pluck down the house. The commandment of that spirit, made
this deed to be lawful, Gen 22.1.
as the offering up of Isaac, was a lawful deed in Abraham. That which had
been nothing else but madness, if God had not commanded it, when God did bid
it, was obedience. So he holds this a particular deed, precisely commanded
to him, which we may imitate by no means, because we have no such warrant.
Hieron. in Ezech 46.
But Hierome in his Co^mentarie, on the six and fortieth of Ezechiel, does go
a little farther, saying that Samson in that deed, Iudic. 16.30.
was a figure of Jesus Christ. As Samson slew more at his death, then he did in
all his life time, so Christ although while he lived, he gave many a wound to
Satan, by his miracles and his doctrine, yet it was his death and his
suffering, that broke the back of hell, and the very heart of Satan. These
matters may in good sort be applied to our Prophet. He was assured by that
knowledge which he yet retained, notwithstanding his fall, that this punishment
was assigned to him by the Lord. This must be the satisfaction, for his great
disobedience. Now again his faith reuiueth, by which he had some foresight, of
all Gods purpose over him. This was peculiar to our Jonas, by his Prophetical
knowledge, and may not be followed by us. It is not any protection for us, to
bid any other throw our selves into the sea.

27 Besides this, I do not doubt, but as Samson was a figure of the Savior of
the world, so Jonas also was, although not in every matter, (as once before I
have noted) yet in this his drowning here. Super. Ion. 1.1. Matthew. 12.40.
Christ himself did expound the lying of the Prophet for three days in the
whales bellye, to be a sign of his own burial, and lying in the earth. The
death of the Savior, was to him a means of his burial: so here the casting
out of Jonas, into the sea by the mariners, was the means whereby he lay three
days and three nights, in the bellye of the whale. John. 19.30.
Jonas is willingly drowned here: Christ also there dies willingly: he yielded
up his Ghost; no man could take it from him. Jonas alone must suffer, to save
the rest of the ship: Christ alone did tread the wine press, and Christ does
dye alone, to stay his fathers wrath; to save all his elect. You see that he is
an excellent type of Jesus Christ the righteous. But as it is impossible, that
comparisons should hold in all things, and there is none who in every matter
may be likened unto Christ, because he had no fellows; he cannot be tried by
his peers; so there is this one difference, that Jonas when he suffered, was
alone in all the fault, and Jesus in his suffering, was only without all
fault, because he was that immaculate lamb, 1. Pet. 2.22.
in whose mouth was found no guile. When I first looked into this text, which I
have now opened unto you, I did think to have said something farther, in or
concerning the person of Christ, whom our Prophet does represent, I meant to
have mentioned his readiness to dye, that he might redeem us sinners, and so
briefly out of the new Testament, to have given some comfort amidst all these
threats of Jonas. But in handling this last question, matter has grown upon
me, and I love not to be tedious. I will therefore defer that, till I come to
the fifteenth verse, where the like occasion is again fitly offered unto me.
In the mean time, let us meditate on the excellent love of Christ, who would
dye so willingly for us, the just for the unjust, to bring us unto his
kingdom. To the attaining whereof he always further us, to whom in the
perfection of the Trinity, be glory and praise for evermore.

THE VII. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 1 The unwillingness of the mariners to put Jonas to death.
4 Great slownesse should be used in taking away life. 6. Against killing of men
to offer to Idols, 7. and other cruel massacrings: 9. As that of the
Anabaptists. 14. The force of the sea. 16. It is some sin that makes many
not to prosper. 20. God reuengeth innocent blood. 22. Enforcement does not
excuse evil. 23. We must yield to Gods will.

Jonah. 1.13.14. Nevertheless the me^ rowed to bring it to the land, but they
could not, for the sea wrought and was troublous against the^. Wherefore they
cried unto the Lord, and said, We beseech thee, o Lord, we beseech thee, let
us not perish for this man's life, and lay not upon us innocent blood, for thou
o Lord have done as it pleased thee.


Jonas being of a Prophet become a sinner, of a sinner a prisoner, as often times
you have heard, is examined by his company, but condemned by himself, as a
grievous malefactor, worthy to be drowned in the sea. So much did his sin
cry for vengeance; so vehemently did his God make after him. But the misery
of his misery is, that since he must needs suffer, for otherwise the fault
which his own mouth has acknowledged, cannot be satisfied for, he wants
some man that may do the deed. The place is ready, and the person, who thinks
every thought of time to be very long, before the matter be dispatched: but
there wants an executioner. He might not do as Saul did, 1 Samuel 31.4.
fall on his own sword point himself, when his harnesse-bearer would not
deprive him of his life. This had argued too great despair. But he might wish
with Nero, that in the course of justice, Aurelius Victor in Nerone.
he might have some friend or enemy, to help him unto his end. But among
these blustering mariners, he could not find that favor. Although himself
accuse himself, and lay his fault plain before them; although winds and
waves did confirm it, although the lot thrown did assure it, although in
words he did desire to be cast into the water, yet those who should have done
it, do so ill like of the matter, that if sails or oars can serve, they will
back again to the land, rather leave their intended journey, then use any
violence toward him.

They rowed to bring the ship back unto the land.
(...)
2 The word which is used here, coming of Chathar in the Hebrew, does signify
they did dig, either because men do thrust into the water with oars, as in
digging they do, with other instruments on the land, Seneca in Agamemn* Suicata
vibra^t aequora and lacera incropant. Virgil. Aeneid. 3. Nullum maris aequor
arandu^.
like as in Latin Poetry the bottom of the ship is said to plow the water,
sulcare, to make things like furrows in it: or because as men in digging, do
turn this way, and that way, and stir and move the ground, so they stirred up
their wits, and did beat their brayns and thoughts, to free him from the
danger. For his sake, they used all such helps as they had at sea. We know
that they be not many: either sailing by the wind, or rowing by the oar: tall
ships do know the one, the galleys go with the other. But as it may be judged
out of the monuments of antiquity, and partly may be seen in some at this
day, every ship in old time, had both the one and the other. When the wind
wanted for their sailing, their arms did use to fall a rowing. In this place I
doubt not, but that the storm had so ouerlayd them, that their tackling in
general did serve them to little purpose. The shift which then remained, was
to see if by clean strength, against both wind and water, they might win the
land, by their rowing backward. Forward they could not get, and therefore they
will retire, rather then drown the Prophet. Their business is forgotten: their
have shall stay a while, rather then destroy his life.

3 When advisedly I consider, how many things here should urge those mariners,
to hasten him unto death, their disturbance in their journey, the casting
forth of their wares, which goes against the soul of a wordly minded
creature, the indangering of their lives, the discovery by a lot, the
confession of himself, and his willingness to die, besides such stubburne
qualities, as of likelihood were fast rooted in mariners and idolaters, and yet
how by no means they would take his life away from him, I cannot but observe
their marvelous of-wardnesse, and unwillingness in very high sort, to the
shedding of blood, which affection of theirs is amplifyed in all my text.
Because he should not die, they would go back to land: and when they see that
there must be no nay, but God would have them to throw him into the sea, they
cry forth with great vehemence, that in as much as it was the Lords own doing,
and not any desire of theirs, (they were but as his instruments, and ministers
of his justice) the blood of this dying passenger, might not be imputed to
the^. Although I be not before Judges and lurours, who have to do with men's
deaths, nor before any Martial warriors, whose spear sometimes eats flesh,
and whose sword oftentimes drinks blood: yet because I speak to men, whom
this cannot but concern, (for life belongs unto all) and because my text
does enforce it, give me leave, men and brethren, to discourse this argument
unto you in the first place, that afterward I may go forward to some other
doctrine.

4 Then I fear not to say, that the laws of God and men, of nature and of
nations, of Gentiles and of Jews, of civil men and Barbarians, have
commanded that a great regard should be borne to the life of a man, the most
excellent of all Gods creatures that go upon the ground, the beauty of the
world, the glory of the workman, the co^fluence of all honor which mortality
can afford, the resembla^ce of the Savior, while he lived upon the earth, the
image of God himself, until that time that Adam lost it: to whose absolute
frame nothing wants, but only a consideration, that God has so graced him,
as that nothing is wanting to him. I need not speak to all these, but urge
that which is the greatest. The Lord has said, I will require your blood
wherein your lives are, Genes. 9.5.6.
at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of man, even at
the hand of a man's brother, will I require the life of man. Who so sheadeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God has he
made man. The often ingemination of requiring and requiring, does enforce the
greater charge. Exodus 21.12. Genes. 4.10. 2. Sam. 12.9. Habac. 2.17.
He that smites a man and he dye, shall dye the death. Does not the blood of
Abell cry for vengeance unto the Lord? How does God take the shedding of Vriah
his blood at David's hand? How does he threaten a punishment, and that in bitter
sort unto the men of Babylon, for their murdering of many persons? The killing
of a man, the murdering of thy neighbor, is such a matter, as for the which
can be made no satisfaction. A kingdom can make no ransom for it, the whole
world cannot make a recompense, if we will take things aright. It is in one to
mar it, but it is not in all Gods creatures, to make the life of a man. The
Creator himself does give it; he wills us to preserve it, that none should
dare to destroy it, either in our selves or other.

5 How does he seem to tender it, when he expressly commands the Israelies,
Deuter. 22.8.
to set battelme^ts upon the roofes of their houses (whereupon they used
oftentimes to walk, because they were flat) least if any should fall down
from thence, 2 Samuel 11.1.
blood should lie upon the house? In like sort, when he gives charge
elsewhere, Exodus 21.32.
that the beast which kills any, should be stoned to death with stones? How
does he detest bloud-spilling in wilful sort, Johan. 8.44.
when Christ gives to the devil, the title of a murderer, as being most fit
for him? So that they who are killers and manquellers, do seem to fight under
the devils banner; to have put off humane nature, which should excel for
mildness, and to be turned into beasts, nay to grow into the quality of foul
and loathsome spirits. The impression of this thought, both that it is
unseemly among men, and odious before God, as it has possessed the heart of
Scythians, and Barbarians, of Egyptians, Greeks and Romans, so these ship-men
doubt not of it, but with all their power they do fly from it, as from the
gates of hell. They row, they cry, they pray: rather any thing then be guilty
of the sheading of Jonas his blood. Nay the more they see him yield, the more
their heart does melt, their affection gives upon him. They know it to be
natural, to spare the life of a suppliant, to save the life of a man. No
custom against that ground: no prescription against that principle. Life
should be dear if any thing: It never can be recovered.

6 They then are monsters in nature, and not only irreligious, and impious
toward God, but verily inhumane, who do cut off the life of other, either in
superstition, or in any bloodthirsty humor. Be they the Carthaginians, who
did use to offer men in sacrifice to their Gods. Oros. Histor. lib. 4.6. 2 Reg.
3.27. Annotatio Geneuensis in cum Iocum in Biblijs Anglicae. Tremelius habet de
filio regis Edom.
Or be it the king of Moab, who being distressed in battle, did take his
eldest son, who should have reigned in his stead, and made a burnt offering of
him, upon the top of the wall, before the face of the Israelites, by that means
thinking to appease the wrath of his idols. For thus some understand it,
although there be that take it, of the son of the king of Edom: which is also
bad enough. Or be they among other, or above other if you will, the people of
God himself, who as David does say of them, if that be David's Psalm, were so
besotted on their follies, Psalm. 106.36.
and so doated on their idolatry, that they offered up their sons and
daughters unto devils. This was it, which the Scripture calls the making of
their children to go through the f^re, 2. Reg. 16.3.
as did Ahaz the king of Israel. Unto this the story of Josias alludeth, Cap.
23.10.
where he speaks of the valley of Hinnom, in which their little ones were
enforced, as the Hebrews themselves do write, to walk between great fires,
until that they sunk down dead with the heat: their parents, or the
consecrators looking on, but not hearing the pitiful skreeches, and squealings
of their children, by reason of the great noise of tabrets, and other
instruments of music, which did dull their ears, that they might not hear
the sound. Blind men, who supposed that they had done great service to the
Lord, when in truth they did that, which was execrable and abominable in his
eyes. So far off they were, from the rules of religion, that they also
slipped from the very grounds of common reason.

7 The like may be said of such, who not for any superstitious devotion, or
idolatrous opinion, but in a wooluish rauennousnesse, would see the blood of
many shed. Be it Haman, who to ease his stomach upon Mardocheus, Est. 3.8.
did cast plots and devises how to have the whole people of the Jews murdered
upon one day. Dion. lib. 59.
Or be it Caligula that foul and foolish tyrant, who wished that all the
people of Rome had but one neck, that whenever it should stand with his good
liking, he might cut it off at one blow. A man worthy to be branded, with a
perpetual note of infamy, and to be registered for such a villain, as scant
ever had any fellow. His heart was soaked thorough: his bowels were steeped in
blood, when he carried so vile a mind to his own citizens and subjects. Good
God, how far is sense, and all humanity extinguished in men, when thou
withdrawest thy grace? How does beast-like rage prevail? This makes me to
remember, the cruel and bloody speech of her, who being resolved upon that
fearful slaughter, which France saw and felt at Bartlemewtide, Anno. 1572.
Comment. Religi. and Reip. in Gallia. lib. 10.
in the year seventy and two, did use to say of the Protestants, and Papists
in that land, that there was no way, but one of the sides must dye for it, else
the other could not stand safe. The thousands which were on either side, the
young innocents and the children, who by her account must dye, did not move her
flintie heart. She had her will afterward, and now although she be in her
grave, yet the obloquie and co^tumelious reproach of that action, remains for
ever on her.

8 Shall not those ancient Romans, who appointed by special laws, rewards
of honor and glory, to such as did rescue the lives, of any of their
citizens, stand up in the day of judgment, and condemn such bloody
Christians? Shall not these sily mariners here convince them in that day, who
wrought as many means to save the life of one, and of that one a stranger, and
of that one an offender, as the other did to destroy the lives of many
thousands, and those of their own countrymen, and many of them questionless
innocents* poor harmless hurtlesse souls. Eternized be the infamy of
Satan's and Antichrists practice in it, that bloody harlot of Babylon; for it
sauoured not of Christ the Savior. It is for cruel wolves, and not for tender
and simple lambs, to have their teeth in that manner defiled. No privilege or
dispensation from any Pope, no warrant from the Council of Constance, that
faith given or promise made to heretics, may be broken at pleasure, can excuse
that horrible act. All humanity has disclaimed it: Divinity does condemn it.
We give the like sentence also, although somewhat in a milder sort, against the
murdering hand of them, who for their rebaptizing were justly called
Anabaptists.

9 A little more then seventy years agone, Anno. 1522.
these did arise in Germany, professing that by the Spirit, they had such
illuminations, and revelations from above, that they freely might perform
whatsoever came in their minds, as a matter suggested from heaven. Their
opinions did quickly multiply, and so did their followers also: for it was a
very pleasing doctrine, to a licentious Libertine-like mind, until it grew too
far. Besides that all things were in common among them, and their wives were
not very private, when some of them had three or four, besides also their
rebaptizing of such, as had received the Sacrament of Baptism before, besides
their plucking down of magistrates, and many other things which I ouerpasse,
they had the gift of killing as many as they would. Sleidan. co^mentar. lib.
10. lib. 6. Surius in commentar. Anno 1527.
John of Leyden their usurping king at Munster, did fetch off the heads of
diverse, with a very great facility. At Sangallum a town in Switzerland, one
of this gentle crew, did cut off the head of his own natural brother, the
father to them both standing by, and the mother looking on. And the reason
which he had for the doing of it, was because it was so commanded to him from
God above. This sect could say that it was the spirit, which moved them to
such deeds, and they were advertised from him by secret inspiration; but
indeed it was the Spirit which urged them, some infernal ugly fiend. For the
holy Ghost, that sacred, immaculate and undefiled being, does not stir men
against the law of God, or to break the bonds of nature, so, as to defile men's
selves with such crimes, Sleidan. lib. 10.
as were odious to the very heathen. Luther living at that time, did set pen to
paper, to discover and discountenance too, those proceedings. He imputed all
that stir to Satan, and the immediate work of the devil. And as he was a
man, every way of most invincible courage in Gods business, so he feared not
to say, Est haec rudis etiamnum cacodaemonis techna. Inuenustus Gemus.
that it was but a blockish spirit, a gross devil and a rude, who did broach
such untoward heresies, as the Anabaptists held. Yet in the Popish spirit, was
more close and fine conueyance.

10 The condemning of such deeds, by the sentence of God and man, and the
general doctrine which has been taught, concerning saving of life in all, by
the example of these seamen, may be a good remembrance to Magistrates and
Judges, that they proceed to punishment of offenders, as men with leaden or
woolly, that is slow feet, not rejoicing in that sentence, which themselves
give, of purpose to send other men to death: not as persons without remorse,
but in heart heavy to see, that reasonable men should be so retchlesse, as to
bring themselves to their end. Although justice must be done, and clemency to
some few may be cruelty unto many, yet it is but an inhumane part, to delight
in spilling blood. Volesus who under the Emperor Augustus, Seneca de Ira. 2.5.
was one Proconsul of Asia, is recorded for a famous tyrant, in that when he
had beheaded three hundred in one day, with a proud and lofty countenance he
walked amongst the dead carcasses, as if he had done some deed worthy the
looking on: O rem regiam.
and then at last out he cried, Oh an act fit for a king. Another might well
have answered him: No, this does not beseem a king, who being the head of his
people, shoud grieve that any of them should grow to that extremity, even as
the head in the natural body should be sorry, that the least joint of the hand,
or foot should so rot, that it must needs be cut off. And as in such a case,
the surgeon is never admitted but with advise, so should hasty judgment never
deprive men of their breath. The fault of Theodosius, otherwise a good
Christian Emperor, Theodoret. Eccles. Histor. lib. 5.17.
was the more grievous the while, when so rashly he gave leave to a garrison of
his soldiers, to overrun the City of Thessalonica, where old and young were
slain, to the number of seven thousands; and all this done, to take vengeance
on that people, for abusing some of his officers: as Ambrose very plainly did
tell him, when he stepped between the Emperor and the Church, being most
unwilling that he should come in that sacred place, till he had made some
satisfaction: A Christian Prince should never have spoken such a bloody word,
to give so cruel and hard a sentence, against so many thousands of his own
subjects, as well innocent as nocent. He afterward grieved for it unfeignedly,
and in earnest, but his grief should have been before. Yet better late then
never: but the best sorrow which men can have, is that they grieve to do evil.

11 There should be a fellow-feeling, and sympathy in men's minds, a compassion
in a ruler, wishing that there were no cause of punishment to be suffered. And
this not for a fashion, and because they are words of course, but in sincerity
and simplicity; not with the tea^es of a Crocodile, or with the sighs of an
hypocrite, Johan. 18.38.
but truly and in heart. Else it is but a Pontius Pilates trick; who
pronounced that Christ was innocent, and that he was loath to give sentence,
but yet he did condemn him. Although the Jews were not Judges, 28.
yet they had learned that lesson, when they would not come into the judgment
hall, least they should be defiled with blood: and yet they never ceased to cry
out, that Christ might be crucified. The Evangelists do all declare, that
Annas and Cayphas who were the Priests, had a finger also in that work. As it
seems they left a pattern, for Popish Bishops their successors, to follow
when they were dead. For they are not behind their old masters, in
hypocritical carrying of things, as they do most lively show in their
Degradations of heretics, as they call them. For when the Ordinary or Deputy
of the Bishop, Sleidan. co^mentar. lib. 4.
does take off such attire, as Priests or Bishops or men of degree in schools
were clothed with, in their formality, and commits them to the secular power
as they term it, they seem to make an earnest request, that no violence may
be offered to their bodies or lives, when their full purpose and intent is no
otherwise, but that they should be burnt at a stake. This is filthy
dissimulation, and not unfit for them, who being wolves and foxes, yet will
shroud themselves in sheep clothing. Blood thirstinesse would gladly cover
it self with mildness: but it is but a rotten cloak.

If I should add any thing farther, by occasion of this desire to save Ionahs
life, it might be to warriors, who should not be preassing into the field for
every light cause. The old Heathen men had that care, that their wars should
be just, as the laws and orders of the Feciales, Liuius. lib. 1.
those Roman Heralds show. Christians should be more careful that they offer
not to draw the sword in battle, unless it be for God, or for religion, or in
their own defense, or for some important reason. And when the Lord shall send
a victory in the iustest cause, mercy beseems a man, and the sparing of all
that may be spared. It carries some meaning with it, that God would not give
David leave, to build a Temple unto him, 1 Chr. 28.3.
although he fought not but the Lords battles, and earnestly did desire to
accomplish that work himself. The reason thereof is assigned to be, because
he was a warrior, and consequently had shed much blood. Which conceit, or the
like as it should seem, was in the mind of Constantine that blessed Emperor,
who being enforced to fight against infidels, Eusebius. de vita Constantini. lib.
2.13. August. de ciuitate Dei 5.21. Ieseph. de bello Iudaic. lib. 6.14.
and idolaters, the enemies of his God, yet gave charge, that as few as might
be should be slain in the wars; nay did propose rewards to those that took
men alive. His predecessor Titus the Roman Emperor, was so gentle of
disposition, that Saint Austen thinks it not unfit, to call him a most sweet
Prince, and Josephus does acknowledge, that he sorowed most bitterly, when he
saw the great store of dead carcasses which perished at Jerusalem. It is
therefore likely, that he would have carried a milder hand upon the Jews his
prisoners, after the sacking of that City, Lib. 7.20.
then to cast so many thousands of them to the Lions, 2500. in die natali
Domitiani.
and other beasts to be devoured, as he did on the birthday of his brother
Domitian, and some other times besides: but that the heavy curse of God, which
boiled against the nation, did urge his gentle and calm nature, to bring them
to destruction. But this is no example for other men: they have no such
commission. It is not in our time* as it was in the days of Jeremy, Ierem.
48.10. Vt iugulent homines surgunt de nocte latrones.
that Cursed is he that keeps back his sword from blood, but blessed is he
that spares, and blessed is he that saves.

13 If the curse now light on any, it is on the murdering hand, which I would
that they in our days, would remember out of war, who either as wicked
robbers destroy life for a pray, or else as brauing minds (for so they esteem
themselves) do make no kind of conscience, to destroy the lives of others,
under pretense of reuengement of indignities, and disgraces offered to them. Is
hell prepared for murderers, and is it said that such shall be without, Apoc.
22.15.
that is, secluded from heaven, and from the new Jerusalem, and will thou for
showing of thy manhood, thrust thy self into this hell? The revenge which is
taken, is more upon thy soul, then on the body of thine enemy. Let not piety
be so dead, nor nature so extinguished, nor thy conscience be so seared, and
burnt every whit away, as to kill any wilfully. Rather learn of these
mariners, to bear loss, and suffer danger, to spare where might be spilling,
then to spill where should be sparing. Jonas had done them wrong, by coming
into their ship, and putting them to that trouble, and a verdict was gone out
from God against him, that he must be drowned; and yet notwithstanding, if it
were in their power to do it, they would return him good for evil: they even
quake and tremble at it, that they were wished to drown him. And thus have you
their auersenesse, and unwillingness to shed blood. Now let us go a little
farther.

They rowed to bring it to the land, but they could not.
14 Since they may not be at sea, they strive and they labor, to return to the
land: but this may not be neither. Here is more against them, then if all the
world were for them. Man will, but God will not: man roweth and God blows,
the arms go for the one, but the winds go for the other. Whether of these is
like to speed? God would not have the Prophet escape away so with the shot.
Since his fault is so great, it shall not be unpunished, least the creature
should learn to insult over the Creator, and flesh and blood should
counterpoise his will against the Almighty. Therefore to teach obedience, and
that nothing on earth, must be balanced with his ordinance, for the execution
of justice, he stirs up the sea, to resist the rowing of these silly men.
The sea wrought and was troublous. How much is here against how little? The
Ocean with his fury, against one wooden vessel. Great waves against small
strokes. This is it, whereof David can say, that they who make trial of it, do
see the works of the Lord, Psalm. 107.24.
and his wonders in the deep. This is it which if it were not restrained,
would return to cover the face of the earth, Psalm. 104.9.
whose waves do roar louder then all the Lions of the forest, whose gulfes do
sup up some, whose sands do sink down other, whose rocks have splitted in
pieces the hugest mightiest Carickes, that ever came on the water. Here is
Scylla and Charybdis, and those Symplegades which are so much feared. This is
it, in which one short tempest, has dashed whole fleetes and nauies, the one
ship against the other: which sometimes by inundation has overrun whole
countries, as might be showed at large. This is one of those two unbridled
elements, with whom there is no mercy: for so we say of fire and water.

15 This works against our Prophet, and what help can there be against the
fury of it? If the multitudes of mankind were assembled upon the land, if the
whole world were put together, yet these are not able to abate this violence.
If Pharao and all the horsemen which belong unto him, although he be the great
king of Egypt, Exodus 14.28.
come but into a corner of it (for so the red sea may well be named) they are
licked up, as if they had been no better then the grasshoppers, and thrown
dead on the shore. Xerxes the king of Persia, was a man of passing wit in the
mean while, Herodot. in Polymnia. lib. 7.
who, as Herodotus writes of him, understanding that the bridge which he had
made over the Hellespont, was broken by the great violence of the waves and
water, caused three hundred stripes to be given to the Ocean sea, in
reuengement of the wrong done unto him, and to teach it a better lesson,
against another time. There is no wrestling for sober men, with the sea, and
for drunken men much less. If he with all his army, had been close at hand to
help the poor Prophet, now in this storm, he must have been contented, to
have left him in that case as he found him. Gods charge was upon the waves, not
to give over from pursuing, until they had drowned him. And he who could
plague all Egypt, with flies and frogs and lice, the basest kind of vermin,
Exodus 8.1.17.24.
could easily give ability, to the sea to drench on Jonas.

16 Then it is no marvel, if they could not bring him back unto the land,
since they had both winds and waves and God himself against them. And against
them he will be, so long as that party, who is the offending sinner, shall rest
with them. In mine opinion, a most excellent point of doctrine is here
affoorded. Men oftentimes do strive and vehemently labor, with oars and
sails and every thing, even with all the powers of their mind, and with all
the strength of their body, to attain to their desire, of riches and
contentedness, and the more they do beat their brains, the farther they are
still from it. Early rising, faring hard, much devising and contriuing,
counsel and help from others: and yet it will not be. Some other with half
the labor, do attain to greater happiness. But as these mariners strive, and
cannot come at the land, they can neither get forward nor backward, so it is
with the desires of the other. Agg. 1.6. O^nus torquet.
God blows upon their money, it is put into a broken bag, or as the
Proverb is, Ocnus he wreatheth a rope, and an ass stands by and croppeth it
off. Their best means come to nothing: the good intent of their friends
proves, as if there were no such matter. Now what shall be said in this case?
Surely we must not rashly censure this state of other men. For God many times
does cross the actions of such as be dear unto him, either to try their
patience, or to confirm their faith, or to teach them obedience, or to make
them loath the world, or for some other reason best known unto himself. So
that we may not proudly or peremptorily judge. Then the conscience of each man,
who will not be wilfully blinded, is the best trial in this behalf. Descend
thou then into thy soul, and sift thy self thoroughly, what may be the reason
of it.

17 If thou be not as other men, and very little do prosper with thee, yea
although diligence be not wanting, see whether that some Jonas be not within
thy house, some lewd or ungodly man, some drunkard or some Atheist, that
draws a curse upon thee. See whether that some Jonas be not within thy heart,
who lies heavy upon thee as the lead, that thou can not arise. The Jonas of
disobedience, the Jonas of discontentednesse, the Jonas of want of faith, or
perhaps some more noted sin. As long as he has his abode with thee, do thou
row and thy mariners, do thou strive and thy friends, but thou shall not come
to the land. But cast once this Jonas out, the Jonas of adultery, the Jonas of
fornication, upon whom beggary waits many a time, the sin of a wanton mind,
the fault of a railing tongue, against God and his Ministers, the sin of an
envious eye, against those whom the Lord blesses, the roo^e of cruel
bitterness in inuenting lies and slanders. Let the Jonas of these faults, be
once thrown over ship-boord, and thy ship shall go like other: the Lord will
bless thy studies, he will prosper thy endeavors, and it shall appear unto
thee, how much he does respect thee. Otherwise the sea shall be troublesome,
and sail thou till thy heart do ache, thou shall not come to the shore. Aulus
Gellius in the third book of his Noctes Atticae, does tell of a goodly horse,
Gellius. lib. 3.9.
which belonged to one Seius, and thereof had his name to be called Equus
Seianus. This horse was never possessed by any one, but both himself and his
family did come to utter ruin. So Seius his first master did speed, and then
Dolabella who bought the horse for much money, drank of the self same cup.
Then Cassius was his owner, and after that Antonius, and the end of both these
was destruction. Understand that sin and wickedness, oftentimes does carry
this fortune with it, that it fretteth the goods of the owner, and makes
little or nothing to prove. Therefore if it be as pleasant to the flesh, and to
thy fancy, as the horse of Seius was comely to the eye, better it is to leave
it, then to have it: he is best that is farthest from it. And so now I come to
the second verse.

Wherefore they cried unto the Lord and said.
18 When these men see by all means, that the Prophet must go out, and that
there was no striving against so strong a stream, although it went against the
hair, nay although heart, soul and all, did go against the deed, yet they
resolve to do it: but it is with fear and trembling. It cannot be avoided:
necessity has no law: they must do it or do worse. Then since God ruled the
roast, and all was at his pleasure, they run poor souls to him. It is said
they cried unto him, which notes their earnest vehemence in uttering of their
prayers. They whisper not, but so loud as their best breath can reach, they cry
unto the Lord. They had seen the immediate power of the Israelites God upon
them: that makes them pray unto him, and that with doubled cries, We beseech
thee, we beseech thee. So important is affliction, and sight of present danger,
to stir up even idolaters, Exodus 10.17.
and wicked ones to devotion. If Pharao once feel the smart of the rod upon
him, he can be well content, if not himself, yet that Moses should pray unto
his God, to free him from the plague. 1. Reg. 21.27.
If Ahab by the speech of Elias, do hear of desolation about to fall upon
himself and his family, he will humble himself in sackcloth. This is an
argument worth the handling, as be many other things in this verse: but because
I have still desired, to go forward without confusion, and if I be not
deceived, it is the distinctest teaching, to put every thing in his proper
place, give me leave to touch that here, which is not handled elsewhere, and
which has most affinity with that, which already I have said: and to refer
other matters unto their peculiar places. Supra versu 2.
Then what crying is, I handled, when I opened the second verse. And for that
matter, that here they make choice of Iehoua, the true God of the world, as
also to dispute, whether they were converted unto the truth or no, just
occasion shall be offered, when I come to the sixteenth verse, Infra ver. 16.
where it is said that the men frared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a
sacrifice unto the Lord and made vows. Moreover what force affliction has, to
bring men unto piety and devotion, I declared in the fifth verse, where these
mariners by the violence of the tempest, Supra verse. 5.
were urged unto their prayers. And again, I shall have reason to touch it
farther, if God do send me ability to come to the second Chapter, where the
Prophet lying in the belly of the whale, makes his prayer to the Lord.

19 Then the matter which now remains for me, is the substance of their
prayer: the scope at which they do aim: which is, that since a necessity of
drowning him lies upon them, which they held as well to be unnatural, as
inhumane and impious, they would gladly be excused for it, that his death and
blood which was innocent unto them, might not be laid upon them. They do
profess themselves, to be but instruments of Gods good will, they had no
quarrel to him. And they in plain terms say, that his was innocent blood,
howsoever otherwise, whereunto they were not privy, yet in respect of them. In
their company he had not any way deserved to dye: his blood therefore to them
was innocent, and not gulity. See the abundant store of wisdom, which is in
the word of God:

Esaias. 26.21.
By the Prophet Esaias: Lo the Lord comes out of his place, to visit the
iniquity of the inhabitants of the earth upon them: and the earth shall
disclose her blood, and shall no more hide her slain. Numer. 35.33.
By Moses: Blood defiles the land, and the land cannot be cleansed, of the
blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it. The sentence
which fell upon Ioab was, 1. Reg 2.5.
that his head should not go down into his grave in peace, because he had
spilled the blood of two just men, of two innocents. It is a great comfort to
all men, that their lives are so far within the Lords protection, that if any
shall offer to take them away, God will require them of him. But there is a woe
to the murderer. All the righteous blood which was shed upon the earth, from
the blood of righteous Abel, Math 23.35.
to the blood of Zacharias, the son of Barachias, who was slain between the
Temple and the Altar, shall come upon the Jews, who were killers of the
Prophets. And if any one thing, it was blood that brought them to destruction.
For as when blood touched blood, the whole land was polluted, so if we will
believe Josephus, who lived in that time, the temple was razed down, for the
murders which were committed in it. The strangling of young infants, begotten
by fornication in our Abbeyes and Nunries, which since that time their bones
have discovered, in more places then one, may be very well supposed, among many
other sins, to have ouerturned those great buildings. Let the houses of
piuate men take heed by their example.

21 The descryings of this fault, which are both by fame, and by books
remembered to us, may be a good token, that in this behalf vengeance does not
sleep. As that the very birds of the air, and the very beasts of the field,
have helped to lay that open. Vide Andream Libauiu^. De cruentatione cadauerum.
But among Gods secret works, showed for the repressing of that sin, there
is none more strange, then the bleeding of the person slain at the presence
of the murderer. Which although it be not Scripture, yet that many times it
falls out, I fear not to believe, by reason of a good consent of nations,
some later some more ancient, whom experience as it seems did teach that
lesson. For besides a general opinion in our own land, long derived by descent
from hand to hand, the low-countreymen do so hold it, as by Leuinus Lemnius in
the second of his Natural secrets, Leuinus Le^nius de occultis naturae
miraculis 2.7.
is made plain, and that by a collection from the trial of their magistrates:
where accepting the thing, as undoubtedly true, and without all kind of
controversy, he inquireth the reason of it. So does Andreas Libauius another
learned man, who has also made a treatise upon that argument. In Buchanans
Scottish story, Buchanan. Hist. Scot. lib. 6.
we find an example of this. When by the procurement of one Donaldus, king
Duffus had been slain, the worker of the mischief, caused those who had done
it, in no case to come in sight, least the doers should be disclosed by the
blood of the corse. That is a testification also, that this is an ancient
conceit among the Scottish people. Howsoever that be, much experience has
taught, that this cruelty is very strangely detected, and many times revenged
too, by courses extraordinary. Sometimes where man forbeareth, there God does
show his hand in a more immediate sort, as Procopius says that he did on
Theodoricke king of the Goths, who slew Boe^tius and Symmachus, Procopius de
bello Gothico. 1.
two both noble and innocent persons. But afterward, the guilt of that sin
sticking fast in his conscience, he grew to an imagination, that the head of a
certain fish that was set upon his table, was the head of Symmachus, which
gaped and yawned upon him. Upon which conceit he trembling and quaking, fell
into a sharp sickness, and quickly thereof dyed. Some other times it is
deferred, but yet the punishment never resting, comes tumbling on at last, as
Euagrius in the fifth of his Ecclesiastical story, Euagrius Hist. Eccl. lib.
5.3.
does tell of one Addaeus, which in his time was reputed one of the special
friends of the Emperor Justinian. This man when he had escaped the law for one
murder, yet was afterward put to death, for a fact wherewith he was charged,
but in truth had never done it. So the Lord did change the matter, and the Lord
did change the time, but the punishment was not changed. He escaped for that
which he did, and dyed for that which he did not. Sometime God does punish the
fathers sin upon the children, as he did David's murder upon Vriah, on his
own sons Absolon and Ammon. These mariners might hear of such examples
among the Gentiles. For Gods finger is every where: he is Lord over all the
earth; and therefore they might well fear, least that themselves should
perish, for the blood of this dying Prophet.

22 The second thing which I note is, that although they were enforced against
their will to destroy him, yet because the deed it self was in his own quality
unlawful, they cannot satisfy themselves, but still make scruple of it.
Although there were a kind of commandment from God, that it should be done (for
they had signs to that purpose) yet they doubt at it, and grieve to do it. Oh
how far does the conscience of these weak ones, exceed the minds of many now,
who think that they may do unlawful things, if they be enforced to it, by any
temporal reason, not having for their warrant a notice from God, as these men
here had, but all piety clean against them. Such are they, who will not refuse
to go to the service of an idol, if their Prince should command them. This was
the great persuasion, which was used by Magnus a noble man, toward diverse
Christians; Theodoret. Hist. Eccl. 4.20.
that they should embrace the faith, and opinions of the Arrians, because Valens
the Emperor, had made laws to that purpose. Suppose says he to them, that
your religion be very good, yet if you be enforced to turn unto another your
God will forgive it to you. And much more of that matter. Such are they, who
being urged by nothing, but the concupiscence of their own affections, will do
things most ungodly. Steal to maintain their bravery: they cannot else live
like men. Ly, for to match their enemy, they may reach him so in policy. In
like sort, wrestle against their conscience, in oppugning of the righteous, in
slaundering of the innocent, because he is not for the^, he stands sometimes
in their light, although they know that they do amiss, and that they shall
answer for it. This is a small necessity, my idleness or my wantonness, my
engrocing of filthy gain, to make me do that, which mine own heart knows,
that Gods book daily forbids to me. Although they were deeply persuaded,
that it was the Lords determination* yet what doubting is in these seamen, to
do a thing unlawful? for so it is in it self, but Gods will does make it
lawful. To this will they the^ yield

23 And this is the third point, which I observed in them, thou have done as it
pleases thee. They do not accuse God here, and lay the fault on him, as men
commonly use to do. We all have learned that of Ada^, The woman which thou
gave me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat. Genes. 3.12. August. de
Genesi contra Manicheos. lib. 2.
Not the woman simply says S. Auste^, but the woman which thou did give me.
For nothing is so familiar as for sinners to lay upon God, that whereof they be
accused. These do not so in this place, but assume that to be righteous, which
God will have to be done, and because they see him will it, and that he will
take no nay, therefore they know it is just, and accordingly yield unto it. This
is a sound direction, for man to submit his will, to the will of his maker,
that as we are taught to pray, O Lord thy will be done, Matthew. 6.10. cap.
26.39.
so we yield unto it in mildness. He is wiser then we be, and therefore let
him lead. Not my will in my manhood, but thy will in thy Godheade, be done
says Christ our Savior. 1. Sam. 3.18.
Let the Lord says old Eli, do as seems good in his own eyes. Although
therefore any thing be unlawful, and seem unto us to be unnatural, yet if God
do command it, we ought not to resist. It was unlawful for Abraham to kill,
but more unnatural to kill his only son, and that with his own hands, yet
when the Lord commanded, he was ready to do the^ both. Let other learn this
lesson thence, that if their friends or children, be as dear to them, as Isaac
was unto his father Abraham, yet if God take them hence, they say in all
obedience, the will of the Lord be done, or with these shipmen here, thou have
done as it pleases thee. The like we should say of sickness, banishment, loss
of goods, or whatsoever else in this world. Although it go as much against us,
as it did against these men, to drown the Prophet Jonas, yet if God do require
it, let us do as it pleases him. And so let us pray unto him, first that he
will keep us always from bloud-guiltinesse, and from murder; and then that
he will give us grace, to make conscience of such deeds, as are against his
word; but that evermore we may learn, to submit our selves to his pleasure,
that walking here as dear children, we may be brought along to the inheritance
of his glory. Unto the which o Father bring us, for thine own son Christ
his sake, to whom with thee and the holy Spirit, be laud and praise for ever.

THE VIII. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 2. Reverence to the Prophet even in his death. 4. Such
reverence is not borne to our Preachers. 8. Gods creatures are all at his
beck. 9. The magistrate punishing sin turns away Gods plagues. 10. Christ's
death appeaseth the Fathers wrath. 11. Comfort to us by Christ's death 13. The
punishment of others should make us tremble 16. The vows of seamen. 17. The
temporary faith of the mariners. 19. Hypocrites can make show of religion. 20.
We must persevere in good things.

Jonah. 1.15.16. So they took up Jonah, and cast him into the sea, and the sea
ceased from her raging. Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered
a sacrifice to the Lord, and made vows.


YOu have oftentimes heard of our Prophet on the sea, now his turn is to be in
the sea. Jonas flying is past, and now comes Jonas dying, for in his drowning
he could expect nothing else but death. He who would needs to the water, shall
have enough of the water, if he know what is enough. His disobedient negligence
may not be slipped over, but God who was fled from, will find him: God offended
will strike him: he must be made an example to all that come after him, to
perform with faithfulness, what so ever the Lord shall command them. The
poor mariners his ship-fellowes, will they, nill they, are the men that must
do execution. Their humanity must yield to the purpose of the Deity, their good
nature to necessity, Eleazar an old Jew, who lived about the time of our
Savior Christ, does say that these mariners, to show their aduisednesse in
proceeding to his death, before they drowned him, diued the Prophet up to the
chinne oftentimes in the water, and still the sea was quiet: but when they
lifted him up again to take him out, it fell to his raging again, so that
being every way assured, that he must suffer, they resolve for his drowning.
Howsoever this be true, or not, for I cannot aduouch it, it is a case
undoubted, that they had maine presumptions, and inducements enough, to throw
him over shipboarde, and yet they most unwillingly laid violent hands upon him.
Besides all that which is gone before, the first words of my text including the
manner of their deed, will make that plain unto us. They took up Jonas.

Hieronim. in Ion. 1. Non dixit arripuerunt non ait inuaserunt, sed tulorunt
quasi cum obsequio and honor portantes.
2 It is Hieromes observation in his Commentary on this text, that they did take
up Jonas, not hastily did snatch him, not rudely fall upon him, not offer
outrage violently unto him, but they lifted him up with honor, which the word
Nasa will well bear, being both to lift and to honor. They lifted him with an
honor, they used reverence to his person in the midst of that extremity, which
was to befall him. Such was the strong impression of his calling in their
minds, as if they had read that verse of the Psalmist, Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Which opinion in all ages has obtained
that force, (...) Psalm. 105.15.
I say not with the Jews only, nor I say not with the Christians, of whom a
Leuite and a Priest have been accounted fathers; but with infidels and
idolaters, as not only Churchmen have been preserved from ill usage, but have
also been entertained in an honorable manner. Iezabel was an idolater, and a
woman of much evil, yet she so plentifully extended her bounty to those, 1.
Reg. 18.19.
whom she reputed as Prophets to her God, although it were but that block
Baal, that four hundred of them were maintained at her own table. Numer. 22.5.
Balaam had but a name to belong to the Lord, and how honorable an Embassage
did king Balac send unto him? Our mariners in this lesson are not at all to
seek. How would they have esteemed Jonas leading an innocent life, who so
highly did respect him, when he was ready for his sin to endure a death? They
touch him with a love, they handle him with a reverence* they lift him us with
an honor, and all these things in earnest.

3 Caligula that infamous Emperor of Rome, as Philo Iudaeus writes of him,
Philo Iudaeus de legatione ad Ca^u^.
had a nephew of Tiberius his prodecessour, appointed by the same Tiberius, to
reign jointly with him. The incompatible nature of Caligula, could endure no
such companion. Therefore as tyrants use to do, this young Prince must needs
dye. But mark the manner of it, how cleanly it was carried. He must do the
murder upon himself, with his own hands. Although there were diverse Nobles,
and great Captains, which stood by and looked on, yet they might not help to
rid the poor creature out of his pain, because that was a most unlawful
deed: yea a thing wicked and unseemly, that the posterity of great Emperors,
should dye by the hands of other. Nolebat iuris videri oblitus, in patranda
summa iniuria and sanctitatis in scelere meminerat.
Whereupon Philo concludes of him, that in committing a high injury, he would
seem to remember an equity, and to profess a sanctity and solemnity in his
villainy. Such untoward hypocrisy is not in these men here, but in truth and
just dealing, they would not spill his blood: and since that he must by their
hands receive a doom, they perform what they are enforced with honor unto
him, but with honor in themselves. Solinus cap. 66.
They rather may be compared to the men of Taprobana, of whom Solinus tells,
that they did use to choose their kings by election, and not to derive them
down by an hereditary line, from the father to the son. When they had made
choice of their king, they honored and obeyed him in all good sort, while he
remained just and careful over them. But if once he grew intolerable in his
regiment by injustice and tyranny, they took away from him, both his kingdom
and his life. Herein (as I must confess) they took no pleasure, but clean
contrariwise, they did it with a reverence, and regard to his person. Not any
one laid hands upon his sacred body, but by a common consent, the use of all
necessary things, was interdicted to him, yea very speech with his nearest
friends, and in that sort he died. So the very heathens did bear respect to
some sorts of men, for the dignity of their calling; but to none more then to
their Priests, to none more then to their Prophets.

4 They had evermore an opinion, that the persons of such men, were acceptable
to God, that they were such as were singled out, from the common condition of
other: that they were richly adorned with good gifts from above, and those to
whom the supreme power was accustomed to impart his will, by inspiration or
secret revelation. And in brief they thought these the Oracles of his voice,
and remembrancers to other, of such things as were to be done or avoided. Then
in tumults and seditions, although otherwise tempestuous fury did rage, yet
the lewdest sort of tumultuous people did hold their hands from these, as may
be showed in Antiquity, no less quaking to touch them, then did Iether the
son of Gedeon, in the eight of the book of Judges, Iudic. 8.20.
to slay Zeba and Zalmana, a boy two mighty warriors. Of this our Jonas had
good experience even to the full, who did find that special favor, among men
inhumane and barbarous in comparison, that although the sea did descry him, and
the wind made strongly after him; although the lo^cast had discovered him, nay
his own mouth had condemned him; although his desire was to dye, so to appease
the fury conceived by the Lord, yet notwithstanding they refuse to destroy him,
and when they cannot avoid it, with no despite to his person, but with
reuerence^ they perform it.

5 When I look into the world, and this age wherein we live, and compare with
these heathen men, the usage of our Christians, toward those who in their
places, do bear the (...) of Jonas, nay in very deed do bring a message,
far better and far sweeter then ever Jonas did, because his word was wrath,
but theirs is reconcilement in the blood of Christ our Savior, I find a very
great difference. I speak it with some grief, even for the Gospels sake, which
by this means is reproched, I find a very great difference. For in the
countries abroad, it is a matter not strange, that painful and careful
pastors, who labor in the word and doctrine, and therefore by the testimony
of Saint Paul, 1. Tim. 5.17.
are worthy of double honor: who study to frame themselves to the rule of the
Apostle, to show themselves examples of patience, Cap 6.11. Tit. 2.7.
of long suffering, of mildness, of sound doctrine, of industry in Gods
business are vilefied and conteinned, are sl^^ndered and reproched* being made
as the filth of the world, 1 Cor 4.13.
the of scouring of all things. Whereof there needs no farther witness, then
the libellings which in some places have been made against the Preachers, for
rebuking of sin, the rimes and meeters which elsewhere have been song and
resounded out: the manifold cauillations, and false exceptions taken to that
which they teach, yea sometimes reports most constantly avouched, of this or
that point of doctrine delivered openly, which is both absurd and monstrous.
These things partly arise by ignorance, and want of judgment in discerning
causes aright: but the truest and most ordinary cause, is the lack of zeal to
God, and of charity toward man, and of dutiful regard to those who should not
be wilfully grieved, but esteemed as such who wait for men's souls, Heb. 13.17.
and must give an account, which they would be glad to do with joy. Hereunto
may be joined, the pulling and renting away of the maintenance of the minister:
that whereas Ethnicke people, yea and our forefathers too in the days of
superstition, did think that they could never be too prodigal, in heaping
much of their substance, on those who were no better then blind guides, now
clean contrary he is held the most wise and prudent man, who either by
cunning devise, can steal something secretly from the portion of the Leuite,
or with strong hand will maintain, his open and gross oppression.

6 And if the iniuried person taking knowledge of the wrong, which is
smartingly done unto him, seem but to think how he may procure due
satisfaction, although it be by entreaty, his actions are straight pryed into,
his fame is called in question, he is generally reproched for a hard man, and a
covetous, for a peace-breaker and contentious. Now see whether this be the
regardfull carriage, which should for his masters sake be borne to him, who
stands between God and the people, whose hands do reach forth that
sacrament, which is the representation, not only of the Communion of the Saints
each with other, but of the union also of them with Christ their head. For the
office which he bears, for the message which he brings, let him have that
immunity, that if thou will not honor him, and regard him as thou ought,
yet do no ill unto him, nay say to him nothing evil. Cyprian. Epist. lib. 3.9.
When Saint Cyprian once was informed, that a Deacon had given ill and railing
speeches, against Rogatianus who was of eminent place in the Church, his
spirit could not endure it, but he writes back again, that the Deacon should
be enforced to do some penance for that his foul abuse. And yet this man was
by vocation a kind of spiritual person, who therefore had some more
prerogative then a common body, to rebuke sharply if he saw any thing amiss.
But in these days men go farther, then to use unseemly speeches, when they
are ready in bitterness of heart, not to stay till occasion be offered, but to
wait opportunity, and spy, nay seek means true or false, of turning the
Prophets of the Lord out of their livings and houses. As Jonas might not rest
and be harbored in the ship, so they shall be removed: as he was thrown into
the sea, where in the reason of man nothing was to be expected, but that he
should drown and perish, so these shall be cast out into the wide world, as
men without a place, wherein to rest their head, so that for ought which their
adversaries intend, they may famish for want of food. But whereas all was done
to Jonas unwillingly and forced, and at the last cast, they honored him; men
of our age do take their victories over their Pastors, as things to be
triumphed on: they hold those acts as their crown, their glory and
commendation much to be boasted of. When in truth there is no one thing, more
infamous in the eyes of all good men, or more to be shamed at, then for sheep
to arise against the careful shepherd, the children and congregation, against
their spiritual Father.

1. Sam. 22.17
7 We do find in the book of God, that an everlasting blot is laid on wicked
Doeg, for one part which he played, although he were an Edomite and no
Israelite, and therefore the more likely to commit any such outrage. When Saul
in his malicious humor, picked a quarrel against Ahimelech and the Priests,
for giving food to David in his necessity, and commanded such as attended
upon him, to run on them and slay them, not one man of all the Israelites,
dared to lay hands upon them, but Doeg the Edomite was he, who spilt their
innocent blood. This as an everlasting spot, is registered of him to all
posterities. It is for infidels and Edomites to do such deeds as these. But
Christian men should submit them selves, with patience and mildness, to the
moderate reproofs of their wise and careful Pastors, and not to be offended
with them, who labor to do them good, by the word and by their prayers. It is a
good memorandum, which Saint Cyprian has in this case: Cyprian. Sermon. de
Lapsis. Irasceris ei qui abs te auertera iram Dei nititur, ei minaris qui pro
te Dei misericordiam deprecatur.
Thou art angry with that man who labors to turn away the wrath of God from
thee, he speaks of the Minister, thou threatnest him who desires the mercy
of God upon thee: who feels that wound of thine which thou thy self do
not feel, who sheddeth those tears for thee, which thou thy self do not
shed. And God knows that the good Pastor does most diligently perform these
duties, that is, grieve to see ought amiss, and pray that all may be well, and
take pleasure in the true and spiritual welfare of his charge, as well as in
his own* Let him therefore be esteemed as a friend, and reverenced as a
father: I will press this note no farther.

They cast him into the sea, and the sea ceased from her raging.
8 Saint Chrysostom in that one Homily, Chrysostom. Homil. in Ionam.
which he has upon this Prophet, does note that by the courtesy which these
mariners showed to Jonas, and their very great unwillingness, that he should
come to destruction, God would teach the Prophet to have mercy upon the
Ninevites, as these men had on him: that he should by his preaching, reclaim
them from their sins, and so save them from ruin: which because God more at
large lays down in the fourth chapter, Jonah. 4.6.
in the parable of the gourd, I do defer it thither. But the mercy of these
men here, is enforced to turn to justice. They are compelled to leave him
whom they willingly would keep. Jonas goes over shipboord, where behold
appears a miracle, the sea ceasseth from her fury. That which roared so
before, and was so disquieted with winds, which wrought and was so troublous,
which so becalmed them with a storm, that forward they might not get, and
backward they could not go, that ceasseth upon the sudden. The disturbance was
not natural, nor the quieting is not natural, because it comes in a moment.
It was not by degrees, not one step after another, as in tempests which are
ordinary, but in that very instant when he was thrown into the water. So
miraculous is Gods power, to have the mightiest creatures, to move and rest at
his beck. If he command the world to be drowned with water, Genes 7.11.
the Ocean shall break forth, the fresh springs shall gush out, the very
floud-gates of heaven, shall be opened with a word, and so all the earth shall
perish. If he bid his servant Moses but stretchfoorth his hand, Exodus 14.16.
the red sea shall part in two, and stand up as a wall on the right side, and
as a wall on the left. This is a great comfort to the faithful, that they
serve such a master, who so commands all the frame of heavenly and earthly
bodies, that he turns them and windeth them, as with a hook in their
nostrels, and leads them so up and down, that nothing shall assault them
without Gods special pleasure. It is he that made the sea here to cease from
her raging, and boiling with such violence.

9 But the reason why it then stayed, was because it had effected the thing
which it desired. The fugitive being taken, the pursuer is now quiet. It is
punishment inflicted on the sinner, which in temporal causes allayeth the
Lords anger. When Achan had his hire, Joshua. 7.25. and 8.1. 2. Sam. 21.14
the Israelites did proceed in their conquest as before. Saules cruelty to
the Gibeonites, did procure three years of dearth, to be sent upon the land,
in the time of David: but when once the posterity of the offending sinner, was
hanged up by the wronged parties, Gods indignation toward the land was
appeased. Princes and Judges have here a pathway laid out ready to them,
wherein they ought to walk. If God do awaken a land, with a rod of his
displeasure, be it famine, or be it pestilence, or be it the sword of the
enemy, after a view taken of the actions, and ouersights of their people, let
the^ purge their land from iniquity, by cutting off malefactors, and breaking
the back of sin, and wilful transgression. There is no sacrifice more
pleasing in the eyes of the Lord of hosts, then that those who dishonor him,
should be suppressed by justice. 1593
He did whippe us not long since with a rod of pestilent sickness: this year
he threateneth otherwise, with some fear of a pinching famine. 1594
Very likely it is, that if gross faults were removed from amongst our
nation, his wrath would cease with the cleansing, as the sea did with receiving
our Jonas. If the usury of the city, the oppression of the Landlord, the
symonie of the Clergy, the extortion of the Patron, the idleness in the
Minister, the want of love in the Communaltie, and security in all sorts, did
but so much decay, or so fast diminish, as it has increased lately, Gods wrath
would turn to favor, and we should more feel his blessings.

10 But here in the ceassing of the tempest, by the drowning of the Prophet, we
are notably put in mind of him, of whom our Jonas is a figure in this case. It
has been mentioned before, Matthew. 12.40
out of the twelfth of Matthew, that his lying in the whales belly, was a sign
of the death of Christ, by the witness of Christ himself; as his casting up
again, was a sign of his resurrection. The dying of Jonas alone for all, does
signify the same thing, as was taught out of the twelfth verse, of this
present chapter which I now handle. Jonah. 1.12.
But nothing in plainer sort does express unto us, the force of the suffering
of our Savior, then the ceassing of the storm, at the drowning of the
Prophet: even as Gods wrath was appeased, by the death of the unspotted lamb.
By the fall of our first parents, we all were fallen from grace. We had
changed not a Niniue for a Tharsus, but a Paradise for a torment, and a heaven
for a hell. The coldness of our disobedience, was followed with heat of
justice; not winds and waves did make after us, to take vengeance on our
bodies, but a weight of angry fury, of purpose to destroy our souls. Not one
ship but a world was endaungered in this hazard. The Gentile and the Jew,
the civil man and Barbarian, were every moment ready to be drowned in
desperation. In this state of extremity, God pitieth forlorn man, and sends
a better ghest then Jonas was, among those who are passengers thorough this
vale of misery. And although this ghest was clothed with humanity, like an
ordinary passenger, yet in this he differed from Jonas, that our Prophet alone
had sinned, when all his fellows were free, but Christ alone was innocent,
when all his fellows pleaded guilty.

11 We can never sufficiently admire the effectual force of him, Johan. 11.50
who quieted this great rage. Justice called for a death, take my death quoth
the Savior: let one dye for the people, the head for all his members. Just.
lib. 2.
An Oracle had once answered, that either the king of the Atheniens, or else
their army must perish. Codrus who was then king, never stood or staggered at
it, but gave his life for his citizens, to save them from destruction. The king
of men and Angels, had this choice put unto him, that either himself or his,
the mystical head or body, should undergo a death. He took the turn on
himself, and so wrought a reconcilement, from his Father toward his Church.
So, by his stripes we are healed. Isa. 53.5.
The chastisement of our peace was upon him. So he being the Lamb of God, has
taken away the sins of the world. Johan. 1.29.
He has freed us and delivered us from the wrath to come. His blood speaks
better things, then that crying blood of Abell, that cried vengeance from the
earth: this from the cross cries redemption, reconcilement and atonement. So
he has by his blood bought a spouse unto himself, whom else he had not had.
By the dying of Christ, the Church is made, as Eve was made by Adams sleeping,
August. in Ioh. Tract. 9. Dormit Adam vt fiat Eua: moritur Chrisiu^ vt fiat
Ecclsia. Leuit. 16.8.
which is Saint Austens comparison. The Adamant is so hard a stone, that it can
be softened with nothing, but the blood of a goat. Man's heart was grown so
hard, man's case was grown so hard, that it could be lenified by nothing, but
by the blood of him, whom the skape-goate in Leuiticus, so lively did
represent.

12 But to procure our peace, he plucked wars on himself; and what we should
have borne, his humanity did sustain with a lovely change of our parts. For
the unrighteous sins, and the righteous man is punished: Augustine. in
Meditationibus. Pe^cat iniquus and punitur iustus: d^linquit reus, and vapulat
innocens.
the guilty man did offend, and the innocent one is beaten, the ungodly had
transgressed, and the godly was condemned: what the wicked man had deserved,
that did the good one suffer, what the servant had endomaged, that did the
master pay: and what man had committed, that he a God took upon him. This
brings a way to the wandering, this brings life to the dying, and safety to
the perishing. For his loss was our gain, Ambros. in Psalm. 36. Christi mo^s
vita est: ipsius vulnus vita est ipsius sanguis vita est: ipsius sepultura vita
est.
his impouerishing our enriching. The worst which was on Christ, was the best
help unto us: for his death was our life, his wounding was our life, his
bleeding was our life, his burying was our life, his rising again our life, as
Saint Ambrose truly notes. This is the assured comfort, which the wounded
conscience has: although he be fallen in Adam, yet he is risen in Christ:
although the law do condemn him, yet the Gospel does acquit him: although
generation does kill him, yet regeneration saves him: although the tempest of
Gods wrath be ready to swallow him, yet notwithstanding the casting in of this
Jonas, procures a calm unto him. And so having Satan maistered, and hell
gates shut against him, he dares to present himself before the throne of
grace, with cheerfulness and boldness, in the confidence of his passion, who
has entered into the heaven, and made way to his father. This is it which
holds us when we are living: this is it which helps us, when we are dying.
A God become a man: the celestial made terrestrial: our judge become our
Jesus, to cease the rage of the sea, to stop the wrath of the Father. We find
this accomplished in our Jesus: but we may learn it in Jonas, whose mariners
found their best ease, by putting him to pain. For the casting forth of him,
did put them from their peril: when the sea once had him for whom it looked,
that immediately was quiet. And now let us see what effects all this wrought in
the beholders.

Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, etc.
13 No marvel if this miracle did make them quake: for what flesh can choose
but tremble, to see and feel his hand, who shakes the mighty ceders? Psalm.
29.5.
It is written of the Israelites, that when they saw Gods power, which he
showed in drowning the Egyptians, Exodus 14.31.
and their king Pharao, in the midst of the sea, they began to fear the Lord,
and believe his servant Moses. They saw that God could serve them, as he had
served their pursuers, that all power is his own, that vengeance and
protection, are in every place at his pleasure. So these mariners had
experience, how grievous in Gods sight iniquity was, even in the^ who did
peculiarly belong unto him: how he could follow one to the sea: deprehend him
with a tempest: discover him with a lot: and would not rest, till his life had
made amends for his folly. How must their heart needs quake? how must their
conscience tremble, to think on their own transgressions? their commissions and
omissions, the number whereof was great, the hugeness whereof was horrible?
Luc 23.31.
If it were thus with the green wood, how should it be with the dry? If an
Israelite had such measure measured unto him, how should a Gentile escape? If a
Prophet were so punished, how should such a profane man as all they were, bear
that burden? Signs and wonders and strange punishments, are of force and
power, to make men look backward into their own souls, and make application
to their own consciences.

14 In which respect, the dullness of our age is much to be deplored. We behold
as in a glass, the almighty power of Gods justice. We read it, and hear it
read out of the book of the Lord, which to those who are faithful, is as
present, as if their very eyes did behold it. For where faith makes a doubt,
there the sense is never satisfied; and those will not believe, no not if one
should come from the dead, Luke 16.31.
who have Moses and the Prophets, and give no credit to them. The case was
tried in the Jews of Chorazin and Bethsaida, Matthew. 11.21
who saw many of Christ's miracles, and yet remained unbelievers. Out of the
holy Scriptures we have heard of strange examples, of Gods punishment toward
sin, Genes. 7.21. Cap. 19.24. Numer. 21.6 Leuit. 10.2. 2. Sam. 6.7.
a whole world drowned for security: cities more then one, for their lusts
sake, consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven: the Israelites stung with
serpents, for their murmuring in the wilderness. Nadab and Abihu blasted to
death, for offering with strange fire. Vzzah stricken that he dyed, for
touching of the Arc, Jonah. 1.15.
which did not belong unto him. Jonas drowned for refusing, to go and denounce
Gods judgments: a whole land cursed in the prophecy of Malachi, Malach. 3.8.9.
for sacrilege, and detaining the portion of the Leuite. These things are
written for our example: for us I say, on whom the ends of the world are come.

15 These and the like things, are often sounded into our ears: but do we
learn thereby to fear the Lord exceedingly? do we apply this plaster, by
remembrance of our own ways, that in such or such a deed, I and I have
sinned more then these; I transgressed in wilfulness, with such a provocation,
and with such a one in infirmity. I were best to withdraw my foot, from
doubling of such lewd crimes. I may preasse upon God too far, and ouerlay his
patience, with mine incroching boldness. Who is he that makes such use, of
the fearful and terrible works of God? Who takes these things to heart? The
deed declares the mind, as the fruit makes the tree known. Does the wanton
leave his wantonness, and the adulterer hate his lust? Does the swearer of our
age, remember that his blasphemies are written up in a book, and sealed until
the day of vengeance? Does Jonas go to Niniue, and rebuke the great and small,
with that spirit wherewith he should? No: but either we will say nothing, like
men who cannot speak; and so leaving it to younger persons, we our selves
grow to a desuetude, which afterward we peradventure would be willing to leave
and cannot: or if we speak at all, it is but a bare and cold narration,
neither aiming to teach for faith, nor to infourme for manners. We do not cut
at the root of sin: we seek not to warm the conscience. Where is our fear
of the Lord? our reverence to his sanctity? our submission to his majesty?
Yet well fare these silly mariners: one example could work with them, to move
them exceedingly for the time, and to cause them to sacrifice to the Lord.

16 In opening of which words, and by a consequent of this whole verse, I must
profess unto you, that here I find among the interpreters, more difference in
opinions, then in any thing yet in this Prophecy of Jonas. The text says,
that they offered sacrifice, Gualther. in hunc locum.
but what or where, it speaks not. Some think not at Jerusalem, the place
then only appointed for sacrifice to the true God: but wheresoever they first
landed. Arias Montanus thinks that they offered it at Jerusalem, Ar.
Montanus in hunc locum. Act. 8.27.
which thing was sometimes done by the Gentiles, as by the Chamberlain to
Candace the Queen of Aethiopia. The Chaldee Paraphrase has, that they said
they would offer sacrifice. Hierome thinks that what they did, Hieron in hunc
locum.
was at sea and not at land. They made such spiritual sacrifice, as the inner
man could afford: thanks giving, and supplication, and repentance and such
like. Osee. 14.3. Psalm. 51.17.
The Prophet Osee does call these the calves of our lips. And David he
speaks of them saying, the sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit. Howsoever
it is not much to the history, whether it were the one or the other. The holy
Ghost does let us know, that the motive which they saw in this action, was so
mighty, that it wrong from them a remorse, and so possessed them for the time,
that compunction and devotion was within them, and without them, and as men
thoroughly mortified, they refused to do nothing, which was any way religious.
They either fell to their prayers, which is a spiritual sacrifice, or offered
something else, when they came to the land, or at least they professed that
they would do it. But it is a case without controversy, that they made vows
to the Lord. A thing common among mariners, and passengers at the sea, when
they fear any shipwreck. If they can ouer-stand that journey, and escape well
from that danger, they will fast, or give alms, or dedicate some great thing
to the Lord. They spare not to speak in the fit, although they never mean it.
Yea and it may be, that in the extremity they resolve to perform their vow,
but the danger being once past and gone, if they should be urged to accomplish
it, they would think themselves as il used, as those two were by Caligula;
Dion. Hist. lib. 59.
of whom Dion reports, that when the said Caligula was sick, they thinking
to get much money, as a reward for their great love to the Emperor, vowed that
on condition he might live, they themselves would dye to excuse him. When
indeed he was recovered afterward, he took them at their word, and put them
to death, least they should break their vow, and prove perjured persons. Of
likelihood, these thought themselves to be used but unkindly, and so would
these vowing shipmen, if they should be forced to performance. But he that will
see more of this, let him read Erasmus his Dialogue, which he calls by the
title of Naufragium. Erasmus in Colloquio.
What the Scripture thinks of vows, and what our Church maintains, which
is a better argument, to be handled against our Popish Votaries, I may touch
hereafter, when I come to the ninth verse of the second Chapter. For at this
time my meaning is to discourse another matter.

17 It is a great controversy, whether this exceeding fear, do intend a true
conversion from Gentilisme to the Lord, from idolatry to true piety; and in
this also, the best Expositors do very much dissent. Some think them to be
become earnest Proselites, Ar. Montan.
and men turned to the Jewish faith: that their fear was sincere from the
heart, and perseuerant in them unto the end, and that their sacrifices were
accepted, and all this so much the rather, because the text does say, that they
feared the Lord Jehovah: Caluinus.
not an idol, but the true God. Some other put a condition, that if the heart
were justified with a purifying faith, then their vows and sacrifices, were
acceptable and pleasing to the Lord. If otherwise, then it was but a vizard,
put on for a little time, Danaeus.
and so thrown off afterward. A third sort are of opinion, that their
repentance was only temporary, like the seed which is mentioned in the parable
of Christ, Matthew. 13.5.
to be sown on the stony ground, which took root for a little time, and
afterward did wither away. I do approve this last sentence, thinking that
although they feared, and took upon them some religion, yet this was not
sufficient to apprehend true grace: for they had not heard by the Prophet, of
the Messiah Christ, in whom is all remission and washing away of sin. Act.
4.12.
Only the wrath of God in punishing, is made known unto them, which is enough
to put the unbeliever, into a trembling fear, as we know that Felix did quake,
Cap. 24.26.
to hear Saint Paul speak of righteousness, of temperance, and of the
judgment to come: and yet Felix was an hypocrite. Neither is this opinion
crossed by that, where it is said that they feared Jehovah, for the reprobates
do quake at the true God, with a kind of seruility, as the devils of hell do
likewise. The awe wherein Pharao stood, Jacob. 2.19. 1. Reg. 21.27.
when he let the people go, was to the God of Moses. Ahab hearing the
threatening of Elias, did humble himself to the Lord, but it was not with due
continuance. Dan. 3.32.
The fear of the God of Sidrach, of Misach and Abednego, was fallen on
Nabuchodonosor, when beholding the deliverance of those three children, out of
the fiery furnace, he gave forth a proclamation for the service of their Lord.
And yet it is not to be doubted, but these men were reprobates.

18 These sea-people in like sort, might well think of the Lord, and yet not
leave their idolatry. The people placed in Samaria, 2. Reg. 17.3^.
were by the Lions which destroyed them, enforced to serve the Lord: yea the
text does say that they did fear him: but they worshipped their idols also,
and so it had been as good not at all, Tertullian. in Apologet.
as to be never the nearer to him. The Romans would have had Christ, to be in
the number of their Gods, placed in their Pantheon: but they cannot away to
leave their old Gods, whom they had before. Such halfe-seruice could not profit
these mariners in this place. This was an insufficient comprehension of the
Lord, without sound application in particular, by a true faith, which teaches,
that God alone is to be adored by his creatures, and that with a single heart,
and an understanding knowledge, and perseverance unto the end. Which because
the wicked do want, howsoever upon occasions of afflictions, and strange
wonders, they seem humbled for the time, yet afterward with the dog they
return to their vomit, 2. Pet. 2.22.
and with the sow which was washed, to their wallowing in the mire. And this
recidiuation is more dangerous then the sickness: this relapse then the first
fall. For those to whom this happens, are they whom Jude calls trees twice
dead and rotten, Iud. 12.
and good for nothing else, but to be plucked up by the roots. The knowledge
which such men have, does make against themselves: their thoughts against
themselves: the motions of their own mind, when they have thought upon
goodness, shall witness hardly against them.

Act. 8.13. Matthew. 26.25. Cap. 22.15. Luc. 18.12.
So Simon Magus will be baptized, and Judas come to the supper, and heretics
can preach Christ, and Herodians hear his word, and Pharisees pay their tith,
and Jesuits fast and pray, so that ceremonies and the show which is outward,
do not ever import verity of religion. 2. Cor. 11 14. Matthew. 7.15.21.23.
Satan transformeth himself into an Angel of light. Wolves come forth in
sheep clothing: There be that cry Lord, Lord, and yet Christ does not know
them. Whereupon that speech is true, that we may more easily know who is an
ungodly man, then who is truly godly. For hypocrisy may with a shadow, make a
disguised show of the one, but foul and wicked deeds will necessarily discover
the other. Where an irreligious life is lead, and gross sins are committed,
it is an evident proof, that the true fear of God, is not yet resident in
that person. Therefore it concerns us to be wary, that we lean not on any
one, but as he leans on Christ: for as we must take heed, that we judge not
other men, in particular without charity, so we must hold this in general,
that all is not gold that glistereth.

20 A second lesson is, that we all look to our selves, that Bernard. de 2.
discipulis euntibus ad Emaus. Cuius oculi sunt sicut piscinae Hesbon prae
multitudine lachrymaru^. Hora compunctionis transacta ita superbus est sicut
ante.
as well as in adversity. We must not hold our duty to be then discharged to
the full, when in a moment of some great matter, we fear the Lord exceedingly,
and sacrifice and vow, and do all that we can devise, and straight way prove
like a fever, have a cold bowte for a heat and so fall away from grace, but we
must follow that vein, and pursue it to the end.

21 Saint Bernard in his time, found men rebukeable for this error. For
writing of the two Disciples, which went unto Emaus, he speaks fitly to this
purpose: You shall sometimes see a man very devout in his prayers, whose eyes
will seem to stand like the pooles of Hesbon, for the multitude of his
tears, and yet this man refuses to bear the yoke of obedience. He bewaileth
his pride, while he is at his prayers, but the hour of compunction being once
past and gone, he is as proud as before. I would that ourage were free from
this unstayed repentance. But I fear that it is otherwise. When we sit and
hear a Sermon, a word or two well set on, does bruise us much for a moment.
Upon solemn days, as at our anniuersary thanksgiving, for the love of God, so
far extended to us, in the enjoying of her Majesty, or upon other the like
occasions, our hearts and eyes and all, shall testify our great feeling. So
when we come to the Sacrament, we are very repentant persons; but is it not
true of us, that like unto the bull rush we hang down our heads for a day: that
drinking with the serpent, Isay. 58.5.
we resume again our poison of malice and perverseness. When we are in the
Church, we intend to leave our bribe-taking: but with the Church we forget it:
when our night-thoughts have well troubled us, we vow to leave our
uncharitableness, and to pluck up the root of bitterness; but rising we
return unto our ancient evil. In the fields we can protest, against our own
oppression, our slandering and reuiling, but when we come home, we yield our
selves unto the tempting Angel. This is to dally with God, and to heap wrath
on our selves. The most wicked men and idolaters, as Jonas his fellows here,
can think on goodness for a little, and fear the Lord exceedingly, and yet
not be the better for it. Sincerity and simplicity, and perseverance and
performance, beseem the child of God. I have troubled you over long. Lord
enrich us so with thy spirit, that as we have begun, so we may end in thee,
that thy true fear still possessing us, we may be brought to thy kingdom,
there to reign by the merit of thy Son, to whom with thee and thy Spirit
be laud and praise for ever.

THE IX. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 1. All creatures are at Gods beck: 3. either to punish the
wicked, 4. or to preserve the good. 6. Of the greatness of fishes. 8. That
Jonas might live in the belly of the whale. 12. How the three days and three
nights are to be taken in the lying of Christ in the grave. 13. Christ rose
again. 14. And so shall all other men. 16. Some deny the Resurrection. 17.
Reasons and examples proouing it. 21. That we should prepare our selves against
the time of Resurrection.

Jonah. 1.17. Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah: and
Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.


BY this time you may see a very great difference of the several estates, This
Sermon was preached at Easter.
wherein our Prophet has been: for first he was at land, and there he could
not keep him: afterward he was on shipboord, and there he might not keep him:
but now he is in the sea, in the belly of a fish, and there he shall not choose
but keep him, until that himself be most weary of it. God has a certain
fish in a readiness for to receive him, which for the space of one three days
must lodge him. In discoursing whereof, I think it not necessary to dispute
that question, Ribera in hunc locum.
which has been moved in this argument by very learned men, that is, whether
that the preparing of this fish for the Prophet, were the new creating of that
which was not before; which must intend, that at the same instant of time, a
creature of purpose should be made, to swallow him and devour him. There
needed no such matter: for there were in the sea fishes enough to serve the
turn, and the Lord had one of those at hand, to fulfill his designement. Much
rather the power of the Creator is here to be noted, whose authority over his
creatures is such and so absolute, that in a moment of time he has them very
readily attending, wheresoever he pleases. It is he who alone may say, Job.
41.2. Psalm. 115.3.
as he does speak in Job, All under heaven is mine. The people say of him
truly, Our God is in heaven: he does whatsoever he will. There is not any
creature in the heaven, or earth, or sea, be it body, or be it spirit, which is
not at his devotion and waits not at his beck. The greatest do him homage,
the smallest do him service. For he is greater then the mightiest, by whole
millions of degrees: and his ouer-seeing providence takes knowledge of the
meanest. Matthew. 10.29.
Not a sparow which lights on the ground; not an hair which falls from the
head, but he is interested in it.

2 What is greater then the heaven? yet if Iosuah pray unto him, Iosuah. 10.12.
for one whole day this euer-wheeling body shall cease his swift diurnall
motion. The Sun shall stand still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the vale of
Aialon. That which comes forth as a Giant, Psalm. 19.5.
and rejoices to run his course, yet to satisfy Ezechias, and to confirm
his faith, shall fly back as a coward for ten degrees at once, 2. Reg. 20.11.
as then it appeared by the dial of Ahaz. What is ruder, or more unfit to be
dealt with, then the earth? Yet at his pleasure he shakes both earth and sea.
Agg. 2.7.
What is more excellent, or of a more pure and single nature then the Angels?
Yet he has bound up four of them in the river Euphrates: Apoc. 9 14.
and although they be prepared at an hour, and at a day, and at a month, and
at a year, to slay the third part of men, yet these Angels cannot stir,
until that they be loosed by his precise commandment. And such is his
sovereign power, that when he finds occasion, they are freed all in a
moment. In like sort, to effect his purposes he needs not the posts of
Persia, Ester. 3.15.
who^ Haman sometimes used, nor the dromedaries of Egypt, nor the swift runners
of other nations, to go from place to place, and give notice of his will: but
in the very instant, he either does touch the mind of him who is to be the
doer, or he raises up some thing else which shall declare his meaning. God
sends forth his commandment: and his word runs very swiftly. Psalm 147.15.
The day is his and the night, the open place and the secret: fish and birds,
and beasts and all: the very wings of the wind to carry his precept on them.
Inconceivable is his Majesty, inestimable is his power: the highest things and
the lowest, the greatest and the weakest, are ever at his commandment: Apoc.
1.18.
he has the keys of heaven; nay of hell and of death. This his power so
uncontrollable, most eminently appears in punishing the wicked, and
preserving his own children.

3 Ammianus Marcellinus reports, Ammianus Marcellinus lib. 18.
that in Mesopotamia among the reeds and bushes growing near to the river
Euphrates, are evermore great store of Lions, which use to remain there, being
much delighted with the great calmenes^e and pleasure of that climate. The
danger arising from these, both unto men and beasts, would be perpetual, but
that God has provided a remedy to slack the fury of them; and that is in
admirable manner. There are always in that coast infinite swarms of gnats,
which gather much about those Lions, and to nothing in them so desirously as to
their eyes, whom we know to be bright and shining members. But sitting fast on
the eyelids, they do so prick and sting them, that the raging Lions are
forced to scratch with their nails, as if they would remove the gnats; but
indeed they claw out their own eyes, so that many of them by this means
growing blind, do drown themselves in the great rivers, or otherwise become
less terrible. This is an argument of Gods wisdom, who delights in such
variety of these inferior bodies. And yet withal, it is an argument of his
puissance, who by so weak a matter can overthrow such a great one: a Lion by a
gnat: and has those little ones so attendant, as that every man may see that
they are prepared by their maker, to overrule the other; to chase them and
pursue them, and vex them unto destruction. The tyrants of the earth are
^earefull unto the poor, as the Lion is to the lamb. Their might gives them
ability, and their mind does yield them will to tread down their
inferiors. Now for the punishment of these bitter ones, God has prepared as
small things as the gnats, to master them in their fury. Let Pharao be one
man, and Herod be another who shall demonstrate this. The violence of the
former and his cruel oppression toward the sons of God, was insolent and
outrageous. But how does the graund ruler of the heaven trample upon him, and
make him cry peccaui, with the basest of those bodies which mankind ever sees?
Exodus 8.6.
The hand of his servant Aaron was but stretched out on the waters, and frogs
came in such store, as made him loath himself, and every thing about him. 24.
So the swarms of flies did force him to be humbled for a time. Exodus 10.13.
What hosts were there of grasshoppers, and of devouring caterpillars, which
came forth at one call, as if they had been reserved before by the Lord, to
show his mighty hand, and his power which is not limited? Nay to testify Gods
own finger, Cap. 8.17.
there was an army of lice, then whom nothing is more vile; yet prepared they
were at an instant, to plague where the Lord commanded. Act. 12.23.
The other, that proud Herod who upon a glosing flattering speech of the
people, assumed to himself that glory, which of right appertained to his
maker, was stricken with Gods Angel, and so died consumed with worms. In such
manner has the Almighty every creature for his messenger, and executing
servant, close standing at his elbow, to vex and plague, and torture the
enemies of his Majesty, or the oppugners of his glory.

4 And is he strong to hurt, and is he not so to help? To defend and to
offend, are they not alike unto him? protection and correction? His sweet
mercy triumphs over his bitter justice: and his power attends his mercy,
and the world attends his power, and so does every thing which is in it. In
the twelfth of the Revelation this is well shadowed to us. Apoc. 12 13.
The woman which is the Church here militant upon earth, is followed hard by
the Dragon: there are found two Egles wings, by the which she does escape.
Behold, there is one deliverance, and one not looked for remedy. The Dragon yet
does not leave her, but since he cannot come, he thinks to send home after
her: he casts out of his mouth a water like to a river, thinking thereby to
drown her. See another help in a moment. The earth opens herself, and
swalloweth up that water which the Dragon had cast forth. To the same effect
with this parable or vision, were the Israelites reskued by the red sea, Exodus
14.22.
the waters flying a sunder, and yielding them dry footing, as if it had been
on the land, when they were so pursued and made after, by the chariots and
horsemen of the Egyptians. How fitly unto my purpose, was the daughter of king
Pharao brought forth, Exodus 2.5.
and put in mind to pity poor drowning Moses? How was the iaw-bone of the ass
made ready, Iudic. 15.15.19.
to be as a sword for Samson, wherewith he slew so many Philistines? and how
was one of the teeth thereof prepared, to yield him drink when he fainted? So
admirable is the Lord, in the assistance of his Saints, that one thing or
another, shall be borne to do them good in their bitter extremity, as if it
were made only for that purpose. There be few, which have lived many years,
and in Christian meditation contemplated in themselves on the kindness of
their God, who know not this over and over. Such comforts and such stays
arising by such means, as themselves could not conceive of, until they see
things done. Oh the love of God inestimable, oh his strange ways for our
good. The wicked on the one side may fear his hand, who can raise such means
to perplexe them: and the faithful on the other side may embrace his mercy,
who has such helps at need: and both of them may stand amassed, and wonder at
his power, who has his instruments evermore so ready.

5 I know not whether in our Prophet, is more to be respected, Gods punishment
or his protection. If we think upon his drowning, he does favor him, since he
had at hand a great fish to receive him, so that he did not perish. If we
think of the time and place, where he lay, and how long, that is, in the
dungeon of that fishes belly, for three days and three nights, it does double
and often multiply Gods angry wrath upon him. The event does give this
testimony, that since Jonas (howsoever at the first he fell) was appointed, and
predestined to good and not to evil, his deliverance was as ready, as his
chastisement was for him: one hand to cast him down, another to help him up:
when the ship might not any longer contain him, the fishes belly was in
steed of a sea-vessell, to bring him on toward Niniue. But in the mean while
his lying was such, in so many dreades and horrors, and anguishes for his
life, nay for doubt of the life eternal, (because wrath was upon him, which
endangered his best part, even his inward man and his soul) that many deaths
had been easier then a languishing in that prison, where now he had his best
repose. So sour a thing is sin, and disobedience to the Lord. It may be
sweet in the mouth, but it is bitter in the belly, like a cup of deadly
poison. Certainly it is a daughter of those Locustes, Apoc. 9.7.10.
which have faces fair as men, but killing stings in their tails. It is
pleasure with too much pain: sweet meat with too sharp sauce. And therefore
it may well be likened to that herb Sardonia in Sardinia, Solinus cap. 10.
of the which Solinus writes, that it makes the eaters thereof, to look as
if they laughed, but in their laughing they dye. Thus Jonas is preserved; but
to testify Gods displeasure, in the means of his preservation he endures
full many sorrows. Let us now see if you please, what that was, whereby God so
wrought for him.

The Lord prepared a great fish to swallow
(...)
6 In the Hebrew it is a great fish, but it is not added of what kind, or
species this fish was. Our Savior Christ does briefly touch this story, Matthew
12.40.
and there the Evangelist in the Greek, does use the word Ketos, (...).
which although sometimes (like to the Latin Cete) it be applied to diverse
sorts of great fishes, yet properly it notes that one, who is the king of
fishes, and ruler of the sea, Balaena the great whale: and it is evermore so
Englished in that text. A fish which in diverse seas, is of several shapes and
fashions, as in the Indian Oceane, in the red sea near Arabia, in the Northren
waters toward Island, and in our English Oceane: but every where very huge,
and every where very mighty. And so this had need to be, who had so wide a
mouth, as to receive the Prophet: who had so large a throat, as to swallow him
and not hurt him: who had so vaste a paunch, as to lodge him there and not
stifle him. A matter to some men incredible, that among all living creatures
should be any so capacious; but so undoubtedly a known truth, to men that live
near the sea, or that have traveled much by ship; and a verity so confirmed,
so consented upon by all, who have read the writers either old or new upon
that argument, that he were a man much absurd, who would make question of it.
They all agree that at sea there are fishes, far exceeding the greatest beast
on land. And thereof particularly Olaus Magnus does assign these reasons,
Olaus Magnus. lib. 21.8.
the abundance of the moisture which is fit to dilate and increase any living
creature, and the very great depth, where is both store of food, and safe
means to escape such other fishes, as are ready to hurt them. They farther
add, that the Elephant is but little, when he is compared with these
water-monsters. That the bellies and mouths, and throtes of some fishes are so
spacious, that a man may well be received in by them. Gulielmus Rondeletius who
has taken great pains, in displaying the proportions and qualities of fishes,
as appears in that excellent work of Gesner De Aquatilibus (for those two
are often joined together) reports of a little small fish (in comparison of a
whale) which he calls by the name of Lamia, Gesnerus lib. 4. de Aquatilibus.
that in the Mediterrane sea, some of those have oftentimes been found, having
a whole man swallowed into each of their bellies. Yea he tells that near
unto Marseilles, an ancient city o^ France, there have been found of them,
which have had within them virum loricatum, a man in some kind of armor. So
huge-bellied is this fish, which comes not near to the great ones.

7 But for the whale it self, if any list to read of the bigness of it,
Plinius. lib 9.3. Natural. Histor. lib. 32.1.
and should esteem that too much, Pliny speaks positiuely, that in the
Indian seas there are some of two hundred cubits in length: and the same Pliny
out of the books of Iuba, that in the seas near Arabia, have been seen some
of four hundred cubits (for so much is six hundred feet) which also Munster
delivers to us, Munster. Cosmograp. lib. 5. Dion. lib. 54.
in the fifth of his Cosmography; then let him hear what Dion a good
Historien, does lay down of certainty in his fifty and fourth book, and that
is, that in the days of Augustus sometimes Emperor of Rome, a whale leaped to
the land, out of the Germane Ocean, full twenty foot in breadth, and
threescore foot in length. This was so big a body, as might well receive the
Prophet. Gesner. lib. 4.
But add to this what I find in Gesner, taken out of an Epistle, which was
written to Polydore Virgil, and is avouched there as most true, that in the
year of our Lord 1532, in the Northren coasts of our own land, not far
from Tinmouth haven, was a mighty whale cast on land, who was ninety foot in
length, which arises to thirty English yeards. The very breadth of his mouth,
was six yeards and a half, and the belly so vaste in compass, that one
standing on the fish, of purpose to cut a ribbe off from him, and slipping into
his belly, was very likely there to be drowned, with the moisture then
remaining. The hollownesse of this paunch, might contain much more then Jonas;
such a mouth might well receive him, and such a throat might well swallow him.
The stories and the Chronicles of our own land let us know, that quantities
like to these, among fishes are not to be held for miracles. This question
concerning our Prophet lying in the belly of the whale, Augustine Epistola. 49.
was once proposed to Saint Austen. In answer whereunto, he makes no doubt,
but that a whale is great enough, to receive a far bigger matter into his
belly. He appealeth unto certain ribs, which at Carthage were hanged up, for
every man to behold: and from the compass of their hugeness, which were taken
from a whale, he bids them imagine, how mighty that mouth was, which was but
as a door or gate, to that cave or vile dungeon, intending the fishes belly.
But he concludes it to be neither impossible, nor yet unlikely, that a whale
might swallow Jonas. If any should be desirous, to hear or see more concerning
this matter, let him read in Job, Job. 40. and. 41.
Gods own testimony of Leuiathan, which intends the great whale.

8 But there is another and that a greater difficulty, in that place proposed
to Austen, by the means of a pagane person: how the Prophet could be able, for
the space of three days and three nights, to endure the concocting vapor, and
strong heat of that belly, which digesteth and resolves some substances of
strong quality. The infidels of that time, did hold this to be very ridiculous,
and as fabulous a thing as might be: and he that wrote to Saint Austen, seems
to make doubt of this matter, although otherwise he were a Christian. Epistol.
49.
The learned father making answer, does not labor to satisfy the scoffs
and scorns of any Paganes, because they do contemn the Scriptures, and all
grounds of Christianity, and do call into question not only this, but many
other matters. Yet he says, that they would have believed this, which they
judge so strange in our Prophet Jonas, Vide Apuleium de Asino aureo. Et
Philostrat. de vita Apollon.
if it had been reported by their own fond Apuleius, or Apollonius Tyaneus,
two notable Magicians. But he speaks home, unto those who profess the name
of Christ Jesus. Why should they, who do believe other miracles of Gods book,
make scruple of this matter? It is not so that one part of the Scripture is
true, and another otherwise; but all is of undoubted verity. Could the belly of
the whale be hoter to the Prophet, then the fiery furnace was to the three
children in Daniel? Daniel. 3.25.
God saved them in the one, and he saved him in the other. Is it more to bring
a living man, after three days from a fish, then it was to raise a dead man,
after four days from his grave? Yet we believe that this was done to Lazarus.
Johan. 11.44.
In like sort Christ Jesus being dead for so long time, as Jonas lay in this
fish, did come alive from his sepulcher, which miracle says Saint Austen, we
should not believe, if the faith of the Christians, did fear the scorns and
taunts of the Paganes. For we know that they do deride that. Thus Saint Austen
does resolve it, acknowledging it to be a miracle, wrought by the hand of the
Almighty. Saint Hierome in his Commentary, which he wrote on the Prophet
Jonas, Hieronym. in Ionae. 1.
does iumpe in the self same judgment. Those who make question here, says
he, are either faithful, or infidels, Christians or unbelievers. If
Christians, then the truth of that word which is inspired by God, must prevail
here, as well as elsewhere, and this by faith must be embraced, as much as
other things which are written. If infidels, then no marvel, for they deny
both the Old and New Testament. Yet they would believe any fable in Ouids
Metamorphosis, Ovid Metamorphos. lib. 1.
as that Daphne was turned into a bay tree, or some other thing of that
forging. So he rests himself, on the power of God all-disposing.

9 These answers may suffice, for all those who fear God in our time; that he
who out of nothing, did make the heaven and the earth, and the armies of them
both, and spread the one in circumference, Genes. 1.1.
and laid fast the other as the center, which hangs upon nothing: Cap. 7.17.
Daniel. 6.22. 2. Reg. 13.21.
who drowned the whole world with water: who in the midst of the Lions,
preserved his servant Daniel: who by the bones of Elizaeus, restored a dead man
to life: Act. 5.15.
who granted to the Apostles, that their shadows healed many, Cap. 19.12.
and so did clothes brought from their bodies; could as easily, and with as
ready a facility, maintain one longer, or less while, within a fishes belly.
For grant him to be Almighty; lay that once down for a ground, and every
thing will follow, which he shall be pleased to will. This is the faith of the
Christians: this belongs to all Gods children. But the Atheists of our age,
who are risen out of the ashes of Libanius the great Sophister, or of that
scorning Porphiry, or of that derider Lucian, or of Julian the Apostata, do
insult over this position, of the omnipotency of God, with impiety more then
monstrous. They jest at the name of faith, as a toye made to delude men: and
Reason only must carry it. This may lively be notified, by that one of their
Axioms, which I once did find written, in the beginning of a new Testament,
Ratio suadet, O vox impia.
fides fallit: Credere quam fidere prudens mallet. Almightinesse they approve
not, and miracles they allow not, and holy writ they regard not. But bring
reason or experience, from the bowels of very nature, and then we go with you
while you will. And who is he that by these shall be ever able to justify,
first that a fish could live for three days and three nights, with such a one
in his bellye, with his clothes and apparel on (for that must be imagined) and
this fish should neither be choked with his carriage, nor killed with the
moving, and tumbling of him within; and secondly that for so long a time, a
man living and not hurt, should be lodged in such a prison. For how could he
endure the vapor of a stomach so hote-boyling? Where should he have breath to
feed him, and air to live upon? Thus with an audacious forehead, they call
him to a reason, who does things beyond reason, and will not tie himself to
that sifting and that scanning, which the thinness, and the baseness of man's
wit can afford him. He shows this very plainly, Isay. 7.14.
when he will have a virgin to become a mother, a son without man's seed,
mortal and yet immortal, a creator and yet a creature, most infinite and yet
finite, ever living and yet once dying.

10 Notwithstanding even for this purpose, in his wisdom he does not leave
himself without a witness: for as impossible things as these, are done every
day amongst us. This perhaps may seem a paradoxe, and not to be believed: but
I say it again, as impossible things as this is, are done every day amongst
us: but that our custom is to contemn, and pass by the strangest matter, if
it once grow common among us; yea when it is so strange, that our
understanding is able to yield no reason of it. Such actions do move us most,
which are most rare, and fewest times do fall out. It is no marvel to see the
Sun, and the stars in their daily order, because daily we may do it, but to
see a new star appearing, as not long since there was one in the sign
Cassiopaea, Anno. 1572.
is a matter to move amazedness: whereas any other star might raise as much
admiration, if we would but call to mind, that it had been new in the creation,
although in these days it be old. Hear Seneca speaking to this: Seneca
Naturalium quaestion. lib. 7.1. Sol spectatorem nisi cum deficit non habet.

Nemo obseruat Lunam nisil aborantem. Adeo natural est magis noua quam magna
mirari. Athen. Dipnosophist. lib. 8.7.


The whole company of those stars vvherevvith the beauty of the huge heaven
is distinguished, never calls people together to gaze upon them. But when
any thing is changed from ordinary, then every man's eyes be on heaven. The
Sun has not any to look at him, unless he be in the Eclipse. No man
marketh the Moon, but when she has lost her light. He concludes: So
natural it is to us rather to wonder at new things, then at great things. To
speak then to these disputers: I will not say of them, as I find in Athenaeus,
that Stratonicus a mad fellow said of Satyrus a bad Sophister, that he reputed
it for a miracle, how his mother should ever be able to bear him in her womb,
for ten whole months together, whom no City could bear, that is, endure but
ten whole days together: so bad was he and untoward. I will take that pro
concesso, that they were borne of their mothers, yea perhaps of virtuous
mothers; who love God with their soul, and tremble at his judgments; and
withal, do much grieve to see their children to degenerate, in such sort from
their mothers, or rather from their maker. Yet this I may add concerning them,
that so far they are like that Sophister, that if they had their demerites,
no reformed place, or City, no Christian commonwealth, should bear them and
retain them, who are monsters and not men, being of impudent hearts and faces.

11 Let that then be agreed between us (because it cannot be denied) that they
were borne of their mothers, and after the course of common children. Then they
cannot utterly be ignorant what belongs to a little infant. It abides for
some whole months together, in the womb of the mother, unformed and
imperfect, Luc. 1.41.
but yet a living creature. When Mary came to Elizabeth, that child which was
afterward John the Baptist, is said to spring in her womb. This example and
common experience which cannot be denied, does argue life to be in the little
ones. Now then tell me thou wicked Atheist, how can this be maintained? If
there be no breath, how a life? If breath, whence does he draw it? Thou art
taken in thine own net: the scruples of this question, cannot be resolved by
thee. Thou art proud in thine own conceit, and presumest much of thy wit; but
yet in the knowledge of natural effects, thou art much inferior unto David, as
thou must needs confess, if thou will read his Psalms advisedly. But he can
say for himself, in discoursing of his own generation, Psalm. 139.14.
that fearfully and wonderfully he was created by God, and that there were
miracles in his making. Nay having before protested, 5.6.
that Gods knowledge was too wonderful, and excellent for him, and that he
could not attain unto it, 13.
he exemplifieth that skill of the Lord, in the curious frame of himself in
his mothers womb. Pardon me thou proud disputer, if I think that thy wit does
come much short of the Prophet. If then thou will not be wilful, thou must
answer for the infant, that it is done which has been spoken off, but the
manner how thou know not. Confess Gods finger there, and confess Gods
finger here; who can do that to a man, which he does so often to children, who
can do that by sea, which he does so often at land; who can do that in a fish,
which he does in every mother; who can do that in one age, which he does every
day. This is his power but for once only, the other is his power always. Then
reason no farther reasons, but set open the door of faith give assent to the
word of life, and strive not against thy maker. Act. 9.5.
Thou do kick against the prick: thou impugnest him, against whom thou
never shall prevail. Not the least jot of Gods book, can ever be tainted by
thee: the Author is vnstainable, vntouchable, uncontrollable. That is indeed
peculiar unto him, and proper to his word, which one falsely fathereth upon
Virgil, Macrob. Saturnal. 124. Haec est Maronis gloria, vt nullius laudibus
crescat, nullius vituperatione minuatur.
that the praise of no man does add unto him; nor the dispraise of any man
does take from him. Since then we have the warrant of this writer, let us rest
our selves on this, that our Prophet was three days and three nights alive,
shut up in a fishes belly.

12 The precise account of which time, (being nothing else but a figure, of the
lying of Christ Jesus, in the bowels of the earth, and being appointed for that
cause, (as Gods own Son does witness) does move me to suppose, that those
days and nights, wherein our Prophet was shut up in the whale, were not
entirely completed thrice four and twenty hours. Matthew. 12.40
For if it were otherwise in Christ who was the body, then very likely that it
was otherwise in him who was but the shadow: that the sign and the thing
signified, the figure and the truth, might have a due proportion. But the lying
of Christ in the grave, concerning the circumstance of three days, was in some
measure Tropicall, and not to be taken literally: for by the figure Synecdoche,
part of the day is reckened for the whole: and because the light and the
darkness, for four and twenty hours, make but one natural day, part of the
day shall enclose the night which was gone before, so that a piece of the
artificial day, shall be accounted for a day natural. To make this the more
evident: the Jews did account their day to begin at the Sun setting, which
is to be understood, of one of their natural days; but their day artificial,
was commonly reputed to begin at six of the clock in the morning,
especially about the time of the Aequinoctium, when it is apparent that our
Savior did suffer. Christ then dyed at the ninth hour, Matthew. 27.46.
that is at three of the clock after noone, on a friday as we call it; and
before that the evening was in, on the day of the Preparation, which was that
self same Friday his body was laid in grave. That little time before evening,
Synecdoches vna species est, cum pars pro toto capitur.
is by the figure Synecdoche, (which takes a part for the whole) reputed for a
whole day and a night, that is, the day and night before going. The night then
which did follow the setting of the Sun, and the day which was their Easter,
(but by us is called Saturday) is reckened for the second. And indeed this was
complete, both for the day and the night. Then follows the next night, Matthew.
28.1. Marc. 16.1.
wherein Jesus arose very early in the morning, at or before the dawning of
the day, and the opening of the light, and this is to be numbered for the third
both day and night, the part taken for the whole by the figure as before. This
kind of computation, as with ease it may be gathered from the narration of the
Evangelists, Augustine. Epist. 49. Beza in Ioh. 18.
so Saint Austen does approve it, and the late Divines so accept it. And it
should not seem strange, since in other things we do use it. The Physicians
call that fever, a Tertian or third Ague, which skippeth but one day only.
The Terms of our University are reckened in that manner. The last day of a
Term is reputed for a Term, and the first day of another is taken for another
Term; so that according to our use in some cases, one Term and two days are
taken for three Terms. Thus was Christ in his grave, by the space of three
days and three nights, either in part or in whole; like to which it is very
probable, that the staying of the Prophet in the whale, was abridged and
abbreuiated, for some part of the time, that there might be a full resemblance
between the one and the other, the servant and the master. But herein I will
not be contentious.

Concerning the Resurrection.
13 But to say no more thereof, the maine note from this place requires full
understanding, because there is hence deduced a mystery of our faith, I mean
the Resurrection, which Christ Jesus himself expounds, to be here very
lively signified. Matthew. 12.40
Jonas was in the fishes belly, for three days and there nights: so shall the
Son of man be for that time in the grave. It must follow thereupon by a
necessary consequent: But as Jonas was then delivered, so shall the Son of
man then come forth, with a sensible resurrection. Christ foretold that he
would do this, Do you destroy this temple, Ioh. 2.19.
intending thereby his body, and in three days I will raise it, and set it up
again. This was also foretold by David, Psalm. 16.11. Act. 2.31.
although in the person of our Savior: Thou will not leave my soul in hell,
nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption, which text Saint Peter cites, to
aduouch Christ's resurrection. That he did rise again, the Evangelists all do
cry: the Apostles all do confirm it. How plentiful is Saint Paul in
discoursing this argument, 1. Cor. 15.5.
that he did appear oftentimes, one while but to a few, another while to the
Twelve, but afterward to more then five hundred brethen at once? By the virtue
of his Godhead, Christ had a sovereign power to loose himself from death: it
was a thing impossible that he should be holden of it. Act. 2.24.
If his life had been taken from him unwillingly, and by violence, then very
likely it is, that the self same violence might have still detained him
prisoner. Ioh. 19.30.
But his dying was voluntary: he yielded up the Ghost, and being contented to
put himself amidst those anguishes and horrors, he abode there at his
pleasure, on the cross and in the grave; and from death he returned with the
self same pleasure, as having conquered all, and triumphing in great glory.
And then he who came from heaven, to disquiet himself on earth, so to purchase
man's redemption, left death and grave and earth, Ephesians. 4.8.
and with captivity captive, ascended again to heaven, where he ^ate him
down in his majesty on the right hand of his Father.

14 And by his resurrection our hope is to be saved: herein does rest the
anchor of our happiness and true blessedness. For in vain had been his
debasing, and in vain his incarnation, if he had not lived amongst us. And in
vain had been his life, and in vain had been his preaching, if his death had
not followed after. For his life was given for our ransom: his blood it was
which did wash us: his death it was which did quicken us. But in vain had been
his death also, if he had not shaken off mortality from him, and borne up his
grave before him, and thereby winning his prizes, had not maistered all which
resisted. So that we apprehend his resurrection, as the stay and substance of
our salvation; as the vp-shot of our blessedness; from the which if we should
fall, we do plunge into utter ruin. Therefore in the Articles of our faith, In
Symbolo Apostoloru^.
this is put for one, that dying, he rose again the third day from the dead.
Not that only he died, for the Jews believe so much, and the Gentiles believe
so far; but that he was quickened again. Augustine. contra Faustum
Manichaeum. l. 16.
For, as Saint Austen has observed, the Paganes do admit this for a truth,
that Christ did dye: but that he rose again, is the proper faith of the
Christians, and imparted to no other. Now we hold Christ for the head, and our
selves to be the members: what he has done before, we trust that we shall do
afterward. So that by his rising again, is inferred the resurrection of other,
and that of all, as well the just as the unjust, and the unjust as the just:
the one sort to reign with their Savior, on whom they have believed, the
other to suffer torments, because they have contemned. 2. Cor. 5.10.
So that both great and small, shall stand upon their feet, in the general
day of judgment; and appearing before the throne, shall then receive their
last doom of misery or of mercy. And if we did not expect this, the
followers of Christ Jesus were most wretched men of all other, 1. Cor. 15.19
who for this hope sealed unto them, do endure such strong vexations, such
grieuances and perplexities. All the Martyrs were most foolish, who loose their
lives in this world, for the maintenance of Christ's glory, Chrysostom. in Matthew.
Homil. 5.
which were absurd stupiditie (as Chrysostom has well noted) if they held not
themselves assured, that he were come from the dead: never dye for him who
lives not: and again if they believed not, that in recompense of their
sufferings they should see a better life, and receive a firm inheritance in
the day of last proceeding.

15 Their warrant is sealed unto them, by him who cannot lie, both that their
holy service shall be rewarded by him, who shall pronounce that comfort, Come
you blessed of my Father, inherit eternal life; Matthew. 25.34
and that there shall be a day, wherein they shall hear that sentence, and
that is in the resurrection. There were in former times many figures of that
matter, even before the light of the Gospel, as when Enoch and Elias were
assumed up into heaven, Genes. 5.24. 2. Reg. 2.11.
and translated to immortality, to show that other after them, should have the
same vncorruptnesse, although by another change: and to make proof of a life,
Ezech. 37.1.5
which is elsewhere for our bodies, but shall not be revealed, until that
general rising. In like sort, when there were showed unto the Prophet Ezechiel
great heaps of scattered bones: which the Lord yet put together, and laid
sinews upon them, and made flesh grow thereon, and then covered both with
skin, and afterward breathed life into them. In Job is an evident testimony,
Job. 19.25.
I am sure that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth.
And although after my skin the worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God
in my flesh. So in the end of Daniel, Dan. 12.2.
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt. Matthew. 25 31
But how evident is this in the new Testament? When the Son of man comes in
his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne
of his glory. And before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall
separate them one from another, as a shepherd separateth the sheep from the
goats. And in the second to the Corinthians, that we must all appear before
the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive the things done in
his body according as he has done, whether it be good or evil. But most
manifest of all other is that of John in his Revelation: Apoc. 20.11.
I saw a great white throne, and one that sat on it, from whose face fled away
both the earth and heaven, and their place was no more found. And I saw the
dead both great and small stand before God, and the books were opened. Then
forthwith, And the sea gave up her dead which were in her, and death and hell
delivered up the dead which were in them. So oftentimes and so plainly, does
God foretell unto us this general resurrection. In so much that it is as
certain, as that the Lord sits in heaven, that this shall one day be.

16 As there is in all the faithful an assenting to this doctrine, and the like
might be in very Ethnicks, saving that their eyes are closed, and therefore they
cannot see, as a sound to a deaf ear is nothing, which yet is discerned by
another man, so the miscreants of all ages, belly-gods, and beast-like men can
in no sort endure it. Indeed they have little reason, for that the portion is
very small, which shall then be allowed unto them. Such were those swinish
Epicures, falsely termed Philosophers, who luxuriating in voluptuousness, and
thinking that to be felicity, to bath themselves in delight, did enjoy the
present with the Ass, but utterly denied the immortality of the soul, and by
a consequent, that the body shall ever be repaired. Like to them was
Sardanapalus, who had this Epitaph on his grave, Athenaeus Dipnosoph. lib. 8.4.
Bibe, lude, mortalis est vita.
Drink and play, our life is mortal, and our time is short upon earth, but
our death is everlasting if a man once be come to it. Pliny the elder was a man
most worthy praise, for his labors which were inestimable: yet that speech of
his was impious, and unbeseeming those good parts which were otherwise in
Pliny. Plin. Natu. Hist. l. 7.55. Omnibus a s^prema die eadem quae ante
primam: nec magis a morte sensus vllus aut corpori aut animae quam ante
natalem. Matthew 22.23 1. Cor. 15.32
To all men from their last day, is the same state as was before their first
day, neither is there after death any more feeling in the body or the soul,
then was before the birthday. Certainly the Saduces were in this belief, of
whom the Evangelist witnesses, that they denied the resurrection. And you may
put them in this number, who in Saint Paul's time did use this byword, Let us
eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye, as intending that in death should
be a final end, and we should be no more heard of. The persecuting Gentiles
were plainly of this opinion, of some of whom in France Eusebius witnesses,
that they in scorn of the resurrection, which the Christians do believe, did
burn many of the Martyrs, and afterward threw their ashes into the river
Rhodanus, with this foolish exprobration, Let us see now if their God be able
to revive them. In a word, most of the Pagans in all ages of the world, and all
Atheists among Christians, (a thing in our time too well known) do oppugn
this truth beyond measure. At whose lives I do not marvel, if they be like
their profession, that is, such (some few civil respects excepted) as are fit
for those men, who fear neither God nor Devil. I could wish, that since it
must needs be, that Gods wrath is oftentimes by these plucked down upon our
land, the sword of the civil magistrate, would with severity provide some
remedy for them, that there might not be in Israel a man, who should once dare
to blaspheme the name of the Lord. I remember it is recorded of the Atheniens,
that in the respect which they carried to their false and fained Gods, Diodor.
Sic. Bibl. lib. 13.
they so detested Diagoras, for talking against their heathenish religion, that
he standing in fear of his life, was glad to fly the country. But herewith
the other not contented, did put forth a proclamation, that whosoever it were
that would kill that Diagoras, should have an honorable reward, that was, a
talent of silver for his labor.

17 But to leave these laws unto the Christian magistrate, and to proceed as a
Minister, the arguments of all these, and a thousand more of that suit, are but
vanity of all vanities, when they come once to be weighed in the balla^ce of
the Sanctuary, and are counterpoised only with the high Gods omnipotency. For
why should we tie his power unto our foolish wit? Suppose that there be dying
upon dying, and devouring upon devouring; that a man be slain, and his members
consumed, some by birds, some by beasts, some by fishes; and imagine that
those creatures be taken, and eaten again by men, and those men be then burnt,
and their ashes thrown into the water, and if we can go farther, let there be
as many mutations more, what is all this to plunge his ability, who can do
every thing, whatsoever himself shall please? He can do every thing, and
therefore raise this man. If nature cannot conceive it, learn to look a
little higher, to grace and faith beyond nature. Plato an heathen man did much
reprove Anaxagoras, Plutarch. de defectu oraculorum.
because tying himself too far, to natural causes and reasons, he omitted
to think on the efficient cause of all things, which is surely God the first
moouer. This is a monstrous error of us also. But will we allow that to God,
the like whereof we do allow unto men? If an image should be made of lead,
Lombard. Sentent. lib. 4. Did. 44.
to the proportion of a man, and the workman which did make it remaining still
alive, should retain the mould, or remember the fashion of it with his best
observation; although this image were now broken into pieces, and some of the
lead thereof did perchance in a wall, join some stones unto other, or iron to
stones in windows, or if some were framed into bullets, or put to other uses,
be they never so different, yet afterward the artificer having these fragments
brought together, can refound them, and renew the image in that resemblance,
wherein they were before. That which man can do in his trade, can man's maker do
much more, in new framing man himself.

18 I have borrowed this reason from the master of the Sentences: whereunto if
any reply, that the comparison is much different, because here the substance
remains, in the self same nature as before, whereas it is oftentimes altered
in the corruption of the flesh and bones in man, I might answer, that it is
recompensed by the greatness and the power, and the skilfulnesse of this
framer, which so far does exceed the ability of all workers. Tertullian. in
Apolog. cap. 45. Recogita quid fueris antequa^ esse^* vtique nihil. meminisses
enim si quid fuisses. Gregor. Moral. lib 6.7. Cum proculdubio omnibus co^stet,
quia plus sit creari quod non erat, quam reparari quod erat.
But I rather will strengthen it, with that argument of Tertullian who speaks
to this purpose. We were already once made of nothing, when our matter went
not before: and is it not as easy, that we should be again made, when we have
been before? If after our corruption our substance should be little, yea very
nothing at all, yet can we think it less, then it was before our breeding?
The author of the first, can as well do the latter. This reason seemed strong
unto Gregory the great, where he speaks in this sort, If a man who has been
dead should be raised up, all men break forth into admiration, and yet daily
is man borne who never was before, and no man wondreth at that: whereas without
doubt it may appear unto all men, that it is a greater work when that is made
which never was, then when that shall be but repaired and new made which was
before. To follow this a little farther, which of us does remember what we
were, before that we were borne: where was our form or our matter? Yet we are
grown to this quantity, and come up to this fashion. If we will speak as
Philosophers, the son is said to be in potentia of the father: so of the
grandfather and great grandfather, although much more removed. If we will
speak as the Spirit of God does speak, Hebr. 7.20.
Leui the son of Jacob, who was the son of Isaac, who was the heir of
Abraham, is said to be in the loins of Abraham his great grandfather. The line
by this proportion, may be reached a great deal higher. Now how many
alterations, corruptions, dissolutions, in nutriment and in food, within men
and without, of necessity must there be, within ten generations, before that
he be produced who is the tenth successor? Where shall we say was the seed, or
what shall we think was the matter, from whence he was derived? Yet God has
so disposed, that by order of propagation, it should be so and no otherwise:
and a thousand alterations cannot hinder the course thereof; and a million of
corruptions shall not cross his purpose afterward, but that from earth and
sea, and stones, and rocks, and ashes, changed over and over again, he can
rowze us and revive us. The perpetuated order of his actions here among us,
does show that he can do things, which are as far unlikely. To add somewhat
more of man, of how small a thing does he make him, Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2.
even that which has no proportion? how does he bring out the limbs, and
members of the infant? where were his bones and his sinews, his arteryes and
his veins? where was his head and his feet, his countenance and his visage?
how were these things distinguished in his first generation? August. Epistola.
49.
We may have the same consideration, of the kernel of any fruit, which being
small in quantity, and in resemblance very different, from that whereunto it
spreads, is put into the ground. From this there grows a root with many
things sprowting from it; Gregor. Moralium. 6.8.
from thence a stem arises; a bark percase without, a pith perhaps within,
here a branch and there a bough, here a blossom and there a fruit. August. de
Consolat. mortuoru^ 2. 1. Cor. 15.36
A grain of wheat is put by the husbandman into the ground; and then it is but
a small thing, and in respect as nothing. Yet from thence comes root, and
blade, and stalk, and ear, and corn, yea when the original of all was dead
and even dissolved. From these things God each day does raise such sensible
matters, and makes the earth and rain, whereof much comes from the sea, to
depart with their own nature, and to be turned into them. Why then should it
be impossible, or why should it be strange, that he should bring this to pass
in man, the best of his creatures, that is, to fetch him out of the dust, or
from the midst of the water? Why not one day that in general, when this in
special every day? why not all, which to each? Reuolue these things
advisedly, and join faith with thy sense, and thy external feeling, and we
shall have a resurrection.

Gregor. Moral. li. 14 28.
19 Remember how that every winter, the glory of the trees, and all woods is
decayed: their leaves lie in the dust, their cheerful green is but
blackness: the sap and life is hid in the root within the ground: all the
tree does seem as dead. But when the Sun comes forward, with his warming
aspect, they resume their former beauty. So it is with the meadows, so it is
with the flowers, and most delightful gardens. Their winter is as our death,
their spring like our resurrection. The putting of our clothes off, Lodo* Viues
in Genethliaco Jesus Christi.
should remember us of mortality, that we must put our flesh off, and yield it
to corruption. When we put them on in the morning, and go forth as before, we
represent to our selves, the receiving of our flesh again in the day of
judgment. What is our bed but a grave? Epiphanius Haeresi. 64. Athenagoras de
resurrectione mortuorum.
what is our sleep but a death, wherein we are to our selves as if we had
never been, without sense and in darkness? what is our hasty awaking, at the
sound of bell or other noise, but as our starting up, at the sound of the last
trumpet, to appear before Christ's throne? Herein indeed is the difference,
that the grave does hold us longer, the bed a lesser while. Thus has the Lord
every way, put remembrancers in our actions, and daily observations, that
certainly we shall die, and certainly rise again, and certainly be then judged.
The verity of which matter, even by the light of nature has appeared unto
some, who never did know the Lord. The heathen man Zoroastres did
fore-prophecie of a time wherein there should be a rising of all that ever had
lived. Aeneas Gazaeus in Theophrasto.
They were not far from this, who believed an immortality of our souls after
death. So did Plato above all other of the ancient Philosophers, who both
says that the soul lives separated from the body, Plato Epist. 7 Idem de
Legibus 12.
and that it comes to an account, and if it have so deserved, suffers
punishment and great torment: yea he mentions such a judgment, Dialog. 10.
de republ.
as wherein the good are set on the right hand, and the evil on the left, as
if he had perused the books of the sacred Bible. The French Prophets those
Druides, as Pomponius Mela notes, Pomponius. Mela lib. 3.
did both believe, and teach the immortality of the soul, which was a good
inducement to infer the resurrection. For when they held this undoubtedly,
that the better part does not die, and by a consequent, that the souls of them
which had done well, for their good life in this place, should come unto
felicity, they might have easily been persuaded, that by a good congruitie,
the instrument and copartner and sister of the soul, I mean this flesh of
ours, being joined in all actions, should in uprightness of justice, be joined
in the reward, whether it be good or evil.

20 How much to blame are the Atheists and Epicures of our time, who come not
so far as this; but as they deprive our bodies of all future reviving, so
they teach that our souls, in nothing are different from the beasts: but that
in the dissolution, the spirit shall be dissolved, as well as the exterior
man: in which thoughts they show themselves, to be worse then many Ethnicks.
They little conceive the dignity, and simplicity of that spirit, the single in
compoundnesse of that self-moouing soul, for so I may well call it, Chrysostom.
in Matthew. Homil. 35.
in comparison of the flesh. For as Chrysostom makes his argument, If the
soul can give such life and beauty unto the body, with what a life and
fairness does it live in it self? And if it can hold together the body,
which is so stinking and so deformed a carcass, as appears evidently after
death, how much more shall it conserve, and preserve it self in his own
being? So pregnant is this reason, that an infidel may conceive it, and very
well apprehend it: but we which are Christian men may remember a farther
lesson. That our Savior has dyed for us, and paid a price very great, his
own most precious blood. For whom or what was this? for our body which lives
and dies, and rotteth and never returns again? for our soul which is here
this day, and too morrow spilt and corrupted? How unworthy were this of him, to
endure so much for so little? Shall we think him so unwise, or repute him so
unadvised? No, he knew that this soul of ours must stand before his throne;
and this rottenness must come forth, by a fearful resurrection. And if this
should not be so, if there should be no account, no recompense for ill deeds,
no retribution for the good, to what end should men serve the Lord, or what
difference should there be between the just and the unjust, the holy and the
profane? nay between man the best creature that moves upon the ground, and
the basest and vilest beast, which has little sense and no reason? Because it
were impiety to think this of our just Lord, that so slenderly he disposes
things, let us with an assured faith, conceive our immortality, and the hope of
a resurrection.

21 As this has been deduced from the example of our Prophet, by this or the
like sort, Jonas was in the fishes belly, so was Christ in the grave: Jonas
came forth from thence, so did Christ rise again, his rising does bring our
rising, his resurrection, ours, because he was the first fruits of all those
that do sleep. 1. Cor. 15.20
So to conclude this doctrine, by making use of it very briefly: if this be
determined over us, and the hour shall one day come, that all that is in the
grave, shall arise and hear Gods voice, and neither the mountains nor the
rocks, Apoc. 6.16.
can cover us from the presence of the Lamb, what ones then and how perfect
should we study to be? how should we prepare our selves against that day of
reckning, that our judge may acknowledge us to be his friends and his brethren
unspotted and undefiled, that so we might not tremble to see him, and hear his
judgment? But alas how far are we from it, and indeed from thinking of it? For
as Chrysostom speaks, some do say that they believe, Chrysostom. in Genes.
Homil. 22.
that there shall be a resurrection, and a reco^pe^ce to come. But I listen not
to thy words, but rather to that which is done every day. For if thou expect
the resurrection, and a recompense, why art thou so given to the glory of this
present life? why do thou daily vex thy self, gathering more money then the
sand? I may go a little farther applying it to our time: why do we bath our
selves in folly as in the water? why do we drink in iniquity, and bitterness
in such measure? why hunt we after gifts, and thirst after rewards? why seek
we more to please men, then labor to please the Lord? Briefly, why does
security in inward sort so possess us, as if with Hyminaeus and Philetus, 2.
Tim. 2.17. Bernard. de interiori domo.
we did think the resurrection past? Why do we as that man, of whom Saint
Bernard speaks, that is, eat and drink and sleep careless, as if we had
now escaped the day of death and judgment, and the very torments of hell. So
play and laugh and delight, as if we had passed the pikes and were now in Gods
kingdom? Who sees not this to be so, although he could wish it to be far
otherwise?

22 The remembrance of this account, should be as a snaffle to us, or as a
bridle to keep us backward from profaneness and enormitie. And in these evils
let them take their portion, who are incredulous and unbelievers, of whom it
is no marvel, that they do hotely embrace them, and egerly follow after them.
For take away an opinion of rising unto judgment, and all observance of piety
falls presently to the ground, and men will strive to be filthy, Hebr. 9.27.
in impiety and in sin. But because we profess Christ Jesus, and the hope
of immortality, let us live as men that expect it. Genes. 27.2.
And since that it is appointed, that all men shall die once, and after it
comes the judgment; and since the day of death is as uncertain to us,
Matthew. 25.1.
as it ever was to Isaac, let us furnish our selves before hand, that with the
oil of faith, and of good life, in our lamps, we may go to meet the
bridegroom. If Christ as our head be risen from the dead, let us arise from
the vanities and follies of this earth, which are not worth the comparing with
eternity in the heavens. If he as the chief of his Church, be ascended and
gone before, let us who wish to be members, wrestle to follow after him. Let it
be enough, that hitherto with Jonas we have fled from our duty, which we owe
to our maker, and that we have lain not days but years, often three times and
three over, not in the fishes belly, but in the belly of sin. And let us
beseech the Lord, that since Satan is more desirous to swallow us into hell,
then the whale was to devour the Prophet, that he will free us from that
enemy, and bring us into his kingdom, there to reign with his own Son, to
both whom and the holy Spirit, be laud and praise immortal. Amen

THE X. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 2. The anguish of Jonas in the whale. 3. The use and force
of prayer. 6. Our negligence herein. 8. Invocation is to be used to God only.
10. Some things in the Fathers favoring invocation of Saints. 11. Those places
discussed. 14. Some of the ancient are against praying to Saints. 15.
Affliction stirs us up to piety. 19. The great misery of the Prophet. 21.
We are to repute God the author of our afflictions. 22. God hears our
prayers. 23. There are circumstances to be observed in prayer.

Jonah. 2.1.2.3. Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God out of the fishes
belly, And said, I cried in my affliction to the Lord, and he heard me: out of
the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice. For thou had cast me
into the bottom, in the midst of the sea, and the floods compassed me about:
all thy surges, and all thy waves passed over me.


WHen Jonas was in the sea, being cast out by the mariners, and was now of all
likelihood ready to be drowned, God had a fish prepared, (as before you have
heard) to swallow up the Prophet. And in the belly thereof, he lay three days
and three nights, after such a manner, as was never heard of before, but no
doubt much tormented between hope and distrust; almost quite in despair, yet
by faith again comforted. This faith of his, when at length it had prevailed,
he breaks forth (even there in prison) into good meditations, and after his
delivery, when he wrote this prophecy, he digested them into a prayer, which
is here set down in a kind of Hebrew verse, not much unlike to the Lyrikes of
the Greek or Latin Poets. Those words which I have read unto you, are some part
of this prayer, and that which follows after, is another part, in both which
if something sound, as from him being in danger, and some thing again as from
him being escaped, impute the one unto the time wherein he did write it, and
the other to those conflicts which he sustained while he lay in the belly of
the whale, where his bitter meditations, and troubled thoughts, did answer
unto that which is here proposed unto us.

2 For the space of those three days, he did not lie asleep, as a man in a
trance, or one insensible amated, (for right happy he had been, if that might
have be fallen him) but boiling in the extremity of anguish, and great sorrow,
as he that had on him a burden so unsupportable by his shoulders, that he knew
not how to turn him, or to manage himself. He felt the wrath of God,
perpetuated on him without intermission, which wrath was not contented to have
him over ship-boord, and so once to drown him, but dying he must live, and
living he must die in a torturous execution, so terribly and uncomfortably, that
the like had been never heard of. The horror of death still present, and yet
prolo^ged still, in the middle of the sea, in the belly of a whale, a prison and
monstrous dungeon did urge him often to tremble: but the feeling of Gods
displeasure upon his soul for sin, and the very great expectation of
eternal pains in hell, what thoughts did these now raise in him? Now the sour
of his disobedience is fully tasted by him: he may tumble it and reuolue it,
and chew it again and again. Now if Niniue had been distant, as far as the
Eastern Indies, or the South part of Aethiopia, and there he had been sure to
be murdered and massacred, by the tyranny of the governor, or ruler of that
country, he could have been well contented, to have gone thither even
barefooted, and thanked God on his knees, who had brought him to such a
bargain. For it is better to trace over all the world, then once to go to
hell: better to suffer many sorrows in body, then in soul to die eternally.
With which thoughts being so perplexed, as never was man before him, and not
knowing what else to do, with a faith tried in and out, and over and over
again, he falls at length to prayer, the effect whereof is in this second
chapter, by it self laid down unto us. But because this prayer is so long, as
that at many several times it must be handled, for distinction and orders sake,
I think good first to divide it into a Preface and a Prayer. The Preface is in
the first verse; the Prayer in that which follows. And there, what
subdiuisions are afterward to be made, it shall in his place appear. The
Preface notes these two things, what he did, that is, pray, and to whom, unto
the Lord his God.

Then Jonah prayed.
3 Many are the temptations and spiritual invasions, which in this life do
befall us, while the enemy of mankind does often assail us; by himself and
by the world, and by our own flesh, that domestical foe: and many are the
afflictions, which the great God in his wisdom, Reasons why God sends
affliction to his servants.
and our good Father in his love, does lay sharply upon us, to punish us for
our sins, to make trial of our patience, to strengthen us in the faith, to
make us loath the world, to teach us true humility, to inure us to a suffering
of greater things for his sake, (for so many are the ends, wherefore he sends
his cross, to those whom he best favors.) In respect whereof, Job. 7.1.
our life is by Job well called a warfare, wherein we are to fight, and wrestle
against great matters: to the which Saint Paul alluding, 2. Tim. 4.7. Ephesians.
6.12.
says that he had fought a good fight, being exercised all his time, against
powers and principalities, against anguishes and great grieuances, much within
and more without. The only stay of all which perplexities, in the very best of
Gods children, is earnest and hearty prayer, to him who sits above, who
plucketh down and sets up, who ouerturneth and raises, who strikes and
then makes whole, Dan. 2.21.
who corrects and then comfort, who brings to the pit of evil, and then
does not cast in, who tempts not above our strength, but in the midst of
temptation, does give an issue, that we may be able to bear it. The
sacrificing of our souls unto this blessed Father, the be^ding of our knees*
the bedeawing of our cheeks, the lifting up of our hands, the beating of our
breast, but withal and above all, the compunction of our hearts, and the
earnestness of our spirits, are the altar that we must fly to, are the
anchor that we must trust to. This is that chain, whereof one end is tied to
the ear of God, and the other end to our tongue: if we pluck he will listen:
if we call he will hearken.

4 Then it is for our good, that so often in the book of God, prayer is both
commended, and commanded to us, and not any way for his profit, who is to be
sought too, but for ours who are to cry. Matthew. 7.7. Cap. 26.41. Colos 4.2.
Jacob. 5.16.
Ask and it shall be given you, knock and it shall be opened to you. Watch
and pray says our Savior Christ. Continue says Paul in prayer. Is any of
you afflicted? let him pray, says Saint James, for the prayer of a righteous
man prevails much, if it be fervent. The faithful evermore have had recourse
to this in their necessity, Genes. 32.9.
as when Jacob feared Esau, he called on the name of the Lord, that he would
send him safety. When the Israelites were driven to that extremity, that
nothing in man's reason, but present death did remain for them, behind them
being Pharao and their enemies to slay them, before them the red sea, Exodus
14.15.
a fit place to drown them; then Moses being troubled in his spirit, although
he said never a word, having his heart as bleeding within him, Exodus 17.11.
cried unto the Lord. When it went hard with that people fighting against the
Amalekites, what did Moses but pray for them, when he held up his hands; from
which when by weariness he did cease, they sped ill, but while he continued
it, they did conquer? What are the Psalms of David, but recourses in his
passions, unto the highest God? Did not Jeremy in the pit and bottom of the
dungeon, Lament. 3.55
fall to calling upon the Lord? And our Prophet in worse case then ever was any
of these, had nothing else to comfort him, but to address himself to his
prayers. When all other helps do fail, yet this is near at hand: we need
not run far to seek it. And blessed is the reward which oftentimes does
follow these requests, either the having of that which we desire, or a
contententednesse to leave it.

5 The Church of God and the faithful, have evermore retained the use hereof:
Eusebius. Eccle. Histor. 5.5.
and sometimes men which have been infidels, have been glad to seek to them for
it. When the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, had almost lost his army in Germany, for
want of water, a legion of the Christians which were then in his service, had
recourse unto this remedy, and by vehement invocation did beg rain at Gods
hands, which he sent them in great abundance, to the amazing of the Emperor,
but the safety of all his army. De vita constantini 2.4.
That noble and mighty Constantine, knowing that one in heaven is the true Lord
of hosts, and all victory comes of him; that the joining of a battle, is
the loosing of a kingdom, unless he do assist, would never enter fight, but
that first himself and his forces, with knees bended upon the ground, would
desire the Lord to bless them. When his enemies on the other side, Ibidem.
and Licinius above other, would begin with incantation and seeking to the
Devil. But the good Emperor, having many things of great weight still upon
him, which he knew not how to weild without the help of the Highest (and that
was to be had for asking) did so delight in prayer, Luc. 18.11.
that in memory thereof, not as the dissembling Pharisee, but in true fear to
his God, and the better to instruct his people in it, by his own example, he
ordained that his image (which we know that Princes do use to coin upon their
money) should be stamped, Eusebius de vita Constant. 4.15. Socrat. 5.24. Theodor.
5.24. Sozom. 7.24.
with the resemblance of him praying. The example of Theodosius, is in this
case not unfit. Being in a battle which was hardly fought on both parts, but
at length his men being put to the worse, and now apparently ready to fly, he
throws himself on the ground, and with all the powers of his soul, he
desires the Lord to pity him, and to prosper him in that danger. God heard
the voice of his servant, and in miraculous manner did grant to him the
victory. To this comfort he found that of Origene to be true, Origin. in Numer.
Homil. 25.
One holy man prevails more in praying, then innumerable sinners do with
their fighting. For the prayer of a holy man does pierce up to the heaven. I
need not urge other examples of other in latter ages, who have evermore made
this their refuge, in dangers and extremities, to fly with speed unto the
Lord. For Divinity builds upon it: Christianity does enforce it: no faithful
man makes doubt of it: very Ethnickes in their services to their Gods,
continually did frequent it, and openly did practice it.

6 In the mean while, the supine security of our age, shall I say,
Gentillettus in examine Council. Tridentini* lib. 5.
cannot be enough rebuked, nay cannot be enough lamented, of which it may be
said as one speaks of the Monks, that their fasts are very fat, but their
prayers exceeding lean; for if we will compare matters that be in secret, with
such things as are open, and judge the one by the other, how cold are all our
prayers? If we look into our Churches, we shall find many of our Pastors, to
go through their common prayers, with very small devotion, little moved and
little moving. The people, that is not only young ones, who are of-ward
enough from God, and whose feeling is not so passionate, as the Lord in time
may make it; but the elder sort very slowly do repair unto the tabernacle:
every light occasion does keep them away: halfe-seruice does serve the turn:
and for that which is, it were as good to be never a whit, as not to be the
better: they sit there as in a giddiness, neither minding God nor the
Minister, but rather observing any thing, then that for which they come
thither. If it be thus in public, what may be thought of those prayers, which
in secret are powered forth, between God and our selves, in our closets or our
studies, when we rise up or lie down? It is to be feared that they are few,
and those which be, are very sleepy, rather perfunctory and customary, then
warmed with zeal of affection. And how shall God know what we say, when we our
selves do not know? how shall he hear that prayer, which we our selves do not
hear? Let us, brethren, stir up our selves, and be fervent in this, if in
any thing, and the tutour for his scholars, the parents for his children, the
master for his family, the Magistrate for his people, the Minister for his
flock, pray every day that the Lord will bless them, in their inward man and
their outward, in their businesses and their studies, in their piety and their
safety. Job. 1.5.
Remember how holy Job did sacrifice for his children, least in vanity of their
youth, they should forget the Lord.

7 And let every man for himself give no rest to his God, but beg of him
oftentimes, to double and multiply his gracious spirit on him. For how
dangerous are these ways, wherein we here do walk? What perils and great
hazards are every day about us? What drawings on are there to sin? what
entisements to iniquity? How is the Devil more ready, to swallow us into hell,
then the fish was to swallow Jonas? What Atheism does increase? what worldly
lusts and affections? Yea we may see many more things, to prick us on to
solicit the Lord of all importunely. Anno. 1595.
The dearth which does now reign in many parts of this land, which does little
good to the rich, but makes the poor to pinch for hunger, and the children to
cry in the streets, not knowing where to have bread. And if the Lord do not
stay his hand, the dearth may be yet much more. In like sort, the safety of
Gods Church, which in England and in Ireland, yea in many parts else of
Christendom, as Scotland, France, and Flaunders, much depends under God, on
the good estate of her Majesty, the hand maid of Christ Jesus: whose life we
see to be aimed at, by the cursed brood of Satan, unnatural homebred
English. And were it not that his eye who does never slumber nor sleep, Psalm.
121.4.
did watch over her for our good, it had often bin beyond man's reason, that their
plots should have been prevented. The spoils of the Turk in Hungary, and his
threats to the rest of Christendom, should wring from us this consideration,
that he is to be called on, who can put a hook in his nostrels, 2. Reg. 19.28.
and turn him another way, as he once did by Sennacherib. There should be in
us a sympathy, and fellow-feeling with our brethren. These things in general
to all, and in particular to each, should remember us to break forthinto
invocation with the Prophet. It is that which God loves in us: it is that
which Christ with his precept and example, has taught unto us. He prayed often
to his father, Cyprian. de Oratione Dominica.
and continued whole nights in prayer, and as Saint Cyprian does well gather,
if he did so who sinned not, what should we do who sin so deeply?

He prayed to the Lord his God.
8 The next circumstance in this preface is, to whom the Prophet prayed. He
prayed to the Lord his God, where this note may specially be given, that this
offending soul does yet dare by his faith, to make so near application, as
that the Lord is his God. Which point because it is plainer in the sixth verse
of this Chapter, Jonah. 2.6.
where he says o Lord my God, I will defer it thither. My general
observation here is that he prayed to the Lord. And as his case required this,
because none else could help him; and he was to be sought unto by submission
and humility, who before was by sin offended: so does the Lord appropriate
this honor to himself, and will not have any other to be served with this
sacrifice. Exodus 20.5.
He is a ielous God, and will not impart his honor to any of his creatures. But
he accounts that the greatest argument of duty which is in man, to be sought
to, and solicited by the sighs of the heart, and by the groans of the mind.
Call on me in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50.15.
says himself by David, and I will hear thee, and thou shall praise me. And
Christ cites this, as a matter appertaining unto all. Matthew 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. But in
this invocation, is the Majesty of his service. And if we did want other, to be
called on or prayed to, it should argue that our God either could not, or would
not hear us. The one denies his Omnipotency, the other does clip his mercy.
Psalm. 145.18.
But we acknowledge both. The Lord is near unto all that call upon him: yea
all such as call on him in truth. Then we need no intercessours, but him who
is the mediator of the New Testament, Jesus Christ. We embrace the faith of the
martyrs: we love the love of the Apostles: so far forth as we may, we
imitate the obedience of the good Angels in heaven: and we thank God for
proposing such holy examples to us: but we dare not call on these, least we
should be accounted guilty of robbery to their master. Whose meaning if it had
been, to bestow any of his honor, or a portion of his glory on any of his
creatures, he surely would have let us known it. But through all the Old and
New Testament, is no commandment, no example, no reason why we should do it.

9 Nay we have much to the contrary. As first that it may be said, that God
alone is there called on, which in the whole Bible is sounded out unto us. And
secondly we may know, that howsoever in general, the Saints which reign
triu^phing in heaven, do pray for the co^su^matio^ of Gods grace on their
brethren, who are militant upon earth, which may not amiss be gathered, from
the souls under the altar, Apoc. 6.10. Cap. 8.3.4.
and from the 8. of the Revelation, and the reformed Churches in no sort do
deny this: yet we are not to believe, that in particular manner they know the
deeds of one man, or hear the vows of another, but specially understand the
secret thoughts of the heart, which in prayers do most prevail. We find
otherwise in Job, Job. 14.21.
that a dead man does not know if his sons shall be honorable, neither does he
understand concerning them, whether they shall be of low degree. The speech is
of all dead generally. He knows not of his own children, much less of other
men: whether that they be in honor, which is an outward occurrent, and
sensible to the eye, much less what they think in heart, which is proper to
the Almighty. 1. Reg. 8 39. Th. Aquin. p. 1. q. 89. a. 8.
That place in Job, made Aquinas to acknowledge, that the souls of those which
are departed hence, do ex se, of themselves, know nothing done upon earth, but
says he, those which are in blessedness, do take knowledge of our deeds, by
revelation from God. But neither he nor any of the Papists, do prove out of
the Scripture, that God reuealeth such things, to the blessed which are in
heaven. That remains to be confirmed. We may join to that of Job, the
confession of the people, Isay. 63.16.
Doubtless thou art our father: though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
know us not, yet thou o Lord art our father, and our redeemer: and thy name is
for ever. Then the Patriarchs did not know, and wherefore should they now? For
that then they were in Limbus, is an untrue faithless fable, without any
ground of Gods word. Yet it is marvel to see, how stiffly the Church of Rome,
does maintain in Saints, and the Virgin Mary, the hearing of those which pray,
and their intercession for us. Breuiarium Romanum in Suffagijs communibus in
initio. In Orat in die S. Andreae Sabbato ad vesperas. Ad completorium. In
Antiphona a Dominica prima. Aduentus ad plurificationem Mariae.
He that shall look into their reformed Breuiary (for in the old many things
were worse) shall see that they are much called on, nay that God himself is
requested, that by the merits of them, and by their mediation, we may attain
salvation. There the Virgin Mary is called porta coeli peruia, the gate to
pass through to heaven: and she is prayed unto, that she herself will take
pity upon offending men. And as they say, if these things be not in the
Scripture, yet our duty, and the complements which we owe unto Christ himself,
do require it at our hands, and all Antiquity does make for it.

10 I will not sist this Non sequitu^ of decency and congruity, that because
Mary was Christ's mother, and the Saints were his faithful servants, therefore
in devotion to him who was son to the one, and master unto both, we should use
very high duty to them: for God himself best knows what fitteth, and he has
laid all that down, and no word of this invocation. But briefly for
Antiquity, I confess that in the writings of some of the ancient fathers,
they may find something, which serves for this purpose. Augustine. confess. 9
3. De vera Religione cap. 55. Epistol. 120.
As that Saint Austen in his Confessions does suppose, that his friend
Nebridius does think on him in heaven. Elsewhere he seems to say as much, as
that the Angels do hear our prayers, and he proves it out of the book of
Tobias. So, in his Epistle ad Honoratum, he mentions, that the Angels do tell
unto us, Gods benefits sent unto us, and deliver back again our prayers unto
him. In his treatises upon John, We do not pray for the martyrs, Tract. 84. in
Ioh^nnem. Sed magis vt orent ipsi pronobis.

In Meditationibus Tomo 9.

De Sanctis Sermon 19. Hyeron. Epostola. 25. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 118. Sozomen.
Eccles. Hist. 7.24.


but we rather pray to them that they may pray for us, that we may walk in
their steps. But in that which some do think to be his Meditations, the Author
does pray to Saints, and in his Sermons De sanctis, unto the Virgin Mary. So
Saint Herome in his first Tome, and five and twentieth Epistle, says that
Blesilla the dead daughter, did pray for her mother Paula. So Chrysostom on
the Psalms, does mention the intercession of Mary the mother of God, and of
the other Saints. To these may be joined, the testimony of Sozomen in his
seventh book, where Satan is reported to have railed on John the Baptist, as
if by his meditation his purpose were sometimes hindered. I know that much more
of this nature may be brought to uphold this doctrine, and yet God knows, how
sandy is all this weak foundation? how rotten are these supporters, which
bend under such a burden? I beseech you to judge indifferently, when you hear
what shall be answered.

11 To speak first to that in Sozomen, which is drawn from Satan's testimony,
suppose the story true, which is there but a bare report, And is not this a
proof right substantial, Satan railed on John the Baptist, because that by
his intercession, his purpose sometimes was crossed, Ergo Saints are our
mediators? What if the Devil there forged? Johan. 8 44.
Is he not the author of lies? What if this were his policy, to make men
turn their service, from God unto his creatures? I doubt not but so it was. He
saw that the ancient Oracles were fallen down long before (as it appears by
Plutarkes testimony, Plutarch. de defectu Oraculorum.
who wrote a tract to that purpose) with the which in former times, he had
possessed men's souls, for a great space together. He saw that Christ's faith
did spread, and that by the force of no tyrant it could possibly be
extinguished: he saw that the ten persecutions were ceased, by the reigning of
Christian Emperors, and there was now no good to do that way: therefore now he
will turn over a new leaf, and will take another course, to breed flawes in
the faith, and by opinion of religion, to supplant Gods true religion, by
superstition to ouerturne good devotion. Then begins he for to broach some
of Antichrists mingled wine (for the Apostle said, 1. Johan. 2.18
that in his time Antichrist had set in footing) and nothing fell out more
fitly to his humor, then to spoil God of his honor, by turning to Saints in
prayer. Thus is the roaring Lion now become a subtle fox, and seeks by
error in the show of truth, to undermine holy piety. Such another devise was
that, when Satan being asked in the time of Julian the Apostata, Theodoret.
Hist. Eccles. 3.9.
why the Oracle which was sometimes in Daphne, near to Antioche, had ceased,
and gave no answer, he signified that he might not appear any more in that
Chapel, because the Relics, and the body of the holy martyr Babylas, were
entered in that place. Wherein his meaning was, by a secret insinuation, to
inueigle men to the honoring of the relics and the bones of martyrs and holy
men, to the which indeed they afterward fell, with doting superstition. So
crafty is this Serpent, to destroy men's souls by fraud. And that example of
John the Baptist, I hold to be of this nature.

12 Concerning the authority of the fathers, which are cited to prove this
doctrine, I say first, that many books are foisted into their works, which
savor not of their spirit. The censures that be upon them, by Papists as well
as other, together with the difference of the style, and many other
circumstances, do make that plain enough. In the most of them this has been
brought about, either by the ignorance of such as did transcribe, and copy them
out, before that printing was invented; or else by the falsehood of base
authors, who would assume noble names, Passio Cypri. per Pontium diaconum ejus.
to things which were most unworthy. In Cyprian there is nothing, which makes
mention of Charles the Emperor, which if we will interpret, of the first
Charles called the Great, yet there is so great a difference, of the times
wherein these lived, that the one was after the other more then five hundred
years. Yet that is said to be written, by Pontius who was deacon to Cyprian
himself. I ascribe this to the gross ignorance of the writer, or counterfeit
author. In Austens works there are many things, which are fathered on his
name, and that by wilful falsehood. I will name to you one for all, and that
shall be his Sermons, Augustine. ad fratres in eremo.
as they are entitled, Ad fratres in eremo. There in the name of Saint Austen,
one makes the whole tract, willing to do great credit, to the order of Austen
Friars, as if the great Saint Austen had been the founder of the^. But as the
ears of the ass did show what beast he was, although he had gotten on him the
skin of a noble Lion, so albeit that honest man do use words for his purpose, I
Augustine Bishop of Hippon did this, and this, and many things, yet the
Barbarismes and the Solecismes which are in that work, do make it plain, that
some worthy wight did hatch that Treatise up to the world. In his five and
twentieth Sermon, Sermon. 25.
he does let us know the reason, why some holy days have no fasting days, as
Philip and Jacobs day, and Saint Bartholomew and Saint Thomas. A fit argument
for Saint Austen, especially as he handles it. But because he will pass
himself, and show of what house he comes, in his thirty and seventh Sermon,
Sermon. 37.
he says that himself did go into the South part of Afrike, as far as
Aethiopia to preach the Gospel of Christ, and that he saw there men and women
without heads, having their eyes standing in their breasts. This tale had had
little credit, Act. 8.27.
but that himself did see it. The Chamberlain of Candaces, who was met with
by Philip, did come out of this Aethiopia, and shall we be so wise as to think
that his shape was of such a strange kind of making? Yet we must go a little
farther: he does add that in that country, he saw men which had but one eye,
and that in the midst of their foreheads. Herodot. li 4. Plinius Hist.
Natural. 5.8. (...).
The fool had heard or read in Herodotus, or in Pliny, or some one of the
ancient, that some such things were talked of, Acephali men without heads,
Cynocephali, men with heads like to dogs, Arimaspi, men with one eye in the
middle of their forehead, and other of monstrous shape, all which were
imagined to be in the hoate countries, within the Zona Torrida, or in the cold
coasts of Scythia, whither very few in old time did offer at all to travel,
either by land or sea, for the great heat of the Southern parts, and the
great cold of the Northern. Ovid. Metamorphos. lib. 1. Quarum quae media est
non est habitabilis aestu.
Yea many in ancient time, did think those quarters of the earth, to be
utterly inhabitable, by men of common proportion; neither in the most civil
countries, of Asia and of Europe, where learning and knowledge abounded, was
the contrary received, until that the late discoueries of the Portingales and
the Spaniards toward the hoter climates, and of the English toward the colder
by sea, and some other few by land, have let men know the contrary. And indeed
until very late times, the opinion so prevailed, of people of such strange
figures, that Authors of good reckening, Munster. cosmogra. 5.
received it for a truth, and left it so in their writings. For that conceit
was continued from hand to hand, which at the first did arise from this
imagination, that in countries so strange from the ordinary temperature must be
people as far differing from ordinary men; which ground being once laid
down, it was no hard thing for fancy, to frame very many shapes; which
believed once by the simple, and being sometimes talked of, Hedodot. lib. 3.
non credit esse Arimaspos. De Acephalis and Cynocephalis vt de bestijs
loquitur. lib. 4.
for the commonnesse of the fame were reported by some learned, which were in
ancient times (yet doubtfully and otherwise then their successors entertained
them) but such as did come after them, took them up for a truth well ratified,
and so did set the^ down. Now this honest man, who gladly would shroud so vain
a tale under Saint Austens name, in kindness and good nature to the Friars in
his Covent, very soberly and advisedly professes, that he had seen the^. And
you know that one eyewitness, is better then ten other, who speak only by
report. Very many such bastard broods, Viues de causis corruptarum artium. Aug.
de spiritu and anima. Meditat. T. 9. Sermones de Sanctis. T. 10
are fastened upon the Fathers, besides here and there whole pages, and
sentences shuffled in, and notes that were in the marge^t, put afterward in the
text, by this Friar and that Monk, when their Nouices were appointed to
transcribe their ancient copies. He that would see more of this, let him look
Lodouicus Viues, in his books De causis corruptarum Artium. Now in these
forged writings, are many of those plain places for prayers to any creature,
and especially in Saint Austen, as in the book De spiritu and anima; in his
Meditations, and in his Sermons De sanctis, Vide Censuras Erasmi in hos libros.
al which are expunged by the learned, and shut out from his true works, as
may be seen in the censures on them.

13 Yea but in their undoubted works, there are many things to that purpose.
Indeed I do not deny this: but yet take this withal, that if we look through
their writings, Homil 3. in Cantica. apud Hyeron. T. 8.

Omnes sancti qui de hac vita decesserunt, si dicantur curam gerere salutis
eorum, and juuare eos precibus suis atque interuentu apud Deum, non erit
inconueniens.

Gregor. Nazianz. Orat. 29. and 31. Orat. 30. Iliicque vt opinor sacrificia pro
nibis offert. Orat. 25. Quod si quid nostros etiam honores curas, atque hoc
praemij sanctis animabus a Deo confertur vt ista persentiscant.

Aug. de cura pro mortuis gerenda ca. 13. Vt volet accipiat quisque quod dicam.


we shall find that they set it down, so waueringly and doubtfully, that a
sober man would be fearful, to build his faith upon it. In the eight Tome of
Saint Hierome, are four Homilies on the Canticles, supposed to be Origens, and
translated by Saint Hierome. In the third of them I find this, All the Saints
which are departed out of this life, having yet a love toward those which are
in this world: if they should be said to take care of their safety or
salvation, and to help them with their prayers and intercession to God, it
shall not be inconvenient. How cold a speech is this, It shall not be
inconvenient. That great clerk Gregory Nazianzene, does make a kind of prayer,
both to the Virgin Mary, and unto Athanasius: yet see whether in some other
places, it be not as a scruple unsatisfied in his mind, whether that the Saints
did know, and take care of the affairs of their friends remaining on earth:
when speaking of Basile lately dead, he uses these words, But now is Basile
in heaven, and there as I do think offreth sacrifices for us, and powers
prayers out for the people. He did not know it, but thought it. But speaking of
Gorgonia, his own sister departed, he expresses his doubt more plainly. And
if thou do take care of the honoring of us, and if this reward be given by God
unto holy souls, that they shall perceive these things, then receive my
prayer. If besides other men's opinions, he had been resolved in it, what needed
this If, and this doubting? But Saint Austen whom I honor above all the old,
for his judgment, when he canuasseth this question, disputing it of purpose,
and not slightly, or by the way, whether the souls departed hence, do know
what is done here, how uncertain is he in it, and rather propendeth to the
Negative? Let every man, says he, take as himself will, that which I shall
say, so seeming to cross the stream, of that which was the^ received. Then he
infers three reasons; The first was, that if the dead did know our deeds,
he certainly was persuaded, that his mother Monica, who loved him so well
while she lived, would sometimes have appeared to him, and taught him something
for his good. For God forbid, says he, that she being now in a life of more
felicity, should be grown cruel toward me* But he found that neither by
dream, nor vision, nor any apparition, she had ever been present with him, and
therefore Isay. 63.16.
that Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel does not know us. And therefore not
other men. 2. Reg. 22.20.
Thirdly, that Josias was taken away, that he might not De cura pro mortuis
gerenda. cap. 15
Thus does he dispute against it, and does not answer his own reasons
otherwise, then that it may be said, that the departed may be informed, what is
done here on earth by men, by the souls of other, which dye from hence, or by
the Angels. So far off is this holy father, when he thinks of the thing
advisedly, from pronouncing of any certainty, which infallibly and undoubtedly
will maintain this suspected doctrine.

14 Next, to suppose that many of the Ancient, directly and conclusiuely did
iumpe in the consent hereof (which cannot be found, as I have showed) yet were
this a sure rule of truth? What, when the word of God does give no warrant for
it? nay does teach us the contrary, as before has been mentioned? Have we not
learned that lesson, to distinguish men from God? the inspired works of the
one, from the doubtful words of the other? We hold nothing for Canonical but
the writ of the holy Bible. Tit. 1.2. Romans 3.4. August. contra Cresconium Gram.
lib. 2.
It is God which cannot lie: but every man is a lier. Hear Saint Austen
himself here: I hold not the Epistles of Cyprian for Canonical, but I try
them and examine them from the Canonical Scripture. So to Fortunatianus, We
are not to esteem the disputings of any, yea although Catholic and
co^me^dable men, Epistola. 111. Ad fortunat. Talis ego sum in scriptis alioru^,
tales volo esse intellectores meor^m.
to be as the Canonical Scriptures, so that, saving the honor which is due to
those men, we may not dislike and reject any thing in their writings, if we
find that they have thought otherwise then the truth has, as it shall by Gods
help be understood, either by other or our selves. Thus do I in the writings
of others, and such understanders of mine would I have other men to be.
Whatsoever then they shall teach, which has not his foundation upon the rock
of Gods truth, we leave it and pass by it, and among other things, invocation
of Saints, or of any other creature. But yet this may be said farther, that
from diverse of the writings of the Ancient, it may be showed, that this was
by some of them held unlawful. Among the works of Saint Ambrose, is found a
certain Commentary on Paul's Epistle to the Romans, Ambros. in Epist. ad
Romanos. 1.
and therein there is setdowne for an objection, the reason of the Romish
Church, that none dare to approach the person of an earthly Prince for any suit,
but by the intercession of some courtier, or other about him: therefore it
should be so of our part toward God, unto whose mighty Majesty, we must use the
mediatio^, of some which are in his favor. The absurdnesse of this comparison,
is answered there in a word, Quia homo vtique est Rex and nescit quibus debet
Re^p. credere.
that the reason is most unlike, because Princes are men, and know not of
themselves, to whom to commit the commonwealth. He means that they have
their power, and presence, and understanding limited, and they must be helped
by the information of such as are known unto them: but to God nothing is
secret; himself does take notice of it. His conclusion at the last is, Ad Deum
promerendum suffragatore non opus est, sed mente deuota. Orig. contra Celium
lib. 1. and lib. 5. Omnia vota, omnes interpellationes, deprecationes and
gratiarum actiones destinandae sunt ad Deum rerum omnium Dominum.

Hoc ipsum cohibebit nequis audeat preces offerre nisi soli Domino Deo.


that to win God unto us (from whom nothing lies hid, but he knows the
deserts of all men) we need not any to speak for us, or to help us in our
prayer, but only a devout mind. Join hereto the witness of Origene. When
Celsus had objected, that first the Jews and then the Christians, did worship
and pray to Angels, Origene in his first book against him does disclaim it,
but much more in the fifth book, telling plainly, that God alone was to be
prayed to, and not Angels. We are not bid to adore the Angels, or worship them
with divine honor, although they bring the gifts of God unto us. For all
vows, all requests, prayers, and thankesgiuings, are to be directed to God,
who is the Lord of all things, by the chief Priest who is greater then all
Angels, that is the living word and God. And having adjoined something of the
unknown nature of the Angels, that we cannot comprehend it, he adds, that
this should restrain us, that none should dare to offer prayers, but only unto
the Lord God, who alone is abundantly sufficient for all, through our Savior
the Son of God. He that lists to read the place, shall find yet farther
matter, Lactant. Divine. Instit. 2.17.

Nullum sibi honorem tribui volunt, quorum honor in Deo est.

Aug. de vera Religione cap. 55.

Nec eis templa construimus.

Idem de ciuitate Dei. lib. 8.27. 1. Cor. 6.19. Chrysostom. de poenitentia.
Homilia 5. In Deo nihil est tale. Sine mediatore exorabilis est, sine pecunia,
sine impensa precibus annuit.


making for my present purpose. Lactantius says that those Angels whose honor
is in God, will have no honor given to them. Yea Austen himself denies that
to Angels, to Martyrs and to Saints, which might as well be done, as to seek
to them in prayer. We build no Churches to Angels. And elsewhere says he, Who
ever heard the Priest to say at the altar, I offer to thee a sacrifice, Peter
or Paul or Cyprian? And is it more to build a material Church to them, then
to offer to their service our bodies, which are the spiritual temple of the
holy Ghost? Or to offer corporal sacrifice, then to offer spiritual sacrifice
of prayer and invocation? I will end this whole matter with a saying of
Chrysostom. Let us still fly unto God, who is both willing and able to ease
our miseries. If we were to entreat men, we must first meet with the door
keepers, and persuade parasites and players, and oftentimes go a great way. But
in God there is no such thing. Without a mediator he is to be entreated:
without money, without cost he yields to our prayers. Since then that men are
so doubtful, but God himself is so peremptory, that nothing but the Trinity,
is to be sought unto by sacred invocation, let the Church of Rome in this be
distinguished from the Church of God, and let us learn here of Jonas, when
misery ouerwhelmeth us, to pray only unto the Lord. And thus far of the
Preface.

Affliction makes men godly.
15 The prayer it self is long, and offers much doctrine to us, but in these
two former verses three things may be observed. I Secondly, that the misery of
the Prophet was very great, from the belly of hell I cried, and all thy waves
did And thirdly that when he cried, the Lord did hear his voice, Thou heardest
my voice. To touch them briefly as they lie. He that was contented before,
quite to renounce his master: he that was so far forgetful, as that when he
should have gone, for his Lord to preach at Niniue, would take a course unto
Tarshus, about business of his own: he that before was so hardened, that he
could sleep most soundly, when he had more need to awake: he that could give
leave to the mariners, to pray to a God whom they knew not, but he himself was
not so holy; being now in the fishes belly, so lashed and whipped with justice,
thinks it not enough to pray, but he cries out with great vehemence: in
earnest and hearty manner, not coldly or at all adventures, as the hypocrites,
who sometimes do slubber up a few prayers; but with the soul and the mind, and
with all the powers of his spirit. Oh the true force of the cross, of
calamity, and of misery, which makes us remember that, whereof else we should
never think. God says by his prophet Osee, Ose. 5 15. Isay. 17.7.
that his people in their affliction would seek him diligently. So when by his
servant Esaias, he had threatened the cross before, At that day says he, shall a
man look to his maker, and his eyes shall look to the holy one of Israel. So
in the time of the Judges: Iudic. 6.6.
Thus was Israel exceedingly impouerished by the Madianites, therefore the
children of Israel cry unto the Lord. The Scripture is very copious in examples
of this kind, but yet has none fitter then this of our Prophet. For he who^
favor could not move, to stand when he was upright, the rod did force him to
labor, to get up again when he was fallen. The prison could make him humble,
whom liberty had enraged. The darkness in the whales belly, does more bring
him unto light, even the true and heavenly light, then the sight of Sun or
firmament. Thus restaint does make him holy, to the great benefit of his soul,
clean contrary to that Proverb, Non vsquam belli carceres, Prisons are good
in no place.

16 That, adversity and the cross, should be a door to devotion, is without
question a Paradoxe to repining flesh and blood, which does ever love to be in
iolity; but yet unto a Christian man, it is a principle of a sound truth. For
when we do luxuriate, and grow riotous in the gallantnesse of this world, and
have all things at our pleasure, we forget that God who made us, who does cause
his Sun to shine on us, and with the untamed heyfer which is full fed, and
grown perfectly wanton, we kick against the sole author of our happiness and
beatitude; with the Magnificoes of the world, and great-mouthed Gloriosoes we
do both contemn our brethren, and speak against the Highest. But affliction
does humble us, 2. Chron. 33.12.
and make us know our selves, as it did Manasses the king of Judah, who being in
chains, did thrive more for his soul, then he did in his royal palaces. It
makes to us say with David, O Lord, it is good for us, that we have been in
trouble. And with Jeremy lamenting, Psalm. 119.71. Lament. 3.27.
It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth. When the sovereign
dispenser of all things, by his wisdom does consider, that this is our case, by
his sober and sage providence he sometimes sends prosperity, lest we should be
discouraged, and broken by calamity, but he often sends adversity to exercise
us here, lest we should be puffed up by the abundance of his mercy. And while
his hand is upon us, we which else are stiff and stubburne, Liuius lib. 1.
will in pliable manner bend. When Numa had broched in Rome, a set order of
service unto their heathen Gods, and had possessed the people with it, his
successor Tullus Hostilius not only did neglect it, but contemned it, as
accounting that no one thing did less beseem a king, then to yield himself
to ceremonies, and sacrifices of religion. But when he dad proceeded long, and
gone forward in this vein, a great pestilence grew in Rome, and himself lay
afterward long languishing of a sickness. This did so abate the spirits, and
pluck down the heart of the king, that he who before despised al, did now
yield himself, to all both great and small superstitions, and filled the
peoples heads with a multitude of religions. Look what effect these things had
with him in his heathenish errors, the same in Christian obedience, does
tribulation bring to many of Gods elect; this only thing excepted, that these
fly superstition. Those who in their younger days, and in the strength of
their time, have scorned the word and the ministry, and have made no kind of
conscience of theft or fornication, but have sucked them in as water, being
afterward pinched with poverty, or banishment, or imprisonment, or especially
with sickness (which gives a man right good leisure, if it be long and sharp
on him, to bethink himself of his follies) with contrition of the heart, and
compunction in great measure do fly unto the Lord, and with many tears wash
away the blackness of their iniquity.

17 Then they desire to be with God, and to leave this vale of misery, which
lately they embraced as their greatest treasure, and preferred it before their
own salvation; and the delight whereof they would yet have followed after, but
that misery and calamity did enforce them otherwise. Wherein we may well
observe, that nothing so much as affliction does make us love our end, by
loathing the bitter potions which we daily do taste of. When Elias was chased by
Iezabel, and was comfortless in the wilderness, 1. Reg. 19.4.
he cries: Now it is enough, Lord take away my soul, for I am no better then
my fathers. But if this gall and wormwood were turned into sugared honey, we
should not hasten from this place; but yet we be not ready; stay a little, and
a little. Plutarch. in Pelopida.
Plutarke in his Pelopidas, tells that Antigonus had a soldier, who being
vexed with an ill disease, and so loathing to live, was always foremost in his
services, were it skirmish or other fight, and was so resolute, as no man in
the army. The General much liking this, cast such an affection to the valor
of the man, that to his great expense, he caused him to be cured, who held
himself lately incurable. But then looking that his soldier should be forward
as before, he found him to do far otherwise, and now never offer to come in
danger. Asking the reason of this, his soldier makes him answer, that now
he had somewhat to loose, that was a healthful and sound body, with which he
should grieve to part; but before when he was in misery, he had thought his
case should have been very happy, if he might have been dead and buried. The
wisdom of the Almighty did foresee that in us, which Antigonus found but
afterward, that we who in anguish and persecution, do desire the company of the
elect, Philip. 1.23.
who are triumphant in heaven, and with Saint Paul do long to be dissolved,
would lie groueling in prosperity, as tied and glued to the ground; and
therefore in his love he does whip us oftentimes, that we may seek unto him,
that we may sue to be with him.

18 This is one great occasion, wherefore the Lord does send his chastiseme^t
upon us; and yet in the mean while also he does aim at this, that we tasting
of that bitterness, which other things yield unto us, may evermore fly to him
by prayer and meditation; may be reposed on him, when other things do annoy us,
when other things do affright us. Chlrysost in Psa. 114.
It is a good comparison, which Chrysostom. has in this case, that mothers do
use with vizards and bugbeares, to fright their unruly children, to make the^
fly to their lap, not willing to hurt the infants, but to make them sit close
by them. So God desiring to join us fast to himself, being a true lover of us,
does permit that oftentimes we are brought to such necessity, that perpetually
we may intend to prayer and calling upon him, and leaving all other things, be
only careful of him. Such an attractiue violence, and violent attraction is
in the cross, to draw us as well as Jonas unto the Lord. Happy men if we could
see it, and make that benefit of it, which if we will not learn at first, he
will come again unto us, and double his rods upon us, if we belong to his
election. In the mean time we must learn, with patience to suffer whatsoever
comes from the Lord: since besides all other uses, it brings that good unto
us, as to drive us to our duties, and obedience to our God. Our land has long
felt the sweetness of the Lords distilling grace, prosperity, peace, and
plenty, which makes men forget the author of their felicity. They with the
Ox, have tasted the fodder that lies before the^, but they have not thought
of the giver. Oh the blockishnesse of our nature, who return to God little
love, for his great love unto us. Our neighbors of France and Flaunders, have
drunk of another cup, and have taken another course. Some years now past,
religion and true faith has been oppugned in France. Edicts have been made,
that the Protestants or Huguenots, as they call them, should get them out of
that country, within such a time or such a space, under peril of their lives.
Thousands of them have fled, and left their native country, but not the care
of their country; for although they were elsewhere, wishing still good to
Sion, they have harkened after the adventures of that Church and commonwealth,
and have found both to be in hazard. Many invasions and great slaughters, and
civil wars in that land, wherein those that have been the pillars of
religion in that country, have been oftentimes shrewdly shaken. This has
caused them, as London does well know, to assemble themselves together in their
Churches, with solemn fasts and prayers, which of likelihood they had not
done, but that they saw themselves to be fallen into most perilous times.
These assemblies and these fasts, being many more then we have had, did argue
that more affliction was on them then on us, which made them so to cry. I would
that we might learn by their example to be wise, before that we be stricken.
But if peace do lull us asleep, the rod it is which can awake us. That we find
by our Prophets case, in whom the next thing which I observed is the
greatness of his calamity.

The greatness of his misery.
19 In the last place I have noted, that misery minds God unto us. Then the
greater our misery is, the more is our mind on our maker. If this be true, our
Jonas might well cry to the Lord, for great and exceeding troubles were at this
time showed unto him. He says that he was in hell, yea in the belly and midst
of hell, and in the third verse plainer, that he was thrown into the bottom,
(...)
in the very heart of the sea, for so it is in the Hebrew, that all the floods
had passed over him, all the surges and all the waves. What can be expressed
more horrible, then this was unto Jonas? (...)
The word which is used here is Sheol, which sometimes does note the grave unto
us, and other some times hell, and that double signification, together with the
like in some few other words, does cause that question so often handled, of the
manner of Christ's descending into hell. But partly because I love not to
extrauagate from my text, (although occasion be here well offered by the nature
of the word bearing so plain a difference) but especially in a desire of
unity in our Church, least some by contradiction should gainesay, whatsoever
is uttered in this argument, (so apt are we to be iarring, which I wish were
otherwise) I pass over that point in silence; only observing unto the weak,
that we all do hold the Article of Christ's descense into hell, but the
disagreement is in the manner of his descending, and how that should be
expounded. The Prophets words here import, that he was in the fishes belly, as
a man might be in his grave, without light, without sight, in darkness and
discomfort, never hoping more to live, then a man who was dead and buried. Or
else that he felt in himself such anguish of his conscience, because Gods
wrath did follow him, and because he knew that himself had deserved
everlasting torment, that now he was so tortured, (with an Hyperbole speaking
of it) as if he had bin in hell. The Chaldee Paraphrase here has a word,
signifying a bottomless pit, which intends to us, that the sea was very
deep, wherein he was, as if he had been drowned. And this may be an argument,
that the sea was very deep there, that the whale which devoured him was there,
whose greatness was such and so huge, that it would require much water. The
whale swimmeth not in the shallowes, neither can remain in the foords.

20 The greatness of this danger, so amplified by the Prophet in many parts of
his song, first could not choose but much dismay him, and fright him home for
the present; for what could he think of himself? that drowned he was, and not
drowned; eaten up and not devoured; and yet for every moment, in case to come
to his end, besides the pangs of his soulefearing eternal death. Secondly,
when afterward he had by the mercy of God escaped from destruction, it might
be a great remembrance and testimony to him, of the favor of the Lord. For
the greater was his danger, the greater was his deliverance. Neither does that
man ever know, what it is to be freed from misery, who was never like to feel
it. To be brought to the pits brinke, and then and there to be stayed; nay to
be in the midst of death, and there to be kept from dying, must needs urge in
the patient, a meditation of thankfulness. That consideration of Ammianus
Marcellinus in his story, Ammianus Marcellinus lib. 15. Illa qualitas vitae
non tantum habet sensum.
is very good, that although it be a matter exceedingly to be wished for, that
fortune would continue in flourishing state unto us, yet that quality of life
has not that feeling with it, as when from a desperate and very hard estate,
we are recalled to a better fortune. We better know what health is, when
sickness has much broken us. We know what it is, to have store of clothing
and competent food, if hunger and thirst and nakedness, do for a time assail
us. It is a pretty reason (although the practice thereof were bad) which
Herodotus says, Herodotus lib. 3.
that the Samian tyrant Polycrates did use to make. He very much exercised
piracie and robbery, as well by land as sea, and his custom was to spoil his
friends as much as his enemies; whereof he assigned that cause, that when he
should understand afterward, that his friend was robbed of any thing, he might
gratify that friend more, in restoring what he had lost, then if he had taken
nothing from him. I do not commend his thieuing; but his reason had wit and
meaning. God knows that when himself takes from us such things as are not
ours, (we are but his disposers, or as tenants at will unto him) he makes us
so much the more embrace his mercy, who has sent grace in wretchedness, and
present comfort in extremity. Our Prophet in his suffering, had good
experience of these things, which makes him the rather break forth into a
song of thanksgiving.

21 Thou had cast me into the bottom, in the very midst of the sea, as if he
should have said, now it is otherwise, and the more am I beholding to thee.
Where also observe his speech, that he refers all his punishment to the hand
of the Lord. He speaks not of the mariners, by whose means it was done, much
less does he revile them, as in our time wicked offending persons often do to
the magistrates, or Judges, or other officers, who do but see that to be done,
which just law lays upon the^, and they wilfully have deserved. But Jonas
passing by the instrument and means whereby God wrought, seeks unto the
fountain and original of the deed. He acknowledges that his maker was he
who was offended; that his hand had corrected him; that his wrath must be
satisfied; but by all other he passes. That evil Ioram did not so, 2. Reg.
6.31.
when his city of Samaria was oppressed with a famine so grievous, that the
mother did eat her own child, which extremity it is likely, that the Prophet
Elizaeus did foretell should fall upon them, for the greatness of their sin.
But then he, in stead of looking upward to God, whom he should have sought unto
by fasting and by prayer, turns his anger on the Prophet, the minister of the
Almighty, and voweth himself to much evil, if innocent Elizaeus were not put
to death that day. Blind man who could not look higher, and see whose
messenger the Prophet was. How much better was Jobs behavior? for when news
was brought unto him, that the Sabees and Chaldeans, by violence and strong
hand, had taken away his Oxen, and robbed him of his Camels, he did not
straight way curse those sinners, and wish much evil on them, but not so much
as naming them, did fasten his thoughts on God, and imputed all unto him, Job.
1.21.
saying most patiently, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken it;
blessed be the name of the Lord. I would that men in our time, could carry his
resolution. When ought amiss does befall them, to have recourse to the
Highest, and to suppose that either he does try them, or does punish the^ for
their sins, or has some other good purpose. But we rather run to any thing,
then that which most does urge us; often surmising that which is not, and
suspecting those that be innocents. And if we can find the means, whereby all
is brought about, we double our force on that; this witch has killed my
beasts; this wicked man has undone me; this mighty man has crossed me: I
would he were in his grave, or some mischief else were on him. Indeed I do not
deny, but that the evil are oftentimes the rods of God, to chasten good men
withal, but yet think thou evermore, that his hand is it which effects all,
and that his stroke is in the action, Fasten thy eyes on him, and with sighing
and true repentance, seek to appease his wrath; and the^ the means shall not
touch thee, no wicked thing shall have power over thee. But let this be thy
song, to utter forth with the Prophet, thou had cast me into the water, thou
have laid this cross upon me.

I cried in mine affliction, and thou heardest me, and again, O Lord thou
heardst my voice. You see that his woe was exceeding, and after the common
course of sorrow it drove him unto his maker; it enforced him to pray. Where
behold, the comfort is, that he did not loose his labor: the Lord did hear
his voice. This evermore is his property, to attend to those who solicit
him: to respect those who call on him. I called on the Lord in trouble, Psalm.
118.5.
says David, and the Lord heard me at large. So by Jeremy his servant, God
promises to the Jews, and in them to all his Saints, you shall cry to me, and
shall go and pray to me, Ier. 29.12.13
and I will hear you. And you shall seek and find me. So respective is the
Lord to those who fly to him, which shows his great prerogative above all
heathen idols, who may be derided with Baal, 1. Reg. 18.27
that either they are busy in following of their enemies, or asleep and must
be awaked, but surely they cannot hear. But especially to us it is comfort in
extremity, that if sickness, or pinching poverty, or malice of any man, nay
if pangs of death do hurt us, or if in the soul which is our better part,
temptation ouercharge us, and Satan's darts hardly drive at us, if we call unto
that Lord, Apoc. 1.18.
who can bind and loose, and has the keys of hell and of death, he can rid us
and deliver us. Yea he so yields to our prayers, Cyprian. de caena Dom.
Quoties te in conspectu Domini video suspirantem, Spiritum sanctu^ non dubito
aspirantem. August. de tempore. Sermon. 226. Oration iusti clauis est coeli.
Ascendit precatio and descendit Dei miseratio. Cum sensibus loquitur si si^
solus noster gemitus.
that they shall not return in vain, but comfort at the least, and patience
in our miseries, shall be bestowed upon us. It is a good speech in Cyprian, if
that tract be his De caena Domini. In the presence of Christ, our tears which
are never superfluous, do beg a pardon for us: neither ever does the sacrifice
of a contrite heart take repulse. As often as in Gods sight I see thee to be
sighing, I doubt not but the holy Ghost does breath upon thee; when I see thee
weeping, then I perceive him pardoning. This should be a great instigation,
that when any thing does oppress us, be it inward or be it outward, we should
run unto the Lord. So may also be that of Austen: The prayer of the righteous
is the key of heaven. Prayer ascends up, and Gods mercy descends down.
Although the earth be low, and the heaven high, the Lord does hear the tongue of
man, if he have a clean conscience. It speaks with feeling, if it be but
only our sigh. A shower of the eyes is sufficient for his ears: he does
sooner here our weeping then our speaking.

23 I doubt not but all the faithful do find this easily in themselves, that
when they do lay open their souls before the Lord, as Ezechias did the letters
of Sennacherib, 2. Reg. 19.14
and when they do earnestly pray, a deaw of consolation, of most blessed
consolation, is distilled down upon them, whereby they are assured, that they
have to deal with a father, who sees their frail infirmities, and has
compassion on them. Psalm. 103.13.
Yea as a father does pity his children, so has the Lord compassion on all
that do fear him, for he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are
but dust. He knows us to be most ignorant, and most foolish, and unfit for
all goodness, very impotent and unable, to keep off wrong from our selves. He
knows this and considers it, and as evermore he supporteth us, and keeps
us to himself as the apple of his eye, giving when we demand not, and more then
we think on; so if we lift up our voices, and power out our complaints before
him, he will never fail us seeking him. Only this he claims of us, that we
ask that which is fit, Jacob. 4.3.
not vanities or impieties, or to bestow upon our lusts; for he denies these
things to us, and Chrysostom. in Psalm. 129.
but in humility wait his leisure. For as Chrysostom does teach us, If to
give be in Gods power, it is also in his power to give when he thinks good,
and the time he best knows himself. If we do well keep these things, and
earnestly and incessantly do make our complaints before him, he will deal with
us as he did with Jonas, he will certainly hear our voice. Lord send us a
mind to serve thee, that by wilful disobedience, we pluck not thy punishments
on us: and if we do turn from thee, draw us back to thy self, rather by thy
temporal rods, being laid on us in great measure, then by heaping earthly
pleasures, thou should suffer us so to be choked with them, that we should
fall from thee utterly. Do thou chastise us and correct us in iugdement, not in
fury, and there grant us a mind to see, who it is that does strike us, that
so we may pray to thee, to be eased in our affliction. And of thy mercy add
this, evermore to hear our prayer, that so passing this troublesome life, with
fast hold laid on thy promises, we may come at length to thy kingdom, to the
which o Father bring us, for thine own Son Christ his sake, to whom with
thee, and thy Spirit, be glory and praise for ever.

To the Reader.
GOOD Reader, the words of the text in the former Lecture, ministered me
occasion to show, who it is to whom our prayers are to be directed, that is God
alone; and consequently, that we should not use any invocation of Saints. But
in the handling of that question so largely, out of the Fathers of the
primitive Church, my purpose was not only to settle the ignorant for their
belief concerning that point, but withal by example thereof to let the
simpler sort see, what is to be conceived in other questions disputed between
us and the Church of Rome. For the same may be said concerning the Primacie of
Peter, the merit of works, free will, prayer for the dead, Purgatory, and the
most part of those controversies which now a days are handled. They take on
them to maintain many of their positions if not directly out of the
Scriptures, yet from probable shows out of some of the old Fathers, who were
great lights after the time of the Apostles. But first, many books pretended
to belong to that reverend age, are

And whereas I have showed my opinion concerning the supposed strange shapes of
men in many quarters of the world, if any should urge any author of former or
later age against that my assertion, in one word I account them all in that
point to be fabulous, and only to have received such rumors and unjustifiable
traditions from hand to hand: although some of them, thinking thereby to
procure to themselves the fame of men far traveled, do aduouch that they
have seen such. In our days God has given light, and therefore let us not
still delight to be in blindness. Only this one scruple is to be removed
away, that whereas constant report has auerred this to be so, in some one part
of Peru, is the South portion of the West and lately found Indies; and some men
of good judgment, whose adventures for navigations that way, have nobilitated
the discoueries performed or attempted by our English nation, have with firm
credence entertained that for a very truth; yet as I esteem, they may easily
satisfy themselves in that behalf, by the full and sufficient report of Pedro
de Cieca in his first part of the Chronicles of Peru, chapter 26. who being a
Spaniard borne, and now more then fifty years agone having spent seventeen
years in his personal peregrination over that country, shows that not
far from the Line, yea in more places of Peru then one, there are people who
being borne in natural shape as other men, yet do take their infants when they
are but a few days old, and by certain devises which they have, as with
frames of wood and binding or swathing do make the head of such fashion as they
would, as some to be very long, and some to be so crushed together that they
have no necks, but their heads seem to be immediate parts of the trunk of
their bodies. And this contenteth me for the verity of that matter, and I
doubt not but so it will to all other, who desire in their minds to be
persuaded of things as indeed they be, and not as sometimes they seem.

THE XI. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 1. Comfort here offered to the languishing soul. 3. What
it is to be cast from Gods sight. 4. The fear of Jonas. 5. The elect cannot
perish. 7. How Jonas is recovered by faith 8. and repentance. 9. His desire to
see the Temple. 11. How the Church should be frequented. 12. Against those that
abstain from it. 13. The conflict in the Prophets conscience. 14. Grievous
temptation is common to the godly. 16. Why temptation is necessary. 17. God
does protect us in it. 18. The benefit which redoundeth to us by it. 19. Helps
against temptation.

Jonah. 2.4. Then I said, I am cast away out of thy sight: yet I will look
again toward thy holy Temple.


MAny are the instructions which this Prophecy has yielded in the hearing of
most of you: aduertisements and warnings against sin; disputations against
Atheism; observations against Papisme; in the person of the mariners,
comparisons of Gentiles with us that be Christians; and doctrines of diverse
sorts, as Gods spirit from time to time has assisted me. But for informing of
the conscience of a languishing sinner, who groneth under the burden of
heaviness and casting down; and is almost swallowed up in the gulf of
desperation, by reason of the fear of Gods displeasure for sin that hangs
upon him, (which things oftentimes befall some of the little ones of Christ
Jesus) no one matter in this Prophecy is more apparently fruitful, or more
worthy consideration, then that which I have now read. For what can be more
wholesome then Physic to the sick, or remedy to him that is ready to
perish? And who is more like to perish, then he who feels no rest either
inwardly or outwardly, in body or in mind, but as it were gasping for breath,
does daily long for comfort in the midst of great distresses; his case being
this, that sin egerly insulteth, Satan fiercely impugneth, and his conscience
bears witness against his own soul, that in right justice should destroy
it. To the relief of which tender ones, as I could wish that our speech were
oftener directed, (for it is a needful argument to be handled, and blessed is
that speech which binds up the broken, and gives life to the dying) so the
example of my Jonas does fitly remember me to speak to this purpose, because
he is as a glass for all such to look in, and thereby to see themselves, and
in his case to help themselves, with the good assistance of that Spirit who
herein is all in all.

2 For in this man may be seen, a most vehement and forcible conflict between
faith and fear; between hope and despair, between sin and grace: on this
hand the flesh sinking with distrustfulnesse into the bottom of hell, being
like to acknowledge it self a forlorn creature, a castaway from God, a
reprobate from the promises, Genes. 4.13. Matthew. 27.4.
as if it were some Cain or some Judas: but on the other hand, the spirit
forthwith mounting into the bosom of the Savior, and there apprehending
mercy by remission of all iniquities, and forgiveness of all transgressions.
In the mean while, amidst the one raising up, and the other hanging down, is
a combat of such bitterness, as makes the endurer of it, in the heat of the
fishes stomach often times to quake for cold, and in the cold of the sea, often
times to sweat for heat. Many fevers and agues cannot shake him, as his own
heart does now shake him: his boiling is like the fire: his torture is like the
hell. How many crowns and kingdoms? what thousands of gold and silver? what
heaps of precious stones? how many lands and seas, and whole worlds would he
give, if they were now in his power, to be freed from such a torment, as forced
him with extremity to say as here he said, I am cast away from thy sight, I am
but a damned reprobate. A very fearful thought, and yet recovered again by
confidence in Gods mercy, which fails not his at need; so that thereby he is
encouraged, to hope that he shall see Jerusalem, the sanctuary of the Lord,
and his temple once again. Which recovery of his should make us much admire
Gods mercy; and yet withal teach us, to work out our salvation in great fear
and great trembling. But because this text does note unto us some doctrine
besides this, and the illustration of that does make a way for my purpose, I
will first touch the other, observing in the general words, these three things
to be handled. First the deiection of I am cast out of thine eyes. Secondly his
arising up Yet I will look again toward thy holy temple. And thirdly by a
comparing

I am cast away out of thy sight.
3 The Antithesis put between the casting away from the Deuteronomy. 11.10.12.
Moses says of the land of Canaan, that it was not as the land of Egypt from
whence they came, that is a place hateful to him, inhabited with idolaters,
but the eyes of the Lord God are always upon this, that is to say, his
gracious love, from the beginning of the year, even unto the end of the year.
1. Reg. 9.3.
So God promises to Solomon, in behalf of the Temple at Jerusalem, I have
hallowed this house (which thou have built) to put my name there for ever, and
mine eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually, that is my most kind blessing,
and the presence of my grace. Psalm. 31.22.
So David, I said in my have I am cast out of thy sight, that is, I am deprived
of thy sweet assistance. And in another place, Psalm. 34.15.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous. As much as he does tender them,
and cherish them with his providence. It is the fear of our Prophet, lest the
kindness of his maker, wherewith he had embraced him, should be utterly taken
from him, and now nothing but hell fire and brimstone should remain for him,
to plague him in another world.

4 The heaviness of the hand of God, which had followed after him with that
rigor: the multiplicitie of his punishment, by a tempest while he was in the
ship, by drowning in the sea, and by imprisonment in the whale, the horror of
his transgression, and disobedience toward his God, the remembrance of that
grace before, from which he was now fallen, of a Prophet to become a runnagate,
do so amate his heart, that when he thinks of himself, he resolves as a
despairing abject, that he has no fellowship in the inheritance of Gods
Saints, but that as an outlaw, he was quite to be secluded from the covenant.
So that now either he supposes, that he belongs not to Gods election, and
that he had never been booked, in the register of those Saints, which were
appointed unto life, or that the Lord as a man does vary and repent, and had
altered his purpose concerning him. The first was against himself, to think
himself to be a reprobate, appointed and predestined before hand unto evil.
And how woeful a thought was that, to persuade his soul, that nothing belonged
unto him but damnation? The second was against the Highest, that his counsels
should depend upon our mutabilitie, as if his eternal purpose and decree,
which is from everlasting, were tied to our well doing, and did not much rather
dispose us, and enable us to do well, Whomsoever he ordains to the kingdom,
he does teach the way to that kingdom. Christ Jesus who is the life, Ioh. 14.6.
is also the way: he that gives the one, grants the other. Where he
intends to bestow the end, there he does first bestow the means, Ephesians. 1.4.
which shall lead to that end. We are chosen not being holy, but that we
should be holy. God then contemplating in himself, his counsel which is
immutable, retains still his secret purpose, and whom he has once cho^en,
that man he chooses ever. Johan. 13.1.
Whom he loves, he loves to the end, neither does he for evermore cast one
of his little ones out of his sight.

5 Then it is a wrong opinion, either of the Papist teaching, or the Prophet
here mistrusting, that any of Gods faithful ones, 1. Sam. 19.24
can be finally cast away. Saul may have a spirit of Prophecy, and Judas
another spirit of doing miracles, and both of these may come to naught: but
where the spirit of adoption, that spirit of sanctification, has once made
his residence, it does ever inhabit there. The child of God shall be brought
to repentance, and acknowledgement of his fault, to confession and contrition,
and faith and hope and glory, through many seas of temptation, and downefals
of despair, through Vrias his death with David, 2. Sam. 11.17 Matthew. 26.70
through denying of Christ with Peter. Either youth or age, life or death, in
him that is elected, shall apprehend the promises. Mat. 20.5.6.
Be it the ninth hour, or the eleventh hour, yet there shall be a time. The
Eternals beneplacitum, shall have his effect undoubtedly. And although that
holy man Moses, Exodus 32 32. Romans 9.3.
can desire to be razed out of Gods book, rather then his people should
perish, and Saint Paul wishes that he might be accursed, to save those which
were his countrymen in the flesh: yet this shall but show their great zeal,
and love unto their brethren, as also their earnestness for Gods glory, which
they thought might more appear by saving of a multitude, then by their private
safety: but this tainteth not Gods decree, who will certainly make up his
work, wheresoever he begins it. And if the Spirit of the Almighty, do in
some places of the Scripture, Psalm. 69.28.
speak of blotting out of that book, which is the book of life, this is not
by and by to be taken literally, but that God therein does frame himself to
our capacity, as sometimes in like sort he attributes a foot or hand, or
ear or eye, to his own divine Majesty. In all which, and other places of the
same quality, Origin. contra Celsum. lib. 7.
the speech of Origene is most true, that as the most civil man if he were to
go among Barbarians, (as suppose the Moors or Tartarians) had need to learn
the language of that people, if he mean to speak unto them, or do any good
among them, so when the Lord would teach us in the Scriptures, he contempereth
his phrases to our capacity, and speaks to us in our own tongue. And this he
does in the case in question, resolving by the speech of wiping out of Gods
book, an assuredness that they shall never have any portion in the
fellowship of eternity. But if it seemed unto any, that they were likely to
be of the number of the elect, yet that seeming should be frustrate.
Notwithstanding, the purpose of his good pleasure, in truth is never varied.

6 Then whosoever is once grown unto that measure of faith, that upon a settled
knowledge, he can meditate in himself of Gods true love toward him, and can
satisfy his own soul, not with a foolish lightening, or hasty fond
persuasion, (which may befall an hypocrite, or temporary believer) but with a
resolved confidence, that his God is his father also, and dares to cry Abba,
Romans 8.15.
father; that he is sealed up by his maker, against the day of redemption; that
he is one of that number, whom Christ has bought with his blood; that whether
he live or dye, yet evermore he is the Lords; that neither death nor life, 38
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, no that neither hell nor devil shall be able to separate him, from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, this man need not stand in
fear of casting out of Gods sight, or perishing from his favor. And if that
his sin, or Satan sometimes suggest the contrary, or his own heart do
discourage him, this is but a temptation, which notwithstanding must be
strongly resisted, with hearty and earnest prayer. For the infallible word of
God has taught us to say with Saint Paul, if God be on our side, 31
what matter who be against us? And God justifies: 33
who shall condemn? And with Saint John in his first Epistle: 1. Ioh.
5.13.^5.19. Heb. 6.11. (...).
I write those things that ye may know that ye have eternal life, And we
know that he hears us, And we know that we are of God. We do not rest upon
our selves this full certain persuasion, this assuredness of hope, for that
were to build on the sand, that were to lean on a reed, which breaks and
the splints thereof do run into the hand: but we stay it upon the power of God,
and on the love of our Christ, from the hands of whom, none are able to pluck
that away, which they have chosen. In confidence of this, a man may be bold to
say, although I be sick yet God is mighty: although I be weak yet Christ is
strong: look what is too light in my flesh, that his Spirit does make up. His
grace is sufficient for me. 2. Cor. 12.9. Bernard. de 7. misericordijs. Sermon.
3. Charitatem adoptionis, veritatem promissionis, potestatem redditionis.
I dare to say with Saint Bernard (and it is an excellent saying,) Three things
I consider wherein my hope does consist, the love of his adoption, the truth
of his promise, the power of his performance. Now let my foolish cogitation
murmr as long as it will, saying, Who art thou, or know thou how great
that glory is, or by what merits thou hopest to obtain it? And I will
answer boldly, I know whom I have trusted, and I am assured that in very
great love he adopted me, and that he is true in his promises and able in his
performance: for he can do what he will. This is that strong foundation
whereon we may build safely: this is the stay of a Christian, unto the measure
whereof, if any shall find that yet he has not attained, let him pray to God
to enlarge his knowledge and understanding. But let us most firmly hold this,
that whom he has once chosen, to a true feeling of his grace, he does never
utterly cast them away, from his sight and good favor. This then was the fault
of our Jonas, and argued in him great infirmity, when he broke forth into this
passion which sauoured so of desperation. And so much of this matter.

Yet will I look again toward thy holy Temple.
7 You have now seen him at the worst: for worse he the instant, when he was
in the pits mouth, ready to sink eternally. This shows that in former time
he had been used to temptation: being practiced in Gods service, he knew well
what belonged to faith, when he did so soon apprehend it. He was not ignorant
that he had offended, and offended a fearful God; yet such a one as would
have compassion upon a repenting sinner. This grief of his, was sustained by a
trust in Gods free promises, who has said, that if the wicked will return
from all his sins that he has committed, Ezech. 18.21.22.
and keep all his statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall
surely live, and shall not dye. All his transgressions that he has committed,
shall not be mentioned unto him. The two wings of faith and repentance, do
mount him up into heaven, even from the gates of hell. His faith kept him from
blasphemy, that in the heat of his extremity, he had still a mind to God:
which makes him speak unto him, not as the despairing miscreant, whose manner
is to speak of God in the third person, not to God; he hates me, he plagueth
me, he detesteth me, he does not love me, which words argue no hope remaining;
but in his bitterness he turns his speech unto the Lord, I am cast away from
thy sight, I will look again to thy Temple, so in want of hope showing a
hope, a confidence in a diffidence. This is the fruit of believing the sweet
mercy of our Savior, that in the day of sorest trial, it is able to keep us
upright, who else should fall down groueling. As a ship without his ballace,
is tilted and tossed at sea, and cannot endure the wave, so is that soul right
unstable, and every hour apt to perish, which has not faith in temptation. It
is written of the Cranes, that when they do intend in stormy and troublesome
times, Solinus cap. 15.
to fly over the seas, fearing lest by the blasts of the wind, their bodies
which be but light, should be beaten into the sea, or kept from the place
whither they be desirous to go, they swallow some sand, and little stones into
their bellies, whereby they are so moderately peized, that they are able to
resist the wind. While we do cross this troublesome world of sin and great
temptation, it is faith which must be our ballace, it is faith which must
preserve us equably upright, or recover us when we are going. Now it stood the
Prophet in steed, in the bottom and depth of misery; to have feeling what
belonged to believing upon the Lord.

8 This belief inferred repentance, which is acceptable in great measure to
our most gracious father. As he scorneth not the weak man falling, so he
embraces him that rises; which point Nouatus and his fellows, with their
hard hearts did deny. If the prodigal son can say, Luc. 15.21.
good father I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy son, he runs to him, and falls on him, and
kisseth him as his beloved. He likes in us a sorrow for that wherein we have
faulted. Hieronimus Epistol. 65. Secunda post naufragium tabula est culpam
simpliciter confiteri.
It was a good speech of Saint Hierome, to call repentance after sin, by the
name of a second board, or planke after a shipwreck. In a wrack at sea, a
board oftentimes does save a man from drowning, by his lying fast thereupon.
But if he be beaten by the violence of the wave, from this first planke, and be
now floating in the water; if a second by some accident be affoorded him, and
he can keep him fast thereto, it sets him free from all danger. It is more
then apparent that we have suffered a wrack, and are diuing in the sea of
sin and desperation, even ready still to be drenched. The first table which
releeueth us, is the Sacrament of Baptism, which by the blood of Christ
washing us, and for the covenants sake, does acquit us from the guilt of
original sin: from the which if we be beat off, by the force of actual
crimes, the second planke is repentance to be caught at, which if we hold fast
and do not leave, it will bring us into the haven of blessed and quiet rest.
Then let us evermore call upon God, to bestow upon us this compunction of heart,
that since every day we fall, we may daily rise again, and not sink under our
burden.

9 The weak Prophet now leaning on these two such assured staves, first
sorowing, then believing, does raise himself up with a correction: that
although he had said before, that he was cast away from Gods sight, yet he will
not leave it so: he will not give over there, but once again he will look
unto Gods holy Temple. Hieron. in Ionae. 2.
Once again I will see Jerusalem, and the place of thy true worship. Which
words as Hierome notes, do either import a confidence, and hope that it should
be so, or a wish that so it might be. And in the Hebrew the future tense which
is used in this place, is very frequent for wishing. Both show a will to the
Temple: by which some understand the whole service of God, circumcision, and
the sacrifices, and the expounding of the Law, or whatsoever else was of
speciality, in the tabernacle of the Lord; so taking one for the other, the
place for the duties in it, making that which was so eminent, as the matter,
and the object of his confidence and faith. He certainly had a mind, not to
dye there where he was, as unprofitable, and in a place so obscure, but openly
to honor God whom he had so dishonored before: and therefore now he was
desirous, in conspicuous manner to draw other to his obedience. But of all
places, he chooses the Temple to do the deed, because that was the house where
God had put his name, who although he be every where, Enter praesenter, Deus
hic and vbique po^enter.
by his being and presence and power, yet he was more apparently conversant
there, by his special grace. This did make that house and city, to be counted
an holy mansion, the very joy of the earth, the beauty of the world, the glory
of all nations, the palace of the great king, the delight and paradise, and
garden of the Highest. There was the Arc of the Covenant, the Tables of the
Testimony, the Cherubins and the Mercy-seate, all being strange things of much
excellency: but the summity of all happiness, was the residence of Gods favor
there.

10 All which how much the faithful esteemed and accounted of, David's example
may teach us, who when there was but a Tabernacle, whose beauty was much
inferior to the magnificent Temple of Solomon, so grieved that himself in his
flights and persecutions, was hindered from assembling within those courts of
the Lord, that he witnesses for his own part, that never heart did so bray,
Psalm. 42.1.
to find the brook of water, as his heart and conscience did thirst for that
place; yea his tears did trickle down, to think that he might not come
there. And elsewhere he complains, Psalm. 84.3.
that the sparrow and the swallow were happy, being compared to him, for they
might come to the Altar, to make their nest near about it; but leave to do
that was denied unto him. But afterward, when Solomon had erected his famous
house to the Lord; that had many extraordinary blessings granted to it, at the
time of the dedication: when God witnessed by his presence, that he heard the
requests of Solomon, among which these were some, 1. Reg. 8 37.
that if famine, or plague, or any other affliction, did vex the hearts of the
Israelites, and they the^ came into that Temple, and there prayed to be
delivered from that cross, 44.46.
the Lord would remove it from them. Yea if they were out of their own land,
either going against their enemies, or captives in other countries, if they
turning their faces about to the coastward of this house, should either pray
for victory, or for release from their captivity, their God would grant it
unto them. The Jews afterward observed this, evermore in the earnestness of
their prayer in what land soever they were, turning them toward the Temple: not
tying superstitiously the power of God to that place, but knowing that the same
house was not erected in vain. And witnessing withal, their obedience unto
the Lord, and to men the constancy of their profession, who held that place as
the seal of the Lords assured protection over them. Dan. 6.10.
So when Daniel in Chaldaea would pray, he set his windows open toward
Jerusalem, to the hazard of his life. And truly the majesty, and great fame
of the place was such, Agg. 2.4.
that when the second Temple, which was a far meaner matter, was raised up,
the Princes of the earth which were of the very Gentiles, did repute it and
esteem it a thing most holy. The regard which was borne to that sanctuary,
Joseph. Antiquit. 11.8. and 12.2. and 14.8.
by Alexander the great, sometimes king of the Macedonians, by Ptolomeus
Philadelphus, by Pompey the great Roman, some whereof did there offer
sacrifice, as it is testified by Josephus, and the coming up of the Eunuch of
Candace the Queen of Aethiopia, Act. 8.27.
who resorted thither of purpose for to worship, do make this very plain unto
us. Then our man (who sometimes had been a Prophet, and of likely hood had gone
up to Jerusalem to do his devotions, 1. Reg. 12.27
contrary to the custom of the Israelites in his time) had great reason to
bethink himself of this place.

11 The doctrine to be derived unto us from hence, is this, that since in
substance we are inheritours of that faith, which the Israelites and Jews did
hold, and in stead of their Temple, have the Churches of the Christans, which
are places severed to Gods service, and for the assembly of his Saints, and the
gathering together of his people, that we therefore should bear the like
affection to these, as they did to that house, and this so much the rather,
because the substance is here, when there was but the shadow; there the figure,
but here the truth, there sacrifices made of beasts, here the true Lamb Jesus
Christ. We should therefore resort to these Sanctuaries with greediness, even
as to the type of heaven: we should joy to be there, and see all other there
whom we love: and a Christian man loves every man. Ioh. 2.14. Matthew. 21.13.
Luc. 2.36. Act. 3.1.
Christ did frequent the Temple: he called it an house of prayer: Anna that
widow so much commended, lived in the Temple: the Apostles came to this: and
after that Christ was ascended, the holy men who were in the time of the
Primitive Church, did rejoice to see the Oratories, and places of devotion,
which were built in honor of Christ. They knew that if the private prayers, or
lifting up of the hands of one man, were acceptable to the Lord, the^ the voice
of a multitude, making their requests ioy^tly together, would more sound in the
ears of God. If the Savior has made a promise to be in the middle of them,
Matthew. 18.20.
where two or three are gathered together, with what an eye of compassion, is
he present to look upon hundreds, or thousands of his, assembled into one
place? Then let us account it our happiness, that we may join our prayers
unto a great congregation, which God denies to his best children, in the time
of persecution, and of banishment, and great sickness: and let us press to
this place, as to that where bread is broken, which is the very food of life.
For herein God gives a most approved argument of his love, that we are not
forced to run from this sea to another, Amos. 8.12.
from this land unto that, so to enjoy this blessing: but we need no more but
even step out of doors, it is so brought home unto us. And let us each man
exhort that brother of his, who yet wants understanding, to hasten unto this
banquet: for it is a good token of more grace which is afterward to follow, when
men come to this place, although it be for other purposes. God catches them
upon the sudden; August. Co^fess. 5.13.14.
the hook is fastened in them, before themselves be aware. Austen came with
another mind to hear Saint Ambrose preach; it was to observe his words, and
his eloquence, and the manner of his gracious delivery (for Ambrose was an
eloquent and sweet man) but at length the matter of his Sermons took him, and
made him a good Christian. So mighty Gods word is; and hearing is the means to
bring men unto faith, Romans 10.17. Chrysostom. in Johan. Homilia. 52.
by which faith, they are saved; and this is the place of hearing. If any man,
says Chrysostom upon John, do sit near to a perfumer, or a perfumers shop,
even against his will he shall receive some savor from it: much more shall he
who frequenteth the Church, receive some goodness from it.

12 Then they are much to be blamed, who do willingly and of purpose, absent
themselves from this place, be they either the stiff and stubburne recusants,
whose fancy and refractary will, is called by the name of conscience: who being
invited to the Supper of the Lamb, yet keep themselves away, and therefore
according to Christ's parable, Luc. 14.23.
are well compelled by the Magistrate to come in. It is a most blessed
compulsion, for a man to be driven to truth, for a woman to be forced to
heaven. Or be it the idle person, who prefers his rest and sleep, before
his own souls salvation. Isay. 29.13. Ambros. in Psalm. 219. Sermon. 19.
In which case he is worse then the Jew, of whom (as Ambrose well observes)
the Prophet says, that he honors God with his lips, although his heart be
far from him. The Jew did yield his speech, and the Jew did yield his
presence, and seemed to give some countenance to the word, but this slothful
man comes not so far. Or be it the ancient Donatist, or Rogatian, in times
past so peeuishly bent, who abstained from the assemblies of all other men
whatsoever, which were not of his opinion, and tied to a small corner in
Africa, that Catholic Church, which is so far diffused over all the face of
the earth. Vincentius one of their company, is justly reproved by Saint
Austen, Psalm. 72.19.
because when the Lord had said that all the earth should be filled with his
majesty, Amen, Amen, so be it, so be it, August. Epist. 48.
for so it is in the Psalm, he would sit at Cartenae, some mean place belike
in Africa, and with ten perhaps of his Rogatians, which yet remained with him,
would say Non fiat, non fiat, that it should not be so. Or be they our new
Barrhoists, sprung from the seed of the Donatists, who because they conceive,
that some spots and spotted men, do yet remain within the Church of England,
they single themselves from us, by a schismatic rent. Cantic. 1.4.
They forget that the spouse is black, while she remains on earth, that in
the field where the best seed is said by Christ to be sown, Matthew. 13.24.
tares spring up as well as wheat; and both must grow together until the day
of harvest. That in the womb of Rebecca, which was a good figure of the
Church, is Esau as well as Jacob, Genes. 25.23.
which cannot be discerned, until the time of their birth. And this birth is
the judgment. What a holy and wise saying is that, which Austen has in this
behalf, We suffer many in the Church, August. Epist. 48. In Ecclesia nonnullos
toleramus quos corrigere vel punire non possumus.
whom we can neither correct nor punish. But yet for the chaffes sake, we do
not forsake the threshing floor of the Lord; nor for the bad fishes sake, do
we break the nets of the Lord, nor for the goats which are to be severed in
the end, do we leave the flock of the Lord, nor for the vessels made to
dishonor, do we flit out of the house of the Lord. Let the spirit of
singularity, carry these me^ in our time, headlong while it will, but let us
love the public meetings of the faithful, the sacraments duly administered,
the word sincerely taught, the devotions uttered here. Let us hold it our joy
and crown, that we may so come together; that we may not only with our
Prophet here, look toward the temple, but that if we will, our feet may stand
in the gates of Jerusalem. Psalm. 122.2.
We do sin against our souls, when by a fancy we debar our selves, from
the fellowship of the faithful, and communion of Gods Saints. And so now
leaving this, let us come unto the third thing, which was at the first proposed
by me, and that is the grievous conflict which Jonas here sustained.

The combat of the Prophet.
after so large measure of Gods bountifulness toward him, he should be
unthankful. For now his conscience cries out against him, that he was most
unworthy to have any part in the Redeemer, who had turned from him so
wilfully. Now he breaths out displeasure and indignation against himself. So
fearful a thing is sin: it does so wound the soul. Hence great fights do
oftentimes arise unto the faithful, where the flesh armed with desperation,
lays on load even to destruction; but faith holds out a buckler, wherewith
she wardeth the blows. Notwithstanding between the one and the other, there
is a combat hardly fought out, much ebbing and much flowing, much rising and
much falling, that the waves are not so various, as the thoughts of this
sufferer are; disputing pro and con, acquiting and condemning. Whereunto at the
last a victory comes, but it is with great difficulty in the mean while,
the inward man and the outward, the spirit and the flesh most vehemently
wrestling. Now as Saint James has told us: Jacob 1.12.
Blessed is the man that endures temptation: he that strives, and stands,
and in the end co^quereth, shall not loose his reward. But in the mean time it
makes the weak one, the tender and sickly conscience to droope and be
discouraged, so that being heated violently, he thirsts after comfort. In
which case, since God himself is so far from despising the broken and
contrite heart, Psalm. 51.17
that in very truth, he does love it; and Christ for his part came for that
purpose, not to break the bruised reed, Matthew. 12.20
nor to quench the smoking flax, we are in example of the^ both (the father
and the word) to bind up the broken, and to seek out that which is perishing.

14 Then to speak to this argument, whosoever thou art, that gronest under
this heavy burden, strengthen thy feeble knees, and resume thy decaying
spirits. If the motions of thy mind be fearful beyond measure, yea unfit to
be spoken, and uttered by thee, so that thou art ashamed even to name them, as,
that Gods being is not certain; that the Scriptures may be doubted of, that
Christ was not the Messiah and Savior of the world that thy sins shall not be
forgiven thee; that thou belo^gest not to Gods election; that the promises of
his mercy appertain to other me^, but are not true in thee; that thy best way
were to dispatch thy self of thy life, by some fall, or a knife, or by
drowning, or otherwise, since thou art but a forlorn person, and a castaway in
Gods sight, (which is a most fearful and uncomfortable thought,) yet
understand that these suggestions and a thousand more of that kind, are but
attempts of thine enemy, who would willingly rush upon thee: but know that
thou herein art not alone, such co^flicts are very common. The Prophets and the
Apostles, the best Saints of God have endured them. Job. 3.1.
How great was Jobs extremity, when he cursed the day of his birth, and being
impatient and unruly, he satisfies not himself again and again to curse it?
In what a case was David, when he seemed to fear utter perdition? Psalm. 51.11.
Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me. He
speaks as if he doubted of his election. It was not well with him, when he
distrusted God in his promises, daring to say unadvisedly in the midst of his
distresses, that all men were liars, that was, every one of them who did tell
him, Psalm. 116.10.
and that from the mouth of Samuel, the true Prophet of the Lord, that he
should be the king over Israel. How was Jeremy on his knees, Ierem. 20.14
when he cursed and fretted bitterly, and wished that he had never been, or
would that he had been slain at his first entering into the world? How was
Elias troubled, when he cried, 1. Reg. 19.4.
It is enough, Lord take away my soul? How did Peter strive in himself, Mat.
26.75.
whether he should deny Christ or no? and imagine what he thought of it when he
had done it, and wept bitterly. What disquietnesse did the prick in the flesh
bring to Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 12.7.8
when it made him pray thrice, that is, very many times, that he might be
delivered from it? But how hot is his conflict between the flesh and the
spirit, Romans 7.24.
when he terms himself a wretched man, and knows not how to be freed from
the bondage of sin, that body of death. Yet at the last, to his inward
consolation he remembers himself, that it should be done by Christ Jesus.
Now, who were dearer to God then these, who higher in his favor, then Job a
mirror of patience, and David a man after his own heart, and Jeremy who
specially was preserved in the desolation of Jerusalem, and Elias who was taken
up into heaven with a whirlwind, and Peter a great Apostle, and Paul the
Doctor of the Gentiles? Join Jonas here to the number of these, a Prophet
once, and appointed to everlasting life, Jonah. 4.8.
yet in one place he would needs be dead, and in this place he thinks that
he should be damned. And as it was with these, so it is in our days. The
Ministers of the Gospel who are employed in their calling, and know any thing
in the world, have manifold experience of such cases of conscience, although
they speak it not to every man.

15 Some for one thing, and some for another are troubled every day: for
fancies and temptations do arise a thousand ways: especially in those who are
weak in mind or body, by reading or by hearing, by being too much alone, by
children and by friends, by prosperity or adversity, by a word spoken at
adventure, by any thing which the mind of the troubled party does apprehend.
Where faith is not extinguished, or plucked up by the root, but weakened for a
time, as the Sun under a cloud, is shadowed for a moment, or as fire under
the ashes, is raked up and not seen. And when it has been amated and
discouraged for a time, then it breaks forth again, and peradventure it is
then a second while dismayed, Psalm. 107.26.
as the ship upon the sea, sometimes is carried up to the heaven, and then down
again to the deep: or as the winter water which freezeth in the night, and
melts in the day, and has his intermissions, and therein many alterations.
In this appears Gods providence, and his endless love in protecting, that he
so ballanceth discomfort, with an equal weight of comfort, that evil and
distrust does not prevail, but if the scale do tippe down, it raises up
again upon the sudden. If the challenger be on the left hand ready to defy
us, the defendant is on the right hand as ready to maintain us. If the
inuader be behind us, the protector is before us: yea if a strong armed man
have set-footing in our house, Luc. 11.21.
a stronger then himself comes, and drives him from the possession. But he
will keep us thus exercised; and he does it in great wisdom.

16 If we had not this to quicken us, we should yield our selves to security,
and be ouergrowne with the weeds, and moss of careless negligence. For as
flesh says Origin if it be not sprinkled with salt, Origin. Homil. 27. in
Numeros.
does putrify and corrupt, although there be great store of it, and that of
the best, so the soul will presently grow loose and licentious, if it be not
as it were salted with continual temptations. The best would grow to be high
minded, and proud in his own conceit: but by this we are much humbled. So we
are made the fitter to receive the crown in heaven, which is for the lowly
minded, and is never given to any, but to those who do get a victory. And how
can there be a conquest, unless there be a fight? how a fight without an
enemy? Then this life is our striving; the other is the reward which we
receive for our striving. Here we wrestle says Saint Ambrose, but we are
crowned elsewhere: here is the striving, Ambros. in exhortat. ad virgins. Hic
quidem luctamur, sed alibi coronamur.
there the reward, here the warfare, there the wages. Therefore while I am in
this world, I do yet wrestle, I do yet strive, I am yet driven at that I may
fall. But the comfort is that which follows, which Ambrose adds in that
place. But the Lord is mighty, who supporteth me when I am thrust at, who
sets me up when I am slipping, who raises me tilting aside. This is phisike
for thy sickness, and remedy for thy evil, whosoever thou art that gronest
in thy soul: thou have much ready to hurt thee, but thou have more to help
thee: thou have a strong one against thee, but thou have a stronger for thee,
one who loves thee and respects thee, and pitieth thee at thy need. Romans
8.31.
And if he do stand for thee, what matter who is against thee? He brings thee
unto this battle, and his hand is upon thine enemy, to limit how far he shall
urge thee, and farther he cannot go: 1. Cor. 10.13.
no tempting above thy strength. He looks on thee, and relieueth thee, and
does as much says S. Austen, as cry to thee out of heaven, August. in Psalm.
39. Specto vos luctamini, adiuuabo.
I look upon you: do you wrestle, I will help you: do you conquer, I will
crown you. Nay, he makes us conquer; he breaths into us a strength, which
shall never be ouerborne. Well thou may have blows, and bruses, and shrewd
brushes in the heat of thy fight, but the victory shall be thine: floating
thou shall not sink, encountering thou shall not perish.

17 If he were ignorant of that case wherein thou art, then thou might justly
fear, and suspect his ignorance: but he conceiueth of thy infirmity, and
therefore as a father he takes compassion on thee. He knows whereof thou art
made, he reme^breth that thou art but dust. Psalm. 103.14.
Yea to the end that he might the better understand, what thy miseries be,
amidst such strong throbbes of temptation, he let his own son take flesh
upon him, who became a man clothed with mortality, that therein by humane
practice, and not only by divine contemplation, he might be tempted and feel
assaults, and so, as the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews speaks, Heb.
2.18.
he might the better be able to succor those that are tempted. Now what
need thou at all to shake or quiver, when his shield and his safeguard do
perpetually attend thee? The experience of things past, should encourage thee
for hereafter. Remember how he has kept thee, and cherished thee in his bosom
in former times, when thou wast in danger. That did abode good unto thee. He
who loved thee then, 1. Sam. 17 34
will love thee still. When David had to do against Goliath, no impression
wrought so forcibly with him, as recounting what he had done before. When I was
a boy and kept my fathers sheep, a Bear came and took a sheep out of my
flock, and I killed that Bear: then a Lion came and did as much, and I killed
that Lion also. Surely that Lord, which saved his servant from the paw of the
Lion, and of the Bear, will deliver me also from this Philistine. Bethink thy
self in the like. Thy God has ever favored thee even from thy mothers womb:
when thou wast not, then he made thee, when thou wast lost he redeemed thee,
when thou wentest astray, he reclaimed thee: when thou wast naked, he clothed
thee, when thou wast hungry he fed thee: he has nourished thee and maintained
thee: when thou wast ignorant he did teach thee, and has given thee some good
measure of knowledge, and will to serve him: he has admitted thee by baptism,
into the fellowship of his Saints, he has sealed his affection toward thee, by
the Sacrament of his body and his blood; in great griefs he has stood by
thee; in anguishes he has blessed thee; the pit has been open for thee, but
yet thou never did fall in; Satan has gaped and roared, but yet his fangs
have not touched thee; in conflicts thou have been safe, thou have been
preserved in combats. How fully should these sound experiments confirm thee in
thy faith? how should this lively feeling, for the delightfulnes of the joy
conceived thereby, as it were melt thee in kindness toward thy God? Why sholdest
thou not say with David, Psalm. 116.12. Psalm 18.1.
what shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benefits toward me? Or I will
love thee dearly o Lord my strength. I will honor thee, I will embrace thee,
(I want words to express it) I will joy in thee, I will deuote my self wholly
unto thy service. With thy favor and loving countenance with thy hand and thy
heart, thou have helped me, kept me, saved me; thou have strengthened me, raised
me, blessed me, and I know that thou will never leave me. For thou art the same
God for ever, and continuest thy goodness daily over me.

18 He who has learned these lessons, makes true use of the battles between
hope and despair, between the flesh and the spirit: and the farther he goes
forward, the more always he does conquer. He recounteth thus with his own
heart: God might have suffered me to have frozen in my dregs, to run on to
all filthiness and uncleanness with the worldlings, to have died before that I
had understood what belonged unto his service, and so to have dropped down to
hell, before that I knew what I did; but he has dealt better by me, he has
afforded me more grace. Now he brings this fire of temptation, to warm me,
and resolve me, but it is to good, and not to evil. I doubt not but I am his,
I shall not perish finally. He slubbereth me to scour me, he rubbeth me to
make me brighter; he whetteth me to make me sharper. If I were not pressed and
urged, I should not know what he does for me: but to relieve me when I need,
to help me when I am ready to drown, to save me when I am sinking, to
quicken me when I am at deaths door, is an argument of such favor as he can
better give, then I can well conceive. And since I have these testimonies of
his assured favor, let the world allure and slily entice, let the flesh insult
while it will, let Satan tempt and not spare, let doubts and thoughts and
distrusts, be eger and eger again; in life and death, either day or night; I
know who it is that bought me, and paid for me with his blood, and I know that
he will not leave me. As Saint Austen says, August. in 17. Sermon. 8. Tom. 10.
A mighty man will not lose that which he has bought for his money, and will
Christ loose that which he has bought with his blood? I doubt not but my
Jonas in his troubled meditations, did grow to these resolutions, and by
thinking thereon, did shake off that his heavy passion, that he should be cast
away from Gods sight. It was a lively feeling of former mercies which made him
to break forth into so religious an insinuatio^, as if he did bleed with
tenderness and softness, Jonah. 2.6.
calling upon God, o Lord my God. Wherein he showed so sound an hope, that
although he should kill him (as Job says of himself) yet he would not leave
him, Job. 13.15.
but would evermore trust in him: although his sin did more then abound, Romans
5.20.
yet Gods grace did superabound.

19 These words well understood, and applied unto the conscience, may serve for
every soul which languisheth with grief taken for evil motions. But because
every tender spirit, is not grown so far in Gods school, and where so hard
a siege is laid by Satan, there cannot be too many helps, therefore some other
remedies may be added unto this before named: for the describing whereof, I
could wish more leisure to meditate upon them, and more time to utter them, but
it shall now suffice to point at them. Then first, when any Christian shall
feel himself Psalm. 73.1.17
when he was so affretted with the prosperity of the wicked, that he had
almost renounced the service of the Lord. How was he troubled with that conceit
and could not be resolved, until he went into the Sanctuary? God directs
the mouth of the preacher, that when himself scant thinks of that particular
fruit, he speaks to the heart of some one man in this point, of some other
in another. Thirdly, let him pray to God, both in public and in private. The
heavens does it not enter? Fourthly let him not fear, to impart his grief to
his friend, but especially to the minister, who is learned and fears God.
They are made for such purposes, and such things are not strange unto them.
Man is ordained for man, to help him and to comfort him, and more eyes do see
better the^ fewer, and what a joy to the mind, is a word spoken in season? But
the faithful minister, of all other things does hold this for his charge, to
hearken to such complaining, to raise up such me^ lamenting. Jacob. 5.20.
He that conuerteth a sinner, does save a soul from death, and covers a
multitude of sins. If that precept of Jude do belong unto any man, Iud. 22.23.
it is unto him, have compassion of some in putting difference, and other save
with fear pulling them out of the fire. Matthew. 12.20
This is to imitate Christ, who will not break a bruised reed, nor quench the
smoking flax. This is to seek out the lost, and to bind up that which is
broken. Unto these this may be added, that it shall not a little help to have
conference with such, who in former times have been exercised with the like
temptations, that out of their experience being plentifully powered out; the
distressed mind may be relieved. None can speak more sufficiently, and unto
better purpose, then he that has felt the same fire, wherein this grieved
soul is now burned. And they who are in this cafe, are not a little revived,
to know that any other has been troubled like themselves, which they will
hardly believe, thinking that none did ever bear such a burden, own son
Christ his sake, to whom with thee and thy holy Spirit be glory for evermore.

THE XII. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 2 The circumstances aggravating his danger, 6. which do
the more show Gods mercy toward him, and other sinners. 8. Why God suffers
his to be in misery. 9. Particular consideration does most stir up our
affection. 14. By fearing small crossings in doing our duties, we incur other
very great dangers. 16. All help is to be ascribed to God. 17. How a godly
man may desire that his life may be prolonged. 20. The faithful ought
particularly to apply Gods love to themselves, 22. which the Church of Rome
does not.

Jonah. 2.5.6. The waters compassed me about unto the soul, the depth closed
me round about, and the weeds were wrapped about mine head. I went down to
the bottom of the mountains, the earth with her bars was about me for ever,
yet have thou brought up my life from the pit, o Lord my God.


THe fearful conflict which the Prophet sustained, in the verse next before
going has been made plain unto you. A passion of little less then
distrustful despair, did vex him and disquiet him for the time. From the
terror and danger whereof, being recovered by the effectual apprehension of
grace, by a lively faith, he returns to contemplate the peril of his body;
which as it was great, in the middle of the sea, in the belly of the whale,
which was irrecouerable in man's judgment, so he seeks to express it by
multitude of words, repeating it, and reuoluing it with variety of phrase, but
all tending to one end; yet with such copiousnesse, especially being in so
short a prayer, that a man would wonder at first, how the Spirit of God which
uses to speak pressely and briefly, so that no one word may fitly be spared,
should so run upon one thing, with difference of speech, but in substance all
agreeing. Yet the use of it is such, as of words fully replenished with
sanctity and holiness, as shall appear in his due place. In the mean time
that which he says is this.

the waters did compass me about unto the soul; to the death, says the
Chaldee Paraphrase, as intending that he was now likely to be drowned, his life
to depart from him, his soul to be severed from her carnal habitation. David
also does use such vehemency of words, Save me o God, for the waters are
entered even to my soul. Psalm. 69.1.
Neither is there any speech which more lively discovers the earnestness of
that which is presently in hand, be it prayer or peril, or desire or
detestation, then the name of soul does. As the Heart brayeth for the rivers of
water, so pants my soul after thee o God. My soul thirsts for God. Psalm.
42.1.
This notes an entire affection, and earnest desire, wherewith David was
moved. As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee,
says Elizaeus to Elias. A very passionate affirmation. 2. Reg. 2.2.
Jacob in Genesis gives this censure of Simeon and Leui. The instruments of
cruelty are in their habitations. Gen 49.5.6.
Into their secret let not my soul come. This argues a perfect detestation.
So the depth of danger is purported here, when he speaks thus, the waters
compassed me unto the soul; the enemy of my life, the water which has no
mercy, was above me and below me and round about me, without me and within me,
that my being was death, my hope was but destruction, nothing possible unto me
but drowning, as far as man's the depth did close me round about. I was not in
the shallow as a man in a lake, who lying down may be stifled, but standing
may be safe; but I was in the maine Ocean, which is called for the hugeness of
it, the gathering of waters, and elsewhere Tehom, a gulf or bottomless pit,
I was in that vastness, Genes. 1.10. Job. 41.22. (...)
which sometimes cannot be sounded by very long lines; I was in waters by
multitudes, and there not diuing or floating up and down, but as closed and
shut up, as included in a sepulcher, or made fast in a prison: this deep pit,
this dark pit, this vnco^fortable dungeon, had closed her mouth upon me.

3 Thirdly, the weeds were wrapped about mine head. The sea does bear weeds,
as well as shallow water; yea somewhere very straungely, strangely I say, that
in such places as where the depth seems to be of incredible greatness,
weeds should be seen in abundance, in the upper superficies, the very top
of the water, and that so plentifully, that in navigations the course of ships
is stayed sometimes by them. Experience has confirmed this in the huge
Atlantike sea, Leuius in nauigat. ad Bresiliam. cap. 21.
as men sail to America, whereout does grow a very strange Dilemma or
Division, because either they be there without any roots at all, and that is
very marvelous, or because the roots do go down exceeding deep in the
water, which is not otherwise affoorded by nature in thin spindie bodies. But
that weeds do grow in the sea, and those of some price, Solin. cap. 8.
Solinus lets us know, saying that shrubs and weeds in the Ligustike sea,
are those from whence our Coral comes. Such then being in the bottom, are
about the head of our Prophet: Tremel. in Ionae 2.
he is wreathed and tangled in them* or as some do suppose, he was so fast in
the water, as if he had been tied there; with as little hope of rising or
coming up again. But the words here being positive, that his head was wrapped
in them, I imagine that when he sunk, and went down to the bottom, he there
strugled for life, as men do that are dying, and by that means he was
entangled in the weeds, as if some net had bespread him. And in my judgment
this clears that doubt, which arises unto some, in the third verse of this
chapter, Ribera in Ionae. 1.
where because it is reported, that he was in the very bottom in the midst of
the sea, and all the waves and surges did go over and over him, they suppose
the meaning of it to be, that as soon as he was cast forth over shipboord by
the mariners, the whale forthwith devoured him, on which because the waves
passed, and he was in the whale, he says they went over him: and because the
fish went down to the bottom of the sea, the Prophet in the fish is said to
do the like. Whereas this place does rather enforce, that between the time of
his casting forth, and the swallowing of the whale, there was some pretty
little space, which in this text is insinuated.

to the bottom of the mountains. It is very likely that it was some Cape or
Promontorie, which did shoot forth from the continent or firme-land, whereof
there are very many in all the sea shore near to Iapho; both Syria and Judea
being described, to be hemmed in with mountains. And this argues all to be
done, not very far from the shore, because a tempest deprehended the mariners
at the first, soon after that they put from land. Or else he may mean the
rocks, which being in the midst of the water, have the hugeness of pretty
mountains; and this desolate man is now fallen into the clifts, or
concauities, of one or other of these. He is then every way a prisoner, fast
fettered in the sedge, and closed up in the hollownesse of the mountain which
was over him. Thus water, and weeds, and earth, have all conspired to drown
him. If otherwise he might have risen, yet now the hill is upon him, Virgil.
Aenei. 3.
not fainedly as Aetna was said to be on Enceladus, but verily and indeed, not
to crush him with the weight, but only to keep him there, and detain him
till he were drowned.

the earth with her bars was about him, and that for ever. Bars are to make
things strong, as in doors or otherwise. Then the strength of the earth had him
within her keeping; even that which David does call the pillars of the earth, I
will establish the pillars of it. He was now as in a pit, Psalm 75.3.
fast bolted and surely kept, and as it seemed unto him, for ever and for ever,
never hoping to escape, and to be freed from that danger. He held that the
doom of fearful death, was pronounced over him, the sentence of dissolution
and destruction, and now he is in the midst of his dolorous execution. Thus he
does paint out unto us, the abundance of his misery, proposing himself as a
wretched spectacle for the time, environed with such woes, as he knows not
how to describe them. The water, that did compass him, even to the very soul;
the depth did round beset him; the sedge was about his head; he was at the
roots of the mountains; the great bars of the earth were closed, and made
fast upon him. What more could a carnal man wish upon his enemy, if he would
wish to be never afterward troubled with him on earth? This is the full
recounting in particular, of those fears which were upon this sinner. Now let
us see the use of these words.

6 If I should be asked here, why I have used this Paraphrasticall exposition,
so much speech in a case so evident and apparent, whereas doctrine and store of
matter, is more fit and acceptable to this auditorie, I must forthwith shroud
my self under the Prophets shield. He thought good to write it, and I think
not amiss to touch it: if any man shall say, unfruitfully; he does wrong to
Gods Spirit, who throughout all the whole book of the Scripture, has put no
one thing in vain, although the dim eyes of our weakness cannot hastily
comprehend the mystery of his meaning. The speaker then and the reader, are in
this case to pray God, that he will descend and come down unto them, that he
will touch the heart of the one with the key of knowledge, and that he will
sear the lips of the other, Isay. 6.7.
with the coal of the Seraphim. And then this shall be gathered out of it. The
vehement inculcation of so many degrees of misery, does the more magnify Gods
great mercy unto our Jonas. The harder his necessity was, the more welcome
was Gods aid. The more grievous that his wound was, the greater was the cure.
The more dangerous the sickness was, the more gracious was the healing.
Beyond hope to save, beyond thought to preserve, in a deplored state, and at a
desperate pinch to succor, is an eminent grace and favor, never enough
recorded, never enough reported. My danger was unspeakable, my peril was
vndescribable: all hope was past and exiled; yet now in this wretched tenure, o
Lord my blessed God and everlasting Father, thou have brought up my life from
the pit. Now his obstinate hard affection begins to yield: this does even
melt the heart of the Prophet in kindness, to see that from the bottom of
millions of extremities, he was delivered by the free grace of his maker.

7 The remembrance of this benefit, does so stir up his mind, in his holiest
meditations, and gives such life to his motions, that he does not satisfy
himself, but the more express his misery, the more to extol Gods mercy. He
thinks himself the more deeply devoted to such a Savior. The lower he was
dejected, the greater was his deliverance; and the more sound his deliverance,
the more sufficient should his thankfulness be to the Lord. Now he sees his
God to be a God of power and majesty, able to free from any thing. Where his
creatures do depresse, there he alone can lift up. Although the wind rage, and
the sea roar, and all the earth be disquieted, yet he does bear sway over
them. Then we need not despair in the waves of woe and extremity: if our
faith be not extinguished. It is Gods greatest glory to rid from greatest
evils. Where all man's help is wanting, there his finger is most conspicuous.
It was a good speech of Philo the Jew, Philo Iudaeus de legatione ad Caium.
which he uttered on this occasion: when that beast Caligula could be persuaded
by no reason, nor by any man's intercession, but that his image must be set up
at Jerusalem, which would quickly have inferred the adoration of it, and he
was so earnest on it, that there was no way, but do it or die, Philo turned him
unto his fellows, and bad them not be discouraged, for where man's help does
cease, there Gods help does begin. Then it proved so with them; and so it
does with other oftentimes: but nothing could be more evident then this, to him
who wrote my text. He ioyeth that in such a downfall, he did taste of Gods
kindness: but the particular contemplation of his heaviness, by recounting
special circumstances, does wring from him more gratefulness, more thanks
giving.

Luc. 7.36.
8 When Christ being invited came to the Pharisees house, he had some
entertainment of him, but no way to be compared with that of the woman reputed
the great sinner. She washed his feet with her tears, and wiped them with
her hair, and afterward kissed them, and anointed them with ointment. She
could not content herself with many demonstrations of her affection toward
him. The Savior Christ, who knew all things, did yield the reason of it, and
that was she loved much because much was forgiven her. Then where much is
received, there should be much returned. That man is very blessed, whose eyes
are opened so, as to see and iudiciously behold, what it is that is done for
him. The Lord often times does leave us very far to our selves, that we may
take knowledge of our infirmity, and then give him entire and complete praise,
as unto him belongs. Adam was quickly fallen, Genes. 36.15.
but he was not so hastily raised up again, by the actual and present
performance of the promised seed. Man might wrestle and struggle to get up
again, and cast his devises, and beat his brains long, but all would not
serve. Lodouic. Viues de veritate fidei. l 2.
God suffered him to languish almost four thousand years, and the longer he
did lie, the deeper still he did sink. This time of long staying, was first to
make man without all excuse, who if he had been restored immediately,
peradventure would have boasted in the pride of his heart, that it had been a
needless labor, for God to repair him; for as in time he had fallen, so in
time he would have risen, without help of any. Now God took away this
exception. Secondly it was to remember man of his lamentable state, who had
lain vndeliuered so many years and ages, and thousands of times, and now at a
desperate pinch, was set on foot again by the free favor of God. The opinion
of which mystery shall take deeper root in us, if therein we use our selves
as Jonas did here, that is, specially recount the evil then sustained, and
severally remember the good things now received. If we will say as Zachary the
father of John Baptist said, Luc. 1.79.
that when we sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, a light was given
unto us; and add withal, that Adam had condemned us, and Eve had undone us:
our hands were polluted, our hearts were defiled, our deeds were depraved, our
toungs were profaned, our thoughts were corrupted, our knowledge was decayed,
our understanding darkened, all the powers of our mind even to the death were
wounded: the world triumphing without, the flesh insulting within, and Satan
gaping for us, as for a pray surely accounted of, yea hell and damnation being
in us and on us: yet the riches of the mercy of him, who redeemed us by his
own precious blood, did frustrate our enemies, did supply all our infirmities,
did amend our defects, and set us at liberty, that nothing should be laid to
the charge of us.

9 This sweet recapitulation, moves a tender conceit in soul, and is
pleasing unto God, who delights in that conscience, which is bruised with such
often and ingeminated motions. It argues a lively feeling, and true touch in
that, which is for the present thought upon. How does the spouse of Christ in
the Canticles, fetch backward and forward the description of her love? how
particularly does she speak? It is not enough to say that her well-beloved is
white and ruddy, Cantic. 5.10
the chiefest of ten thousand, but, his head is as fine gold, his locks curled
and black as a raven: his eyes are like doves upon the rivers of waters, which
are washed with milk, and remain by the full vessels, his cheeks are as a
bed of spices, and as svveet flovvers, and his lips like lillies dropping
down pure myrrh. Yea she goes forward to his hands and legs and mouth. When
Jeremy in the heat of his Lamentations, was desirous to move commiseration
at Gods hands, if it might be, he holds it not sufficient to say, the city
is solitary which was lately full of people, Lament 1.1.
she is now as a widow, but in special he does amplify the desolatio^ of
it. The fire had destroyed her buildings, the sword had slain her mighty
ones, the famine had pinched her tender ones, the walls and streets and temple
were ruinated and defaced; the Princes and the people, the Elders and Priests
and Nazarites had lost their ancient glory. What should I say of David, when
once he does complain then every thing is too little, and where he does give
thanks there nothing is too much. In the two and twentieth Psalm: Psalm. 22.14.
I am like water povvred out, and all my bones are out of joint: mine heart is
like wax, it is molten in the midst of my bowels, my strength is dried up
like a potsheard, and my tongue cleaves to my jaws, and thou have brought me
out into the dust of death. There he speaks of bulls and oxen, and Lions, and
dogs, and Unicorns, for by such names he calls his enemies that oppressed
him. So when he comes in another mood to give thanks, he fears not to
speak: in the abundance of his gratefulness he spares no cost to utter it. I
will name one place for all: Psalm. 18.1.
I will love thee dearly o Lord my strength. The Lord is my rock and my
fortress, and he that delivers me, my God and my strength, in him will I
trust, my shield, the horn also of my salvation and my refuge. What words
almost could he devise, which he has not here put in?

10 I would that this age of ours, which is so apt to learn all evil, could
learn this one good lesson, either of Jonas here, or of the other parties whom
I have named, to lay unto the heart such things as do befall us, or the works
of God which we see; and then to abide and dwell upon them, not slightly but in
serious contemplation, between God and our souls. But the truth is, it is
far otherwise. We are alive and quick in Gods business only, while the
sharp spur does prick us. It is the rod which does quicken us, but not so
much as it should. Commonly and for the greatest part, let there come upon us
weal or woe, good or evil, great blessing or small blessing, we are dull and
insensible. We observe not as we should, by amplified circumstances, what it is
that is upon us. We feel the rod, but it is as men sleeping, or in a trance:
we see Gods goodness over us, but it is like men standing a far off: great
things do seem but small things to us. When we come to give thanks, we put all
in one gross sum, and if we begin to pray, we huddle our needs together. In
a word, our best laying open of our hearts before the Lord, which should be
with an exquisiteness and curiousness if it might be, not of words so much
and of form, but of matter and sighs and groans, and compunction and
contrition, is but shuffled and scambled over. Lord lay not this idleness, and
great negligence to our charge. If we come to a Physician, we lay open our
grief by parts; this ach is in the head, this distemperature in the stomach,
this griping is at the heart. In our merchandise or business committed to our
servants, we examine all from point to point. Let us do so in Gods benefits: it
shall procure in us a more ingenuous acknowledgement, then we ever did imagine.
One example or two to teach this.

11 This present day does remember us of the birth of her, This was preached on
the seventh of September, the birth day of our Queen Elizabeth.
by whom under God we do receive a multitude of great blessings, as the free
course of the Gospel, an admirable peace, prosperity and abundance. He is
little less then a brutish creature, or at least he is a very ill minded
subject, who having age and experience, does not give the Lord thanks for her.
Yet in this so apparent a chain of Gods benefits, let us examine it from link
to link, and it shall wring out better motions, from him who is best minded.
That the everlasting Father should bring her to the crown and scepter of this
kingdom, through so many difficulties. Ioh. Foxus in vita Cranmeri Edit. 4.
Her brother (as he supposed to prevent a greater mischief) denying her that
prerogative: her sister coming between: and matching with that Prince, who
was then held the chief flower of Christendom; a certain expectation of
issue being between them; the Spaniards thereat joyous, as hoping thereupon to
tyrannize and dominere at their pleasure. Nay yet much more then this. The
Clergy giving counsel to take away her life: Idem de periculis D. Elisabethae.
Gardener thirsting for her blood, as a wearied man would long for water:
Story daring to say, when some each day were burnt in question of religion,
that these were but the branches, they should strike at the root: a suspicion
of strong treason against her sister, being sought to be fastened on her:
imprisonment of her being procured in rigorous and hard manner: yea the very
sentence of death as it is thought once being gone out against her. Yet that
the Lord should deliver her from all this, and advance her to the guiding of
this land and people: That he should so preserve her being a woman (and
therefore by nature weak, and exceeding fearful) in so many plots laid
against her: Pope Pius with his Anathema deposing her from the Crown, Pius 5.
in Bulla sua 1569. Gregor. 13.
and absoluing (if he could get us to believe him) her subjects from their
obedience: Pope Gregory by the setting up of his Seminaries, inueigling some of
her own to play some treacherous part against her; in oft-intended invasions;
in a rebellion once plainly attempted; in conspiracies of sons of Belial
more then twenty; To bring her yet notwithstanding, to such an age of her life,
to such a year of her reign; and if this be too little, if we will serve God
and honor him, to give us hope that more shall be added unto her days, and by
a consequent to our happiness: To carry her who in her self is a mortal
dying creature, apt to be broken like a glass, yet as if she had been borne in
the bosom or hand of Angels, so that nothing has annoyed her. This particular
Analyzing or scanning of the graces of God upon her, will wrest from us a true
joy, with feeling and understanding. And what we do in her, we may all do in
our selves.

12 Let us run from step to step, through Gods favors showed unto us.
Bernard. de diligendo Deo. Tantillos and tales.
Either as Barnard does, God deserves to be loved by us, because he loved us
first, that is something; so great a God as he is, that is more; so fervently
as he does, that is yet more; and freely, whereas we were such little ones,
when as we were such bad ones. Or otherwise if you please. To create us when
we were not; to make us men, not beasts; to redeem us when we were lost, and
that with so inestimable a price: among men to grant us to be Christians, and
not infidels, Turks or Jews, who are bitter enemies to his son: to give us
so long a life, as that we may comprehend what pertains unto his service: to
bring us in place, where we may see his Sacraments to be administered, and hear
his word taught: to touch our hearts with faith, and an earnest desire of
perseverance, to fill our consciences with spiritual joy, and comfort in his
promises; in sickness to stand by us; in adversity to uphold us; in
temptation to strengthen us. All this should make our hearts pant, Psalm.
116.12. Genes. 32.10.
and say with David, What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? or with the Patriarch Jacob, I am not vvorthie of the least of all
thy mercies, and all the truth, which thou have showed unto thy servant. So to
think, when other beg, that we might beg likewise: when we see other
deprived of their senses or common understanding, to remember that the same
might be our portion; or banishment, or imprisonment, or bondage and
captivity. But there is a Lord in heaven, who has dealt otherwise with us,
and given unto us a maintenance from our cradle, clothing unto our back, and
bread unto our belly, yea peradventure to come from state of necessity, to such
a condition, as rather to be able to give, then to take, to help, then to be
helped. We may go on in these meditations. When evil has been conspired,
when mischief has been contrived, then he has affoorded us that favor, as
to go on the thorns vnpricked, to walk in the fire unburned. When slanders
and defamations have been devised, and such complaints made and suggested
against us, yet all has vanished as the smoke, and in the uprightness of a
good conscience, we have gone quite untouched, as if no such thing had befallen
us. What sweet thoughts should this work? what passions of admiration? what
embracings of Gods mercies? He who knows this and performs it, does make
true use of that which befalls him, in crossing over the troublesome sea of
this world, and in passing through this wretched vale of misery.

13 I beat this point the more, as partly to demonstrate that these words of
my text, which seem to us so barren, are not altogether without their fruit;
yea if nothing else should be gathered from them, but that which I have already
taught (although I doubt not, but another man might find some other doctrine in
them, as God does give diverse conceits to diverse of his servants.) So again
to draw each of us to a special consideration, of that good or that evil,
which has or does fall upon us. It is a very dull age, even the dotage and
last time of the world, wherein we do now live: our memory is decayed, by
reason of the heaviness of our spirits, and the earthinesse of that
corruptible carcass, which hangs so fast upon us. Then we had need be
wakened with often and loud remembrances, that as drop after drop does pierce
the hardest stone, so thought after thought may make our dead heart to be
pliable. This is the course of our Prophet, by manifold repetitions of the
dangers wherein he was, to acknowledge the Lords aid, to be so much the more
over him; and himself the more beholding, the more bound and devoted to such
full mercies on him. Great love requires a great measure of returning
retribution, if that possibly may be; if not that, yet of consideration, and
earnest contemplation, and acknowledgement to the uttermost. Take Jonas here
for an example of behavior in like danger. This was my case, this my state,
this my forlorn hope of rising, yet thou have brought my life from the pit, o
Lord my God. This word yet comes with an Emphasis, which confesses that his
help came more welcome. But before that I speak of his restoring, one little
note more from hence.

14 The danger whereinto Jonas was fallen, being thus expressed by himself,
and that with so sensible a feeling, might recall into his mind, the vanity
and folly of his former fear, which was, that when by the Lord he was
appointed to go to Nineveh, Ion. 1.3.
he would needs unto Tarshish. I showed in the third verse of the first
chapter, that among some other reasons, the fear of danger might make him
change his course. It might have been, that in Niniue he should have been much
disgraced, it might have been quite despised, perhaps by the king imprisoned,
peradventure put to death. Terentius. Ego in portu nauigo.
It was best for him to escape all this; good sailing in the haven; good
sleeping in a whole skin. The safest way were to make sure work, and not to
come there at all. But what a change did he make? He feared a little hurt, and
now he has a great deal. He suspected, that only one thing might annoy him,
and now he has found another. Nay in truth for every ten, he does receive a
thousand. Before, he did distrust that his body might have smarted; now body
and soul pay for it. Before he might have had some man perhaps his enemy, but
God his friend assured: now not so much as any man is his friend, and God like
to a furious enemy does chase him, and make after him. In this sort, such who
in the Lords causes will not depend upon him, but in their imagination cast
great perils to themselves, thinking to avoid those by declining from their
duty, in that their turning away, do plunge themselves into greater dangers.
They think that they fly from a dog, and they turn them upon a cockatrice.
They hope to escape a blow, and receive a deadly wound. They imagine to save a
finger, and are pierced to the heart. 1. Sam. 15.9.
Saul would not displease the people, by killing the king of Amelek, but he
displeased the Lord, which was a higher matter. He was unwilling to loose so
much cattle, Ioh. 19.12.13
but he lost his crown and his life. Pilate would not offend the Emperor:
what? spare him who was said to be the king of the Jews? but he plucked on
himself the anger of the great king, and Emperor of the heavens. This is a
fault too common among the sons of men, to dread that which is little, and to
pass by that which is more; Matthew. 23.24
to make a strayning at a gnat, and to swallow up a whole Camel. It is an
excellent saying, which Chrysostom has to this purpose: Chrysostom. in Psalm.
48. Personas timent hominesque saccis indutos.
It is a point of extreme madness, to stand in fear of those things which are
not to be feared, but to laugh at such matters as in truth are dreadful. In
this says he, men do differ from children, that these (as not having their
understanding perfect) do fear vizards, and men clothed with sackes, but
think that it is nothing to revile their father or their mother, and they
leap into the fire or touch candles which are burning, but they quake at some
noyses which are not to be feared. But men do care for none of all these
things. If we look upon our selves, and sift our hearts as we ought, we shall
find our selves in the number of these babies and silly infants, when we make
much scruple of some trifles, but respect not an higher duty, and so to escape
the rain, we run our selves into the river.

15 What is more common amongst us, then when we are in hope of preferment, to
fear this or that cross? the anger of this mighty man, or of that noble
woman? If their names be but used, or their letters be procured, although upon
wrong information, yet if they be induced to move something inconvenient, or
scandalous, or amiss, (be it never so much against the will of the writer, for
that he wants true notice) do we not more fear to fail their unjustly
extorted motion, then we dread the Lords displeasure, or the great account
which one day we must yield for our selves, when no Prince of the earth shall
be able to protect us? Thus for men's sakes we leave God, (for so it may be
termed, when we decline from justice, and that which should be done) and when
we think that we have dealt most subtly and most wisely, Gods finger is up
against us, and ouerturneth all our policies. Yea peradventure he whom we have
served, or she whom we have feared, by the motion of the Spirit of the Lord, is
made a rod to whip us, considering that we have dishonored them, in making
them the authors of unfit actions; or else that person for some worldy respect,
is drawn away from our purpose, and so the hope of our labor is frustrated
and made nothing. And then this wound remains upon our conscience, that we
have done this and this, which our heart did tell us was untoward and indirect,
or at the least to be doubted. And what a grief is it to us, to have such a
worm within us, fretting and gnawing on us? The way to prevent all this, is
evermore to look on Gods fear, and his precise commandment, and not to
swerve from that, and then he whom we sincerely serve, will either send us the
fruit of our desires, or patience in the contrary. The kings heart is in the
hand of the Lord, Prou. 21.1.
as the rivers of waters: he turns it vvhither so ever it pleases him: Then
how much more the hearts of other inferior persons? If he think that it be
fit for us, where-about we go, he will send it us; but when he pleases: if
not, his will be done. Only this is our comfort, whether that come or not, the
bird is safe in the bosom: sorrow shall not vpbraide us, that we have feared
men more then the eternal God: that we have for the pleasure of any, made
shippe-wracke of a good conscience, or very far adventured toward it. Take
heed then by the Prophet, that in seeking to fly such harm as is but
imaginary, or little in comparison, we do not run our selves by offending of
the Lord, into danger which is inevitable. Now go we a little forward.

Yet thou have brought my life from the pit.
16 The common translation has in the future tense, Vulg. edit. Subleuabis de
corruptione vitam meam. Tremelius and Anglica editio Geneuensis. Act. 17.28.
Psalm. 40.1.
thou will lift up my life. The Septuagint, let my life ascend from corruption.
The Chaldee Paraphrase, it is ready, or but a small thing unto thee, to bring
me from corruption. The best do translate it by the time that is past, thou
have brought my life from the pit, or corruption. He ascribes all to God as
moving in him, and living in him, and in him having his being. So the
faithful do evermore. I waited says David patiently for the Lord, and he
inclined unto me and heard my cry. He brought me also out of the horrible
pit, out of the mire and clay, and set my feet upon the rock, and ordered
my goings. A gracious God, who can strike us and can heal us; can foil us and
can raise us. He whippeth us by number, and scourges us by measure, and when
we turn unto him, he will quicken us and revive us, from death and the gates
of hell. Jonas sinning is punished: Jonas crying is helped. While stubburnnesse
is on him, down must his proud heart: but when fear and faith possess him,
he is hoyssed up again. Let us then change our heart, and God will change his
hand, in the midst of his roughness toward us. Augustinus in 8. questionib.
Dulcitij. Mutauit vocabulum quia mutatum vidit affectum.
Saint Austen in those eight questions which were proposed to him by Dulcitius,
speaks fitly to this matter. When the woman came to Christ from Syro
Phaenicia, he said unto her, the childrens bread is not to be thrown to
dogs: but afterward, not O dog great is thy faith, but O woman great is thy
faith. He changes his word because he saw her affection changed, and he
understood that the same reproof of his was grown up to good fruit. So it is
with this patient: when his faith once breaks forth, he shall come from
corruption.

17 But what may be the matter, that he so much rejoices, that he should live
again. The words which go before from the beginning of the chapter, do show a
fast hold to be laid on Gods favor by faith, (howsoever for some little time
it was dismayed) a remission of sins, and a hope of life eternal, although he
had very much transgressed. Then since his life was sealed up against another
world, why should he desire to be here again? Why should he so rejoice that he
should be delivered? Very shame might have enforced him to hate the light. The
report of the mariners, who would freely speak wheresoever they came, might
spread the name of him, as of a most infamous person. He might be poynted at
with the finger, by children and vile folks, as he went in the street.
Howsoever, Gods children should thirst to be above, should long to be
dissolved, and be at home with their father. So did Saint Paul in the new
Testament, Philip. 1.23. 1. Reg. 19.4.
when he desired to be loosed: so did Elias in the old when he cried, It is now
enough, o Lord take my soul, for I am no better then my fathers. And who would
be in his pilgrimage, when he might be in his country? who would be in the
sea, when he might be in the haven? who would be warring, when a crown might
then be given him for his victory? who would be in the way, when he might be
at home in rest? It seems then at the first sight, that the Prophet does take
joy in his loss, and desires that for a benefit, which was a harm unto him.
But when all these things are scanned as they should be, it will appear far
otherwise.

18 Now it was no time to fear the shame of the world: he was rather to seek
to please one, and that was his old master; yea if he displeased all other by
it. It was a good resolution of him, who did write the eigth of those Epistles,
which be in the end of Saint Hieromes works: Hieron. Epistola 8. in fine
operum.
Let every one say what himself will. In the mean time according to my small
understanding, I have judged it better for my self to blush before sinners
upon earth, then before the holy Angels in heaven, or wheresoever the Lord will
show his judgment. And to wish as Elias wished, were but to be impatient;
wherein Jonas is not behind, as appears in the fourth chapter. Ion. 4.3.
And his case was not like Saint Paul's, who might yield up his soul in
quietness of conscience, as having in his heart a testimony of the Lords good
accepatnce of his labors in this world. Now he who is settled in such an
opinion, need not fear to depart from this transitory habitation: nay he may
well long to dye. But with Jonas it is otherwise: he stands yet in a
mammering, and knows not which way to turn him. Yet he is not quite exempted
from that conflict of his, between hope and despair: yet, (although his faith
be not extinguished) he is not assured, how the Lord will take his sin at his
hands. This makes him wish for more time to testify his obedience; to make a
recompense if it might be, for his sinful rebellion; or at the least to wash
away his iniquity with many tears. And having this purpose in him, to ask
pardon with sighs and sobbes, he ioyeth with all his heart, that time is
permitted him, to perform the vows of his soul, and to remove away from the
Church of God, that scandale which he had offered.

19 Moreover if he had dyed in the sea, and the belly of the fish, his
departure had been violent, and laid upon him for his sin, as a grievous
punishment for ungodliness: and such a kind of death, the faithful servants
of the Lord have no desire to dye. It may well be gathered out of the thirtieth
Psalm, that the sickness of David there insinuated (for that Psalm may best
be understood of sickness) was laid upon him for one fault or other: Psalm.
30.6.
perhaps for presumption, he thought that he was too strong. But when for that
cause, he felt the hand of the Lord sharply chastising him; he beggeth that he
might not in such a sort go down to the grave. What profit is there in my
blood when I go down to the pit? shall the dust give thanks unto thee? or
shall it declare thy truth? For some one reason or other, which the Spirit of
God has concealed, 2 Reg. 20.3.
Hezechias was not ready, when the Prophet Esaias came unto him, and told him
that he must dye. This did make him turn himself to the wall, and weep, and
pray to the Lord, that if it might stand with his good pleasure, that sentence
might be reuersed. Then it is not our best safety, at every time, and in
every case, to be removed hence, but upon some occasion we may joy with
Jonas, that longer time is affoorded us to bethink our selves. This is his
exceeding comfort, that though the pangs of death were upon him, yet that God
once again brought his life from corruption.

O Lord my God.
20 The only thing now remaining, is the confident appellation, which he uses
to the Lord, Jehovah o my God. This shows a faith beyond faith, and a hope
beyond hope: when he knew that the Lord was angry, and extremely wrathful at
him, yet to cling in so to his mercy, as to appropriate to himself a portion
in his maker. For what greater insinuation of confidence can there be, then by
particular application to apprehend Gods mercy: to lay hold upon him as on a
father; and that not as we say, with a reference to the Communion of Saints,
Matthew. 6.9.
Our father which art in heaven, but my father and my God. This has been the
perfect trust of the faithful in all ages, which has encouraged them to
approach with boldness, unto the throne of grace. Psalm. 22.1.51.14. Job. 19.25.
Luc. 1.47. Ioh. 20.28. Galat. 2.20.
My God, my God says David. And, thou that art the God of my salvation. And
Job, I am sure that my Redeemer lives. My spirit says the Virgin Marie, does
rejoice in God my Savior. My Lord and my God, says Thomas. Paul says of
himself, I live by faith in the Son of God, who has loved me and given
himself for me. This true faith does close with God, and incorporateth it
self into the body of the Redeemer.

21 And this is it, which brings comfort unto the wounded soul, and
afflicted conscience, not that Christ is a Savior, for what am I the better
for that? but a Savior unto me. That I am one of the adoption, reconciled and
brought into favor, sealed up against that day, when the quick and dead shall
be judged: my portion is with the Highest, mine inheritance with the Saints.
How could flesh and blood ever bear the heat of strong temptation, without
this firm persuasion? What is it to my belly, that bread is prepared for
other, unless I be assured that my part is therein? What is it to my soul,
that Christ has dyed for other, unless I know that my sins are washed away in
his blood? It may be good for Moses, it may be good for Paul, or Peter, or
James, or Stephen, but what is it unto me? It is Meus then and Tuus, as Luther
did well teach, it is my God and thy Savior which does satisfy thirsty
consciences. Luther. in Epist. ad Galatas.
There is the joy of the Spirit, when men come to that measure. Then it is a
blessed doctrine which instilleth that faith into us; and in that if in any
thing, does appear the fruit of the Gospel, which is preached in our days,
that people sick and dying, being taught before in their health, can give most
divine words, and right admirable speeches, in this behalf whereof I speak,
sayings full of holy trust and assurance; which as it is a thing most
comfortable to themselves, beyond all gold and treasure, which are but as dung
and dross, to a man yielding up the ghost, so it brings good meditations
unto the standers by, in causing them to acknowledge very evident an plain
arguments of election in the other, whom they see to be so possessed with joy
in the holy Ghost, and so rapt up, as if they had already one foot within the
heaven.

22 But it is otherwise with the ignorant; they lie groueling upon the ground,
and cannot mount up with the Eagle. So is it in that doctrine which the Church
of Rome does maintain, when their people are taught, that they must believe in
general, that some shall go to heaven, that some belong to God: but to say or
think, that themselves shall be certainly of that number, or constantly to
hope it, that is boldness overmuch, that is ouer-weening presumption. They are
to wish and pray, that it may be so with them, but yet it appertains to the^
evermore to doubt because they know not the worthiness of their merits: a most
uncomfortable opinion, which cannot choose but distract the heart of a dying
man, that he must not dare to believe with confidence, that he shall go to God:
that Jesus is his Savior, and the pardoner of his faults. No marvel if the
life and death of such who hearken unto them, be full of sighs and sobs, and
groans, and fears, and doubts, since quietness and settled rest cannot be in
their hearts. They have a way to walk, but what is the end they know not. They
are sure of their departure, but whither they cannot tell. A lamentable taking,
and wherein of necessity must be small joy. How contrary hereunto does Saint
Paul speak, Roman. 5.1.
being justified by faith we have peace toward God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. How contrary to this does Saint John speak in the name of the
faithful, 1. Ioh. 5.19.
we know that we are of God. How does dejected Jonas yet keep him fast to this
tackling, when he cries o Lord my God?

23 And this is the surest anchor, whereunto a Christian man may possibly know
how to trust. This is it which in the blastes of adversity, will keep him fast
at the root; which in the waves of temptation, will hold him fast by the
chinne, which in the greatest discomforts, and very pangs of death, will bring
him to life again: To ground himself upon this, as on a rock assured, that
his God is his father, that Jesus is his redeemer, that the holy Ghost does
sanctify him, that although he sin oft-times, yet evermore he is forgiven;
and albeit he do transgress daily, yet it is still forgotten; that whether he
live or dye, yet ever he is the Lords. Good father lead us so by thy most
blessed Spirit, that we never do fall from this. But although sin hang upon
us, as it did upon the Prophet, yet raise us so by thy love, that laying hold
on thy promises, and the sweetness of thy favor, we may reap eternal life,
to the which o blessed Lord bring us for thine own Son Christ his sake, to
whom with thee and thy Spirit, be laud for evermore.

THE XIII. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 3. Gods election is sure. 4. One argument thereof is to
remember the Lord after affliction. 6. That cogitation is very comfortable. 7.
The good and bad do differently remember God. 8. The wicked do it with a
murmuring. 10. Especially in death, God is to be thought on. 11. Therefore it
is good to think on him in health. 12. Else we shall not be willing to dye.
14. Churches are to be used reverently. 15. God hears the prayers of his
servants. 17. By vanity is signified evil. 19 as Adams fall may therein be
comprehended, 20. or idolatry, 21. or curious crafts and studies, 22. or
adultery and carnal sin, 23. and ill gotten goods, 24. and ambition.

Jonah. 2.7.8. When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord: and my
prayer came unto thee in thy holy Temple. They that wait upon lying vanity,
forsake their own mercy.


IT is evident unto us, by the whole process of the Chapter before going, that
the transgression of Jonas, did seem unto the Lord a grievous transgression:
And his fall may seem to us, a very strange fault, that a Prophet exercised
before in Gods service, among the Israelites, acquainted with secrets and
revelations from above, should so vary from the tenure of piety and obedience.
But great sins require great punishments, strange faults require strange
chastisements. Our Jonas as I think, may make his profession, that it has
been so with him. A tempest did follow him, which would not give him over: a
lot did discover him to be a malefactor: and when he could answer to the
evidence, no one word but guilty, which imported his confession, the mariners
will they, nill they, must cast him over ship-boord: where after sinking down
to the bottom of the water, after wrapping and intangling of his head within
the weeds, he is caught up by a fish, in whose belly he is lodged, for three
days and three nights. Here how perplexed his state was, who cannot imagine?
Without food, without light, without company and comfort: a man drowned, and
not drowned; devoured but not digested, alive but yet as dead, in perpetual
expectation of the fearful dissolution, of his soul from his body. Nay the
torment was greater, which he sustained in his heart, that horror in his
conscience, that conflict in his soul, as if God had forsaken him, and given
sentence upon him, as on a reprobate castaway, a firebrand of hell, an
inheritor of damnation. Woeful sinner, who for his fancies sake, and upon the
suggestion of flesh and blood, would draw such a judgment to himself, as
which a man well advised would not have sustained, but the space of one day,
for any treasure on earth. For it is a fearful thing, to grapple with the
Highest, or to wrestle with our maker.

2 As this anguish has been largely before touched, so to make it up complete,
he adds as the conclusion of his misery, although not of his prayer, that his
soul fainted in him, it doubled it self together (as some men do translate
it) as the knees of a man dying do double; it was as overwhelmed, fainting as
in a swound, his life was at last cast, even ready now to go out, as a consumed
lamp: the gaspes and groans and pangs, of very death were upon him. Yea throbs
of desperation did oppugn him with such violence, that the hope of eternal
life seemed for some moments, to be exiled from him; his forlorn soul was
sinking in diffidence and distrust. So the best are dejected when God does
eclypse his presence and comfortable aspect. But that absence and forbearing,
makes a more tender feeling of succor when it returns, a more abundant
thankfulness: for it deserves gratefulness in great measure, to be brought
from the depth of sorrow, to the height of joy; to be saved from extremity.
Jonas yet strikes this string, amplifying Gods mercy over him, from the
circumstance of the time: when my ghost was giving up, when all hope was past
and gone. Which argument because I fully handled in my last Lecture, I would
now leave it, and teach some other doctrine. These two verses note two persons;
the former of them the Prophet, the latter some other men, who wait on lying
vanities. The actions of the one of them, and the other, are here specified,
and the fruit which both of them do reap. Then these two persons yield two
parts, to be handled by Gods assistance. In the former which concerns the
Prophet, these circumstances are: what he did, and how he sped: what he did, in
that he says he remembered the Lord, how he sped, in that he adds, that his
prayer came unto God in his holy Temple.

I remembered the Lord,
3 The purpose of Gods election, in fore-appointing some unto Matthew. 16.18.
prevail not against him whose the determination is; neither prevail they
against his. No creature can cross the intent of the Creator. He can bring us,
he can force us, from sin, unto sorrow and heaviness for sin, from
filthiness unto innocence, from transgression to repentance, from forsaking of
goodness to embracing of grace. He it is who can regenerate us, renew us, and
reform us, remould us, and reframe us, that natural corruptions, and actual
deprauations, even idolatry with Naaman, 2. Reg. 5.1. Luc. 19.2. Act. 9.1.
Matthew. 26.70. Luc. 8.2.
or extortion with Zacheus, or persecution with Paul, or denying Christ with
Peter, or entertaining of seven devils with sinful Mary Magdalene, shall be to
us no prejudice, no detayning of his favor. Where he appoints salvation,
there every thing in his time shall work unto salvation; but it must be in his
time. He draws the unwilling to him, the broken he binds up, the lost he
seeks out, he touches that with remorse, which was before as the Adama^t,
the hardest heart he does mollify. He that ordains glory to any, will give
him grace to attain it. He who is the life is the way leading to that life:
Ioh. 14.6.
he who gives the one, grants the other. Where he determines the end,
there also he offers the means to apprehend that end. As before more at
large.

4 But there is no mean more direct, to bring any to God, then to teach him to
know God, who never knew him before: and such a man as did know him, and now is
as if he were fallen away, to bring him to remember him; that he may once
again assume that confidence, and resolution to himself, that he who loved
him before, will return his affection toward his soul, if it do seek unto
him. Which favor, look to whom God in his mercy grants, it is an assured
argument that he is not such a lost child, as who finally shall perish. For
with his sweet remembrance (for so I may well term it, when it comes after
bitter temptation, and a grievous fall) does go a faith of that nature, that if
it be once admitted to presence, it will never out again; no justice can
dismay it, no judgment can affright it; but although it creep on his knees,
it will to the mercy seat; from which albeit rigor should offer to repel it
and remove it, yet it clingeth and clutcheth so fast, that it will not out any
more. Then, the best men who have fallen by the infirmity of their flesh,
think their case very happy, if that may be granted to them, to have God in
their mind, and to have recourse to him: and they make much of that motion,
retaining it and pursuing it, as the best way to their blessedness: they
account this in greatest difficulties, as the first step to a conquest, as the
first link of a chain, which being plucked will bring on much more with it.

Psalm. 42.6.
5 In the two and fortieth Psalm David complains thus: My God, my soul is
vexed within me, but yet he adds for his comfort, Psalm. 77.2.1.
therefore I will remember thee. In the seventy and seventh Psalm, In the day
of my trouble I sought the Lord, my sore ran and ceased not in the night: my
soul refused comfort, But I did think upon God. What a joy was it to Job,
when after loss of all, after his biles and botches, and scraping them with a
pot-sheard, after his wives temptation, after his friends reproching him that
he was a sinful hypocrite (else God would not have so plagued him) he found
that grace with his maker, as to grow to this resolution to say, Job. 13.15.
Lo, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. For it is the only rock of
contentment, the best and sole assurance, which languishing souls can have, to
run unto the Lord, all-sufficient for his power, and merciful in his love.
Jonas was past the pikes, and now entering upon a victory, when after his
deiection, and discouragement in his suffering, he begins to remember God,
whose amiable countenance he had seen so often before, and whose favor he had
enjoyed. And that is a great matter, unto a wounded soul (whereby he may close
again with the Highest, and gather in with the Judge) to have had former
experience of his love, as of a father. This experience brings hope, and hope
will never cease to beg, Psalm. 74.12.
and urge for a pardon. God is my king of old, says the Church of God in
affliction, and it rests it self on that. When Habacuc had complained of
those, who in his time did grievously persecute the faithful, his refuge is,
the remembrance of the Lords foregoing favor, which evermore had sustained
him. Habac. 1.12.
Art not thou of old says he my Lord my God, my holy one? Therefore we shall
not dye.

6 The siliest soul among us, may hence derive some comfort to himself: that
is, when any fearful waves of temptation do grow on us to drown us, then to
think on the mighty Iehoua who alone can rid us out. If ^^ can speak against
us, what matter is it if God be for us? If our sins within us be great, yet
is the Lords mercy greater. What blackness can be so filthy, as that Christ's
blood cannot wash it? I cannot owe so much, but my God can forgive it. I cannot
want so much, but my Savior can supply it. If I look upon my self, behold woe
and damnation; but if I look up to heaven, there I have a strong redeemer. Now
as for earthly matters, and these corruptible trifles, with which we have to
do, they are to the regenerate man, far lighter then the other. If penury or
poverty come, God has enough for all, he can relieve in abundance. If sorrow
oppress the mind, Psalm. 30.5.
it may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. If sickness do
vex the body, what Physician is like to the Lord? 2. Sam. 15.31. 1. Sam. 21.7.
If Achitophel should take counsel, God can turn it into foolishness; if
Doeg should lay snares he can destroy and break them. And all this may be
soundly warranted to me, by those former experiments which I have had. I have
lived so many years, and have ever been preserved: I have slipped often but
never fallen; or fallen but risen again. I have been much bruised, but never
broken: in adversity he has helped me, in temptation he has succored me: he
is the same God ever, most gracious and most kind; him will I serve in weal,
him will I seek too in woe.

7 Well fare this good remembrance, and flying to the Lord; unto who^, the holy
men of all ages have had recourse, the Patriarks and the Prophets, and every
grieved soul. And whither could they better go, then to the spring of grace,
then to the well of power? No fishing unto the sea: no service to a king: where
most is, most may be gotten. No seeking like to that which is to the king of
kings, who is more then a sea of bounty. But in remembering him, remember this
withal, that it be with a lively faith, with a confident apprehension of the
sweetness of his love. For in this, the elect do differ from the wicked: both
of them are in distress, and both remember God: but the one of them with a
hope, the other with a horror: the elect firmly believing, that his God does
think upon him: that although the beams of his countenance, for a time be
shadowed from him, yet they will break forth again: that he smites but not
to death, he strikes, but not to kill. Whereas on the other side, the
unbelieving sinner, be he hypocrite or idolater, does think that his God or
Gods, have utterly forgotten him; or if they do remember him, it is but for to
plague him, to vex him or torment him: by which meditation, he breaks into
wrath and most impatie^t fury, sometimes raging with heat, sometimes despairing
for fear, evermore quaking with horror. So the one of these lives, and
recouereth, and daily approaches more near to the Lord; the other sinketh and
faints, as the melting ice does in the sunshine; or else fretting he
blasphemeth, not unlike to a stroke of thunder, which ratleth and makes a
great noise, but presently dissolueth, and goes away unto nothing.

8 We find such in the Scripture. In the eighth Chapter of the Prophecy of
Esaias, Isay. 8.21.
God threatens thus unto Judah, then he that is afflicted and famished, shall
go too and fro in it, and when he shall be hungry he shall even fret himself,
and curse his King and his Gods, and shall look upward. Here is a thinking
upon those, which were but supposed Gods, but it is with indignation. When
Samaria was besieged, 2. Reg. 6.33.
and famine did shrewdly pinch it, Ioram that wicked king thereof, had God in
his memory, but to murmr and fret at him. His message unto the Prophet showed
that, when he durst to say, Behold this evil comes of the Lord: shall I
attend on him any longer? As if he should say, that he would no longer wait
the Lords pleasure. His words before show as much, 31.
when in steed of making his prayer to the Almighty God, he does curse and ban
himself, if he did not that very day, take off the head of Elizeus the Prophet
of the Lord. Apoc. 16.21.
In the sixteenth of the Revelation of Saint John, is is reported that a great
hail did fall, every stone as big as a talent; but it is added withal, that
men blasphemed God, because of the plague of the hail: for the plague thereof
was exceeding great. Among heathen men, the wisest have herein fowly fallen,
being dejected to desperation, upon every great occurrent. Tul. lib. 1.
Epistol. ad Quint. Fratrem.
I would pray to the Gods for these things, says Tully, ad Quintum Fratrem,
but that the Gods have given over to hear any thing of my prayers. Among the
old Roman historians which have written, who was wiser then Cornelius Tacitus?
men do now study him for policy. Yet in the first of his history, Tacitus
Histor. lib. 1.
recounting those great grieuances, which befell Rome by the civil wars,
under Galba and Vitellius, he uses this desperate speech: Never by greater
slaughters on the Roman people, or by more just judgments was it approved
unto us, that the Gods do not at all respect our safety and security, but to
take vengeance on us they are ready enough. Here policy has forgotten the very
first grounds of piety, which are patience and humility. Liuie a grave writer
although otherwise superstitious enough, as appears by his Prodigia, and
yearly monsters, yet tastes of these dregs, when in his fourth book he
writes thus: Liuius lib. 4. Vixope Deorum omnium res sisti potuisset.
Here follows a year, which for slaughters and civil vprores, and famine
was very famous. Only foreign war was vvanting, wherewithal if our state
had been laded, things could hardly have been stayed by the help of all the
Gods, but that they had run to ruin.

9. Thus the wisdom of this world, is nothing else but foolishness, nothing
but doting folly, when it comes indeed to the cross, or to the fiery trial.
The knowledge of God is wanting, or at least the laying hold aright by faith is
wanting. And where faith is not to be found, there is neither hope nor
patience, which are two infallible notes of a just and Christian man. There is
nothing says Saint Cyprian, Cyprian. Sermon. de bono patientiae.
which puts more difference between the just and the unjust, then this,
that the evil man in his adversity, does complain and impatiently blaspheme,
but the good does suffer quietly. The just has trust in his Savior, but the
other has no part in him. What marvel then is it, if the wicked do fret and
rage without comfort, since he has no share in him, who is the God of comfort?
What marvel is it, if he perish? Plutarch tells that this is the quality of
Tigres, Plutarch. de superstitione.
that if drums or tabours sound about them, they will grow mad, and then they
tear their own flesh, and rent themselves in pieces. If the unbelieving
reprobate do hear the noise of affliction, he is ready to rent himself: but
by cursing and by swearing, he will tear the body of Christ from top to toe in
pieces. As Jonas did remember God; so the reprobate will not forget him; but it
is not to pray unto him; not to believe upon him, for he harh not so much
grace, but to ban him and blaspheme him I could wish that such profaneness as
this, might never be heard off, in earnest or in play, in the life or death of
any man. We should think of him with a reverence, we should mind him with a
fear; in prosperity with a trembling, in adversity with a hope. There should
be no fretting against his providence, no grudging against his punishment. When
my soul did faint within me, I remembered the Lord says Jonas, I remembered him
to beseech him, I remembered him to entreat him, I remembered him to embrace
him, to trust in him as a deliverer, to believe in him as a father. I called to
him and doubted not: and he afterward heard my voice.

10 Saint Hierome does give this note upon this place, Hieron. in Ion. 2.
taking it out of the Septuagint. That because he thought upon the Lord, when
his soul did faint, and he was ready to dye, we by his example, should above
all things mind our maker, when we are in the fits and pangs of death. A very
needful doctrine, if any thing may be needful; that when we must dislodge,
and be removed hence, when our glass is so far run, that immediately a
change must follow, and that not to a trifle, or toye, which is to be
contemned, but either to heaven or hell, either to perpetual joy, or to
everlasting torment; we have him in our meditations, who is to see our judge,
who is to scanne our actions, and to peruse our conscience, and give the last
sentence on us: that then with our best remembrance we think upon his mercy,
and contemplate on his great love, in the redemption of his son, and desire
him for his bloods sake, to take us into his favor. That this lesson might the
better be taught unto us, Jesus the son of God, and forerunner of our faith,
when he was ready to yield up his spirit, did commend his unspotted soul, Luc.
23.46,
to his most righteous father. Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. Good
Steven the eldest martyr, did tread these steps right after him, when at the
time of his death he cried, Act. 7.59.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. And every Christian man should struggle and
strive to do so; to shake off as much as may be, the heaviness of his
sickness, and as having that one prize, that last great prize to play, should
stir up his spirit in him, and should then pray to God to comfort him, to
conduct him unto heaven, to lead him along to glory. It is a good thing to
live well; but because death is the vp-shot, which makes or marreth the rest,
it is the best thing to dye well. He who has begun aright, has half that
whereat he aims; but to begin is our hurt (it shall be a witness against
our conscience) unless we do persevere. The man who shall be blessed, Matthew.
24 13.
must continue to the end.

11 Then may the dangerous state of such, be justly deplored, who in their life
time have so fondly doated upon the world, that when death which is Gods
baylife, does summon them to appear before the judgment seat, they do least
of all other things know, wherewith he should be furnished, who comes there:
but as before in the time of their health, so in their despaired sickness, do
think only upon their Mammon, admiring it and embracing it, and kissing it in
their thought, as if they were wedded to it. But neither of themselves, nor by
the instigation of the Minister (who is a remembrancer for the Lord) can they
be any way urged, to speak of celestial things, to call on God for mercy, or
to profess their faith, and confidence in their Savior. And this wordly
imagination, first ministers hope of life, they not dreaming that death will
take them, till on the sudden both body and soul, do eternally dye together.
Next if they do conceive, that it must be so, and there is no way with them but
the grave, then is their heart oppressed with sorrow, and a huge weight of
grief, that there must be a separation, from their beloved treasure. And
lastly if their memory do serve, there must be an unsettled and unresolved
disposing, with disquietnesse and much vexing, of that which has been ill
gotten, to this child or to that friend, and much stir there must be about
the pomp of a funeral: by which means all good motions are so stifled and
choked, that there is scant one word of him, who made all and must judge all.
See what it is, in our life time to thirst after this trash, to repose our full
contentment and blessedness in this dross. When the heart should be lifted up
to celestial contemplation, this hangs so about it, that it cannot but lie
groueling, upon the the rotten ground.

12 Vain glory, or any sinister passion which does possess the mind, has the
same effect; and so has ignorance of the true God; which ignorance and vain
glory, as I suppose were the reasons, Sueton. in Tito. cap. 10.
wherefore Titus the Roman Emperor (who was among the heathen a mirror of
men) was so loath to depart from this earth; when knowing that he must dye,
being carried as he was in his horse-litter, he looks up toward heaven, and
most bitterly makes complaint, that his life should so be taken away, from
him, not deserving so ill. How vain are all the shows of virtue, without the
knowledge of Christ Jesus? Yet the end of Saint Ambrose, In vita Ambrosij. Non
inter vos vixi vt vixisse me pudeat.
was in a more holy manner, when he being spoke unto by his friends, to pray
that yet he might not dye, made his answer as he lay, at the very door of
death, I have not lived so ill among you, that I am ashamed to live any longer:
neither am I afraid to dye because we have a good Lord, upon whom he then did
trust. There can be no better meditation, to any man at that time of departure,
then to think on that good Lord. It causes a willing and safe leaving of this
world; a perfecting and completing of all, that has been here begun; which is
more to be desired, then all the land or treasure, which ever the Sun did
see. When the time of receiving the reward comes, it is good to be ready. It
is best to be advised of our standing, but most of all of our falling. He that
for a long time runs nimbly, but stumbleth immediately before the mark, has
lost his former labor, and is deprived of the price. If at any time, then at
that time, when our soul does faint within us, and is leaving her habitation,
together with our Prophet, let us think upon our God. Now let us come to the
next circumstance, and that is how he did speed.

And my prayer came unto thee into thy holy Temple.
13 Jonas in great misery, and expectation of his end, has his mind upon his
master, and with faith he remembered him, and he remembered him to pray to him.
Now his prayer was not unfruitful, as that which is made to idols, or unto
hard hearted men, but by the favor of the Judge, it has audience to the full.
It came to God in his Temple, which is not to be intended, as taken of the
heaven, the chief seat of his majesty, and residence of his power (although
in general all the prayers of his elect and chosen, do ascend and go up
thither) but in more special manner it is meant of the Temple, which Solomon
did erect: where together with the Arc of the covenant, and the Cherubims and
the mercy-seate, the presence of Gods grace was in most peculiar sort. And this
house was to the Jews, a visible sign and Sacrament thereof, 1. Reg. 8.31.33.
Isay. 37.14.
so that according to the request which Solomon made to God, they repaired
thither when any thing did oppress them, as appears by Hezechias, who laid
open the letter of Senacherib, in the Temple before the Lord. Yea when soever
the Israelites were in a strange land, in bondage or captivity, and called upon
the Lord earnestly, they did turn themselves to that coast, which way this
house did stand, Daniel. 6.10.
as I then made plain unto you by the example of Daniel, when I handled the
fourth verse of this present Chapter. Then to say no more of that point, his
prayer was directed to him who sat in this Temple.

14 But observe withal, with what reverence he speaks here of Gods house,
the Temple of thy holiness, for so it is in the Hebrew, (...)
or into thy holy Temple, as we commonly do translate it. If we refer the
appellation of holiness to the Lord, who is so holy as he, whose sacred
goodness and sanctity, does exceed the thought of all creatures? In
Leuiticus he speaks thus, Leuit. 19.2.
be you holy, for I the Lord your God am holy. So in Exodus it was written in
that plate, which was in Aarons forehead, Exodus 28.36.
Holiness to the Lord. If we take it of the Temple, this also was a holy
place, consecrated unto piety, and dedicated to religion; whose inner part by
an excellency, was called Sanctum Sanctorum, the holy of holies, as implying
that the rest was also of good quality. From hence all profaned persons and
polluted things, were precisely bid to be kept. Joseph Antiquit. lib. 20.6.
The violating of this house did much offend the Lord, as may be seen many
times in the Prophets; and Josephus is of opinion, that nothing sooner brought
destruction to Jerusalem, then the execrable deeds committed in the Temple.
The place was made for all kind of goodness, and devotion to the Lord; but it
was so far abused, as any thing which is most filthy. These are warnings to
us, that since in our age Churches are as much to the Christians, as that
Temple was to the Israelites, or at least they are sequestered houses, to serve
God truly in, that we use them with all reverence, for his sake to whom they
belong: that as we repute them, to be consecrated matters, so in truth we do
use them, as Gods most holy Temple. Which whether men do or no, let the
chopping and the changing in symoniacall sort, the buying and the selling of
these Churches as of most profane things, witness unto the world. If we should
be silent, yet let the preassing in of the vilest, 1. Reg. 12.31
right Ieroboams Priests, proclaim the truth herein. Let the carelessness of
those Pastors, whom God has blessed with skill, make open declaration, who do
mind that field or barn, whence corn or wool comes to them, oftener in one
month, then the pulpit in a year. They can enquire for a Curate, where one
may be had best cheap, (not respecting whether he be able to teach,) or what
payments be to the Prince, or impositions to the state, but how the people
shall be instructed, they do not regard at all. And on the other side, let the
general behavior of men throughout the land* speak whether those that be of
the congregation, do use these houses as sanctified things or no. Look into
their cold coming on the week days, in such places where Lectures are
continued, their talking and gazing about, when their soul should be
instructed; their reuoluing of their worldly business; their observing rather
of eloquence in the minister or preacher, or in some, what may be carped at,
then how their own life may be bettered, or their conscience informed; their
perfunctorie praying, and formal invocation of him who requires the heart.
These matters show that it is made unholy by us, which in it self is ordained
to be holy. Of likelihood the temple at Jerusalem was used in another sort,
when the Prophet here called it holy: otherwise he might justly have feared,
that God had not been there to have heard him, when he cried out of the fishes
belly.

15 But hitherto the Temple was not relinquished by him, as the later house was
afterward, when a voice was heard in the night saying, Joseph. de bello
Iudaico. lib. 7.12.
Migremus hinc, let us be gone from this place; and therefore the Prophets
prayer which was directed hither, found the success which it wished. It came
thither to the Lord. The distance of the place, the great depth of the water,
the shutting up in the whale, yea the odiousness of his sin, could not
detain his crying, and seeking to the Lord. He who in the fourteenth of
Exodus, Exodus 14.15. 1. Sam. 1.11.
did hear the cry of Moses, although never a word were uttered, and he who
heard Hannas prayer, when her lips only did move, and no word was spoken
out, did attend Jonas when he besought him with faith, and implored his
gracious goodness over him. He has bid us call upon him in the day, Psalm.
50.25.
that is, in every day of trouble, and he has said that he will hear. It is
he who never failed any of those who seek to him. As in all other matters, so
in this he has a prerogative above all other: he can hear, and he will hear.
Heathenish Gods are but delusions, and imaginary toys; he who prays to them
prays to nothing. 1. Reg. 18.27
Baal may be iested at, as sleeping or being busy. Idols are but dead stocks;
they cannot move themselves, and therefore not help themselves, much less
those that pray to them. Yet a man exceeds all these, if they were in number
ten thousand: although oftentimes he debaseth himself, as a servant unto
these. But how short of God does this man come? This will not if he could:
another could if he would: a third both could and would, but is absent, and
therefore ignorant what it is that is begged of him. The power of all is so
limited, that the greatest cannot grant the tenth thing which is asked, and
either themselves do confess this, or use base shifts to cover it. And how
hardly do men part with that which is in their power? Seneca de Beneficijs.
lib. 2.17.
As Seneca writes, on a time a Cynike Philosopher asked a talent of Antigonus,
who would gladly have been reputed a bountiful Prince. His answer was, that a
talent was too much for a Cynike to receive. Then the other asked him a penny.
That says he is too little for a king as I am to give. How often soever such
answers be given from men, they do never come from God. He gives without
reproching; he hears without delaying. But we must ask that which is
lawful, and we must ask in faith, and we shall not have a denial.

16 It pleases him to yield so much unto our prayer, appointing that as the
instrument whereby we do approach him. And indeed it is a good means to come
into his presence. For prayer is so piercing, that it will get to the seat of
God, through the very heavens and clouds. It is winged and ascends upward,
being made light by the heat of fiery pure devotion. The wind is not so
quick: the lightning is not so nimble, which goes from East to West, as this
is in his passage. In a moment it ascends from our tongs to Gods ears. His
eyes see our eyes weeping: he well conceiueth our groans; he well understands
our sighs. If heaviness do oppress us, and sorrow weigh us down, yet if our
knees be bent unto him, or our hands held up on high, or our breasts be beaten
before him, or our cheeks bedewed with tears, we shall be eased from all. Then
this is the only remedy, in agonies and in anguishes, for the afflicted soul
to seek to. It hasteneth to and fro, and never returns empty. Our sinning
and suffering Prophet, this drowning and dying Jonas, did cry from the middle
of the whale, from the bottom of the sea, from the very belly of hell, and as
he said before, so here again he professes it, the Lord did hear his voice:
his prayer came to Gods temple. Now you have heard what he did, and how
likewise he sped. Let us here come to the second part, which notes some other
persons, whose words and deeds are otherwise.

They that wayt upon lying vanities, forsake their own mercy.
17 These words do imply a kind of Antithesis, or contrary observe, or keep,
or wait upon lying vanity in stead of truth, not ignorantly falling into it,
but wilfully pursuing it. Such as set their whole labor on that which is but
error, and make a study of it. Now those who with such egernesse do follow
wrong paths, the farther they go on, the more they go astray. They bend indeed
all their diligence to somewhat, but it is to lying vanity: under which name,
the Scripture does comprehend all things, which are besides piety, and the
true service of God. Psalm. 31.6. Psalm. 62.10.
I have hated them says David, who give themselves to deceitful vanities. And
in another place: Trust not in oppression and robbery, be not vain. Gods
Spirit does account every thing to be but vain, and lying, and deceitful,
which cannot endure the trial, which fails us and falls from us, and when
we most trust to it, is least able to do us good. Such are all earthly things,
without the grace of God being joined to them; as riches which are so much
desired, and honor which is so hotely sought, or beauty, or strength, or
friends, which help not in that day, when judgment or vengeance comes.

18 Such are all the inventions, and devised figments of men, superstitions and
false religions, Pharisaicall observations, papisticall dreams and fancies,
for whose sake, whosoever will leave the true prescript of Gods word, he may be
said to forsake the fountain of living water, Ier. 2.13.
and dig unto himself broken pits. He may be said to have turned from the
Lord who is only truth, and to have embraced falsehood; to have refused grace,
and forsaken his own mercy. For where as God has promised to be merciful to
all such, who serve him as he has taught, by their neglecting of true
devotion, they also neglect that mercy, which was offered to them before. So
they make themselves unworthy of remission and pardoning of their sins. And
in this case, the end does prove heavy, like to that rule of Aristotle, where
he says that it must needs be in progress of time, Aristotel. Politic. l.
4.12
that of counterfeited good things, should grow that which is truly evil. That
wherein Zedechias trusted was but a lying vanity, and had a doleful issue,
Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 10 4
when (as Josephus did well gather) he thought that the two Prophets Ezechiel
and Jeremy, had spoken contrary things, and therefore that the Lord had not
at all sent them. The reason was, for that the one foretold that he should be
led to Babylon, and the other had foresaid, that he never should see Babylon.
2. Reg. 25.7. Ier. 52.11.
Whereas both these things were true; for his eyes were first put out, and then
he was carried prisoner thither. The heretical understanding of Scripture is of
this kind, being nothing else but a lying vanity: and so is the faining of
that to be Scripture, which is not written by Gods Spirit, and the grounding
thereupon of such positions, as touch piety and salvation. But because the
consideration of this doctrine is very ample, and good fruit is herein to be
found, let us see some few examples of such, as have or do so fall away from
their mercy.

19 First our old parents in Paradise, did observe lying vanity. God had
expressly forbidden unto them, the touching of the tree of good and evil. All
other but none of that. Satan comes with his temptation, and suggesteth
another matter, and that was this, as Chrysostom writes upon Genesis: What
profit is it to be in Paradise, Chrysostom. in Genes. Homil. 16. Sp^tare vobis
licet, frui non licet.
and not to enjoy such things as are in it? Nay therefore your grief is the
greater, that see these things you may, but use them you may not. Or as Austen
turning it another way, supposes thus. God says, do not touch it: what? This
tree. And what I pray you is this tree? if it be good, why may not I touch it?
if it be bad what does it in Paradise? There is no hurt in the tree; but God in
his spiteful mood, is loath that you should be graced so far forth as
himself. You shall be Gods if you do it, and able to discern good and evil.
Thus was a lie inculcated in stead of a simple truth, and Adam was induced to
hearken to the vanity of the deceiving serpent, whereby he lost that mercy,
which the Lord had appointed over him, and plucked on himself and his
posterity after him, that misery, that body and soul for ever had jointly
perished by it, if our Savior in compassion had not made restitution. Other by
his example may take heed and warning also, what that thing shall be, whereunto
they presume to trust.

20 Secondly, idolatrous persons do come within this compass, Number. 23.1.14
in accomplishing that duty which appertains to it. When Balaam would curse
the Israelites, he goes from place to place, imagining as dicers do, that one
standing room was more fortunate for his purpose, or luckie then another. But
in every place he must have seven altars to be erected, and seven bullocks, and
seven rams to be offered on them. He held this number of seven to besome holy
number, and therefore would not break it. How did they tie themselves to
idolatrous observations, Isay. 57.5. August. de ciuitat. Dei. 4.8.
who had their idols standing under every green tree? Or those of whom Saint
Austen speaks, who had for every thing a peculiar God or Goddess. When the
corn was in the barn, they had a Goddess for that, and when it was in the
earth, they had another for that, and when it began to blade, and when it began
to ear, Tutelina, and Segetia, and Patulina, and Volutina, and how many I
cannot tell. How careful think you were they, to watch when the times did
come, to offer sacrifice unto every one of them in his kind? How laborious is
their folly who live in Scandinauia, in Biarmia or Scricfinnia, which are
Northren parts of Europe beyond Sweden, Olaus Magnus. lib. 3.2.
who as Olaus Magnus reports, do mark every morning what living thing they
do first see, in the air or earth or water, and all that day until the
evening, they adore that creature for a God, be it bird or beast or fish, 2.
Chron. 36.8.
yea or creeping thing, as a worm. Iehoiakim who is mentioned in the book of
the Chronicles, did much dote on his idols, when he had found on him being
dead, marks and prints in his flesh, which were made for their sakes, (for so
the story is expounded. Eusebius. de vita Constant. 2.5.15.
) So Licinius was fond upon his Gods, whom he did serve many ways; yea and
upon occasions used to change them also, as he did when he fought against
blessed Constantine. Theodoret. Hist. Eccl. 3.21.22.
But no man more then Julian, who did honor unto his Idols, with such and so
many sacrifices, as were against humane nature, and decorum in a man, as we
find in the Ecclesiastical stories. Now see what can be more vain, then
stocks and stones, and imaginary supposed powers as these were: what could be
more lying, and more fraudulent, then such fond Gods as these? And they who
wholly intend such toys, have renounced the true service of the Lord, who is
jealous of his honor, and will not have any creature rob him of his glory;
but such vain toys least of all. From this text, they may fear judgment, who
wait on he Saints and she Saints, and serve God and the Virgin Marie, with so
many Pater Nosters, and so many Aue Marias, and Credoes, upon their beads. All
these are without the warrant of Gods book, and therefore lying vanities: yet
how careful are superstitious persons to number them, and account them, and
keep true reckening of them, as if therein lay all the virtue.

De proprietatibus rerum, and other of that stamp, do suggest to idle heads,
and young men which are too credulous. Take the liver or some other part of
this bird or that beast, such a stone, or such an herb, at such a time of the
Moon, and you shall do this or that; imagine, go inuisibly, or understand
birds languages, or obtain some evil purpose. If any thing be a vanity, this
is a lying vanity, and a mis-spending of that time, which God has given unto
us, not to abuse, but to serve him; and he will require a reckening of it at
our hands, when we do least think upon it. There fall within this number, the
ancient Aruspicia and Auguria of the Romans, that is, the marking of the
flights of birds, or of the entrails of beasts, or other things of that
quality, all which are foolish vanity; and yet much time was spent in them,
and some made profession to be very skillful about them. The wisest among the
heathens, although they did not know God, yet held these things for cousinage.
It is a renowned speech which is fathered upon Cato, Cicero de Diuinat. l. 2.
that he would say, that he wondered very much, how one of their Aruspices could
forbear to laugh, when he met with any of his fellows, to see how they
deceived men, and made a great number of simple ones in the city. Saint Austen
thought another matter, fit to be recorded of that Cato, August. de doctrina
Christ. 2.21.
and that was this, that when one asked counsel of him in sober earnest, what
harm he supposed was aboded him, because rats had eat his hose; he answered
that party with a jest, that it was no very strange thing to see that, but it
had been much more marvelous, if his hose had eat up the rats. Tul. lib. 2.
Diuinat.
In Tullies disputation concerning such arguments, when one to enforce the
verity of Divination, had said that a victory which fell to the Thebanes, was
foreshewed by some extraordinary crowing of Cocks, Tully could answer that
with a smooth flowte, but very significant, that it was no miracle that Cocks
should crow, but if fishes had done it, that had been strange indeed. Those
Ethniks could see that these things were falsehood, and exceeding lying
vanities, worthy to be but laughed at; yet how did some of their greatest men
attend and wait upon them? Act. 19.19.
I may call these foolish Arts, for I think that they come not so far, as
curious crafts extend, which are named in the Acts of the Apostles. But to
speak mine opinion, I imagine that figure-casting for such things as are lost,
or to judge of Natiuities, is fully within that kind, and is a lying vanity, as
that which is most lying. Yet although by the Prophets it be sharply rebuked,
Isay. 47.13. Ierem. 10.2.
although condemned by Philosophers, although ill spoken of by Historians,
although by good laws forbidden, in well governed common wealths, although no
Principle therein have approved verity, neither may there be any good
argument or conclusion made for it, yet how do some wait upon it, and in no
sort will go from it? Of whom I may also say, as Cato said of the Aruspices,
that I marvel when they meet one another, how they can forbear to laugh to
see how they get money. From the number of these, I may not seclude
superstitious observations of ominous or unfortunate things, upon which some
men do so dote, that they believe such vanities, as a man should believe the
Gospel. All fearful judgments sent from God, are to be regarded by us, but
frivolous superstitions, and traditions from old tales, are rather to be
contemned. He that observes the wind shall not sow, Eccl. 11.4.
and he that regards the clouds shall not reap. Take heed of such lying
vanities.

22 Fourthly, ordinary transgressions may very well be taxed hence, and
adultery among other: wherein although Satan the more to inflame it, do buzze
a tale into want on flesh, that great men have sinned so; that God will not
call such natural faults as those be to reckening; that there is time enough to
repent in old age; and it is best in the mean while to satisfy concupiscence:
yet when these things come to be weighed in the balance of Gods justice, they
prove both light and lying. For the wrath of the Lord is oftentimes kindled
against such wilful crimes; and he has threatened, that whore mongers shall be
shut out from the new Jerusalem. Apoc. 22.15
They then do forsake their own mercy, who pollute themselves in such sort,
and withal are a cause for other to be filthy. Yet how some wait upon this,
it is lamentable to think, seeking to hurt themselves by every kind of
wantonness. Good Job in his confession, held this for a gross sin, Job 31.9.
and disclaimed it from himself, If my heart have been deceived says he by a
woman, or if I have laid wait at the door of my neighbor, observe that
adulterers do wayt upon their sin, let my wife grind unto another man, and
let other men bow down upon her, that is, let my wife also be false to me: for
this is a wickedness and iniquity to be condemned. But many do not fear
this, and so pluck Gods judgment on them.

23 Fifthly, they who in desire to enrich themselves or theirs, Psalm. 62.10.
whom I cited before, trust not in oppression nor in robbery: be not vain, or
give not your selves unto vanity, if riches increase, set not your heart upon
them. If any, then this is a vain conceit to think that a man's purse is the
best friend which he has, that riches can preserve in the day of greatest
trouble, that God accepts money, that ill gotten goods can long prosper.
Oftentimes money is kept to the hurt and death of the owner: and children are so
far off from being blessed with goods which are ill gotten, that fretting and
consuming, and a curse is joined with them. Then what folly is it to force and
strain our consciences, and so to adventure on Gods displeasure, and the loss
of his best mercy, for the gaining of that which is but a fugitive servant,
and cannot help at need? And yet it is strange to see, how the world lies
open to unlawful and filthy gain, what wringing there is from all sorts,
what griping of the poor, what thirsting after gifts and hunting after
rewards. Are there not which wayt upon this, and make a study of it, as a man
would study heaven, devising and contriuing by what fine slight and skill,
this money may be soked out, and this cheat may be gotten, and that gift may
be had? and then like to the hypocrite, whereof Zachary speaks in his time,
Zach. 11.5.
they can cry blessed be God for I am rich and live well, seeming to give the
Lord thanks for that, which they have spoiled, and robbed from their brethren,
whom as there the Prophet speaks, they slay and sell for money. It is great
thanks which we return to God, for the wit and reason which he has bestowed
upon us, to employ it in that sort; as to offend his divine Majesty, to abuse
those with whom we live, to help our selves, (so farrefoorth as is in our own
power) to infamy in this life, with all such as be virtuous, and to
destruction in another. Better it is to have clean hands here with a little,
then much profit by false vanity.

24 The same application may be made, concerning ambition and other sins, in
all which we may take this for a warning; that our sight is so dim, and our
understanding so dark, and such are the false shows of many things in this
life, that we may quickly pursue a lie, in steed of truth, and vanity for
sound verity, and so purchase Gods wrath, unless with a single eye we look
on things aright, and ever take the judgment of Scripture for our trial; and
withal pray that our heart and intellectual powers, may be lightened in that
behalf, that so having will and strength, by the mercy of the Lord, we may
walk as we ought, and as it beseems our calling. And here I end. Holy Father
we beseech thee to direct our steps in thy paths, that renouncing all lying
vanities, we may acknowledge thee in our life time, to be the only Lord; and
when our soul faints within us, and is departing hence, we may only think
on thee, that both our present prayers, and spirits afterward may ascend into
thy celestial temple, where thou raignest with thy most blessed Son, to whom
with thee and thy holy Spirit be laud and praise for ever.

THE XIIII. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 1. Jonas proves thankful for Gods mercy. 3. The reason
and order of sacrifices. 5. They should be spiritually meant. 7. How we should
do in Gods service. 8. Gods praise is publicly to be sounded out. 9.
Thankfulness is a sacrifice to be offered of all. 11. We are forgetful in it.
12. The manner of vows. 14. What rules are to be observed in them. 17. Popish
vows examined. 19. All help comes from God.

Jonah. 2.9. But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving,
and will pay that that I have vowed: Salvation is of the Lord.


IN the words before going, the Prophet does comfort himself exceedingly, that
he serves such a master, as is best able to help him when he most needs,
and in his Temple attended to his hearty prayer, when as his soul fainted
within him; whereas all other things, be they idols or heathen Gods, or any
devised refuges, be nothing but lying vanity, and therefore those who wait and
depend upon them, do forsake their own mercy. Where, when he had found God so
eminent, and incomparably great, in comparing him with those weak ones, he
esteems it a special point of duty, to yield to one so excellent, a high
measure of praise; and most deserved thanks to him, who in extremity had so
raised him from the pit. And this is the drift of this present verse, to
acknowledge himself so bound and devoted to God, that all the powers of his
mind, and faculties of his soul, should be employed in his service. A
conclusion well beseeming him who had received such favor, that he would not
as beasts, or as unthankful persons do, only take that which does come, and
make no more adoo; but with a respect unto the giver, who beyond all
expectation had raised him and relieved him, would record it, and repeat it,
and in his best meditation, again and again reuolue it, as not knowing how to
return enough, for Gods great mercy.

2 But in the mean while, the words which he uses are various and
significant. He does mention thanksgiving, which declares his grateful mind:
and the better to express it, he names the voice of thanksgiving, as
intending, that he would advance the honor of him who saved him, not in
secret only, but with manifest declaration to others: and to both these he
does ad the act of offering sacrifice, applying that to his thanks, which was
the most solemn service, used in old time to God. Neither does he make his
stand here, but whereas he had vowed some things unto the Lord, which he
promised to perform, if ever he did escape, he says he will pay those vows:
and at the last for a conclusion, he shuts up all with these words,
salvation is of the Lord. Where because (as you see) the circumstances in the
text are manifold, and all of them have their use, for better order of
instruction, I think good to observe two things. First the duty returned by
Jonas, and that consisted in a double deed, one, the sacrifice of
thanksgiving, and the other, the paying of his vows. Secondly, that good
which comes from God, not only to the Prophet, but to all those who do serve
him. Salvation is of the Lord. Among all which the word of sacrificing is first
proposed unto us.

I will sacrifice unto thee.
Matthew. 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. In this,
because he has made all, he does require all, our selves and all ours, the
body and the soul, the inward and the outward, the sensible and invisible;
although especially the heart and immateriall soul, yet jointly the hand, and
action from without, yea and the wealth also, that every part may recommend a
duty to the author. And for these external matters, he has given unto man
not only members, as in prayer his hands to be lifted up, his breast to be
beaten on, his knees to be bowed, his eyes to be bedewed, that so compunction
in the mind may the more be stirred up; but also his other creatures, either
dum or dead things, the fruits of the earth, the birds of the air, the beasts
of the field, the metals of the ground, to be used to his glory. And this in
old time was done, in nothing more then in sacrifices, which was in some to
consecrate and dedicate them unto him, in some other to offer them in whole or
in part consumed with fire, to testify their obedience and seeking unto him.
Which manner of sacrificing was known unto men from the first time of nature;
Genes. 4.3.
as good Abel and bad Cain, the first heirs of the world, presented an
oblation of such things as they had, to him who had sent them. Cap. 8.21.
Noe after the flood offered a sweet smelling savor, and Abraham by
commandment, intended to sacrifice his only son Isaac. Cap. 22.1.
By all which it is evident, that sacrificing was common, before that any order
for Gods service was settled.

4 But when the people once were returned out of Egypt, and God by the hand of
Moses had ordained a civil policy, for the government of the laity, and a
Hierarchy Ecclesiastical (for so I may well call it) for guiding of his
Clergy, to the end that every thing afterward might be practiced with
conformity, he appointed first for the Tabernacle, and after that for the
Temple, a tribe of Priests and Levites, whose office was to attend to the
offerings of the people. And himself did name the matter and manner of every
sacrifice, what bird, or beast, daily, or on other occasion should be offered,
as the whole body of the Leuiticall law does make known to us. Thence grew the
daily sacrifice, which never was omitted; the sinne-offerings, and
free-will-offerings, and many sorts besides: and when extra-ordinarie cause was
given, great store of beasts were slain; as when Solomon to consecrate the
Temple at Jerusalem, did offer in his magnificence, two and twenty thousand
Oxen, 1. Reg. 8.63.
and one hundred and twenty thousand sheep, such a sacrifice as I think the
like was never seen. And that time only excepted, when the Jews were
captives in Babylon, or when Antiochus did tyrannize at his pleasure, the
altars were still going, till the very time of Christ, and diverse years
afterward, until that the city and the Temple were brought to desolation by
the Romans under Titus: the Priests and people so precisely observing that,
(when other sins, and dishonours to God did abound) that in the time of war
and close siege, Joseph. Antiquit. 143. and 8.
when they might not issue forth to have cattle for their offerings, they
would bargain with the enemies, at high price and great rates, to serve the
turn for their money, as we may read in Josephus. In such manner was the
succession of sacrificing, for so many years together; God both approouing it
and commanding it.

5 Now these external sacrifices, as when they were rightly brought with true
faith and obedience, and understanding knowledge, they had their use very good,
as to thank God for his blessings, to acknowledge that all benefits were
derived from his goodness, to testify their obedience in perfourming his
commandments; but above all to figure Jesus Christ, the true Lamb, who was
one day to be offered on the altar of the cross to redeem the sins of the
faithful, whereof in the mean time, their offerings were a sign and seal
unto them; so if they were brought by any, as perfunctorie things, formally and
for a fashion, as hypocrites and worldlings did come with them, the Lord was so
far off from accepting them as his service, that he hated them and detested
them. In the first chapter of Esaias, God speaks to them by his Prophet: Isay.
1.11.
What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices, says the Lord? I am
full of the burnt offerings of Rams, and of the fat of fed beasts, and I
desire not the blood of bullockes, 13
nor of lambs nor of goats. Bring no more oblations in vain, incense is an
abominatio^ unto me, I cannot suffer your new moons. Which agreed with that of
Solomon: The sacrifice of the wicked, Prou 15.8.
is abomination to the Lord. God then required in them, that besides the
material gift, there should be a true mind to serve him; humility and lively
faith, which should express and show it self, with charity and good life;
and a killing of the evil affections which were in them. Micah. 6.6
To which purpose the Prophet Micah most excellently does speak, Wherewithal
should I come before the Lord, or bow my self before the high God? shall I
come before him with burnt-offerings, and with calves of a year old? Will the
Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, 7
or with ten thousand rivers of oil? Shall I give my first borne for my
transgression, even the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? 8
No: he has shevved thee o man what is good, and what the Lord requires of
thee; surely to do justly and to love mercy, and to humble thy self to
walk with thy God.

6 Then it was the spiritual sacrifice, at which God chiefly did aim; the
laying down of their souls on the altar of his will, the killing of evil
thoughts, the mortifying of the members, the consecrating of themselves wholly
unto his honor; which doctrine Paul unto the Romans does plainly teach,
where he beseeches them by the mercies of God, Romans 12.1.
to offer up their bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, that
is their reasonable service of God. And this not only under the Gospel, was
seen by the faithful, but was foreseen also under the Law. David can say in
his fourth Psalm, Offer the sacrifices of righteousness: Psalm. 4.5. Psalm.
51.17. Ose. 6.6.
and in the one and fiftieth Psalm, The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit.
So Osee in his sixth Chapter, I desired mercy and not sacrifice, and the
knowledge of God rather then any burnt-offerings. It seems also by my text,
that our Prophet understood this, when he promises to sacrifice, but with the
voice of thanksgiving, as knowing that to be it, which God indeed preferred
before all things. And reason might well teach him, that it was that which the
Lord meant, by the external sign; for what delight could he take in the blood
of brutish creatures, a spirit in their bodies, the impassible in such savors
as did arise from their altars? What need had he of an Ox, or ten Rams of a
man, who is the owner and chief Lord of all the beasts of the field, of all
the birds of the air? If he but speak, they be, if he but call, they come:
he made them, and he knows them, and has no want at all of them. Then he
respects the mind, and the life, and not the offering. The verity of which
doctrine, is of so assured a truth, that Gentiles by the light of nature,
believed it and acknowledged it, as above other, Menander the Poet in one of
his Comedies, as Clemens Alexandrinus notes in the fifth of his Stromata,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Stromat. l. 5.
where he cites his words to this purpose: If any man offering sacrifice, a
multitude of goats or bulls, or any thing wrought by art, although of yuorie,
gold, or pearl, do think that God will therefore be merciful unto him, he is
deceived exceedingly: for the man whom God regards, must be good and honest,
no deflowrer of women, no adulterer, thief, or murderer. And afrerward
again: The just man does every day offer sacrifice to his God, but it is not
with clean clothes, but with a shining heart.

7 These are good lessons for us, who profess a service to Mark. 12.41.
then any apparent thing. The two mites of the poor widow, came welcome into
Gods treasury, because her heart was rich, though her purse were very empty.
It is recorded of Aeschines, that when he saw his fellow scholars, give great
gifts to his master Socrates, Se nec de Beneficijs. lib. 1.
he being poor, and having nothing else to bestow, did give himself to
Socrates, as professing to be his in heart and good will, and wholly at his
devotion. And the Philosopher took this most kindly, esteeming it above all
other presents, and returned him love accordingly. The gracious disposition of
our eternal father, takes in far better part, then any man can take it, the
laying down of our souls, and prostrating of our selves to the fulfilling of
his will. He accounts that the best sacrifice, because it is spiritual.
External things do well, but inward gifts do better. I have noted this unto
you, from out of the word of sacrificing, where the Prophet does not stay, but
particularizeth specially, what it is that he will offer.

I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving.
8 This voice does imply an open and manifest declaration of the mercies of the
Lord, that he meant not to conceal his wilful disobedience, nor his
punishment for the same, but every man should know, how he had been in the sea,
fast closed up in the whale, in pangs of death and extremity, and yet the Lord
had brought his soul out of the pit. He thought it not enough to ruminate in
his own mind, and chew upon this mercy, but others shall be advertised of it,
that so by his example, they may learn to know their Creator, they may learn
to dread their maker. This was a custom of David, who upon great things
obtained, does use to make solemn profession, that he will praise his God in
the great congregation. Psalm. 26.12.
It is but a small thing to think it, but he will speak of Gods glory. And
thus every one should do, yielding unto the world a testimony of his faith, and
honor unto him, whom he chiefly does honor, that such as yet are not called,
by that means may be provoked, to harken to true religion, pricked forward by
that comfort, which they see in Gods children. Plutarch. in Themistocle.
Sueton. in Iulio. 7.
The speech of Miltiades which was in the mouth of every man, and his
victorious acts, set Themistocles on fire to attempt to do the like. The fame
that was of Alexander, gave heart to Julius Caesar, to become the more noble
warrior. And shall not our speaking of God, and the reporting of his acts, his
justice in correcting, his mercy in defending, his providence in disposing, his
willingness in redeeming, his readiness in forgiving, uttered by Christian
me^, incite others to be Christians? God did know that, to be a great means of
bringing me^ unto him, when he gave charge, that the Israelites should recount
unto their children, Psalm. 78.4.
his glorious facts, and the works which he had showed in Egypt. It is a fault
in our days, that parents are not careful to instill into their children, the
remembrance of such things as they have read, or known to come obseruably from
the Almighty. It is a fault in others, that if they come in place where
religion is not respected, as among Papists or Atheists, they think best to
conceal the profession of true piety, lest they should be scorned, or derided,
or pointed at with the finger: and so by a policy stopping the course of their
zeal, in time they quench their zeal, and make themselves as key-cold as
those with whom they do live. They should discharge a good conscience, by
acknowledging of their hope, and peradventure they might by the blessing of the
Lord, draw on other which were backward before: for the heart of him who
hears, is not in the power of himself, but God does rule and guide it, and
the means whereby he works is the hearing of good things. Let the voice then
go to serve the Lord, and let him bless and prosper it, as seems good to
himself. But thou have discharged thy duty: he has given thee a tongue to
praise him, and with it thou do honor him.

9 The voice of Jonas goes, and it is in giving thanks, unto which the name
of sacrifice is often given in the Psalms, as namely in the fiftieth, Psalm.
50.14.
Offer to God praise or thanksgiving; where the word offer, does plainly
import a sacrifice. And in the hundred and seventh Psalm, Psalm. 107.22.
Let them offer sacrifices of praise, and declare his works with rejoicing.
This gratefulness is maruellously acceptable to the Lord, when he bestows
not his benefits as upon the ox or ass, who have them and forget them, but on
those, which are mindful who is the author of them. And that is the sole
reward, and only retribution which we can render to him, and if he have not
that, then he reapeth nothing for all his blessings: but if he may have that,
many good things of necessity will be joined therewithal. Therefore he
straightly requires it, of all that belong unto him. In the eighth Chapter of
Deuteronomy, he speaks thus to the Israelites, When being come into the land
of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 8.10.
thou have eaten and filled thy self, thou shall bless the Lord thy God, for
the good land which he has given unto thee. In the thirtieth of Jeremy, he
says in this manner, Ierem. 30.18.
Thus says the Lord, Behold I will bring again the captivity of Jacobs
tents, and have compassion on his dwelling places, and the city shall be
builded upon her own heap, and the palace shall remain after the manner
thereof. But immediately he adds: 19.
And out of them shall proceed thanksgiving, and the voice of them that are
joyous. The precepts are diverse, which be in the New Testament to this
purpose. Let there be in you no filthiness, Ephesians. 5.4. Colos. 3.17.
neither foolish talking, nor jesting, but rather giving of thanks, And
again, What soever you shall do in word or deed, do all in the name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God even the father by him. The Patriarchs and the
Prophets, and the faithful of all times, had ever this in their memory. How
did Moses and the people, Exodus 15.1.20.
with timbrels and with daunces, sing and rejoice to God, when Pharao and his
chariots were drowned in the red sea? Iudic. 5.1.
How did Barack and Deborah sing, upon the fall of Sisara? There is no end of
examples, what has been done in this case: but the rule may generally be
given, so many as have been faithful, so many have been thankful.

10 It causes a continuance of the love of God unto men, and an adding of
further graces, when he sees them to be mindful of that which is bestowed.
But on the other side, unthankfulness is the mean to stay his hand from
bounty: for as Bernard has well observed, Bernard. Sermon. 4. in Psalm. 90.
Accipiendis indignus est qui fuerit de acceptis ingratus.
he is unworthy of things to be received, who shall be unthankful for such
as he has received. Here every one of us may examine his own heart, whether
he do rightly discharge his duty. We do all long for perpetuating and
augmenting the favors of God upon us, but see whether we requite those, which
are already come unto us. As Jonas was in danger to be drowned by the sea, and
devoured quite by the whale, so was mankind in general (by reason of Adams
transgression) even as in the pit of hell, and very jaws of Satan, apparent
heirs of damnation, fuel for eternal fire, forlorn men and past hope. Yet
by the death of our Savior, we were set free from all, redeemed by his body,
and ransomed by his blood, admitted into the covenant, and incorporated into
himself, so that now we are made free denizons of the city which is above.
What can be a greater blessing? When ignorance and barbarism were grown over
the world, and the darkness of superstition, as thick as that of Egypt, had
possessed the show of all Christendom, that maine Antichrist dominering and
triumphing at his pleasure, so that few were to be found, without the mark of
the beast, God did dispell that darkness, by sending us light from heaven; and
causing the Sun of righteousness to shine out by his word, he cleared that
filthy mist, that the nations of the earth, may now fully behold the purity of
the Gospel. That which was denied to great ones, Exodus, 20.21.
has been revealed to us. As Moses had more liberty to see the Lord, then the
people had, so we see more then our ancestors. But what thanks do we yield
for that celestial comfort? Do we magnify his mighty name, and sing and
speak out the honor of him, who has done such things for men? Where is that
Glory to God on high, ^uc. 2.14.
and blessed be our strong Redeemer?

11 We who live in this land, have sat as at the well head, for many years
together. We have had a most gracious Princess, a mother to our country, and
a nource unto Gods Church; under the shadow of whose wings, next after the
eternal Lord, we have enjoyed much peace, prosperity and abundance. Our
neighbors who groan under the burden of heaviness and oppression, of
persecution and civil wars, do very much admire it. Learning has flourished
with us, and manual arts increased; navigations has been advanced, and
traffic entered with many, to the enriching of our people, and the honor of
our nation. I doubt that we are not so thankful, as all this has deserved.
Yea it has come so fast on us, and continued without interruption, that our
hearts are fatted with it, and we as full and glutted have fallen a sleep in
security, so that we understand not the sweet things which are on us; much
less do we with heart and soul, and all the powers which are in us, extol
the author, who has done such things for us. Conspiracies have been made, to
deprive our land of her gouernesse, and to bring it into the thraldom of a
proud and bloody nation; yet by the Lords strong providence, they all have been
prevented. The great fleet which meant to have made such havoc, 1588.
has been confounded: when men did not much to help us, the winds and waves
did fight for us. Liuius lib. 30.
Truth it is, that as the Romans did give thanks to their Gods, when Hannibal
was removed, who had oppressed and troubled Italy, for sixteen years
together, so by the highest authority, in the most famous place of our land,
and by the noblest persons, and in most solemn manner, Gods praise was sounded
forth, which was a most holy action, and worthy of a Christan kingdom: but
see whether since that time, the common sort of men do study to remember it.
Our thoughts within are so curious, and our ears without are so itching, that
we loath to hear the Preacher to name this in the pulpit: we imagine that this
never comes, but for want of other matter, being a crambe, oftentimes sodde.
It seems that we are little moved, when we think so lightly of that, which
to the natural inhabitants of this land, was so great a deliverance as our
eyes never saw. Albertus Cardinalis Austriacus Caletum capiens. Anno. 1596.
Deuteronomy. 6.7.22.
We have reason to fear, that God lately has brought the same enemy so near
our land, to quicken us and to stir us, to a remembrance of the former mercy,
by shaking his rod over the sea unto us. The acts which God did in Egypt (of
the which I spoke before) and his victories by the conduct of Iosuah, were
commanded to be proclaimed to all succeeding ages, and were bidden to be
spoken off. I do marvel why no man in that time objected; What shall we never
have done of hearing these old matters? No, their thankful mind did use it
otherwise, and recorded that matter, and recounted it as the fairest flower in
their garland, and their honor with all the earth. We should make such
reckening of all Gods mercies toward us, but most of all of the greatest. The
enjoying of apparent good things, or the escaping of fearful and dreadful
evils, does deserve thanksgiving with us. Jonas had felt the bitterness, being
in hazard of destruction of body and soul together: but by compassion of his
master, he is like to pass through this danger; and therefore he makes a
promise, that he will sacrifice to the Highest in spiritual manner, by giving
him praise and glory. And thus you have the first point of that which he
undertook: now let us come to the second.

I will pay that which I have vowed.
12 The making of vows, was a solemn custom among the children of Israel,
that when any good thing was granted unto them, but especially if they
earnestly desired to have any thing, they would bind themselves by promise, or
peradventure by an oath to be kept without violating, that this they would
perform, or that they would abstain from, as it might be, Number. 6.2.
drink no wine, or not cut their hair, as the use of the Nazarites was, or
dedicate their children to an attendance in Gods tabernacle, or offer such and
such offerings. Wherein the care of those who were faithful, was first that
they vowed nothing but that which was lawful, and secondly that they performed
the thing which they vowed. Numer. 21.2.
So the Israelites did vow, that if the Lord would give them victory, they
would raze down and destroy the cities of Canaan. A matter which was lawful,
nay which God required of them. 1. Sam. 1.11.
Barren Hanna did vow, that if the Lord would so respect her, as to send her a
son, she would give him to God all the days of his life. She spoke it, and
she performed it in Samuel her child. Job. 22.27. Psalm. 22.25.
Thou shall render thy vows, says Eliphaz to Job. My vows will I perform
before all that do fear him, says David of himself. They knew that God did
expect it, and precisely had enjoined it by a special law. It is a peremptory
place, in the three and twentieth of Deuteronomy, Deuter. 23.21
When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not be slack to
pay it; for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and it should be
sin unto thee, he means if thou perform it not, but when thou abstainest
from vowing, it shall be no sin unto thee. He would not have men bear
themselves so carelessly toward him, as foolishly to promise, and falsely to
break promise.

13 This made men under the law, to be very well advised, what it was whereunto
they tied themselves by vow, that what they undertook should still be to Gods
glory: and withal their promise was for such things, as should be in their
power to perform, if the Lord did continue his ordinary blessings over them:
And these were rather praises and thanksgiuings to the Almighty, (indeed
perhaps in the open Temple, or great public congregation) then any material
gifts, although those also were not wanting. Psalm. 56.12. and 57.7.8.
David's Psalms do make that plain; for wheresoever he speaks of vows,
there commonly he joins praises to them: and in my text, thanksgiving and
vows, are coupled together by Jonas, as noting that the one has a reference
to the other. And I doubt not but we may make such vows in sobriety, in
knowledge and in faith, to bind our selves to God, and seal it as with a
covenant, that we will serve his Majesty, while we live here in this world;
that we will give among profane persons, a good testification of his honor;
that we will sing Psalms unto him; that we will teach our children religion
and true faith: yea further in particular, that if God would give us leave, we
which be of the ministry, will look carefully to our charge, and will be
diligent in the word: if the Lord send no great let, will preach at least every
Sabbath; or if we have not that strength, once or twice in a month: which
task if we do inioyne our selves, and use the ordinary means of reading and
of study, and pray to God to assist us, his Spirit will aid us more, then we
ever did imagine. Then we do not utterly deny vows; but we willingly allow
whatsoever is justifiable by the prescript of the Law and the Gospel. But
because many kinds of men make question in this matter, the Papists for their
votaries, other men for other causes, I think it not amiss to limit this
whole doctrine, by some Aphorisms or Positions, which shall clear the whole
controversy.

14 Then the first rule maybe this: We in no case may vow evil things, that
is, such as are contrary to piety toward God, or charity toward men. For these
are sinful vows, and ought not to be made; in as much as it beseems us not,
to bind two sins together: but an evil deed is the one, and swearing to
perform it, Act. 23.12.
is no less then another. Hence we condemn the act of them, who being angry
with Paul, did bind themselves with an oath, that they would neither eat nor
drink, till they had murdered Paul. A most malicious, and ungodly, and
uncharitable promise: and yet there were more then forty of them, who had
combined themselves together in that wickedness. And as it is a sin to make
entrance into such an action, by speaking it or swearing it, so it is a greater
sin to perform it being sworn. Saint Bernard has a good saying to this
purpose: Bernard. Epistol. 219. Quamuis nemo sapie^s dubitet illicita iuramenta
non esse tenenda. Matthew. 14.7.
Among the French men it is accounted a reproach to break an oath, although it
be sworn evidently amiss: although no wise man does doubt that unlawful
oaths are not to be kept. Within this compass such rash vows do come, which
infer some evident evil, although when they were made, no such thing was
intended. Of which nature that oath was, which Herod did take, when being
delighted with the dancing of the daughter of Herodias, he swore that he would
give her whatsoever she should ask, to the one half of his kingdom. A hasty
and fond promise, as appeared by the demand made thereupon, for the head of
John the Baptist; which he would never have granted, if he had not purposed to
go on in his iniquity and tie two faults together. For as Origene says
disputing upon that deed, Origin. in Matthew. 14. Quod peierandum erat potius
quam seruandum. Iudic. 11.30.
The head of John the Baptist was cut off for an oaths sake, which was
rather to be broken by forswearing then to be kept. For it was not so great a
fault to have made an oath hastily, as it was for a hasty oath to be the
death of a Prophet. The vow which Iephthe made, to sacrifice whatsoever living
thing he first met, at his return from his victory, is by this position found
to be made without judgment: but his fault was the more grievous, that he
observed it so precisely, as to destroy his daughter. Take heed of vowing
evil things directly or by a consequent.

15 The second rule is this: that there be many good things, which all of us
ought to vow, and earnestly keep, because they touch the glory of God
immediately, by a duty unavoidable; as that we will serve him truly, and
evermore account him that mighty one which is to be honored. Such was that
vow of Jacob, Gens. 28.20.
of which Moses reports thus: Then Jacob vowed a vovv saying, If God will be
with me, and will keep me in this journey which I go, and will give me
bread to eat, and clothes to put on: so that I come again unto my fathers
house in safety, then shall the Lord be my God. The covenant of the Israelites
is also of this kind, Iosuah. 24.25.
where by the motion of good Iosuah, they do promise solemnly to put away
their idols, and to serve the true God only. So is that promise also, 2.
Chron. 15.14.
of the people of Judah under king Asa, where both great and small, do enter an
oath to serve Jehovah alone, the true God of all the world. Among us who are
Christians, the celebration of Baptism does include as much in it self, to
which whosoever comes (as all of us should come) does bind himself by a vow,
to renounce the pompes and vanities of this spotted filthy world, and manfully
to fight against the flesh and the devil. How much do they forget this, whose
whole delight is vanity, and idleness, and security, aiming at nothing more,
then at voluptuous pleasure? Now when any goes about to break such a vow as
this, he makes a separation between God and his soul, and as far as is in
him, does divorce himself from the spouse and husband of all the faithful. Do
thou make these vows advisedly, and pray earnestly to God, that being made
thou may keep them.

16 The third rule may be this: some things there be indifferent, neither in
themselves good nor evil, which if a man do use, they make him not the better,
and if he do refuse them, yet is he not the worse. If occasion should be
offered, in devotion toward God, or in charity toward men, to promise to do
such, or to abstain from the custom of them, I doubt not but we may vow. But
in these we must put some limiting circumstances, as first that it be
apparently for good and not for evil: Secondly that we undertake that action
with great judgment, not rashly nor unadvisedly, but upon just occasion:
Thirdly that we put no kind of superstition therein, as imagining that our
deed should be meritorious with God: Fourthly that we be assured that it is
in our power to do it: in which respect that condition is also to be put, if
God will, or if the Lord do not hinder us. Within this kind I find the usage of
the Rechabites, Ierem. 35.6.
who were bound by their fathers charge (and as it seems they assented
thereunto) that they would neither drink wine, nor sow seed, nor plant
vineyard, nor dwell in any house, but only remain in tents; that so they
might the better remember themselves to be strangers in the land where they
inhabited; and of likelihood moreover, that they were but pilgrims upon the
earth. And he who makes such vows, under these forenamed conditions, is now
bound to observe them, For although at the first, and in themselves they were
things indifferent, yet now they are become otherwise, because an oath is
passed upon them. He who was free is made bound by a voluntary offering, and
therefore has lost his liberty. Then these three positions may be gathered

17 Here the pretenses of Popish votaries, may be in a word examined. Their
common vows are of such things, as be not absolutely evil; neither are they
of such matters as being simply good, do lie upon us by a duty of necessity,
but they may much rather be accounted indifferent, although by their usage of
them they make them to be otherwise; they make them to be wicked. A great part
of their vows, is the going to places far distant, in pilgrimage as they
call it, to Rome, or to Jerusalem, or Saint James of Compostella, or to the
three kings of Coleyn: their keeping of the great Jubilees; their abstaining
from all flesh, and feeding rather on fish, as their Carthusian Monks do:
their wearing of a haire-cloth or sackcloth next their body, and other things
of like stamp. All which as they do use them, may well be accounted in the
number of those wil-worships, Colos. 2.23.
that (...), against which Saint Paul does inueigh, and concerning which the
Lord may ask, Isay. 1.12.
who required this at your hands? They do fail in diverse circumstances,
which should make their vows to be lawful, as first they cannot be warranted
to them as assuredly holy, by faith which is grounded upon the word of God.
Secondly they put a great deal of superstition in them, while they account
them meritorious. Thirdly they tie themselves rather to the external thing,
then to a sound reformation and bettering of the mind. It were better
therefore, that such vows were omitted then made by them. Their vow of wilful
poverty, is a thing of their own devising. Rich Abraham, and king David, and
Job with his multitude of cattle, knew how ^o serve the Lord in the abundance
of their riches, and did not think, that religion only was in them who
begged. And although our Savior Christ and other of his Apostles, had little
of their own, yet they left us no such precept, nay they rather did teach the
contrary, saying that it is more blessed to give then to receive. Act. 20.35.
And it is said that a Bishop (of whom it is presumed that he should be a man
of religion) should be hospital, Tit. 1.8.
that is an entertainer of strangers, which implies a set kind of maintenance.
When the Gospel was first preached, miraculous means were used to bring men
to the faith; and this was one, that God could mightily provide for those, who
were the messengers of his will, and relieve them from day to day, although
they had nothing of their own. His purpose also was to show his power, that by
means most contemptible in the eye of the world, he could settle his kingdom:
and withal he would leave their wants as an example, to encourage his children
in succeeding ages, that they should not be dismayed, if sometimes they were
driven to penury and necessity, since his dear servants and his son were
in that case before them. But these times now are past, and miracles are
ceased, and such extraordinary feeding as the Apostles had, is not wilfully to
be sought, lest we tempt God, and live without a lawful calling. The Church
now has an established government, and therein the Ministers which are
needful, are to be provided for. And the word has enjoined this, 1. Cor.
9.11.
that where spiritual things are sowed, there temporal should be reaped: as
knowing that in the end of the world men's charity would wax cold, and they who
lived of alms, oftentimes should have hungry bellies. The living then of
their Friars in a voluntary beggary, is a worship of their own, and he who
voweth thereunto, does vow to that, wherein his conscience can never have good
warrant.

18 They stand as much upon chastity, that their religions men should vow a
single life; wherein although I might show by good proof from the Scripture,
and from the ancient Church, that Bishops and Priests did marry, yet omitting
that, I will rather speak of the quality of their vow. Virginity without
controversy is an excellent gift, in him to whom the Lord does give it. Christ
himself was borne of a virgin, and did lead a virgins life, Matthew. 19.12. 1.
Cor. 7.32.
and both he and Saint Paul, have commended it unto us, that we ought to
strive for it. But who is he that so far has power of his own flesh, as
that before hand he can swear, to quench the lust of concupiscence, so that it
shall not burn? I suppose that no man on earth, who is in his strong age, and
in good health of his body can promise that to himself: then how much less
their young ones, their Nouices or Nuns of lesser age, who before the time
that themselves come to experience, are put into the monastaries, by their
parents or their friends, or are inueigled by others to take their rules upon
them: which has been a great occasion of much vile fornication, and the
killing of many infants, besides the enduring of such untamed affections, as
have boiled in their bodies. It is a good lesson of Solomon, that we should not
suffer our mouth to make our flesh to sin, Eccles. 55.3.
he means in vowing that which is not in our power. He had commanded before,
that we should pay our vows, intending it in those things which we have
promised to the Lord: but lest thereby we should take occasion, to promise any
thing whatsoever, he gives a restraint down with it, that we should be
advised, that we vow not that, which our flesh afterward cannot make good. For
want of this wholesome caveat, they were put to much extremity, who were
votaries first in monasteries, but afterward by the true light of the Gospel,
did shake off the heavy yoke of Antichrist, and became great setters out of
Gods truth in this last age. They had entered a rash vow, in their minority and
young years, which afterward they found themselves not able to perform, and
therefore they did marry. Campian. in Ratione. 3.2.
Against which although our Campian and his fellows, do with open mouth most
bitterly inueigh, yet they never can be able by sound truth to condemn them.
Their choice was hard, that either their vow must be broken by them, or else
they must bear about a daily sin in their bodies. They adventured on the
lesser fault, I doubt not but asking pardon, for the rash and unadvised oath
which they had taken. And God does forgive us such things, when we call to him
by repentance, as may very well be gathered from the fifth Chapter of
Leuiticus, Leuit. 5.4.6.
where was appointed an offering, as a kind of satisfaction, for him who had
vowed any thing, which he afterward does find out not to be in his powor to
accomplish. Charity does bid me think, that those fathers in the Gospel, and
excellent men in the faith, did enter into wedlock, with all labor to
satisfy a good conscience toward God. And therein their own hearts, might be
the best witness and direction to themselves. Yet the person who has so
vowed, and in so doing has not done well, let him fear to break that vow
causeless, by a licentious liberty: and if God do give the gift of chastity,
let him live in continency if he can, as otherwise for the honor given to
virginity in the Scripture, so for his vows sake also. And so much I thought
good to teach concerning vows, by occasion of the words of the Prophet Jonas;
wherein if I have been ouer-long, let this excuse the matter, that this
doctrine is few times handled, and now the text did minister opportunity. That
second part which now follows, I will ouerrunne most briefly.

Salvation is of the Lord.
19 Many of the old interpreters, and Hierome among and so caused the sense of
all to be troubled. The Hebrew has it thus: (...)
Salvation is to the Lord, which the most careful expositours do plainly
express, by Salvation is from the Lord. Tremelius does interpret it, All
manner of salvation or sauetie is to Jehovah. So that here the Prophet
gathering by a constant faith, that after his great fears in the sea, and in
the whale, he should be freed from all peril, and enjoy his life once again,
ascribes all to God, and with this Epiphonema makes conclusion of his prayer,
acknowledging that whatsoever came unto him well, was from the Almighty. For
to whom should he impute it, but only unto him, whose inconceiuable power he
had felt before, to the full: who to punish and chastise him, had the air and
water at his commandment, and had for three days kept him alive in the
fishes belly? Now if he should bring him to liberty, out of bondage and
desolation, and should pardon his sin and transgression, he had great reason
to magnify his mercy and goodness over him. Mine aid comes not from me: I
cannot help my self: it comes not from fortune or blind chance; there is no
such thing in nature; not from any lying vanity of idol or heathen God, but
from the all-sufficient Lord, who can help when he pleases, and raise up when
he lifts: he puts down and sets up, he does what himself will. If I
have hope of any thing, it is derived from him.

20 Yea under this general speech, he remembers unto all, that every of their
escapes from danger, are only from the Lord. Exodus 12.37. 1. Sam. 23.28. 1.
Reg. 19.3.
If the Israelites be delivered from the bondage of the Egyptians, if David get
from Saul, if Elias be freed from Iezabel, this good does come from that
father, who sits above in heaven. Or if any one of us, being laid for by the
malice of cruel and wicked men, be not made a pray to their power, or
deceiving policy, it is not of our wit, neither is any flesh our arm, but
this safety is of the Lord. And if we will look higher, the delivery of our
souls from the chains and bands of Satan, the saving of us from the violence
of all our ghostly enemies, the redeeming of us from sin, the incorporating
of us into his own Sons body, the bringing of us to that glorious liberty of
the sons of God, is the work of the Almighty. Psalm 115.1.
Not unto us o Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory. We may say
as the Elders say, in the Revelation of John, Apoc. 5.9.
to Christ the Lamb of God: Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open
the seals thereof, because thou vvast killed and have redeemed us to God by
thy blood, out of every kindred and tongue and poeple and nation: and have made
us unto our God kings and priests, and we shall reign on the earth, nay we
shall reign in the heaven. But the whole work of our ransom, only belongs
to the Trinity. As Jonas concludes that prayer of his, which has been so
full of passion, so do I end at this time, salvation is to the Lord. Let us
pray to him to bless us still, that by grace given unto us, we may be sons
of adoption, and at last be brought to salvation, which himself grant unto us
for his blessed Christ's sake, to both whom, with the holy Spirit, be majesty
power and glory, both now and evermore. Amen.

THE XV. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 1. Gods fatherly affection toward sinners. 4. He commands
his creatures at his pleasure. 6. Jonas is cast on land. 7. A figure of Christ's
resurrection. 9. We also shall rise again. 10. Comfort to the heavy heart. 11.
A comparison between Jonas and Arion. 13. The whole narration of Arion is a
fable. 15. Some wonders are wrought by the Devil, 16. who does much imitate
God, 17. and seeks to discredit Gods word by his fables. 19. How the
Scriptures might be obscurely known, by the old Poets and Philosophers. 20.
But they corrupt the divine stories. 21. Humane learning is fit for a Minister.

Jonah. 2.10. And the Lord spoke unto the fish, and it cast up Jonas unto the
dry land.


IT is not without cause, that so oftentimes in the Scriptures, God is compared
to a father, and called by that name, as Our father which art in heaven;
Matthew. 6.9. Cap. 5.48.
and, Ye shall therefore be perfect as your father which is in heaven, is
perfect: And, Psalm. 103.13.
as a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on
them that fear him: for he bears a very father-like and natural affection,
to all those who are chosen to be his. If they be led by weakness into
diverse temptations, or by infirmity of their flesh be stained with great
transgressions, he looks angrily for a time, and with a terrible countenance
severely frowneth on them; but yet in the middle of his justice, he remembers
mercy, and does not utterly reject them, nor cast them away. It may be that he
does chastise them, with parent-like correction, according to the measure and
quality of their crime; yea he lays smart blows on them, not sparing to
strike them, till he has brought them, and depressed them to the pit of death,
and entrance of the grave; but there he makes a stay, in his kindness being
satisfied with judgment, Ierem. 10.24.
not with fury, rather topping them and shredding them with some short
adversity, then plucking them up by the root. And that is the manner of severe,
but yet natural parents, in restraining their children from gross and foul
enormities, to bend the^ not to break them: to seem more angry then indeed
they be: or if they justly be displeased, to be so but for a time, giving
pardon to such faults as be past, and expecting with much patience, that it may
at length be better.

2 The righteous Lord of all, does so look here upon our Prophet with a
favorable eye. He had deprehended him long since, as a runne-agate from his
charge: he made his own mouth give sentence, that he had deserved to be
drowned: he had thrown him into the water, where as if it had been, with a
death upon a death, he had made a fish to devour him, and for three days
space to keep him close prisoner in his belly, in all the anguish and torment
that his heart could imagine. He was as though he lived not, and yet he could
not dye; having time enough to meditate in what misery he was, but not knowing
with all the wit which was in his understanding, how to rid himself from
that sorrow. But at the last, lifting up his thoughts to his Almighty maker,
he flies by faith and repentance, to the throne of grace, desiring God to
pity him, and show compassion on him, that once more returning to land, he
might by open obedience, make some little recompense for his former fault. And
the Lord graciously respecting his earnest and hearty prayer, does content
himself with the punishment past, and with a most free favor restores him to
liberty. As a dead man from the grave, as one buried from the sepulcher, so is
this man brought forth: his prison-doores shall be opened: his fetters shall
be shaken off; he shall be rid from the whale, and set on foot on the land:
yea as he was a messenger before, so he shall be a messenger still, a Prophet
for the Highest, to go and preach at Niniue. My charge at this time is, to
show the means of his deliverance, which is set down so briefly, and plainly
in my text, that the words do neither need division, nor much interpretation,
but that which shall be convenient to be touched, you shall hear of in the
doctrine.

The^ the Lord spoke to the fish, and it cast up Jonas to the dry land.
3 If otherwise we did doubt, what power and authority God has over his
creatures, yet it is assured to us in the end of the first chapter, Jonah. 1.17.
as in that place I gathered: when the Lord had a whale as at a beck for his
purpose prepared, and in a readiness to swallow up the Prophet, being thrown
into the sea. And as he there used that fish for his instrument, so he might
have had obsequious to him any other thing in heaven, or in the earth, or in
the sea: and as he might at that time, so might he at all times. That
unrestrained prerogative in God, is once more expressed to us in the self same
fish, whom after that he had caused to keep his burden in him, for so many
days and hours and moments of time, as himself had appointed, now he will
have him in a trice disburden his belly, and be eased of his carriage. But note
with what facility he fulfilleth his designement, The Lord spoke to the fish.
Not the struggling of Jonas, nor his pricking of the fish within; no other
receipt which should urge him to disgorge, and cast up his stomach; no
violence which was offered from man or fish, or ship, or any other thing
without him, did extort or force him out of his belly: but one word spoken from
God, or less then that if it might be, did bring about that which was done.
Which is not to be taken after the understanding of the gross
Anthropomorphites, called otherwise Audaeani, Theodoret. Hist. Eccles. 4.9.
(who did attribute to God the members and body of a man) as if the Lord had
used some language, or talked to the fish, as men commonly do talk each to
other, for that agrees not with his spiritual nature, his impassible and pure
and divine being. Ioh. 4.24.
God is a Spirit says our Savior Christ. And although he assumed a voice unto
him, when he was pleased to proclaim the law of the ten Commandments before
the Israelites; Exodus 20.1.
and may do the like again when it seems good to himself, Ioh. 12.28.
as when he was disposed with words uttered from heaven, to glorify his Son
Christ, yet that was not of his nature, but an action of his will, wherein
extraordinarily he did take to himself some means, which are besides his
essence, and which are not frequent with him. But here the word of speaking, is
used to notify unto us, who are of dull capacity, and love our own phrases
best, that he signified and gave inkling, in some sort or other (which was
easy for him to do, but not for us to conceive) to the whale, that it must
perform that service. And that the Lord in such manner does frame himself in
the Scripture, unto our understanding, as a rude one to the rude, as barbarous
to Barbarians, as men to little infants do stammer and talk like children, is
a verity so apparent and so common an observation to those who read the
Bible, that it were but lost time to handle it: Lect. 11.
and once before I have said somewhat of that matter.

4 It is a thing more worth the knowing of us, to observe his forcible power,
that his saying is a doing, and his speech a commanding. In the very beginning
of Genesis, Genes. 1.3.
God said, let there be light, that is, he did command it. The words of the
tempter unto Christ were, Matthew. 4.3. (...).
Do thou say, or do thou speak, that these stones should be made bread, that
is, as it is commonly translated do thou command. The Lord said to the fish,
he laid his commandment on him; and who or what is that which can resist his
will? If he bid come, all comes: if he bid go, all goes: the greatest is
within his compass, the least is not exempted. If he will plague the
Egyptians, Exodus 8.6.24.17. Cap. 16.14.
armies of frogs, and flies, and swarms of lice shall attend him: and if on
the other side he do but put up his finger, they shall all away in a moment. If
he will feed the Israelites, and 17.6. Ios. 10.12. 2. Re. 20.11. Ios. 3.16. 2.
Reg. 2.8. 1. Reg. 17 6. Daniel. 6.22.24.
the heaven shall give them bread, and the rock shall bring them water. For
Iosuah, the Sun shall stand still, and it shall fly back for Ezechiahs sake.
For the passage of the children of Israel, Jordan shall part in two: and so it
shall do for Eliah. And for the same Prophet, the ravens shall bring food in
the morning and evening. The lions mouths shall be musled, when Daniel is
among them, but they shall devour most greedily, when the wicked accusers are
cast in unto them. He who has the key of heaven, and hell, and death, to open
when he pleases, and shut when he lists, can so order his servants and
ministers which are under him, that sometimes they shall take, and sometimes
they shall loose, here punish and there save, this day sound out his justice,
and the next day teach his mercy.

5 Neither was it only in the time of the Prophets and Apostles, that God had
all his creatures, miraculously if need be to execute his appointment; but also
since their time they give the self same assistance, although miracles be not
common, as they were in former ages. Tertullian. Apolog. ca. 5 Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. 5.5.
Tertullian in his Apollogie, and Eusebius do witness that at the prayer of a
legion of the Christians, the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, in his wars against
the Germans, had his army relieved with rain, which was before in danger to
perish for want of water: and they add, that at that time, certain
thunderbolts did strike and beat down the enemy. In fine Apologiarum.
In some Editions of the works of Iustine Martyr, may be seen the copy of
the Epistle of the Emperor himself who gives witness thereunto. Chrysostom.
in Matthew. Homil. 4. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. 3.17. Vide Grego. Nazianz. Orat. 48.
When Julian the Apostata, upon an intendment to cross the faith of Jesus
Christ, had set the Jews on work, to build again the Temple at Jerusalem,
as both Saint Chrysostom and Socrates write, at first an earthquake marred
their work, and afterward fire from heaven did burn and spoil their
instruments and tools wherewith they wrought, so that they could not proceed.
Yea something more then this is to be found in the story, of the sign of the
cross appearing upon their garments. Ammianus Marcellinus. lib. 23.
Ammianus Marcellinus who was no friend to the Christians, yet gives testimony
to some part thereof, saving that he rather supposes that the fire issued out
of the earth; which comes all to one end. When the barbarous Northren nations
did break into the bounds of the Roman Empire, in the days of Basile the
Great, Basil. in Psalm. 18.
who lived in the time of Valens the Emperor, as Basile himself writes, God
destroyed them with fire and hail without the hand of man. And as we read in
the same place of that Father, the Lord did so by the Persians attempting to do
the like. But in my judgment there is no example more memorable or true, then
that which fell out in our own time, after that great Massacre in France, but
especially at Paris, Anno. 1572. Comment. Relig. and Reip. in Gallia lib. 11.
in the year seventy and two. For at that time the whole power almost of that
kingdom, being gathered together against the city Rochel, and besieging them
with extremity who defended the town, God in the time of famine and want of
bread, did for some whole months together, daily cast up a kind of fish unto
them, out of the sea, wherewith so many hundreds were relieved, without any
labor of their own, even as the Israelites were fed with Manna, every morning
while they were in the wilderness. And as all the while that the enemy was
before them, this endured to their marvelous comfort, so to proclaim to the
world Gods providence the more, when the enemies tents were once removed, and
the city was open again, this provision immediately did cease. It was a good
testification, that the Lord of hosts would leave a remnant, even a seed of
his faithful in that land: and although he had sealed his truth, with the
blood of his other servants, yet he would not deal so with them. To the end
that all might not sink in despair, he ordained that when men failed, yet the
sea should be a maintainer to them.

6 There God to show his power, did fill a many with fish, and here to show his
power, he did empty a fish of one, both declaring his love and greatness;
which he purposing to complete, and make perfect in our Prophet, to whom I now
return, not only causes the fish to free him from his stomach, and that not
in the midst of the Ocean sea, that there once again he might be shifting
for his life, that is, if he could not swim, sink, and drown: but he so
directs this carier, as that he came to the shore. Of all liklyhood this was
a chosen shore, where the water was so deep, as that it could bear the whale,
who swimmeth not in the shallow; and yet the bank withal so low, as that with
putting up his head, he might cast the prisoner to the land. When the Lord does
decree the substance of a matter, the circumstance shall not be wanting. He who
made all the rest, will find a place for accomplishing of the deed. It is not
much material, where or in what coast of the world the Prophet was cast on
land, Joseph. Antiquit. l. 9.11.
but Josephus says that the report was, that this happened in Pontus Euxinus,
as it is commonly called, and that it was that part of the Ocean, where he was
put to shore. If it were so, then the whale did carry him a great way, from the
sea toward Cilicia on the south side of Natolia, or Asia the lesser, through
the Hellespont, and Propontis, and all the straights near to Thrasia, and so
into that Pontus Euxinus, which was a long space of way, in so short a time to
be passed. But if this were so done, then the fish was as a ship, as the
fleetest and swiftest ship, to convey him forward on the way; that whereas
toward Niniue the place whither he should go, the coast was East, he was
brought back again to the East, on the Northside of Natolia, so much being
recovered by the fish, as he was carried by the ship before toward the West. But
this is only coniecturall, and therefore I do not follow it.

7 Thus far the Spirit of God has plainly said, that Jonas is gotten to the
land: he is freed from the terror and imprisonment of the whale, and now he is
so set at liberty, as if there had never been any such matter. Which whether
we will in the figure apply to Christ, or by example to our selves, it is
worthy consideration. Our Savior who is the best interpreter, and expositor
of the Prophets, in the twelfth of Saint Matthew, does compare this lying of
Jonas for three days in the whale, Math. 12.40
to the burying of himself for three days in the grave. Then by the same
Analogy or proportion, the restoring of Jonas from the belly of the fish, must
represent Christ's resurrection. As this sinner was designed, not for ever but
for a time, to be kept within that ward, and when his hour was expired, his
keeper might not hold him; so our Savior was shut up in the tomb, not for
ever, nor until the day of judgment, but a set space was appointed, wherein
he was to rest, and when that was consummated, the grave could no longer hold
him. It had received a burden, which it had no power to bear. It detained him
for a little while, because it was his good pleasure, to be so detained there;
but when he began to stir, it felt it self ouercharged, and could last out
no longer. And in my judgment, the Metaphore which is used here in the type,
(...) Vomere. (...)
does express this in Christ Jesus, for the Original has it Vajake
eth-Ionah, which Vajake coming of Ko with Aleph in the end, signifying Vomere,
is as much as if it were said, the fish did vomit up Jonas: the quality of
which word Vomit, does imply that which I have spoken. For when the stomach of
any living thing, has received that, which either for the weakness of it
self, or by reason of the strength of the meat, it has no power to digest, it
does cast it up and vomit. The hardness for digestion, of that which is the
ingredient, or the weakness of the part, receiving more then it ought, does
cause that euacuation. The case was so with death and the grave, when they
received Christ.

8 It was no common meat which it had taken into it, but that which it was
impossible should be concocted by it: not an ordinary man, Ruffinus de Symbolo
A. postolorum.
but one who had no fellows. His body was but a bait, to entise the grave to
swallow him, but underneath was the hook of eternity, and that Godhead which
caught both grave and death, and made them glad to put up such a one out of
their bowels. Feign they were to be rid of him, because he did ouerbeare them:
Act. 2.24.
The Godhead raised him up, and loosed the sorrows of death, because it was
impossible that he should be holden by them. Iudic. 16.9.
When Samson was disposed, he brake the cords and ropes wherewith he was tied:
they fittered and dissolved, even as the flax which is burnt with the fire: 3.
he rent off the gates of Azzah, and posts and bars and all; and putting
them on his shoulders, he carried them whither he pleased. So when Christ was
disposed, be shook off the graue-clothes from him, and bore up all before him,
the rock which was about him, and the stone which was upon him, resigned their
strength unto him, and he comes forth victorious, as a Champion who had
slept, or a Giaunt refreshed with wine. As a tamed Lion, he had suffered death,
and Satan, and the infernal spirits, for a time to play with him, and disgrace
him, and have some hand upon him: but when it seemed good unto him, he rowzed
up his body, and roaring in his might, this he renteth and that he teareth, he
knappeth their chains in sunder, and makes them glad to fly; happy he who
could get farthest. The whale was not so glad to part here with our Jonas, as
the earth was with our Jesus. Here the drowned man is restored; there the dead
man is revived, being the first fruit of the resurrection.

9 As he dyed so we shall die: and as he rose again, so we also need not doubt
but we shall rise again. Only he did it by his own power, but we not by our
own force, but by the power of him. The head is gone before: the members shall
follow after. Daniel. 12.2.
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt. Gods children
shall be translated into a better state, recovering the same purity, which was
given to Adam in Paradise, where he was after the image of God, in innocence
and integrity. But first by death they must be beat in sunder, and knocked in
pieces, that so they may be remoulded, and new cast by the workman, not only
to their old figure, but to a better form in the day of the resurrection. But
as their captain was, so must they first by death be dissolved and separated,
that their bodies may be refined, and made a great deal better. Chrysostom. in
2. ad Cor. Homil. 1.
When we pluck down a house (this is Saint Chrysostomes comparison) meaning
to build it new, or repair the ruins of it, we withdraw such from the house,
as inhabited it before, lest they should be soyled with the dust, or offended
with the noise, and bid them for a time to rest in some other place: but when
we have new trimmed and dressed it, we bring them back again to a better
habitation. So God when he ouer-turneth the rotten room of our flesh, calls
out the soul for a little, and lodges it with himself, in some corner of his
kingdom, but repaireth the brackes of our body, against the resurrection: and
then having made it decent, yea glorions and incorruptible, he does put the
soul back again, into her acquainted mansion. He has determined this
concerning us; that dust shall recover breath, and rottenness shall have life:
against all Atheists and Epicures, there shall be a resurrection. But I pursue
this no farther, because in the end of the first Chapter, Jonah. 1.17.
I handled it at large.

10 If in another sense we will turn the present example, to the benefit of
our selves, this gives great consolation to the dejected conscience, which
groneth under the weight of her sins. Such things as are written, are written
for our learning. This wretched suffering man had displeased the Lord most
grievously. For the haynousnesse of his fault, wrath was gone out against him.
The Lord would not be satisfied, but with drowning and devouring, in the belly
of such a monster, where the fear of death, and almost the pains of hell were
upon him. The passions of his heart had been desperate and distrustful, if
faith had not come to the rescue. Yet we see that he did not perish, but when
his woe was passed over him, he came to good again. God did but give
signification, as small a thing as might be, as if a man should nodde, or wink
upon another, and his sorrows are shaked off from him: he is set alive on the
land. If grief do assault our minds, that we think our hearts will break, if
temptation have so rent us, that we suppose we are all to shiuers; if pangs of
desperation, with remembrance of sins past, have beat faith so out of
countenance, that we see no way, but our souls must be a pray to Satan, yet
there is hope with God, and mercy with the Highest. He brings men to the
door of death, but he does not turn them in. Or he puts them into the pit,
that they are half way down to the bottom; but his hand goes along with
them, and suddenly in a trice he draws them back again. If we be within the
jaws of Satan, he puts a gagge in his mouth, that it shall not close upon
us. It is never too late for him to help, while life and soul hang together.
He who bid the dust become Adam, Genes. 2.7. Johan. 11.43.
and Adam was made of dust: he who spoke to the grave, and bad Lazarus come
forth from it, and Lazarus came out of the grave: he who commanded the fish
to loose Jonas, and Jonas was loosed in a moment. This Lord, if he speak to
hell or devil, or all the feends of darkness, they shall not dare once to
touch thee, but thou shall escape from their clutches, as a bird from the
snare. How much less shall mortal man oppress thee, or triumph over thee, if
it be he that does vex thee? God does but cast an eye upon thee, and the mist
before the Sun, can not be dispersed so suddenly, as thy sorrow and
heaviness. In steed of sadness, joy and mirth shall compass thee and embrace
thee. If once his refreshing spirit cast but an aspect upon thee, thou art as
safe, as thy self would ever desire to be. Only to win God hereunto, be
thou sorry for thy transgression, and grieve at thine own iniquity. If thou
have fallen with David, spare not to sing with David a Psalm of Miserere:
Psalm. 51.1.
if thou have offended with Peter, Math 26.75
with Peter go thou forth, and cease not to weep bitterly. With Jonas pray
and call, and thou shall be delivered.

A comparison between the Prophet and Arion.
11 Look what has been spoken hitherto, may manifestly be gathered by the
plain words of my text, and therefore as you have seen, I have passed it very
briefly. But pondering farther on this Scripture, and looking nearer into it,
yea withal, comparing it with some things of the Gentiles, it seems unto me
to offer a farther doctrine. For thinking with my self, how strangely those
mariners, who in the Chapter before threw him into the sea, and made account
they had drowned him, would look upon him, if they met him any where
afterward, (as that was no impossible matter) maruelling how he should live
whom they left in the sea, and how he should be at land whom they cast into the
water, and there relinquished him remediless and past hope; I called to mind
the narration of Arion in Herodotus, Herodot. l. 1.
who being said to be thrown into the Ocean by mariners, and supposed by them
to be drowned, was afterward seen at Corinth, in the court of Periander, to
the great amazement of them, who before had consented to his death. And I
thought of this the rather, because Saint Austen in his first book, August. de
ciuit. Dei. lib. 1.14.
De ciuitate Dei, does compare this story of Jonas, unto that of Arion,
reproching the Gentiles, that whereas they would not believe this, which was
written of our Prophet, yet they would give credit to that, which their Poets
and other writers reported of Arion. Whereupon conferring yet farther the
likeness of these two matters, although not in every circumstance, yet in the
mainest points, I could not but suspect, that the Greek tale of the one, meant
the Hebrew truth of the other. And therein I imagined, that the Musician of the
Gentiles, was the Israelite mentioned here, although the story were peeced up
with another narration, after the custom of the Heathens, in dealing with the
Scriptures. And moreover, Danaeus in Ionam.
the note of a learned interpreter writing upon this place, did further this
opinion, who names our Jonas here Arion Christianus, the Arion of the
Christians. I find also, that this report is very ancient among the Greeks,
and therefore might well sort with the antiquity of the Prophet. Now, as if we
will allow this to be true, it does yield us fruitful doctrine, fit to be
handled in this place, before so learned and judicious an auditorie; so being
otherwise, that is, untrue and false, it is also worthy of our consideration:
and therefore give me leave to speak a little unto it. You shall see anon to
what end.

12 Herodotus in his Clio, Herodot. li. ^
has a narration to this purpose: that Arion a skillful harper, going from
Greece his own country into Italy, there and in Sicilia, by the excellency
of his music, had gained a great deal of money. Being now desirous with his
wealth to return again to Corinth, to his old Prince Periander, he found a
vessel at Tarentum, which belonged to certain ship-men of Corinth, who were
returning home: and with them he agrees for his fare. When they had him at
sea, being men of ill conditions, and desirous of his money, they intended to
drown him. He now in this peril, makes request for his life: but when
nothing would serve those hard-hearted persons, but that such must be his
doom, he begged this favor of them, that yet before he died, he might cloth
himself with his best clothes: which being done, he takes his harp, and
singing and playing to it a most melodious song, then threw himself into the
sea. There a Dolphin a kind of fish, delighted as it seems with the music,
does undertake him, and ceased not to bear him on her back, till it landed
him safe at Taenarus; whence he going to Periander the tyrant, then reigning at
Corinth, so apparelled as he was when he came out of the water, informs him
of all the matter, who believed it not, till at length sending for the self
same mariners, who were arrived in his country, and showing them Arion (who
upon the sight of him were exceedingly amazed, as indeed they had great cause)
he learned that all was so. This* says Herodotus is reported at Lesbos, and at
Corinth; and at Taenarus there is a very great image made of brass, which is a
man sitting on a Dolphin: and that image was set up there by Arion. Plin.
Histor. Nature. 9.8. Plut. in conuiuio 7. sap. Ovid. fast. 2. Gell. 16.19.
This tale with all his circumstaunces, is so common among the ancient, that
Pliny, and Plutarke and Ovid, and Gellius both do report it at large, and
Pliny gives other examples, that Dolphines couching down their pinnas, their
sins, which as he seems to say go all along their backs, have carried
diverse other over the water, and so saved them.

13 If I shall give my judgment concerning this, I do not at all doubt, but
that it is a fable. The diversity of the report which is among the ancient,
does argue the uncertainty. For although the most record it to be one
Dolphines doing, Plutarch. vbi supra.
one that carried him all the while, yet Plutarke has it otherwise, that they
were diverse Dolphines which carried him in the sea, meaning belike by turns,
or many at once supporting him. So they agree not in the manner. But whether it
were one or many, why did not the mariners see it, that it was so strange a
thing unto them, when they met him on the land? If he went above the water,
they of likelihood might have spied him, and so made some shift to unhorse him:
if it were under the water, how came it about that he was not drowned in all
that time? The ancient full well saw, that this was but a fained thing. That
made Suidas in Arion, Suidas in Arione.
to say nothing of the fish, nor his escape from drowning: although he have
other things of him. Strabo in his thirteenth book, says plainly it is a
fable. The late writers think no otherwise, Strabo Geograph. 13. Natal. Com.
Mytholog. lib. 8.14.
and hold these tales of Pliny to be but fained matters: and they give this
reason for it, because the nature of Dolphines, and of all other fishes, as
also of all other creatures, is the same in our days, which it was in ages
long agone: but since those ancient times, we hear not of any Dolphine, which
delighted in Music, or saved any man in the sea, or carried any over the
water. Besides that, Rondeletius whose work is many times joined with Gesners,
denies that a Dolphine has any such sins, Rondelet. in Gesner. de Aquatil.
cap. de Delphino Plin. 9.8.
as they in old time did describe him to have, for that, says he, there is
only one in his back, and it is not all along him, which may be thought unfit
to bear a man. But imagine that it were true which Pliny has concerning
them, yet his speech is, that they were brought to that custom by much
practice, and feeding them with bread, Petr. Mart. Decad. 3. lib. 8.
which agrees with the qualities of that strange fish Matum, which the
Historian Peter Martyr reports to have been in the West Indies. But how could
this acquaintance with men, and feeding by hand, happen to this fish of Arion,
who was found at al-aduenture, in the midst of the Mediterrane sea?

14 Neither does the report at Lesbos any whit confirm this tale. For who
knows not that every country, has strange reports of it self, which by
the common sort are reputed for great truths? If we look on our own land, how
many things have been said of King Arthure, and of the Prophet Merlin, who
although they may have in them some ground of truth (which I will not stand to
dispute) yet questionless much vanity is mixed there withal. We need no
better example, then the self same Herodotus, who although in his positive
declarations, he be held a good Historian, Tull. de Legib. lib. 1.
and therefore is named by Tully Historiae pater, the father of story, yet in
his by-digressions by heare-saies and reports, he has so many untruths, that
by other men he is termed with a censure too too gauling, mendaciorum pater,
the father of lies. That such fames have gone for current even among
Christians, 1. Tim. 1.4. Cap. 4.7. Tit. 1.14.
the words of Paul to Timothy, and Titus may show, where he speaks of
fables and Jewish fables, and of old wives fables also. Now for the picture or
image of the Dolphin, and the man sitting upon it, that does make a great deal
less: for inventions and wrong devises, are wrought as well as truths, by
painters and image-makers. Saint Austen tells how the Gentiles reported,
August. de consensu Euangelistaru^ lib. 1.10.
that Christ was a sorcerer, and that he did his works by Magic; and because
they had seen Jesus in windows, painted with Peter and Paul standing by him,
they gave out that he wrote unto them, some things concerning Magic, not
knowing says Saint Austen, Sic omnino errare meruerunt.

Non in sanctis codicibus sed in pictis parietibus.


that Paul was converted to the faith, somewhat after Christ's death. But he
makes this conclusion upon them: Thus have they deserved to err, who have
sought Christ and his Apostles, not in holy books but in painted walls, and
windows. That which he judged in a matter of far greater importance, that I
may say of this. A picture or image is not an argument of an approved truth,
although Master Campian do call such in church windows, Campian Ration. 10.
Testes fenestrae Rondeletius in Delphino
for witnesses of the verity of his cause. So the song which is now extant,
and said to be Arions, is as weak a proof as any; for why might not another
man, believing the tale to be true, put it out in his name? Yea peradventure if
he did not believe it, as in Poets we have many speeches feigned on other men's
persons. Then we may gather, that either the narration is altogether fabulous,
or if he were so thrown by any into the water, that another ship intercepted
him, the badge whereof was a Dolphin (as in the Acts of the Apostles, Act.
28.11.
the badge of that ship wherein Paul sailed, was Castor and Pollux. Natal.
Com. Mytholog. 8.14.
) And thereupon together with the invention of Antiquity, grew the fable, as
some other have imagined.

15 To apply this somewhat nearer to my bresent purpose, and to a true use in
Divinity, if there were any such matter of the Dolphin and Arion, (as I in no
sort do believe it) we must hold it for a miracle wrought by the Devil, who by
the Lords permission has false wonders of his, as God has true of his. Christ
says that false Christ's, and false Prophets, shall show great signs and
wonders, Matthew. 24.24
so that if it were possible, they should deceive the very elect. Apoc. 13.13
Exodus 7.11.
The beast in the Revelation, does bring fire down from heaven. When Moses was
in Egypt, the sorcerers had their sleights, wrought by the finger of Satan.
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. 9.2. August. de ciuit. Dei. 10.16.
Eusebius speaks of strange deeds, done by the Devil and by Magic. Saint
Austen in his tenth book De ciuitate Dei, does attribute such credit to the
stories of the Romans, that he thinks that the Troiane Penates (which were a
kind of images) did go from place to place: and that Tarquine with a razor,
Liuius. lib. 1.
(Liuie says it was Actius Nauius) did cut a whetstone in pieces, and other
such like things named there, August. de vnitate Eccles. Tom. 7. Figmenta
me^dacium hominum, vel portenta fallacium spirituum.
but he adds that these were done, by the power of infernal spirits. So in
his book De Vnitate Ecclesiae, speaking of miraculous matters, he makes this
division of them: Let these things be set aside, being either fained inventions
of lying men, or monstrous acts of cousining spirits, supposing that some
strange reports, were fained and invented by men, and some other things were
indeed brought about and effected by the Devil. If we would hold this, of the
Musician in Herodotus for a truth, then it teaches us this doctrine, that as
an Ape is the imitatour of man, in his acts and gestures, so is Satan the Ape
of God, to follow him in his powerful works. But how far does he come short
of the original which he looks at? He follows him indeed, Virgil. Aenci. 2.
but it is non passibus aequis, with very unequal steps. He sees that God
is mightily glorified, in doing such strange and rare deeds, as he pleases;
and he will study to do the like, that himself also may be glorified among the
sons of darkness. As the Lord shall have his Jonas to be spoken of every
where, so he will have his Arion, both of them thrown down into the sea, and
both saved by a fish.

16 Hence it is, that we have so many arguments of his subtle imitation. God
has appeared like an Angel: and Satan transformeth himself into an Angel of
light. Iudic. 6.11. 2. Cor. 11.14 Io^uah. 10.11 Liuius. lib. 25. and 30.
God rayned stones on the enemies of Iosuah, when they fled before him from the
battle; and Liuie writes of credit, that in the time of the Roman wars with
Hannibal, it rained stones for two days together on the hill called Mons
Albanus. Hirtius de bello Africo.
So Hirtius that great welwiller of Julius Caesar, does write that when Caesar
was personally present in his wars in Africa, very stones fell on the army, as
it uses to hail. Exodus 16.14. Genes. 19.24 Liuius. lib. 40. and lib. 3.
Orosius. 7.32 Liu. lib. 27. Bozius lib. 2. contra Machiauellum.
God rayned Manna from heaven, and fire and brimstone upon Sodom, the one to
help, the other to hurt. So the stories of the Romans do mention, that it
rayned blood, and rayned flesh, and wool too says Orosius, in the days of
the Emperor Valentinian, and milk and other such stuff: which (as the
learned do gather) were of purpose caused by Satan, that supplications might
be made, and sacrifices to him, as the heathen people did commonly use, in such
fearful and frightfull times, thinking that they had performed some devotion
to some Gods, when all was to the Devil. Abraham was commanded to sacrifice
his son to please the Lord; Genes. 22.1. Ovid. Metamorph. 12. Iudic. 11.39.
Agamemnon was bid to sacrifice his daughter, to please the prince of
darkness. A ram was slain for Isaac: for Iphigenia an hind. As Iephthe
offered up his daughter, which was supposed by some to be a point of religion,
so the Carthaginians and many other Gentiles, Plutarch. de Superstitione.
did offer men to their idols, upon their altars. There came from God answers,
in obscure and dark causes: 1. Sam. 28.6.
the Oracles of the heathen, as at Delphos and elsewhere did resemble that,
when foul spirits did there give answer. The true Temple at Jerusalem, had
in imitation of it, Act. 19.27.
a false temple at Ephesus to Diana, and in diverse other places the like to
other, as the Capitol at Rome. Aulus Gellius in reckening up the apparel, and
ceremonies of the Roman Flamen Dialis, Gel. l. 10.15.
has many things merely taken from the high Priest of the Jews, as he may
see who compares them. Ambrose in his Commentary on the eighth Chapter to the
Romans, Ambros. in Roman. 8.
shows that as Christ was taken up to his Father in a cloud, so Simon Magus
also to procure himself credit, did fly above in the air, which no doubt was
done by the special means of the Prince of the air, Ephesians. 2.2.
who advanced such a business. This is the fraud of him, who is the
fountain and welspring, and chief Lord of all deceit. And as on the one
side, by his undertaking of such actions, or semblances rather, his great
vainglory does appear, and that the means whereby he seeks it, is the
imitation of God: so, on the other side, it is a great argument for the truth,
against all Epicures, and Atheists, conuincing that in the books of the Bible,
there is a divine and most undoubted verity. For as counterfeits do evermore
presuppose, that there be some such indeed, as whom they take on them to
resemble, (as he who made show to be the son of Herod the Great, Joseph.
Antiquit. 17.14.
did argue that there had been such a one, who was in truth called Alexander:
and in England in the days of King Henry the seventh, Perkin Warbecke, who
pretended to be the Prince Edward the fifth, Holinshed in Henrico septimo.
did manifestly declare that there had been one of that name.) And as the
coyners of false money, do imply by their attempt, that some of that stamp, is
good and current in one place or other. And as Alchimistes who do labor to
make gold by proiection, do intend that there is natural gold. Yea as painters
howsoever they may sometimes make pictures of fained devises, yet account their
art to be a resemblance of that, which verily is, or has been: So the manifold
and laborious affected imitation, of the sacred stories, and such things as
were done in them, does give the wise and holy soul fully to understand, that
the pattern which is so followed, and curiously shadowed by so many
inventions, is a matter of truth, of justifiable verity, and absolutely without
exception. But I urge not this any farther.

17 In the second place, if we will take the whole tale of Arion for an
untruth, which it much rather does deserve, it does remember us of as fruitful
instruction another way. And that is the wonderful suttlety of Satan, to
discredit the writings of the Scriptures, as far as lies in him. For when it
should be spoken over any part of the world, that such or such a thing was
done, which was true in our Prophet, if he might be able to bring another
matter, like to it in resemblance, which yet in truth should be but fabulous,
the first might be disgraced with the common sort of men, Quintil. Orat.
Instit. lib. 4.6.
in comparing it with the second. Quintilian in his sixth book of the
Principles of Rhetoric, going about to teach how one false thing, may be
displaied and discovered with another, brings this for an example: When one
Victoriatus had said, that in Sicily he had bought a Lamprey, which was five
foot long, another called Galba did make him answer, that it was no marvel,
for in that country says he, the breed of them is commonly so large, that
fishermen do use them for the lines of their angles. Here if any man had
inferred, that the latter tale was certainly a lie, Galba by and by would have
replied, so also is the other. The old and crafty serpent, saw this to be a
good way, to bring the Scripture in doubt, by fables like to the Scripture. And
this does Justinius Martyr assign to be the reason, why so many things in the
old tales, are like to the truths of the word of God. He principally insisteth
in the person of Christ Jesus himself. Justin. Mar. Apolog. 2.
The devils says he being taught by the Oracles of the Prophets, many things
concerning Christ who was to come, caused like things to be spread touching
diverse sons of Jupiter, hoping that those who heard those monstrous trifles,
would believe no more of Christ, then they did of the other. For an example he
cites that of Aesculapius, who by the Heathen was reported, to be able to cure
any defect, and was held to be the son of God: which was drawn from hence,
because it was fore-prophecied of Jesus, Isay. 42.7.
that his power should be such, as to give sight to the blind, to restore
limbs to the lame, to raise up those which were dead. He reputeth this to be
the work of Satan, that men might no more believe the true reports of our
Savior, then the fained things of the other.

18 If we will look on their old Poets, as well Latin as Greeks, we shall
see how this purpose was pursued, in very many matters. Genes. 1.1.
The confusion of all things which was before the world was made, and the
manner of the creation, is shadowed and pointed at, Hesiod. in Theogonia. Ovid.
Metamorph. 1. Genes. 3.22. Homer. Odis. E. Genes. 7.11. Ovid. Metamorphos. 1.
Munster. lib. 5. Cosmogr. cap. de Babil. Genes. 11.3. Ovid. Metamorph. 1. Just.
Martyr. in cohortatione ad Graecos. Genes. 19.26. Ovid. Metamorph. 6. Iudic.
13.24. Diodor. Sic. lib 4.2. Virgil. 6. Aeneid.
by the Chaos of Hesiodus, but most elegantly by Ovid, in the beginning of his
Metamorphosis. If God have a tree of life in Paradise, whereof who so ever
eats shall not dye, but by the restauratiue force thereof, shall be kept and
evermore maintained in cheerfulness and fresh youth, the Poets will have
Nectar and Ambrosia, which shall work with their Gods the like effect. The
deluge in Noah's time, is quitted among the Greeks with the deluge of
Deucalion. If Noah did see things before and after the flood, they will have
Ianus for him, who shall be double-faced, and look forward and backward, for
the learned do suppose that Noah was meant by their Ianus. If the people do go
about, to build the tower of Babel up to the heaven, so to get themselves a
name, the Giants shall be said to lay Pelion upon Ossa, and Olympus on the top
of both, so to pluck Jupiter out of heaven. Iustine Martyr who is ancient,
says expressly that all the tale of the Giants piling up those hills, was in
imitation of the story of the tower of Babel. If Lots wife for her fault be
turned into a salt-stone, their Niobe for her fault, shall be turned to a stone
likewise. If there be a Sampson of the Israelites exceeding for his strength,
there is a Hercules among the Gentiles, who shall do as much as he. If there be
hell for the damned, and heaven for those that be blessed, Virgil will have his
Paradise, those Elysian fields, and tortures also for wicked ones, among the
ghosts below. But if all of them should be served, as Virgil was for his
labor, they would gain little by the bargain; for as he had hell from us, so
the Papists to be quit with him, have Purgatory from him. And if in our Prophet
here, there be any thing worth the looking on, both Satan and his Poets will
not be behind hand with him. If he be in the whale for three days and three
nights, Natales Comes Mythologiae. 8.3.
their Hercules shall be also for three days in a whale. And if one will not
serve the^ turn, they will make it up in two. If Jonas drenched in one place,
be seen alive in another, Arion cast into the sea, shall appear again at
Corinth.

19 This is the deadly fraud of the enemy of our soul, Tertul. in Apolog. 22.
who in suggesting lies for truth, by himself and his instruments, would
defame the word of God. For he himself being a subtle spirit, and every where
at hand, knew the Scriptures well enough: where they lay he did read them:
where they were read, he could hear them: he knew them well enough, when he
cited the text to Christ: Matthew. 4.6.
and he brought many of his agents and ministers in place, where they might
hear what the Jews received, Exodus 1.1.
for the grounds of their religion. The Israelites were once in bondage under
Pharao in Egypt, and afterward they lived not far from that country,
Palestina being a near borderer, so that the Egyptians by a neighbourly
conversation with them, did well know the manners of the Israelites: and
afterward by the intercession of king Ptolomee, Joseph. Antiquit. 1.1.
the books of their laws, were by the Septuagint translated into Greek, and
by that means were well known in Egypt. And whither but into Egypt, did the
great scholars of old time, travel to increase their learning? Diodor. Sic.
Antiquit. 1.
I find in Diodorus Siculus, that the priests of the Egyptians had it in
record, that Orpheus and Musaeus, and Homer, and Lycurgus, and Plato, and
Democritus were there, Augustine. de doctr. Christ. lib. 2.28.
to increase their knowledge. Saint Austen cites it out of Ambrose, that Plato
being in Egypt met with Jeremy the Prophet, and learned many things of him,
concerning the faith of the Israelites; De ciuit. Dei lib. 8.11.
but afterward that learned father, better looking into the Chronology or
computation of years, reformeth that opinion. For indeed Plato was after
Jeremy. As it was with the Egyptians, Ierem. 52.7.
so it was with the Chaldeans. The Jews in their Babylonish captivity were in
Chaldea, whereby they also of that nation, did hear of much in the Scripture.
But the Chaldees as men studious of learning, did travel often into other
countries, Tullius de Diuinat. lib. 2.
yea it seems as far as Rome, by Tullies second book de Diuinatione, where
he names their figure-casters, by no name so much as Chaldees. Thus diverse
ways, an ignorant kind of knowledge was spread among the Gentiles, which in
their study of Poetry and Philosophy, gave them occasion of many things for
their books. Clemens Alexandr. Stromat. 5. Just. Mar. Apolog. 2.
Clemens Alexandrinus makes it evident, that the old Philosophers did take all
their diuiner matters, from the books and reports of Moses. Justinius Martyr
whom so often before I have named, says that whatsoever their Poets, and
Philosophers did record, of the immortality of the soul, of the pains of
hell, of things in heaven or any other matter of that kind, they took occasion
from the Israelitish Prophets, both to think them and to speak them. By which
it is plain, that those old Ethnickes did hear some sound of the Scriptures,
and whatsoever truth is in their books, they derived it from this fountain.

20 But when it was once come into the hands of heathen and polluted men, it
must needs taste somewhat of their handling: some dross must be mixed with the
gold; some water powered Herodot. lib. 2. Isay 37.36.
as that of Sennacherib is, in the second book of Herodotus, whose loss of so
many men, by the Ange^l of God striking them, at his siege against Jerusalem,
is said to be in Egypt, and that by an army of mice, who did no other harm but
this: in the night time they did eat up the leathers of their armours, and
targets, and horse-bridles, and thereupon he was glad to fly away, with great
loss of his soldiers. Sometimes Plutarch. Symposiac. lib. 4.
So Plutarke writes, that some of the principal feasts among the Jews, yea
their very Sabbath day, and the word Sabbos as he calls it, were derived from
the feasts of Bacchus; whereas in truth the solemnities of Bacchus rather came
from the other, being is no comparison so ancient, as those which were under
Moses. Some other times, like must go for like; but a lie for a Isay. 9.6.
upon the words of Esaias, that the Lord would send a child who should be the
mighty God. But it was not spoke of before, until the deed were done;
therefore he thought not of it; and therefore it must come after. And in the
days of the Prophet, while himself lived, it had been too gross to speak
it, therefore he will stay one age, or two ages at the most, before that he
publish his fable. For Jonas lived a good time before the captivity of Babylon,
either in, or sooner then the days of the latter Jeroboam: 2. Reg. 14.25.
and Arion as it seems, lived in the time of the captivity: for as we read
in Herodotus, Herodot. lib. 1.
he lived with Periander, who lived with Halyattes, who was father unto
Craesus, who was conquered by Cyrus, who gave out the first proclamation, Ezra.
1.1.
for restoring the Jews from Babylon.

21 Thus not a miss as I suppose (especially in an auditory of such learning
and judgment as this is) by comparing our Prophet here, with that fable of the
Gentiles, I have showed the apish quality of Satan, in his imitation of the
mightiest works of God, and his craftiness otherwise, in seeking by his
tales, and invented reports, to withdraw credit from the Scriptures. Whereunto
I might first add, that since we have to do with an enemy of that quality, we
had need be very circumspect in regard of our selves, that we yield not
assent, to any of the lewd motions of himself, or other his Atheistical
agents, in going about to extenuate the credit of the word, but pray to God
still to guide us in his undoubted truth, both that we may believe, and
practice that which he has taught us. Secondly I might show the conueniency,
or rather the necessity, that a Minister who should expound the Scriptures,
should be furnished with liberal Arts and sciences, with histories and other
humane learning, that when occasion directly serves, such knots as this is,
may be opened to the honor of the true God. In which respect, I do profess my
judgment to be clean contrary to the opinions of such men, who think that
the understanding and use of these matters is frivolous, and vain for a
Minister, and only for ostentation; and that it skilled not if there were no
Universities, or schools where these things are studied. I repute them the
great blessings of the Lord of heaven, affoorded to us, for the apparent
furtherance of his ministry, and the profession of Divinity. How can the
Revelation and the prophecy of Daniel be understood without these? The like may
be said of some other parts of Scripture. When with so many helps of history,
from the Greek and from the Latin, the best and most laborious wits, cannot
attain to the depth of many matters in them, how imperfect and uncertain, nay
how amazed plainly should he be, that would look into them, and knows
nothing of antiquity? The positio^ is most true, that art and knowledge has
none so great an enemy, as that person which is ignorant. Take away these, and
bring in barbarism. But I have no time to handle this, and therefore I do
leave it, desiring God to perpetuate these arts and skils among us; that the
means of our studies here, in this ungodly age be not taken away from us, for
our abusing of them; but that they may continue as handmaides to Divinity, and
servants unto the Scriptures, till Christ Jesus come to judgment. To him with
his blessed father and his most holy Spirit be praise for evermore.

THE XVI. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 3. God in sending twice shows his love to be the greater:
4. which is hindered by no cross from man. 6. As appears in England. 7. God
imployeth Jonas after his former fall. 8. The cruel doctrine of the Nouatians.
10. The word is the great instrument whereby God calls. 11. To the old
Prophets the word of God came. 12. But preachers now must go to it. 13. Jonas
is not forward to his second message. 14. God purposely sends variety of
business to us, and why. 15. The finger of the Lord appears, in that one
teaches a multitude. 16. But especially the word is forcible. 17. Knowing of
danger beforehand makes the Minister more resolute. 18. Prophets must preach
that only which God commands. 19. Which the Papists do not.

Jonah. 3: 1.2. And the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second time
saying, Arise, go unto Nineveh that great city, and preach unto it the
preaching which I bid thee.


AS it pleased God, The Lecture on Thursday disco^tinued.
that upon the first reviving of this weekly exercise of preaching among us (I
mean in these late years, after some discontinuance of these holy labors) he
put in my mouth the first charge laid on Jonas to go to Niniue, the event
whereof from time to time I have discoursed unto you, as the Lord has enabled
me: So it falls out fitly, by the providence of the self same God, that upon
the second reviving of the self same exercise, the second sending of the self
same Prophet, unto the same city, should be offered to your hearing. Anno. 1596.
Wherein as the mercy of the Almighty was manifested to Niniue, when after the
first stay and hinderance of that, which was intended toward it, he did not
give over, but redoubled his message by sending again. So it is an argument of
Gods kindness to us, that he suffers not the practice of his servants in
holy things, to cease; but although upon occasion it has been interrupted, yet
to break forth again. A copious blessing, when God plentifully sends the
food of our souls, and that not only by imposed sacrifices, but by free will
offerings also; so remoouing far from us the famine of the word, Amos. 8.11.
which is the greatest famine, and against which we are to pray more earnestly,
then against all hunger of the body. It were to be wished, that this may be
continued with an everlasting performance, that so the building of this house
like that of Salomons Temple, 1. Reg. 6.37.38.
might not cease, till all were ended by Christ's coming to judgment; or if
like the second Temple it must be at a stay, Ezra. 4.21.
yet that it might never quite stand, lest the memory should be razed out, that
there was any such building. Although some space be between, Cap. 6.1.
yet let the days of Darius add to the days of Cyrus; and the Lord stir up
the spirit as of Zerubbabel before, 14.
so of Zachariah afterward, to second and forward and encourage the work.

2 Now there is proposed to me a larger field to walk in, then hitherto has
been: for the sin of one man alone, was offered before unto me to be
discoursed of, but now the sin of a multitude. So heretofore I had occasion,
to look into the private repentance of one offending person, but now into the
public penance of a whole transgressing city; and that of the city Niniue the
greatest in the East, which by her enormity, did minister God great matter of
vengeance and wrath, but by her deploration and sorrow for iniquity, did move
him unto mercy. Jonah. 1.2. Genes. 18.20.
Before, the cry of their joined transgressions did ascend into the ears of
the Lord, as the cry of Sodom did; but now in a like manner, the outcry of
their joined prayers, of their fasting and contrition does pierce through the
very clouds, and comes before Gods seat, and obtains forgiveness of him.
Which as it is afterward illustrated in this present Chapter, and therefore in
his fit place will yield most fruitful doctrine, so because the means also of
moving them to repentance, are here opened unto us, that is to say by the word
of God, delivered unto the^ by the preaching of the Prophet, my purpose is to
pursue it, with that natural order which the text prescribes unto me,
beginning with the Lords sending, and so proceeding to the Prophets going, and
afterward to his preaching, and then to their demeanor in hearing and
receiving, and so forward to the rest. But this day in these two verses,
especially I shall touch these two things: The employment of Jonas again,
which the first verse yields in general, And the word of the Lord came unto
Jonah the second time saying: Then secondly in what special words, this charge
was delivered unto him, Arise and go to Niniue. Such sub-diuided notes as do
arise out of these, shall be touched in their order.

And the word of the Lord the second time, came unto Jonah saying:
3 The manner of men is, that if they intend any thing of the greatest
importance, they are at first earnest and peremptory for it, but afterward,
time perhaps does slaken their heat, and cool their resolution. But if there
come an hinderance or stop in the way, they sink under their burden, and
desist from their enterprise, attempting little farther. Hence, common
observation has taken that up for a speech, that in fights the first conflict
is ever most dangerous, and if that be resisted, the rest will be but easy.
Hence, such as by their guiltiness have provoked the wrath of him, Primi
congressus sunt acorrimi.
who is like to deal with them in severity, do take what course they can to
prolong, and put off their conuenting and arraignement, both conceiving that
the Judge being assuaged with time, will abate of his rigor, and the pursuer
sleeping on it, will remit of his fury. Great wars and great iourneyes,
receiving great crosses in the entrance unto them, end before that they begin,
and so the greatest preparations, oftentimes turn unto nothing. Neither ever
was there purpose having maine impediment, which was seconded by any and
followed afresh, but by him whose hate was strong, or his love exceeding great
to that which he did aim at, Romans 1.10.
which would not be rebuked or choked with a little. Cap. 15.22.32.
Of this kind was Paul's love, as he specifieth of himself, who intending many
times to visit the Saints at Rome, and being often stayed by unavoidable
occasions, yet still burns in desire of the personal seeing of them, and
holds not himself satisfied, till it were done indeed. He speaks of it,
and he writes of it, and he wishes it and prays for it; he is so settled in
it.

4 The greater was the love of the maker of mankind, to this retchlesse city
Niniue; to the which, meaning to send a message full of threatenings (but such a
one as should in the end bring peace and quietness to them) although he were
stayed for a while, and as a man may say put from his first ground to work on,
his servant running from him, and causing him to follow him, and chastise him,
when in the mean while much good might have been done, by preaching to that
people: yet he is not quite stopped with it, or put from his first meaning, but
secondly he will send, that they may have some warning, to fly the rod hanging
over them. If he had not intended their good and safety, with a purpose which
he meant should not be controlled, he might right well have suffered that doom
to fall on them, which he threatens by the Prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 3.17.18.
both to the Jews and to him, that if he being set for a watchman, would not
tell them of such plagues, as were to come upon them, they should dye in their
sins, but their blood would he require at the hands of Ezechiel. So the
Ninevites being not acquainted with that vengeance which was near them, might
have perished in their ignorance, and been damned for their iniquity, but
their blood might have been required at the hands of our poor Jonas. But to
make it manifest, that his purpose was inuariable in it self, and full of good
to them, he does but defer his sending: some few days may be slipped, but it
assuredly comes at last. His intendments depend not on the ability, or want
of any of his creatures: the stubburnenesse of the reprobate, or falling away
of him who seems to be somewhat, or the apostasy of a great one, or the
depraved error of any of his own servants, do not hinder his designement. If
this man will not serve, then there shall come another: or if yesterday will
not do, yet it shall be too morrow. The Philistines shall be conquered: 1. Sam.
18.27. 1. Chron. 22.8.
if Saules sins will not suffer that he shall have a victory, David shall be
the man. The Temple must be erected: if the father may not do it, because he
has shed much blood, the son Solomon shall be peaceable, and he shall begin
and end it.

5 But when he has once purposed good upon a nation, that it shall be called
home, and rectified in his ways, be there never so many difficulties, as they
seem in man's judgment, he cleereth them every one. For to God nothing is
difficult, but himself has a finger in that which seems to hinder, as
divines commonly do show in determining that question, that God is not the
author of sin, and yet does work in all things. He resolved to make the
Gentiles like the Jews, to call those for a people who were no people before.
There was in the time of Christ, a decree and bar against it, Matthew. 10.5.6.
Act. 10.15.34.
Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into the cities of the Samaritanes
enter ye not. But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Yet
afterward Peter shall see the unclean made clean, and God will be no longer a
respecter of any persons. He by his Apostle has foretold, that the Jews shall
again be called home to the adoption, Roman. 11.26.
before the day of judgment. Then Gods election being over them, and his words
being truth and verity, they shall come to the sheepefold, that all Israel may
be saved: Although the blood of Christ be on their heads, Matthew. 27.25.
and on the heads of their children, although they yet to this day hate, and
revile the Savior of the world, Hieron. in Isay. 5.
and under the name of Nazarites, do curse us in their Synagogues. In this last
age of the world, when the fullness of time was come, that by the breath of his
mouth (the preaching of the Gospel) God would weaken and consume that wicked
one, 2. These. 23.4.8.
that adversary, the very son of perdition, and the light of the word should
clearly shine again, in a great part of the world; not all the clouds of
ignorance; nor the thick mistes of darkness, could stay from us his decreed
mercy. When the Pastors had conspired, either not to preach at all to their
charges (as Jonas would not at Niniue) or if they did bring any thing, it was
poison for meat, and venime in steed of water: when Antichrist with his pomp,
and his followers with the brightness of earthly and carnal glory, had
dazeled the peoples eyes, that they could not see truth from error: when the
knowledge of the tongues, and almost all other literature, was raked up under
the ashes: when the decrees of Popes, and the Canons of Councels, and customs
and traditions, were in place of the written word: when the schoolmen had
conspurcated and abused true Divinity with their filthiness: when a lively
faith and understanding knowledge were not heard of: God did a second time send
his servants, to bring light to the world, and furnishing one with this talent,
and another with that good thing, he brought life again to the dead, and
sunshine in the midst of darkness. A great token of his gracious and
bountiful inclination, to the age wherein we live. It must be imputed to his
love: it must be ascribed to his mercy.

6 So must that, which we enjoy so abundantly at this time. God has sent twice
to our nation, in a special manner, as he did to Niniue. In the time of good
King Edward, and in the days of our Queen. The difference is in this, that
those which were sent to us, did come indeed, and did not like Jonas: and
besides it was not one, but many servants of the Lord which showed themselves.
But herein is the likeness, that as when the first served not, he sent the
next time to Niniue, so having here appointed, that so many should be sealed
and marked in the forehead, as belonged to his election, so many thousands or
millions, which number in those six years of king Edward was in no sort
completed (and God forbid, for our sake and our posterity, that it should have
been) he stayed not at that stop, which was made in Queen Mary's days, but
went on with his purpose. The conspiring against the Gospel, the striking of
the sheapheards, the burning of the professors, the yielding of all to the
Pope, the confederacy with the Spaniard, which were things of far greater
moment, then the turning back of one Prophet, did not so restrain his
affection, but that a second time we should hear from him more at large, to
the building up of his Church, and dilating of his kingdom, but to the
eternal blessedness of us both in soul and body. If any thing may deserve
it, this deserves at our hands a thankfulness, and grateful consideration.
I would that our lives, and our contempt of the world, could testify, that so
we do think of it. But we must impute this to his love, as also the other,
that he would send again to Niuiue.

7 Which City as I do now leave, so I may not leave that argument, of the
kindness of the Lord; for the messenger yet gives farther occasion, to
magnify that. For he who had but lately run away from his master, and cast
his word behind him; he who for some carnal reason, had despised his
commandment; he who had so transgressed, that a punishment never heard off
before, was inflicted for his labor, is once again put in trust, as the
Prophet of the Highest, to go to a King, and a City, with threats which are
so terrible. Why would not he who is Lord of all things, rather make choice of
some other, to be used in this service, who was untainted and untouched,
unstained and unreprovable? This may seem at the first blush, to be more for
the senders honor: and again, he that should be sent, might reprove the
sins of other, with a freer conscience, when he knew himself to be
innocent. The Lawyers would have said, Sexto Decretalium. lib 5.

Tit. 12. De Regulis iutis regul. 8. Bonifac. 8.


Semel malus, semper malus: Once evil, and ever evil, he may not be
admitted. Perhaps the Elders of the Church, or the grauer sort of men, might
have received him again into the congregation, upon his testification of
sorrow for his fault; but to honor him as a Prophet, or to esteem him as in
former time, that does not stand with discipline, that were no safe example.
The Gibeonites were suffered by Iosuah, Iosuah. 9.21.
to come into the Tabernacle: but they came without preferment; nay it was with
great disgrace; they served but for wood-cutters, and drawers of water. Such as
in the Primitive Church, being Clergy men before, had notoriously fallen, were
permitted upon repentance to come to the Eucharist, but it was to the laymens
Communion, not as Bishops or Priests, who might consecrate and minister to
other, but as men of the congregation, who were to receive at the hand of
another. And thus Cornelius Bishop of Rome, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. 6.35. Gellius.
lib. 10.3.
served a Prelate, who laid hands foolishly upon Nouatus, at his consecration.
The Brutij were the first of all Italy, who revolted from the Romans to
Hannibal. But for that trick, the Romans would never trust them afterward,
although upon their humble submission, they took them into their protection:
yet they reckened them not as fellows, neither mustered they any soldiers out
of their country, but appointed them to attend on such Deputies and
Lieutenants, as they sent into their Provinces. Thus would worldly and carnal
wisdom have dealt with this man: he may be held for an Israelite, but in no
sort for a Prophet: no gracing, no advancing, no honoring yet a while. Let him
bite upon the bridle, that knowing how he has fallen, he may be wiser
afterward. But the Lord who knew his heart, and saw it now quite broken,
waits not for more experience, or for years of probation, but as fully
satisfied with his sorrow, and putting the greatness of his error out of
memory, he sets him once again in his old place, and old honor, without
disgrace, or diminution. He does not so much as upbraid, or cast him in the
teeth, as an ungracious servant, that thus or thus he had served him, but
shutting up all together, he employeth him as before. This is a lesson to the
Ministers and pastors of the flock, that by Gods own example, they should
not be too rigorous upon such as have gone astray, even in the greatest crimes:
but when conspicuous tokens of repentance shall be given, to open the lap and
bosom of the Church to receive them. Not every slight acknowledgement, but yet
pregnant signs may be taken; and better it is that he be an hypocrite, then
thou an hard hearted father. Ezech. 33.11. Luc. 15.10. Luc. 15.20.
God will not the death of sinners, but that they should turn and live. The
very Angels rejoice for one repenting sinner. When the prodigal child came
toward, his father did run and meet him, and kissed him and embraced him.
Let not the servant be hard unto his fellow servant, when the master is so
easy.

8 The more cruel in the mean while, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. 6.35.
was the doctrine of Nouatus: who barred not for a time, but for ever from the
Communion, and access into the Church, such as in the bloody persecution of
Decius the Emperor, had by infirmity offered unto idols; teaching that God if
he would, might take them to mercy, but man might not deal with it, no not
although they did implore it with sobbes and continued tears. He had forgotten
that Peter denying Christ three times, yet continued an Apostle, Matthew. 26.69.
and was afterward martyred for Christ. That the spirit may be willing, 41.
and yet the flesh may be weak. That to endure the fiery trial, is only the
gift of God, who grants it when he lists, and gives it where he pleases.
That he that stands, 1. Cor. 10.12.
or at the left thinks that he stands, may take heed left he fall. That
the soldier who now ^lieth, may afterward fight again, as Demosthenes once
could say. And as Eusebius shows, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. 5.1.
many Christians which renounced Christ, for the fear of cruel torment,
returned to him again, and made a good confession. Cypr. de singularitate
clericorum.
Oftentimes says Cyp^ian, both adulterers, and murderers, and drunkards, and
those who are guilty of all wickedness, finding occasion of a fight, and
being converted, have deserved to come to a palm of martyrdom. How much more
then may a weak brother? The example of Bishop Cranmer is very well known
unto us, Johan. Foxus in vita Cranmeri.
who was a great pillar of Gods Church, a great light of the Gospel, but yet
first denied, but afterward repented, and purged it with tears. But as the
scholars, do oftentimes say more then their masters, so the Cathari, and
Nouatians who were the Disciples of Nouatus, Socrat Hist. Eccles. 7.25.
did give a more bloody sentence, then ever their teacher did. For they held,
that not only to deny Christ, was so heinous, but whosoever after Baptism had
done any mortal sin (such as we find in the Scripture, that death is
threatened to) was cut off from the Church, and he might have no portion in the
Eucharist or Communion, howsoever afterward he did behave himself. He must
stand a man sequestered, and excommunicate to the death.

9 A hard saying to all men; for who is he that sins not in that sort, since
every ^^nne is deadly, unless the Lord do pardon it? Circumcision was to the
Israelites, as Baptism is to the Christians, an admission into the flock, and
a testification to the conscience of every believer, that he was in Gods
favor: 2. Sam. 11.4.17. Psalm 51.1. Prou. 24.16. Hier. Epist. 46.

Si cadit quo modo iustus, si iustus quo modo cadit? Socrat. His. Eccles. 1.7.


but David circumcised, was an adulterer and a murderer; yet upon his true
repentance, both the Lord and the congregation, received him to mercy. The
righteous man says Saloman falls seven times, and rises again; Whereof
although Hierome does ask, if he be just, then how falls he, if he fall,
how is he righteous? yet he answers himself, that he loses not the name
of a righteous man, because he rises by repentance. And this is the hope of
the best; for who otherwise should not perish? When Acesius a Bishop of the
Nouatians, at the Nicene Council, did show Constantine that holy and blessed
Emperor, the strictness of their opinions, and how precisely a man must live
without sin after Baptism, if he would attain salvation, the Emperor
makes him answer, Erigito tibi scalam, and ad caelum solus ascendito.
If this be so Acesius, then get thy self a ladder, and clime alone into
heaven, giving his censure of it so, that scant any man should be saved, if
that ground were maintained. No marvel if for the comfort of wounded
consciences, at the first Saint Cyprian, and Cornelius Bishop of Rome, and
Dionysius of Alexandria, so hotely did impugn this heresy: and after them
Chrysostom, who so far did dislike this hard lacing of Nouatus, that he
spoke thus against it, Socrat 6.19. Si millies lapsus paenitentiamegeris
i^ecelesiam ingredere. Psalm. 19.13.
If thou have fallen a thousand times, and do repent thee of it, enter into
the Church, that is, if thy repentance be true, I will not seclude thee from
the fellowship of Gods children. We do teach the self same doctrine, not to
stir men up to sin (for that were to fall of presumption, unto which many
times God denies the benefit of repentance) but that we may seek out that
which is lost, and bind up that which is broken, and raise up that which is
fallen, Iud. 23.
and save some out of the fire. Gods Church is made of sinners. Christ Jesus
did dye for sinners. Our very Creed does teach us, Symbolum Apostoloru^.
that the Communion of Saints, and the forgiveness of sins, must be joined
and go together. He who will have part in the one, must have his fellowship in
the other. He cannot come to the first, but he must taste of the latter. We cry
to the man lamenting his iniquities, Ambros in Lucam. lib. 2. cap. 2.
as Ambrose writing upon Luke, cries: Let no man distrust, let no man being
privy to his old faults, despair of a reward from God. God knows how to
change his sentence, if thou know how to change thy fault. Bernard. de
interiori domo cap. 37. Tardius videtur Deo venta p^ccateri dedisse quam illi
acce^isse.

Absque dubio and absque mora.


We testify with Saint Bernard, It seems unto God, that he does more slowly
give pardon to the sinner, then it does unto the other that he does receive it.
For the merciful God does so hasten to acquit the guilty man, from the
torment of his conscience, as if the suffering of the wretch, did more grieve
the pitiful God, then his own suffering did the man which is in misery. For
he who truly repents and earnestly sorroweth, without doubt and without delay
shall receive a pardon. Let the weak then raise up his heart, and strengthen
his feeble knees. Sinners which call for grace, Genes. 9.21. cap. 19.32. 2.
Petr. 2.8. Matthew. 26.70
do belong to the adoption. Noe swarued, and yet he was a Patriarch, Lot fell,
yet he is said by Saint Peter, to have had a righteous soul. Peter himself
had a guilty conscience, and yet was a great Apostle. Jonas became a mighty
trespasser, and yet still remained the Lords Prophet. It was Gods gracious
bounty, whose favor originally ever comes for nothing, but being once
settled, it is not lost for a little. And thus have you his love both to Niniue,
and to Jonas.

10 There is yet another matter, which in this former verse is worthy of
consideration, that the word of the Lord is said here to come to Jonas. The
Creator of all things, might have used many other ways, to reclaim that
offending city. In old time he did call and warn men, by visions and by
dreams, as it is in Job: Job. 33 15.
or his benefits might have allured; or if those had but choked, and pampered
them up with fatness, his rods might have beat them to it; famine might breed
remorse, or the sword of the enemy, or some devouring pestilence. Or if he
would save all their lives, such judgments might have frighted them, as were
showed at Jerusalem, Joseph. de bello Iudaico. 7.12.
at the last destruction of it. For as we find in Josephus, a Comete like to a
sword did long hang over the city, and troops of armed men, were seen to
fight in the air. What terror would this have wrought? what heart would not
this have rented, and driven it into mourning, and calling to God for pardon?
But the great Lord who in his wisdom has ordained another way, as the
ordinary course to win men to himself, that is, by his most precious word,
and his ministry, does here commend this his ordinance, for the instrument of
their good. He has made this word more sharp, then is any two edged sword.
Hebr. 4.12.
This is it which does pierce the marrow, and break the bones in sunder, which
enters into the division of the soul and of the spirit, of the heart and of
the reins, which wresteth sighs from the mind, and wringeth tears from the
eyes, and makes a whole man, as it were to melt, and dissolve into water. This
is it, to which especially he has promised to give a blessing, Isay. 55.10.
that it shall not return in vain, but as the rain comes down, and the
snow from heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes
it to bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to
him that eats, so shall the word be that goes out of Gods mouth, it shall
not return void, but accomplish that which God will, and it shall prosper in
the thing whereunto he sends it. It is the very power of salvation to all
those that do believe, a lantern to our feet, Psalm. 119.105
and a light unto our paths; and therefore as at other times he uses this to
save men, so he does in this place, teaching the Ninevites by that word, which
comes from the mouth of the Prophets, by his preaching and crying; and to
that purpose also sending his word to Jonas, as a warrant in what sort he
should cry. The word must be the means, and he the man that must bring it.

11 This is a sure seal unto him, of his calling and vocation. The mind of God
in particular concerning this or that, is revealed and made known to him; not
after a common manner, as every one in the Scripture is informed of his duty,
and what the Lords will is, but in a special sort, as to one singled out, as
the Prophets were to choice places. And to signify that no man can of himself
be a Prophet, but by Gods disposing of him unto it, the word of the Lord
comes to him, he does not go unto it, but it is imposed on him. So that he
who would be a Prophet, or a foreteller, as all those holy ones were, who were
called by that name, before the coming of Christ, must peculiarly be raised up
by his God unto that office, and have divine and supernatural revelations from
him. Amos 7.14.
I was says Amos no Prophet, neither was I a Prophets son, but I was a
heardman, and a gatherer of wild figs, and the Lord took me as I followed the
flock, and the Lord said unto me, go prophecy unto my people Israel. Now he
who lacks this commission, is a liar and deceiuer. Such a one was that
filthy Mahomet, Petrus Messiah in Heraclio.

Cael. August. Curio Sarac. Hist. lib. 1.


the author of the Alcoran, and of the Turkish religion, who would needs be a
Prophet, but had no word for the same. Yet to blind the eyes of the people, (as
our Christians do write of him) when the falling sickness came on him,
wherewith he was much troubled, he would say when he came again to himself,
that he was rapt into some revelation, and in his soul had some conference
with the Almighty maker. Let such false Prophets as these be, perish with that
in the Revelation, Apoc. 19.20.
for whom as well as for the beast, that fire and brimstone is prepared, which
is the second death.

12 The true foretelling Prophets are ceased now long agone. The Prophets of
the new Testament, 1. Cor. 14.5.
are the Preachers and expounders of the word unto the people, as Saint Paul
to the Corinthians, does take Prophets for Preachers. But although a motion
even from the Spirit of God, and an inward calling be needful for us, whereby
we may be assured, that we are sequestered out, and ordained unto this vocation,
yet the word of God may not properly be said to come to us, but it is rather
our part to go to the word of God, and to have recourse to the Scripture, and
therein to see what the Lord does teach unto us. And when we are furnished,
Matthew. 13.52
and well stored with things both old and new, we ought as the good Scribe to
bring them out of our treasury. Which if all those did respect, who do enter
into this function, we should not have such base ones stand before the altar.
If we had not men so good, as those holy inspired ones were, yet we should not
have them so bad, as every where abound; men who never imagined, what an inward
calling means; they know not of any such matter; such as neither the word
comes to them, nor they come to the word; the meanest of the flock, yet be
guides to the flock, neither learned, nor apt to learn, the refuse of the
people; a dishonor unto God, and a great disgrace to our Church after so long
a peace. It were the less, if they only made themselves to be guilty, but
they slay the souls of other. Their case is unnatural; against the rules of
nature, that any should be teachers who never learned, or preachers who cannot
speak, or men to divide the word, who know not how to divide it. But I leave
them and this verse, and come to my second part.

Arise and go to Niniue that great city.
13 As hitherto you have heard in a kind of generality, that Ion. 1.2.
is in precise terms plainly set down unto us. Arise. In the beginning of
this Prophecy, the very same word is used, and in both places intends, that
Jonas was not ready, but as it were sitting or lying down; so that he did
need a spur to quicken him, and revive him. In the second of Ezechiel, God
speaks thus unto his servant, Son of man stand up upon thy feet, Ezech.
2.1.
and I will speak unto thee. It shows that he was not ready, and therefore
he bids him stand up. Our man when preaching at first to the people of
Israel, he thought that he had done no good, but utterly lost his labor; of
likelihood being discontented, did set him down and vex. Then did the Lord
put life into him, and bid him arise and be stirring, he would send him
elsewhere. But now it is rather to be supposed, that being dejected in his
spirit, for his grievous disobedience, and troubled in his soul for his so
great offense, he sat musing and pondering, as not having yet digested the
sorrow, through which he did run. And to say the truth, he had been
insensible, and without all kind of feeling, if he had so soon shaken off the
remembrance of his sin, and his punishment for the same. He that has
sustained bitterness, and felt it to the full, shall after his deliverance, in
a melancholic pang, starkle and be affrighted, as if he were yet troubled, yea
be perplexed in his dreams; as if there were yet a continuance of misery upon
him. How much more might Jonas be yet quiuering and trembling, whose body was
in the mouth, yea the belly of the grave, and whose soul did feel that
anguish, which the fear of Gods displeasure, and his casting away from his
presence, could possibly lay upon him? Now to the end that he might not wast
himself with sorrowing beyond measure, and so be swallowed up with grief, he
is rowzed out of his passions, and busied otherwise yet more to his own hearts
ease, and his masters better service.

14 It is a thing worthy observance, in very many men, although in some more,
in some less, that in the greatest pensiveness of mind which befalls them,
God by some new occasion does set them up and revive them. The Pastor has his
vexations, and grieuances at his heart. The untowardness of his people does
make him fret like Moses: Number. 11* 11.
so the wiliness of the serpent, in devising new kinds of evil, or the
stubburnnesse of Recusants, or the circumuentings of heretics, or the
deriding of enemies, may disquiet him and afflict him. The father and the
householder, may be grieved and disturbed, by the unruliness of his children,
and the infamy which is upon them, as was upon the sons of Eli or Samuel; 1.
Sam. 2.22. Cap. 8.3.
or by the falsenesse of his servants, and treachery of his people, by whom he
sustaineth harms or losses, or by malicious neighbors. The faithful man who
is in any vocation, 2. Sam. 16.1. Exodus 1.10. Genes. 21.9. Ester. 3.6. 2. Sam.
16.5. 1. Sam. 22.9.
may be tormented in his spirit, by an undermining Ziba, or by an oppressing
Pharao, or by a deriding Ismael, or by a contemning Haman, or by a reuiling
Shimei, or by a slaundering Doeg. The tender and troubled conscience may be
frighted and molested, by recounting his iniquities against so high a majesty,
and so severe a justice. There is no one of these, but being followed and
pursued as with wave after wave, must needs sink and grow faint, unless
there be some remedy. He that should only feed upon this in his thought, and
as one who made much of the humor, should increase it and maintain it, might
fret himself to pieces; and if his bones were iron, or if his sides were
brass, might consume them and dissolve the^. Therefore our respective father,
knowing whereof we are made, remembering that we are but dust, Psalm 103.14.
does take this order for us, that as sometimes he intermingleth joy with
sorrow, like the night with the day, and fair weather with cloudie, and peace
with war, health with sickness; so otherwise in our troubles, he sends
such variety, and vicissitude of disturbances, that this business is driven
away and removed with that, as a nail is forced with a nail, Clauum clauo
pellere.
or one wooden pin with another, that the mind may not have time to g^aw, or
leisure to wast it self with sorrow. This duty or that necessity, or the
coming in of a friend, or fear of evil to come, or hope and expectation, or
watchfulness to prevent, or laboring to escape, or one thing or another, is
set by God as a stay, that we shall not with Job only sit down and mourn,
Job. 2.8. Lament. 1.1.
or with Jeremy yield our selves wholly to lamentation. We shall have some
thing or other say to us as to Jonas, arise. I am assuredly persuaded, that
this was the estate of Saint Paul above all other men, 2. Cor. 6.4.
who ran through so many difficulties in watching and in fasting, in
imprisonment and in beating, in preaching and in writing, in comforting the
weak, in combating with the enemy, in taking care of all Churches. God did
not afford him time to grieve at his perplexities, but choked one with
another, and gave him grace for all. Every man may apply this to himself as
he pleases. But to the end that our Prophet might not be steeped and quite
dissolved with sorrow, the word of the Lord comes to him, No more (Jonas) of
this heaviness, Arise and go to Niniue that great city.

15 No marvel if this did awake him, to send him in such an errand. Now he is
not to go, as upon any private business, from one man to another, but he must
go from God, and he must go to a city, and that as I think the greatest which
then was on the earth, which might very well urge him to look about him, with
all his wit and understanding. I shall have more occasion in the third verse,
to speak of the hugeness of this place, because there it is said, that Niniue
was a great and excellent city, of no less then three days journey. Ion. 3.3.
It shall suffice for that purpose which I now intend to follow, out of these
words of my text, that Niniue was a great city, to contemplate with reverend
admiration, the sound force and effectual operation of the word of God and the
ministry: that one man and a stranger, without pomp, without train, without
any one to grace him, should be sent to such a multitude, and being sent should
prevail. See whether some secret virtue, and power which cannot be expressed,
be not in this lively word, when it is taught. See whether the mighty finger
of the Lord himself be not with it, that he should depute one mouth, to speak
unto a million, and to move them and persuade them, and sometimes to erect
them, and sometimes to depresse them, with promises and with threatenings: to
make so many hearts as would not fear an army of the old Greeks or
Egyptians, to quake, and with a quauering to tremble in all the bones. That he
should appoint one Moses, Exodus 12.37
to advise and give precepts, to six hundred thousand men, which were able to
fight in battle, besides women and children. Act. 2.41.
That Peter at one Sermon, should not only speak to so many, but should win
three thousand souls. That in a great congregation, where hundreds or
thousands be, a man of the self same quality, as those to whom he does
preach, clothed with many weaknesses, and bringing this most precious treasure
but in an earthen vessel, should stand between the Lord and the consciences
of the people, and with memory and constancy, should speak boldly to the best,
and rebuke them and reprove them, and thunder out Gods judgments. And that
the tongue of this man, a little piece of flesh, and nothing in comparison,
should talk of God and Angels, of the mysteries of the Trinity, of the
benefits of the Redeemer, of the power of the holy Ghost, of everlasting joy,
and of the pains of hell, of salvation and damnation; and with this speech so
uttered, should conquer and prevail, and incite men unto fasting and weeping
and lamenting, yea to suffering of affliction, yea to martyrdom it self.

16 It shows that this word, Mat. 13.31.
is truly likened to the mustard seed, which being small in the sowing,
grows to great branches afterward. 33.
And to leaven, which being put in meal far greater then it self, yet does
season and savor it all. So it is fitly compared unto a little spark, or
coal of fire, which lighting upon apt matter, proves soon a burning flame,
and has in it such power, as that cities or forests, or whole realms may be
wasted with it. This word has endless increase, when God gives a blessing to
it. By how few in respect of a multitude, was the Gospel propagated in all the
coasts of the earth? Their sound went out into all lands. Psalm 19.4.
They were but a few Apostles, and a small number of their scholars, neither
rich, nor learned, nor eloquent, yet India and Armenia, and Greece, and Rome,
and Spain, were filled with their devotions: the base were heard by the noble,
and fishermen and their followers, catched Caesar's and mighty Emperors. Act.
8.26.
The E^nuch of Candaces had but a little parley with Philip the Evangelist, yet
he so planted Christ's doctrine in the country of Ethiopia, that it remains
to this present age, in the whole kingdom of the Abyssines, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl.
2.1.
although with some noted blemishes. For Eusebius does acknowledge, that he was
the first who wanne them to be Christians; besides the likelihood of the
matter, in the Acts of the Apostles, that when he came home he would not be
silent, Damian. a Goes de Aethiopu^ moribus.
and the testification of late writers in that behalf. These be demonstratiue
proofs, that there is more in this word, then man's wit can imagine, that not
by sword or compulsion, but only by speaking and hearing, perhaps this day it
creeps, to morrow it flies aloft, and shows his head with the mightiest.
That the Sun in the heaven, cannot do more with the creatures, then this with
the receivers. For as the Sun being one, does give light to many, and does
harden the claye, and yet soften the wax, and makes the flowers to smell
better, and dead carions to savor worse, and cheareth the springing plants,
and cherishes other growing things, with an influence which cannot be
described; so the word of God uttered by one man, does serve multitudes and
great numbers, and fitteth every one according to his need, as to beat down
him that is proud, and raise up him that is humble, to threaten where threats
are needful, and to comfort where comfort is expedient, and with a force which
cannot be expressed, to frame every one to that, whereunto he is ordained, the
elect to his salvation, the reprobate to damnation.

17 Then it was no oversight, but amply to Gods glory, that the Lord did send
only one man, to a city of that quantity. He had armed him before, and
metalled him for the nonce. He came with matter in his mouth, to satisfy all
the sort. He who sent him was that Lord, who made all, and could break the
hearts of all; then what is it to be respected how many they were? By calling
he is a Prophet, and therefore need not fear a world full of gaine-sayers.
Ierem. 1.18.
He is as a wall of brass, and a bulwark of iron, against all the troops of
them. It is Gods word which he brings, which is operative and quick, and
very apt for diffusion, and spreading abroad. As the voice in the air, so this
in the hearts of men does quickly extend it self. He has a sound commission
from him, who will bear him out, to go to Niniue that great city. I send thee
not to a hand-full, but to a spacious charge, and I do furnish thee for them
all. I tell thee that they are many, expect and reckon of it, but thou shall do
well with them. And this was a happy help, that he was told before hand, that
the city was so great, that he might foresee the difficulty, and so be amazed
the less. For if suddenly without former meditation, he had been pushed among
so huge and vast a multitude, he might right well have trembled at it, as a few
soldiers would, when they expecting no such matter, nor think of their
enemies, were fallen into an ambush, or gotten into the midst of an army. Such
dangers as come unlooked for, do not only bereave men of counsel, and of
sound understanding, but of sense too many times. To prevent which, our Prophet
is advertised beforehand, that the monster of the multitude, that beast with
many heads, is to be dealt with by him: I could wish that such of my brethren,
as live here in this Seminary and storehouse of the ministry, would before
the time that the Lord imposed any charge elsewhere upon them, consider and
ponder deeply, what a difficult part of service they are to be used in: and
that there is no kind of conflict, wherein they may not be exercised. This is
the very same counsel, which Christ gives to his disciples, Luc. 14.28.
Which of you minding to build a tower sits not down before and counts
the cost, whether he have sufficient to perform it, 31.
Or what king going to make war against another king, sits not down
first and takes counsel, whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him
that comes against him with twenty thousand? There is less odds by much,
between twenty and ten, then between the flock and the Pastor. They are
many unto one; the variety and diversity of wits and dispositions, requires
a careful mind, and also a man resolved. Perverseness and ouerthrwartnesse,
must be looked for before hand. Whereupon if with foresight men did meditate
and contemplate, we should not here such complaints, as are rise in the
country. Oh what a blessed life do you lead in the University? we live here
as in a hell: such crossing and such vexations we taste, as you do never dream
of. And these seeming to many of them, to be no less then insuperable, cause
them to sink, and faint in their hearts, and to be as dead and discouraged, in
going through with their calling. They should have imagined before, that for
their strength and ability, every place might be to them, as Niniue was to
Jonas, a huge and mighty charge: that the contumely of Atheistes, and bitter
hatrest of Papists, the invasions of vpstart heretics, the wranglings of
newfound schismatikes, should exercise their patience. That the civil sort
with their niceness, and overmuch curiosity, the ignorant with their
rudeness and indisciplinable barbarism, the old with their superstitions, the
young with their sports and follies, would minister matter to them. That some
with troubled spirits, would seek to them for comfort, whom they cannot choose
but pity: that others of troublesome natures, would draw them into quarrels,
and partaking of factions, so that all their wits and knowledge, should scant
keep them from brawles. That the greater their talent is, the more shall be
their burden; the greater their graces be, the greater shall be their crosses.
In which matters and many other, the worst being cast beforehand, noting shall
come strange unto them, no not if the heaven should fall on them, Horat. lib.
3. Carmin. ode. 3.
as the Poet Horace speaks. I do not recite these troubles, to fright men
from accepting of any pastoral charge, Matthew. 9.38.
(I do rather make my prayer to the Lord of the harvest, to thrust out
laborers into his harvest) but to remember my self, and others, to prepare
them selves by precedent speculation, to burdens of this weight, and to call
to God to enrich them, with graces fit for this calling. But ceasing in this
matter, I come to the last note which my text does offer to me.

Preach thou that preaching which I command thee.
18 Or do thou proclaim against it, that proclamation which I speak unto
thee. He is sent as an Ambassador; but such are his aduertisements, and
instructions from his Lord, that he may not vary from them. His commission is
not general, to take counsel e re nata, or ^rbitrarily, as when the Roman
Consuls had power without limitation, Tullius pro Milone.
vt videant ne Respublica quid detrimenti capiat. He must be but as a channel,
or conduit pipe, to convey that along to Niniue, which he received from his
master. All the Prophets were so tied, this only comes from them, Thus or
thus says the Lord. Yea Balaam that false Prophet, Number. 22.1^.
had catched this by the end, If Balac would give me his house full of silver
and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God, to do less or more.
Saint Paul had learned this lesson, as the first in all his book. He shows
it in nothing more plainly, then in the case of the Sacrament. 1. Cor. 11.23
I received from the Lord, that which I also have delivered unto you. Gal. 1.8.
So in the first to the Galathians, If an Angel from heaven preach unto you
otherwise, then that which we have preached unto you (he had called himself
before an Apostle from Jesus Christ) let him be accursed. 1.
It is a rule inuariable, that in cases of salvation, we look to God the
oracle of wisdom and truth; not to our own inventions, or to confirm our
doctrine, from this or that of our own brain: but if we have our warrant from
the old or the new Testament, Orig lib. 3. in Epistol. ad Roman.
then we may safely speak it. Origene proposes Saint Paul for an example in
this case. Paul (says he) as his custom is, will affirm that which he
teaches, out of the holy Scriptures, and he does give an example to the
Doctors of the Church, that they should produce those things which they
speak to the people, Non proprijs praesumpta sententijs sed diuinis munita
testimonijs.
not grounded upon their own opinions, but strengthened with the testimonies
of God. For if he so great and such an Apostle, did not think that the
authority of his words might suffice, unless he did know that those things
were written in the law and the Prophets which he said, how much more should we
little ones observe this, that when we teach, we utter not our own but the
meanings of the holy Ghost?

19 If the teachers and preachers of the Antichristian faith, had kept this for
a law, there had never so absurd and filthy points of doctrine been taught to
their people, visions, and revelations, and messages from the dead, dreams,
customs, and such follies as are besides the word, Purgatory, and limbus
Patrum, pilgrimages unto Relics, and Transubstantiation of the bread into
Christ's body, being contrary to the Scriptures, and many other things of this
quality, the later ever adding to the invention of the former, such a Canon or
such a ceremony. These men are bold, beyond the authority which was committed
to them, for theirs was but as this of Jonas, thou must preach to them that
preaching which I shall show unto thee. Their charge was but as Timothies was,
and Paul's words to Timothy were, O Timothy keep thy charge. 1. Tim. 6.20.
Keep and hold fast that, which by the Scriptures is committed to thee from
the Lord, and from me by his direction. And there is not the greatest Minister,
not the most learned or acute, but must observe this rule. Not James, not John,
not Peter, not all the troop of the Apostles, may once vary from this. He who
shall bring other doctrine, let him be accursed by us. He who speaks of
himself, let him be refused by us. Howsoever godly or holy he do pretend
himself, yet if he decline that word which should be his direction, let him be
declined by us. Whosoever shall say otherwise then that which is appointed,
Ignat. Epist. 10. ad Heronem.
says Ignatius, (he means otherwise then God has appointed) although he be
a man of credit, although he fast and keep virginity, although he do
miracles, although he prophecy, let him be thought by thee to be a wolf, who
under a sheep skin, does intend the marring of the sheep. Thus should the
hearers be careful, that they receive no doctrine, but that which is
approved, and the Preachers be advised, that they never teach any thing, but
what God has commanded. Our Barhoisticall separations, and absentments from
the Sacraments, had not crept so far in the land, if this had been well
practiced.

20 I need not give farther exhortation in this place, to retain this as a
ground, in as much as all of us do lay it down as a principle, that the
written word of God, is the only guide to salvation, and that fancies and
traditions, are to be exiled from us. I therefore will here end, desiring the
Almighty that such doctrine as is oftentimes taught unto us from this place,
may bring forth such plenteous fruit, that in this congregation the name of
God may be honored and glorified in great measure, and our souls may be so
strengthened, that they may soundly persevere to everlasting life. To the which
God the Father bring us for his own Son Christ's sake, to both whom and the
holy Spirit be glory evermore.

THE XVII. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 2. Carnal reasons why Jonas might yet have refused to go.
3. But affliction has schooled him: 4. and that not only while it was on him.
5. Affliction works otherwise in the good, 6. and in the bad. 7. A reproof
of the present time. 9. Obedience requires even circumstances to be regarded.
10. God must be obeyed without debating. 11. The greatness of Niniue. 12.
Jonas fears not that he is alone. 14. A great auditorie gives more courage
to a wise Preacher. 15. Jonas speaks not fearfully. 16. The difference of
opinions for the days of repentance allowed to Niniue. 17. Judgment
concerning Luther in the matter of the Sacrament. 18. The Hebrew tongue is not
to be neglected by a Divine.

Jonah. 3.3.4. So Jonah arose and went unto Niniue, according to the word of
the Lord: Now Niniue was a great and excellent city of three days journey.
And Jonah began to enter into the city a days journey, and he cried and said,
Yet forty days and Niniue shall be overthrown.


THe Prophet Jonas, who should have gone in the business of his master, but
upon some supposals had no mind unto it, Psalm. 78.58.
and therefore starting aside like a broken bow, was well beaten for his
labor, has now a second time his commission drawn, and his instructions
given him, to go as an Ambassador from the Almighty king of heaven, to a
great Prince upon earth. The message which he brings, is of more fearful
quality, then if all the Princes adjoining, had sent him their defiance by
their Heralds, that they would immediately invade him, with fire and sword, and
irreconcilable hatred. For he might have made some shift against all their
powers; and standing upon his guard in the defensive part, he might have
repelled them, with such multitude of people, as were under his government,
and a city so fortified as his was at that time. Or if he and his people, must
needs end their days, by the outrage of their enemy, who would be much
encouraged by prosperity and desired success; yet that might be his comfort,
which is the last comfort in death, to men in his case, that he went not away
unrevenged, but he had rid some of those who came to rid him, and slain
some of the murderers, before that his last breath, was yielded up to nature.
But there can be no such reuengement taken upon him who sends this: the King
of Niniue must suffer all and do nothing.

2 Now here it may be expected, that the man sent on this errand, might yet
pick some occasion, and slip his neck out of collar, that he might not
perform this business. It might have frighted this weak man, to go to a
king, and to a barbarous king, proud, and hawtie by nature, apt enough to
revile the poor preacher, that should be sent; yea ready enough to blaspheme
his Lord and master himself, saying who is this God, or what have I to do
with him? Who knew whether he should ever return alive, for Ambassadors have
been slain, by perfidious and fedifragous, and barbarous Princes, clean
contrary to the law of nature and of nations. Or what if his body should be
served of that sort, as the beards and garments of the messengers, 2. Sam. 10.4.
which David sent to Hanun king of Ammon, were, by mangling in the face, or
cutting off some arm or leg, that as a maimed criple he might bear it to
his grave? Or it might be imagined, that he who once before had failed so
grossly, might now since the ice was broken, still hold on in his course, and
come to have a facility in running away. For it is a great matter, to have
once ouer-slipped the bonds of our duty, and to have cracked the conscience,
which cannot so easily be soudered again. But the event is otherwise; and
without peraduentures, our Prophet performs this charge. He thinks it
enough that he has broken once, and now he will not be hired to do so again.
He goes without delay, and speaks very liberally, that which is enjoined
him. So that now in the stead of a stubburne-minded man, you are to expect an
obedient servant. He arises as he is bid, he cries as he is bid, what will
you have more? And this is it, which my text at this time imposes on me, and
for the more ready opening, may not amiss be divided into these And Jonas
arose and went unto Secondly the greatness of the city, Now Niniue was a
great and excellent city of three days journey, and he went a days journey
for that intends so much. And thirdly, the preaching which he uttered, or
Sermon which he made, Yet forty days and Niniue shall be destroyed. While I
speak of these three, the Spirit of God give me his holy assistaunce, and you
your gentle patience. To say therefore to the first.

The obedience of Jonah.
3 It is a matter of great force, to make us proficients in the school of God,
to have the rod going as well as the tongue, some discipline and some
doctrine. For whereas we should be wantons, and hearkening to toys, yea first
neglect that, which should be taught unto us, and after contemn the teacher
himself, (for that is the fruit of security and impunitie) we by no killing
severity, but by a gentle remembrance, are brought to like that, which we
should learn of all things, that is to say, patience and faith, and to love
him who teaches. It is good for me says David, that I have been afflicted,
for now I may learn thy statutes. Psalm. 119.71.
And, before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now I keep thy word. 67.
Isa. 26.9
So by the Prophet Esaias, seeing thy judgments are in the earth, the
inhabitants of the world shall learn righteousness. When the men of Ai, had
slain but six and thirty of the Israelites, Joshua. 7.5.6.
it made Iosuah and the Elders to look the more about them, so that Iosuah
rent his clothes, and fell upon the ground, and cried earnestly unto God, and
with a more settled will, took punishment upon Achan, and made away the
Anathema. The Israelites came together, to take order for the injury offered
to the Leuite, Iudic. 20.1.
who had his wife so abused beyond common humanity. The cause of the meeting of
the twelve tribes against one, was good; but the manner of there handling of it,
was not pleasing unto the Lord; for fury and indignation that any man should
stand against them, did move them as much as justice; and they bore themselves
the brauer, on the multitude which was with them; which made the Lord yield
them over for two days to the enemy, so that first two and twenty thousand,
and afterward eighteen thousand of their strong men were slain. But when they
came weeping with one consent to the Lord, and fasted and offered offerings,
the humbling of themselves was rewarded with a victory, a great victory over
their enemies. So their soul was the better, and they had what they desired.
Our Prophet has his share, in this good arising from affliction, who of a
rebellious person, and one of-ward from his duty, is rectified and made
orderly, so that now in steed of going, he is ready to run, he thinks the
better of himself, that he may be used in such business. And carrying in his
memory, what shrewd stripes he had borne, although he were now freed from them,
2. Pet. 2.22.
he turns not to his vomit, but indeed he will amend, and not continue as
before.

4 The manner of the world is, that while the smart is upon men, they are
passing obseruant, and obsequious to the full; but when the storm is blown
over, they will to their old play again. It is a note of Xenophons, that when
mariners at sea, stand in fear of a tempest, or know that they must fight,
with some enemy who is to invade them, they not only do such things, as are
commanded them, but stand silent and carefully expect, what shall be imposed
on them, like dauncers who wait when their time shall be to strike in. But
otherwise says Xenophon, Xenophon Memorabil. lib. 3.
when they are afraid of nothing, they do nothing right, but are most
ungoverned men. In the greatest part of the world, we see this humor hold in
matters of importance. Plin. lib. 7. Epistol.
The younger Pliny could say, that when we are in extremity of sickness, we
are devout, and far from the affections of avarice and ambition (if he had
been a Christian, he would have said, that we had been mortified, and very much
sequestered from the world and worldly things) but when we grow to health
again, we forget those meditations. He concludes in that place, that when we
are well, we should persevere to be such, as we profess that we would be, so
long as we are sick. It were to be wished, that our age would look better to
this, that what we vow in our weakness, might be performed in our strength,
and what we have in our speech, when we are most dejected, may in deed be in
us, when we are erected again. But it is otherwise, and we bear our selves in
such sort, as if the recovering of our bodies, were the putting off of our
minds, and our gayning in the one, were a mere loss in the other. Upon such
is Gods care and labor ill bestowed, that they be not bettered by it. Yet our
Jonas in this place, does make a sounder benefit, of that which he has
suffered. He who in the whales belly, being compassed with the pangs and
anguishes of death, had groned for his sins, and acknowledged his errors,
and vowed many good things, if he ever might get out, does not straight upon
his parting with his keeper, and his prison, forget what he had said, but
imagining that his God would require an accomplishment, does fit himself to
that which should be required of him. In his suffering and enduring of such
smarting tribulation, vt in palaestra crucis, as in a place of practicing to
play feats of actiuity, he has profited and grown better. A happy time, that
so he suffered: a happy man who was so righted.

5 This is the good which arises from affliction, when it is put on him, who
has grace to bear it: he looks up to God, and yields himself with
patience: he knows that it is his burden, and he must sustain it: he
acknowledges that all is deserved, and thinks that he is well dealt with, in
that he has felt no more: but for that which is to come, he is the most
vigilant man alive, to amend what is amiss; with diligent assiduity to
recompense his negligence, and to make good whatsoever was omitted. So that
those things which seemed to another, exceedingly to hurt him, have helped him
exceedingly, by teaching him and reforming him. Plutarch. de animi
tranquillitate.
As the Be, according to Plutarkes speech, does suck out honey from the
Thyme, a most hard and dry herb, so the faithful minded man, sucketh
knowledge and obedience, from the bitter potion of adversity, and the cross,
and turns all to the best. That slurrying which was used toward him, to
scour him and rub him, has made him shine the brighter. The weight which was
on him, being like as if it had been on a good Palm tree, has made him grow
the faster. The hammer which has beaten him, has made him the broader,
Sarisburiens. de nugis Curialium. lib. 8.23.
and much enlarged him. In incude and in malleo dilatasti me: Thou have made me
broader on the anuill and with the hammer. Although it be with the hammer, yet
dilatasti me, thou have made me grow the vvider: And then when once he shows
himself in his kind (as he who in former times, was kept from the right
course, by affection, or idleness, or forgetfulness) he presses on to the
mark, and shaking off all that hinders, with violence and great vehemence,
he urges as for his soul. The fire which has been suppressed, flies forth
with the greater force. If a watercourse has been stopped, when it shall find
a passage, it comes with a more mighty stream. Homer. Iliad. 20. Act. 9.1.
Achilles as a man of metal, fought not the worse, but with a great deal
more egernesse, when he had layen so long idle in the Grecian army. It was
long ere Paul was called, but as if he would redeem the time, which he had
lost, he bestirreth him, 2. Cor. 6.4.
and lays about him, as a champion indefatigable. Now there is nothing, which
does more quicken this spirit of regaining, and recovering that which is lost,
and omitted, then the spur of affliction. The remembrance of whose pricking,
does keep the soul from drowsinesse, and from sleeping forgetfulness, and
makes it busy, to procure the good will of God, lest a worse thing fall upon
it.

6 But as this rule holds in him, of whom it may be said truly, that he is
sound at the bottom, and there is in him no evil or froward heart to fall
away from the living God, Hebr. 3.12. Chrysostom. in Johan. Homilia. 59.
that nothing so prepares his heart to wisdom as calamity and temptation
and affliction, as Saint Chrysostom supposes; so in him which is putrified,
and rotten at the root, vexation and the cross has contrary effect: for he
falls to desperation, and hatred of the Lord, unto hardness of heart, and
farther disobedience. Either wilfully with Pharao, Exodus 7.14.
he will try what God can do (yea and when he beholds it, yet he will scant
believe it) or wounded with indignation, he languisheth away, dissoluing as the
ice which melts in the sunshine, or vanishing like a vapor. The wicked are
the worse, when they are under the ferular, and either do rage with fury, or
else do sink with fainting. Hence they are likened to the chafe, Psalm. 1.4.
which is whiffed away with the wind, but the righteous are compared to good
corn, which remains and abides. So the wicked are but as dross, which is
burned and consumed, but the faithful are as the gold, which is made the
brighter for melting. It is no ill comparison, to compare them both to iron,
but such as is of different sorts and qualities. Suppose one kind to be heated
in the forge, but the other to be in the substance and body of the anuill: the
hammer does strike them both, but the anuill is made the harder, and moves
not to any form, whereas the other for the time is made the softer, and is
framed and fashioned to that which the workman will. The faithful like a
twigge, will rather bend then break: the ungodly breaks and bends not.
Hereupon without any kind of stowping or seeking to the Lord, the wicked does
seek devises, how he may shake off the evil, which he feels hanging on him;
and if he could tell how to do it, in despite of God, he would with strong hand
ouerbeare him. All the friends which may be made: all the money that can be
gotten: no spare to ride or run: the Physician for his advise: the Lawyer for
his counsel (which are good helps, if they be used well) and if this serve not
the turn, no sorceresse shall escape free, nor witch shall be unsought; if it
will not come from heaven, it shall be fetched from hell; if it will not be had
in Gods name, it shall be had in a worse. Thus evil is tied to evil, and
sin is heaped upon sin: the rod which should have bettered, has made a
great deal badder: and by this the wrath of the Lord is more and more
provoked, and the reporbate at the last, is swallowed up with everlasting
destruction. When he sees that all his evil means do fail him, either dying
he rages hotely, or pensiuely droopeth till he dye. Vnumquodque recipitu^
modum secundum recipientis.
This rule then is very true, that every thing is received, according to the
quality, of that which does receive; the evil man afflicted is not amended by
it; but with our Prophet it is otherwise; God does but put up his finger, and
he is ready to run: no sticking nor no standing: he has paid well for his
learning, he will no more of those bargains.

7 In handling this argument, of the diverse effects of the cross, in diverse
sorts of men, when I think upon our selves, I cannot choose but marvel, of
what metal we are made. For to judge that this assembly, are not lovers of
God, and again beloved by God, were as I suppose a presumptuous and
uncharitable, and unchristian sin; and far be it from me, to have the least
thought of it. I am rather induced to think, that every one here belongs to
Gods election; for it stands much with reason, that grace should have deep
root in that people, who so early before daylight, come together with
devotion, to hear what the Lord does say concerning all of them. And God
increase this affection in us all unto the end. Yet when I look farther, I see
that all is not well. He is blind who now beholds not, that God is angry with
us. The continuance of his punishment, does testify that his wrath is in no
sort appeased. I pass by other matters, of a pestilence lately gone, and the
sword yet threatened to us. But behold what a famine he has brought upon our
land, and making it to persevere, yet hitherto does increase it. One year
there has been hunger; the second there was a dearth, and a third which is
this year, there is great cleanness of teeth. The poorer sort do most feel
it: the Lord have mercy on them. So that as in David's days, 2. Sam. 21.1.
there were three dear years together, so we have had already, accompting
that for one wherein we now do live. And see whether that the Lord does not
threaten us much more, by sending such unseasonable weather, and store of rain
among us. Which if we will observe, and compare it with that which is past, we
may say that the course of nature is very much inuerted; our years are turned
vp-side down; our summers are no summers, our haruests are no haruests; our
seed-times are no seed-times. Ammian. Marcellinus lib. 22.
Ammianus Marcellinus does write, concerning the City Alexandria in Egypt,
that for many ages together, scant any one day has been seen, that the Sun
has not shined upon it. We may say to the contrary, that for a great space of
time, scant any day has been seen, that it has not rayned on us. Or if there
have been some few, that have been otherwise, Decembr. Anno. 1596.
their glory and our hope is forthwith ouerturned. And the nights are like the
days: we know not which are the better. It was said in the time of the
Emperor Augustus, Nocte pluit tota, redeunt spectacula mane,
It raineth all night, Virgil. in Epigram.
but in the morning men return to their sports again, the weather was so
fair in the day time, that all returned to their spectacles, or plays, or
went about their business: but with us it is otherwise. Athen Dipnosphist.
lib. 8.7.
Athenaeus tells that Stratonicus a ^esting fellow, did use to say concerning
the mountain Haemus, as often as he was asked of the temperature of the air
there, that for eight months in the year, it was exceeding cold, and for the
other four it was winter. We may speak in such sort of this weather, that in
the daytime it raineth, and in the night it showreth, or powers down, and
that is all the difference.

2. Sam. 21.1.
8 Now, as in the days of David, when the matter was looked into, it was found
that the famine fell upon them, for one sin, and that was for the deed of
Saul and his bloody house, in murdering the Gibeonites, neither could the
land be purged, till blood were paid for with blood; so no man need doubt, but
this hurt is on us for one sin or another, or for a multitude of wickednesses
bound together, for we make no spare of them. Since we know not the particular,
let every man suspect himself, and privately cry to the Lord, it is I who have
offended, and it is my fathers house, 2. Sam. 24.17.
and let us not thrust it, as men do use, from our selves unto other. But who
is he that has altered or changed his ways, although the wrath of God be yet
on us, and his hand be stretched out still? I grieve to speak that which is
truth: who goes not on as he did before, and keeps not his old tenure? Who
yet hangs down his dead: or whose countenance is abated? May we not say with
Saint Bernard, How many do we see humbled, Bernard. Sermon. in Omnis qui fe
exaltat. Quantos videmus humiliatos, sed non humil^t.
and yet they be not humble, stricken but not grieuing at it, dressed indeed by
the Lord, but yet they be not cured. Who leaves that sin which he
frequented? his avarice, or his malice, or his swearing or his pride? what here
I say of our selves, may be spoken of all our land. The sore is far extended,
and the sin is grown as far. Then in general we may ask, whether bribery
in the temporalty, be diminished at all, and detaining of that, which should
serve for a Minister, to feed the peoples souls? or simony in the Clergy, or
usury in the citizen, or oppression in the mighty? Do the pastors any whit
more diligently inform the charge depending on them, or do they shine before
their people in honest conversation, and propose themselves examples of
contemning the world? Do the people with more devotion, or more increased
numbers, come together to solicit, and call on the God of heaven, to be yet
merciful unto them? The manner in all times has been, to do something which
is not common, while the smart has bin upon men; although afterward the badder
sort, do turn again to their wickedness. Chrysostom. in Act. Apostol. Homil 41.
Chrysostom upon the Acts of the Apostles, makes mention of his time, The
year before, says he, did not God strike our whole city? what then? did not
all run to their devotions? Did not whoremongers and wantons, and effeminate
persons forsaking their possessions, and the places where they conuersed,
turn and become religious? But when three days were past, they returned
again to their malice. There the end was amiss, but the beginning was good. I
would that we might begin so: I would hope for a better end. Some extraordinary
thing would well beseem this time; if we would not fast with the Ninevites
(whereof I may have occasion, if God will, to speak hereafter) yet public
prayers are much worth, which coming jointly from whole congregations, will
echo up to the heaven, and pierce the clouds and sky, and as a man may say,
will offer a kind of violence, Matthew. 11.12.
to that God who did make us. It will wring mercy, and wrest loving kindness
from him, for so is his own pleasure. If we do thus, then together with Jonas,
we make use of our afflictions, learning by those things which we suffer,
religion and true holiness, and patience, and obedience, which the Lord loves
more then sacrifice. 1. Sam. 15.22.


9 Thus hitherto having spoken in general of the readiness of our Prophet to
obey, after his grievous punishment, it is not amiss to look on that in
special, which my text does import unto us farther. And that does not only
say that Jonas did arise, and go to Niniue, but adds according to the word of
the Lord. As much as if it were said, that he both took the journey, and
observed all the circumstances, which God proposed to him. This was faithful
performance of his part, to look to every tittle which should be required of
him. These circumstances are they, which make or mar a matter, and the Lord
stands much upon them. To go, and when, and whither: and to speak, and what,
and to whom, and with what manner of spirit. When Moses went to Pharao, Exodus
5.1.
he failed not in any one of these. In the building of the Tabernacle, the
matter, and figure, and number of every thing was prescribed and kept. Moses
was the most careful man that ever lived on earth; therefore he had that
Elogium, or testimony given concerning him, that he was faithful in all Gods
house. Hebr 3.2. ^. Sam. 15 1.
What was it which cost Saul his kingdom, but the failing in these
particulars? He went and fought with Ameleck, and conquered and destroyed; but
not the king, and the cattle; therefore the Lord was offended, with anger
which never was appeased. Saul thought himself to have reason for those
things which he did: but God will be obeyed, and not taught by his potsheards,
nor rectified by his creatures. The Romans in their discipline, would not have
an inferior swerve from the words of his commander, much less to chop speech
for speech with him, or give him reason out of the conceit of his fancy.
Sari^b. de i^ugis Cutia^^um. li. 6.12
When Crassus being on a time General, had written to Magnus Gaius, that he
should send him the bigger of two shipmasts which were in his custody, that
thereof he might make a Ram, which was an Engine used to batter, Gaius knowing
that the lesser was fitter for that purpose, sent him that lesser: but because
he obeyed him no otherwise, Crassus caused him to be beaten with rods most
severely. How much more should our God stand upon his glory, that what he
bids should be done, and his will should be fulfilled according to his word?

10 In which respect, I doubt not but our Jonas now is so wise, as to look to
that word only, and to be obsequious to it, in every the least thing. When he
was bid forthwith to repair to that place, Thucydides Histor. lib. 1.
he does it without delay. When Themistocles being banished from his country,
would needs into Persia, to the great king Artaxerxes, in one year he would not
come into his presence, but spent that time in learning the Persian tongue, that
he might be able personally to speak to that Prince, and tell his tale
himself. Here now is no such doubt made by Jonas, but either he could already
the speech of the Ninevites, or was sufficiently instructed, that he who once
at Babel, made so many tongues of one, Genes. 11.8.
could give his servant so many of those tongues as were fit for his business.
That evidently was showed, some hundreds of years afterward, Act. 2.1.
in the gift powered upon the Apostles. Therefore he stood not upon this, but
presently went his way. Neither does he make scruple of another matter, that
himself was but a stranger, and therefore he should not be believed: that he
was to speak to a king, for the which he was insufficient: that such things as
were necessary, might be denied to him, as his diet and his lodging; but
looking on nothing else, saving Gods commandment, and nakedly upon that, he
betaketh himself to his journey. True faith and true obedience, do not busy
themselves with that, which rests upon the commanders direction. It was a
most commendable rule, of that worthy Paulus Aemilius, Liuius lib. 44.
that his soldiers should take care of three things, and no more. First that
their bodies should be nimble, and such order taken for them, as should be
needful. Secondly that their armor were fit. And thirdly that their mind
should be ready for every thing, which their General should give them in
charge, although it came upon the sudden: but for other matters, they should
not trouble themselves about them, but know that those were cared for, by God
and by their leader. There can be no better precept, even in our Christian
warfare against powers and principalities and every thing that withstandeth,
Ephesians. 6.12.
then to have all things in readiness, which belong to our vocation, and to
respect the voice of Jesus, Hebr. 12.2.
who is the Captain, and finisher of our faith: but not to meddle at all with
his secret counsels, or with casting too many perils. He requires a duty of
us, and that is it which he himself inioyneth; and he will have us in many
cases, to depend upon his providence. This is not always remembered, when we
forbear to speak a necessary truth, fearing to utter it, lest this or that
should come of it. I do not incite men to presumption, or to speak they know
not what, but I urge them to perform that, which is commanded them, with all
singleness of heart, and to discharge a good conscience, by the example of the
Prophet. And so I come to my second part.

The greatness of the City Nineveh.
Jonah. 1.2. Cap. 3.2.
In the first Chapter, it is called that great City, and so in this third
Chapter; and in this verse great to God, for so it is in the Hebrew, which is
expounded to signify as much as excellent; even as in the thirtith of Genesis,
Rahel says of her self, Genes. 30.8.
I have wrastled with my sister, with vvrastlings of God, which yet commonly
is translated, with excellent vvrastlings. Some other more literally say great
to God, because for a very long time, he placed there the seat of the Assyrian
monarchy, and therefore much advanced it in all kind of temporal blessing. Or
else great to God, that is before God in sins, which for the odiousness of
them were ascended up before him. Jonah. 4.11.
In the fourth Chapter it is said, that there were a hundred and twenty
thousand such infants and young ones, that they knew not their right hand from
their left. But here, which is most of all, that it was a City of three days
journey. Which is not to be taken, as if a man riding apace, could but cross
it in three days, from the wall of the one side, to the wall of the other, as
from an Eastgate, to a West-gate, but that the circuit was such, as by the
compass of the wall in the outward circumference, a man traveling on foot,
might by reasonable iourneyes, be well three days in compassing it. (And that
it was the greatest custom of those Eastern countries, Genes. 18.4. Matthew.
4.23. Cap. 28.19.
to journey on foot, may be very well collected, by washing of their feet so
commonly after iourneyes, and by the travels on foot, of Christ and his
Apostles.) Now by such testimonies, as we do manifestly gather from profane
writers, this is found to be so. There be that do cite some thing to this
purpose, Tremel. and Iunius in Ionae. 3. Diodorus lib. 2. Iunius vt supra.
out of Herodotus, but that is not so plain. But Diodorus Siculus in his
second book (as Stephanus does reckon them) speaks fully to this point. And
in the times of Herodotus, and Diodorus, the rudera, the ruins and desolations
of Niniue stood, so that if they had written falsely, common men might have
controlled them. Diodorus then says, that this city had walls of marvelous
breadth, so that carts might not only go, but very well meet upon them: that
it had fifteen hundred towers, which argues a great bigness: and that the
walls being four ways set, although not equally square, had no less in the
compass of the outside, then four hundred and fourscore furlongs. Where if
we account after eight furlongs to the mile, all amounts to threescore miles,
and not only to eight and forty, as the Geneua note in the English Bible has
upon the first Chapter. So then threescore miles in circuit, may be reckened
for three days journey, twenty miles to a day, which is more then soldiers
march; and for ordinary footmen, in the winter it is harder, in the summer it
is easier. And this I take to be the true meaning of the Prophet, and not only
as some would have it (which may be true also) that it was full three days
labor, to go through every lane, or broad street in the City.

12 When I opened the first verses of this prophecy, speaking out of this
place, I more fully handled this argument, and showed that in old time, the
Eastern Cities were very huge, as for example sake, Aristot. Politicorum. li.
3.
Babylon, which Aristotle reports to be so great, as that when one part
thereof, was taken by an enemy, the the other part heard not not of it, in
three whole days together. Moreover that the city stood on a river, and
therefore had store of water; Herodot. li. 1.
and that the fertility of the soil was such, that Herodotus on his knowledge,
speaks it in his first book, that the seed thereabout sowed, did return two
or three hundred fold, so many bushels for one. The water then being
plentifully there, and the soil answering to it, to yield food for such a
multitude, and the place being the royal city of the Assyrian Monarchy, and
therefore built with all magnificence, for the honor of the kingdom; yea the
profane writers confirming it; but that which is most of all, the Spirit of God
affirming it, we may very well take Niniue, for an excellent and great city,
such a one as I suppose, that neither the old world, nor the new world had any
like unto it. Not Babylon, not Jerusalem, not Rome with her seven hills, not
Quinzay in the East, nor Mexico in the West, not Millaine as it is, nor
Antwerpe as it was, not Paris in her late glory, nor Venice in her now beauty.
Which since the holy Scripture has described so plainly, we must needs labor
to find some thing in it, which may be applied to our learning. It is worth the
thinking on, that the Prophet is not discouraged to go to such a place: a
single one to so many, a sole man to such a city. Who would not have thought,
that himself should there have been contemptible? and derided for the paucity
of his attendants? not a fellow to bear him company? not a boy to do him
service? Appian in his book of the wars of the Romans with Mithridates,
Appian. de bellis Mithridaticis.
tells how Tigranes iested, when he saw the small number of soldiers, which
the Romans sent against him: he must needs bestow one scoff on them:
Sil^gaeti sunt ^i, multi sunt: quod si hosts perpauci.
What are these men says he, I think they come as Ambassadors: but then they
be too many: or if they come as soldiers, alas they be too few. It is likely
that if he had seen this Ambassador, and his train to be none, and
peradventure his apparel, to be base and disgraceful, he would not have left
at one speech, but doubled his wit upon him.

13 Our man stands not at this: neither fears he his life among them,
although their number were so great that with ease they might have devoured
him, and every one of them taken so little, that it needed not offend them. His
faith and his resolute mind now put him through thick and thin: his confidence
in his master, makes him contemn the greatness of a world. He knows that
if God be on his side, Roman. 8.31. 1. Ioh. 5*4.
what matter is it who be against him? All that is borne of God, says S. John
in his first Epistle, overcomes the world, and so does that also which is
borne out by God. Psalm. 3.6.
I will not be afraid says David, for ten thousand of the people, that should
be set me round about. Then what the Ninevites should think of him, or how the
king would frown upon him, he reckeneth not to dispute; they were all in the
hands of his master, and so himself was also, therefore he only strove, how
to please him, and not any other man. And this is a good resolution, more to
think on one God, and retaining of his favor, then of all the world besides.
His love is inco^parably greater, then the love of Niniue, and ten Niniues, yea
of all the frame of creatures. For instruction herein, Chrysostom. Homil. 3.
super Elatum est cor Oziae.
Chrysostom directs us to chariot driuers, of whom he speaks in this
manner: Do thou not see the driuers of chariots, who passing swiftly by all
the part of the race, where the whole city sits, to behold the coursing of
the horses, do there strive to ouerturne the chariots of them whith whom they
contend, where they behold the Emperor sitting, and do say that the eye of him
alone, is more worthy to trust unto, the^ the faces of so many me^? But when
thou see the very king of Angels, to sit as the judge and rewarder of thy
striving, passing by him thou fliest to the eyes of thy fellow-seruants,
seeking to please them. We should imitate these chariot-riders, preferring Gods
liking, and love, before a many of Ninevites. For put them in the balance, and
he ouer-weigheth them all.

14 His settled mind at this time, remembers this well enough, and therefore
fears not this mighty city: Nay on the contrary side, if his heart were
upright, as it should be (and I think that at this time so it was) the
greatness of the company to which he was to be sent, should give him larger
hope, and yield him greater spirits: for if God did bless his labor, here was
good indeed to be done: to angle where was such store, to speak where was
such an auditory. For by this means, how many thousands might he win to the
Lord, and what joy might he conceive, that his mouth should be the instrument,
to win their souls from destruction. If God be glorified in gaining one, how
is he honored in gaining many? If men labor, and spend themselves to obtain
a little, what should they do for much? Then the Prophet need not fear, but
take it as a mercy of his God shed upon him, that he must go to great Niniue.
For I doubt not but he was furnished with the powerful grace of the Spirit,
that he needed not fear himself, or distrust his own ability. And indeed I
am of that mind, that when a man is provided with sufficient meditation, and
earnest prayer to God, to speak to a congregation, his heart is more with
child, and his vigor is more kindled, and his spirits are more quickened, when
he sees a great assembly, attentive and intelligent, so that nothing may fall
to the ground. Act. 2 41.
I doubt not but this was the very case of S. Peter; his heart did yearne in
his belly, and his bowels were more dilated, when he saw so many hearing with
reverence and respect, as that three thousand of them, might be catched at one
time. And it is mine opinion (although perhaps it be but mine) that the Savior
of the world, according to those different inclinations, which his manhood
brought unto him, did rouse himself the more, and did pierce the hearts of his
hearers, with more patheticall speech, when he saw such troops come about him,
that he was forced to go to a mountain, Matthew. 5.1. Matthew. 9.36. (...). Quint.
lib. 1.2.
or betake him to a ship, to teach so many of them. He who was moved in his
bowels, with compassion, to see so many as sheep without a shepherd, may be
more moved, in and with his tongue, to satisfy such a multitude. Quintilian
says of a schoole-maister (imagine that he means a good one, such a one as
is well prepared to teach) that since a good Lecture is not like a supper,
which being provided for a set number will serve no more, but as the sunshine,
which may satisfy all without scanting, come as many as will; that he is very
much encouraged, when he reads to many, and does use such voice and gesture,
as if he should use to one, a man would think that he were mad. Surely this
is the case of the faithful steward of Christ, who aims only at the
honoring and glorifying of his master, and does not mean to set himself at
sale, with vain glory (for there God oftentimes, does send a curse, in matter,
or voice, or memory, or one thing or another, besides those common
infirmities, which are incident to Gods servants) he is cheered, that the Lord
is pleased to make his tongue, the conduite to convey grace to so many. It is
likely that our Jonas at this time was so well persuaded, and therefore it is
said here so precisely, that the city was so great and huge a city, straight
after mention made of his willingness and obedience.

15 Well, Hieron. in Ion. 3.
be it as it is, he enters this great city a days journey, it is said: This
is, as Hierome cites the opinion of some men, he passed so among them, that he
warned and instructed the third part of the city, so much as a man might
compass, in the journey of a day. And there he began to cry: he crept not in
as heretics do, nor whispered like to our Jesuits, who by secret reconciling,
draw men from God and their Prince, and all true love to their country: not as
a fearful coward, who dare not show his head, for fear lest he should be
taken, but as one of the Lords Prophets, he delivers his message in open
streets and the market. Gods servants have not feared, to speak even to the
faces of kings and cruel tyrants. Christ Jesus taught in the Temple, and in
the midst of Jerusalem, and so did his Apostles. Neither may that be said to
be, by a secret or private conference, but as our Jonas here, so Christ in the
seventh Chapter of Saint John, Ioh. 7.28.
did stand and cry in the Temple. They were on sleep in Niniue, through
prosperity and security, and therefore that they might be awaked, they had
need of one to cry. The more they were lulled in evil, the more noise must
be made to rowze them out of evil. He who should have spoken mildly, and but
softly and quietly there, might have been passed by of all men: which was the
estate of Christendom, when Luther came into the world, and therefore he spoke
with a stirring spirit, of fortitude and courage, God sending a sharp surgeon,
to sores which were so vlcerated. Our Prophet is in this predicament of
vehemence and earnestness, which appears by all particulars, as first that
he began so soon to tell his message; he goes not about the city, nor gazeth
to see the buildings, or with curiosity to observe the streets, or houses, or
palaces, or Temples, but he straight way falls to his work: secondly he
thundreth with voice lift up, and speaks out that every one may take notice;
but thirdly, which is most of all, he utters that which biteth. The matter is
a great deal more piercing, then the manner. Yet forty days and Nineveh shall
be destroyed. But because this is the third maine note, which I culled out of
my text, give me leave now to come to it.

The Sermon of Jonah.
(...). Orig Hom. 6. in Ezech. Athanas in Synops. nomine Jonas. Et libro de
passione and cruce Domini. Hier. in Ionae. 3. (...)
yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed. The Septuagint translate it,
yet three days and no more; which caused the expositours of the Greeks, who
only followed the Septuagint, to use no other number. So Origin upon
Ezechiel, has three days. So Athanasius in his Synopsis, and in his book, De
passione and de cruce Domini. Hierome upon this place, wondreth how the
Septuagint could so much ouer-see themselves, since there is no similitude of
sillables, words, or accents in the Hebrew, between Shalosh and Arbagnim,
whereof the one does signify three, and the other forty. Saint Austen although
in most things he be a follower of the Septuagint, yet as I suppose being put
in mind by the translation of Hierome (which about that time began to be
published) that in the original it was forty, and thereby being put to a push
whether to choose, Aug de ciuitate Dei. lib. 18.44.
in his books De ciuitate Dei, does modestly like of that which is in the
Hebrew fountain; but being desirous withal, to retain that which was
received from the Septuagint, (under a mystical figure, applied to Christ
Jesus, who was three days in the grave) has that excellent wit of his, Viues
in August. de ciu. Dei. 18.44.
as Lodouicus Viues writing upon that place speaks, so troubled and so
entangled, that he knows not how to clear it. Thus the greatest are but men,
and every man has his errors. But as it falls out that judges who are too
facile to qualify two opinions, Justin. Martyr. Dialogo contra Tryphonem.
would gladly say as both have said, and yet do say like neither, so I find
that Justinius Martyr, will neither have three nor forty, and yet both three
and forty, yet forty three days says he.

17 This worthy man as it seems, would have a way by himself; but by
moderating two sides, he has drawn them both upon him. In which his case may
not unfitly be compared to that of Martin Luther which is so famous. For he
knowing that the Papists in the matter of the Sacrament, held a
Transubstantiation, as the Septuagint hold three in Jonas, (both of these
opinions, both concerning three and the transubstantiating) having continued a
long time, but not from the beginning) and that Zuinglius held that the bread
remained after Consecration, but yet representing the body of Christ (which
agrees with the Scripture, as forty here does with the Hebrew,) would needs
like to Justinius Martyr, bring both these sides after a sort together, that
there should be bread with Zuinglius, and the body too with the Romanists, not
by turning the bread into Christ's body, but by a Consubstantiation, or joining
each with other. And in holding this opinion, being driven to those
extremities, In pane, Cum pane, Sub pane.
as to maintain that the flesh of Christ is in the bread, and with the bread,
and under the bread, yea every where in the earth, and air, and heaven, he
drew both sides upon him, and is oppugned by both, with bitterness and great
egernesse. Whereout I do make this use, that Gods acts are miraculous, and his
ordinances wonderful, when he suffers the best to fall, that none in this
world may be perfect, but only the Godhead which is immaculate and undefiled,
and so by this means all glory may be his. Moses shall have his spots,
although in another kind; Number. 11.11. Galat. 2.11.
and Peter shall deserve to be reproved by Paul. So many Martyrs and Fathers
in the old and Primitive Church, had their spots and noted spots, and yet were
Gods noble servants. In like sort that renowned man, the great instrument of
the Lords glory, who so cleared that point of justification, the very ground
of salvation, against all the Rabbines and schoolmen, and so purged out other
superstitions, that all Europe at this day, does shine the brighter for him,
(and therefore as his memory shall be blessed to the end, in despite of all
that gainsay it, so his soul does rest with the Highest) had his lapsum
humanum, his error incident to a man, that we might evermore remember that he
was a man, although an excellent man, and not more dote upon him, then we
should upon a creature. Ministri Heidelbergenses in Actis colloquij Mulbrunens.
Genebrard. Chronolog. lib. 4.
Yet there wants not good testimony, that himself before he died, did
dislike that opinion, and thought that he had gone too far. I have named
this, by occasion of that in Justinius Martyr, in whom that about three and
forty days, was an error, although I put a great difference between the
mistaking of a number, and this higher point of religion.

18 But to prevent in our selves the like slips, which befell to them writing
concerning Jonas, the best and readiest way is to have recourse to the
wel-springs, wherein the word was written, which Saint Austen himself does
confess, August. de doctr. Chr. lib. 2.11. Idem Epist. 131.
although he were nothing seen in the Hebrew, and but little in the Greek. In
which toungs, the greater knowledge is the greater gift of God, which although
he do not grant in abundant sort to all, (as to one he gives this thing, to
another that, to the end that all may stand in need one of another) yet it is
good for a Divine, to know something in them, that when great doubts arise, he
be not quite to seek, albeit he be not so well furnished, as to read a
Lecture of a tongue in an University. In that little whereof I have taken
notice, which I confess is not much, I do find in some of the Ancient,
ouersights which are greater then ordinary, for want of understanding in the
original of the Hebrew; and this has fallen out in the greatest
controversies. I will name one for all, but such a one, as then the which
nothing is more evident, nothing is more material. He who has read the old
Councels, or the Ecclesiastical story, or the writings of such Fathers, as
succeeded the time of Constantine, within one or two hundred years, may
sufficiently see and surfeit, how Arius and his company oppugned the Godhead of
Christ, and his equality with his Father. What more maine question was there
ever concerning the grounds of Christianity, or what could possibly strike
deeper? In the reading of those forenamed writers, we find that at the first
Athanasius was the only man, for writing and disputing, to oppugn them; as
was evident in the Nicene Council, and otherwise afterward. And he suffered so
much for his labor, that he well deserved to be called a ringleader, and
bel-wether of the flock, a pillar of the faith, that invincible Athanasius, a
champion for Christ Jesus, and whatsoever else is honorable. Yet it is marvel
to see, how in all his disputations he is troubled with that place, in the
eighth chapter of the Proverbs, Prou. 8.22.
where wisdom says of her self, (which he cannot choose but interpret to be
the Son of God) the Lord made me, or created me the beginning of his ways,
whereout the Arrians urged, that Jesus Christ in the Godhead was made or
created, and consequently was a creature, and so of another substance. And this
they had from the Septuagint, who translated it in that manner. (...). Athanas.
in Decretis Nicenae synodi.
The Lord made me, or the Lord created me. It is strange to see, how in answer
of that place, the good Father is driven, as elsewhere, so in Decretis Nicenae
synodi, to expound and distinguish this creature, and to show how Gods Son in
the Deity may be so called. Truth it is that he holds the ground, as an
Orthodoxe Catholic man, but he is put to hard shifts. Now if his skill had
been such, as to have repaired to the Hebrew text, the matter had been soon
answered, and he had found that, which Hierome quickly afterward did discover,
that it is there in the place, Dominus possedit me, or Dominus acquisiuit me,
as Arias Montanus has it, the Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way,
(...) Vide Schindler. Hebr. Instit. lib. 2. in Sexto ordine verborum.
which makes not for the Arrian. Jehovah Canani, which does not come of Canan,
nidificare, for then the former Nun, should have Daghes in the middle; but of
Canah, acquirere, possidere, with the Affixe in the end. And so it had been
better translated by (...), some of whose tenses do signify possideo, then by
(...) creo. And this being so answered to the enemy, had razed the greatest
fort, wherein he trusted most. Let this place out of the Proverbs, in so
renowned a man as Athanasius was, and the other out of Jonas, which was
mistaken by so many, show what a help it is, to be able upon occasion, to
look to the original: where finding as we do; Yet forty days and Niniue
shall be destroyed, I will not farther dispute it. But having now made this way
to the doctrine of the place, I do leave that to be touched, as God shall give
grace hereafter. In the mean time let us pray to him so to open our hearts,
that we may make true use of the rods of our afflictions, and with patience
bear his cross, with trembling respect his judgments, and with obedience
work his will, that his justice be not enforced to send forth against us, a
sentence of destruction, as it did against Niniue. From the which the Father
save us, for his own Son Christ his sake, to both whom and his holy Spirit,
be honor for evermore.

THE XVIII. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 1. How the Sermon of Jonas might be short and yet
effectual. 4. Numbers are observed in Divinity, 5. and may be abused. 7. How
they may be rightly used. 8. Gods mercy in forbearing sinners. 11 Sin is
forcible to draw down vengeance. 14. It is the more fearful, that they are
not told how they are like to perish. 15. God has many ways to destroy. 16.
No place is invincible.

Jonah. 3*4. Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown.


HE little conceiueth the purpose of this Prophecy, who sees not that Gods
drift from the beginning of it was, to have Jonas go and preach to the
Ninevites. You have seen what work he has had, to bring this business
about. The sea and air have been troubled; the mariners much disquieted; Jonas
himself so vexed, that he has spent half this book, to tell what did befall
him, because he did not preach. But at last, after all this, he is come to it;
and therefore we may now very well expect a long Sermon and a large. Elephanti
partu^.
For like to the young of an Elephant, it has been long in breeding: therefore
it may be great. Else it may be said, that we stay long for a little: and he
came far for a small message: and a great head to a child's body: and a Preface
very tedious, to a tale which is quickly ended. But God tyeth not himself to
the rules of Rhetoric, so to fit the fancies of men, but as in matter he is
evermore the same, to speak nothing but truth, so in manner he is oft-times
different, now longer and then shorter, now sharper and then sweeter. But the
quality of his shortest speech, does recompense want of quantity, for much is
in a little, and in few things there are many things. Yet if that which is
short be repeated many times, the frequent repetition does also make that
large; as that Psalm is no small one which has reiterated in each verse,
Psalm. 136.1.
for his mercy endures for ever. Then if our Prophet being in Niniue, and
going from one street to another, had used in the ends and middle of them, but
these words, Yet forty days and Niniue shall be overthrown, he might first
have spent his day and found himself work enough, and secondly have left much
more amazedness in the people, that he would denounce one thing so frequently
and so confidently, and say no more nor less, and thirdly he might also
fulfill the end of his coming.

2 My text says that he cried, and I read of another crier, who took the
self same course in a city of no less note, although somewhat meaner in
quantity. When the time was come that Jerusalem soon after was to be
destroyed by the Romans, a countreyman while yet there was great peace and
prosperity, Joseph. de bello Iudaic. 7.12.
cried day and night in the street, and sometimes in the Temple: A voice from
the East, a voice from the West, a voice from the four winds, a voice against
Jerusalem and the Temple, a voice against new married men, and against new
married women, a voice against all this people. This was continued by him in the
self same words, saving that sometimes he added, Woe, woe unto Jerusalem. The
man who did this was named Jesus. I doubt not but in this case of Niniue, our
Prophet was a Preacher: and I read of another Preacher, who took the same
course also. Hieron. in 6. ad Galatas
Hierome writes concerning John the Evangelist, that he abode at Ephesus till
he was so old, and f^eble by reason of age, that he could hardly be borne to
Church by his scholars. But being there, and his memory or voice not framing
to his mind, he would say again and again over, and multiply it oftentimes,
Little children love one another, little children love one another. And when his
scholars and auditors were weary, with the continual hearing of these words,
and no other, they asked him the reason of it; who gave them this answer, It
is the commandment of our Lord, and this alone is sufficient, if it be done
as it should. If our Jonas as a Preacher, should like that Preacher John, or
our Jonas as a crier, should like that crier Jesus, have sung the self same
song, and redoubled the self same note, I fear not, but as these men offended
not in the manner, but caused much admiration, so he might have done likewise.

3 But I rather think that this case, was the case of John the Baptist, Matthew.
3.3.
who had both persons in him, a crier in the wilderness, and a Preacher among
the people. Yet when his Sermon is described by Matthew the Evangelist, it is in
as short terms, as this was here at Niniue, 2.
Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Where although the words be
few, yet those were but the knitting up, and brief of a great deal more: for
John sung not one note, but rose, and fell, and varied, as occasion was offered
unto him, as in the midst of the chapter is manifest to the reader. For the
Pharisees had their errand, and the Saduces had their item; Lu. 3.7.12.14
and Luke goes farther yet, the Publicanes had one lesson, and the soldiers
had another, and the people went not free. Yet because the solid substance of
all which John did say, was reduced to that head of repentance, and to inform
them, that the kingdom of grace, and appearance of Messiah, was now to be
seen of them, all his doctrine and preaching is laid down in that brief
sum. So it may be rightly supposed, that this messenger did tell a longer
tale in Niniue, even the narration of himself, to procure more credit to his
words: and the recounting of his punishment, and escaping from the same; but
especially, did inueigh against those noted sins, which were in that great
city, their oppression and their ravening, their tyranny and bloud-shedding,
which they exercised upon those who were under them; their arrog^ncie and
pride, whereunto prosperity did puff them; their avarice and their
wantonness, but most of all their security growing by their abundance: and
that for these and the like, destruction and a speedy ruin should be their
portion. Yet because the burden of all, was forty days and destroying, all
is closed up in those words. So that it which being folded up, does fill but a
little room, if it be opened and spread, does make a greater show. Caesar's
veni, vidi, vici, contained much matter in it. Luc. 18.13.
The Publicane had but few words, o God be merciful to me a sinner, but they
were more effectual, then the long prayer of the Pharisee. The Paternoster is
but short, August. de haeresibus ad quod vult Deum.
but those heretics called Euchitae, who prayed all their life time, never
said so much in substance, as those few lines have in them. It is the wisdom
of God, and it is the grace of the Scripture, to say much in a little; to be in
show compendious, yet indeed to be large. Johan. 6.10.
In five loves there was food to feed five thousand men, in five words here
is matter to teach many thousands more. The Lord who guided the tongue of Jonas,
to speak them at first, direct my tongue now, to open them at this present.
Then to avoid curiosity, or far fetched speculation, conceive all in these
two points. First the time which here is limited, yet forty days. And
secondly, the sequel which should follow, and Nineveh shall be destroyed. To
speak then to the former of them.

Yet forty days.
4 In opening the Scripture, it is a custom among the ancient, one example
most natural for this place, ^ieron. in Ionae. 3.
Hierome upon this text says, that this number of forty, which is here
allotted to the Ninevites, is very fit for sinners, for fasting and praying,
for sackcloth and tears, all which followed afterward in them. So Moses did
fast full forty days in the mount. Exodus 24 18. 1. Reg. 19*8. Matthew. 4.2.
So Elias flying from Iezabell, was forty days without meat. Christ Jesus the
true Jonas, fasted forty days says Hierome, and left us the inheritance of
fasting in like manner, before that we eat his body. He means the time of
Lent before Easter, at which the Sacrament is by Christians received. He might
also have added, that this number of forty might be well applied to the
overthrow and destruction of a city, since (as Eusebius has it) Jerusalem
was quite razed, Eu^eb. Eccl. Hist. 3.8.
forty years after Christ's death. And to speak a truth in this question, we
find in the Scriptures that sometimes numbers are pointed out for special
things indeed, as the seven fat kine, Genes. 41.26
and the seven lean kine, and the seven ears of corn, to signify seven
plentiful years at the first, and then seven years of famine afterward.
Exodus 28.17.^1.
Twelve precious-stones were set in the breast plate of the Priest, but it is
there expressed, that they were to represent the twelve tribes of Israel, for
whom he was to pray, and to whom he was to give judgment. So in the time of
Iosuah, Ios. 4.3.
the twelve stones set up in the river Jordan, and the other twelve which were
taken thence by them, and pitched in Gilgal, are expressly said in the text,
to note the twelve tribes of Israel.

5 So that in Divinity, wilfully to reject all observation of numbers, is to
deprive our selves of a good measure of knowledge, and to seek to have that
concealed, which God to good fruit and purpose would have to be known. But
there may be an abusing of that which in it self is not evil; when sanctity
shall be attributed, or superstition put in this or that number, or overmuch
curiosity shall be bestowed therein, to make the world believe that to be a
point which is very much material for the sound knowledge of Christianity,
which indeed is nothing else, but an idle speculation of our fantastic
brain, although with show of ground in some thing. Did not those heathenish
people put sanctity in odd numbers, the manners of whom the Poet Virgil
describes in his eighth Eglogue, Virgil. Eglog. 8.
where when they were to use charms for some purposes, he tells that they
made three streakes, and three pictures of a man, and gives that reason for
it, Numero Deus impare gaudet. God delights in an odd number. Did not old
Balaam carry this opinion when going to curse the Israelites, Numer. 23.^ 13.14*
29.
he not only changed his standing, supposing one place to be more luckie, and
another more v^luckie, as gamsters and dicers oftentimes do, thinking that that
may fadge here which elsewhere does not prove, but he must have seven altars,
and then seven other altars, and seven bullockes, and seven rams, as if that
seven were much to the purpose. In case of superstition we need no example more
Vide Polyd. Virgil. de invent. rer. lib. 5 9.
and have their beads for that purpose: three Credoes for such a matter, five
Paternosters for this, ten Aue-maries for that. See whether Christ aimed not at
them, when he speaks of vain repititions, and counter-chaungings of prayers,
Matthew. 6.7.
and adds that they think to be heard for their much babbling. Genebrard.
Chronolog. lib. 4.
Well fare thee Gilbert Genebrard, who do tell us that one Peter an Hermit
of Amboyse, was the first who did invent those beads for Pater-nosters, that
we may know the author, and he may have the praise of that hypocrisy for his
own. But Genebrard thou had this (as thou professest) out of Polydore
Virgil, Polyd. Virg. vt supra.
where thou might have added that, which thy author there adds, that these
beads made now a days not only of wood and amber and coral, but of gold and
silver, Sintque mulieribus instar ornamenti, and hypocritis praecip^i fucos^^
honitatis instrumenti.
are both unto women in steed of an ornament, and to hypocrites in steed of a
special instrument of counterfeit goodness. Thine author did suspect that
there was some hypocrisy in the using of these toys, for the saying over of
that, which you call The Ladies Psalter.* But because it is fit and expedient
that every man should be praised and commended according to the proportion of
his own invention, and no farther, it may much be doubted, lest this Peter
borrowed the ground of that, which is now fathered on himself, Sozom. Hist.
Eccl. lib. 6.2^
from one Paul who was some hundreds of years before him. For Sozomen does
tell of one such, who seemed to dedicate his whole time to prayer, so that
every day he did say three hundred prayers which he offered as a kind of
tribute to God; and because he would not fail in his reckening, he put three
hundred little stones into his lap, and at the end of every prayer he cast
out one, by which means he knew when his tale was up. Thus did superstition
long agone begin to show it self. In our days let a man of mean
consideration look into the Jesus Psalter, and see if there be not there a
vain and fond numbering of that which is to be said. In the Preface of that
book, In Praesat. Psalt. Jesus Anglice impresso. Anno. 1583.
we are given to understand that there be three kinds of Psalters. The first is
David's Psalter, which contains thrice fifty Psalms: the second our Ladies
Psalter, and contains thrice fifty Aues, and the third is Jesus Psalter,
containing fifteen petitions, which being ten times repeated do make in all
thrice fifty. And indeed suitable hereunto there are fifteen Petitions, where
Jesus, Jesus, Jesus mercy is ten times word for word to be repeated in the
beginnings of them. And if you fail in the count, the devotion is not perfect.
What is it to put superstition in numbers, if this be not? And where are the
people kept in bondage, and blindness of darkness and gross error, if it
be not in these toys? Jesus Christ open the heart of many of our nation, but
especially of that sex^ which is the weaker vessel, ^. Pet. 3.7.
that at the last they may shake off this yoke of vanity and superstition.

Genes. 2.2. Exodus 20.1^.
there is much in the number of seven. The seventh day in the creation, was the
day wherein the Lord did rest: the seventh day was the Sabbath of the Jews:
Iosuah. 6.4.
at Hiericho seven Priests did take seven trumpets of Rams horns, and they
went seven days about, Act. 6.5.
and the seventh day seven times: and the Deacons were seven whom the Apostles
chose: and John wrote to the seven Churches, Act. 1.11.20
where seven stars, and seven candlesticks are mentioned in like manner. And
this is urged, without any reason which may imply fruit of doctrine, or sound
edification, or without any necessity of the place, and yet is pursued and
followed more, then if it were an Article of the faith; as if the whole law
and the Prophets, and the greatest means of coming to salvation consisted in
such points as these, and in the ripping up of Genealogies. It is good to be
wise: but yet be wise to sobriety. Not so much tricks of our own wit, and
the glorifying of our selves, is to be respected of us, as an upright zeal to
magnify our eternal and fearful maker. But for the matter it self, how
many numbers be there, which might be amplified in such sort? As for two, to
say the two tables wrought by the finger of God; the two Testaments old and
new, the two persons in Christ, the Divinity and the manhood: the two parts of
a man, the body and the soul. For three, the blessed Trinity, and the three
who came to Abraham. Genes. ^8.2. Daniel. 7.3. Ezech. 1.16.
For four, the four beasts in Daniel, the four wheels in Ezechiel, the
four Evangelists in the new Testament. For five, the five books of Moses,
the five senses, Matthew. 25.1.
the five wise virgins. This may be said for ten, and twelve, and thirty, and
fifty, and many more, whom I follow not, lest I my self may justly be
reproved, in this my reproof of other. Yet I give a taste by the way, of the
Non sequitur of the matter. In cases of other nature, those come within this
compass, who do tie the event of things to Pythagorean numbers, as the
chaunges of states and kingdoms to the ends of seven years, and of nine
years, being multiplied up and down. Bodin. Method. Hist. cap. 6.
Herein Bodine in his Method of History is too free, howsoever for other
matters of invention and good wit, scant thought of before his time, his
industry is praise-worthie. Now if any should make a book, containing nothing
else but examples of some one number, and serving in truth to no purpose, that
should need no other censure but to be termed, the fruit of an idle wit. From
which I would that our countrymen at last would keep their hands clean,
leaving judgment and judicious works to our nation (for which some Critickes
will say that we are fit, by the stayednesse of our constitution, and
robustiousnesse of nature) but tricks to the Italians, who suppose that their
wits more abound. Thus let numbers of curiosity, of superstition, and of
sanctity be quite removed and separated from us.

7 Yet being kept in measure, they have their good and Apoc. 22.2.
In the last of the Revelation there is speech of the tree of life, which is
said to bear twelve fruits, and to give fruit every month, and that the
leaves thereof do heal all kinds of diseases. Here to speak of the twelve
months of the year, and of twelve fruits, is fitly to the matter. Yea to
note that every month in the year has several pleasures, and that some
things are more seasonable in one month then in another, as some fishes are
for special times, and fruits in hotter countries (where the dainty orchards
are) are more kindly at set seasons. And moreover that many diseases do follow
terms of the year; but yet that by the tree of life, there is provision made
for all these matters; in the diversity of whose good things, the various
joys of heaven are painted out unto us; and that nothing is convenient for
heaven, but there it is to be had: all this is consonant to the place, and both
for the matter and number, it may be soberly discoursed. Where there is an use
which is not forced and wrested, there the Spirit of God is so far off from
forbidding us to apply numbers, and make ou^ benefit by them, that it gives
us the example. In the beginning of Saint Matthewes Gospel, Matthew. 1.17.
in showing the descent from Abraham to Christ, are named fourteen
generations, and then fourteen generations, and so again the third time: but
that is partly to help memory, but most of all to note the times which were
of fame, as that of David, and the other of the captivity. In such cases as
are manifestly offered by the text which is in hand, we may very well stand on
numbers. Secondly I do not think, but we may also apply them, when Joseph. de
bello Iudaico. lib. 6.6. Exodus 25.31. Leuit. 24.5.
Josephus does expound the seven candles, which did burn in the Candlestick
in the Tabernacle, to signify the seven planets, and the twelve loaves of
shewbread, to note the twelve signs of the Zodiac. Here if we believe the
assertion of that learned man, I hold it to be very lawful, to observe those
seven and twelve, for the one and for the other. So he says that the veil in
the Tabernacle, Exodus 26.31.
of blew silk and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, did intend the four
elements; and he gives good reason for that. And the same is also the opinion
of Saint Hierome. Hieron. Epistola. 128.
Here to compare four and four, has a natural use in discoursing of the
elements, the good creatures of God. Nay it will not do amiss, if by a farther
allusion we shall make application thus: that as we read in Exodus, that the
veyle made of those four things, Exodus 2^.33.
did hang between the holy place whither the Priests did come to offer, and
the Sanctum Sanctorum, the Holy of Holyes, where the presence of God was, so
that they who stood in the one, could not behold the other, until the veyle
which was between them were rent or removed: So the holiest man that is, even
the very Priest at the altar, cannot see God as he should in the high abode of
his holiness, until that his flesh and body which are made of those four
elements, be torn off and removed away, by death and by the grave. This or
the like about numbers, may be thought to be natural and not strayned, so that
I dare not determine against it; as also against nothing else, which apparently
has true and proper use of doctrine, or due application. But I leave to your
consideration, whether the author of the book De Spiritu sancto, (who
sometimes but not rightly, is supposed to be Saint Cyprian) or other like to
him, Cyprian. de Spiritu sancto.
do keep close within these bounds, when he especially magnifieth the number
of seven above other, because it consists of three and four, where, says
he, three show the three persons of the Trinity, and four notes the four
elements, which intends that God who is signified in the mystery of the
Trinity, is carried with a love over his creatures, who are figured in the
compass of the four elements. A man may go too far. And this I have
observed, by reason of Saint Hieromes note upon this place concerning forty,
which I hold to be not unfit for this auditorie, because it is few times
touched. But now for the benefit of the unlearned, I come to doctrine which is
more moral.

8 When God gives the Ninevites forty days to bethink themselves, it
implies his exceeding mercy, who as he was very loving to them, when he sent
them warning of their destruction, so is his love more abundant, when he gives
them space of repentance, that they might turn away his wrath which was to
break out against them. The prayer of the Levites is true, Thou art a God of
mercies, Nehem. 9.17. Psalm. 103.8.
gracious and full of compassion, of long suffering and of great mercy. And so
is that of David, The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger and
of great kindness. We can never sufficiently admire his bearing patience. That
city which for the manifold evil of it, had deserved to have perished in one
day, shall have a day and a day, and forty days of grace, to purge it self
if it will. The tree which bore no fruit, L^^. 13.7.
shall have this year of probation, and the next year of expectation, and
shall be pruned and dounged, before it be cut down. So that Lord who is
jealous in his anger, is yet a mild God in his suffering. It is observed in
men, that they are long in making any thing, but very quick in marring of it.
A house built in a year, may be plucked down in a month. A castle which has
been long in setting up, by mining and powder may be blown up in a moment. A
city whom many ages have but brought to her beauty, is consumed in a little
time, by fire put to it of the enemy. Only God is quick in making, but
pawseth upon destroying, he comes not but by step after step; and when he
should strike he stays, and turns and looks away, and will not root up,
till justice can no longer endure. Genes. 1.6.
He made the heaven in a day, and might have done in a moment, but Niniue that
one city shall have forty days to breath in, before her ruin come. The
Sun, and Moon, and stars, had but one day for their creation, Cap. 6.3.
but man had warning for a hundred and twenty years, before the coming of
the flood in the time of Noe; and Jerusalem shall have admonishment by the
Scriptures, before the appearaunce of Christ, by John the Baptist afterward, by
our Savior personally: and when they have killed that just one, Eusebius. Hi^^.
Eccl. 3.8. Genes. 2.1.
yet forty years shall pass over, before that it be quite destroyed. Six
days made the whole world, but almost six thousand years have been
affoorded to it, before that the end overtake it. Thus justice in many cases
is, if not swallowed and deuouted up, yet much shadowed by mercy, which
sometimes ouer-weigheth it, and other times ouer-layeth it; when it is ready
to rise, preventing it and holding it down. And there be few of us, who may
not feel this proposition true in our selves.

9 If we look upon our own land, how may we break out and say, that pity and
compassion have abounded on us from him. See whether he has not lent us as
many years to repent, as he did days to Niniue, when the infinite prouocations
wherewith we have provoked him, in hypocrisy, in luke-warmnesse, in gluttony,
and in wantonness, in security and unthankfulness, have called on him for a
shorter time. Severity might have said, Forty years I have been grieved or
contended with this generation; Psalm. 95.10.
and yet cleme^cie stays that speech. He lent not so much time to our fathers
next before us: his mercy did strain it self to afford six years to them,
of free passage of his word, v^der his gracious instrument King Edward, whose
memory li^e for ever; and yet that was encombred with seditions of the
subject, and tumults of the Commons, as also with much hurrying and banding of
the Nobility. But concerning our time the question may be, whether is more to
be admired the greatness or the goodness, the length which is very memorable,
or the variety of those blessings which we do little conceive, because we most
enjoy them; even as no man notes the benefit of the air whereon we breath,
because we have store of it, and yet nothing is more precious then it, or
nearer to life it self. So in a common generality, God does bear with us
all. But farther, if each man will take the pains to look on himself in
private, he may say that he has had his forty days oft-times told, together
with Niniue our city here. Saint Bernard in one of his Sermons shall speak
that which I do mean. Bern. Ser. de triplici misericordia.
The mercy and expectation of the Lord is great toward thee, for when the
Angel had offended, he stayed not at all for him, but threw him down to hell,
and when Adam transgressed, he did not defer his punishment, but drove him
straight out of Paradise. But now he wayteth for thee, he will not see thy
faults, he forbeareth thee ten years, yea twenty, yea to old age, even to
dotage. And who is he among us that has not his part of this, if not to come
to old age, yet at least to a great deal more age, then ever he could deserve?
He who has lived so long, as to know that he should turn to God, has had
much time yielded him: and the least here has seen that. But the greatest
sort of us having had space to do good, have turned that another way, and have
rather found time to do a great deal of evil; and whereas therefore shame and
confusion do belong unto us, God has borne with us, and yet bears many days
and months and years. So we have had time with Niniue. We taste of this loving
kindness. We go forward to provoke him, and he goes on to spare us.

10 This is the more to be magnified, since he offers not so full a measure
of grace to all. Many of far better parts in the eyes of flesh and blood,
more noble, and more honorable, more rich, and wise, and glorious, have
perished in a moment. Those which have lead the daunces, have been straight way
in the pit. Job. 21.11.13. Seneca in Thyeste.
He whom the morning has seen brauing it, the evening has beheld dying. How
many have been hastily catched away by the sword, by ruin and fall of houses,
by the pestilence or by poison, by dead palseyes and apoplexies, by diseases
which men know not, by falling from their horses, by sinking down as they
stood, by dying in their bed suddenly, yea by thunder and by lightning, which
does make the ears of as many as hear of it to tingle? Which although it be
all one, to a man prepared (as all of us ever should be) as if it were at more
leisure, yet how fearful and dreadful is it, when we look on common men, of
whom we have little hope, that they have called for mercy? Imprint this in
your hearts and reuolue it, dear brethren, and tell me whether my speech be
untrue and false, that we have tasted of clemency, more then this city of Jonas
did. But other men must not by our example, be encouraged to defer, and
prolong their repentance, and to hope that they shall still speed so; neither
must we our selves presume to take hearty grace, to run on in iniquity and
ungodliness: for he may bear a while, which yet will not bear ever. He who
is crushed with our sins, as a cart is laden with sheaues, if we will not
disburden him, will ease himself of his load, and cast that load on the
ground of confusion and desolation. We may be too bold with our friend, and we
may take too much of him who is most free. God bears with man a long time,
but as David says, Except he turn, he has whet his sword, Psalm. 7.12*
he has bent his bow and made it ready, and we know what follows afterward,
even the black arrows of destruction. And this is seen no where better, then
in the words of my text: for Niniue shall have forty days, but if then it
repent not (for these threatenings are conditional, as if God give leave, I may
show in the end of this Chapter) it shall be overthrown. And this is it which
at the first, I laid down for my second part.

And Nineveh shall be destroyed.
11 The saying is most true, that patience being too far Patientia lasa
vertitur in furorem.
is turned into fury. The hand lift up the higher, does fall so much the more
heavy. If a watercourse be stopped, when it breaks forth again, it
comes with the greater violence. If thou stand in danger of it, let it not
run upon thee, but turn it another way. If forty days will not serve,
there remains nothing for Niniue, but woe and lamentation, and unspeakable
desolation. Here in the first place, the forcible guilt of sin does offer it
self to be thought on, that it should have in it a power to draw down so
great a vengeance. God himself is a God of mercy, and takes delight to be
mild: and his love is such a quality, as stays not in himself, but diffuseth
it self to other, and that to all his creatures. Psalm 145.9.
For his mercy, as David says, is over all his works. But especially unto
man, the most excellent of all things, either terrestrial or visible, the
glory of his workmanship, the resemblance of his son, the beauty of all the
world. If to man then to many men, to hundreds and thousands yet more, to
Niniue that great city, the greatest of all the earth, where were so many aged
persons, so many unable women, so many sucking infants, whose innocent age did
keep them from very many actual sins. Notwithstanding all this, that sin
should be so strong, that Niniue which was externally blessed, and made the
Lady of all the East, by the Lords own preferment, should by the force of it
be so quickly overthrown. That there should be so many things to help, in
God, in man, in number, in greatness and continuance, yet naughty sin and
ungodliness should counterpoize all these, and ouer-way them far. This is a
stinger indeed: heavy more then a mil-stone. This is it whose cry will go up,
Genes. ^8.^1.
as it was said of Sodom. Sickness cannot be hid, and fire cannot be kept in,
but sin exceeds them both. When it grows once to be horrible, God cannot
forget himself (for it stands with his essence to be just) but he must pay
and pay home. His strictness in judgment may be covered with a cloud, or
eclipsed a while with forbearing, but it may not be extinguished. Habac. 1.13.
He is a God of pure eyes, of innocence and integrity, and will not be urged
too far. Too much he says is too much.

Ierem. 22.24.
12 If a place be near unto him, as the signet on his finger, or if you will
have more, as dear as the apple of his eye, yet if there be no remedy, he will
pluck off the one, and he will pull out the other, and throw it a great way
from him. Be Jerusalem his own city, and Sion the pleasing spouse of the
great king of mankind, yet if she play the harlot, and do persist therein, and
grow to be so hard-hearted, that she will not be reclaimed, she shall be made a
spectacle of judgment and vengeance, to all the coasts of the earth. The more
that she was honored before, the deeper shall* her plague go. God will double
misery upon her, Ezech. ^1.27.
as he spoke by Ezechiel, I will ouerturne, ouerturne, ouerturne, meaning that
head and tail, root and branches shall taste of his displeasure. And if after
one divorce, which may be said to be in the time of the captivity in Babylon,
he be pleased to take her to him again, yet if she again turn backward, and
grow worse then before, her end shall be worse also. If she once come to that
pass, Joseph de bello Iudaico. 6.16.
that Josephus himself could say, that their wickedness was so monstrous,
that he thought in his conscience, if the Romans had not invaded them, that
the very earth would have opened and devoured them up, as it did Corah Dathan
and Abiron; Numer. 16.32. Genes. 7.11.
or a special flould have drowned them, as a general one in Noah's time, made
a riddance of all the world; or fire and brimstone from heaven, have consumed
them as the Sodomites; Cap. 19.24.
God will no longer endure it, but will root them up, and destroy them by
misery which cannot be described. And whereas I speak so much as this
concerning Jerusalem, what other sinful place may not tremble? For if those
who are so near him, do so bitterly feel the smart, what shall they suffer
who are farther off? Luc. ^3.31.
If it be thus in the green tree, what shall it be in the dry? If those do not
escape whom he has once loved tenderly, why should they hope for favor
extraordinary, who were never otherwise unto him then common men?

13 If this do not sufficiently inform us, how heinous sin is in his sight,
let us run over all them, who have notoriously bin punished in the world, and
the examples of them are committed to solemn memory, as Adam and Cain and
Saul, or Antiochus, or Ananias and Saphyra, or Judas the traitor, or Julian
the Apostata; yea look into the Babylonian Empire, or the Persian, or the
Grecian, yea particular cities, Corinth, Rome or Constantinople: all these
have suffered ruin, only for their sins. The future torments of hell, are
prepared only for sinners. All calamities which our neighbors endure, or we
sustain here in our land, do come to us for sin. The speech which Cyprian
uses Contra Demetrianum, Cyprian. contra Demetrianum.
is very fit in this place, Thou maruellest or complainest in this
stubburnnesse and contempt of yours, if the rain do few times fall upon the
ground, if the earth be unsightly by the filthiness of the dust, if the barren
turfe do yield hungry and pale grass, if the hail falling do spill the vine,
if the ouerturning whirlwind do mar the olive, if drouth dry up the
springs, if pestilent breathes do corrupt the air, if diseases consume men,
when all these things come by sins provoking, and God is the more offended,
since such and so great things do no good at all. Now by this we may remember
to think, that it is our sin which brings on us that famine, which is every
where so bitter. Then if wickedness be so forcible, it is no marvel if on the
one side Niniue were like therewith to perish, in so short a time: but on the
other side, let us fly from all gross sins, and wilful disobedience, lest
transgressing, we so far provoke God as they did, and so bring on our land
that, which perhaps we can be content, with patience to hear of them, but
should rue to feel in our selves.

14 The second thing here worth the noting, in these words of our Prophet, is
that he lets them know, that they should be overthrown, but he does not
tell them how. He himself did not know, and therefore he could not speak it.
It was enough of their part, and too much as they thought, that the matter
should be verified: they needed not to enquire of the manner. But this kept
them in suspense, and made them fear the more, since they knew not what to
prevent. For if they had known the way, their wits would have been busied to
withstand the thing imagined. That is the froward nature of man, to turn away
from the maine, and to look on some by-thing: as in the like sort, we see the
man who is complained off, to his superior for his fault, strives not to
amend his error (take heed of that by all means) but labors to know who it
was that complained, that he may be quit with him. If the Prophet here had
said, that some enemy should invade them, all their wits would have been
employed (if they had believed his message) in mustering of their men, in
scowring of their armor, in preparing of their munition, in uniting of their
forces. Their city must have been victualled, their rampars have been
repaired. If mention had been made of some inundation to follow, here trenches
and there ditches had been cut, to see whether art and labor, might have
turned away the water. And the like is to be said of any other set evil
whatsoever: they would have b^ne busy in providing for it. But now while they
know nothing, they stand in fear of every thing. They entertain that opinion,
that it is God who does threaten them, and allowing him thereupon, to be
infinite and Almighty, as amazed men they do fear, what possibly may be
dreaded. He is of force to do what he pleases, and they only must be the
sufferers. Now as every man will grant, that one skillful at defense, may rap
a silly child, who has neither strength nor knowledge, and may strike him at
his pleasure, on this side and on that side, and above and underneath, because
every way he lies open, so God if he see cause, can lay a burden of any kind
of trouble on men or cities, who must take what he offers, and in no sort can
avoid it.

15 Then has he ways enough to ouerturne great Niniue. He speaks by his
servant Ezechiel, Ezech. 14.21.
of four grievous judgments to chastise men withal, that is the sword and
famine, and the noisome beast and the pestilence: what havoc would these
make, and cause clean work before them; that what escapes of the one, might
fall upon the other, and he whom the first does not touch, might be crushed
with the last? And if these four would touch the people, but do nothing to the
City, then remember the force of fire, not only rained from heaven, Genes.
19.24.
as on Sodom and Gomorrha, but being put to by men. How came Corinth to
destruction, or Saguntu^ to desolation, but by fire which is one of those
things, which we truly say has no mercy? 2. Pet. 37. Leuin. Lemnius de
Occultis naturae miraculis. 4.2.
If all the world hereafter shall be destroyed with fire, what marvel then, if
one city might perish with that element? Remember the force of water, which by
inundation from sea, within these hundred years, has devoured great parts of
Zeland, and by the ouer-flowing of Tiber, within these forty years has cast
down very many houses in Rome, Anno. 1557. Natales Comes Histor. lib. 10.
and has been known in other places, to have ouerturned many mighty bridges.
Yea the general deluge did drown the whole world with water, when they
thought themselves as sure, as Niniue now could be, and perhaps laughed at the
news which Noe brought to that purpose: therefore a special deluge might
quickly drown one city, if God should loose the water. Remember the force of
earthquakes, which destroy both men and buildings. How did Lysimachia fall,
and Thessalonica sink? Agath. Hist. lib. 5.
Constantinople in the time of Agathias was sore shaken, and Antioch with a
great part of Asia, near to Antioch, was swallowed up in Traianes time, Dion.
Hist. lib. 68.
as Dion writes, reporting very marvelous things thereof. Remember the force
of enemies, assembled in great number and with discipline of war, what
strange things they have done. I spoke before of Hierulalem: and who thought
themselves more safe, then the inhabitants of that city? Lodo. Viues in
praefat. ad libros Augustini de Ciuitate Dei.
and yet the Romans took them. The Goths surprised Rome, when Honorious who
was then Emperor, lying quietly at Rauenna, thought the matter so unlikely,
that when news was brought unto him, that Rome was lost, he supposed that they
had meant a fighting cock, which he called by that name. So it might be with
other places, even with this mighty Niniue.

16 Truth it is that they had people, and soldiers in great store, a city
strongly defenced, money and much munition* yet these things are not evermore of
power, to keep and save from an enemy. Plutarch. in Apophthegmatibus. Salus.
de bello Iugurth. Natales Comes Histor. lib. 7.
You have heard of that speech of Philip, who never feared but he might take
that city, whose gates were so wide, that an Ass laden with gold might enter.
Iugurtha could say, that Rome it self might have been bought for money, if
there had been any to buy it. But it is the note of an historian in our age,
that it is a foolish speech which commonly men do use, to say that any city or
fortress is invincible. For says he, when an enemy has once laid siege
against it, either force of gunnes by violence, or craft of mining in secret,
or privy scaling by night, or tiring out the besieged by long continued
labors, or treason, or some stratageme may bring it to the inuader. Yea
victual may want within, or things fit for defense, or the garrison may be
worn. And by such means, warriors may win any place. Q. Curtins. lib. 4.
Let Tyrus be the example, which was gained by Alexander the Great. And if a
hold he once taken, why is it not in the mercy of the conqueror, both for the
place and the people, to be used at his pleasure, to be saved if he will save,
or spilled if he will spill? And is a mortal creature, of power to break the
greatest, and shall we not think that God, who moves and the heaven does
stir, who speaks and the earth does tremble, can pluck Niniue on her knees
within forty days, or whenever it shall seem good unto him? There is no
doubt at all of this matter. Then since they had no suspect of the ability of
^^s power, and what his will was they had heard, no marvel if all their hearts
were filled with such a sorrow, as requires time to describe it. Thus you now
know the cutting Sermon, and galling speech of our Prophet, which is short and
not sweet: few words, but full of weight; so heavy that they make the proudest
there to quake. Which I shall let you know, as God shall give occasion. In the
mean while let us pray, that the Lord will send us that grace, to lead our
lives in his fear, that he in wrath be not enforced by the multitude of our
sins, to intend such destruction to us, as is here proclaimed against Niniue,
but that we may do those deeds, which belong to Christ Jesus his servants; to
which Christ with his blessed Father and his eternal Spirit be praise for
evermore.

THE XIX. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 1. The Ninevites are not obstinate, but yield. 3. The force
of the word of God. 5. Conscience and present fear makes sooner to repent. 6.
The Pastor must not be discouraged if at the first he prevail not. 7. The
Pastor is near to God. 8. Therefore he should be very wary. 9. The people
should use their Ministers reverently. 10. Godliness is most embraced where it
may be least expected. 11. Fasts are to be proclaimed by the Magistrate. 13.
The force of fasting and praying. 14. But we are negligent herein.

Jonah. 3.5. So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and
put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them.


IT has been showed before, how fearful a message the Prophet Jonas brought
to mighty Niniue. That yet forty days and Niniue shall be overthrown. Yet
forty days, and then as Joel sometimes spoke, Joel. 2.2.
a day of darkness and blackness, of clouds and obscurity, of lamentable
horror, and unspeakable desolation. The great city, the rich city, the
Imperial commander of all the East parts, he knows not how, nor he speaks
not how, but be it howsoever, shall be surely destroyed. I am now to lay down,
according to the order of the story, the good intertainement which this
messenger found. Who would not imagine, that men in that height of prosperity,
in the top of the wheel, now bearing rule over a great part of the world,
would have used this stranger in some strange manner, sutably to that pride and
disdainefull contempt, which commonly waits upon abundance. That an unknown
fellow, simple, out of countenance, having neither stateliness of apparel,
nor any attendants to commend him, should come facing and threatening, with a
tale of that nature, neither respecting himself, nor his superiors. If it be
want of manners in him, he must be taught good manners: if it be lack of wit, he
must be taught wit, not to disturb or interrupt the peace of such a city. Ahab
although he knew well enough who Elias was, yet in like case would have said
unto him, Art thou he that troublest Israel? 1. Reg. 18.17. Act. 7.57.
The Jews would have served him, as they served Saint Steven, shoute at him,
stop their ears, run upon him at once, draw him out of their city, and stone
him. Cap. 22.22.
Or as they served Paul, cry Away with such a fellovv from off the earth, it
is not fit that he should live, and then again shoute and cast off their
clothes, and throw dust into the air. Very few of the quality of the
citizens of Niniue, would have forborne to imprison him, or d^^e him from among
them.

2 But the Auditors here, being made of other more gentle and soft metal, do
bear themselves better. The sound of his voice being entered into their ears,
has descended to their hearts, and there having wrought an effectual
conversion, reflecteth it self so again, that their uttermost members are
affected therewith. The soul having once given credit to this so imminent an
evil, the whole man is possessed with a fearful contemplation; the body
quiuereth at it, and all the joints do tremble: the voice is lifted up to
proclaim mortification: the belly shall be pinched with a macerating fast: the
back shall be disguised with sordidity of sackcloth: the head shall be covered
with ashes and dust; the tongue shall cry mightily unto God for mercy. Yea
great and small of them, without any exception, shall thus be brought down.
Such a change, in such a moment of time, was never seen. That the voice of
music should be turned into mourning; the sound of the viole and harp, into
howling and schreeching; that the Princes and beggars should be equalled
together, that the daughters of Niniue, the daintiest of ten thousand, deprived
of their delicacy, and luxurious attire, the joy of their hearts formerly, and
pleasure of their eyes, should lie grouelling on the ground in sobbing and
bitterness, as vilefied creatures and as dejected worms. So mightily did Gods
word, and the horror of their sin prevail among them. But this was a happy
fall, to shrink once and stand long for it; to sink a while, and rise again.
Here because the things are diverse, which my text says they did in sign of
repentance; to the end that you may particularly understand, so much of them as
I think fit at this time to deliver, I suppose it best, for plainness sake,
to branch all So, that is upon his they believed God. And secondly, the effect
which followed of their believing, they proclaimed a fast, and put on
sackcloth. For avoiding of confusion, I do not now name such subdivided
circumstances, as do arise from these, but they shall be tou^hed as they lie.


(...)
3 I stand not to dispute whether Belohim in this place, with the prepositiue
letter B, being put to Elohim, be better translated by they believed Deo, or in
Deo, or in Deum, they believed God, or they believed in God, or they believed
on God, as diverse diversely have it; for howsoever otherwise these may have
their difference, yet in this place as I take it, they come all to one end:
they believed that the Prophet had reported from God, whatsoever he reported.
But I rather observe the excellent virtue of the word of truth, and such a
force in it as cannot be uttered; that in so short a time, as the preaching of
one day (for so the text best bears it) by a man so unacquainted with that
place, Jonah. 3.4.
in a City so auerse from sanctity and devotion, it should work so strong an
effect, that flesh and blood may marvel, and the natural man may stand amazed
at it. But is not this it, ^say. 55.10.
which Esaias has compared to the snow and rain, who come down from above, but
return not thither again, but water the earth, and procure a fruit out of
it? Is not this it which the Apostle does affirm to be lively and mighty in
operation, Heb. 4.12.
and sharper then any two edged sword, and enters through even to the dividing
a sunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints and the marrow, and is
a discerner of the thoughts, and the intents of the heart? Is not this it which
by Christ is called a net, Matthew. 13.47.
which does take the greatest fishes, even against their will? Which as it made
Josias a religious Prince, 2. Chron. 34.27. Act. 24.26.
to melt at the heart, upon the reading of it, so it forced Felix also an
irreligious Deputy, to tremble at the hearing of Saint Paul, when he disputed
of justice, and temperance, and the judgment to come. Then surely this also
might do good among the Ninevites.

4 The Law of the Lord, as David has taught us, gives wisdom to the
simple. Plal. 19.7.
I may add that it makes the rough ways plain, and crooked things straight;
it remooueth away that which is scandalous, it does rectify the untoward. Give
me a man says Lactantius who is angry, Lactant. Diuinar. Institut. lib 3.
an evil speaker and unbridled, and by a fevv words of God, I will make him
as mild as a lamb. Give me a man that is greedy, covetous and hard, and I
will return him to thee liberal, and such a one as with his own and full
hands will bestovv his money. Give me one that is afraid of smart and death,
and forthwith he shall contemn the gallows and fire, and the very bull of
Phalaris. Chrysostom. in Proaem. in Isaiam.
Let sin (says Saint Chrysostom) be like an Oak which has taken deep
root in thee; yet Gods word is like an axe, which will hew down that Oak, and
if it do it not at one stroke, yet it will be brought about, with doubled and
multiplied blows. August. de Sanctis Sermon 33. Matthew. 13*31.
Saint Austen, or whosoever he is, who is the author of that Treatise De
sanctis, alluding to the parable of Christ, says that the word is like to
mustard seed, which being first ground and then tasted, by the biting thereof
makes the countenance sour, the forehead contracted, or drawn into a narrow
room, the tears to break forth; but it is wholesome, and purges the head.
So the word of the Lord being received, makes the mind heavy, the body
disquieted, the tears to drop down, but yet all this in such sort, as that
salvation is gained with this weeping and bitterness. Then if it be so
powerful, and the baseness of the messenger detract nothing from it, but
rather add honor to it (for by weak things and foolish things, 1. Cor. 1.27.
God will confound the wise, and his power is made perfect by weakness, 2.
Cor. 12.9.
and the words of fishermen are read, but the necks of Orators are subdued
by them, August. de verb. Domini. Sermon. 59.
as the before named Saint Austen has) then no marvel if so many were pricked
in their hearts, at the speech of this poor Prophet; and as being wounded to
the bone, could not be at any quiet, till the sore were both searched and
healed. No marvel if this Sermon did work as much with them, as once a letter
of Paul's did with the people of Corinth, whereof himself does witness thus,
What great care it has wrought in you: 2. Cor. 7.11.
yea what clearing of your selves: yea indignation: yea fear: yea great
desire: yea zeal: yea punishment. So this here procured, that all the
faculties of their mind, were frighted and moved, and busied to the full, to
turn away that wrath, which now did hang over them.

5 And although they had many things, yea all the things that might be, to
deteyne them from these good motions, prosperity, security, satietie of
bread, a wall of sin about them, a sea of sin within them, superstition and
ignorance and contemning pride, which so loves it self that it loves not to
be controlled, yet the breath of one mortal man (although inspired indeed
from an immortal God) does ouertumble all. For first albeit the words of his
Sermon, be most briefly set down here, yet without question he inueighed
against their sins, the enormitie of their lives, the crookedness of their
ways, their outrageous impiety, their insolent intemperancie. And upon this
they were stricken with a biting remorse, and fear, that some divine essence,
or supreme Iusticer, would take vengeance upon them. For the mind of all
evil men, Genes. 3.^.
agrees with Adam in this, that after that a sin is done, there is a horror
for the same, and blushing and concealing; and there is an impression by the
very light of nature, that transgression is punishable, and the integrity of
justice is lovely and acceptable. The Atheniens and Greeks who never knew God
did admire virtue, as may be evident by the deeds of Socrates and Aristides,
and the writings of Plato and Xenophon; and they severely chastised some
iniquity; yet they knew not the Scripture. But where the Lord himself
speaks (if men be not impudent, even their faces of brass, and their bowels
of the adamant) they must needs show a conformity, in acknowledging the
equity of his exclamations against sin, howsoever in some mysteries they
yield not their consent. Petr. Maffeus lib. 1^. Hist.
Petrus Maffeus a Jesuit reports in his history, that when his fellows
came first to preach in the East Indyes, the Gentiles and Infidels there,
hearing the ten Commandments, did exceedingly commend, and magnify the
equity and uprightness of them. For what could be (thought they) more
reasonable, or more holy or just, then that men should not steal, or murder
one another, or live in adultery, or dishonor those that bare them, or abuse
the name of him, whom they accounted for their God, and so of the rest? Thus
ignorant men do assent, that there is a good and an evil, a lawfulness and
unlawfulness, that virtue is to be praised, and sin deserves punishment;
and this opinion well rooted in the men of Niniue, does make much for the
Prophet. Secondly it is manifest, that his threats were of such dangers, as
were soon after to follow, so that wrath was at their gates, and vengeance at
their doors, and would quickly break in upon them. But only forty days
space, and all must to destruction. If it had been years or ages, they might
have contemned: but they are put to their days, and forty days God knows
will soon be expired. The long suffering of the Lord, makes Atheistes to
scorn and deride, Where is the promise of his coming? 2. Pet. 3.4.
and the opinion of impunitie, or scaping scot-free, until the day of
judgment, makes the wantons of the world persist in disobedience. But here is
no such remoouing, nor putting off of time, no repriuing till next Assizes, or
binding to expect judgment a hundred years after, as once the Judges at
Athens served a woman, A^l. Gella^* 12.7*
whose cause they knew not how to sentence. It is a danger which is to follow
immediately, that will make men look about them. Tell a scorner in his iolity,
that he must dye one day, he answers what remedy, and makes no more of it;
but let him hear that which Ezechias did, 2. Reg. 20.1.
Set thine house in order, for now thou must dye, or as Nero sent word to
diverse, that they by their own hands must forthwith make away themselves,
Cornel. Tacit. Annal. lib. 15.
or else they should dye with torture; and this ruffler is by and by abated in
his courage, grows pale in his countenance, and is dejected like a miserable
caytife. Cato had oftentimes cried out, that Carthage must be destroyed by the
Romans; Plutarch. in Catone Maiore.
that it was too near a neighbor to their city. For a long space together,
he made no speech in the Senate house about whatsoever business, but that was
brought in, as his conclusion in every Oration. But this earnestness of his
prevailed not. And that so much the rather, because Scipio Nasica with a
contrary opinion, did in every speech maintain, that it was for the good of
the Roman commonwealth, that Carthage should continue. Yet as Pliny writes,
Plin. Natural. Histor. lib. 15.18.
when Cato on a day, brought a green fig into the Senate house among them,
and auowed unto them that but three days before that fig was growing in
Carthage, he made plain demonstration to them, that if the wind did serve, and
all other things were ready, within the space of three days, an enemy might
come from Carthage to Rome, with a fleet of ships, and an army, and besiege
them in their City. And the nearenesse of this danger, did so much move, and
earnestly affect the beholders, that whereas they could never before be brought
to it, they gave not over till Carthage were laid on the ground. Beware of
evil at hand: it is that which stingeth in earnest. The word of God coupled
with these two attendants, first that sin deserves punishment, and then that
this plaguing was immediately to follow, has prevailed so far, from the mouth
of Jonas.

6 A thousand things beside these do wait upon the word of God, as
allurements, reasons, promises of infinite variety, and that does fasten one
way, which does not catch another, and that is done one day, which is not done
another. Then let the faithful Pastor, who stands between the Lord, and
the consciences of the people, still hope the best of his labors, that his
harvest may be great, although yet he reap little, of an of-ward, and
untoward, and stif-necked congregation. Let him plant with diligence, and let
him wait with patience; 1. Cor. 3.6.
let him teach and let him pray, and God will give an increase. But let not him
appoint the time, and be wiser then his maker. It is the Lords own word, a
softening, seasoning, piercing, a working, winning word, and by the force
thereof, he who has fished a whole night, and caught nothing, may make a
draught to be wondered at, Luc. 5.5.
in a Sermon of one hour. That sinful man Jonas, who lately by his notorious
disobedience, and sleeping upon his fault, had provoked the Lords high
displeasure, and was accordingly chastised for it, has his labors so
countenanced, and graced every way by his master, that he stirred the greatest
city that all the world had, to fasting and repentance. And shall thy single
heart deuote it self to the Lord, and consecrate all his ability, sincerely
and entierly to the honor of his name, and to the enlarging of his kingdom,
and shall not a blessing follow thee, yea an inestimable blessing? Only see
that thou do serve him in integrity of thy soul, and go in and out as thou
should, without halting or paultring: and if thou gain not much, yet thy
joy is with the highest, and thy comfort is with that blessed one, that thy
heart does bear thee true witness, that the fault is not in thee. He who
labors to draw other unto evil, although he prevail not, yet he is
punished as a naughty man for his wills sake, August. lib. 1* Co^tra Cresconium
Gra^matic.
when he speedeth not (this most plainly appears in cases of treason.) And
God forbid, that the pastor who endeavors to bring the stray sheep home to
Christ's fold, should loose his reward with the Lord, for his willing travels
sake; although he should be refused or rejected by men. This is the comparison
of Saint Austen. And he adds farther afterward, that Christ wept over
Jerusalem, and professed that he would have gathered them together, Matthew.
23.37.
as a hen gathers her young ones under her wings, and yet they would not. By
this says he; he intended to teach us, that if we strive to convert men to
grace, and do not obtain our purpose, we should not thereupon sink and be
discouraged in our hearts, because Christ sped so before us. So if we do our
duty, we are sure on every side. To win nothing, is the worst that in reason
can befall us: yet we our selves do fare well. But if our faith be steadfast,
and we apply the means without fainting, we may build so far upon God, in
the confidence of his promises, that for his own names sake, and for his
Churches sake, our work shall grow and prosper. If the heart within be
perfect, and the external powers be vowed to God as a sacrifice, our lips,
and tongue, and mouth, shall be instruments of his praise, to the great love of
the godly, and wonderment of the wicked. It is more then an ordinary trust, to
be put in trust with such Oracles, and that eye which never slumbreth, Psalm.
121.4.
does follow and observe those, who have this in their charge: and if this
trust be discharged, he crowns his servants here in this life with much
comfort. For there is no joy like to this joy, when a man does tread the
steps of the Savior and Redeemer of the world, and is a means under God, to
save the souls of them, for whom Christ came from heaven. There is no comfort
like to that comfort, to stand in a congregation, and turning this way and
that way, in humility to say unto the Lord, Behold here am I, Hebr. 2.13.
and the children which God has given me.

7 Having other things to discourse, I fear that I stand too long on the force
of the word of truth; and therefore I step a little farther. It has extorted
and wrung out from these Ninevites (although they formerlie had been stubburne)
a faith and believing on it. The people of Nin^ueh believed God. But why is it
not said that they believed the Prophet, but that they believed God? The
author is here named, and the instrument is understood. Jonas did speak in
Gods name, and they received it as from God. They respected not this man's
weakness, but thought upon the majesty of the sender. And they are said to
believe God, who believe a man speaking by Gods word. Exodus 14.31.
In Exodus the text has, the people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord and
his servant Moses. In that place both are named. But commonly the messenger, as
being a person necessarily understood, is included within the mention of his
master the sender. So the Prophets in old time did evermore use, Thus says
(...) Lord: and yet it is intended that they also did speak. By this we may
conceive the regard which God does bear to his servants, the ministers and
preachers of the word, that as he does impart his name unto Magistrates, I have
said that you are Gods, Psalm. 82.6.
so he communicates his spiritual actions with his pastors, and does give to
them as to a kind of fellow-workemen, the credit of that which is his own,
and so back again assumeth to himself their actions and their sufferings. 1.
Sam. 8.7.
They have not cast thee away, but they have cast me away that I should not
reign over them says God unto Samuel. Number. 16.11.
Thou and all thy company are gathered together against the Lord, says Moses
to Corah, and what is Aaron that you murmr against him? God does attribute
to Jeremy that which belongs to himself. Behold this day have I set thee
over nations, Ierem. 1.10*
and over the kingdoms to pluck up, and root out, and to destroy and throw
down, to build and to plant. It is a great warning to us who stand before the
altar, that in regard of his holiness and righteousness whose person we
represent, our carriage and behavior should be framed to a resemblance of the
immaculate Deity: that we live if not like God (for who can match that
sanctity which resideth in that pure essence) yet like to men of God. The
titles which we bear, the office which we sustain, the person which we
present, the neerenesse of our vocation to that absolute integrity, which is
only in one great majesty, are remembrancers unto us of this. Then we had
need be advised, how we take this office on us, and how we use it afterward.

8 God is a God of knowledge, and of inconceiuable purity. The Priest should
tread those steps. The Vrim and the Thummim, Exodus 28.30.
the light of knowledge and perfection, should rest upon his breast. He should
know how to put a difference, between a sheep and a sheep, to speak a word
in due season, to bind up that which is broken, to beat down that which is
froward. There is committed to him as Gregory calls it, Gregor. Pastoral.
curae. part. 1. cap. 1
the art of all arts, and science of sciences, the regiment of men's souls.
Then he had need know how to handle them. If one should have in a vial or
glass, the precious blood which distilled from Christ on the cross, and were
forced to remove it, and transport it from place to place, how wise should
this party be, that he did handle it warily, lest if the glass should break,
all should perish? This were no charge for an ignorant or silly body. Bernard.
de aduentu Domini Sermon. 3
But the Minister as Saint Bernard has well observed, has the keeping of
those souls in his congregation, whom Christ loved more then his blood, for he
who was no unwise merchant, gave that to redeem them; and therefore he who
should have to do with these, should be no babie for knowledge and
understanding. How fearful should an ignorant and unskillful person be, to
run when he is not called, and to thrust himself into this business? He
will be in place of God, who has scant the sense of a man: for I wish that in
diverse places, there were not such, as want those common complements, which
men of reason have. He to whom you would scant commit the meanest thing to be
governed, must rule that which is most precious. Every man should put to his
hand to amend this error, which crept in while Popery reigned, and can hardly
yet by so many good laws, be utterly rooted out. Let Patrons think on this,
who for gaining a little trash, which is cursed by God and all goodness, as
being a sacrilegious thing, set such to guide their own souls, and the souls
of their sons and daughters, their servants and their tenants, to heaven and
eternal blessedness, as a man of understanding would scant set to guide his
husbandry, yea his cattle to the water. A blind god among Christians, is
ridiculous and contemptible, but a blockish god much more. But he who is to
thee in Gods place, is apparently blind and blockish. How filthy a thing is it
says Gregory, Gregor. pastoral. curae. part. 2.11.
that a man should be to learn, when he is in place to teach? As in knowledge,
so in life we should approach to Gods image, and therefore we should carefully
estrange our selves from all notorious crimes. It is far from that Highest to
be spotted or disorderly: so it should be far from us, as much as man's frayltie
may suffer. A little stain in a white garment, does make a sensible blemish.
Such things as are conspicuous, have their faults seen most easily. Cut off
the hair but from one eye-brow, and how disguisedly will the face look? there
is little taken from the body, but a great deal from the beauty. August de
ciuitate Dei. 1^.22.
It is Saint Austens comparison. Thou art in place to purge other, therefore
first purify thy self. Thy people are to thee, as the shadow is to the body.
If the body stand upright, the shadow is upright also. But marvel not if the
shadow do double, if the body be first crooked. Thy falls draw other on with
them. For thy callings sake, and for his sake whose mark is stamped in thy
forehead, have an eye unto thy ways. But above all follow him in this. He
sits on high in the heaven, and there is no earthinesse with him: let not
thy celestial spirit be fixed upon the earth, and lie groueling on the ground.
Thy outward man, Philip. 3.20.
and thy inward man, and all thy conversation must be above in heaven, not in
scraping or in scratching, as if thou had a perpetual habitation in this
world. How shall other by thy example learn to contemn that world, which thou
with greediness do embrace, and show thy self, as if thou had lost
much time at thy study in the University, and wast now to recover it, with a
preposterous emulation, of the fiercest hungriest worldlings? There is nothing
farther from heaven then this; Sarisbur. de nugis curialium. lib. 7.16
there is nothing more unlike to thy maker. It is noted that those creatures
which are nearest the earth, take most care to get store: those which are more
remote, are less busied, but those who live next the heaven, have their hearts
least set upon it. Prou. 6.6.8.
What hoordeth like the Emet or pismire, which is an earthy thing, and dwelling
thereupon? But the birds of the air, who fly next to the heaven, as Christ
himself does teach, do neither sow, Matthew. 6.26.
nor reap, nor carry into the barn. Let thy meditations carry thee much higher
then their wings, that although thou live with men, yet thy love may be with
God. So thy celestial contemplation, thy pastourlike conversation, thy
knowledge fit for a teacher, may show that thou art one of them, by whom the
Lord does speak, and that title shall be given thee. And so much for the
Minister.

9 But the people are also taught from hence, to yield an unfeigned reverence,
to their pastors and preachers, yea although they be such as have their
infirmities. For who had more then Jonas? and yet his speech is called Gods
speech, and the believing of his words, the believing of the Lord. The profit
which is brought by the true Pastors to their congregations, their master who
does send them, and the message which they bring do deserve to be well
regarded. It is more then men do account it to seek out what goes astray, to
comfort the broken hearted, to lead in the way of peace, to feed that with
spiritual food, which otherwise would perish. To ouerturne the strong holds
of Satan and of sin, is that which is worth the receiving. But as Origene
once said, as the walls of Hierico fell down by nothing, but by the trumpets of
the Priests, Origin. in Iosuam. Homil. 7.
so be the strong holds of Satan overthrown by nothing, but by the doctrine of
good teachers. These come from the immortal Lord, who is a jealous God and a
terrible, and does hold the disgrace done to his Ministers, as a disgrace
offered to himself, and punishes it accordingly. A Christian captain could
once say to Valens the Emperor, Theodoret. Hist. Eccles. l^^. 4 19.
that he lost a victory for abusing of Gods ministers, and they (says he) who
fight against the Lord do prosper in nothing. Moreover, the message which they
bring, is the true peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost. A treasure
beyond all treasures: and although they be but earthen vessels, (and therefore
brittle) who bring it, yet for the treasures sake, they should be well
entreated. How do they keep this lesson* who account it part of their
happiness, if with facility they may abuse and with promptness deprave
those, whom in truth they should honor, 1. Tim. 5.17
for so the Apostle speaks, and yet they will be Christians, and men known
for religion. Thou who so do, art an unhappy man: thou wrongest thy self
and know it not. Hear what Saint Cyprian says unto thee: Cyprian. de
Lapsis.
Thou art angry with him who labors to turn away the wrath of God from
thee, thou threatnest him who entreats the mercy of God for thee, who
feels that wound of thine, which thou thy self do not feel, who powers
out those tears for thee, which thou thy self perhaps do not power out:
for thus the true Pastor does I may add; Thou wicked heart, why do thou
render him so ill thanks for his labor? Come thou not unto his Church? by
that means thou debarrest thy self, from the communion of Gods saints. Do
thou come, and ioynest not with him in prayer and invocation? then thou
secludest thy self from a multitude of men, who call upon the Lord: and it is
better that thou had been absent; for now thou condemnest thy self, for
coming and yet refusing. But thou prayest jointly with thy Pastor: then let
Saint Chrysostom speak unto thee, Chrysostom. Homil. 33. in Matthaeum.
when he says, peace be to you, (as we say in our Liturgy, the Lord be with
you) thou answerest, and with thy spirit, (for in old time, they replied so
also, as we do now.) Thus thou say in the Church, and as soon as thou art
come out, thou impugnest him, thou despisest him, thou reuilest him, and
privily with a thousand reproaches thou rentest him and tearest him: what a
peace is this to his spirit, which thou do wish unto him? Take heed and be
advised o you sons of men, lest despising those whom your God favors, you
purchase his high displeasure. Learn of the Gentiles of Niniue, to think of
God in his messengers, and by the visible creature, to remember the invisible
Lord, and to respect them both, the Eternal for himself, the other with a
reference, because he comes from him.

10 Now to return to my Prophet: by him speaking from God, and by God sending
his word, his loving, moving word, faith is wrought in the Ninevites, Romans
10.17.
according to that of the Apostle Saint Paul, that faith is by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God. They by a terror apprehend the conscience of their
sins, and imagine that without repentance, destruction and unavoidable
desolation is at their doors. See the strange effect of one sermon, and the
doctrine of one day (for so I do still take it) among a forlorn people. The
stony heart is made like wax, the flintie mind is made soft. But how strange
a work is this? where something was expected there nothing is to be found, and
where nothing was looked for, there it comes in great abundance. There is
more treasure in a wilderness, then in the treasure house. He had long
preached to the Israelites, and Israel was not Israel, but a disobedient
nation: Gods people were now become a Niniue, or a Babylon, in comparison of
that which they should have been. He comes among the Ninevites, and there he
finds more of Israel, then he did in his own country. The circumcision
scorneth, and the uncircumcised are made heirs of the promises. The children
prove to be rebels, and the rebels are changed into children. So in the time
of our Savior, the Jews who dwelt near, contemned and neglected Christ, but
the wise men who dwelt a great way off, came from far unto him, Matthew. 2.1.
Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 7. and 8.
and adored him. A new thing says Saint Chrysostom, and marvelous to behold:
Palestina lies in wait to destroy Christ in his cradle, and Aegipt receives
and harbors him. So those who are nearest to the Sanctuary, are sometimes
farthest from sanctity. The Moon has least light, when it is nearest the
Sun, but when it is most removed from him, then it is full of beams and
brightness. They who hear the word but few times, make more profit, by
opening all the hatches of their hearts, and by swallowing it and devouring it,
even as the chapped earth does the rain, then those who by a wantonness, and
evil disposition, do loath even the food of Angels. He goes little abroad
who sees not this experimented: poor people of the country, who hear not of
God many times, do more attentively regard, and more fruitfully receive one
sober and grave instruction, coming from a godly Preacher, never catching nor
censuring at it, then those places which we take to be most solemn auditories.
This is no fault in the word, neither is it to be blamed in the poor people,
but it is a shame for the other, who yield not their best devotion. Israel
scant lends an ear; but Niniue ears and heart, and does not stay there, but
will give trial outwardly of their intendment: a fast shall be proclaimed, and
sackcloth shall be put on, that if any thing may mitigate the fury of the Lord
being offended, that may not be forgotten. And this is it which my second part
in this place does offer to me.

And they proclaimed a fast.
This Sermon was preached on the Act Sunday.
11 It may seem an unfit time, to speak of fasting and sackcloth, when
feasting and gay clothing are in their height among us. But blessed be the God
of our Sovereign, and of our land who sends us such peace, as that we may in
some measure, have fruition of these things. It is a mighty blessing, if we
compare it with the estate of our neighbors. I will therefore not unadvisedly,
but of purpose defer this, which is here mentioned concerning sackcloth to
the next verse, where it shall have ashes with it: and I will put over almost
all the circumstances concerning fasts, to that which afterward follows;
only noting now, and that as I take it, not unfitly for this auditorie, by
whom solemn fasts and abstinence, whenever they are called, should be
designed and appointed. If any man will suppose, that here the people of Niniue
did help to set this forward, I will not be against his opinion; for in as
much as they are first named, I will not be difficult to think, that they
hearing the voice of the Prophet, might by themselves or by means, have
recourse to the nobles, and the nobles to the King, and so make known their
terror, yea in humbleness be solicitors and beseechers, that there might be a
humiliation. For in this sort the feet may be a monitour to the head, 2. Reg.
5.13
the servants of Naaman to Naaman their Lord, the subjects to their Prince, the
gardener to the greatest. But the letter and plain words of the Prophet, is
contrary to that surmise, that the people did decree it. It was the King and
his nobles, who made the Proclamation. And albeit at the first it be briefly
said, that the people proclaimed the fast, yet observe what follows, and the
matter will be evident. The manner of Scripture is sometimes to propose an
action, at the first in gross, and then afterward to particularize the
circumstances of it. So here it is, and the next verse as an Exegesis to the
former, does explane the difficulty. Moreover the name of people may signify
all the inhabitants, and in them the King and the nobles, as populus Romanus
did include the Consuls, and Senators, and Equites as well as the commons.
Then the commandment for the fast did come from the king: and that among Gods
people has ever obtained, and been observed, that the Magistrates and Elders
should determine of it, and not inferior men.

12 In the time of Iehosaphat, 2. Chr. 20.3.
when the enemies came in great multitudes against Judah, the king thereof
Iehosaphat proclaimed a fast. At the coming up of the people from the
captivity of Babylon, Ezra. 8.2^.
the governor Ezra proclaimed a fast, to entreat that God would be pleased, to
defend them by the way. When Esther was to adventure her life for her people,
Esther. 4.16.
she gave order being Queen, that such an abstinence should be held for three
days. Joel. 2.15.
The like may be gathered from the prophecy of Joel, where they are bid to
sanctify a fast, but it is added also, blow the trumpet; Numer. 10.8.
which in the Leuiticall law, was only to be blown by the sons of Aaron.
The high Priest had a finger, both in the trumpet and the fast. Even Iezabel
knew this, 1. Reg. 21.8.
who wrote to the Elders and Princes of Samaria, or some other city where
Naboth dwelt, that they should command a fast. It must be the public crier,
and public authority, which must set a^broach such things. So it was in
England in the fifth year of her Majesty's reign, when by the most sacred
power under God, and by advise of the chief governors, it was established,
that over all the land, there should be set abstinence and prayer, that the
Lord would be entreated to stay the hand of his destroying Angel, who then
overthrew many thousands in this kingdom, with the plague of pestilence. The
people in their parishes, and Ministers in their charges, may be remembrancers,
in modest and godly manner, to the Church-gouernours, to exercise this duty of
Christian obedience, when the wrath of the Lord does hang over by grievous
famine, or the sword or pestilence, or other the like danger: but neither of
them may assume that prerogative to themselves, to inioyne or to publish a
solemnity of that nature. It is no true fast in a Christian commonwealth,
which is begun and ended, with manifest disobedience to that superior power,
which does serve the same God with them. Do thou expect direction from them,
whom the Lord will have to rule, and be not so censorious or Critical toward
them, whom thou (when thou do wisely and reverently consider of it) do
know to be no enemies to God and true religion, as to think that they conceive
not the conueniencie, and necessity of extraordinary humbling of men's souls
to the Almighty, especially when they are warned of it, and religiously
requested. Much less do thou suspect them to be hard hearted and insensible.
Solomon tells us, Prou. 25.3.
that the Kings heart no man can search out, and Magistrates in great place
under him, are not at all times to acquaint all men, with their counsels and
intents. But to suppose the worst, if the time do require it, and God does
expect it of us, and yet those whom it most concerns, shall withhold and
detain such an exercise, yea after solicitation and request thereof made; thou
may then use thy discretion for thy self and thy family, Act. 10.30.
but especially for thy self, like a good Cornelius, and without any murmuring
concerning other men, or seditious complaining, do thou double thy devotion.
Fast twice if God do so move thee, in steed of every single time before
intended; once to turn away the wrath gone out against the land, and secondly,
that the Lord will move them that be in authority, to do that which is truly
pleasing in his eyes. So thou have saved thy own soul, and the burden shall
lie on the conscience of other. But take heed of seditious singularity, and
ouer-weening contempt, and condemning of other, lest thou more offend with
that, then thou profit with thy abstinence. Divinity will not justify it,
that if a Christian state shall give solemn entertainment, for dismissing of
Ambassadors, who may be suspected to come about no religious practice, the
Ministers on the other side at the same time, and in the same place, should of
purpose to cross the first, proclaim a solemn fast: or if the chief
Church-gouernour should bid stay a while, for reasons not irreligious,
inferior men should therefore make a great deal more have. Neither may the
examples of others make good this. We live by laws, not by examples. Every man
must not carry the sword, or be a commander. Good things may be done amiss,
and so the goodness of them may be impeached. It is good to deface idolatry,
but when multitudes in places whereas now reformed Churches be, have run into
the temples, and with violence have plucked down the images, and taken away
the Crucifixes, and made havoc of the vessels and superstitious things, to
speak most mildly of it, it was not well; but it had bin much better, if
public authority had been therein expected. Men who are private persons,
must wait for Gods leisure, and not run before their maker. Saint Paul was
wise, and commanded that all things should be done in order. 1. Cor. 14.40
Take heed then of disorders, and such gaps as these may be to enormitie. I
speak unto the wise, and therefore shut up this point, with that saying of
Saint Bernard: Bernard. in Cantic. Sermon. 49. Si suo quisque feratur impetu.
Non plane vnitas erit, sed magis confusio.
If every man shall be carried according to his own motion, after that spirit
which he has received, and do fly upon every thing indifferently, even as he
is affected, and do not hasten to it by the judgment of reason; while no man
is contented with the office assigned unto him, but all will attempt all things
alike, by an indistinct administration, it will not be an unity, but rather a
confusion.

13 Let not any man mistake me, as if I did dislike the Christian solemntitie
of the most public abstinence: for far be that from me. My Jonas too well
knows the fruit of that in his Ninevites, among whom it wrought not least
with the eternal Father, when so openly and generally they did that which they
did: for all of them did fast, and all of them put on sackcloth, from the
highest to the lowest, The King and his Princes began, the people followed
after: but the greatest begin, and the least follow. The eldest are not
excluded: the youngest are not excused: Psalm. 51.5.
for the child but of one day old, is of spotted seed and corrupted. But all
of them join together, that if one want devotion, another may be right; if one
of them prevail not, yet the multitude may obtain. What a sight was this to
behold, that young and old, male and female, the Ladies and their handmaides,
the Nobles and their servants, should be rufully lamenting on their faces, with
voice lift up unto the highest heavens? How would this pierce to the throne of
the vnapprochable Godhead, what height could keep this back, what cloud
would not this sever, what heaven would not this enter? When so many thousands
cry, al Niniue with one echo, without fraud or hypocrisy, how could God
choose but hear, for the great mercy which is in him? The joint prayers of
mortal men, have much force with the Lord. For, to speak after the manner of
men, suppose that he were hardly bent to take vengeance upon a nation, and at
first when they should call for mercy, would seem to be on sleep; yet would
not this awaken him, when he should have no rest? when on the right hand and
left hand, before him and behind him, at the doors and at the windows, and at
the floor which is under him, there should be knocking and bouncing, which
will not be answered with silence, nor take any denial. The diversity of the
noyses, as the shrill voice of the infants, the wailing of the women, the
howling of the men would move him who is most settled. Their various
importunity will wring forth pity from him. Then it is a fault in us, that
when Gods heavy hand, does lie sometimes upon us, we come not with our forces
united to solicit him. We do in a sort strain courtesy, who it is that shall
go to Church, but the most will be away. And those who come do it so coldly,
that it is as good that they were absent. It is the great congregation of
spirits thoroughly moved and kindled in devotion, which does win God over to
us. When citizens who have transgressed, shall open their gates to their Prince
whom they have offended, and the men and women and children, shall lie
prostrate at his feet, and acknowledge themselves wholly at his mercy and
discretion, his heart melts on them, and spares them being thus cast down.
So would God deal with us. But our proud mind comes not to this: although
much misery be upon us, Basil. Sermon. contra diuites auaros.
we cannot tell how to stoop. Saint Basile complains, that when a most
grievous famine pinched his city of Caesarea, yet very few of the inhabitants
sought for remedy. I come says he to Church to preach or to pray, but scant
any is joined with me. The men are about their merchandise, the women about
their profits. But very few are with me; and those who be, are so gaping and
weary, and so itching up and down, as if they looked still when he who
reads the Psalm, would make an end, that they might withdraw themselves from
the Church as from some prison. The most here are the scholars who come from
the school, which take this comfort by it, that they are from their books the
while, and make no more use of it: but the stronger sort the while are
carelessly gadding through the streets. See if he paint not out as with a most
perfect pensill, the time wherein we live. God has sent us such a famine, that
if under his blessing the seas had not served us more happily then the land, to
the eternal praise of merchandise, many thousands of men besides those few
which are lost, had perished, and the Lord knows what had been done. And yet
the prices of all things continue exceeding dear. Now in this case do we from
the greatest to the least, assemble before the Almighty? Nay as Basile says,
few come, and those who come, come so carelessly and sleepily, as if they were
not present at all: but in many great towns and cities, upon a day of
ordinary Lecture, men and women are so scant to be seen, that indeed the
boys of the school are more, then all the Church besides: and yet they be not
many. This is a fault which cannot be excused; and the greatest herein do as
commonly offend as the meanest. How would the Pastor delight, to see a great
flock about him? how would every true heart joy, to hear the sound of Psalms
sung, like the showte of a mighty army? How would the Lord be pleased to be
moved and called upon, by the prayers of such a multitude? We cannot excuse
this.

14 Yet I commend the men of Niniue, for what they did, they did wholly. I pray
God that it never fall out, that they stand up in the judgment, Matthew. 12.41
and condemn many of our nation, for their forwardness and our beckwardnesse.
For what do we in comparison of those infidel heathen men? We have received
gifts far before them, but bring forth fruit far behind them. There came
one man to them, but we have had many hundreds: a stranger was their
sollicitour, but we have had of our own: Act. 2.17.
God has powered the spirit of Prophecy on our sons and on our daughters,
our young men have seen visions, our old men have dreamed dreams. They were
only taught by threatenings, but we have had sweet promises, and persuasions,
and allurements: and when these have not served, we have felt the smart of the
rod, by a hunger and by a sickness. They had the word but one day, or a very
little time, but we even forty years, a goodly space and a large: and therein
line after line, and precept upon precept, now a little and then a little: yet
in so many diminishments and extenuations of theirs in comparison of us, they
repented, and all of them repented in sackcloth and ashes, in fasting and
lamentation, but we without repenting, go on to provoke his wrath. Then what
should stay Gods fury, that it does not break out against us? Nothing
certainly, but some few such righteous, as were not to be found in Sodom: Genesis
18.26.
but especially his own mercy, which follows us unthankful persons, for
his own sake, and his Sons sake, and for his Churches sake. Let us pray that
this favor of his may yet lengthen, that it be not cropped off with violence,
that we feel not that indeed, which the Ninevites did but hear of, yet a
very little while, and much sorrow and affliction. God the Father turn this
from us: Christ Jesus ever favor us; the holy Ghost still preserve us, and to
them be eternal glory now and for evermore.

THE XX. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 1. The word in diverse works diversely. 3. The causes of
meaner men concern Kings. 4. Things are concealed from many Kings. 5. But they
should take notice of them. 6. Good things in Princes are much respected by
God. 8. Examples of great personages draw on the meaner to goodness. 10. The
Kings humility in coming from his throne, 11. and putting off his attire. 12.
The use of sackcloth. 13. Correction must be of those things, where the error
is. 14. The inward mind makes true repentance.

Jonah. 3.6. For word came unto the King of Nineveh, and he arose from his
throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth and sat
in ashes.


THat saying of Saint Paul is a most true speech, that the Ministers of God,
and the ministry of the word, 2. Cor. 2.16.
are to some the savor of death unto death, and to other the savor of life
unto life. And so is that also, Gregor Moral. lib. 29.
which we find in Saint Gregory, that this word is like the Planet, or
wandering star Venus, which unto some is Lucifer, a bright morning star
arising in their hearts, whereby they are rowzed up, and stirred from iniquity
and sin, but to other is Hesperus, an evening setting star, whereby they
are brought to bed, and laid asleep in impiety. To this purpose we need no
example more significant, then the preaching of our Prophet, whose words by
their contemptuous receiving of them, were a means of condemnation to the
Israelites, adding hardness of heart to their rebellion and unthankfulness;
but were such an occasion of peace to the men of Niniue, that no where in the
world, has the word by teaching wrought greater effect, in so short a space of
time. In the describing whereof, I lately gave but a glaunce, dealing no
otherwise therein, then if the gardener topping a tree, should cut off here a
bough, and there a shred, that he might afterward come to the maine stock it
self. So I have prepared the way, to show the means of the fast and
repentance in that city, by touching the precedent circumstances: but whereas
exegetically or expositorie-wise, it is now more largely amplified, I am at
this present to discover particularly the substance of all that is here done.

2 When the Prophet then having entered the city, had in terrible and fearful
sort cried out, that yet for some few days it might be spared, but after that
glass run out, Niniue must be overthrown, the auditors are affected with
that horror of conscience, and miserable molestation, that by their
disturbance, their King does take notice of the imminent danger, which was
denounced from God; and being provident for himself, and his people which were
under him, he takes a course, I cannot tell whether more holy, or more happy,
to turn away the wrath, which was coming out against him. For by a
Proclamation which was made with good advise, he inioyneth a fast for the
taming of the flesh, a general fast both of men and cattle. But to the end
that he might seem to be most lively touched himself, and that he might the
more stir up the people to devotion, he performs all ceremonies of debasing
and deiection. He who sat in his majesty before, now arises up as forsaking
it: he who was distinguished from all inferiors, by sitting in a throne, as if
it had been in a solemn Parliament, now stands among the common sort, as a
person of no reputation. He who before was covered with a royal and princelike
robe, lays the same aside as loathing it, and puts sackcloth upon him, and
to his tender flesh he joins dust and ashes. An example which very few times
has been heard of in an Ethnicke, and therefore it is the more worthy our
best consideration. For the expressing whereof, after some studying what way
might be most commodious, I resolved to tread these steps: first to note
some things in general, concerning him and other Kings, which notes are
insinuated by the text: then in special to examine the manner of his
proceeding, which is varied by diverse branches. But first here it is said,
that word of the Prophets preaching, was brought to the King.

General things of the King.
3 I suppose it to be no strange matter, that speech of the great abashment of
his people, should be brought to this King: for the cry of common miseries,
and open desolations, will preasse into the Court, and to the hearing of the
Prince, who although he seem to be above ordinary, yet in care he is
possessed by small things, and such as be but contemptible in show. The
abundance of the earth says Salomo^ is above all, Eccles. 5.8.
and the King consists by the field that is tilled. The^ the greatest cannot
stand without husbandry and feeding of cattle. The infection of the plague,
even among very beggars, will trouble the mightiest. The General is not safe,
if an enemy has made an irruption, into the tents of any of his soldiers.
That Emperor may well stir in his own person, on whose land and coasts an
army is entered: and that King is not free, whose imperial city where
himself resideth, Trebellius Pollio in Galieno.
is in the brinke of danger. Galienus the Emperor is condemned as unwise,
when he so neglected his provinces, that he made no more of it when Egypt was
lost* then to say, cannot we be without the flax and linen of Egypt* and when
France was gone, cannot the commonwealth stand sine sagis trabeatis, without
those soldiers cassockes, which France does send unto us? Wise me^ do never
thus, but although themselves be as the head, they will look to the feet.
Therefore it is not this, which I hold so necessary to be observed, that the
king should know of it; but rather that so soon it should come unto him, for
immediately upon the cry of Jonas against them, the best understood of it.
Which albeit it may be imputed to the amazedness of the people, who were not
advised whither else to seek; or to the idle curiosity of some, who were glad
to carry news of any thing, yet I rather ascribe it to the good government of
the King, and his orderly proceeding, that his house was so settled, and his
Court so disposed, that matters of moment were imparted to himself. He himself
did not stand still, as an image wrapped in gold, very glorious without, yet
neither seeing nor hearing, but putting all over to other, but he saw with his
own eyes, and heard with his own ears, and with his own heart considered.
And unto this opinion of him I am induced, by reason of those gracious parts,
which the text records to be performed by him, and could not have been so
done, unless there had been in him a sensible feeling, with great
understanding of his place and office, which grows by practice.

4 The manner of some Courts is, that to satisfy the auaritious, or ambitious
affections of some few in place, the humor of the Prince is fed with fair
tales, or jests, or delights, yea wantonness peradventure, that the other may
sway all things at their pleasure. Placentia are sung, and that which may
content* If Sara a fair woman, Genes. 12.15
although a stranger, come into Egypt, the Princes of Pharao will think that
to be a tale worth the carrying to their master: but if it be business which
touches never so near, that must not be told, for fear lest it should
disquiet. Thus by his voluptuousness, the King is made a child, and as Solomon
says, Eccles. 10.16
Woe is to the land when the King is a child, not in age so much as in manners:
the land is impouerished, the subjects are iniuried, justice is trodden down,
iniquity prevails, a confusion of all things is begun and continued, and
he who should amend it, silly man is brought a bed with folly and security. So
no man is more a stranger to his own charge, and the heavy burden which
lies upon him, then he who is most interested in it. Vopiscus in Aureliano.
Vopiscus in the life of Aurelian, does utter to this purpose a good speech,
which as it seems he borrowed from Diocletian, who sometimes had made trial
of it. Four or five in the Court gather themselves together and take counsel
to deceive the Emperor. They tell him what is to be liked and allowed of. The
Emperor who in the mean while is shut up at home, does not know the truth. He
must only know that which they will speak to him. He makes such Judges as be
not fit for the place, he remooueth such from the Commonwealth as he should
keep, and in brief the good Emperor, the honest and wary Emperor is bought
and sold by them. If the good be thus dealt with, how pitifully are they used,
who willingly fancy, and embrace all delights, tendered to them by their
servants, and are nusseled of purpose, that they might understand nothing, and
think very well of it. In such places and with such persons, it is likely that
a messenger, who should have brought such melancholic news to the king, might
have stayed without doors, or perhaps have been sent back again, as wise as
he came.

5 But this monarke of Niniue, is not made of that metal. Such cases as much
import, are brought to his hearing. He knows that the Prince, as the father
of the country, is set over the people for their good. That the foundation of
justice remains in his own person, and is thence derived unto other men;
that if he cease to do justice in his own person, if the case do so require,
he should by right cease to reign, and give over the name of a King, Dion.
lib. 69. Noli igitur regnare.
as a woman once said to Hadrian the Emperor: and truth cannot be known, but
by taking and admitting speech from the parties themselves. This is the cause,
why the report of Jonas is first brought to his own hearing, that he may know
and judge, and take order accordingly. This may be a lesson to all the Princes
of our time, that they themselves be partakers of all great causes of estate;
that they lean not wholly upon other, because the Lord has laid the charge
upon them; but especially that their ears be open to Gods word, when it shall
be delivered by the Prophets, that they may be taught thence, what is
healthful for their people, and acceptable to their maker, on whose service
their prosperity does wholly depend. Here may we conceive the happiness of our
kingdom, where God has placed a gouernesse, who thinks upon such things.
Hence also the Magistrate, and every householder, in his private family may
learn, to give easy access to sober information, that if there be any thing,
that does make for the good of their household, or other charge, it may not be
rejected. It is best to quench fire, while it is but in the spark, to stop a
watercourse at first, to bind up a wound betimes, to kill young foxes in the
neast, to meet with danger, while it appears yet a great way off, and in
such things not to rest on those who will fail, but to trust thine own eyes,
thine own ears, thine own knowledge. So, many evil matters shall be met
with in the egg; good things shall be advanced, and promoted opportunely; and
as among the Ninevites all points succeeded well, although they sowed in
tears, yet they reaped in joy, so shall it be with thee. But let word of
causes important be still brought to thy self.

6 The next matter which in general I note in this great person, is that God
would have him to be touched above other, that his humiliation might be
accepted beyond others. For the Lord is much affected toward them, in the
persons of whom he has imprinted a majesty, and by special ordinance has
made them his Vicegerents. Psalm. 82 6.
As he has seated them in a propriety of dignity above all their fellows, so
the account which he has of them, is of special property. Look through the
Heathen men, as well as upon such as knew him and feared him. Where do we find
a man furnished with such parts as Alexander was, Plutarch. in Alexandro.
of celerity, of resolute magnanimity, of felicity in all his attempts? Where
see we a man comparable, with that worthy Julius Caesar? Idem in Caesare.

Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 14.27.

Eusebius. de vita Constantini.


How admirable were the works of Herod the Great, and how maiesticall, yea
terrible was the presence of his person, when enemies of his came into the
place, where he was washing, and yet feared to make toward him, although he
were naked and they armed? Name him who may be like to Constantine that blessed
Emperor. And if it be suggested that the faculties and abilities, which they
had to do great things (because they were mighty Princes) might make them to do
such matters, as which others in their places might as well have effected; yet
this serves not the turn, since a spirit of rarer quality then other men
have enjoyed, might apparently be seen in them. Now where the Lord sows
most, he looks to reap most largely. Where he powers forth most benefits,
he expects most gratefulness. And if his service be neglected, but
especially contemned by these royal Potentates, he takes it more unkindly of
them, then of a common man. When Saul being brought to a kingdom, 1. Sam. 15.9.
from following his fathers asses, had faulted in that case of Amelek, what
furies did follow him ever after, with irreconcilable desolation? It was not a
little punishment, 2. Sam. 11.4.
which followed after the murder and adultery of David. The child's death, the
reuiling of Shimei, the rebellion of Absolon, the deflouring of his concubines,
were evident corrections. 1. Reg. 11.4.
When Solomon who was fraught with wisdom, fell foolishly to idolatry, at
once ten tribes were rent off from from the kingdom of Judah. The like may be
said of many the persecuting Emperors: when they being advanced by Christ,
turned their swords and scepters against Christ and his Gospel, he did not
long endure their tyranny, but with violence cast them down.

7 But on the other side, God so embraces the true piety of those in highest
authority, that themselves are not only blessed for their entire devotion, but
their people for their sake. The blessings powered on the heads of them, run
down unto the skirts and lower parts of their garments. When such as by Gods
hand are lifted up above others, do come nearer then their people to the
heaven, not so much in place as in spirit and the inward man, the Lord does
accept them with greater favor and acquaintance. The Israelites knew this,
when they thus make request for their king: Psalm. 20.1.
The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble: the name of the God of Jacob defend
thee. Send thee help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Sion. Let
him remember all thine offerings, and turn thy burnt offerings into ashes.
Grant thee according to thy heart, and fulfill all thy purpose: That we may
rejoice in thy salvation, and set up our banner in the name of our God, the
Lord shall perform all thy petitions, And so they go forward: Now know I that
the Lord will help his anointed, and will hear him from his sanctuary. They
knew, that from him being blessed, good things would flow to them, and God
would bless his devotion. How lovely and how precious in the eyes of the
Almighty, was the melting heart of Josias, 2. Reg. 22.19.
when he heard the threats of the Law read unto him? What private man alone,
ever turned back so much wrath? Yea God does attribute so much to this his
ordinance, that if it be but Ahab, 1. Reg. 21.29.
yet if he put on sackcloth, and will fast and go barefoote, the Lord will
de^erre that vengeance, which was to come on him and his land. Those countries
then are right happy, where such sit in the throne of honor, and most eminent
place of glory, who do love and fear the Lord in integrity, and sincerity full
of faith. For mercy and loving kindness is by such conduit-pipes, diffused
through all the coasts and quarters of a land. If the pestilence shall devour,
yet the prayer of such David's will stay the destroying Angel. 2. Sam 24.17. 2.
Reg 19.1.
If Sennacherib shall revile, yet if such Hezekiahs, shall enter into the
Temple, and with weeping shall lay open the letters before the Lord, a hook
shall be put in his nostrels, and he shall be turned another way. Iudic. 5.1.
If a victory shall be gotten, and such Deborahs shall acknowledge it, by a
public gratulation, this victory shall be doubled. When our Deborah and Hester
as it is voyced and received with bended knees did beg of the Omnipotent
maker, Oration Reginae Elizabethae in expeditione ad Gades. Anno 1596.
and guide of all our worlds mass, that he would prosper the work, and with
best forewinds guide the journey, speed the victory and make the return the
advancement of his glory, the triumph of the fame of those which were sent, and
the surety of our Realm, with least loss of English blood, we all know what
effect this holy prayer had, to foil the proudest enemy, in a strange land; we
all know it, and it were great pity, but succeeding ages should remember it.
Rich. Hackluit, Nauigationu^, Tom 1.
And that may serve for an example of the point whereof I now entreat, which
is, that the actions of great Monarkes, have a straighter kind of reference
unto God, then those of common men. Their voluntary debasing, does lift them
high with the Lord, their repentance is very gracious, their sorrow is much
acceptable. Then it was well with the Ninevites, that such a king did reign
over them, as had an humble mind: God dealt with them most bountifully, to send
them such a ruler, as whose heart he himself did soften, and put some graces
into it, and then did crown those graces, to the comfort of all his subjects.
For I ascribe all this to God. The words of the Prophet were something, but the
heart was touched from the Lord. 1. Cor. 3 6. August. in 1. Iohannis Epist.
Tract. 3.
Paul may plant and Apollos water, but God must give the increase. And as
Saint Austen speaks, Teachings without, and admonitions are helps to set
things forward, but he has a chair in heaven, who teaches the hearts of men.
I speak says he of the Lord. God then did them much favor, when he sent such
a king among them, as whose heart he made to be flexible, that so the Lord
might embrace him, and with him all his people.

8 In these general observations, yet a third thing is here offered. That the
way to bring the city to conformity of repentance, was for the king to begin.
For the actions of the leaders, are a great spur to the followers, to do as
the other do before them. It is not in Rhetoric only that imitation holds,
but in all the course of our life. For naturally the younger do tread the
steps of the elder; servants do as their masters do, children walk like their
fathers. But the example of the Prince, is the mainest provocation, 1. Reg.
12.30.
to do either good or evil. If Jeroboam sacrifice unto the golden calves,
Lactant. Diuinar. Instit. 5.

Lodo. Viues de causis corruptarartium lib. 1.


he must not go alone; the people will have their part. Lactantius could say
that to imitate the manners, yea the vices of kings, is held a kind of
obedience. It is the observation of Lodouicus Viues, that when Alexander of
Macedon lived, because he was a warrior, every man would be a soldier: in the
days of Augustus Caesar, because he delighted in Poetry, he was no body who
could not make a verse. And in latter ages, when Leo the tenth was Pope of
Rome, because he loved merry fellows, all Rome did ring with singers and
iugglers and stage players, but under Julius the second who was both a warrior
and a Pope, the city was full of armor. So the subjects ever press after the
manner of their sovereigns, being even like apes in imitating of them, whom
they know to have a power to honor them or disgrace them. Yea it is marvel to
see, how meaner men then kings are followed by their inferiors, so that the
thing which seemed to be honorable, if it be by the greater rufused, does
straight way grow contemptible, yea contrary to long custom. And that which
seemed base if it be taken up by them, A. Gellius lib. 15.17.
does quickly grow in request. The old manner of Athens was, that young
gentlemen did learn to play on a kind of pipe, the Recorder or some such like.
And this was frequented by the most part of them. But when on a time,
Alcibiades looking in a glass, did see his own cheeks to be puffed up with
the blowing, he threw the pipe away, and so did all the gallants of Athens,
immediately after him forbear that kind of Music. Plutarch. in praeceptis
gerendae Reip.
What was thought more vile in Thebes, then to take charge of the scowring of
the gutters and sinkes? but when that worthy person Epaminondas, had once borne
that office, it was accounted a place of honor, and was sought for among other
preferments. Therefore it is good that great men be advised in their actions,
not only for their own sake, but for the avail of other: that by virtue they
may breed virtue, lest by doing that which is vicious, they lay open a way to
naughtiness. For if they once begin to do that which is preposterous, their
scholars will be many, and they will add to their evil: the picture exceeds
the principal, the copy the original: a little gappe being opened, in small
process of time, comes to be a great deal wider. Jews the twelfth that
king of France, who was called Pater patriae, Antimachiauellus. lib. 1. Cap. 1.
the father of the country, being at exceedieg charges, in the getting of the
Dukedom of Millaine, and willing notwithstanding to spare his people from
great payments, set those offices which belonged unto the Crown ot sale, but
as for the places of dignity which were toward the law, he meddled not with
them: But since that time, other by his example have gone so far, as to make
sale of them also. It is a great misery to that kingdom, that justice is so
bought and sold. But this grew from an ill example.

9 The ruler of the Ninevites did walk a better way, when he would not go
before his people in evil things, but in good. He imagined that his own
conversion, would draw on others with him. He should incite his Nobles, and his
Nobles provoke his people, and so his city might be maruellously changed in one
day, Isay. 66.8.
like that saying in Esaias, Who has heard such a thing? who has seen such
things? shall the earth be brought forth in one day? or shall a nation be
borne at once? He himself began the work, knowing that to be a strong
lodestone, to pluck on other men. And indeed where good is intended, there
let the best begin. Zaleucus might punish other with loss of eyes, for
committing of adultery, when he made his son the first example, yea bereft
himself of one eye, to spare one in his son. It is written of one Frederike,
Malmisbur. de gestis Po^tificum Anglorum. li. 1.
who was consecrated Bishop in the time of the Emperor Ludouicus Pius, that
when upon the day of his installation, he was remembered at dinner time by the
said Ludouicus, that he should be constant and resolute in his office, speak
the truth, and do his duty; before that he would make any other answer, he
requested to be told, whether he must begin on the fish that stood before him,
at the head or at the tail? Whereunto the Emperor replied, that he must begin
at the head. Truth it is then quoth the Bishop, we must begin with the head,
and therefore you who are head to all your people, may do well to put away
Judith from you, the woman which is incestuous^y married to you. And this indeed
was done afterward. It is a very natural and orderly course in any
reformation, that the best should give the onset in good things, and the meaner
sort should follow. If a stone thrown into a fish pond, make one circle in the
middle, that straight way causes a second, and that brings on a third, and
so it goes to the bank. Even so is it in honest or evil actions; being once
set on foot by the chiefest, Sozom. Hist Eccl. 2.4.
they provoke other to follow. When Constantine had once embraced the faith of
Jesus Christ, many heathen cities did likewise. Then the way to stir the
Ninevites, was for the king to begin, which he did as fully and wholly as ever
you heard of any. The particulars whereof follow now in my second part.

He arose from his throne.
10 Among men, such as have their authority unlimited, which point belongs
only to absolute Princes, do think themselves exempted from the common sort
of creatures, and therefore for the mighty prerogative of their sovereignty,
will stand when other stoop, and will bear up the head, when other shall
shrink for fear. It is therefore the more admirable, that this Monarke of the
East, higher shall I say then ordinary, yea the highest as I think, of all the
men on earth, a king over kings, and commander over nations (the Assyrian
dominion being then in his pride) should not only be cast down, and debased
with other, but before other and beyond other, in so noted a degree. For what
was to be done, which he performed not willingly? That which Princes do in
private, is not it which breeds majesty, but their royal glory in public,
when in the eyes of their subjects, they appear in their sta^elinesse of
pompous apparel, of rich and noble train, of guard and other matters, which
procure a kind of amazedness, in those who are not accustomed to it. Act.
12.21. Cap. 25.23. 1. Reg. 7.7.
This as Herod and Agrippa did use, do did Solomon and religious governors,
which exciteth from other toward them a fearful reverence, yet withal a
lovely admiration. But among all shows, there is nothing comparable to the
throne, that magnificent seat of justice, where much honor is accumulated and
heaped up together. In a palace large and spacious, a rich seat to be set,
very eminent for the height, conspicuous for the furniture of gold and cloth of
estate, compassed about with Nobles, and great Peers of a kingdom, in
Parliament-like attire, attended with many trumpeters, and heralds and other
officers, with a guard of strong and armed men, environed with much people, in a
peaceable plentiful place. What on earth represents a majesty, if it be not
in such an assembly? The sight of this or the like, Iornandes de rebus Geticis.
in Justinian the Emperor at Constantinople, made Athanaricus the king of the
Goths, to break forth into these words, The Emperor without doubt is a God
upon earth, and whosoever shall stir his hand against him, shall be guilty of
his own blood. But this phrase of sitting in the throne, is used by the Spirit
of God, to point out unto us the highest honor among men. 1. Reg. 1.35.47.
Solomon was said to be set in the throne of his father David. The people pray
that his throne, that is to say his honor and magnificence, may be above his
fathers. What a stately throne did the same Solomon make, Cap. 10.18. Apoc. 4.2.
as one of his most glorious works? In Saint John's Revelation, where the Lord
himself is described in inconceiuable glory, the first thing named is a
throne. How the Gentiles respected this, may appear by that of Alexander, Q
Curt. lib. 8.
who when a poor soldier of his own, who was as stupefied and amazed with
cold and hunger, was by himself set down in his throne near the fire, told
him that if he had so done to the royal seat of the Persians, it would have
cost him his life, but this says he shall save thy life; meaning that there he
should be warmed, and freed from his cold. And it may be judged also by that
speech of Demaratus the Corinthian, Plutarch. de fortuna Alexandri.
who seeing Alexander in his pomp at Susis, did for joy break forth into
tears, and said that those Greeks who were dead before that day, had lost a
great occasion of rejoicing, because they lived not, to see Alexander sitting
in the throne of Darius. Then for the king of Niniue, being set in open show,
to arise from his pompous place, is a sign of much humility: to top himself,
to come down, with such a depressed diminishment, so grievous to flesh and
blood, is a matter which is not common. He who never tasted the sweet of
sovereignty or ambition, cannot judge aright of this deed. When the nedle
touched with the lodestone, shall bear it self toward the North, in passing
a great part of the earth or sea, it is a great alteration, when it coming
under the Equinoctial line, must give over that property wherein before it was
excellent, and might justly have caused no little admiration. A proud mind
cannot stoop: a lofty heart would not down. And yet the great king of Niniue,
being touched with repentance, vnseateth himself, vnthroneth himself, and
comes as low as the meanest.

11 As he did put himself from his place, so he strippeth himself of his
raiment. It should seem that it was some solemn time, that he was sitting in
his throne, and adorned with his robe. Act. 12.21.
When Herod would show himself in his magnificence, he put on his royal
apparel. Otherwise the Eastern Princes went glorious in their attire, and so
at this day do all men who are of worth among them, as travelers do report.
They use a stately kind of clothing. By the witness of Christ himself, Matthew.
11.8.
they that wear soft or delicate raiment, are in the Courts of Kings: how then
go the Kings themselves? They think that common clothing, makes them seem
but as common men: and they would that nothing should be wanting to them, which
might increase an opinion of estate. We see that some inferour persons, do pin
their greatest felicity on the gayness of their backs. There is more care to
adorn the body, with vanities and new-fangles, then to beautify the soul
with sanctity and devotion. The work of worms shall not be refused, to cloth
a worme-eaten body. Colors shall be brought from the sea, and pearls taken
out of fishes, gold dug out of the earth. Ethyopia and both the Indies shall
be ransacked for new devises, and these things shall be put on with more
greediness, more carfulness, and more orderlinesse, then if it were to do
that, which most nearely appertains to the gaining of heaven. Fashions shall
be invented so wide and spacious, in hoopes and ruffes and supporters, that
there is great danger, that the little gate which leads to eternal life and
bliss, is not wide inongh to receive them. And if it be a grief, and even a
death in comparison, for such as are not the most honorable, to part with
these vanities (for who would live to lack things handsome?) how might it
strain the heart of a King, to be uncased in such sort, as to put off that
which distinguished him from a common man? I fear that there be many in our
age, who hardly would yield to this. Yet the great ruler of Niniue does make no
stay thereat, but at this time puts away from him, his robe of greatest
dignity, as a hinderance to true piety. Where is a lively feeling indeed, that
we should be arrayed with pure and fine linen, Apoc. 19.8.
which is the righteousness of Saints, there the most sumptuous clothing, is
upon some special occasion but accounted as the doung, and that which is most
delectable, is detested as a Scorpion. Where a man is best clad within, there
the least care is for the outward.

12 Well, you see what this Prince has left: now hear what he takes to him.
He puts not off one brave gown, that he might put on another, so to iet it
in variety, whereupon the world stands much; but that he might betake
himself to mourning weeds, even sordide sackcloth, and earthie ashes.
Sackcloth was used to express sorrow, as may be seen in Jacob the Patriarch,
Genes. 37.34.
who upon the news of the death of his son Joseph, rent his clothes, and put
sackcloth about his loins, and sorrowed a great season. Ashes were used by men
dejected to the lowest degree of misery, Job. 2.8.
as may be gathered by Job, who after all his grieuances so doubled upon him,
went and sat him down in ashes. Esth. 4.1.
Mordecai in the book of Esther gives example of both: for when the King had
yielded to the bloody request of Haman, for murdering all the Jews, he put on
sackcloth and ashes, and cried a great cry and a bitter, in the midst of the
city. But by the testimony of our Savior Christ, these two joined together,
are arguments and tokens of the most humble repentance: Matthew. 11.21.
Woe be to thee Chorazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida, for if the great works
which were done in you, had been done in Tyrus and Sidon, they had repented
long agone in sackcloth and ashes, that is in the most lowly manner which may
possibly be devised. Gregor. Moral. lib. 3^.
Saint Gregory in his Morals does show the reason, why these should be used in
the time of grief: In sackcloth says he is showed a roughness and a
pricking, even the compunction of our sins. In ashes is signified the dust of
men who are dead. And therefore both of these are used in repentance, that in
pricking of sackcloth, we may know by our fault what it is which we have done,
and in ashes we may weigh what we have deserved in judgment, that is, to be
made dust and ashes. Consider then says he in the sackcloth pricking vices,
consider in the ashes the pain of vices, which follows by the sentence of
death. This is the spiritual meaning of this mourning attire, and it cannot
choose but strike a kind of horror outwardly, into every one who beholds it.
For does not sackcloth or haircloth cast down the mind of the wearer, or the
high conceit of the stander by, to see him who was most glorious with or
beyond many other, now to be arrayed in that, which notes manifest
lamentation. And do not ashes more remember us of mortification, that he who
lives and moves, should like a carcass turned into dust, be as already in
his grave: that if he be not yet fallen into the dust of the earth, yet the
dust is arisen up to him, and has met him half the way. So living he is as
dead, and moving as if he were already buried.

13 I cannot choose but admire the care of this worthy Niniuite, to satisfy in
every kind so far as lay in him. Look in what he had offended, in that he
would make a recompense. In former time he had displeased God, as well within
as without, and now he would show the fruits of this his grief, as well
within as without. Within, by debarring his belly and stomach of their
sustenance: without, by making that flesh which had taken delight before, in
beauty and in bravery, to be basely and ugly clothed. He saw the faults of
himself, and therefore as a careful planter or ouerseer of trees, he bent
that stock which grew awrie, to the contrary side. And he took the rightest
course to redress his faults, not doing as necessity many times urges men,
in their chastisements to lay upon one member or part of the body, for the
oversight of the other, as for the slippes of the hands, to lay stripes upon
the back or shoulders; but he corrects the offenders in the most just and
equitable order that might be. For had he not transgressed both in the back
and the belly? His belly had been a receptacle of much luxury and excess:
the sumptuous birds of the air, the dainty fish of the water, had been
devoured by him. Joseph. de bello Iudaico. lib. 5.13. Sueton. in Vitellio.
It may be that he had offended as Vitellius did afterward* who caused all seas
and lands to be sought, for rare creatures to feed on, and when they had been
brought unto him at an inestimable price or rate, then they should not be
touched in gross, but an eye only of this bird, or a tongue only of that
fish must be tasted, that so the spoils of a many, might be taken at one
meal. It may be that like his countreyman Sardanapalus that Epicure, Athenaeus
Dipnosophis. lib. 12.12. Philip. 3.19.
he thought that alone to be his, which he had consumed in eating, and so had
made his belly no less then his God. To make amends for this, by proclaiming a
solemn fast, he abateth the ^uperfluity of his unruly paunch, and pincheth it
with famine, that because in former times it had had a great deal more then it
should, now it might want that which is necessary. So his back and loins had
been supporters of much excess, so that the most curious of workmanship, the
most sumptuous of stuff, the most conspicuous of metals, the most precious of
stones and pearls, had been bestowed upon them. There was in likelihood no
pomp to be desired, which they knew not. Therefore to satisfy for those
follies, and to bring his body to better compass, sackcloth bumbasted with
ashes, or vnderlayd with dust, must now be worn and sat on. I Inow not
whether the wisdom of this king, or his equity, or humility, be more to be
commended.

14 But the mind within being added to it, makes all the rest more acceptable.
For we need not doubt but that was joined. He who had done all those things,
that is, came down from his throne of honor, laid his kingly robe from him;
put on sackcloth and ashes; by the advice of his counsel set forth such a
Proclamation, for a fast to be kept by all his people, both young and old, men
and cattle; bid cry to God so mightily; yea who appeased the fury of the Lord,
and quenched his wrath toward them, need not be suspected now but to have
joined his mind within, to his external actions. And that being put to, as a
kind of celestial salt, makes all the rest to be sauoury. For above all
things the sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit, and a broken and contrite
heart the Lord does not despise. Psalm. ^1.17.
It were to be wished, that our Jesuits and Seminary men, would learn this of
this Barbarian, to adorn their external penance and voluntary worships, which
they enjoin to themselves, with this contrite mind within. For if sackcloth
and haircloth, and fasting and whipping too, be used and oft-times doubled,
they which do them are not the nearer to heaven, unless the inward conscience
be established in the faith, and taught that nothing meriteth, but the blood of
Christ our Redeemer. Matthew. 23.27. 2. Reg 9.30. 1. Reg. 18.28.
It is but like a whited sepulcher; whited, but full of rottenness: like old
Iezabel, who albeit she was painted, yet was she full of aged wrinkles: the
deeds but of Baals Priests, who could cut and lance themselves: the very
works of hypocrites. They may gain praise with men, and make their
Proclamations to the world as they do, Ant. Posseuinus in refutatione
respons^onis D. Chyt^ei.
that their lodging is very hard, and their shirts made of course haircloth,
yea as Posseuinus says, and seems to cite it from our Campian, that flying
to wildernesses as Heremits, and to monasteries as Friars, all their life time
in the schools of perfect virtue, cilicijs paludati, and pasti ieiunijs, that
is, being robed in hearcloth, and fed with fastings, they do meditate both day
and night in the Law of the Lord: Yet although they go farther also, and cast
out Devils too, they may hear in the day of judgment, from the mouth of the
last judge, Matthew. 7.23.
Depart from me, I know you not, you workers of iniquity, unless the inward
meaning be rectified, and made orderly, by believing, understanding, and
justifying knowledge. And this may yet be feared to be wanting, by their making
much of images, their invocation of Saints, their abusing of Christ in his
institution in the Sacrifice of their Mass, by counting their prayers on
beads, by reputing that which is sin to be meritorious with God. This makes
vain all the rest, and wringeth that speech from the Almighty, Who required
these things at your hands? Isay. 1.1^.
Let them with the king of Niniue believe on God, and be inwardly settled in
their mind out of the word, and then for Christ's sake, and not for their own
merits, their deeds shall be acceptable.

15 Now to make application of this. There is nothing written here, but it is
written for our instruction. If sin among that people did deserve so hard a
doom, and provoke so fearful a wrath, why should it then be esteemed with us
a light matter, and only a point of dalliance? Why do men now so embrace it,
and with greediness make after it, as after a blessed thing? God is one and
the same God evermore, and hates it now as he did before. And there remains
an account to be made by us, as well as by men before. Then if we did as we
should, we should seek to diminish the faults of former ages, and not to add
unto the measure of them. The least burden is most easily borne; the fewest
sins are soonest reckened for. It is a fearful thing to fall wilfully into
the hands of the everliving God. Hebr. 10.31.
Sin is like to that Siren, which Poets do describe, to sing then sweetly
when it means to destroy. It is like to the Hyaena, which can cry like a
child, but intends to tear in pieces. Although the face be fair above, yet
it has a Scorpions tail to sting. It was like to destroy a whole city, which
was the greatest in all the world, and therefore it may bring desolation and
perdition upon us. Again, if this mighty Monarke to appease the fury of God,
did refuse no humble subjection, but did cast down himself by inward and
outward means, then we oftentimes should change our ways, and give more
signification of the feeling of our misery, that by open repentance, Gods
threats may be removed and turned into blessings. If we will turn unto him,
he is a gracious Lord. But he loves to be sought to, and to be solicited with
earnest devotion. We do little deserve to have it, if we will not ask that
which we want. Then let us cast our selves down, by public and private
prayer, and give him no rest till he grant us things convenient. Moreover as
the king of that nation, did so ouersway all his subjects, that he brought them
also to God, so let all who have any other under them, stir up those to true
holiness who are committed to them; that many hands being lifted up together,
may take the stronger effect. And let him who has fewest to rule, know that
his affections are placed by the Almighty, as subjects under him, if he have
the Spirit of God in him, and therefore let him labor to command them, and
dispose them not to earthinesse and iniquity, but to virtue and obedience. So
shall the ground of our hearts, which brings forth nothing else of it self,
but nettles and brambles and briers, yield lovely fruit, and that which is
acceptable in the eyes and ears of the Highest. And then as the word from
Jonas, was effectual to the Ninevites, so shall the preaching of Gods
Ministers, and good pastors among us, be a pathway to eternity. To the which
the father bring us for his own Son Christ his sake, to both whom and the
holy Spirit, three persons in one Godhead, be honor now and for ever.

THE XXI. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 1. Men in authority are to excite other to devotion. 6.
Prince^ may compel to the external means of Gods service. 8. The greatest
are to govern by advise. 11. Commendation of fasting. 12. Difference of meats
makes no fast. 13. Concerning Lent. 14. Of superstitious and immoderate fasts.
15. In colder countries men cannot fast as in the hoter.

Jonah. 3.7. And he proclaimed and said through Nineveh (by the counsel of the
King and his Nobles) saying: Let neither man nor beast, bullock or sheep taste
any thing, neither feed nor drink water.


IN the verse before going, you have heard of a king, who upon report of the
preaching of a Prophet, which denounced destruction both to him and to his, did
humble himself in incredible manner. For sitting in his throne, and seat of
royal estate, he comes down from it, and being attired with princely
attire, he puts that off him, and seeming for his person to be no better,
then any of his subjects, he goes yet farther, and as one meaner then the
meanest, puts sackcloth on him, and sits him down in ashes. But as in
the natural body of a man, it is not sufficient that the heart alone be warm,
but the heat of it must be a propagating heat, which may breed the like in
the rest of the members, and be orderly diffused to the exterior parts, even
the hands and feet, which are the remotest portions of that (...) or little
world; and if this be not done, the heart does not perform the office
expected: So in this civil regiment and politic place, this Prince does not
think, that he has completed that which lies on him to do, if himself be
thoroughly warmed with heat of devotion, unless his people also do participate
that quality, and be brought even feelingly to know their own misery, that
so they might work means to appease the Lords displeasure. This was a good
motion, as at the first to hear with that zealous king David, what the Lord
God would say concerning himself, Psalm. 85.8. Psalm. 122.1.
so to be glad also when other would say to him, We will go into the house of
the Lord, nay more, to be a spur to hasten them thither by crying, Psalm.
34.11.
Come vnt^ ^e you children, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. Fire
desires to breed fire. The custom of the hard rock, is to turn that earth
which is joined to it, into stone. A sensible object received once in the air,
strives to multiply his species, as far as it may. And in like sort the
soul which is truly converted to grace, loves to convert other. A good
servant does think it the honor of his master, and consequently his own
best contentment, to see many other as well as himself, clothed with his Lords
livery. It is the envious person, who grudgeth his neighbor a light from his
light: but the sanctified creature, is more ready to offer information in holy
things, then other to receive it. The good man desires to make other good also.

2 This makes the king of Niniue, who for his own part had tasted of remorse
and anguish of conscience, for his offense toward the Highest, to be willing
that his subjects should run to the same fountain of sorrow and tears, that
with many groans of heart, and much weeping of the eyes, and many hands lift
up, the long suffering God might be moved to compassion. And if this did not
suffice, then his farther desire was, that the emptiness of the reasonable
creatures, and hunger of the unreasonable ones, even the oxen and sheep and
cattle, which should break forth into bellowing, and bleating and
out-crying, might extort and wring forth commiseration. For I may well use
that speech, Matthew. 11.1^
in the same sense that the kingdom of heaven is said to suffer violence. And
therefore taking counsel of his most honorable Nobles, and Princes, and
Senators, he puts forth an Edict, and most solemn Proclamation through
the streets of the city, that every mothers child, be it male or be it
female, young or old, or bond or free, should enter into abstinence, and put on
sackcloth and pray, but especially with a hatred should turn away from sin.
And to make the stronger outcry in the ears of the Almighty revenger, the
brute beasts should be urged by the pinching of their bellies; to make a
rufull noise, that these conjoined complaints might prevail and work out
mercy. A good consideration of a heathen man, which as a glass may be set
before us who be Christians by profession, and may also teach us something*
which is very well worth the learning. Which that we may understand with better
facility, may it please you to consider with me, first the induction to the
Proclamation,

He proclaimed.
3 It is for no small matters, that Princes and mighty rulers are set over
people, and countries, and cities; not alone to brave it in pompous apparel,
or by external helps to make show of majesty; for the most coward, the
veriest fool, yea an image may in great sort perform this. But there is
required of them a superuising care, and diligent respect, that their people
should do well. By doing well, I mean have welfare and prosperiti^, and be
free from plagues and punishments. So Moses being in the wilderness, did
exceedingly desire that the Lords blessing might abound upon his people: and so
also did David, when in the time of the devouring pestilence, he said unto his
maker, I have sinned, 2. Sam. 24.17
ye^ I have done wickedly, but these sheep what have ^hey done? But
principally I understand by doing well, that they should do their duty, walk
in fear of their maker, serve him with their heart, be informed in true
religion, pursue that which is virtuous, Ios 23.2. Cap. 24.2.
fly from idolatry and sin. See how great the care of Iosuah was, that the
children of Israel even after his death should stick fast to the Lord, and not
do as the Gentiles, but keep their faith entirely. 1. Chr. 29.2.
So David by his own example stirs up his subjects, to offer part of their
riches to the building of the Temple, yea calls on them by plain words, and
when he sees it willingly done, he takes much comfort in it. And which is
most of all, 18.
he prays the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Israel, still to keep that
devotion in the minds of his people, and to prepare their hearts unto him. In
another place the devout mind of Iehosaphat is lively expressed, 2. Chr. 17.7.
who sent abroad his Princes, and his Levites joined with them, that first they
might teach the men of Judah, the law of Moses and the Scripture, that so they
might know the way to walk uprightly and holily: Cap. 19.^.
and then afterward his Judges, to see whether they lived according to their
knowledge. And there was never King, who was commended in the Scripture, or by
just and true desert in Christian commonwealth, but he did take such a course.
They who failed in this* may be thought to fail in all: for this is the very
scope wherefore Kings are ordained.

4 It is no question in holy Writ, but that the Lord requires, that every man
should embrace and frame himself to his commandment: but he has solemnly
appointed the Monarkes of the earth, to see this to be done. He has committed
the charge of their inferiors to them, and does expect from the^ such
executions and accomplishments, as may bring the necks of their subjects under
the yoke of Christ. Therefore he has armed them with the highest authority:
therefore he has given them the help of wise aduisers: therefore oftentimes
he enricheth the^ with graces extraordinary, partly being carefully infused by
education, and partly immediately inspired by his goodnessed, that so they may
be able to foresee with wisdom, what the common sort do not think of, and to
discern with judgment, and to prevent with diligence, and with violence to
restrain from enormities and obliquities. And to remember them thereof, he
gives them titles accordingly: as rulers, that they may rule them with a
faithful and true heart; Exodus 18.^1.
which cannot be done, but by teaching them obedience to the highest ruler. So,
fathers of the people, 1. Chr. 2.24.
that as parents are bound to train up their children in the fear of the
Lord, Ephesians. 6.4.
and by natural affection to work them all happiness that may be, and intend
them all good, so these should do to their subjects, who are placed under their
government. In like sort they are called shepherds, ^o watch over them, to
keep them from the wolves and foxes of heresy, of idolatry and schism, of
Satanicall resolutions, and to better their pasture, as conueniencie may yield.
The heathen Poet did use this name to Agamemnon his King: -- Homer. Ilia. 10.
(...).
Agamemnon the shepherd of the people. But they are put in mind of their
du^ie, by nothing more significantly then by calling them heads, whereby he
lets them know, not so much that they are placed uppermost in the body,
Numer. 1.4.
but how they are placed, and why they are placed, that is, with ears to hear
what is good for all the body, with smelling and tasting to choose what is
wholesome, with the tongue to speak what will help, or what will hurt: but
especially with the eyes to see a great way off, which way the feet should
walk, the stomach should be relieved, the body should be cherished, and ever
to think, that the rest of the parts are so united to it, that all make but
one in the conjunction of the whole. God does require this of the heads of
lands and nations, that in the midst of danger, they should not be winking
with drowsy eyes, but see what is coming, and withdrawing themselves,
withdraw their people also. And there is no one thing, which he will so
severely exact of them in the day of judgment, as an account for this. For
albeit there must be a reckening for the actions of themselves, how they have
bestowed themselves, yet because many thousands are more then one soul, the
account for their charge shall more strictly be stood upon.

5 Inferior Magistrates may herein take instruction, that it is not for
themselves, that they are hoissed to their places, but to the good of other. Be
they never so eminent for sanctity or synceritie, it is not enough, unless
they whom they rule, do savor like to themselves. God expects of each of
them, that they and their houses, Iosuah. 24.15
as Iosuah said should serve him, even so many as they rule over. And that if a
blessing come upon them, it should like Aarons ointment drop from the beard,
to the skirts of their clothing; that the low valleis may have the benefit of
that fruitful rain, which falls upon the mountains. And if plagues and
woes should come, that then the rest should be retired from the danger of the
shot, as well as the fairest. That there should be a (...), and natural
affection to all that be in their custody, principally to save them from the
wrath which is to come, and afterward to encourage them, that they go with an
upright foot; to quell that which is rebellious, to take pity upon the weak,
to rectify the untoward, to think that to be the field wherein God has
bestowed them, and they will strive to make it like the Paradise of the
Highest, by planting choice plants in it, by pruning them, by watering it, by
fencing it and hedging it, by keeping out the boar; to take comfort in the
beauty and prosperity thereof, and to delight in all happiness which shall
befall unto it. Thus the faithful steward does, being always pleased best
when the common good does flourish; not thinking himself a body besides the
public body, and so as two substances to be contradiuided things, and all
well which is scraped and scratched away from the members, but a head unto that
body where and in whom he lives, and so to have a fellow-feeling of the
sufferings of other. This does well in all things, but in nothing so much, as
urging them to aim at things celestial; to beg of God the continuance of his
graces upon them; or to entreat him to be pleased, to turn away that fury
which is coming out against them. And in this last case, the king of Niniue
may well be proposed as an example very singular, who thinks not his duty to
be discharged at all, unless besides the subiecting and debasing of himself,
he do stir up his people to a lively apprehension of the state wherein they
stood, that they as the followers, and he as the leader, but both they and he,
and he as well as they, like humble suppliants might make intercession, to
recover Gods favor, or at least to be pardoned. He shows himself a man
worthy to bear a scepter, worthy to wear a crown, who is so considerate as
to think, that since they should have part of the punishment, he might do well
to bring them to part of the penance.

6 Now as this in general is gathered of that act, which is imported to us, by
the scope of this verse and the next, so I judge that some farther matter is
naturally yielded in this, that he put forth a precept or mandamus, an
imperial Edict, and an urging Proclamation, that every one should fast. And
this is, that Princes by the prerogative of their dignity, have under God a
power, not only to animate, and encourage, and exhort, but by commandment to
constrain, and by law to enforce their people, to the performance and
practice of those religious proceedings, which they warranted by the word shall
think fit. They may ordain laws in Ecclesiastical causes, as we commonly
term them, and use compelling means to bring men to God. He who should
dispute this against the Church of Rome, may easily declare out of the
Scriptures, both in particular and sufficiently, concerning all the
circumstances whereupon they do stand, that it is holy and just which our
Princess does claim, and our Church does maintain. Th. Bilsonus Episcopus
Wintoniensis.

Ioh. Rainoldus in colloquio cum Harto.

1. Reg. 2.27.35. 2. Reg. 12.4. 2. Chron. 19.4. ca. 30.1. c. 34.3.


And this most plentifully has been showed in excellent works extant to the
view of the world. Therefore it shall be enough for me, now to touch and go.
Wise Solomon deposed Abiathar from the Priesthood, and placed Sadoc in his
room. Therefore Princes may deprive their Bishops of their dignities, if they
deserve it, and place other in their steed. Iehoash does call the Priests to
an account, for their negligent carelessness in repairing the Temple. Good
Iehosaphat, Hezechiah, and Josiah do make laws, for the recalling and
exercising of the service of God; they restore it and renew it according to the
law: and therefore Christian Princes by their example may do the like. And if
we will look lower, how great was Constantines care for settling the faith of
Christ? how did he labor both in the Nicene Council and otherwise? Does he
not call himself, Eusebius. de vita Constantini. lib. 4.24.
as Eusebius reports, a Bishop out of the Church? Others were Bishops within
the Sanctuary, because they were to preach and administer the Sacraments; but
himself one without, by reason of his care to discharge that duty which was
imposed on him. How many laws did he make in causes of the Church? Legum
Fra^ciae. l. 1. and 2.
and Theodosius after him? yea this prerogative was retained, until the time
of Charles the Great, and Lodouicus after him, as appears by so many decrees
extant to this day. These and many other knowing more fully then the Niniuite
spoken of by Jonas did, that God had appointed them to bear the sword not in
vain, Romans 13.4.
made Edicts, and put out Proclamations, to command men to the exercise of
Christian devotion. Yea some of them went farther, and by laws repressed
diverse heresies, and enforced men to an embracing of the Orthodoxe Catholic
faith.

7 A matter which may seem most strange, and improbable unto such, as in
truth mistaking the issue of this question, do much use that Maxim, Fides non
cogitur, faith cannot be enforced. It is very true that faith is an assent of
the inward man, which indeed cannot be extorted, (if we will speak of the
actual and complete apprehension in believing) for in that there must be a
willing framing of the mind it self from within. But the means whereby men
get faith, are visible and external, as the hearing of the word, the receiving
of the Sacraments, the repairing to the Churches where religion is set forth,
the flying from the Synagogues of heretics and schismatikes, lest other should
be infected: the forbidding of their assemblies: and these things Princes may
not only use and set on foot, but they are bound by duty to the highest
Lord, to exercise and execute them. 2. Chr. 34.33
Josiah in his fervent zeal compelled all in the land, or bound them as other
translate it, to serve the Lord their God.. And his deed is commended. Does not
Christ in the Parable show, Luc. 14.23.
that he who made the banquet bid his servants go forth, and enforce them under
the hedges to enter into his house, (...), compel them to come in: out of
which text Thomas of Aquine does conclude and resolve, Aquinas. 2.2. q. 10. a.
8. Soz. l* 7.12.
that men are to be enforced unto faith. Theodosius took this course as we
read in Sozomen, when he made most severe laws, and put forth Proclamations
against all those who crossed the stream of the Christian religion; and yet
many of those laws were as the same author observes, but only in terrorem.
And that so much the more argued his religious affection, that he rather sought
by frights and threats to win them, then by rigorous severity, unless
against his will he should be constrained to chastise them by their obstinacy
and intemperate behavior. Never any of the Fathers of the Primititiue Church,
did more ponderously consider of this question, then Saint Austen did, and
accordingly without any scruple he gives his opinion, resolving this doubt.
Aug Epi. 48
In one place, The Kings of the earth may serve Christ, in making laws for
Christ. And in another: The Emperors when they command good, Epistol. 166.
Lib. 2. contra secu^dam Gaudentij Epistolam.
it is none but Christ who commands by them. Again: God does not look for
the help of worldly warfare, when he rather bestows it as a benefit on kings
when he inspireth into them, that in their kingdom they should take order,
that the commandment of their Lord should be done. For unto whom was it said,
And now you Kings understand, be learned ye that are Judges of the world? And
when some disliked this position, Tract. 11. in Johan. Et quomodo redderent
rationem de imperio suo Deo?
in another place he speaks fully to them: They do marvel because the
Christian powers are stirred up against the detestable dissipatours and
scatterers of the Church. But should they not be moved? And how should they
yield an account of their government to God? Let your charity observe what I
speak, because this pertains to the Christian Kings of the world, that they
should be willing that in their times, that Church their mother of whom they
are spiritually borne, should be peaceable. I deny not but some of the ancient
who lived a little before Saint Austens time, and had not experience so much in
this behalf as he had, were of a different opinion, and therefore they spoke
otherwise. As Lactantius: Lactant. Diuinar. Instit. lib. 5.20.
There needs no violence and injury, because religion cannot be enforced:
the matter is rather to be dealt in by words then by stripes, that so there may
be a will. So Athanasius speaking against the Atrians, Athanas. in Epistola ad
vitam solitariam age^tes.
who by stripes and imprisonment did seek to draw men to their opinion: It is
the property of holy religion, not to enforce but to persuade. For the Lord
not enforcing but leaving liberty to the will, said openly to all: If any of
you will come after me: And to his Apostles, will you also be gone? Gregor.
Nazianz. de vita sua.
And so Gregory Nazianzen, I do think it fitter to persuade then to compel.
This was the judgment of them, who living not in times altogether so settled,
as God sent afterward, could not have that in-sight into this case, August. ad
Vincentium. Epistol. 48.
as Saint Austen, who was purposely consulted in it, and more industriously did
^ift it, and discuss it. And that causes him to show, that many were drawn
from the Circumcellians, to be good Catholics, by violence which was offered
them by the Magistrates. But he there requires that there should be teaching
joined to terror, and not most grievous punishment to be inflicted without
instruction. But to my point, Qui phreneticum ligat, and qui letharg^^^
excitat, an. bobus molesius, ambos amat. Contra literas Petiliani Donatistae.
lib. 2.
He who binds a frantike man, and rowzeth him up who is sick of a lethargy,
although he be troublesome to both, yet he loves both. And elsewhere: If any
laws be made against you (speaking of the Donatistes who objected, that it was
not in any man to enforce their wills to his religion) you are not by them
compelled to do well, but you are forbidden to do ill. For no man can do well
unless he choose to do so, unless he love it, which consists in free will:
but the fear of punishments, albeit yet it has not the delight of a good
conscience, yet at the least it restrains evil lusts within the closet of
the thoughts. Intra clausira cogitationis. Tractat. 11. in Iohanne^.
Exufflatores Christi.
And once more: When God will stir up the Magistrates against heretics,
against schismatikes, against wasters of the Church, against such as would blow
off Christ, against blasphemers of Baptism, let them not wonder: because God
raises them up, that Agar may be beaten by Sara. If any man would yet see
farther in this learned Father, concerning that opinion, Retract. l. 2.5
he may find in his Retractations, that whereas once himself had been minded,
that it did not belong to the Magistrate, to compel men to the communion of
the Orthodoxe: upon sounder experience, and more advised consideration, he does
plainly retract it. Upon all which we hold for an undoubted truth, that the
Prince has a power in commanding and proclaiming for God and Gods religion,
and all exercise of the same, which as you have heard I have gathered from that
act of the king of Niniue, imposing upon his a fast by open Proclamation.

8 Then to return to him: in the next place it is said, that the Edict which
was made, was by advise of his Nobles. As that which was said before does
import unto us his zeal, so this implies his wisdom, that to direct
himself he refuses not good counsel, and to purchase the more authority he
joined in his style his counselors and great officers. And in civil affairs
what can be more judicious then to hearke^ to the wise? then to listen unto
many? Many eyes see more then one: many ears hear more the^ one: many minds
co^ceiuing diversely, do utter most of understanding. where counsel is not says
Salomo^, Prou. 11.14
there the people shall fall: but health is where are many counselors. Cap.
15.22.
And, without counsel thoughts come to nothing; but in multitude of
counselors there is stablenesse. Prou. 20.18.
And again, Thoughts are strengthened by counsels, and by counsels are wars
to be taken in hand. The impression of this matter has wrought with all men of
worth, with David and with Solomon, whose Nobles and great captains were at
hand with their instructions: yea has had place in all estates, as the Ephori
in Sparta, the Areopagites in Athens, the Senators in Rome did make manifest
in old time: and in our age there is not the Russe, but has his solemn
Senate, not the Turk but has his Bassas, who at all turns may inform him.
Now as that land is happy, Eccles. 10.17
where the Princes eat in time, for strength and not for drunkenness, that
is, are sober and temperate, so blessed is that Prince who has such men about
him, as may be right hands, not left hands, Exodus 18.21.
men faithful and fearing God, wise persons and hating covetousness:
otherwise himself and all does easily run to ruin. 2. Chr. 22.3.
Ahaziah the king of Judah had a mother, and other kinsfolks, who were of the
house of Ahab for his counselors, which turned in the end to his destruction.
Cap. 24.17.
Ioas is ill advised by the great men of his kingdom, which drew him to
idolatry, and brought sin upon him, 1. Reg. 12.10.
and all the land besides. Roboams case is well known, what good green heads
did to him. Few kings have stood upright, when they have leaned on crooked
proppes. It shows that they are weak, when they cannot find the
deprauednesse or infirmity of the other: but if themselves were able men, yet
having none about them but silly or corrupted ones, or careless or unfaithful
persons, many things must needs run to wrack, if men reputed wise have
conceived things aright. Lampridius in the life of Alexander Seuerus, Lamprid.
in vita Alexandri Seueri.
cites this out of the works of Marius Maximus, as an approved truth, that
the state is better, and a great deal safer, wherein the Prince is naught, if
the Counselors who be about him be good, then that wherein the friends of the
Prince be evil men, although himself be good: for one who is amiss may easily
be corrected by many which are right; but when many are depraved, it is hard
for one to rectify the^. The^ it is well with that Prince, who being for his
own part virtuously minded, has other virtuous ones to assist him.

9 I might amplify this by the example of Justinius the Emperor, spoken of by
Euagrius, Euagr. Hist. Eccles. 5 13.
who being grown into much misery, imputes the cause of it to his
Magistrates, and those great men who were about him: but my purpose is rather
to remember, that the highest should much depend upon good counsel, and not
thinking themselves to be disgraced thereby, as not being selfe-sufficient, but
to repute it their greatest honor, to hear as well as to speak. Liu. lib. 22.
That which the Roman Minutius said of himself and Fabius, is very true, that
the best thing is to give counsel: and he is but next the best, who can take
it when other give it: but he is a most miserable man, who can neither give nor
take. He is not the most eminent, whose weakness is such that he must only
follow other men; but since none here can be absolute, as it is the highest
glory to give, so to take it is no dishonor. Who was ever among the Romans
more gracious for his person, Plutarch. An seni sit gerenda respubl.
or glorious for his acts, then Scipio Africanus, and yet as Plutarke writes,
he so used his faithful and true friend Laelius for his counselor, that some
spared not to say, that Laelius was the Poet, and penner of all the play, and
Scipio did but act it, and present it upon the stage. True wisdom had taught
that honorable General, to be no way wanting to himself, howsoever other men
would talk their pleasure of it. I could wish that in our age, persons of high
esteem, would so use the help of their wise and faithful friends, that they
might oftentimes run into so happy an error. You see that he who commanded
Niniue did hold this rule; and the Spirit of God does record it to the
instruction of our age, and (if we will so receive it as I have expounded it
before) to his exceeding commendation, that in so weighty a cause he would
take the advice of his Nobles. And yet to say what I think, it may not unfitly
be gathered, by those deeds which are reported of him in the former verse,
that he himself stirred up his Princes, and was as a spur to them to give
assent to his Edict: howbeit to show his mind to be temperate, and moderate,
and humble unto men, as well as devout to God, he joins them with himself,
as not failing to grace them, and honor them in their places. The ambitious
man, and he who is desirous of much gain agree in this one point, that they
love to have no fellows. The man who is greedy upon money, excluding from
himself all other companions, can in his private thought only, devour the
greatest pray. And the hawtie and proud heart, being like to the jealous man in
his jealousy, loves not to communicate to other, the least part of that
honor, which gladly he would appropriate to his own actions. The more runs
to the boughs, the more the stock is lessened: Nichol. Machiauel. Dis. in
Liuium. lib. 2.3.
shred all the boughs says Machiauell, and the sap then going but one way,
the body of the tree will prove the greater. But is that the way to be
honorable? The mightiest that ever were have found it the truest glory, that
bearing the raines aright (for that must ever be looked to) they have been
kings over kings, and reigned not over beggars, but over men of worth. And God
is better pleased, when good things shall be commanded, first by the highest
in place, and then after it shall be added, by the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and by the assent of the commons: Stylus Parlamenti Angliae.
And princes which are gracious do never grieve at this; and wise men do love
that style, when all is not appropriated to one, but there is a kind of
parting. Plutarke in his state-precepts, Plutarch. in praeceptis reipubl.
gerendae.
tells that when himself and another joined in office with him, were sent
forth as Proconsuls, in some businesses for Rome, and occasion so fell out
that his fellow stayed by the way, so that all was done by himself: when being
again returned, he was to make declaration of all things which he had done in
his journey, his own father lessoned him before, that he should not tell his
tale in the singular number, but speak still plurally: not I went, but we
went: and not I, but we said; assuring him that by this he should ease himself
of much envy, and by his fair behavior be very lovely and amiable. He was a
wise father who taught thus, and he was a son much to be esteemed, who so
inwardly embraced his good precept, that he thought of it many years
afterward, and recorded it to be remembered of others. Now if it were wisdom
and modesty in him so to do, then what humility was it, for the great king of
Niniue to join with him, I do not say his fellows (for this great Monarke had
none such) but his subjects in his style, by the King and his Nobles. And this
I have gathered hitherto, from the Preface or induction to this Proclamation:
now a little while let us enter into the Edict it self.

Let neither man nor beast, etc.
10 It is good when an action is carried cleanly throughout, to be well and
coherent both in matter and manner. Even ceremonies and circumstances detract
much from good causes, if there be a failing in them: but where is a show of
accidents, and the substance shall be defective, Diodor. Si^. Biblioth. 14
there all is but ridiculous. Diodorus Siculus tells, that on a time
Dionysius the great tyrant of Sicilie, according to the custom used in those
days by men of much honor, did send to the games of Olympus, diverse singers
and Poets, who made so excellent music, that every one admired them, and
commended them beyond measure. But afterward when the Poemes (which were the
matter of most expectance) came to be rehearsed, they were so base and barren,
that both they and their master were scorned and derided by all men. That
proved a matter fit to be laughed at, because the Proeme was curious, and the
maine did not answer to it. This king here in my text had deserved the like
reproof, if after all his preparation, not in a game of sport, as were those
shows at Olympus, but in the most earnest cause, which could touch him and his
people, he had been weak and imperfect, when he came to the substance. If
after his entertainment of the news of the Prophets preaching, after the
coming down from his throne, after the putting off of his robe, after putting
on of sackcloth, and sitting down in ashes, yea after charge of commanding his
people to join with him, and assembling of his Nobility, no other thing had
come forth, Parturiunt montes nascetur ridiculus mus.
but some mouse from a mountain, some frivolous or vain thing, this scorn
might be taken up, Much adoo about a trifle: much expected and naught
performed. But here it is clean contrary: the precedents have been right, but
the subsequent is admirable; such as few Christian Princes being taken upon the
sudden, would have equalled or matched, yea although they had been brought up
all their days in the faith. For it is for a fast to be kept both from meat
and sin, for an abstinence in general by men and brutish cattle, and for
prayer in all vehemency of spirit, to be joined with it. But now only of the
fast.

11 When the wrath of God is to be appeased, the Scriptures propose unto us, as
one thing most effectual among many, the humbling of the body by abstaining
from meat. And withal they mention this to us, as a means to stir up the
favor of God toward us, to procure any thing needful for us. The Israelites
when they were distressed for the murder of their men, Iudic. 20.26. 2. Sam.
12.16 21.
which were slain down by the Beniamites, wept and fasted all the day. When
David's child was sick, he wept and fasted for it. 2. Chr. 20.3. Nehem. 9.1.
When the enemies of the Jews had invaded his kingdom, Iehosaphat commanded
a public fast to be kept. And so did Nehemiah of purpose to turn away that
vengeance, which might justly have befallen them, Exodus 34.28.
for marying of strange wives. This was exercised by Moses, and Elias, and our
Savior Christ at such time, 1. Reg. 19.8. Matthew. 4.2. Luc. 2.37.
as when great matters were to be attempted by them. And we find in the new
Testament the renowned use of this, by persons which were most holy, as in Anna
and Cornelius. And among those weapons wherewith Paul oppugned his enemies,
Act. 10.30. 2. Cor. 6.6.
were fastings and watchings. And this was freque^ted among men of fame in the
Primitive Church. When Arrius the heretic having an iniunction of the Emperor
for it, Socrat. Hist. Eccles. 1.25
would needs come to the Communion, Alexander the good Bishop did betake
himself to abstinence; and fasting did pray Christ Jesus, to take the matter
into his own hand, which accordingly was granted unto him, to the destruction
of the heretic both in soul and body. Lib. 7.22.
Socrates rehearses this as a most shining virtue in the younger Theodosius,
that he spent much time in fasting. Many are the commendations which the
Fathers give unto it. Cyprian. de ieiunio Christi. Lib. 4. Epist. 4
As Saint Cyprian: By fasting the sink of vice is dried up: wantonness waxes
cold: concupisences grow faint, and pleasures like fugitives run away. And in
another place he exhorts us unto it: In imminent dangers let us sigh and
groan, not with the voice alone, but with fasting and tears, and all kind of
deprecation. Tertulli. de Baptismo. August. in Psalm. 42.
So Tertullian: Temptations which are incident upon fullness and immoderatnesse
of belly, are choked by abstinence. And Saint Austen: Will thou have thy prayer
fly up to God? then get thee two wings to it, Chry^o^^om. Hon^l. 1. in Gene^^.
that is fasting and alms. And Chrysostom upon Genesis: As the lighter ships
do more swiftly pass over the sea, but contrariwise they which are too heavy
laden are drowned, so fasting making the mind lighter, does cause it to pass
the sea of this life the more lightly, and to look up to heaven and heavenly
things, and not to esteem things present, but imagines them to depart as
shadows and meaner things. But drunkenness, and surfeiting, etc.

12 Hitherto the Church of Rome and we do well agree, and both of us do like
the fast of the men of Niniue here: but we go a little farther, and observe
that these men in this place mentioned, are forbidden to taste any thing, taste
nothing nor drink water. He does not say, forbear flesh, and feed on most
dainty fish, Erasmus in Colloquio Militi^ and Carthusiani.
(as the Carthusian Monks do) and power in wine withal: neither does he say,
eat of fruits, or sweet meats, but take heed of flesh, or of white meats,
because they come from flesh; but he commands an entire abstinence. And that
we do hold indeed to be an external circumstance required in a fast, and
marvel at the stupiditie of those who teach the contrary. If God had esteemed
sea-creatures before those of the land, certainly he would have told us of it;
Johan. 21.3.
or if he had forgotten it, yet S. Peter who was a fisher, and oftentimes did
follow that trade, would at the least have thought upon it, in some corner of
some Epistle. But what reason can be imagined, why God should prefer the fish
before the meat of the butcher? Saint Paul does make no distinction, when he
uses the word flesh, applying it to fishes. There is one flesh of men, 1. Cor.
15.39
and another flesh of beasts, and another of fishes, and another of birds. In
this disputation I speak not of positive laws, which are made for
commonwealths, but I honor them and reverence the^, according to their due
place: but here I discuss the institution of God, who neither directly nor by
any conseque^t, does propose to us this difference. And concerning pampering of
the flesh, which is many times objected, it is no hard thing to prove, from
Physicians, and Philosophers, and Historians old and new, yea by reason and
experience, that fruits and roots, and fishes, are not any way inferior to the
most dainty flesh, and therefore are oftentimes bought at highrates and prices.
But I will not pursue that argument. Only thus much I may say, that the
reproof which Saint Austen uses against the Manichees, does fitly fall upon
these men, saving that those old heretics did hold that for every day, which
our Papists hold but for some days. Augustine. de moribus Manichaeorum. lib. 2.
But Saint Austen derideth those, when they thought that he was not more
abstinent, who fed moderatly and sparingly, only upon salt swines flesh, then
those who at their pleasure swilled in wine, and the purest juice of the most
choice fruits: who did eat most fine cakes, and sweet meats of all makings,
and rice, and garden fruits belayed with pepper and sugar, and the costly
spice of the world. See whether in our time this be not a custom among some
people, that if a man were disposed to Epicurize a little, he would not rather
choose to fast as some hold fasting, then to feast at a sober banquet. This is a
blind superstition, and so palpably gross and filthy, that if it. were not,
that custom from old time had so prevailed, and diverse of our countrymen did
yet so hold it in their blindness, (and it is our duty to seek to win them)
I should think my self very idle, and should partly be ashamed to speak of it
in this place. The fasts in Scripture are pure abstinence: men eat nothing and
drink no water: but here they may eat and drink, and be full and yet fast
too. This is one of the grossest Paradoxes which the blind beast of Rome, that
deceitful whore of Babylon, does broach unto her followers.

13 And yet poor souls they see it not, nor the fondness of that doctrine,
that such and such days should be fasted, not for laws sake and policy, but
for religion and devotion. I do marvel what sound warrant they can have for
that conclusion: for no such thing can be derived from any place of Scripture.
Hear S. Austens judgment upon that matter: Aug. Epi. 86.
If you ask my opinion in this point, I reuoluing it in my mind do find, that
in the writings of the Evangelists and the Apostles* and in all that instrument
which is called the new Testament, fasting is commanded. But what days we
should not fast, and what days we should, I see it not defined by the precept
of the Lord or the Apostles. And in the ancient Church they had another
custom then is kept at this day. Origin. in Leuiticum. Homil. 10.
Origene upon Leuiticus says, that they had the fourth and sixth day of the
week, wherein they solemnly fasted. Now to tie this, or the alteration from
it, to be a case of religion, is a servitude of all seruitudes, and a
Babylonian bondage. The time of Lent I confess, is a very ancient custom,
but so far from being found a point of faith and salvation, that the most
approved ancient histories, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. 5.24.
tell how diuersely it was kept, one day, or two days, or seven days, and by
some for twenty days, Socrat. Hist. Eccles. 5.21.
and by some other for forty, by some coniunctim, by some diuisim, some
abstaining from this food, some from that, but that the Apostles left it (for
so Socrates does speak) to the liberty of the Church; nay to every man's mind
and will. I would that our people vndestood this every where, that they might
take things a^ight, civil orders to civil orders, and customs which were
indifferent, for nothing else but indifferent, and not to put heaven and hell
upon superstitious obseruances. True fasting is not of custom, but upon an
especial purpose, by the good motion of the mind.

14 Yet these are not the only errors, in the fasts of the Church of Rome,
but this may be added to them, that commonly they respect the external work
alone. But the Apostle tells us, 1. Tim. 4.8.
that if there be nothing else, bodily exercise profits little. There must be
a directing faith, and an understanding knowledge which must make all
acceptable. The end why it is done, does much make or mar the matter: if it
be to humble the body, to work in it more obedience, so to practice spiritual
things; if it be to testify true devotion, if to seek to abate the Lords
fury, this shows that all is right: but these other being for the most part
ignorant, do think the thing barely done, to be a deserving work, and a
meritorious action. And this thought being once received multiplieth evil on
it self so far, that many in their superstition, do not fear to spill their
body, that they may merit the more; and so macerate the flesh, that they make
themselves unfit, Seneca de Ira lib. 3.9. Corpus attenuatum and infirmum
incumbit anim^.
to perform such Christian duties, as otherwise they might do. They procure
diseases to themselves, and impotency by reason of sickness, whereby they make
their body which is the house of their mind, to sink down on their soul,
and to lade it over heavily. Then that mind, which with alacrity might many
ways have served God, with impatiency peradventure, but assuredly with much
grief, does groan under the body. And so in steed of increasing, they diminish
true devotion. Hierome as it is easy to be gathered, alludeth to this, when he
says, Hieronim. Epist. 10. Epist. secunda.
that a little meat and a belly which is ever hungry, is preferred before
fasting three days. And again: Do thou impose on thy self such a measure of
fasting, as thou art able to bear. Let thy fasts be pure and chaste, and single
and moderate, and not superstitious. And he adds fully to that point, which I
mentioned a little before, What does it profit not to eat oil, and to seek
out such troubles and difficulties of meats, carrets, pepper, nuts and dates,
fine cakes and honey, and baked things? So Fulgentius gives an item for
fasting moderatly, Pulgen^. Episto^ 3.
A temperature is in such sort to be added to our fasts, that neither saturity
do stir up and provoke our body: nor immoderate abstinence weaken it. But
some other of the ancient have not only dehorted it, but have perstringed it
with right severe censures, and written against it. Athanas. de virginitate.
As namely Athanasius, If thy enemy the Devil do suggest into thy mind great
exercises of devotion, that thou may make thy body unprofitable and vveake,
do thou on the other side see that thy fasting have a measure. He reputeth it
for no better then a temptation of the Devil, if it be excessive. Saint Basile
speaks to this matter, most soundly and with much reason, Basil. de vera
virginitate.
I do not so beat down my body, that I wear it out with immoderate
vvounds, and make it unprofitable for service; but that is my only cause of
chastising my body, that I may subdue it to service, and make it rightly
obedient to his master. But he who brings his servant so under by hunger,
that not only he is unprofitable for the ministry of his master, but is not
sufficient for himself, what else does he, then make himself a servant to
his servant? For it must needs be that the body being unable to serve, and by
infirmity vvaxing faint, his master must now serve him, while he must stand
amassed about the curing of the infirmity of the other. So far Basile, who
esteems the mind as the master, and the body as the servant, Unto these I
will only add the judgment of Saint Bernard, Bernard. ad fratres de monte
Dei*
who utters a most godly and sober doctrine. Watchings, fastings and such
like do not hinder, but help, if they be done with reason and discretion.
Which things if by fault of indiscretion they be so done, that either by the
spirit failing, or the body faynting, spiritual things be hindered, he who so
does, has taken away from his body the effect of a good work, from the
spirit a good affection, from his neighbor a good example, from God his
honor: he is a sacrilegious person, and guilty of all these things toward God.
Not that (according to the meaning of the Apostle) this seems unfit for a
man, and be not decent and just, that the head should sometimes ache in the
service of God, which has aked often before in the vanity of the world, or
that the belly should be hungry even to croaping and roaring, Vsque ad rugitum.
which has been filled oftentimes even to vomiting; but a measure is to be
used in all things. Affligendum non conterendum.
The body is to be afflicted sometimes, but not to be quite worn out. See
how gravely these learned fathers, inueigh against immoderate abstaining from
necessary things* and give us to understand, that we may feed sparingly and
moderately, and yet serve God too, although sometimes there be an abstinence
from all meat to be required.

15 I do urge this doctrine so far, for some few who yet remain in our land
here and there: but not for the common sort, who stay themselves enough from
taking harm by abstayning. For a great part of men spend much of their time in
gluttony and riot; and very few now fast, if it be not for want of meat. And
herein our sensuality may be justly reproved, that whereas there is such
occasion offered, to study for the turning away of Gods judgments (which
appear in sending famine and otherwise) and again when whatsoever is spared,
may find good vent by poor men's bellies, yet we live not so temperately, as in
reason we should. Surely the Almighty does much threaten us, and therefore we
should awake: and besides that, we enjoy many things, the continuance of whom
is very well worth the begging, as especially the Gospel, and health and
peace, and a lovely and gracious Prince: let us therefore not be so far
wanting to our selves, as to forget to pray that these may endure. And as here
by the example of the Ninevites, there should in great cases be a great
abstinence, so let every man ordinarily, so keep under his body, that it may
be fit for all celestial and spiritual duties. And yet I do not think it
convenient, for us who live in this country, to emulate and imitate the fasts
of holy men in the Scriptures; I mean not, those of Moses and Elias, which
were for forty days, and indeed were miraculous matters; but such as was that
of the Jews under Hester, Esth. 4.16.
who did eat nothing nor drink water, for three days and three nights; or of
some other Christians* who as Saint Austen mentions, August. de mo ibus
Ecclesiae Catholicae.
did forbear in like sort, being both men and women. The difference of
climates for heat and cold, makes the stomach different, and that may be
endured in hot countries, which in the cold cannot. Their inward heat is
less, and therefore their appetite is not equal. Philosophers and
Cosmographers do yield the reason of this, and why men eat more in the
Northern countries, then in the Southern, and do digest it more readily. And
experience does so far witness this, that as Buchanan has noted, Buchan.
Hist. Scotiae li. 10.
the French men do think that we of Britany, that is Englishmen and Scots, are
great deuourers of flesh: so the Spaniards think of the French men; and the
people of Africa do imagine so of the Spaniards. Then is it an unequal match,
for us that are coldly situated, in comparison of the^ who live nearer the
Tropike, to imitate them in fasting. And this consideration together with a
remembrance, that amating and fear of death, do utterly quell the stomach,
gives much light to that place, Act. 27.33.
where it is written, that Paul's company did abstain for so many days
together, in the danger of a shipwreck. It is said that they continued
fasting* and received nothing, which I understand to be meant, that they
received nothing by any set and orderly meal, or they received nothing in
comparison of their ordinary feeding. And so much I thought good to speak
concerning fasting, being occasioned thereunto by the deed of the Ninevites,
and the Kings proclamation. This verse does yield one thing more, that the
cattle and beasts were enjoined here to the penance, which because it is
offered again, in the next verse, I do defer it thereunto. In the mean time
let us pray to God, that he will pardon us our negligence in our duty, and that
he will stir up our spirits, partly by example here of these Ninevites, and
partly by other in his word, to be fearful of his displeasure, and to be
willing to serve him, that after the expiring of this life, we may live
together with him, to whom with his blessed Son, and his most holy Spirit be
glory for evermore.

THE XXII. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 2. Some apparel shows sorrow. 4. Reasons why beasts bore
part in this humiliation. 8. How cattle may be said to cry to God. 9. The
necessity and force of prayer. 12. Reformation of life must go with fasting and
prayer.

Jonah. 3.8. But let man and beast put on sackclo^h, and cry mightily unto God:
yea let every man turn from his evil way, and from the wickedness that is in
their hands.


I Have read this verse, as an imperative speech, but the Septuagint translate
it, as an Indicative in the time past, that men and beasts did put on
sackcloth, and cried mightily unto God. Wherein, as it may well be collected,
they did not so much respect the original words in the Hebrew, as intended to
make the deed of the Ninevites plain, who doubtless did repent, and performed
that charge which their King did put upon them. But since the words and letter
of the text are otherwise, as it is plain in the Prophet, and all other
interpreters as far as I can find, do with one consent translate it as I
read it; I think that they might well have forborne, to take on them the
office of Expositours, or openers of the text at large, and kept themselves to
the letter, allowing that to Gods spirit, which is very familiar with it; that
is to say, that oftentimes it should briefly insinuate things, and leave that
by necessary circumstances to be understood, which yet it does not openly
specify in word. And the truth concerning this place now in hand is, that it
is meant that we should take it, that the Ninevites repented: and so much is
implied by such consequents, as afterward follow: but this verse is a part of
the Kings Edict, wherein he inioyneth some thing more then a fast, which should
pinch the belly, and commands sackcloth to be put on the back, as an
external sign of sorrow, and then prayers to be powered out to the Lord, with
vehement exclamation; and last of all, that there should be a conversion from
iniquity and sin, that the cause of the wrath being once removed, vengeance
it self might cease. I can never sufficiently commend the care of this mighty
ruler, who left nothing unperformed, which might win God unto him. A man worthy
to be eternized, in the memory of all ages. But my meaning is, that thos^
things which he did, should rather commend him, then any praise of mine. You
have heard some arguments of his goodness before, which I need not to
repeat, but now there

Let men and beasts put on sackcloth.
2 That sackcloth in times past was used for a sign of sorrow, I noted upon
the sixth verse; and therefore if it should be taken here most literally, for
it self and nothing else, it serves fitly for our purpose, that is to import
great sorrow. But if you list imagine, that every man in Niniue did not suit
himself so suddenly, neither yet his cattle in such attire; then
Metaphorically we may understand thereby, all sorowing mourning weed, that is
to say the basest apparel, and most sordide kind of vesture that the men could
put on; and that the beasts were left rough, and vncombed, and undressed, and
every way untrimmed in their kind. And that it may be so expounded, we have
warrant from that place, where God says of himself, I clothe the heavens
with darkness, and make a sack their covering, which must needs be taken
Tropically, for some ugly kind of appearance, and not for a material sack;
for how does that agree with the heaven? Then the beasts did want their
ornaments, or were covered with some vile substance, and the men were rudely
apparelled, contrary to their custom: It is said by the wise man, Sirac^d.
19.28.
that clothes are one of those things, which show what a man is. And indeed it
is true; for so far as external things may witness of the inward, monstrous
clothes show monstrous minds; and for the most part, sober apparel shows a
sober disposition. But in the course of every particular man's life, a
difference in his garments notes a difference in other matters. In solemn
feasts, or when the mind is filled with joy and gladness, robes and dainty
attire are put about the body: but when sorrow ouer-whelmeth and oppresses the
inward man, gayness is laid aside. Exodus 33.2.3.4.
God being offended with the Israelites, tells them that indeed they should
go into the land of Canaan, but he himself would not go before them, as he had
done in former times, but only would send his Angel. At this the people so
grieved, because God would not go before them, that it is said, they sorowed,
and no man put on his best raiment. There is no greater outward token of
heaviness, and deiection of the mind, then to go in very mournful clothing.

3 The great Monarke of Niniue meaning to purchase his peace, gives
commandment to his subjects, that laying aside their glorious and luxurious
attire, they should be most meanly clothed, thinking thereby to strike a
horror into the minds of his people. For when their eyes should take knowledge
of that which they saw without, and as windows should let their receipts in to
their understanding; and whereas things seen do move most* Visa mouent maxim.
and nature not perverted loves cleanliness and decency, white garments and
the head anointed: How could their heart choose but humble, and cast down it
self within, to know that the limbs were compassed with most doleful
apparel, and fine linen, and the best purple should be turned into rags, or
course sackcloth, or hairecloth? And when such as they did meet, should
represent the like show, and so many witnesses of grief should be as so many
spur^es unto groaning, it is very probable that a broken spirit and a contrite
heart might grow from those visible things; and that of all other, is most
acceptable to the Lord. Psalm. 51.17.
So the maker and governor of all things might take notice of their melting
for their sin, and draw back his outstretched rod. He who pitied that evil
King Achab, 1. Reg 21.27.
who had sold himself over unto sin, when he once put sackcloth upon him,
and fasted and went softly; he might right well spare the great city Niniue,
when his eyes should as fully see their debasing of themselves, as his ears
plainly receive the cries, which they sent up unto him. So the people by their
mourning attire, might be bettered in works and conversation, and Gods favor
might be procured, when there was a witness both inwardly and outwardly of
their repentance. Now as this is worth the knowing, concerning the reason of
the changing of their clothes, so the doubt may not unfitly be moved, why the
beasts are named here, as if they had offended; and why they should be so
disguised? The reason is very manifest, wherefore it should be so with the men
and women: they had grieved the Lord, by transgressions of all sorts, and
therefore it was fit, that they should make amends. Yea the very little
infants, and those who suck the breasts, as the Prophet Joel speaks, Joel.
2.16.
might well taste of the bitterness, as being slips of an evil root, cut out
from a rotten rock, come from a polluted fountain: in the very propagation
stained with original sin: But it is not so plain a matter, why the dumme
beasts should fast, and b^ barred of their food (for so it is in the former
verse) or why they should be covered with sackcloth and mourning weed, who
knew not what it is to offend.

4 But one reason might be, that the people might in those creatures see as in
a glass, what was their own state. For when their ears should hear the
bellowing of the oxen, the braying of the asses, the bleating of the sheep,
the howling of the dogs, making piteous exclamation for want of food to their
bellies; and their eyes also should see the outsides of them to be ugly and
deformed, like that ground which lies as ouer-growne, they might forthwith
remember, that themselves had deserved to be pined, and starued to death, and
to be deprived of all pleasures, and delights which they did enjoy, that from
henceforth bearing on them many woes and lamentations, they might finally be
over taken with unspeakable desolation. God made such use as this is, of the
cattle in the old Leuiticall sacrifices: for when he for whom they were
offered, did see them to be slain, their blood to be let out, some of them to
be burnt, all of them to be used with much violence, if not quartered and cut
in pieces and mangled; he might presently be stricken at the heart, to think of
his own deserts, that if he had his demerites, he should be martyred and
mangled in his body here upon earth, and his soul should burn and fry in
unquenchable flames of hell. It does teach the Lion obedience, when he sees
that dog whom he loves, and uses as his play-fellow, to be cudgeled and
beaten before him. And when for the young kings fault, the garment which he
wears should be beaten with many stripes, the Prince who had offended, might
learn what his error was, conceiving himself blameworthy by that
representation. The children of the Spartanes might make this use, when they
beheld the bondslaues of their fathers, lie tumbling in that filthiness, which
drunkenness caused to them, as to think that they should be but loathsome
beasts, if they proved to be drunkards. A sight so lively in their eyes, might
be as a sharp spur in the consciences of the Ninevites, to deplore their
own case, with a most careful contemplation of it, unless they were
insensible and so obdurate in heart, as that no good thing could pierce them.
Diodorus Siculus writes, Diodor. Sicul. Antiq. lib. 4*3.
that in Ethiopia there is a people of that quality, that they are not at all
moved with the speech of them who sail by them, or with the sight of
strangers approaching to them, but only looking upon the earth, they use to
stand immovable, as if their senses took knowledge of no man. If any, says
he, should strike them with a drawn sword, they fly not, but bear the
stripes and injuries: neither is any of them moved with the wound, or hurt of
another, but oftentimes without any kind of passion, they ^ehold their wives
and children slain, showing no manner of token, of anger or of pity. An
insensible sort of people, if there should be any such, which in truth I
believe not: but these Ninevites should have been like to them, if when they
had beheld horror and grief, and weeping, and out-skreeking, in every thing
attending them, they would not be moved to think, that their part was in the
bargain. And if it were so with that which wanted wit and reason, and
knowledge to do evil things, how then should it stand with themselves, who had
all these and abused them? Then the cattle served in such manner, might be an
instruction this way to their masters.

5 Secondly, by the laws of the graund Creator, there is such affinity
between man, and the beasts which are subjected to his use, that the sorrows
of the better do easily touch the worser. For God has so coupled all creatures
to mankind, with a chain of strong dependence, that the being of them is much
suitable to the flourishing, or fading of the other. It is a very mystical
point, which Saint Paul has in the eight to the Romans, Roman. 8.21.
that the creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God, 22.
And that the creature groneth and trauelleth in pain with us; yet if we well
weigh it, that text shall argue thus much unto us, that the heaven and earth
and the other elements (for I may not amiss name the heavens, because Saint
Peter tells us, 2. Pet 3.7.
that they shall melt with heat) by the fall of our first parents, fell into
grievous bondage, even sinking in their excellency, when man did sink, to
whose service next after God they were made. And when in the day of judgment,
there shall be a renewing and restoring of that image of God, wherein man was
first framed, then shall they return to that beauty, wherein they at first
were established, so retaining still their substance, howsoever they may melt
in the fire like gold, loosing their dross and corruption. If then these
mighty masses, the heaven and earth and the elements, have such a reference
unto man, as being made to grace him; the earth for him to walk on, the air
for him to breath on, the water for him to feed on, the heaven for him to
look on, the Sun to give him light, every thing to yield him comfort, and
when he stands they stand, and when he falls they fall, and when he is new
molded, they also shall be recovered; may we not much more imagine, that
sheep, and oxen, and cattle, yea and all the beasts of the field, Hieron.
contra louinianum. lib. 2. Ad esum aut ad vsum.
which as Hierome notes, were made for our using, or for our eating, are tied
and chayned unto us, with a straighter bond of analogy or proportion, that as
we fare, so in reason they should do, either well or ill? It is truth, that man
has not that sovereignty in all degrees, which he had: Chrysostom. lib. de
Virginitate.
that is one part of his punishment: for as Chrysostom does observe, God has
taken away from man, a great portion of his power; for he who at the beginning
was made a fearful Lord, and master over living bodies, when like an
ungrateful servant he had offended a higher Lord, was brought into contempt of
those, who were placed to be his servants. Pererius in Genes. lib. 4. ex Hugone
de Sancto Victo^e.
And thereupon (as it is by one noted) many creatures are grown in their
behavior toward him, as vndisciplinated things; but most of all, the greatest
and the least; Lions, Tigers and Panthers (to say nothing of the whale fishes)
are very hardly brought to be tame, but bees and gnats, and flies, and such
little ones, not at all. Thus man's dominion is scanted, and drawn into a
narrow room.

6 But these creatures are not so quitted, but although they do less to man,
yet with man they suffer more. For together with him, who now is but as a young
master, or a kind of quarter-maister to them, they stand both generally, and
particularly, in deep disgrace. They which otherwise would have taken pleasure
to do the will of their master, must now with blows and stripes oftentimes be
forced unto it. They which should only have been used to good, and to the
glory of their maker, by his fault who has fallen, are now applied to evil;
yea they be not in that esteem with him, who first created them. As in
earthly kingdoms when a Nobleman, who has received many favors and
material benefits from his Prince, does requite him who advanced and honored
him before, with treason and rebellion, then not only his own person (which
lies subject to the law) does vnder-go the displeasure of his offended
Sovereign, but every man about him, feels the smart of that rod, yea every
thing that was his; his family is frowned on, his followers are held suspect,
those which were preferred by him, are turned out of their liuelihood and
maintenance; and moreover his houses which were glorious before, are let run
to decay, their stateliness soon droopeth, their beauty mouldreth away, his
gardens and his orchards are ouer-growne with vncouthnesse, his fish ponds and
other pleasures lie disorderly and neglected; yea if there were any tame thing
wherein he did delight, for lack of being handled, it grows wild and
untamed: So when Adam in Paradise, being in the highest degree of honor,
proved a traitor to his God, to whom he was beholding even for his very
self, the earthly house where he dwelt, grew out of fashion to him, his
pleasurable profits were turned to briars and thistles, the arms of his
nobility were utterly defaced; Psalm. 8.6.7.
but those who were his servants, to attend and wait upon him, especially all
domestical kinds of cattle, partaking the reproach which lay upon their
master, are subjected to much misery. And as in civil affairs, the
restoring again of blood, and calling back into favor, puts life into all
the adiacents, and dependants of whom I spoke before, and makes them resume
some courage; yea the hope of such a matter does a little cheer their spirit,
but the greater the hope is, the greater is their alacrity; and yet as he
still is dejected, so still again they fall: Even so without doubt, all
regaining of good aspect from the Highest, does refresh these inferior bodies,
as sometimes appears, when in noted prosperity of the owner, the cattle
fare the better; but while man does stand disgraced, they must expect the like
fortune; and if extraordinarily at any time he do smart, they must also look
for some unusual kind of sorrow. Then when this strange fear and heaviness,
possessed the minds of the Ninevites, the horses and beasts of Niniue by
partaking that misery, which belonged to their masters, might be taught to
be affected with some measure of that sorrow, as knowing that some evil was
now lighting upon them.

7 This matter will grow playner, if this also be considered, that the cattle
many times do actually feel shrewd pains, together with their owners. When
destructions happen unto places, all things abiding in those places, have their
share in the misery. When a town of war is assaulted, do not the houses often
taste of the enemies battery, and are not those razed or fired, together with
the desolation of the walls? Are not the trees of pleasure near adjoining
very often cut down? Yea are not the horses wounded, and perhaps slain in
the fight? or other cattle burnt in the stall? Is not that proverb
experimented diverse times in this case, Love the master, love his dog, hate
the master, 1. Sam. 15.3.
hate his dog? When Saul was sent to destroy Amalek, was there not a strong
charge laid upon him, to kill the sheep and the oxen, and every living
thing? And if God send forth a pestilence, come there not as well rottes of
cattle, and great murrens of beasts, as mortalities of men? But if there
should be some earthquake, which either should cast down the houses, and
crush that which were under them, or should force the ground to open, so to
swallow up that where withal it meets, how could the dumme creatures hence
escape? When therefore it was foretold, that within forty days, desolation
should betide the city Niniue, and mention was not made in what particular
sort it should come, the inhabitants could not tell, but that the beasts in
their place, had as much need to cry, as those who were their owners. Add to
these, that some living things whom use has made domestical, are not so
deuoyde of feeling, but that sensibly they perceive the joy, or
discontentednesse of those which are their keepers, and oftentimes are affected
with some things like to man. Birds have their dumpes and their notes, and
take knowledge in general, when they hear the voice of music. Using to the
hand, does make the horse, and dog and calfe, to play and be wanton, and to
express some signs of joy. And I think that I do not abuse the word, to say,
that some of them in some things, have a kind of fellow-felling with us. Now
there is nothing, which does more teach this, then by giving or denying them
food for their bellies, which was done among the Ninevites, while the fast
continued. For as the ox does know his owner, Isay. 1.3.
so the Ass does take notice of his masters cribbe: although he be dull, yet
his sense can serve him, to observe those things which make for the filling of
his paunch. And if this be moreover true, that those beasts do take delight in
their furniture and ornaments, and the proud neighing horse, Job. 39.22.
as we may gather from the words of Job, knows when he goes to the battle:
if he think himself the brauer, for his saddles and caparisons, or bells or
plumes of feathers, which be about him; then by a reason drawn from the
contrary, there may be in them a perceiving, what it is to be spread with vile
things, and so it might be a discouragement, to be clothed with sackcloth. So
we see by this time, that it was not without reason, when by the proclamation
of the king, the beasts had their part, as well as the men; that either as a
glass set before them, they might move them to think of themselves, by
seeing the creatures, whose affliction could not choose but touch them, since
they are given to men for helps: Or because by the providence of God, they are
pinned to the suffering of man; in ordinary disgraces to be disgraced with him,
and in sorrows extraordinary, to have their part in like manner. If I had not
already been ouer-long in this point, I might join this also, to that which
has been said before, that it is the more reasonable, that the dumme creatures
should feel some portion of the pains for sin, because they oftentimes are
apparent means, and helps and instruments, for men to sin withal, as might
largely be amplified. But no more of that matter.

God. Then the next help which they had, was prayer and invocation. I mean
not much to dispute, whether the cattle may be said to cry to God. We may hold
it for an undoubted truth, that there be no such meditations, and reasonable
discourses in them, as are fit to be in one of us, when we are praying: they
have no such understanding: and yet the Lord, who in his providence does take
care over hairs and sparrowes, Luc. 12.6.7.
respects all their cries, and takes many of those cries, as a kind of
calling on him. We need not fear to speak that, which the Spirit of God has
spoken. In the hundredth forty and seventh Psalm, Psalm. 147.9.
our common translation has, he feeds the young ravens that call upon him:
the letter in the Original goes not so far, but he feeds the young ravens
who do cry or croape, not mentioning that they call upon God. But if we will
supply it, from the nine and thirtieth of Job, we may perfect it up to this
purpose: for there the Lord himself speaks thus: Who prepares for the raven
his meat, Job. 39.3.
when his birds cry unto God, wandering for lack of meat? He who hears
the cry of the ravens, hears the cry of other things; and he who reputeth
their croaping, a calling upon himself, may do so in other creatures. Then it
offends him not, when together with the outcries of the men, and the
howlings of the women, and the schreeking of the children, the bellowing of the
oxen, and the bleating of the sheep was heard: nay without doubt it was the
more gracious in the ears of the Lord of hosts. For as when men do sing, it
makes the more perfect music, to join to their lively voices, the sound of
diverse instruments, which are dead matters without life or feeling, so it
helped the heavenly harmony of these calling and praying Ninevites, to have the
outcries of the cattle mixed with them; and God did hold this variety, to be
the more perfect a consort. So that the place bears it not amiss, that both
the men and the beasts cried mightily upon God. But if there should be any man,
more scrupulous then need is, he may take this to be spoken by the figure
Synecdoche, which applies unto both, that which is meant of one only: and the
whole (by that means) has that adiunct, which is proper but to a part. And
then it may be understood, that the dumme creatures had their portion in the
sackcloth and the fast, but the men only did pray. But be it either the one
way or the other, it yields this lesson to us, for the instruction of our
duty, that when danger is threatened, and there is fear or feeling of any
direful thing upon us, among other our preparations, or above other if you
will, we should break into open prayer, and jointly deplore our sins, and so
call to God for mercy. For if any thing in such cases will serve the turn, it
is faithful invocation, which is better then all burnt sacrifice. Surely the
King of Nineveh took the rightest course that may be; and whether it were that
he were taught, and informed by the light of nature, or the teaching of any
other, or by secret revelation from the spirit of the Eternal, certainly he
was in the right pathway, to purchase grace with God, when both himself and
all his people, as humble suppliants did lift up their voice in prayer.

9 For very great is the reckening which God does make of prayer: he
commands it, and expects it, and rewards it in his Saints. Psalm. 50.15.
Call on me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee. Psalm. 145.18.
And in another Psalm, The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him, yea all
such as call upon him faithfully. So our Savior Christ bids, Matthew. 7.7.
Ask and you shall receive: knock and it shall be opened to you. Those many
good things which were granted to Moses, to Iosuah, to Samuel, to David and
Solomon, Jacob. 5.17.
confirm this plainly to us. Elias bound up heaven by a request to the Lord,
and had rain again for asking. 2. Reg. 19 15.
How but by prayer, did Ezechias turn the evil thought of Sennacherib away
for his land and people? How was Peter brought out of prison, Act. 12.5.
but by the cries of the Congregation? Eusebius. de vita Constantini. lib. 1.11.
Lib. 4.14.
By this the good Constantius was said, to strengthen his family: but
Constantine the Great, his son, did hereby fortify all his Empire. This is
the sword and the shield, to which we all should fly, when the enemy does
invade us: and to this we should retire our selves, when famine does pinch our
bellies, when we are in sickness or sorrow, in bondage or in banishment. This
is it which flies to the heavens, and is not kept back by the clouds, nor
terrified with the height, nor frighted with the frowns of ius^ice. But
especially in our combats with our spiritual foes, we are to run to this, as
to a most safe sanctuary, and to desire him who is the conquering Lion of the
tribe of Judah, to assist us and uphold us. Let not Satan on the one side be so
fierce upon us, as we on the other side be earnest upon the Lord: if he urge us
with sin, let us cry out for grace: if he talk to us of justice, let us
beg the more for mercy. And when the trembling conscience, shall thus by
request have recourse unto him who can help, it does not return dismayed, but
as being spoken to by God, comes back with assured comfort. In the presence
of Christ says Saint Syprian, Cyprian. de Caena Domini.
tears which are never held superfluous do beg a pardon for us, neither ever
does the sacrifice of a contrite heart take repulse. As often as I see thee
groaning in the sight of the Lord, so often I do not doubt but the holy Ghost
breaths on thee: When I see thee weeping, I imagine him to be pardoning. So
gracious and so pitiful is our good father to us. We may then account it as
one of our sins, that when inward and outward sorrows, oftentimes do lay
hold upon us, we do not use this remedy. We go on like insensible men, as
frantike ones being most sick, and yet we understand it not. And if we find
that we need help, we least of all require it by prayer; and he who should
first be thought of, that is God the judge of all, does come last in the
reckening. The Ninevites must all cry, and they must cry to the Lord, and
nothing else, not to idols, not to Angels, not to Saints, or any creatures: but
I handled that argument once already, upon some words of the second Chapter,
Jonah. 2.1.
that Jonas prayed to the Lord, and therefore I do now leave it.

10 And yet I must not here omit one circumstance of prayer, that they are bid
cry might^lie, strongly, aloud, or earnestly: not that God does rather hear,
when the most noise is made: for he is not like Baal, 1. Reg. 18.27.
who must be awaked with loud crying, but he knows the heart and reins, and
searches the very thoughts. That is truly found to be so in the Lord,
Tertullian. de Oratione
which Tertullian reports of the Devil (or spirit of the Oracle of Apollo)
that he assumeth thus much to himself; I both understand ^he dumme, and hear
him who speaks not. God could say to Moses, Exodus 14.15
why criest thou unto me, and yet he spoke never a word: but within he sighed
and groned, and was troubled in his spirit. Then it is not for any weakness in
the Lord, that man should cry aloude, but to signify that when we desire to
obtain, our prayers should be vehement and with motion, not only formal or
perfunctorie, or cold, or drowsy and sleepie. But the usual prayers of the
most men in our time are such; without touch what themselves do ask, and
therefore it is no marvel, that they are heard so few times. It is a right
good precept, and also a just reprehension to the people of his time, which
Saint Cyprian does use, and it may well be applied to our age, wherein the
minds of many in the time of their devotions are upon pleasure, or profit, or
some other such earthly thing: Thus he speaks: Cyprian. de oratione Do nanica.
Let all earthly and secular and carnal thoughts depart, neither let the mind
then think on any thing, but only that for which it prays. What
sluggishnesse is it to be estranged and taken with unfit thoughts and profane
ones, when thou prayest to the Lord, as if there were anything else whereupon
thou should rather think, then that thou art speaking with God. How do
thou require that thou may be heard of God, when thou do not hear thy
self? This is to be awake with the eyes, and to be asleep with the heart,
whereas a Christian man should then be awake with his heart, when he sleeps
with his eyes. Here that we may testify our zeal, and withal prevent this
drowsinesse, it is not amiss when we find our selves to be heavy, that we do
such things, as may be in place of whetstones to sharpen us; as to bend our
knees, to cast up our eyes, to lift our hands to heaven, to beat our breasts,
or the like, yea also with contention of spirit, and extention of voice, if
time and place serve, to relieve our own infirmity. But this in synceritie as
before God, and without fained hypocrisy, which is a double wickedness.

Senec E. p. 10
and yet as if seems religious in his Ethnicke superstition, does complain
in this manner: What a madness is this in men? They do whisper unto their Gods
most filt hie requests: and if a man do hearken unto them, they will bold their
peace, and what they would not have a man know, that they tell to God. This
custom has prevailed among Christians, that leude men will not fear to ask
leude things in their prayers, the wanton to speed in his wantonness, the
deceiuer in his bargains, the oppressor in his oppressions. Loud crying does
meet with this, for although we dread not God, yet we stand in fear of men.
The Pythagoreans in old time did observe this well enough, of whom Clemens
Alexandrinus does write thus: What do the Pythagoreans mean, Clemens
Alexandrinus. Strom. lib. 4.
when they bid men cry aloud? Not as I think that they imagined, that God
would not hear such as speak secretly: but because they would have the
prayers of men just, which they should not fear to utter, yea although men did
know it. It is certainly a preposterous course, more to respect men who stand
by, then the Lord before whom they stand: but since the folly of men is such,
it is to be met with in his kind. Macrob. Saturn. li. 1.7.
He alluded well to this, who although he spoke not of loud crying, yet gave
counsel that we should so speak to men, as if God did always hear us (that
is, our talk should be with sobriety and wisdom) and so speak to God, as
if men did ever hear us, that is, reverently and religiously. Now as this does
teach us something, so I am rather of that mind for the king of Niniue, that he
commanded his by Proclamation, to cry stongly upon God, that by their
importunity and vehement exclamation, the Lord might be more moved to take
mercy upon them. When the hear of the heart within shall break forth into
the tongue, it is so much the more forcible.

Let them turn from their evil way.
12 There is yet a third thing to be found in this Proclamation, Let every man
turn from his evil way, and from the wickedness that is in their hands. That
which our English reads wickedness, is by other most fitly translated
violence, or robbery, or rapine, but Hierome and the Septuagint have
iniquity, (...). Where one kind of sin is put in the place of all the rest:
that one sin for all his fellows, either because that fault did much abound
in Niniue, I mean rapine and oppression toward those who were their subjects,
or toward the poor among them: or because in general, all men who know not
the Lord, are soon taken in that crime, as from some words of Saint Paul may
not unfitly be gathered; where after that he has exhorted them, 1. These.
4.4.5.6
to possess their vessels in holiness, and not in the lust of concupiscence,
as the Gentiles who know not God, he does name this as a special fruit of their
not knowing God, dehorting them from it, that no man oppress, or deceive his
brother in any thing. But to leave this particular, the doctrine is, that every
man who will turn to the Lord, must hate evil and fly wickedness, because
the Lord requires that, as a certain sign of repentance. When Solomon
consecrating the Temple made his prayer, 1 Reg. 8.35.
he speaks to God on this manner: When the heaven shall be shut up, and there
shall be no rain, because they have sinned against thee, and they shall pray
in this place and shall confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when
thou do afflict them, then hear thou in heaven. The condition is put in,
that they must turn from their sin. Ierem. 4.1.
So in the Prophet Jeremy: O Israel if thou return, return to me says the
Lord, and if thou put away thine abominations out of my sight, then shall thou
not remove. Matthew 3.2. cap. 4.17.
It was the preaching of John the Baptist, (...), repent, be wiser, change
your minds, or amend, and alter you lives, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. So the Apostle Peter, Amend your lives and return, Act. 3.19.
that your sins may be put away. And this putting off of sin; this laying
away of the old man, is that which makes us apt to walk the ways of the Lord.
For doing so we are expedite and nimble to tread his paths, to do as he does
command us, to go whither he bids us. But the pack of sin is so heavy,
that we cannot choose but double under it, and sink and fall. Then why do we
not make have to be freed from this burden? Augustine. Tract. 11. in Johan.
If men, as Saint Austen speaks, should bear any heavy load of wood, or
stone, or the like, yea if it were something gainefull, of wine, or corn, or
money, they would hasten to put that off. But they bear a greater load of
sin, and make no speed to be freed from it. But the retaining of this so
long, does in the end so tire out the conscience, that it faints under the
burden, as appears too often when in sickness and otherwise, the minds of
some are so distracted, that they tremble and dread much, lest it be too late
to cry for mercy. They have given way to malice, and have heaped evil upon
evil, and are so incorporated into it, that they cannot in themselves see any
way of separation. Yet let not such men despair, for Gods mercy is infinite,
and if a sentence were gone out against such, yet as Saint Ambrose writes,
Ambros. in Lucam. lib. 2. cap. 2.
in his Commentary on Saint Luke, God knows how to change his sentence, if
thou know how to amemd thy fault. But the fault at last must be amended, and
the former offenses unlearned and forgotten: else it is no good repentance. For
he alone does show himself worthily penitent, Gratian. par. 2. de Paenitentia.
Did. 3. E. Smarag.
who so deploreth evils past, that he does ^not again commit the same
afterward; for he who bewaileth sin, and afterward commits that sin, is
as if he were washed a raw or vndried brick, where the more he rubbeth it in
washing, the more dirt he does make. Whosoever then comes to God, who is a
God of pure eyes, Habac. 1.13.
must know that it is his will, that first he depart from evil.

13 And if this be not done, then all external works are but hypocritical
shows: thy prayer is but hypocrisy, for thou faiest to God, thy will be done,
and yet thou do thine own. Thy sackcloth is but a cover of a counterfeit
and deceiuer. Without a whited sepulcher, Matthew. 23.27.
within full of dead men's bones. Thy speaking of good things, or condemning
that which is evil, is but to condemn thy self, who in word do renounce
it, and yet in deed do embrace it. Corn. Tacitus Histor. lib. 3.
Tacitus reports, that in the civil war between Vitellius and Vespasian,
a soldier had killed his own father, who was of and in his enemies army. This
was bruted about the host, and every man complained, and execrated that war,
which caused such unnaturalness. And yet says Tacitus, they never the less,
nor slower, spoiled their neighbors, and kinsmen, and brethren, who were
slain by them, they cried that naught was done, and yet themselves still did
it. This is thy case, who speak against sin, and yet every day committest
it. Thy fasting and thy abstaining, is so far from being acceptable in the
eyes of the most High, that it is exceeding odious. For as here the King of
Niniue did join virtue with his abstinence, and a turning away from
wickedness with his fast, so God does still expect, that it should be done in
all fasts. The mind must forbear malice, and injury, and oppression, as well
as the belly does meat. See how plainly God speaks to this purpose, Isay.
58.4.
You fast to strife and debate, and to strike with the fist of wickedness.
Is this the fast which I have chosen, that a man should afflict his soul for
a day, and bovv down his head like a bulrush, and lie in sackcloth and ashes?
vvilt thou call this a fasting, and an acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this
the fasting which I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to take
off the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break
every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring
the poor that wander unto thy house, when thou see the naked that thou
cover him? Then it is the leaving of sin, which the Lord does more respect,
then the emptiness of the belly. And of this the holy Saints of God have
always thought: Ambros. Sermon. 33.
As Ambrose: This is the will of the Lord, that we should fast together from
meats and from sins. Let us impose an abstinence on our bodies, that we may
the more estrange our souls from vices. For the body when it is sucked dry,
is a bridle to the luxuriant soul. And Origene: Orig. Homil. 10. in Leuiticum.
Gregor. in 40. Homil. 16.
Fast from all sin, do thou take no meat of malice, neither any delights of
pleasure. And Gregory: To sanctify a fast is, when other good things are
adjoined, to show an abstinence of the flesh worthy of God. Let anger cease,
let chidings be laid asleep, for the flesh is in vain tired out, if the mind
be not refrained from his naughty pleasures.

14 I wish that such of our people, as yet have familiarity with that filthy
harlot of Babylon, would think upon this matter, that it is not only ceremony,
or bare performing of outward things, which does appease the Lord when he is
offended, no not if it be to macerate and pine the body to death, unless a
sincere faith do purify all within, and an honest conversation do make all
clear without. It must be a lively conversion, which God takes for payment of
us. And we who profess religion, may hold this for an assured ground, that our
faith is but a dead faith, unless it shine by love: that all our speaking and
seeming, is fraudulent and deceiptfull, if our life be not joined to it. Our
repayting to the Church, and professing of strict holiness, will be rejected
as too light, if we either oppress our neighbor, or grind the face of the
poor, or scratch we care not what, be it never so unlawful, or lead lives
polluted, with whoredom and adultery. If we make our selves rich with usury
or briberie, if we circumuent men in bargaining, if we profane the Sabbath, or
despise the ministry, we frustrate that which we do pretend. And the very
King of Niniue, who could learn with little teaching, that amendment of life
was the truest devotion, and that as a most necessary clause, must be joined
with all ceremonies, shall in the judgment condemn us, who after the hearing
of many years, use to bring but halfe-repentance, and would willingly be the
Lords, but we would be this worlds also. And so wishing, that this doctrine of
amendment, may evermore be remembered by us, I leave you to Christ Jesus, who
multiply all good graces in us to the end, and bring us to his father, to whom
with himself and his Spirit, the Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity
be glory for evermore.

THE XXIII. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 1. It is not defined whether the faith of the Ninevites
were only temporal. 3. 6. Sin is not to be thought of lightly. 5. The force
of conscience in the guilt of sin. 7. Faith hops when there is little
likelihood. 8. We are to trust on Gods mercy. 9. God respects repentance.
10. Works must follow faith. 12. How the Lord is said to repent. 14. His
threatenings are conditional. 15. How Niniue may be said to be destroyed. 16.
Comfort to us.

Jonah. 3.9.10. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from
his fierce wrath, that we perish not? And God savv their works, that they
turned from their evil vvayes, and God repented of the evil, that he had said
that he would do unto them, and he did it not.


THe broken melting heart, and contrite spirit of the king of Niniue, has been
signified unto you, in the words before going; how as a good Prince he gives
his people a religious example, and first by his deed coming off from his
throne, and putting sackcloth on him; and afterward by his word, and commanding
Proclamation, he stirs his people up, to a rare humiliation. Here it might
be discussed, of what sort their faith was, by which they apprehended the fear
of the Lord, and how far their repentance went; either to be a permanent and
justifying faith, a faith saving eternally, which could not be in them, but by
hearing of Christ Jesus, the redeeming Messiah-( for among men there is no name
given under heaven, Act. 4.12.
whereby we must be saved, but that name of Christ) or whether their believing,
was a temporary assent to that which they heard (and unto nothing else) of the
destruction of their city, which might strike a mighty horror into their mind
for a time, as the preaching of Elias did to that wicked King Ahab, 1. Reg.
21.29.
when he humbled himself and fasted; yet they might relent afterward, and
return to their vomit, allured by the world, or inueigled by such lusts, as
were usual in former time. Howsoever it was; if you allow it to the least, but
a short and particular faith, it teaches us thus much, that if they in their
ignorance arose to so high a measure, then we in so much knowledge, should
arise to much more, and so their example is not to us in vain. But for the
maine point, since the Spirit of God is silent therein, and does not directly
in any place determine it, for ought that I find, and the reasons which the
interpreters do draw by consequent, concerning this faith of the Ninevites are
such* as conclude not substantially without doubting, I pass over that
question, and rather come to that, which literally and apparently, even at the
first sight, the narration of the Prophet does offer unto me.

2 Then, in the tenth verse, follows Gods accepting of their sorrow, and how
mightily their deiection, and debasing of themselves in sackcloth and ashes,
with fasting and lamentation, wrought effectually with the Highest, to diminish
his displeasure, yea to remove his wrath. But because the closing, and
shutting up of that serious Proclamation in the ninth verse, does intimate some
opinion (although it be with a fearful mammering) of some such thing as might
be, that the Lord might be appeased, although that were not very likely, in the
eyes of flesh and blood, that must not be slipped over, but taken in the way.
For thereby it shall appear, that sin is very horrible to the conscience of
the sinner, conceiving the guiltiness thereof, that it may well make a
trembling, and shaking and dread, a suspicion that God will not be moved to
mercy, and yet this distrust does not so kill the mind, but if faith be
underneath, it will presume the contrary, be it never so weakly. It does not
resolve for, neither yet define against. On these terms, in these words,
stands the great King of Niniue. But that which was to him uncertain and
unresolved, is determined by God, and he spares indeed. Now that the doctrine
may be orderly deduced from these roots, for our better instruction, we may
divide the words, Who knows if God will turn, and then the Lords
resolution, And God savv their works, and repented of the evil. The first
part does touch the prisoner, who stands upon his trial; the second, the
Judge, who is to give the sentence. Of both these as Gods Spirit, shall at this
time enable me.

The doubt of the King.
I doubt, or peradventure, or it may be, or who knows, it imports that men
conceive much difficulty and hardness, in bringing that about which is in
question. Caleb makes request, Iosuah. 14.12.
that the mountain wherein the Anakims, and great Giants did dwell, might be
assigned him for his portion, If says he the Lord will be with me to expel
them, as the Lord himself has spoken. He believed that he should compass it,
but that if intends much difficulty, in the reason of man. And so did that
of Ionathas, when he speaks thus to his armor bearer, 1. Sam. 14.6.
Let us go up against the Philistines, It may be or peradventure the Lord will
work with us. Act. 8.22.
That saying of Peter unto Simon Magus, Repent of this thy wickedness, and
pray unto God, if perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven unto thee,
does note much more hardness: because as it should seem, the Apostle did much
fear it; so rotten was Simon at the root. But as a mean between these, and
most resembling my text, is that of Joel, where after a denouncing of very
horrible judgments, the Prophet exhorting to repentance, Joel. 2.14.
does add, Who can tell if he will turn, and repent and leave a blessing? as
if he had said, it may be that God may do this, although it be much unlikely,
and it may be much despaired of; our sins are so plentiful, and his wrath is
so furious. In the first book of Samuel, when the people of the Philistines
were stricken with the Emerods, they asked counsel of their Soothsayers, how
this plague might be stayed. 1. Sam. 6.5.
They enjoined that some solemnities should be used to the Arc, which was now
to be sent away, and thus they speak (as it is nearest to the Hebrew)
Peradventure God will lift his hand from you. Gregory writing on that place,
Gregor* in 1. Sam. 6.
does draw this doctrine from those words: When they say peradventure God may
stay his hand from you, what else can be taken in this word of doubting, but
that the reconciling of men who are grievous sinners, is showed to be
difficult, as says he, does appear in the third Chapter of Jonas, Who
knovveth if God will turn? Then by the judgment of Gregory, it is noted in
this place, that the reconciling of the Ninevites to the Lord, was a matter of
much hardness.

4 Then in the heart of this heathen man, it is firmly imprinted, by that
little light which he had received, that sin in the justice of some supreme
power, does deserve a punishment: that the greater the sin is, the more it
does provoke: that if by ob^tinacie and impiety, it be unmeasurable, it will
scant be remitted. And this is a common opinion in all the world, that impiety
is horrible, and may well be wondered at, for those punishments which it draws
upon men. Jonah. 1.7.
The mariners who were in the ship with Jonas, seeing the tempest to grow
terrible, and much beyond ordinary, conceived by and by, that sin was at one
end of it, and drew down that severity. The people in the Island Melite (which
we now a days call Malta) did miss in their particular, Act. 28.4.
when they took Paul for a murderer: but their general guess was good, that
vengeance does follow intolerable transgressions. That (...) there spoken of,
being the supposed Goddess of judgments, and punisher of guilty persons, as
also that Nemesis which the Ethnickes, and their Poets did hold, for an
unavoidable revenger of evil men, appointed to be so by their Jupiter, does
witness that every where was a settled opinion, that crimes leudly done, would
not lightly be passed over. And herein the wisdom of the Almighty Lord, is
very highly to be admired, that whereas he has not given down any law written
in books, yet by the finger of his power, he has written it in men's hearts,
that there is a good and an evil: lawful things and unlawful: that their
wise men should teach, that the observing eye of some superior Judge, was ever
at hand to look on the deeds of men, and at one time or another, to make them
smart for committing of evil. That their law-giuers should forbid that, which
God himself forbids, and should punish that in their people, which the Lord
does punish in his own. The Scythians to condemn theft, Justin. lib. 2. Dion.
Halicarnas. lib. 2. Herodot. in Euterpe.
the Romans adultery, the Egyptians idleness. That among them should be
required a strictness of life, a performing of ceremonies, an offering of
sacrifices, a consulting of Oracles, a frequenting of Temples, and a reverence
to such who did perform those things, as in Rome a high opinion was had of
Scipio, when he omitted not a day, Liuius lib. 26.
but that he went to the Capitol to perform his devotions.

5 But as I take it, the wisdom of the Lord in declaring to the ignorant how
far he hates evil, does appear more fully in nothing, then by putting into
men, a conscience within, which should accuse and condemn the most hard hearted
sinner: which so often as by maliciousness great mischiefs are done, should
represent the sin unto the inward thought, with terrible suggestions of
vengeance to follow, and should give no rest to the disquieted sinner. Among
ignorant men, there is no one token which enforces like this token, that
ungodliness is loathsome, and odious in it self, and bears a sting with it.
And this has so far been known to haunt the offenders, and torture them
within, that Tragedians on their stages, have oftentimes represented those
passions, by furies of hell fearfully tormenting some, Tul. Oration. pro S.
Roscio Amerino.
which thing Tully does truly interpret, of the conscience of the
transgressing sinner, which does use to discruciate the person affected, in
unspeakable manner. Now what is it, that the conscience being in this case,
does give warning of? Even that at the least it is unlikely; but many times
that it is impossible that they should be remitted. Genes 4.11. Matthew. 27 4.
And hereof, in the Scriptures, Cain and Judas are eminent examples, who had an
opinion, that they had faulted so far, that they could not be pardoned. The
biting remorse of heinous offenses, does gnaw, and gnaw through. The
persecutours of others have tasted of this cup, and smarted with this rod.
Philo. Iud. in Flaccum.
Philo Iudaeus writing against Flaccus, tells that the same lewd man, played
all the parts of cruelty, which he could devise against the Jews, for their
religion sake; but afterward when the doom of Caligula fell upon him, and he
was banished into Andros, an Island near Greece, he was so tormented with the
memory of his bloody iniquities, and a fear of suffering for them, that if
he saw any man, walking softly near to him, he would say to himself, This man
is devising to work my destruction. If he saw any go hastily; Sure it is not
for nothing: he makes speed to kill me. If any man sp^ke him fair, he
suspected that he would cousin him, and sought to entrap him. If any talked
roughly to him, then he thought that he contemned him. If meat were given him
in any plentiful sort, this is but to fat me, as a sheep or an ox is fed, to
be slaughtered. Thus his sin did lie upon him, and ever remember him, that
some vengeance was to follow, from God, or men, or both. In our time such
measure has been measured to murderers: their thoughts have been so
troublesome after their wickedness done, that they have no more rested, then
if continually and vncessantlie, they had been pursued with legions of evil
spirits. The ages which are past have had their examples in this kind. When
Theodorike sometimes King of the Goths, Procop. lib. 1. de bello Gothico.
had unjustly and tyrannouslie slain Symmachus and Boethius, two Noble men of
Rome, the cruelty of that deed, and guilt of that foul trespass, did so
boil in his heart, that when once at his table, among other meat a fishes
head was set, he conceived it to be the very head of Symmachus, the eyes to be
his eyes, the teeth to grinne upon him, and falling into a fright, and stiff
coldness withal, he lies him down, as a ^an much distracted, and dies. So
heavy a burden is sin in the heart, which depresseth and crusheth down,
without recovery if it be not helped with some better persuasion, sent
immediately from God. There may in a natural man, be a struggling and wrestling
against such motions: but his heart and conscience are greater then himself,
and will put him in mind, that terrible desolation remains for him, who has
sinned presumptuously, or wilfully, and of purpose, and that he is not very
likely to be quitted from such crimes. This knowing of monstrous iniquities in
Niniue, does make the king thereof, as one who was amated and distracted, to
hope but doubtfully, and fearfully, for reconcilement between God and his
soul, between the Lord and his people.

6 And if he had reason for this, because of the heaviness of that sin,
which even by the light of nature, and assent of his own heart, he might fear
would be punished, we may make this use thereof, that boldly and audaciously we
diue not into wickedness, and plunging into the depth, do not tumble in the
suddes of it, and wallow in the sink, lest when we would be glad to come
forth again, and turn another leaf, distrust be our portion, and doubting
in a high degree, whether God will receive us. It is good so to embrace the
mercy of our Savior, that we also remember the severity of our Judge. When for
many years together, we with greediness have drunk in the puddle-water of
wickedness, we cannot be assured, that the Lord at our beck will bend
himself to clemency. Perhaps, time may be wanting: perhaps the counsel of
Gods Ministers; it may be the mind inured to a custom of filthiness, cannot
extricate it self: perhaps God will not give the gift of repentance, but as we
have despised to hear when he calls us, so when we shall call to him
unfruitfully and unfaithfully, he will not attend. It may be that the canker of
desperate sins, has so eaten out all faith in us, that we cannot by any
means appropriate Gods mercy, to our selves and our souls. It is a fearful
thing, when the Lords goodness shall be ingeminated again and again, to the
fainting heart, how ready he is to receive the repentant; how he calls to
sinners, and opens the bosom for them, and stretches out his arms: and how
Christ of purpose came to dye for offenders; and yet all this shall find no
other answer, but, These things are for other, they be not for me. I doubt not
but the Ministers of God, who have had trial in like cases, do sometimes quake
in their flesh, and tremble in their bones, to remember such examples, as their
own eyes have seen. It had been good for such, who at length be so touched,
and indeed for all men, to have made stay in time; for if they go on, and will
not be reclaimed when mercy is offered, who knows if afterward God will turn
and repent, and show pity upon them? Cito, long, tarde, vt in pesie ^ugienda.
Then learn to fly from sin, as from a killing pestilence: go from it soon
and far, and never turn again. This is worse then the pestilence: it is
poison sugared over, which may be sweet in taste, but is pernicious in effect.
The pleasure is soon gone, Chrysostom. de Lazaro, Co^cione. 4.
but the guilt remains. Saint Chrysostom therefore does make a fit
Antithesis, between it and the travel of a woman. She, says he, has her
throbs and pangs at the first, which in truth are very vehement; but afterward
there comes joy, when she beholds a child borne of her self into the
world. But on the other side, while it is in performance, sin makes much
mirth and glee, and the humor is contented with it, but when it is come
forth, and now may be seen, it causes to the committer more sorrows and
anguishes, then the sorrows of a woman. And what can be truer? For what grief
is like that, when the creature who might have been assured thereof, shall make
doubt of the mercy of his maker? It is not well, when the heart shall go but
thus far, at the highest, Who knows of God will turn? or it may be, that
he will do it, but we cannot reckon of it.

7 Yet as this which I have spoken, may be gathered from the hardness of the
thing, from the guiltiness of maliciousness, from the strictness of Gods
justice, from the doubtful speech of the King: So observe I pray you therein,
a faith like a grain of mustard seed, a spark among the ashes, a little
breath in the body. Who knows if God will turn? It may be: yet, it may be:
it is not a thing impossible: God may do that which we think not of: no man
can swear the contrary. Here then was a wrestling between hope and despair,
between faith and distrust, where although the better part were foiled and
overthrown, and laid along and wearied, yet lying upon the ground, even when
it cannot arise, it looks upward: albeit it have no strength to live, yet it
will not dye while it can live. It is recorded as a famo^s matter of Abraham,
that he did hope beyond hope: when all reason did cease, yet he did not give
over. Roman 4.18.
Of David, that he held on, when innumerable troubles did come about him, Psalm.
40.15.
when his sins had taken hold of him, when they were more in number then the
hairs of his head, yea his heart did fail him too, in very great measure.
Such a property has faith, it is not quite discouraged, where once it has set
footing. Even this Niniuite, he who is far from perfection, does think that
God can spare sinners; that it stands with the nature, with the custom, with
the honor, of so excellent a being as that Supreme power is, to pardon and
forgive. That although in themselves the errors of men deserve desolation, and
irrecouerable destruction, yet in that true compassion whereof God is the
father, he may be pleased to bear, and wink at transgressions. So that when
of man's part, not a dram of any commiseration may be expected, of the Lords
part somewhat may be looked for. And that is the only stake whereunto we must
trust, the anchor to fly to, the altar to lay hold on, in confidence whereof,
the offender who can believe may lift up his head; although his faith be full
of weakness, Psalm. 130 3.
and had much need to be helped. If thou Lord should be extreme, to mark
what is done amiss, who might abide it? But there is mercy with thee. But
there is mercy with thee.

8 And indeed so there is, very plentifully and abundant mercy with our
Creator, and that more in this time of grace, and the days of the Gospel,
then was in former ages. He who in the wilderness was a consuming fire to the
Israelites, is now a gentle father: he who was an exacting Judge, is now a
redeeming Savior: he who punished those that came not, now calls men to
come, and with an appeased countenance, and intent to be merciful, he meets
them and embraces them. Cyprian de passione Domini.
We may now cry with Saint Cyprian, Thou who in times past, vvast a God of
reuengement, now pitiest and sparest those who have offended: thou healest
the broken in heart, and bindest up the vvounded; to the prodigal son
returning, thou reprochest not his riot: to the adulterous harlot, thou
obieclest not her wantonness, thou refusest not the service of the woman,
albeit she were a common sinner: to him who ought thee money, thou do
forgive the debt. So the wounded conscience may apprehend that comfort in
another, which it cannot find in it self, and may oppose Gods only love, as a
most sufficient shield against all temptations. And where this is once
conceived with a mite of catching faith, which is true and unfeigned faith,
although an humble, stowping, creeping, weak and unable faith, there the soul
does not quite sink, but floateth above the water, until more strength be
gathered. The son of man shows pity, Mat^h. 12.20
seeks out that which is lost* binds up that which was broken, helps that
which is weak; the bruised reed he breaks not, the smoking flax he
quenches not. His coming was to save sinners: he came not to call the
righteous. If we had no faults in us, we had no work for his blood: and our
sins be they many, or be they mighty, are not so powerful, but his blood is
of more virtue. Therefore as Gregory speaks: Gregor. in Ezechiel. Homil. 9.
Let not the multitude of our vvounds depresse us unto despair, because the
power of our Physician is greater then the greatness of our sickness. For
what is it that he cannot repair unto salvation, who could create all things
of nothing? And when we shall rest our selves upon this, even after our offense
some comfort does remain. But my purpose here is not much to follow this
point, concerning Gods mercy, because a full occasion of discussing the same,
will be offered again in the second verse of the next Chapter; Jonah. 4 2.
yet now withal remember, that although the king of Niniue were frighted at
first, lest pardon should be denied him, for the haynousnesse of his crimes,
yet he does not despair, but with a glimce of faith, does put it to the
adventure, saying God can return, he is able to stay the plague, which we have
deserved. And the doctrine of Christianity does most incline to this, where
albeit we speak of justice, yet we rather offer mercy, according as Saint
John does direct us, 1. Johan. 2.1.
My babes I write these things unto you, that you sin not, that is, that you
abstain from it so far forth as you may, that willingly you do it not, nor
of purpose, nor presumtuously, but if any man have sinned, that is by weakness
or infirmity, or repent for it when he has done, we have an advocate with the
Father, we be not left quite destitute, even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he
is the propitiation for our sins. And thus hitherto having spoken of the doubt
of the king, now let us see how God determines it.

And God saw their works, how they turned.
Psalm. 56.8. 1. Reg. 18.28.
he tells our flittings, he puts our tears into a bottle, he notes all
in a book. He is not as Baal was, whose servants might cry and lance
themselves with knives, and all for his honor, yet himself be never the
wiser. The Ninevites fasted and put on sackcloth and prayed, upon the news of
the Prophets preaching, and with lamentable behavior did labor to show their
sorrow, that they should be reputed justly so vile in Gods eyes. They
acknowledge themselves to be ashes and dust: they stand as the stubble now
ready for the flame. How the heaven might help they know not, but from the
earth, is like to come no consolation. The Lord whose drift it was to bring
them to that pass, and had no other end of the sending of Jonas, so far from
his own country, but to work them hereunto, sits above in the heaven, and
beholding it, is much pleased. A favorable Judge, who will turn his eyes of
jealousy, into a gracious aspect, and will endure as much to save men, as he
will to spill them. As the crying sins of Niniue, and of Sodom and like
places, had access unto his cares, and so did call for vengeance, so the
repentance of the Ninevites had access unto his seat, and did plead hard for
a pardon. Yea to show that he delights to help, rather then to hurt, to
spare rather then to punish, he who would not receive the cries of the great
sins of the Sodomites, Genes. 18.21.
until he came down to prove whether it were so or no, takes the sorrows
of the city, even at the first rebound, and not standing to examine them, in
the strictness of his severity, is by and by appeased. He who is slow to
anger, is quicke^ sighted at repentance, and when his son is coming home,
Luc. 15.20.
he beholds him a great way off, and meets with him, and falls on him,
and kisseth him, and with much love embraces him.

10 He saw that which they did. But mark, God saw their works. That which
they ou^wardly did, was a token of their mind, and a fruit of their faith;
which faith had entered into their heart, and in some measure purified that,
which of it self was corrupt. But he beheld their works: not their speech but
their deeds, not their tongue but their hands; not that afterward they would
do better, but that already they had left their filthiness. And this fruit
is it which God requires to testify, whether the root be good. If words
would have served the turn, the Prophet needed not have gone to the Gentiles
in Assyria: the Israelites and Jews, could have furnished him well enough; who
made no spare to say, that they would serve the Lord; the Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord was ever in their mouths: Ierem. 7.4. Matthew. 3.^.
and afterward, We have Abraham to our father, but they did nothing which was
suitable, but clean contrary to their speaking. The Pharisees who succeeded
long after our Prophets time, had by this reckening been very holy, for they
could pray in the streets, and disguise their faces with fasting, yet Christ
brandeth them for hypocrites; and speaks to all in general, Matthew. 7.21.
Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. Saint Basile
upon these words of the Prophet Esaias, Basil^ in Isai. 1.
And if they multiply their prayers, I will not hear them, does declare what
the mind of God is, toward such as think religion to be in words: They who in
this life do no work, which is worthy the name of virtue, but only for the
lengths sake of their prayers, do hold themselves to be righteous, let them
hear these words with attentive ears. For prayers are not a help, when
they are powered out in any sort whatsoever, but if they be uttered with
earnest and fervent affection. For the Pharisee did multiply prayers in show,
but what says the Scripture? The Pharisee standing did pray thus with
himself. But it was not with the Lord. For all of it returned to the good
opinion of himself; for he still remained in the sin of pride. That man who
would not be taken for such a Pharisee, and so consequently be refused of the
Lord, must think that there is something else in the service of the Highest,
then to say or seem to be holy. For that is a matter common to reprobates, to
idolaters, to dissemblers and deceiptfull men, which yet escape not his eyes
who tries the hearts and reins, and rewards men accordingly. Bernard de S.
Andrea Sermon. 3.
Saint Bernard observes that the two Kings Saul and David, when they were
reproved by the two Prophets Samuel and Nathan, cried peccaui both alike, and
yet Saul heard that sentence, the Lord has taken thy kingdom from thee, and
will give it to thy servant, and David heard that comfort, The Lord has
removed away thy sin, and thou shall not dye for it. What was this says
Saint Bernard, but that Saul had not that in his heart, which he had in his
mouth: but with David it was otherwise.

11 Then he who has gone astray, and by that means has offended God, and
desires to return at last (after a thousand prouocations) into the Judges
favor; let him first depart from evil, Augustine. de salutaribus documentis.
Matthew. 5.16.
and purge himself of all poison, as the serpent does going to drink, and let
him never again resume it: but secondly therewithal, let him do that which
good. His light must shine before men, that they may see his good works: his
life must shine before God in purity and integrity. Of which how little all
sorts of men do think now a days, experience too much witnesses. For who is
he almost, that intends to that which he should? I speak not of the Atheist,
who is an enemy to God the father? I speak not of the Papist who is no friend
to Christ the son (many points of their doctrine crossing the life of his
redemption) but of those who seem to be somewhat. The Pastors which are
learned, are almost like the unlearned. The one cannot, the other will not, but
neither of them do preach. They think it is enough to be able to de somewhat,
when they shall see occasion: that to censure the works of other, this was
well, or this was ill, is a great part of learning, but work they will not
themselves; neither God nor men see their labors. The gentlemen in the
country, I mean very many of them, think it is enough, if they like not any
thing which comes from Rome: but if they can declaime in the greatest
assemblies, against the errors of the Clergy, or spy a fault in their
government, they are more then common men: yea, but if they come so far, as
to have prayers in their houses (which is a very holy sacrifice, if other
things accordingly be joined) they think that there is no more needful to
heaven. But as for any works of mercy, or charitable pity, they are not
oftentimes to be found. They yield small comfort to the poor, who perish
before their faces. Little help unto the Minister, who may conflict with
poverty, with bareness, and with hunger: nay he shall speed very well, if
some portion of his maintenance be not detained, and kept from him with
violence^ or with cunning. For his necessary relief, who must teach them the
way to heaven, it would be death to part with the price of the meanest gown,
which their wives or daughters wear. In very many places, the citizens and
townsmen desire to have much preaching, but scant any takes care of following:
they are more scrupulous, lest some old word which was used in time of Popery,
should be named in common talk, then to deceive their brother, in selling or
in bargaining. It is good that the smallest things, in their kind should be
cared for, and that words and external iesture should be composed unto
sanctity; but yet let the greatest matters, be embraced with greatest zeal.
They are works which God expects, and not naked words only. Yet there was
never age, wherein that complaint of seeming, and not being, might not truly
be made: but the complaint is there most grievous, where religion is most
professed, when that may be taken up which Saint Bernard sometimes wrote,
Bernard. in Caena Domini.
There are many who have the commandments of the Lord; but yet they keep them
not: many have them in their book, but have them not in their mind: many have
them in their speech, but have them not in their work; many have them in their
memory, but have them not in their life: many have them in their word, but not
in their example.

12 But the Ninevites left their evil ways, and betook themselves to better.
Now see what followed of it. God repented of the evil which he said that he
would bring upon them. This phrase may seem a strange phrase, that there
should be repentance in God, which implies a change of purpose, and also a
taking of notice, that something which was before, was not so well disposed, or
determined or decreed; which is much, to be once suspected in the Lord, whose
counsels are immutable, and all his ways appointed before hand, to be without
variation. This may argue weakness in him, who is the Lord of strength: and
an unresolved mind in him who is most constant: A thing which he would not have
his creatures, in any sort to think of him, 1. Sam. 15.29.
and therefore proclaims, that indeed the strength of Israel will not lie nor
repent: for he is not a man that he should change or repent. How then comes
it about, that the King should say this of him? Or if we will imagine that a
heathenish and ignorant man, might mistake a word toward God, yet how is it
that the Prophet, who was so well instructed in celestial things, should
record that word to all ages? Yea that Joel also should second it, in the place
which I named before: Who knows ^f he will return, Joel. 2, 14.
and repent, and leave a blessing? For remoouing of which doubt, we are to hold
that fast, that the Lord does not upon any occurrents, alter his decrees, which
he proposes in his counsels; but what he once resolves, either in
circumstance or in substance, he accomplisheth in due time. He grieueth not as
men do, that this or that falls out, which makes him change his mind. Yet
speaking as men speak, and so framing his greatness to the capacity of us
weak ones, he alters that which did seem to men, to be his purpose, and
this he means by repentance. Gregory thus lays down the matter, Gregor.
in 1. Sam. 15.
Because he who is immutability in the highest degree, does speak with those
which are mutable, after the manner of them with whom he speaks, being said
to repent that he made Saul King, he notes that the rashness of proud men
does despl^ase him. He then reputeth it for a phrase, which is only used for
our understanding.

13 Justinius Martyr in his Questions and Aunswers, Justinius Martyr in Quaest
and Respons. ad Orthodoxos. Quaest. 36.
Ad Orthodoxos, moving this doubt, That if no change do fall upon the Godhead,
why the Lord did say, concerning the anointing of Saul, that he repented, and
of the ouerturning of Niniue, that another thing was determined, gives this
answer to it: God both in that which he is, and in this, that he does such
actions, as best beseem himself, is immutable: but taking care of those who
are subject to change, he provides for the commodity of them, over whom he
does take care, and oftentimes he changes things. Therefore when he does
pardon and when he does not pardon, he retains his immutability: for those
who amend their faults, he pardons and changes not, and those who remain
in their faults he pardons not, and yet changes not. He applies this to
Saules case, and that other of the Ninevites. The words are somewhat obscure:
but in substance he decideth it thus: that the Lord does hold fast his
counsels, but yet changes things of appearance, which it was thought that he
minded. Gregory whom I have named before, has a saying much to this purpose:
Gregor. Moral. lib. 20.
Because God himself who is immutable, does change that which he would, he
is said to repent, although he change the things, but does not change his
counsel. If this yet be not so plain, that the ignorant may conceive it, then
take it thus: that God from the beginning meant to spare them, but yet on that
condition, that they should first repent. And to bring them to that repentance,
he sent his threatenings by Jonas, of purpose wishing their good: yet because
absolutely in word he denounced that unto them (the more to fear and fright
them) which he purposed but conditionally (if they turned not unto him)
therefore he speaks of God, as they thought, Hieron. in Ion. 3.
not as he did. Hierome does fully give down his mind, according to some part
of this doctrine: God is said to change his mind: Nay rather God perseuered in
his purpose, meaning from the beginning to pity them: for no man desiring to
punish, will threaten that which he means to do. Then by his threatenings he
shows, that he meant not to destroy them.

14 For conceiving of the rest, whereof Hierome does make no mention, we are
farther to take knowledge, that generally God when he threatens, intends
that if men repent not, then this or that shall fall out: but if they turn unto
him, that it shall not be done. And God lays this down universally, as a
certain Axiom of himself, to be so understood in all the course of the
Scripture, where any threats are mentioned. But yet more significantly in no
place, then by the Prophet Jeremy, where he speaks in this manner: Ierem.
18.7.8
I will speak suddenly against a nation or a kingdom, to pluck up, and to
root out, and to destroy. But if this nation against which I have pronounced,
do turn away from his wickedness, I will repent of the plague which I
thought to bring upon them. Now this being allowed for a maxim, all
denouncings of judgment from him, do contain in them a condition, secretly
and inclusiuely: where if the threats be not executed, no absolute speech is
broken (for far be that from the Lord) but only a comminatorie word has
obtained that, which it would have. God sent unto Ezechiah, Isai. 38.1.
and bad him set his house in order, for he should dye, and not live. This
seemed to be an absolute speech, yet it contained in it this condition, if
Ezechiah did not make his peace by tears and repentance: but when that once
was accomplished, Ezechiah lived and dyed not. Yet because such fearful
words, are delivered from the Lord, as firmly resolved by him, and men know
not the contrary, but that he means to strike, he forbearing is said to
change that which indeed he never decreed, and this supposed change he calls
a repenting: therein framing his words to our dullness, who are men to be
taught, and learn best, when we hear our own phrases.

15 I think it yet not amiss, to mention thus much farther. That there be
some of the ancient, who think that God fulfilled his threatenings upon Niniue,
so that Niniue was destroyed: that is, the sinful City did cease now to be
sinful, so that the evil of it was ouerturned, not the men, not the walls,
not the houses; and this way God performed whatsoever himself did threaten.
Augustine. de ciuitate Dei. 21.24.
And this is the opinion of Saint Austen: The walls says he standing up, the
city was overthrown in the evil manners of it, and so albeit not simply
Niniue, yet sinful Niniue perished. Hierome on the fourth of Daniel, Hieron in
Daniel. 4.
subscribeth to this doctrine, but it is in other words. The Lord does change
his sentence, but that is not on the men, but on the works which were changed.
For God was not displeased against the men, but against their vices, which when
they were not in the men, God does not punish that which now was ceased to be.
He thinks that sin being abated, the city might stand upright, and yet God
keep his word also. Thus we see that God, and good men agree, that it was that
penance which they laid on themselves, nay which they laid on their sins,
which kept them from the Lords punishment. For either God or they were to
chastise their evil ways. All iniquity great or small, must of necessity
have punishment, either from man repenting, or from the Lord revenging. But he
who repents, lays a chastisement on himself. Then the vpshot of all, is on
the part of these Assyrians, that with their tears and cries so affectionate
and so passionate, so hearty and sincere, the Lord who had strong reason to
deal with them as with Sodom, to root out their memorial from the earth, and
from under heaven, has changed that doom, which of likelihood was to be
pronounced against them. His anger is appeased: his fury is dissolved: the city
stands as it did: no ruin, no destruction.

16 This is a great comfort to us, that if the Eternal father did deal thus
with these Ethnickes, that when they turned to him, he turned also to the^, nay
he first sent one to turn the^, we may assure our selves a fair deal more of
his mercy: if after our transgressions, and very many infirmities, we run and
fly to him with a believing sorrow. For if he did take such co^passio^ under
the law, what will he do under the Gospel? If he did so show forth his
kindness, to barbarous heathen men, what will he do to Christians? If he
showed that he did love the^, by sending one Prophet to the^, to preach his
word once among them, what care does he take of us, to whom he has given his
word, and his Sacraments in so great abundance, by so many of his messengers,
and for so many years together? It seems that he wooeth us with a iealosy,
and sueth unto us that we would be his own. Let us not take heart thereby, to
abuse his kind affection: let us not provoke his justice, with wilful
prouocations. He loves to spare, but such as are willing to be spared: not
those who offend upon malicious wickedness. He overthrows the proud Oak,
which will not stoop at his blasts, but he cherishes the bending reed. He
receives them to grace, who are grieved to grieve him, and who by their good
will would not fall, but being fallen do mourn at it. The^ let the heavy
conscience lift us his head at last. He who could find a pardon, for so many
thousand bad ones, will never stick at one, who comes trembling before him.
Yea all who feel themselves to be weary, Matthew. 11.28.
and heavy laden, if they come to him, or his son, he has promised to help
them. God enrich us so with his grace, that with the Ninevites we fall not into
crying transgressions: but since we are oftentimes down, he so raise us up
with his Spirit, that his anger and displeasure may still be removed from us,
that our sins may be washed away in the blood of Christ, who is the true
object of our repentance, that so after this life, we may follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes, into that kingdom of blessedness, to the which the
Father bring us for his Son Christ his sake, to both whom and the holy Spirit
be glory for evermore.

THE XXIIII. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 2. Jonas should have rejoiced at their conversion. 3. The
verity of the Scriptures appears because the writers accuse themselves. 4.
Many arguments of the excellency of the word of God. 5. Other writers magnify
themselves. 6. The best do fall, and the use which is to be made thereof. 9.
What was the cause of grief in Jonas. 13. Especially his own credit, 14. or a
preposterous care of Gods glory. 15. When we have labored, let us leave the
success to God.

Jonah. 4.1. Therefore it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was argry.


BEing now come to this fourth Chapter which is the last of this Prophecy, and
remembering with my self, how long it is since I first began this work, I
partly imagine it to be fatal to the business which is handled in this book,
to be done very slowly. For the Prophet was very long, before he would begin,
and could not be haled to it, till it might not be avoided: sometimes he goes
backward, and other times slowly forward, and what with flying to the sea, and
lying there in the whale, and going afterward to preach, and staying when he
had done, he is long about a little. And God has so disposed of me, that I
have been much slower, in opening to you how far he is from speed. Before
that I can come to this fourth Chapter, the fourth year is now expired, in
which time a quick discourser, might deliberately have gone over a good part
of the Scripture, if either this place had called him oftener to it, or other
occasions had not elsewhere diuerted him. But be it as it may be; Gods will
must be done: and perhaps he may be pleased to afford so much grace, that he
who has attained to the end of three, may complete the fourth also, that so,
although slowly (for ouerrunning my Prophet) yet surely at the last, according
to that power which God shall give unto me, I may on to the end.

2 Now then hitherto we are come, that he who at first refused and could not be
induced to it, has preached to the Ninevites as sharp as sharp may be: yet
forty days, and Niniue is like to be destroyed: and his sermon has so
wrought, that their beauty, and pleasure, and music, and all mirth is turned
out of door, and sackcloth and ashes, and weeping and lamenting, great signs
of repentance are come in steed of them: their heart is dismayed, and their
whole body shaken: no help now nor comfort, Philo Iudaeus in legatione ad
Cani^.
unless it be from heaven. But where man's means do fail, there Gods mercy
does break forth: he is moved to pity, and in commiseration all past shall
be pardoned. Here a man would have thought, that in the mean while, the
messenger as sent from God, and therefore full of all mild and lovely
behavior, would have opened his heart with the largest joy, because the seed
which he had sowed, had fallen in so good ground, Matthew. 13.8.
that it had now brought forth not thirty, not sixty, but many thousand
fold. That his tongue had so far been the instrument of Gods glory: that his
threats as the thunder should so be trembled at: that his mouth had in so high
a degree been the means of the Lords mercy, that both Prince and people, old
and young should be quit of their transgressions, and excused of their
iniquity. But it falls out clean contrary, and he as the man who had only
learned that lesson, to do nothing aright, is grown into great anger, and is
so filled with choler, that he fretteth and chafeth hand-smooth with the Lord,
that he had not razed down the whole city Niniue even to the foundation. That
which should have been to him for his glory and his crown, to have helped so
many prisoners from the dungeon of darkness, and the shadow of death, is the
greatest vexation and corrosiue that might be to him in his distemper; which
yields to us a singular example of the infirmity of man, that such a one as
he was, on so light an occasion should be so far offended, and that with God
himself. The true cause whereof, howsoever it seem different and diverse to
diverse, yet by all is agreed on to be most blame worthy. I cannot so fitly
expound the manner of it as this history requires, but that by degrees I must
descend unto it, and so out of one thing win the matter of another. I think
therefore best, first to refer all things to these two heads, a general
doctrine which may be gathered in

The general doctrine.
3 When I look into the narration which does follow from Jonah. 4.9.
Do thou well to be angry? Yea to be angry to the death: such an answer as
scant any man was ever known to make, not a Judas, not a Cain; I therein do
admire the excellency of the Scripture, and rare wisdom of him, whose glory
it most concerns, that he so ouerruleth the pens of the writers, that they
must depresse themselves to infamy and disgrace, and for their follies and
infirmities, be offered as wonderments to all succeeding ages. It declares a
singularity in those books and writings, that the glory of God is the only
thing which is aimed at, and that men who naturally are ambitious and desirous
to blaze their own praises, or if they have fallen, to extenuate their faults
by Apologies and excuses, are not left to their own liberty, in setting down
of that, which he appoints for the Canon to direct our lives by. But that as
Saint Peter speaks, 2. Pet. 1.20.
no prophecy in the Scripture is of any private motion, for the prophecy came
not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost. They therefore who did well, are commended for their
well doing, but if they did amiss, their friends or their own writings paint
them out to the full. Genes. 9.21. Cap. 19.33.
The falls of Noe and Lot are not concealed by him, who honored the memory of
Noe and of Lot. Ier. 20.14.
Whether it were Baruch or Jeremy, who wrote the Prophecy of Jeremy it is
not much material, but therein he himself is not forgotten, Act. 15.39.
for his vexing impatiencie. Luke as all men may suppose, loved Paul and
Barnabas well, yet recording their behavior, he shows that there was
between them so hot a contention, as beco^med not two such men. But most do
conceive that Jonas in his own person delivered this Prophecy to the Church,
(and there is no reason to the contrary) but yet from the beginning to the end
thereof, he tells such a tale, that if all his enemies should have studied to
lash him, they could not have matched that, which his own hand has published:
not one word to his commendation, but all to his dispraise. That he fled from
his charge, and would have gone to Tharshish: that he slept in security, and a
heathen man did awake him, and teach him his duty: that the lot fell upon him
as a noted malefactor, that for his due desert (after that a tempest had
pursued him) he was tumbled into the sea: that there for three days he was
iayled up in a whales belly: that all that while he was little better then in
distrustful despair. Nay moreover, that when he was out again he preached
indeeed, but as a shrewd cow after that she has given milk, does cast it
down with her heel, so he marred all with his murmuring, and furious
displeasure. And this was the case of Moses, who without doubt wrote those five
books which are called by his name: and there as he spared not his brother nor
his sister, Number. 12.1. Exodus 4.25.
that is, Aaron and Miriam, nor Tsippora his wife, if she came in his way, so
he least favors himself, but relates that the Lord had almost killed him
for his negligence, 24.
in not circumcising his child: that in those prouocations wherewith the people
provoked God himself did fall to murmuring: that the Lord was so displeased
with him, Number. 11.11. Deuteronomy. 34.4.
that therefore he debarred him from coming into Canaan. Thus the inditing
spirit does rule the writers pen, and as ouer-maistering the hand of a young
learner, makes him to set down what it will, and not what the other fancieth.
This is one great argument of the finger of God, and a supernatural power that
is in these books of holy writ, that not flesh and blood, and sensual
carnality which is swayed with affection, are the composers of them, but an
author more glorious first made them and now keeps them.

4 There are many demonstratiue proofs of the unmatchable excellency, and
incomparable rarity of the volumes of the Bible, although the dazeled eyes of
some know not how to behold them. That the truth of so many things should be
fulfilled Hier. Epistol. 50.
Saint Hierome can say of Paul, As often as I read him, it seems unto me that
they be not words, but thunders which I hear. Bernard. de Natiuitate Domini.
Sermon. 1. Blandiebatur Virgil. Dulcius mihi immurmurat filius Iesse.
And Bernard confesses this of himself: In times past Tully seemed sweet
unto me, Virgil stole away my affection, and being as Mermaides sweet to
destroy, had enchanted mine understanding. The Law, the Prophets, the Gospel,
the Epistles, and all the glory of the sentences of my Lord, and his servants,
seemed either small or none unto me. But now I know not what sweeter thing
the son of less does whisper into me, who by the diverse harmony of his
speeches and sentences, does make all those whom I was accustomed to love,
vneloquent and very dumme. Eusebius. de praeparat. Euangelic. lib. 14. in
praefatione.
Eusebius speaks more generally: When I do compare the Philosophers of the
Gentiles, either among themselves or with other, I will not deny but they
were excellent men. But when I compare them to the Divines, and Philosophers
of the Hebrews, and I lay the doctrine of the one with the doctrine of the
other, all those things which their Philosophers have devised, seem to me to
be brittle and frivolous. Furthermore that we who as friends do not conspire
with us, to make a pack for both purposes; but are enemies both to us, and to
our Savior Christ. August. de consensu Evangelist. lib. 1.26
And yet as Saint Austen observes, those Jews are scattered over the world,
and bear those books with them, that the enemies of our faith may be
witnesses to our truth. Moreover were made Princes over Princes, Basil. in
Psalm. 45. Chrysostom. in open. imperfecto. Homil. 41.
and Lords over the highest Kings, yea more mighty then they, for they swayed
while they lived; but these most after death. This made Chrysostom compare
them to the flesh of beasts, which no man at all does eat off, while they are
alive, but when they are dead, men taste of them. So scant any man respected
the Sermons of the Prophets, and other divine writers, while they were living
upon earth, but after their death every one lays hold upon them. These
matters and many more do show, that there is a singularity in the sacred volumes
of the Bible, but that whereof I spoke being joined

5 Look upon the works of other men. who were not directed so immediately by
this spirit as those were, and this shall be more evident. There is not any
worldly writer, but although he profess to lay down the only truth, yet
sometimes he strayneth a string, either by ignorance or affection: this friend
or that faction shall receive a partial ^auour. If wisdom bear some stroke,
it shall not be palpably and grossly to be noted, but secretly and covertly,
and by insinuation: and his own industry in searching out the depth of deeds,
or his truth in reporting, or boldness in detecting, shall deserve
commendation. Not Liuy, not Plutarke, not Seneca (as it may easily be showed)
but may this way be touched. Herein they are all fellows more or less. Yet
there be books in the Scripture, which appear not to come so far. But that
any one should in sobriety, and advisedly and of purpose, make a treatise to
declare the faults of himself, and have no other argument but what must needs
be joined with that, as it is here with our Jonas, I verily am persuaded is no
where to be found, in all the works of the heathen, no not in the most sober
and grave. To give examples from the greatest sort of them, Tull Offic. lib. 1.
Dio. Cassius. lib. 37. Xenoph. de exped. Cyri. lib. 6. and 7. Joseph. de bell.
Iud. lib. 3 8. Ovid. Metamorph. 15. in fine.
Tully will not have it buried, that Rome was beholding to him for Catilines
cause, and otherwise too. Dion will have the world know, that he was a man of
employment in businesses of the Commonwealth. Xenophon will record his
counsels to posterity, and Josephus is plentiful in relating his own
stratagemes: But if we will look among the Poets, we shall have Ouide ending
his Metamorphosis tell us, Iamque opus exegi, quod nec louis ira nec ignis
Nec ferrum poterit, nec edax abolere vetustas.
I have ended such a work, as never any thing shall deface. Horace will not be
behind him, but will conclude one of his books thus, Exegi monumentum aere
perennius, Horat. lib. 3. Carm. Od. 30.

Regalique situ Pyramidum altius.
I have set up a monument which will last longer then brass, and is more
eminent then the Pyramides in Egypt. Martial. ad Auitium. lib. 9.1.
But Martial for his part, rather then he will be out, will tell us that for
trifles he is equal with the best. I lle ego sum nulli nugarum laud secundus.
Thus men will be men, that is to say humorous and ambitious, and full of
self-love, and it will not be restrained, but that directly or indirectly they
will to their kind. Nature will not be driven away, no not with a forke. Yet
where grace is predominant, and God does rule the stern, there self-love is
laid aside, and out it shall come, Psalm. 32.6.
I will confess my sins against my self, yea commend them to posterity,
that the ages to come, and the ends of the world shall take notice of mine
errors. Thus as God has no peers, so his book has no fellows, but is every
way full of judgment, and justice, and truth, and wisdom, and perfection.
God will ever be the Lord, and every man is a sinner. But in the third verse of
the first Chapter, Ion. 1.3.
I touched this somewhat more largely, and therefore I now leave it.

6 My next observation in this general compass, is that Jonas is here
described, to have sinned once again. This plentifully appears in the first
Chapter, and so it does in this last chapter, by the reproof of God himself
used toward him: and the words of my text do necessarily include it: for to be
grieved at the Lords will, and to be angry at his works, is a very high
transgression. And so much the higher, because it is in a Prophet, a sanctified
servant, sequestered for Gods business, and attendance on himself, more
enlightened then ordinary, and better acquainted with divine mysteries, then
other men. Then from this man it is evident, as well as from David, from
Solomon, from Josiah, from Hezechiah, from Peter, that the greatest in this
life fall, 1. Reg 8.48. Prou. 24.16.
and fall to the ground. There is no man that sins not. The just man does
fall seven times and arises again. In many things we sin all, Iac. 3.2.
1. Ioh. 1.8.
says the Apostle Saint James. And Saint John does second it, If we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us. Jonas being
once freed, and delivered from his sin by the mercy of the Lord, which purged
him by a suffering, is a second time in, and yet remains Gods servant, and a
member of the Church, clean contrary to that heresy which the Nouatians held,
Eusebius Eccl. Hist. lib. 6.35.
who denying repentance to sins after Baptism, and secluding offenders from
acceptance into the congregation among the faithful, much impeached Gods mercy,
and laid an intolerable burden upon men's consciences. Why should the servant
be hard, where the master is easy and gentle? Where the wise owner is well
pleased, why is the steward straight? When he whom it most concerns, has
proclaimed by his Prophet, Ezech. 18.21.22.
that if a sinner repent be it once or be it often, from the bottom of his
heart, God will put away his sins quite out of his remembrance. Indeed from the
falls of the old Patriarchs, we should not learn, to adventure upon
iniquities with greediness and boldness, lest presuming, we come short of
that which was granted unto them. For if we will provoke God, in hope of that
which in likelihood will never be given to us, because we would so provoke him,
who can tell whether the Lord will turn, and repent, and abate his fury? The
end wherefore the examples of falls in the greatest men, are proposed to our
reading, is not to encourage us to ill, for that were to abuse the kindness of
God, and out of a good flower to suck deadly poison. Yet it is a thing too
common for Libertines and carnal men, so to apply good to evil. Many will
fall with David says Saint Austen, August. in Psalm. 50.
and will not arise with David. There is not proposed to thee any example of
falling, but of arising when thou art fallen. Take heed thou do not fall. Let
not the slip of the greater, be the delight of the lesser, but let the fall of
the greater, be a trembling to the lesser. What he there says of David, may
most fitly be applied to the rest of the Patriarchs, and other Prophets, that
by any thing of theirs we must not be intised to disobedience.

7 Saint Chrysostom takes occasion by David, Chrysostom. de paenitentia Homil.
6.
of whom Austen also spoke, to draw a threefold benefit from the example of his
transgression, which I think not amiss to be mentioned in this place. David
says he, for three reasons was suffered to go astray. First that he might
make the righteous man to says he, thou have done no more then David. His
meaning is, that if such captains and leaders in the faith, so gracious with
the Highest, so acceptable in Gods sight, yet by humane infirmities have
fallen, and fallen notoriously* then no man should be proud, none senslesly
secure, no man confidently foolish, because his turn may be next. He should
set a watch before his heart, and a hatch before his lips, that nothing may
enter thither, nothing may come out thence, which is not weighed and balanced.
And that this is one of the causes, why the ouersights of the best are made
known in the Scriptures, Saint Austen also consents: August. de Doct.
Christ. lib. 3.23.
The sins of great men are written to this purpose, that the saying of the
Apostle may every where be trembled at, where he says, Let him that
stands, take heed lest he fall. The second reason in Saint Chrysostom is,
that it might appear, that Christ Jesus alone in man's body was pure from all
offense. For if the holiest creatures, and most sanctified sons of women, men
upright and fearing God, men after the Lords own heart, the best men of famous
memory, yet bore about them a body which was heavy to the soul, and were
shamefully overtaken with crimes, which their inferiors knew to be enormous,
then the single prerogative, and that privilege of innocence and
vnspottednesse, which is not to be communicated to any of Adams children,
appears to belong only to Christ. Ioh. 8.46.
He alone could say to the Jews, Which of you can rebuke me of sin? But all
other have this sin on them, although it reign not in them. The just man
must confess that of Hierome to be very true, Hier. lib. 1. Epist. 8. ad
Demetriadem.
that while we dwell here in the tabernacle of this body, and are compassed
with frail and brittle flesh, we may moderate our affections, and rule our
perturbations, but cut them off we cannot, we cannot root them out. Then all
arrogant merite-mongers may boast themselves while they will, of meriting of
salvation, and Pelagius he may vaunt that he can keep the law, but we account
those speeches to be cursed, and heretical, and derogatory from the eminency
of Christ. We say to the^ as Orosius sometimes wrote to that heretic Pelagius:
Oros. de arbitrij liberate.
Thou say that it is possible that a man should be without sin. I repeat it
again and oftentimes, the man which can do this is Christ the Son of God.
Either take that name unto thee, or lay aside thy boldness. God has given
that but to one, and that is he which is chief, and first borne among many
brethren. Then other, yea the Virgin Mary her self, must renounce themselves
and all their possibility, and admire the unspotted beauty of Jesus our
Redeemer.

Chrysostom. vbi supra.
The faults of others are written, that sinners may the less despair of
their own errors: but if any one have offended, let him daily confess his
sins: yea if he have sinned a thousand times, yet let him go forward to
confess a thousand times. Forthere is nothing worse then distrust or
despair. This sentence of turning again a thousand times to God, was it
whereof Socrates speaks, Socrat. Hist. Eccles. 6.19.
that Chrysostom did dare to teach this, in that time which was so filled with
the Nouatian heretics. And this is a most comfortable point to a distressed
conscience, which I think did never more need to be plaistered and suppled,
then in these our present days, wherein Satan is busy, to take advantage of
the tenderness and softness of them, who earnestly desire to have peace with
God. And he seeing that it grieueth them, to displease so good a father,
straightway represents to their eyes the fearfulness of his justice, and
the multiplicity of their crimes. Oh it is a deadly enemy, subtle and full of
sleights: he has baytes for every one. For the wanton, shows of wantonness:
for the idolater superstitions; for the Atheist, ways of obstinacy: for the
envious, cause of spite: for him who hates to sin, a tickling pride of doing
well: for those who love the word, terrors out of the word, to beat them
down and to drown the^: so that all threatenings shall be applied to the^, and
mercies shall be passed over, as no way appertaining unto their comfort. How
careful had we need be, and stand continually on our watch, serve God while we
have time, pray to him for perseverance, and evermore be busied about that
which is good, that solitary idleness and melancholic tentatio^s, great
means to a greater fall, do not grievously oppress us? But to prevent that
objection, which is common to all those who are so affected, as I speak of God
who writes for all our good, that testified in his sacred book, that the
bel-wethers of his flock, have stu^bled and lain along, and that not in toys
or trifles, but in causes of great importance, they have given witness of much
weakness. And yet they have risen again, more humbled and more purged, more
renewed by grace, taught to fly from themselves unto the throne of mercy, to
repose all their salvation on him who is far more sure, Psalm. 51 17.
then the strongest rock or castle. And when the spirit is thus contrite, God
accepts it as a sacrifice: he is so far from despising the troubled broken
heart, that he loves it and embraces it. Thus he dealt with them in old time,
under the threatening law: and therefore he will rather do so under the Gospel.
The errors of our time are no otherwise then theirs were: we are made of the
self same metal: he is made of the self same mercy. He changes not, he
varieth not, he evermore remains himself. Then why should we yield our
selves to diffidence and distrust? why sink we under our burden, which lies
heavy for a moment, and no longer? Sorrow may endure for a night, Psalm. 30.5. 1.
Cor. 10.13.
but joy comes in the morning. He tempts not above our strength, but in the
midst of trial he gives an issue out. That which we feel in the mean while,
is our burden and we must bear it. We cannot live here like Angels. Spe, non
re.
Our purity is in hope: it is not yet indeed. Christ well knew that there would
be faults in us, when he bad us every day to pray, Matthew. 6.12.
forgive us our trespasses. Then let us rowze up our spirits, and shake off
that dull kind of blockishnesse, and sin that hangs so fast on, Hebr. 12.1.
and let us with alacrity run to Jesus our Redeemer, our brother and Savior,
and the finisher of our faith. Matthew 4.1. Hebr. 2.18.
He sometimes was tempted himself, which makes him the better know, how to
pity those which are tempted. And thus much generally I have spoken, that the
Scripture makes no spare, to display the worst of the writers thereof, and how
the best do offend, yea and double it too with Jonas, and yet still remain
Gods servants.

The special fault of Jonas.
per transennam, but that I should touch it nearer, and so indeed is my
meaning. All this while you have heard that the Prophet was out, but what was
it wherein he faulted? It displeased Jonas exceedingly, and he was angry at it.
And what was it whereat he vexed, and knew not which way to take it? That
Niniue should be spared. God meant to continue the standing of that city, and
Jonas would not have it so. The Lord thought best to spare the inhabitants, but
our man is of another mind. Here in the mean time are two sides, but the match
is very unequal. I am certainly persuaded, that Jonas is not like to gain
much by such bargains. The potter is of one side, and the pot-sheard of
another. Fire and thunder and flaming lightning does say it shall be so, and
flax and towe does say otherwise. And yet this weak one is right angry, that
he may not bear away the bucklers. Now a man might have seen this messenger a
perfect malcontent, that every thing went not as he conceived before, that it
should. But why should this fretter grieve, that Niniue should have a taste of
his mercy, who is the father of pity and compassion? All agree that he did so,
but there is not any common consent, what that was which specially did move
him. Hierome tells that some imagined, Hieron. in Ionae. 4.
that Jonas was now grown spiteful, and boiled very much with envy, that the
Gentiles should be called. As if Gods grace toward him, and other of his
people, were now so much the less, because it was communicated to a foreign
nation. This was to make no difference between the sons of Cham and Sem: to
bring Esau and Israel to be beloved alike. This were to make the Ethnickes as
good men as the Jews, yea to make such as were, or hereafter might be great
enemies to Jerusalem, to taste the best fruits of Sion. Where then was the
promise to Abraham, or the oath which was sworn to Isaac, if the Ninevites
should be called, as well as the holy seed? Thus perhaps flesh might reason,
and murmr in our Jonas.

10 If this were it which troubled him, he might justly be concluded to be
envious and malicious, and therefore to sin highly. Matthew. 20.15.
For was his eye grown evil, because his master was good? Would he repine
that other should find that kindness at the Lords hand, which himself had
felt before? As soon as he was over, must the bridge by and by be broken? As
soon as he was in, must the door forthwith be shut? Would not that
sufficiently content him, that he should have a place in heaven; but must he be
the porter, nay rather the householder, to direct who should come after? his
friends and acquantance only? This was a fault which reigned much among the
people of the Jews: they could not brook the fellowship of the despised
Gentiles. Luc. 15.28.
Christ noted this their envy, by the parable of the elder brother, grudging
that the younger which was the prodigal son, should be received with such
grace. But it is very manifestly storied to be true in the Acts, Act. 13 45.
Cap. 17.5.
as both at Antioche and so otherwise at Thessalonica: for when the Greeks
began to believe, the Jews envied at it, and reviled with evil words, yea
made an uproar. But when Paul another time being at Jerusalem spoke unto
them, they heard him with great patience, Cap. 22.21.
till he came to that sentence, Depart, for I will send thee a great way
hence to the Gentiles: but when once they heard that from him, as men able to
hold no longer, they lift up their voices and said, Away with such a fellow
from off the earth, for it is not fit that he should live. Surely charity and
humanity should have weaned them from that fault; but piety should much more
have remembered Jonas, not to dislike Gods will, although it had been to
destroy: But when it sauoured of clemency, and recovering that which was lost,
he should more vehemently have loved it. Gods servants joy, when those graces
which are most visible in themselves, be communicated to other. Numer. 11.29.
When two were said to prophecy, Moses was not troubled at it: but he rather
wished that all the Lords people could do so. Galat. 2 9.
When Paul grew to be a preacher, the pillars of the Apostles envied him not
that office, but gave to him and Barnabas the right hands of good fellowship,
being glad to see many more besides themselves, in the livery of their master.
Yea we read of some other men, that being now ready to step into heaven, by
the bloody way of martyrdom, grudged not that other should follow, but whereas
there were some, whom their carnal reason might rather have wished, to be
secluded from eternal comfort, I mean their murderers and persecutours, they
notwithstanding setting aside their private injuries, desired and earnestly
prayed, that they might be admitted into the same glory, Fulgent. Sermon. de
Sancto Stephano.
whither themselves are going. Let Steven be an example for this, of whom
Fulgentius notes, that whither he went before, being slain by the stones of
Paul, thither did Paul come after, helped by the prayers of Steven. He
means those requests, which he made as he was dying, when he kneeled down,
Act. 7.60.
and cried with a loud voice, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. He did
not malign his enemies, but wished them the same favor, which he himself
enjoyed. If the calling home of the Ninevites, was that whereat Jonas grieved,
how far was he from the mind of Steven, or from another holy man named Paul,
of who^ Eusebius reports, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. 8.18.
that when he went to be martyred, he prayed for the Jews and Gentiles, that
both might be converted to the faith. He begged of God also for the Emperor, by
whose laws he was condemned; for the Judge who pronounced the sentence against
him; yea for the very hangman who executed him, that his death might not be
laid as a sin against them. Then it was a fault in Jonas, that when as by his
education, and knowledge in Gods service, he knew as much as those other, yet
he would suffer malice and emulation, to carry him so contrary a way.

11 But Hierome writing upon this text, does disclaim that to be the reason of
this man's choler here, and cannot think that the Prophet was so simple, as to
vex at it. And indeed I am of this mind, tha^ this was not the cause. For it
seems in the next verse, that he oftentimes thought of that, that God was
pitiful and merciful, and very slow to anger. Whereby he might well gather,
that it was no news, nor strange thing, that he should spare offenders. But
what then was it, which caused this sorrow? Hierome gives a more pregnant
reason, that he by this foresaw, Hier. in. Ion. 4. Deuteronomy 32.21.
that the fall of Israel was come, so that it must be rejected. He remembered
that of Moses, They angered and provoked me by those who were no Gods, and I
will anger them again, by those who are no people. I will stir them up to
wrath, by a very foolish nation. Hence says Hierome, he despaireth of Isreal's
salvation, and breaking forth into sorrow, he utters it thus in a manner, Am
I the only Prophet who by saving of other men, should foreshew ruin to mine
own? To make this the more plain, he brings in that for this cause Christ
wept over Jerusalem: Luc. 19.41. Marc. 7.26. Matthew. 10.6.
that he would not take the childrens bread, and give it unto dogs: that he
first sent his Apostles to preach to the lost sheep of Israel: Romans 9.3.
and for this says he, Paul desired to be Anathema for his brethren. Now in
truth this were a more tolerable case, to be jealous in that sort for his
countreyme^. For if the rising of others had bin the standing of Israel, that
jointly as two sisters they might have served the Lord, two people, but of one
church, it had bin a gain to the latter, but no loss to the former. But being
that it was with the^, as the Poets imagined it to be with Castor and Pollux,
Virgil Aeneid. 6.
that when the one lived the other died; or as with two buckets in one well,
while the one dippeth the other dries, this might trouble and disquiet a man
otherwise much resolved. The Jews could not be blamed, when they were
displeased at Agrippa (as Josephus shows) for when he had built Caesarea,
Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 20.8.
he did not only adorn that being a foreign city, and so neglected all his
own, but took away such ornaments as were any way in his kingdom, and
removed them to that place, so that the flourishing of this new one, was the
sinking of all the rest. If the fault of Jonas were of this nature, it was a
very commendable fault, agreeing with all good Israelites, yea with every
Christian mind, who would desire the celestial, and spiritual good of his
country and people: yea with our Savior Christ, who did so love the Jews,
Luc. 19.41.
and was so troubled at their ^^sll, that it made him shed tears for it.

Tull. Offic. lib. 3.
12 But as sometimes it was said by Tully, declaring how Romulus pretended a
law, to kill his brother Remus, it was a fault by the leave of Romulus or
Quirinus, so by the leave of Hierome so rare and renowned a father, there was a
fault in the matter: and this could not be the reason; for the Prophet imputes
the cause of his anger to Gods mercy, and not to his justice: I knevv thou
vvast a merciful God, not I saw that thou would leave the Israelites. Not
one word of rejecting: not any thing of his people. But to put it out of
question. That had been a zealous jealousy toward the honor of the Lord, an
affection to the Church, Exodus 32.32.
an imitation of Moses, a drawing near to Christ, a thirst that his people
should be saved. But my text does not grace it so, but calls his passion,
anger. He was displeased: he was angry. And lest any man should imagine him
to be angry and not to sin, Ephesians. 4.26.
God himself is in dislike with him for it, which he uses not to be, but
toward those who transgress, Do thou well to be angry? Then let us go a
little farther, and take it that he murmured, because the Ninevites perished
not: and this not because he desired their destruction, as principally
intending it; neither because he originally envied their finding grace with the
Lord; but because it followed consequently, upon that which he intended. But
the maine point which did vex him, and put him to all the sorrow, was lest he
should be accounted a false and lying Prophet, to tell a tale, and deliver a
message which proved clean otherwise. He had spoken it definitely, in the
name of the Lord, Yet forty days and Niniue shall be destroyed. And since that
the city stood in majesty as before, untouched and unharmed, he might very well
be taken for a forger and a fainer. And this is declared by the text, to be the
cause of his moving. Was not this says he my saying, when I was yet in my
country? that is, did I not suppose, that thou who art so merciful, and do
take pity so soon, would relent from this thine indignation, and so I should
be sent but on a sleeuelesse errand? Therefore I took this course, and
prevented this inconvenience by flying to Tharsis. Then his anger was, because
by the Lords direction he was forced to say that, which he saw fell out
otherwise.

13 It is his reputation then whereupon he so much stands: yet perhaps with a
certain reference to this, lest God should be blasphemed, and traduced as
unconstant. But under this opinion, not knowing of what spirit he is, or ought
to be, in a most preposterous zeal he could have wished with the Apostles,
Luc. 9.54. 2. Reg. 1.10.
that as in the days of Elias, fire might be brought from heaven, to consume
the city Niniue, or that the earth might open under them and swallow them up,
Number. 16.32.
as Corah and Abiron were served. All this while he runs on a very wrong
ground, exacting overmuch the rigor of the letter in his preaching, and not
knowing that inclusiuely God understood this condition, Niniue shall be
destroyed: that is, if they repent not. But he is firmly persuaded, that the
glory of the Lord is like only to appear, and be eminent by vengeance. He had
already said it, and auerred it, that ruin and desolation was immediately to
follow: and a Prophet was sent forth of purpose to do that message; therefore
in his opinion it is high time, that the thing were now performed. If we
think of him alone, then a matter of reputation and credit in the world, does
carry him so far headlong. But that was fame dearly bought; and the credit
of one man, prized at too high a value. What? must God be the minister and
worker of his ambition, and must he establish it by such a ruin, and such
destruction of so many thousands? This, although in a different sense, was
pride little inferior to that of wicked Haman, Esther. 3 3.
who because he would teach such fellows as Mardocheus was, next time to bow
before him, would have all the Jews, which were dispearsed through six score
and seven Provinces, to be slain upon one day, and the mighty king Assuerus
must be he that must do it, by a very sharp proclamation. Our Prophet looks
so much to the ruff of his own glory, that rather then himself will be
tainted for his word, not an earthly Assuerus, but God must be the instrument,
to destroy the lives of thousands. In the wars, he is thought but a hard
General and Commander, who when himself unadvisedly by fury or sudden
passion, has said he will have this; or such a day he will do it, when
afterward it falls out to be a thing of great difficulty, yet will thrust
his soldiers on, and make them be slain like sheep; whereas if he had his
will, that for which he did sweat, will bring no profit to him, but the matter
is, he will keep his word. Oh the lives of men should be dear, and blood
should be much esteemed. There was a Roman who could say, I had leyser save
one citizen, then destroy ten of mine enemies. The Ninevites who formerly were
miscreants, are now come to be Gods subjects: then Jonas thou shall be but a
bloody leader, if for thy words sake, thousands of them should dye. It is
better, that thou should loose thy will: better that thou should lose thy
longing, then they should lose their lives.

14 If it were, that he thought the glory of God was hazarded by that bargain,
and thereupon he was angry, that is a most inconsiderate zeal, to take on him
to be wiser, then the very fountain of knowledge. Can man be more jealous then
God himself is of his glory? Can the creature better know what belongs to
it, then his maker? How dares flesh band with God, for justice or for mercy,
or for true understanding? Were it not the easier way for it, to think it
self to be ignorant, to be defective, to be far short of the Lords proiects
and purposes? and to suppose that he best knows what is fittest for himself,
and for all those which are under him? If the Prophet had been set to the
guiding of an Elephant, or a ship upon the sea, he knew not how to rule it: yet
the silly man would now sit in a throne, and dispose of Niniue, and by a
consequent, of the world, and of God also, how he should order it. And although
it be the Lords honor which is in question, yet he will be the caruer, to tell
what best befitteth. It had been his part rather, to subject his discretion to
the discretion of his maker, and if that wise Creator would in justice have
proceeded against that people, to like well of that justice, because the Lord
liked of it: but if he would have inclined to a favorable pardoning, to be
best pleased with that. Exodus 32.32.
Nay rather if he with Moses had stepped in as an intercessour, it had argued
more charity; or if he imagined that to undertake that, was too hard a point
for him to manage, yet at least upon the smallest inkling, that grace should be
affoorded, he should have waited for it, and should have rejoiced that light
might break out of darkness, and that the frowning countenance of God, had
been turned into a pleasing. And if he could not be induced to go thus far,
yet he should never have made stay, to be content with the Lords doing: let him
work his will: but to fret and grieve and vex at it, yea to chide with God as
he did afterward, is a fault of a grievous nature.

15 The doctrine which we must learn by it, is of more then ordinary benefit.
Wheresoever we live, and God offers unto us any matter, wherein we are to
spend our labor, it concerns us to be diligent and industrious in the
performance of that, which belongs unto us. 2. Tim. 4.2.
In season and out of season, by friends, by purse, by presence, by all our
strength and endeavor, to further and forward that, which we undoubtedly know to
be good, and to advance all duty of piety and charity, or of service to the
Church. But when we have done all, let us leave the event to God: let us leave
the success to him, to whom it properly appertains, and let there not be the
least murmuring, or grudging if we speed not. For our friends or children, the
Lord better knows what is good, then we our selves can devise; but in the
mean while, we must pray and beg the best of him; and yet with this
condition, Matthew. 6.10.
Thy will be done. That which we think is most dangerous, turns oftentimes
to our good: and thence whence we expect our undoing, God raises our greatest
comfort. The case of Monica, mother to Saint Austen is famous: she grieved that
her son was spotted with the heresy of the Manichees, and she prayed that
the Lord would bring him to the Orthodoxe Catholic faith. August. de moribus
Catholicae Ecclesiae lib. 1.18.
She remembered this, day by day, and yet as himself does witness, for nine
years together he continued so infected. It fell out afterward, that he would
needs go, and travel out of Africa into Italy. His mother being loath to part
with him, who was as the staff of her old age unto her, earnestly prayed, that
God would hinder him of that purpose. Yet Austen went, and by hearing the
Sermons of Saint Ambrose at Millaine, he was converted to that, which in former
times he could never like. He reporting all this matter does use this good
speech of it, August. Confession. lib. 5.8.
Thou o God being deep in counsel, and hearing the substance of my mothers
desire, did not care for that which she did then ask, that in me thou
might do that, which she ever asked. Thus the Almighty deals with other of
his servants, working all things to the best, but it is at such times as he
himself does think good. If it be in him to bless, it is in him to do it,
when it seems good to himself. Therefore let us never be angry, and repine
at that, which he alters from the intent of our mind.

16 But among all, let the Minister be most patient this way. He peradventure
beats down pride, or cries out against extortion: he is derided for it:
then he powers out many threats against scoffers and deriders. If repentance
follow in them afterward, and so their prosperity continue, let not him be
offended at it, but let him rather rejoice, that God has so prospered the word
which came out of his mouth. Again, it may be that he requesteth at the hands
of his heavenly father, that he would spare some whom he sees to be tempted,
and in Christian commiseration, wishes that they were refreshed, with the
sweet deaw of Gods comfort: Or else he sees some tainted with superstition,
and doting on the Sea of Rome, whom yet he loves in humane affection, as
being of neighborhood or kindred, or because they be of his charge, or for their
lovely behavior, and other amiable moral virtues. Let him use the best means
that he can to bring them unto the sheepfold, by preaching, by exhortation, by
conference and by prayer, but especially by honest and holy conversation: but
if God still shut their eyes, let him not be angry at it, and fret against the
Almighty: but leave all to his dispensing. Perhaps that hour which afterward
shall appear, is not yet come. Perhaps God means that it shall never come;
but according to his unsearchable purpose, he will leave them in darkness.
Here do thou admire Gods justice toward them; but his favor to thy self:
stand amazed at the one, and kindly embrace the other: but be patient in both.
And as it may be said of Socrates, Aristides, or Curious, or Fabricius, that for
the desire of honesty which was more in them, then in other people of their
time, we could in humane commiseration, wish that they were in heaven, among
the Lords elect, but that when we in Christian understanding do think upon the
matter, we find that it is not for us to be more merciful, then God the father
of mercy, and fountain of loving kindness; so in this case of our own
experience, we may not take upon us, when we have wisely considered of our
duty, to be more pitiful to our friends, then God who is perfect pity. Let us
in humility sigh and groan for them, and be thankful for our selves, but no
anger, no displeasure. God is King over all the earth, and on whom he will have
mercy, on him he will have mercy: and whom he will, he will harden. Now he who
is this gracious father to us, continue this favor on us, Romans 9.18.
for his own Son Christ his sake, that in the joy or the sorrow, the welfare
or the ill fare of our selves or other men, we may yield our selves to his
will, who is the rule of justice, of integrity, and of clemency, that so we
may be obedient unto him, to whom be praise and glory for evermore

THE XXV. LECTVRE.
The chief points. I. Jonas does not quite turn from God. 3. The force and
virtue of orayer. 5. Our prayers are ofentimes faulty. 7. Jonas to excuse
himself will lay the blame on God. 10. The forbearance and patience of the
Lord. 13. The words of Jonas condemn himself. 14. They are blinded who frame
not themselves to Gods will.

Jonah. 4.2. And he prayed unto the Lord and said, I pray thee, o Lord, was
not this my saying, when I was yet in my country? Therefore I prevented it
to fly unto Tarshish. For I knevv that thou art a gracious God, and merciful,
slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil.


THat the Prophet was to blame, for being angry with any thing, which the Lord
would have done, I hope from the former verse, has been made plain unto you.
Yet furious as he is, he is not so forgetful as to turn^ quite away from God,
and to leave him in the plain field: he does not throw down his liuerie,
neither does he openly answer him, that he will no more belong unto him: but
follow him he will, Marc 14.54.
although it be as Peter followed Christ, a far off, with infirmities and
weaknesses heaped up with ouer-measure. When the women in Samaria, 2. Reg.
6.31.33.
by reason of the violent and strong famine, which was caused by the siege, fell
to eating their children, Iehoram rages at it, and there is neither God nor
good man that comes in his way, but at him he does strike. God do thus and
thus to me, if the head of Elizeus stand on him this day. And, this evil is of
the Lord: shall I wait any longer on him? That was the rage of a reprobate,
who could have been content there had been no Lord in the heaven; or that he
had had his will on him. Like to which or something worse, is the fury which is
described by Saint John in his Revelation, Apoc. 16.21.
where when hail like talents is mentioned to fall, men on earth are said to
grieve at it, yea to blaspheme the Almighty, for the plague of the hail. Jonas
is not so far gone, but although he fret that his will is not every way
completed, yet he shakes not quite off the yoke of obedience and humility,
neither yet taking the bit peruersely in his teeth, runs on to his
destruction. He is not so far in as he should, nor so far out as he might
be, if Gods grace had forsaken him. Notwithstanding to testify some thing, for
indeed it is but some thing, he betaketh himself to his prayers: he prayed
unto the Lord.

2 Then a general obedience yet remains in this sinner, wherein he could
wish all well, as having learned by his smart, to stand in awe of that great
Majesty, which had so followed him before, and might reckon with him afterward.
But as water which arises from the purest and cleanest fountain, if it come
through a puddle channel, will keep still to be water, but it will be
troubled water, by means of that which it touches: so his intendment to pray,
springing certainly from devotion, is so mingled with dregs of wrath, and
vanity and excuse, to quit himself and blame God, that as good almost not at
all, as not to be better. Some drammes and grains of gold, appear in him and
his action; but dross is there by pounds. Little wine, but store of water:
some wheat, but chafe enough. That he came to God it was good, and that he
came by prayer, for that is the best sacrifice which the soul can send up into
heaven: but that it was in such sort, to expostulate, not to beg, to reason,
not to confess, to chide, not to ask pardon, is a many faults put together.
My meaning is not to exagitate this in Jonas, otherwise then by looking
particularly to the circumstance of the fact, to see how good instructions we
may gather from this his prayer, to right our selves and straight our steps, in
that where he went amiss; which I shall the better do, if I propose unto you
these three things to be considered: First, the preface And he prayed unto the
Lord: Secondly, I pray thee was not this my saying, when I was yet in my
country? Therefore I prevented it to fly unto Tharshish. And thirdly, the
reason whereon he grounded all, because the Lord was merciful. In the first I
shall speak of prayer: in the second of our excusing and shifting sin from
our selves; and in the third, of that wherein must be all our comfort, that the
Lord is kind and long suffering.

And he prayed unto the Lord.
Psalm. 34.19. Act. 14.22. 2. Tim. 3.12.
Many are the troubles of the righteous. By many afflictions we must enter
into the kingdom of God. And whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus must
suffer persecution. Persecution is of diverse sorts: it may be inward or
outward, in body or in mind, in goods or in fame, in sickness or in sorrow,
and the most holy have abundantly tasted some one of these, the Patriarchs and
Prophets, the Apostles and Martyrs, Christ Jesus himself. The weight of which
burden, he is not well advised who seeks not to support by some firm
vnder-lyer, and that is faithful invocation upon the name of God, and flying
to him by prayer. For if there be any thing which may appease sorrow, and ease
the grieved heart oppressed with the feeling of temporal occurrents, or wounded
with the want of spiritual consolations, it is to have recourse to the throne
of grace, and there with watered eyes and cheeks be deawed with tears, to lay
open those grieuances which breed sorrow unto us. Psalm. 1 16.4.
I shall find trouble and heaviness says David, but I shall call upon the
name of the Lord. Jacob. 5.13.
It is the counsel of Saint James, Is any among you afflicted? let him pray.
Hanna being vexed in her spirit, did betake her self to this medicine: ^. Sam.
1.11.
she went to the Tabernacle, and there she earnestly entreated. The whole book
of Psalms does witness, that this was the Altar whereunto David when he was
pursued, did still retire himself. This was the stay of Hezechiah when he
turned him to the wall, 2. Reg. 20.2.
being in extreme anguish. And Saint Paul being buffeted by the Angel of
Satan, 2. Cor. 12.8.
ran to this as a refuge: I besought the Lord thrice says he, that is, many
times. And where can be comfort, if it be not in this? When worldly things do
fail us, and there is help from no man, when friends are few, or weak, or
absent, or perhaps grown unfaithful, but foes are fierce and malicious; when
Satan himself suggesteth all things to the worst, when the thoughts within
are much disquieted, the conscience even amazed and standing at the gaze, scant
knowing which way to walk: then to power forth our complaints, and discover
our miseries to him who does know all, because he is almighty, to him who
considers all, because he is our father; and who both can and will take pity
of the distressed. The practice of this, does both expeditely and assuredly
bring relief to him that tries it: that sigh which breaths out sorrow, by a
backe-breathing brings in joy. That hand which being thrust out, does reach a
supplication upward, reaches down contentation: deliverance does break
forth, or at least patience sits within: yea now there may be joy in
suffering. Thus mercy is powered down, and seasonable showers of sound and
sure refreshing do fall upon us, as upon the thirsty land. Were it not for this
precious ointment, the heart which is sometimes puffed and stretched with care,
would break and rent in pieces: but by praying it is suppled and mollified,
and stroaked, till it return unto his settled nature.

4 Then are not we to blame the while, who having a remedy so fair, so lovely
in it self, for what is like speaking to God? so profitable for us, for what
does so assuage our grife? so acceptable to our maker, for what does he account
a better sacrifice then this? so ready at hand to us, for where or when may we
not pray? Yet in our many molestations, we rather seek to ease our selves,
with any thing then with this; and so indeed we disease our selves, either
presently heaping more evil upon evil, or if we think that we slack our
sorrow, it comes forthwith more vehemently on us, as the fever does to him
who drinks cold water in his fit: there may be a superficial skin bred
above, but rankled, festered, dead flesh does putrify underneath. If one
mighty man do oppress us, we seek to back our selves by another which is
his equal: if our neighbor agree not with us, the law shall end all between
us: if we speed not there, then more money shall be employed, to fetch it
another way: if that practice go not forward, we will try a farther conclusion
of slander and defamation, so to quit a friend in his kind. If that way we
cannot reach him, yet we will have our peny-worthes out, in railing upon him,
or at least in secret whispering: inward we chafe, and outward we act it, with
more then tragical gesture And thus we do in those things, which we account
not as trifles, but in such as bite and gripe us, and break our sleep and
quiet. Yea in matters of greater consequence, we run a very wrong race. If
our conscience be now touched with the horror of some thing past, or fear
some future punishment, or a falling away from grace, which terrors are
sometimes incident to the faithful, we either wish merry company, or some
sport to pass the time, or music, or some stage play, or if we be much
possessed, we throw our selves on our beds, and in melancholy we muse, or we
walk solitary, till we be even steeped and dissolved in most dull
contemplation, the heart frighted, the spirits weakened, the brain crased, the
remembrance perished, and so either Gods graces are obscured, and diminished in
us, or endangered quite to leave us, which I cannot speak without horror.
Where now is our Christian wisdom, and spiritual understanding, when we have
a help so compendious, so forcible, so effectual, to be wanting yet to our
own good? Here the author whereon we should take told, is earnest and frequent
prayer: we are to get us into our chambers, and there with mighty contention,
to knock and rap at heaven gate, to beg resolution and constant patience, of
him who denies not any good thing to the asker, that so the issue may prove
well, and the end may be with comfort. In this sort to solicit with a lively
faith, and not sleepingly or faintingly, is the launcing of that impostume,
which does canker and heat within us: and this we may do, if we were but
single and alone. But if this serve not the turn, then let us join with other
faithful: the more company the more cry. Where two or three be together, there
Christ will be among them. Matthew. 18.20.
That which comes slowly when it is entreated by several ones, comes
quickly when many are joined together. And therefore God has made the
communion of Saints, that one might help another. As men going upon the ice or
some slipperie place, do stand so much the surer, if one hold hands with the
other, Gregor. Epistol. lib 1. Epist. 24*
so is it says Saint Gregory, when we join hands in prayer, we ask so much
the stronger, we obtain so much the sooner. But whether we be alone or
otherwise, the heaven and our heart will make a consort, which will allay all
distemper. If the fire be not thus let out, or our wine be not thus vented, it
does break the place which holds it. Wise men upon observation, lay it down
as a most expedient rule, that grief of mind should be imparted to some one or
other: it is much eased with the telling: but by taking part in the hearer, and
by counsel and comfort from him, it is very much diminished. If it be
prescribed to us, to do thus by man, then how fit is it that we should have
recourse to God, that we should double our selves before his approved
goodness, who best considers, and helps soonest, and therefore were it but
in that, he excels all other; but otherwise none of Adams children is to be
compared to him: for he scorneth not at the miseries of other men: he
dissembleth not hypocritically: he tells no tales to enemies, who would joy
at the fall of those whom they hate: he plays not false as men do, who take
advantage of the sufferings of their neighbors; but concealingly and
compassionately he sees all, and he salueth all. He then who flies to this
sanctuary, is well, and very sure of succor.

5 Then hitherto our Jonas is right, that in the midst of his disturbance
mentioned in the former verse, he went and prayed to the Lord. But he does not
keep him there: for although the cloth were good, he sets an ill dye upon
it; yea he staineth it and marreth it all. For if we will but look backward,
and see what anger was in that mind of his, from whence all was derived, and if
then we will look forward, and see how turbulent the words themselves are,
laying a sault on God, and drawing an ill conclusion, from the pity of him who
is most merciful, and afterward wishing to dye, we may easily conjecture that
the fashion marred the garment, and the sauce disgraced the meat, I mean the
quality of his work, defaced the goodness of it. For he prayed indeed, but
it was tumultuously, and expostulatory-wise, rather chiding then beseeching: he
calls God to a reckning, as if his counsel were amiss, and Jonas were in
the better: and on he goes most impatiently, and wished that he were dead. How
apparent is the infirmity of man, and how unfit is he for celestial
business, when our prayers which are the beauty and glory of our best
thoughts, shall be mingled with so much evil? And how do other men swerve,
when Prophets go thus awry? In matters touching men what slips are there, when
in that which immediately appertains unto God, there is such stumbling and
falling? How many are the sins, which we must have forgiven at Gods hand,
before that we can speed well, when we fail so in his service? When every
thing requires a purity and cleanness; Exodus 3.5.
the ground whereon we stand, that the shoes of all base affections should be
put off from our feet; the Tabernacle whereinto we enter, that we should be
washed and purged; the seat before which we appear, that the best clothes of
our soul should carefully be put on; his greatness to whom we come, that we
should only intend to him; yea the approaching of our selves, that for that
time at the least we should be appropriated, and devoted to himself, we are,
and we are not; we draw near with our lips, and our hearts are a great way
from him. The very name of praying, and of praying to a Judge, should strike a
terror into us, and imprint in us a reverence both what we did and how.
Chrysostom. Homil. in dictum Iohannis, Veniet hora.
Look says Chrysostom on the manner of prayer. Do thou not when thou
show thy hands, openest thy breast, liftest up thy face unto heaven, castest
up thy eyes, show thy self wholly unto the Lord thy maker? Then happy be thy
hands if they be clean, blessed is thy breast if it be pure, glorious thy face
if it shine in simplicity, worthy thine eyes if they be not spotted with
concupiscence, happy thy whole man if all of it be undefiled. But this serves
not our turn: we will pray although it be unfitly, as God knows it is many
times.

6 For sometimes when we ask good things, as the enlightening of our souls,
the free way of the Gospel, the increase of the faithful, the tranquillity of
the Church, the continuance of graces from above, yea patience and repentance,
and everlasting life, we do it with such coldness, such perfunctory formality,
such idle and gaping sleepiness, that we our selves are not moved with any
zeal toward Gods glory, but we do it because we do it, and we care not much
what comes of it. Yea if we will acknowledge that which is the truth of the
matter, we are filled with such wandering thoughts, and straggling cogitations of
Mammon and of ambition, of envy or of lust, that rather we do any thing, Deuteronomy.
6.5.
then that which we are doing. Whereas all the heart, and all the soul, and
all the strength should be the Lords, the vigor of our wit, the intentnesse of
our brain, the most fixed meditation of the spirit, that if it were a thing
possible, we should be wrapped from the earth, and sequestered from that body,
while we be in that holy exercise. Some other times, the manner is not the
only thing wherein we trip, but the matter it self is naught. For gold and
precious stones we bring stubble and straw: we ask such things of him, who is
an immaculate, unspotted and undefiled spirit, as we would be ashamed that men
should know. We tender that to our maker, which we would not ask of our
neighbor. I do not here speak of such vanity, as wherein the Pharisee
abounded, Luc. 18.11.
I thank God I am not as other, but rather of carnal devotions. We entreat
for our sports, and for our wantonness, as for everlasting matters. I had
leyfer that you should hear from the words of Saint Gregory, Gregor. in 40.
Homil. 27.
rather then from mine, what things we do ask. In the house of Jesus you seek
not Jesus, if in the Temple of eternity, you importunely ask for temporal
things. Behold one in his prayer asks for a wife, another beggeth for a
farm, a third makes request for a garment, another would have meat given
unto him. Nay, may not we go farther, Erasm. in Peregrinat. Religionis Ergo.
even as sometimes Erasmus noted, how in the days of superstition the Virgin
Mary was solicited: for the soldier prays for his booty, the thief for his
rich cheat, the dicer for his good fortune. Do not these things very sutably
agree with so sacred a Majesty? Do they not become us very well? I doubt not
but that we may ask for such things, as are needful to this life, if we place
them in their fit place, and sue for them with condition, If it shall seem
good to the Lord; but those other things are toys and trifles, and do favor
of carnal motions. And it is no marvel, if in such cases we speed not: for as
once it was said, to the mother of James and John, Ye ask you know not what,
so it is with us in our prayers. God sees that such things do hurt us, Matthew.
20.22.
and therefore in his kind love, he denies them unto us. Here that of Saint
James has place, Ye ask and receive not because ye ask amiss, Iac. 4.3.
Bernard. Sermon. 5. in Quadragesima.
to consume upon your lusts. And that also of Saint Bernard: When his little
child asks bread, the father reaches it unto him, but when he asks for a
knife, he denies it. So God does grant fit things to those who ask them, but
unto him who entreats for voluptuous or bad matters, he does deny them. And
surely if he should give them, they were rather tokens of his displeasure, then
of his favor to us. But how merciful does God appear to be, when he bears
these things at our hands, and does not consume us, as he did those who brought
strange fire unto his Altar? Leuit. 10.1.
Let us study to amend this fault, neither begging in bad manner with other,
nor bad matters with Jonas, but let us be earnest in that, which we know to be
good, as that entreaty of Fulgentius is, where he prays for himself,
Fulgentius de praedestinat. lib. 1.
I beseech him who is the truth, that by his mercy preventing me and following
after me, he will teach me whatsoever things are healthfully to be known, and
I know them not: that he will keep me in those true things which I do know:
that wherein as a man I am deceived, he will correct me: in what true things I
do stumble, he will confirm me: and that from false and hurtful things he
will deliver me. And thus much of the preface. Now come we to the words
themselves, which do mention his excuse.

Was not this my saying, when yet I was
run away from his calling, Ion. 1.3.
as it is in the first Chapter. In steed of land he gets him to sea, for
Eastward he goes Westward, for Niniue to Tharsus. What God thought of this, he
had pretty well felt already. The tempest which belabored him, the lot which
deprehended him, the whale which devoured him, might acquaint him what the Lord
conceived of him. But to the end that no doubt may remain, God a second time
bids him go, and preach to the Ninevites. Here duty would have supposed,
that the Lord knew well enough what he did, and the issue of the matter would
be his glory. But Jonas thinks otherwise, that God might spare his honor,
and himself might save his labor, and stay at home at the first, and not come
with a great show, and all but in a sleeuelesse errand. And whereas he ran to
Tharsus, he supposes that he had reason for it: he took the best course that
might be; and if the Lord might be pleased so to think of it, he did well: he
did as he should: that did he. Oh the incredible folly of man, that to justify
it self in a most indecent action, cares not how it lays about it, and
rappeth it esteems not whom. The Highest was ouerseene: not the best but
sometimes sleeps: and the servant was in the right. Psalm. 51.4.
Yet welfare king David: Against thee have I sinned, and done evil in thy
sight, that thou might be just when thou speak, 2. Sam. 24.17.
and pure when thou do judge. And when the Angel with the pestilence
destroyed seventy thousand, he stands not to defend his folly, but confesses
that he had sinned. Old Eli wanted no faults, yet he had learned that lesson,
not to stand on his justification, when threats were denounced against him, 1.
Sam. 3.18.
but replieth, It is the Lord, and let him do what seems good unto him. But
our man where he takes an opinion, will not be removed from it, be it right
or be it otherwise. Although here he would withdraw from himself the blame of
his former flight (which while he goes about to maintain, he makes himself
twice guilty) yet still he will be innocent. Wherein appears how blind man
naturally is: when it comes to him or his, there will be a selfe-weening, a
selfe-liking, a selfe-conceipt, in the grossest errors that may be. This sin
of thinking well of our selves, sits close and long, even when other sins
are shaken off, which shows that the speech reported of Plato is true, Euagr.
Hist. Eccl. lib. 1.21.
that this is as the inmost garment, or shirt next the skin, which does sit
on last and fastest, yea when we have put off all the rest of our other
clothing. Hence it is, that be accused who will, we for our parts are always
innocents. When Saul had spared King Agag, 1. Sam. 15.21.
and brought home the best beasts of Amalek, it was the people that did it, his
hand was not in the fact: nay he could make good use of the oversight: the
cattle would serve for sacrifice, to be offered to the Lord. Matthew. 27.24.
Pilate will not be to blame, for crucifying of Christ: he takes water and
washes his hands, and the Jews only are in Viues de bello Turcito.
made Lodouicus Viues compare men to his children, who oftentimes disagreed, as
children use to do, yet never any of them did wrong, but injury was done to
him. All the earth does run this race: other men are only nocent, and we
innocent in all causes.

8 This is a pretty paradoxe: the man who is most culpable, is least of all to
be blamed. But it were more tolerable, if man only to man used this, by a
strain of wit to divert, or boldly to ouer-face that, which justly may be
reproved: But this is it which passes a good man's understanding, that so we
may be scotfree, the just and terrible Judge, all whose ways are truth and
equity, shall have the spot cast upon him. If any thing be amiss, it is by
Gods decree, or by some thing which he has done, which we cannot avoid: or if
we had had our will, it had proved far otherwise: I foresaw this in my
country, says Jonas, and therefore I prevented it by flying, and getting me
to Tharsh^sh: but the Lord would have his own way, and now see what is come of
it. Here he shows himself to be a very right son of Adam, who although he
had borne himself disobediently in Paradise, yet he would shift the matter,
and lay it upon God. August. lib. 2. contra Manicheo^.
Adam does not say says Saint Austen, the woman gave me the fruit, but the
woman which thou did give me. And with sinners nothing is so familiar as to
attribute that to God whereof they be accused. It was marvel that Adam going a
little farther, Aug. in Psalm. 70.
he had not added this: Why should I not eat this fruit, for if it be not
good what does it here in Paradise? and if it be good why should it be
forbidden to us? Since God made it and set it here, he is to blame if we may
not eat it. This humor is by propagation derived far and near, and
although it be not showed in toys, where our patience bears no burden, yet
when there is any grievous feeling, too many do run that way. My natural
inclination does lead me to this folly. I have it from my nativity. I do but
tread the steps of my father, from whom I have it hereditary, that I know not
how to avoid this love to Bacchus and Venus. Why should God give me a body,
which by sicknesses and diseases, is so subject to impatiency, if he like not
that I should grieve thus? He ordained me for a beggar, or laid a curse on my
patrimony, which is come down on me, and on my fathers house, and therefore if
luxuriously I wast all, who can hinder that which must be? who can hold that
which will away? These are fearful and cruel words which being uttered
falsely and unadvisedly, provoke great wrath from heaven. If any thing in thee
be amiss, it is by imitation of evil, or by a degeneration from the
commandment at the first; Genes. 3.6.
and the miseries which do follow thee, are either sins in thy self, because
thou fliest from grace, or punishments of such sins as were in thy
predecessors, of whom thou have part by their means. But if thou would call
for grace, and inure thy self to good, and to a desuetude of evil, thy
natural inclinations would be turned to be spiritual; thy soul would cast
her slough of impiety and presumption, and the maladies of thy body would all
turn to thy benefit, that is, to increase thy faith and humility. Then
learn to confess thy sins to the Lord against thy self, Psalm. 32.5.
and let him be excused.

9 For such bitter words as these be, do not savor of the spirit, but of that
furious fiend who waits upon the reprobates. And they oftentimes (as Paul
intimates) to quit themselves of such sins as bring condemnation on them,
Roman 9.1^.
lay all upon the Lords appointment and decree unto life or death, which they
cannot withstand. So they know not, that howsoever God in his secret counsel
(which we are to wonder at and not to search into) does leave them to
themselves, yet they by heaping up of wickedness, do make up their own
condemnation, and add unto their torments; and that whereas by original
stain they are too much infected, yet by actual wilfulness they will
multiply the guilt of the former, by some thousands of degrees. And herein is
their grievous error, that they impute that to God, which is their own by
inheritance, and besides that, purchased also through their merit, and so by a
double right: but it is the Lords in no other circumstance, saving because he
will be just, which he is and ever will be, let them spurn while they can. It
were a more direct course, and more honorable in the end, to let God go
untouched, to allow what he allows, and to ratify what he likes: to accuse
man who deserves it, and not to seek crickes and starting holes, to lay the
fault on the Judge. But especially to be vigilant, that with all thy power thou
fly sin: for be thou either elect or reprobate, that shall bring ease unto
thee. If yet thou be in doubt whether thou be the Lords, or not his, thy faith
not being yet fervent, then love virtue morally, that the Almighty may the
^ooner bring thee to the sheepfold, if he mean at all to power grace on thee.
And evermore h^pe the best: for he can call the most wicked, and of stones
raise up seed to Abraham. Matthew. 3.9.
Yea if thy heart seem to condemn thee, yet God does rule thy heart, and can
mollify it and soften it; and the devil himself which tempts thee, is but
a lying spirit, for although he do suggest, that thou art nothing but a
castaway, yet he is a deceiuer, and is not of Gods counsel. But suppose that
thou belong not to him (whereof I would not have any man distrustfully to
doubt) yet fly from sin, and do moral virtues, and that at least shall ease
some part of the extremity of those torments, which thou shall have in hell
fire. Although thou gain no joy by it, yet thou shall escape much evil. Thy
pain shall be the less: not because thou have done well, but because thou
have less declined from virtue, as Austen speaks, making difference between
Catiline and Fabricius: Augustine. contra Pelagianum Iulianum lib. 4.
Fabricius shall be less punished then Catiline, not because he was good, but
because the other was more bad: and Fabricius was less wicked then Catiline
was, not in that he had true virtues, but because he did not as far as might
be, stray from true virtues. But be it the one or the other, take all thy
sins upon thy self, and seek not to excuse the nocent, by accusing the
innocent, who is free from the smallest blemish. In a lesser matter then
eternal life or death is, it was a fault in our Prophet, that he would assume
the better, and God must have the worse: he will be clear, and the Lord shall
be culpable. And let this be said of his excuse.

The mercy of God.
10 The third note is the reason, whereon he groundeth his A gracious God and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the
evil: such a one is ready every way to take pity, but comes to vengeance and
fury with heavy and leaden feet. Our man does so well at this, that we need
not doubt but he had a good schoolemaister to direct him, and that is the Lord
himself, who appearing unto Moses, Exodus 34.6.7.
does cry thus of his majesty, The Lord, the Lord, strong and merciful,
gracious and slow to anger, abundant in goodness and truth, reserving mercy
for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin; in which place of
Exodus although afterward there follow a little of his justice, which he may
not forget, yet we see the maine stream runs concerning mildness, and
kindness, and compassion. That is it wherein the Lord may be said to delight,
ioying to be a Savior, a deliverer, a preserver, a redeemer and a pardoner,
rather the^ to be a Judge. He has one skale of justice, but the other does
prove the heavier: mercy does ouerway. He who is ever just, is merciful more
then ever, if possibly that may be. And it seems that every day, as his
Gospel was growing on, so his pity came also forward. He who for one
transgression, thrust the Angels out of heaven, and for his first slipping
awry, turned Adam out of Paradise (his fury breaking forth against both them)
now in the days of grace, bears with us years and years, from our cradle
to our grave, after a thousand and a thousand falls, of weakness and
wilfulness, by word, by thought, by deed. Yea he came to this soon, not long
after the creation, giving in the days of Noe, Genes. 6.3.
a hundred and twenty years of repentance, before the flood. Our Niniue from
the mouth of this present Prophet, had forty days, Ion. 3.4.
before it should be destroyed. But Jerusalem being grown to the height of
all iniquity, so that both the servants and Son of God were slain by them,
the Sabbath polluted, the Sanctuary profaned, yea a horrible sink of filth
being now among them, yet was spared forty years, before that God sent up
Vespasian and Titus. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3.8.
See whether this be not tollerancie, which we with amazedness may admire.
Indeed when nothing would serve, but the member being quite incurable, must
needs be cut off by him; when their sin extorted and wrung down vengeance;
he paid them for all together, that they who would none of his love, might have
full heaps of his hatred. His arm being lift up the higher, did fall so much
the heavier: the watercourse stopped the longer, did break out the more
fiercely, according to the custom of God, who as Bernard sometimes spoke,
Bernard. de Anima. cap. 2.
By how much the longer he expects that we should amend, so much the more
strictly he will judge us if we neglect. The Jews felt this to the full: but
how slow was he to his anger?

11 Christ Jesus who is the image, and engraven form of his father, was not
behind hand in this property, while he lived here upon earth. He taught it by
the fig tree, which bearing no fruit, Luc. 13.6.
was not by and by cut down, but first for one or two years it should be
dunged and trimmed, to see what good would come of it. He sustained many
ignorances, and vntowardnesses in the Apostles, and yet did not reject them:
yea his patience was so great, that it showed it self to Judas, No marvel
says Saint Cyprian that he showed himself patient toward his obedient
disciples, Cypr. de bono patientiae.
who could with long suffering endure very Judas to the last; could take his
meat in company of his enemy; knew a foe to be in his house, and did not
openly descry him; yea refused not the kiss of a traitor. Ioh. 1.29.
He might rightly be called a lamb, yea that innocent Lamb of God, by an
excellency above all other, who could see such a one, and suffer him so often
and so near him, and scant say a word against him. This did no good on Judas,
but as the same Cyprian observes, the like tollerance was effectual to
salvation in other men. If those who did shed the blood of Christ, had been
taken presently after, they had perished everlastingly: but God so graciously
disposed for their good, Act. 2.37.
that they were pricked in their hearts, and so brought home to the sheepfold;
of enemies being now made friends. Which made that father say, Cypr. vbi supra.
He who shed the blood of Christ, was quickened by the blood of Christ; such
and so great was Christ's patience, which if it had not been such and so
great, the Church should not have had Saint Paul for an Apostle. Thus the holy
and blessed Trinity deals with men in this present age, in great mercy after
years and twenty years before they come to the grave, respecting such as have
been men audacious and impudent in ungodliness; such as have been
superstitious, and Popish even unto idolatry; such as in a conceited fancy
were so fastened to Antichrist, that to lose their lives for the beast, they
thought to be to do God good service. Those persons who had lain and fried in
hell, as firebrarnds to be burnt, remediless and everlastingly, if they had
departed in that mind to the grave, the place where is no redemption; by
compassion from the mighty one, whose bowels are made of mercy, are suffered
to live, till with tears they wash away many folli^s. But then apprehending
Christ aright, they bless the eternal father, who has thought upon them so
kindly: they bless the day and the hour, that ever their eyes were opened:
that their mist was removed away: that they have changed the puddle of
traditions and superstitions, and will-worships and ignorances, of customs and
vain inventions, into the bright delightful water, which streameth from him
and his word who is the well of life.

12 We who never drank of those dregs, yet may make the same confession: for
we feel Gods favor every day. It is an argument of his love, that we have so
many things, life and breath, and food and raiment: that many such accidents
do not overtake us, as whereby other come to ruin, sword and fire, and hunger
and pestilence, and diverse others occurrents, which destroy many in this life:
that in so many prouocations, for forty years together we have enjoyed such
rest, that the ages to come will hear it and scant believe it, but never
again expect it: the soul so fed and the body: such honor and reputation, in
all the coasts of the earth, under a woman's conduct, that we cannot choose but
confess, that the Lords aspect has been good over this blessed Island. But
besides that general sea of grace, which lies open to all that come, how long
suffering is the Lord to every one of us? Indeed he is singular in clemency,
for when he found nothing in us, why his eye should be upon us, then he
prevented us with grace, and touched our heart with a feeling. Since that time,
when we would slip from him, he catches us and holds us fast: when every
toy would allure us to sell God and be gone, he will not so part with us: if we
be lost, out he seeks us, if we lie long he raises us, if we come not, then
he draws us, in temptation he does strengthen us, in strong despair he
releeueth us. Who would ever have to do with such a froward generation, so
slipperie and so tickle, so giddie and so perverse, but only he who is like
himself, who will love because he will love: our inconstancy shall not hinder
his firm and sure good pleasure. The pains of the mother with the infant, is
a matter of various labor: her sleep his broken, her business hindered, her
necessities even neglected: yet because she loves she swalloweth all: but she
must come short of God, who, were it not that he is resolved to do it, because
he is full of mercy, he would never so wait upon us, and expect us as he does.
We reap the comfort of it, and he reapeth the praise, the honor and
admiration. For as every thing in him is worthy to to be wondered at, so this
is to be embraced with admiring amazedness, Hilar. in Psalm. 144.
that he so respects man. Hilary has a sentence worthy to be recited here.
This is an especial thing in God: this is to be wondered at in that mighty
one, not that he made the heaven, because he is powerful: not that he settled
the earth, because he is strength: not that he tempered or distinguished the
year with the stars, because is wise: not that he gave man a soul,
because he is life: not that he did move the sea into anebbing and a flowing,
because is a spirit: but that he should be merciful who is just; but that he
should be pitiful, who is a King: but that he should bear with us, who is
a God. At this we may wonder, but receive it with great comfort, for the
harvest thereof is ours.

13 But to return to my Jonas. Thou saidest when thou wast in thy country,
that God was so kind and gracious, and would relent from the fury which he
threatened to the Ninevites: then wherefore do thou now grieve at it? Thou
did resolve before, that the end and conclusion would be such; therefore it
is likely, that God advisedly performed that which he did, since thou had
thought so long of it. Then why art thou now angry at it? Who would grieve
that fire should burn, or water should be moist? that the earth should be dull
and heavy? that the Sun should yield forth light? The creatures cannot so
much challenge those properties, as God does challenge to himself the title of
mercy. Then so it is, and thou think so, and saidest so long agone, and yet
thou grieuest that it is so. Thou thoughtest it so in the Theorike, but
beleeuedst it not in the Practike. He is gracious where thou listest, but must
not be so where he pleases. To Jonas he is and may be, but not so to the
Ninevites. But thou saidest that he would do it, and yet thou chafest that he
did it. Now Jonas thou condemnest thy self: thine own mouth has so taken
thee, that thou can not avoid this straight. For if God be just, and do
punish this people, then thou saidest ill, that he would repent of the evil:
if he be kind and do not destroy them, then thou frettest amiss, that he who
is grace and pity, should show himself in his kind. Then thy collection for
the justifying of thine anger is most absurd and preposterous: God is
merciful, therefore I fret because he will show mercy: when it should have
been clean contrary, God is merciful, therefore I should grieve, if he should
not show mercy to them: or, he is slow to anger, therefore he will forgive
them. The master in the parable would have turned this answer on him, Luc.
19.22.
Not thou evil, but foolish servant, from thine own mouth I condemn thee.
For what a speech is this, did I not say that it would be so? Yes: but why then
do thou murmr that it is so? Thou saidest that the Lord would deal thus
with the Ninevites; then when it had been done, thou should not have
grumbled at it.

14 It is a lesson to us, that still we submit our judgment to the judgment
of the Lord: that we seek not with our own wit to carry that which is his,
besides the streams of his purposes, but to look to his revealed will, and
with modesty and humility, to submit our selves thereunto. For if upon any
affection of discontent, or envy, or ambition, or gaine-saying, we will vary
from his designements, he will let us be as absurd and unreasonable as Jonas
was, to please our selves in conclusions, which manifestly teach the contrary
to our opinion. God is marvelous and unsearchable, in taking entangled man in
the snares of his own inventions. And if we be as Jonas, that is Prophets, and
will be foolish, in things which touch his own determinations, he will most of
all take and whip us. In this case Gods counsels are deep, and oftentimes
leave a scarre, of a mind unsatisfied in it self, or of just reproof with
other, when the crachets of our wit must overrule his will, and we will have
it our way, when God has said it otherwise. What a dash of great reproach to
this day, Vineentius Lyrinens aduers. haeres. cap. 23.
did light upon Origene, besides the fear of a farther danger, when the spirit
of his conceit, must be taken for the marrow of the Scripture, and look what
with tricks he devised, other men must straight believe. His conclusions grew
as inconsequent, as ever this did of Jonas. Because we also are Prophets, let
us fear in like sort, to force the word of God to any thing, but to what he
meant it; or to broch any new devises by singularity of opinion. For as the
Lord both blesses and graceth things done with a good mind, although they have
their imperfections, so when our purpose is but vanity, or rareness, or a
fancy to sing a note beyond all men, in that where soundness seasoned with
care and industry, is best, God a little to bridle us, leaves us unto our
selves, and in steed of praise more then common, our spot is more then
ordinary. Concerning the matter of Gods business, the best ground is the
common way: to teach as the Lord does teach, and as the words are naturally,
and then if all other good helps be used, it is not amiss: but let no humane
passion make us vary from the substance, because we will have it one way, when
God will have it another, lest the Almighty be not so much honored as
otherwise he should, and we our selves be discomforted. God grant that we may
make use of the examples in the Scriptures, that in need we may seek to him
who is able to help us: that we may pray to him as we should, in humility and
obedience, accusing our own infirmities, that so we may taste of that mercy,
wherein he is so plenteous, especially in his Son, to both whom and the holy
Spirit be praise for evermore.

THE XXVI. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 1. Out of evil grows evil. 3. God is Lord of life and
death. 5. Man is to regard himself as an excellent creature. 6. No man should
lay violent hands on himself, 8. nor do things tending thereto. 10. Christians
are not excused who killed themselves to avoid their persecutours. 11. How a
man may desire to be dead. 12. God in mercy does not grant all our wishes. 13.
The Lords mildness in reproouing Jonas. 14. Which should be imitated by all,
but especially by the Minister.

Jonah. 4.3.4 Therefore now, o Lord, take I beseech thee, my life from me: for
it is better for me to dye then to live. Then said the Lord, Do thou well to
be angry?


IT is a speech true, as well in Divinity as in Philosophy, Vno absurdo dato
mill consequuntur.
that grant one absurdity, and a many will follow: which is more commonly
seen in practice of life, then in holding opinions. For when we have once gone
aside from Gods law, and from the rule of virtue, one sin draws on another,
as the linkes of a chain move their fellows, where the first plucketh on the
second. And as a stone which is cast into a poole or standing water, makes one
circle where it falls, and that circle breeds another, and so forward
successively, till it come to the bank; so evil grows of evil, and the
first begets one farther, and there it will not rest, but on in infinitum,
unless grace sent from heaven as a bridle of restraint, Genes. 3.6.
do make stay in the soul. When Adam had once yielded to hearken to the woman
more indulgently then he should, credulity comes on him: that hatcheth out
ambition: thence flows disobedience; after that comes excusing, and posting
all over to God. 1. Sam. 15.9.
When Saul by a foolish pity, had spared the king of Amalec, and by a greedy
covetousness had saved the cattle alive, he despaireth upon those
threatenings, which were denounced against him by Samuel: then he grieueth to
lose his kingdom: afterward hearing that David was the man, who should succeed
him, he seeks every way to slay him. After his hatred toward him, he hated
every man who in least sort entertained him, 1. Sam. 22.18.
he murdered the Lords Priests: and then to the end that he might procure that
from hell, which would not come from heaven, Cap. 28.8.
he consulteth with a witch: and at last for the vp-shot he slaughtereth
himself. Cap. 31.4.
Jonas is not so far left to his own disposition, as to mar all in the
end: Gods grace is more upon him: yet to show how far weakness in his
calling had surprised him, he makes an ill gradation. Being in up to the
shoes, he will on to the shoulders, and it was more by grace then by nature,
that he had not diued over head and all. For first he had unadvisedly resolved
on the destruction of the city, without any sparing: and in his longing for it,
he was grown bloody in mind; then seeing that God would pardon them, he is
displeased at it, and he proves angry with the Lord himself. His wrathful
mind breaks forth, and excusing himself for all, he lays the fault on the
Lord. Yet here he sits not down, but furious as he is, in all have he will
be dead, to be rid of all the trouble. And although the Lord do interrupt him
there, yet he will be dead the second time, as afterward it does follow.

2 In this place I am to handle the conclusion of his prayer; wherein after
that he had tendered his own justification, as it is in the former verse, and
had vexed himself that he could not see that which he intended, he requesteth
that he might dye, accounting his peevish anguish to be a thing so
intolerable, as that a living man might not bear it. Wherein he still
continues an example of humane frailty, which being led by affection, and
fancy-full opinion of some present incombrance, forgets the rules of piety,
and very grounds of reason, and speaks it knows not what. For how unfit was
that motion, because other men must live, Jonas himself will dye. Because he
might not have revenge on those who hurt him not (for their faults were against
the Highest) he would be revenged on himself. Thus dealt he at that time; when
as a man whose heart had been seasoned with understanding, should have taken
such contentation, at the conversion of so many sinners, that his joy should
have been the greater, and his life should have been the sweeter, to see such a
metamorphosis, that unrepentant sinners should be now crying out for pardon.
But my text leads me to speak, not what a one he should be, but what a one
he was, and therein these two verses offer to us several matters:

Life and death is from God.
Lord take away my life. And in their greatest sobriety, the holiest Saints
have and must acknowledge that Iehoua was he who in the first creation,
breathed into the clay a living moving soul. Genes. 2.7. Act. 17.28.
In him says Saint Paul, we live and move, and have our being. And whose it
is to build, his it is to destroy: whose the making is, his is the marring.
This caused Moses speaking plainly in Gods own person, to join them both
together. Deuteronomy. 32.39.
Behold now for I am he, and there are no Gods with me: I kill and I give
life, I wound and I make whole, neither is there any who can deliver out of my
hands. So Job that holy man: Job. 12.10.
In Gods hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all
mankind. If in his hand, then to give it where he pleases to give it, and
where he lists to deny it. Solomon the wise does apparently aim at this,
Eccles. 8.8.
where he says: Man is not Lord over his breath, to retain his spirit,
neither has power in the day of death, nor deliverance in the battle. Where
by an Antithesis it must needs be understood, that God the^ is Lord over it,
and he does dispose of it. And he has learned little in the school of Christ
Jesus, who perfectly knows not this, that his breath in his body as a tenant
at will, is put into a house, whereinto it may not enter, but by the good will
of the landlord, and being once in, there it must keep and hold the building
upright, till it have his discharge to remove some whither else. It must not
stay longer, then the term set by the owner, neither must it depart till that
moment come. In the beginning of our being, it is God who gives the barren a
power to conceive, who quickens that within, sometimes sooner, sometimes
later, which he means shall see the Sun: who brings it into the world:
thou art he says the Prophet David, Psalm. 71.5.
who took me out of my mothers womb: who preserves from the cradle, by thee
have I been holden up ever since I was borne: and leading us along, he
lengtheneth or he shorteneth the race which we shall run, and when we come to
the period of the time decreed by himself, there he bids us stay and fall.
Our glass being run, we return to the earth from whence we were taken.

4 And that it might appear, to be only his prerogative, to begin and end
life, howsoever he gives the entrance unto it but by one way, Seneca. lib.
7.1. Controuersiarum.
that is by generation (as a heathen man notes) yet arbitrarily, by
innumerable means he dissolueth it and destroys it. And this he does not at
hap-hazard, but he ordains it before with an immutable decree, so that it may
not be changed. Ierem. 43.11.
Jeremy the Prophet uses these words: The king of Babel when he comes shall
strike the land of Egypt, such as before death unto death, and such as be
appointed for captivity to captivity, and such as be for the sword to the
sword. This intimates that by the providence of the Lord, who did set that
king on work, several persons in their times are determined to their several
ends, some to the sword, some to famine, some to the pestilence, Ezech. 14.21.
and some other to the teeth of wild beasts (which are the Lords four great
plagues) and some other to other deaths. The execution of this decree is so
various and so manifold, that there is no one man's tongue which possibly can
describe it. Genes. 4.8. Iudic. 9.53.
Abel he is slain by his brother. Abimilechs brains are beaten out by the
hand of a woman, throwing a piece a mil-stone from a wall. Agag is hewed in
pieces. 1. Sam. 15.33. 2. Reg. 9.24. Epiphan de vitis Prophetarum. Luc. 13.1.4.
Plin. Nature. Hist. lib 7 7. Hier. Epist. 19. Tom. 9.
Iehoram slain with an arrow. Esaias cut with a wooden saw. Amos slain with a
dore-barre: the blood of other was mingled with the blood of their own
sacrifices. Some there were on whom the tower of Siloah did fall, Anacreon the
Poet as Pliny tells, was choked with the kernel of a raisin, and Fabius the
Senator was served so with a hair. Pope Adrian the fourth as Cremonensis
writes, was choked with a fly. Valentinian the Emperor came to his end,
Sozom. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6.6.
by straining himself with crying too loud. Iouian another Emperor was found
dead in his bed. And to recite no more of ancient time, now in our days, many
come to their graves by Apoplexies and Lethargies, and dead palseyes, some by
falling, some by drowning, some other as a wasted candle go out naturally. What
the Lord has appointed over them, that every one partaketh. So that it is a
thing peculiar to his own pleasure, to withdraw breath from mankind, which if
at any time he be not pleased to do, no devise of man can bring about the
destruction of the least person: snares and ambushes laid as against Elizeus,
2. Reg. 6.14. Dan. 6.22. Cap. 3.27.
shall be frustrated and escaped. Lions teeth shall stand still as they did at
Daniel: fire shall not burn, as it was in that oven, where the three children
were. All policy shall sink, and all complots shall be dissolved, as the Lord
has manifestly testified in his anointed handmaid, who reigns over us: whom
he has kept hitherto amidst most strange conspiracies, because his purpose is,
that yet longer he will honor her.

5 Here it shall be no ill advise, to intersert this word: that since the Lord
himself, who forgets not his other creatures, is notedly and especially so
careful over man, to let his life in into him, and to let it out by decree, to
measure out his sufferings, and to moderate his endurings, to deliver when he
lists, and to save when he thinks good (the remembrance of all which, and
the like benefits, Psalm. 8.4.
made David cry out, Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the
son of man that thou do so visit him?) we should esteem of our selves as
of Gods special workmanship, in a degree beyond ordinary. My intent is not to
puff up our hearts with any pride, or to thrust into a self-liking (for the
Lord does hate pride: Prou. 16.5.18. Matthew. 11.29.
it goes before a fall: and the humble men are those, on whom Christ's yoke is
laid) but to rowze us up from that neglect, which commonly is in all carnal
men, I mean a careless estimation, and drowsy consideration of the graces of
God upon us. For do we not see many, as if they were only borne to be somewhat
in the world, and that so small a somewhat, as if it were but nothing, go on as
forlorn people, who make no account of their being, and only eat and drink
and sleep, and walk on idly, as if they cared not much, whether this or that
did fall out, to themselves or other men, and they were but a sort of things,
which be they or be they not, it makes not any matter. A conceit which is
very earthie, and dull as is the clay, and in no sort beseeming a reasonable
soul, who should carry his face upright to God, and to the heavens, and think
himself to be made for somewhat: to glorify the Almighty, to be a part of
the Church, to help to adorn the world, to be doing honest actions, while he
is here in this life, and not to go poring forward, as a beast which looks
only downward. Is it nothing, that he has given thee speech and reason,
which he denies to every thing but man? Is it nothing, that his son redeemed
thee with his blood, and paid such a ransom for thee? Or, to note what my
text does note, is it nothing that thy life is dayed and houred, and inched
out, by a fearful God and a terrible? who among so many motions, and
directions, and disposings, and altering transmutations, of heaven and earth
and water, yet has thee so in his reckening, Psalm. 139.1.
and bears such an eye upon thee, on thy in-going and thy out-going, of thy
lying own and thy rising, of thy sickness and thy health, of thy living and
thy dying, as if only he did intend unto thy self in special. Do not thou
esteem that to be vile, which he reckeneth of so much worth: let that soul be
precious to thee, which he accounts of so great price: do not hang down thy
head, but with industry adorn thy soul, and with diligence in his service,
thinking it a shame to see that active, nimble and stirring substance, to be
ouergrowne with mossinesse, and rust of such neglect, as hitherto has
possessed it.

that he who sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Genes* 9.6.
Leu. 24.10. Ios. 7.25. 1. Reg. 2 31.
Moses stoned the blasphemer: Iosuah did so by Achan, and Solomon in his
uprightness took away the life of Ioab. But I speak here of that case, which
might touch our Prophet nearer: that is, that although he did pretend, that he
willingly would be dead, yet he does not take a course, violently to lay hands
on himself and his own body, but prays the Lord to dissolve him. Wherein
it appears, that although he were perverse and discontent; yet he was not
come to that height of iniquity and impiety, as to destroy himself. A sin
of the most strange nature, that any is in the world, that whereas all other
sins are to preserve the body, indeed, or in a fancy, in circumstance or in
substance, this is to overthrow it. Yea to overthrow it with God, and overthrow
it with man, in this world and the next, without hope and all recovery,
unless the Lords mercy which cannot be limited, do that whereof is no
warrant. His commandment is in general, Thou shall commit no murder. If no
murder upon other, Exodus 20.13.
then much less on thy self. For thou must love thy neighbor, but as thou
love thy self; and the pattern of all duty to be extended in him, Matthew.
22.39.
is taken from thine own person. Then when the Lord has created thee, and put
thee into the world, and bid thee there to keep, as in a standing place, as in
a watch or ward, from whence thou may not move till he come to discharge
thee, will thou dare to leave thy ground, and forsake that which he has
enjoined thee? When thy soul shall come before his just and fearefulll
countenance, how must it needs be dismayed, when that speech shall come from
his mouth, what do thou in this place? who sent for thee? who dismissed
thee? As thou with violence have cut thy self from thy body, so with violence
I do cut thee from all hope of participation in my glory.

7 What a trembling may this sentence procure upon this soul? what mountains
may it not cry to, or what hills to fall upon it, Apoc. 6.16.
to be freed from such a doom? It is good therefore that every Christian, who
desires to have his part in the holy resurrection, should fly from this, as
the way to everlasting damnation. 1. Sam. 31.4. 2. Sam. 17.23. Matthew. 27.5.
This is a pranke for such as despairing Saul was, to fall upon his own
sword: or of cursed crafty Ahitophell, to go home and hang himself: or of
Judas, to go forth, and work himself to his end. How many are the miseries
and vexations, which a Christian should suffer all his life time here, before
that he should once think of this? With what earnestness of prayer, should he
resist this tentation? Joseph. de bello Iudaico. 3.14.
Should I say that Josephus a Jew, with full reasons refuted that, which was
urged for this ungodly fact, at such time as he was pressed unto it, by his
bloody minded fellows? Yea heathen men have taught this, as Plato in Phaedone,
Mocrob. in Somn. Scipion. 1.13. Tull. in Somnio Scipionis.
from whom we find, that Macrobius has collected seven reasons, why we should
not dare to attempt this. But the speech of Tully is excellent, in that Somnium
Scipionis, whereupon Macrobius there commenteth. For when Scipio had said, If
true life be only in heaven, why stay I then upon earth? why have I not, to
come to you? No it is not so, says his father, for unless that God whose
Temple all this is that thou see, free thee from the fetters of thy body,
thou can not have an entrance thither. For men are begotten, and bred upon
that condition, that they should maintain that round thing, which thou see
in the midst of that Temple, and which is called the earth. And there is
given unto them a soul, of those everlasting fires, which you call stars
and planets. Wherefore o Publius, both thy soul and the souls of all good
men, is to be kept by them, in the safe custody of thy body, neither without
his commandment by whom it is given unto you, are you to leave this life,
lest you should seem to fly this duty assigned by God. If a heathen man by
the light of nature could go so far, it were a thing very admirable, that
bare reason should be able to teach so much. But we may very well imagine, that
this came from the Divinity of the jews. For Tully in that place deriueth his
position from Plato, Macrob. vt supra.
which Macrobius plainly notes, and Platoes divine Philosophy, was by hearing
or reading, sucked from the books of Moses, which thing Eusebius in his book
De Praeparatione Euangelica, Eusebius. de* Praeparat. Euangelic. lib 9.3.
does manifestly lay down, citing there Numenius the Pythagorian, who writes
that Plato was nothing else, but Moses speaking Greek, or in the Attike
language. But be this so, or be it otherwise, the doctrine is most true.

8 First then in this are condemned those, who yielding themselves too much
unto Satan's suggestions, wilfully destroy their own bodies: from whom as I
dare not generally withdraw the hope of salvation, and everlasting life (for
Gods mercy may give grace, and a sudden hasty repentance, between the bridge
and the water, between the deed and the dying, so that then they could wish
all were well, and no violence offered) so on the other side, I cannot but
pronounce that the case is very dangerous, and in the highest sort to be
suspected and feared, unless the Lord do give apparent tokens of penitencie.
Do not first take strong poison, and then afterward seek some such remedy, as
may be offered in an instant, whereunto to trust thou have no warrant, but
almost all to the contrary. Secondly they are here taxed, who wilfully and
without cause, adventure upon such things, as are the ways of death, by that
means tempting God, to see whether he will preserve them: for so it must needs
be, Matt. 4.6.7.
if they think of him at all. Remember how Christ discountenanced all leaping
off from the Temple, which in nature had been a means, to dash himself to
pieces. Some dangerous tumbling tricks, and walking upon ropes not without
danger of life, and other sports of that quality, are very near to this. Here
let me acknowledge one thing to you, whereof I have oftentimes thought in my
self by occasion of that text, which was cited to our Savior, by Satan the
great tempter in the story last mentioned. When he would have Christ throw
himself from the pinnacle of the Temple, he encouraged him by that place of
the Psalm: Psalm. 91.11.12.
He shall give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands they shall
lift thee up, that thou dash not thy foot against a stone. Where, as every
man may see, he cited the Scripture falsely, leaving out that which is very
material, to keep thee in all thy ways. He shall give his Angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. I have heard that a reverend man,
preaching on a time in our sister University, at the burial of one or two
gentlemen, who came to an untimely end by swimming, enforced out of that place
of Matthew, that it is the policy of the tempter, to draw men from their own
ways, to the ways of other creatures. And therein (as I have heard) he
observed, that a ma^s way was to go, a birds way was to fly, as fishes way was
to swim: and if we would leave our own paths, dangerously and without
cause, to do as fishes or birds do, we tempt God in that case, and suppress as
much of the Psalm to our selves, as Satan did to Christ. For God will keep
thee in all thy ways, not in the ways of a bird, not in the ways of a fish.
I cannot say that at that time, by collection from that text, or by the
doleful example which was then before his eyes, that reverend learned man
utterly forbad that exercise, as impious and unlawful; neither dare I do so:
for fishermen have use of it: and Peter in the presence of our Savior, Ioh
21.7.
girded his linnnen garment to him, and threw himself into the sea: and the
means that some escaped from the ship-wracke, Act. 27.43.
in the company of Saint Paul, was their swimming: and soldiers in passing
waters, are oftentimes constrained to betake them to this exercise. So that
utterly to condemn it, or dislike it, I think it not convenient, or
warrantable; but certainly in that sort as many use it, and too many in great
cities, and perhaps some in this place, that is to say, young ones, and in the
deep, and without company or good help, yea and upon the Sabbath day, which
the Lord has notedly punished, as some of us may remember, does fall within
just reproof, of being too much accessarie of shortening men's own lives. Let
the elder and the younger lay this to their own consciences, and make the use
to themselves. Only upon occasion of this summer time of the year, I do
briefly mention it.

9 Within this compass, there come plainly our chalenges, and defendances for
combats in the fields, for every trifling braule; where not for God and their
country, or for their Princes safety, but upon every brauling disgrace, the
life is thrust into danger. How uncomfortable a thing is it, in a mortal
deadly wound, which may very well be thy share, to think that thou have sought
the dissolution of thy soul from thy body, and to have rather stood on thy
manhood, and fame with other men, then upon thy Christian duty? How many laws
did Moses make, but none for the duellum, or combat between two? Deuteronomy. 19.5.
Nay, he who laid it down, that if the head of an axe fly off, as a man is
cutting wood, and slay his neighbor being near unto him, with whom he had no
quarrel, if the pursuer should take his person, before he came to the city of
refuge, it was lawful to kill him; what would he have thought of these men,
who will thrust themselves into this straigth, to slay or to be slain? What
the Emperor Honorius, son to that good Theodosius, thought of this,
appears hereby, that as Theodoret writes, Theodor. Hist. Eccl. lib. 5.26.
he took away all sword-playings and gladiatorie fights, which so long had
been used in Rome, because they were the means of many slaughters. The very
Turks in this case are worthy of commendation, of whom I find in the Epistles
of Augerius Busbequius, Augerius Busbequius Epist. 3.
Ambassador sometimes among them, for Ferdinandus the Emperor, that while he
was in the country, when one of the Turkish Captains had reported before the
Bassas, that he had challenged into the field, another of the San-iacks or
Lieutenants of the Turk, of whom he had received some grieuance, the Bassas
that Graund Segnieur thrust him presently into prison, and used these words
unto him: Did thou dare to denounce the combat against thy fellow soldier?
were there not Christians to fight with? You live both by the bread of our
Emperor, and would you try for each others life? Know you not that whether
soever of you had ben^ slain, it had bin a loss to our Sovereign? he had
lost a man? a soldier? This was but a worldly reason, which yet holds among
us also. But for the avoiding of slaughter, upon other men or our selves, which
point concerns the Lords commandment, we should fly from these great
occasions of murder, which is so horrible a sin. But to return to the maine
cause, if these accessaries and helps to bring our selves to the grave, be
things not to be justified, then what a great fault is manslaughter, directly
done upon our selves?

10 I have said more of these adiacents, then my purpose was to speak: but for
the great point, which naturally arises from my text, I have therein said
less, because I debated this question at large, Ion. 1.1^.
upon the twelfth verse of the first Chapter of this Prophecy: and in the
opening of this book, I have ever aimed at that, not to repeat the same
things often, in manner or in matter. Yet one word more before I leave this, and
that is, that in the Primitive Church, it was somewhat a strange kind of
opinion, that men confessing Christ might make away themselves, to withdraw
their bodies from torments, which their persecutours would offer to them; and
they knew not certainly whether their strength were able to sustain. Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. 8.24.
Eusebius in his history tells, that in the bloody time of cruel
Diocletian, there were diverse, who for the reason named, did procure death to
themselves, by throwing their bodies from floores and lofts, and high places.
And he adds farther there, that a certain Chistian mother and her two
daughters being taken, and fearing lest she or they should be defloured, which
of all things she detested, stepped aside from their keepers, and threw
themselves into the river, and so perished in the water. Cap. 27.
Afterward, the same Eusebius speaks of another matrone, who going into her
chamber, as it were to attire her self, while the officers of the Emperor
expected her return, thrust her self through with a sword. And these matters
Eusebius does not only historically relate, but by an insinuation, does little
less then commend them: but of certainty he evidently approoueth them. Now
true divinity does maintain, that this praise is not good; but such deeds are
very unlawful. God who simply forbids all murder on our selves, does also
forbid this, because he gives no exception in this point or case, either
directly or indirectly. The Prophets and the Apostles, and our Savior Christ
himself, did with humility expect, that the will of God should be wrought
upon them by others: they did not make themselves guilty, by laying violent
hands on their own flesh. That were not patience, but impatiencie, and
breaking away from the cross imposed on them. 2. Match. 14.42. Augustine. contra
secundam Gaudentij Epistolam. Hieron. in Ion. 1.
By occasion of the example of Razias, mentioned in the second book of the
Machabees, and there said to destroy himself. Saint Austen very excellently
disputes this against the Donatistes, whose treatise who so lists to read,
shall see that he plainly and substantially proves that this is not to be
liked in any Christian. Hierome upon the first of Jonas, desirous as it seems
to make excuse for such facts, gives thus his judgment on this matter: It is
not our part to hasten death to our selves, but willingly to receive it being
laid upon us by other. Whereupon even in persecutions, Absque hoc vbicastitas
periclitatur.
it is not lawful for us to perish with our own hands (unless it be where
chastity is endangered) but to submit our selves unto the striker. In general
he condemns it, and that particular exception where our chastity is
endangered may very well be left out: for violence which is offered to the
body of man or woman, and cannot be resisted, does not make the party
sinful. It is consent which staineth us with transgression, and not that force
which we cannot avoid, and which we approve in no sort. He who lived in a
deeper time of darkness and superstition, Sarisbur. de nugis Curialium. lib.
5.17.
that is Sarisburiensis in the fifth of his Policraticus, could see definitely
and positiuely to determine all this doubt. His words are plain and direct,
and therefore I think good to cite them: None of them who have laid hands on
themselves, are sufficiently excused by me, although the Ecclesiastical story
with great commendation, does extol some who hastened their own death,
because they had leyfer that their temporal life should be endangered, then
their chastity. His judgment therein is sound, although the faults of those
who were surprised, and deceived with such an opinion, should be covered with
silence, and left to Gods secret judgment. Now to come to my third
circumstance.

Lords part, to give life and take it away: and he is not ignorant that to use
violence on himself, were a very grievous sin: but yet he goes so far, as
to wish himself dead: he prays God to end his life, and concludes it to be
better for him, to dye then to live. Here is a double fault in the Prophet;
one, that the cause which did move him, to such vehemence of thoughts was a
matter much unbeseeming: for all his anger was, that the Lord would spare the
Ninevites, which he thought was against his credit, and the esteem of a
Prophet; and Jonas by a consequent is in this case grown bloody. But of this
before in this Chapter. The second fault is, that in this his mad and raging
anger, he does wish himself dead. For this in him proceeded from a vexed
unquiet heart, possessed with impatiency, and not from a sanctified resolution.
We deny not but in some cases, a man who is here on earth warfaring, and in a
combat with his spiritual enemies, may wish himself out of life. As when
there is a mere and fervent desire to be joined with his head, to be with the
blessed Trinity, and the Angels about the throne, as accou^ting that glory to
be the garland, for which we must sigh and groan. And this does Saint Paul
teach us by his evident example, Philip. 1.23.
where he professes of himself, that he longed to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ. And this love has filled the minds of many of the martyrs, who
thought all to be dung, in comparison of that heavenly celestial beatitude,
which is aloft with God. And therefore they feared not to press on to that
mark, by fire, and sword, and racking. And is these days of the Gospel, that
is one of the consolations, wherein we do abound, that we see many of our
Christian brethren and sisters, when in the extremity of their sickness, they
lie upon their deathbeds, to embrace our Savior Christ, and thirst for their
dissolution, to think each hour a year, before they be in heaven. Again,
when there is truly in us a settled hate against sin, which arises from a
seruent love to the Lord, whom we grieve to displease, not for fear, but for
kindness toward so gracious a father; then it it is a good desire, soberly and
with ripe judgment, to wish our selves out of this body, where daily we
provoke him, whom we love so entirely. And in this also, we have the steps of
holy Paul to tread, and to walk in, who considering the great burden of
sin, which was upon him, and how it did evermore disturb him, does cry out
passionatly, O wretched man that I am, Roman. 7.24.
who shall deliver me from this body of death? Where certainly he intends so
much, as that in this consideration, he could wish himself from this earth.
But on the other side, if they be but froward thoughts, and werying
perturbations, which distemper us too much; or if it be for some sorrows, and
afflictions which fall on us; or because by one or other we are thwarted in our
designements, then in wishing for death, we prove plainly to be offenders,
for want of submitting our will unto the Lords will, for lack of waiting with
patience, and attending the leisure of the Almighty. If Elias that powerful
Prophet, be overtaken thus, to cry, now it is enough, O Lord take away my
soul, 1. Reg. 19.4.
for I am no better then my fathers, because Iezabel pursued him, to destroy
him if she could take him, he may not be excused.

12 But for our man, it is evident that he was in this bracke: it was no
earnest motion to be with God which did stir him; for now he was angry with
him: neither was it because he loathed sin; for he heaped that as fast on
him, as possibly he could: but because in a testie peevishness, and
unbeseeming curstness, he could not see that effected, which he so hotely
desired, that was, to see all Niniue brought to utter desolation. And in this
fury, the man would be nothing else but dead. He had never bin dead before, and
therefore did not know, what it was to come unprovided and unfurnished, yea
indeed clothed with frowardness, before so high a Judge. If it then had been
removed when it was in that fury, with what comfort could his soul approach
before the tribunal? Whereby it appears, how mercifully the Eternal deals
with us, who oftentimes in his love denies to us those things, for which we
wish; which if we should evermore enjoy, we were better be without them.
Theseus as Tully says, Tullius Offic. lib 1.
by obtaining the thing which he desired, gained this, that his only son
Hippolytus was lost, and torn in pieces. The same which that fable reports,
of those wishes which Neptune granted to him, that they did hurt and not help
Theseus, is true of Gods part toward us: if he should evermore grant, that
which we wish on our selves or other, it would ouerturne our bodies, and make
our souls to perish. Do we not many times, unadvisedly wish our selves in our
grave, as Jonas did in this place, when I wis we little think it? And if then
there should come any, who would take us at our word, should we not make
twenty pauses, yea a hundred exceptions, before we would be ready? It is but
Aesopsfable, but the moral thereof is true, Aesopus de Seen and Morte.
that a poor and desolate old man, turning home from the wood with a burden
of sticks upon him, threw them down, and in remembrance of the misery which
he sustained, called oftentimes for death to come to him, as if he would live
no longer. But when Death came to him in earnest, and asked what he should do,
the old man presently changed his mind, and said that his request unto him
was, that he would help him up with his wood. This most commonly is our case:
we would find some other business to set Death about, if he should come to us,
when vainly we have wished for him. And it is not much unlikely, that our
Prophet in this place, would have played such a pranke, when he prayed to God
with such vehemence to take away his soul. But be that as it will be; let this
stand good between us, that with anger and with chasing at that which the Lord
decreed, and with wishing death in his rage, the Prophet highly offended. Which
being so largely discoursed, now come we in the second place, to see how the
Lord takes this, which I shall pass as briefly over, as I have been long in
the former.

And the Lord said, Do thou well to be angry?
13 That which Jonas had witnessed in the second verse of the Prince would have
rung such a lesson to his subject, that he should well have remembered with whom
he had to deal. Nay may we not justly think, that the mighty Iehoua, who is
covered with the thunder, and clothed with the lightening, who speaks and the
earth does tremble, who moves and the heaven does quake, Leuit. 10 2. 2. Sam.
6.7. 2. Reg. 5.27. 2. Chr. 26.19.
who blasted Nadab and Abihu dead in the instant: who stroke Vzzah in a moment,
that he never spoke again: who made the body of Gehazi, and the face of King
Vzziah to be covered with a leaprosie: who so disgraced Herod, Act. 12 23.
that in the ruff of his majesty he was eaten up with worms, would have
shaken up Jonas so with tauntings and reproaches, that he should never have
forgotten it? But the Lord to give a token of his infinite moderation, and
inconceivable softness, makes no answer but this, Do thou well to be
angry? Wherein as he does show that Jonas was to blame (and therein ouerturneth
the excuse of Saint Hierome, Hieron. in Ionae. 4.
who most willingly would cover all, as if there were no fault, and therefore
goes not right, since the text is to the contrary) so he bears with the
infirmity of the distracted Prophet, and does rather warn him kindly, then
entreat him very roughly. Do thou well to be angry? as if he should have
said, Thou frettest when thou should not: will thou be the Judge Jonas, to
decide what is most for my glory? thou take on thee to prejudice my
wisdom, or my will: that either my discretion is not such as it should be; or
when I know the best, yet I will follow the contrary. This is not aright Jonas:
for if any have occasion to be angry it is I, who must be ruled now and not
rule, be directed and not govern. This mild increpation would have moved any
man, but him who was steeped in anger, as Jonas was. I do not here any farther
pursue Gods patience in his own person, because I have oftentimes touched it.

14 My lesson which I gather here, is rather for our selves, that when we have
to do with passionate persons, that is to say, brethren which are weak, but
not desperately evil, and see them overtaken with affections of anger, of
sorrow, or displeasure, we by our mild behavior, seek to win them from that
fault. When rage is repelled with rage, it increases farther fury, and so oil
is put to flame, and contention to strife. A soft answer appeaseth wrath:
Prou. 15.1.
but grievous words stir up anger. Although to equals this may fitly be
applied, and to superiors, yet the saying is general, and has place toward
inferiors also. The bending yielding spirit is most likely to prevail, with
the most robustious persons; but a good man will have an eye, that he yield not
in things unlawful. The Apostle deals thus with the Corinthians: 1. Cor.
4.14.
I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved children I do warn
you. The Apostle would not of purpose shame those, whom he saw coming
willingly enough to God, but the matter it self will shame (yet with a
bashfulnesse to good purpose) the man who is intelligent, when he shall see
another, who is greater then himself, to be calm when he is troubled, yea
more and more to be calm, when he sees another troubled: when himself is
surprised with heat to behold his better to stand immovable, no more but to
hear him and be silent, or only to look upon him, or to turn away, to be
gone until the storm be past: or if there be a speaking, only to say as God
says here, without further provocation, Do thou well to be angry? He who is
wise and prudent, has learned to pity those who are blind and deaf, or
distracted in wit, and not to study to be like such: but those who are
impatient, are for the time no better. Blind, in that they see not what is
commodious: deaf from heating any reason: yea possessed with a frenzy, to
speak and do things unlawful. Where although flesh and blood would suggest,
that as one noise is best of all beaten back with another noise, or one
wooden pin with another, so violence with violence, and great words with great
speeches, are soonest done down and appeased, yet Christian imitation of the
best, and patience fit for Saints, bids tread another path, of quietness
and of softness.

15 I know not to whom this precept may rather be commended, then to the
Ministers of the Gospel, who should not be over ready, to take knowledge of
such censures as their people do pass upon them, for those things which they
preach: when it is not of any malice, or pretended thought to disgrace, but of
idle curiosity, and because men have their fancies. Into what flames do these
matters break forth, when heat ca^ hold no longer, but on the next Sabbath
day, to sound out of the pulpit, an inuectiue declaration against such carping
judges? when perhaps the words were mistaken, perhaps increased and aggrauated,
by the carier of the tale. But the end is, that whereas before the party was a
brother, and a hearer, now he proves to be an enemy, and forbeareth to hear
the Sermons, from whence he only looks to be galled: the congregation is
disquieted, and in steed of one speaking before, now each man's mouth is open:
and the pastor himself being now torn and rent on every side, is troubled in
his mind, and discouraged in his calling. How much safer were it here, if it
could not be avoided but knowledge must be taken, in private thus to appease
the thing which is not right? Do you well to be angry, or do you well thus to
say? But if it be a thing possible, the way were to hear and not to hear: to
avoid all notice of it. There was never man wiser then Solomon, Prou. 19.11.
Eccles. 7.23.
and he taught much to that purpose, The glory of a man is to pass by an
offense, And in his Ecclesiastes, Do not give thy heart also to hear all
words that men speak, lest thou hear thine own servant cursing thee. These
precepts are true in all, therefore much more in the pastor, who should shine
before other men, and should be more obseruant, because if it be not in the
matter, yet in manner or circumstance, he possibly may err. Prou. 28.14.
And blessed is the man that fears always, says Solomon. To which sense may
be applied, the beginning of ano-speech of his, Cap. 14.16.
A wise man fears. Yea the first point of wisdom, is to distrust himself.
And so much of Gods mild reproof. Let us pray to him, so to guide us that we
may walk aright, while we be here in this world, and acknowledging him the
giver and sender of life and death, submit our selves in both to his most holy
will, unto whom with his Son Christ, and their most blessed Spirit, be
glory and praise for ever.

THE XXVII. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 1. The whole Prophecy of Jonas is not to be applied to
Christ. 3 Reasons why Jonas went out of Niniue. 4. Christians are to fly
danger. 6. Reasons why he sat on the East side. 8. We should grieve at the
ruin of others. 9. Gods servants are oftentimes meanly entertained in this
world. 10. Therefore none should murmr at their want. 11. We may use any of
Gods gifts of foorded us. 12. Reasons why Jonas waited near the city. 13.
Satan is the author of all doubts which are against Gods word.

Jonah. 4.5. So Jonah went out of the city, and sat on the East side of the
city, and there made him a booth, and sat under it in the shadow, till he
might see what should be done in the city.


HOw some of the ancient fathers of the Primitive Church, Hieron in Ionae. 4.
have by allegorizing labored, to apply the greatest part of the whole
Prophecy of Jonas, to the person of Christ, may easily appear to those, who
are conversant in the volumes of those reverent writers. And I fear that to a
judicious and sober reader, it will too plain appear, that those excellent
lights and great pillars of the Church, have somewhat troubled their own wits,
and forced the text also, to make that good in Jesus, which is only true in
Jonas. For although there be some thing, which by the open witness of our
Savior himself, has good place in him, Matthew. 12.40.
that as the Prophet was three days and three nights in the belly of the
vvhale, so the son of man should be three days and three nights in the belly
of the earth, Hieron. in Ionae. 1.
and some things more besides, which not unfitly may resemble him, yet it is
most apparent, that very many matters are as far from him; in the one whereof
and other, he may quickly be satisfied, who lists to look but on the
observations of Mercerus, Merceri obseruat. in Ionae. 4.
upon the book of this Prophecy. But if any would be refractary, and stand
stiff for that, which is past in the Chapters foregoing, yet here he must
needs yield, or be mightily overtaken. For how fitly shall this going out, and
expecting what shall become of the city, be applied unto Christ? What shall the
gourd be, which is spoken of in the next verse, and the worm which did destroy
it? Shall the one be his flesh, and the other his death, or some thing farther
fetched? The gourd brought ease to Jonas, and delight and contentment, but
Christ's flesh brought him none, but rather sorrow and much anguish. The Prophet
grieved to leave the thing which shadowed him, but Christ willingly died and
gave up the ghost. But above al, this messenger which now was at Niniue, Ioh.
19.30.
was offended with God, and did chide and chafe at him: and when the Lord
disliked that, as it is in the ninth verse, and asked him whether he did well
to be angry, for the gourd which was destroyed, he most furiously and testily
forthwith replied, that he did well to be angry, eue^ to the very death. There
is no extenuation or imagining supposall, which can fit this to Christ, and
keep the text sound too, and therefore let us rather leave those fathers,
where they study a little too much to be like Origene (who would turn every
thing into Allegories, although the story wrecked for it) and let us harken to
Saint Austen, Augustine. de Trinitate. lib. 4.6.
where he speaks like himself, yet in a matter more general: Against reason
no sober man, against Scripture no Christian man, against the Church no
peaceable man will think or dispute. But both reason and Scripture put us here
from a figure, and therefore we must literally understand it of the Prophet,
and aim only at the story.

2 Then mention is made before, how Jonas was agrieued, that the city should be
spared, when he had preached the contrary. But there is some difference among
the interpreters, whether that knowledge was given unto him being in the city,
that it should not so prove as he had foretold, and so he came troubled out,
not meaning to stay in that place, where he might be derided as a lying
Prophet; or whether he was informed that the Lord would be merciful, after his
coming forth, when he severed himself, partly to fright the Ninevites, but
especially to sequester himself, from taking part of their hastening
destruction. Again it is controuersed, whether this which now follows to the
end of the Chapter, Ionae. 4.1.
were a new grief that surprised him, besides that which before had troubled
and vexed him, or rather but only a farther explication of that which is past,
which Iunius and Tremelius not obscurely do insinuate, expressing the beginning
of this verse and the next, by, For he went out of the city, and for the Lord
prepared a gourd. And thirdly here arises a farther ambiguity, whether at his
coming out, the gourd were prepared ready, so that thereby at the first he
eased himself, plotting the leaves thereof as fit to shadow him, Iun. in
Ionae. 4.
in manner of a booth, to the which also Iunius very openly does bend, so
intending that he sat there, no more then one day (for the next morning the
gourd withered) or whether as some other do rather suppose, he made himself
first a booth, or sommer-house of boughs, whereof when the freshness was soon
decayed, by the drying up of the greenenesse, then the gourd sprung up in
place, as a fresher and kindlier and more contentfull cooler. Which doubts so
far forth as they shall vary any point of doctrine, I shall touch very briefly;
but because they make no difference in the substance of the story, I mind not
to pursue them, avoiding on the one side, confusion of the part of the hearer,
which cannot choose but arise by intricate things; and on the other side
curiosity in the speaker, which by following such nice points cannot choose but
be suspected. The^ to keep close to the text, and to make all as plain as
possibly I can, this verse does offer to us four obseruable circumstances,
first, his going out of the city, Jonah went out of the city, secondly, his
sitting down and where, he sat on the East side of the city, thirdly, what he
did there, he made him a booth and sat there in the shadow, fourthly, the end
and reason of his staying in that place, till he might see what should become
of the city. While I handle these things as Gods Spirit shall direct me,
afford me your wonted patience.

So he went out of the city.
3 If Jonas having very peremptorily preached the destruction gone out against
them was altered, and that God who meant to strike would now shut up all, and
quit it with a pardon, then this messenger who mightily stood upon his
reputation, as before I have showed (although therein he made no dainty, to
mistake the whole matter, which must ever be supposed) had great reason to be
gone. For allowing his own ground, that himself had said one thing, and now
there fell out another, in the altering whereof, he was no way satisfied, he
might think that as a liar, he might justly be derided, and pointed at with
the finger, as he went in the streets, for a fellow threatening much, and then
performing nothing. Now that a man should come so far, and should openly cry
out, before such a multitude, who brought it to the Kings ear, that there was
ready at the doors the ruin of a place Imperial, as that was, the Queen of
many kingdoms, and Mistress of many nations, and should set all not in an
uproar, but in skreeking and lamenting, and in the end and vpshot, it should
neither be so nor so: Yea that Gods name should be used, and threats should be
uttered from that fearful Jehovah, that the Lord might be taunted at, as well
as he, There is a wise God of Israel, Psalm. 42.13.
to send such a message; and where is now his God? as in another sense was
often said to David; might well make this erring and misunderstanding man, to
slinke aside from them, who before had been witnesses of his terrible words,
which now were returned al to wind. For had he bin but a man, yet to speak an
untruth voluntarily and asseuerantly, had been a shameful thing, especially in
the hearing of many and great men, Eccles. 41.17.
as Syracides well notes, be ashamed of lies before the Prince and men of
authority; but being a Prophet, and denouncing all voluntarily, and of
likelihood mentioning a very strange matter, that he had been in the whale, and
yet had escaped, and now should tell so palpable and notorious a lie, was a
disgraceful reproach, yea reproaches a great many. And that this also should be
in the name of the Lord, whose honor should be much dearer to him then this
life, but not lay open to be blasphemed by Ethnikes and Atheists, might make
him who was led and possessed with a fancy of ignorance and error, to fly the
sight of men: Dan. 4.30.
like some Nabuchodonosor, to get him into the wilderness: as Timon (...) to
think himself most happy, when no other man was near him. They who have the
greatest spirits in aspiring to honor, and stand most on their brauing, are
most of all dejected, and disgraced in their thoughts, when they sensibly miss
their aim. 2. Sam. 7.23.
Ahitophel who presumed on the depth of his own wit, and the acceptance of his
counsel, cannot endure and suffer that it should not take place, but rather he
will dye. Sueton. in Iulio Caesari.
Julius Caesar will be Pontifex, or Rome shall not hold him; he will leave all
and into banishment, where speak who list of him: but no friend of his shall
see him. It is good to be moderate in affecting things desired, and then if
there be no speeding, the grief is the less. Jonas for being too much eger on
his thoughts, is the more discontented, and therefore partly angry, and partly
ashamed, gets himself out of the city.

4 But if we will take it, that being out of the place, knowledge was brought
unto him, that the Lord would spare Niniue, then the reason wherefore he
departed is otherwise, and that was for his own safety. For if desolation were
now to come upon them, and as reprobate cast-awayes, or impenitent sinners,
they were to smart home, the Prophet had great cause to hasten him from among
them, lest remaining with them, he might with them be stricken. Nature it self
had taught him, to fly from that which he threatened as a plague to others. He
is in vain wise, who is not wise to himself. And it is true of a Prophet, as
well as of a Sophister, Odi Sophistam, and Odi Prophetam, qui sibi non sapit. I
like not that Sophister, nor I like not that Prophet, who is not wise for his
own good. But Gods own direction might make him wary therein, who when he
meant to destroy Sodom and Gomorrha, Genes. 19.12.
he sent two Angels to Lot, both to warn him and to hasten him, from the
danger there to follow. And when he was disposed to make Corah, Dathan and
Abiron, Number. 16.26.
a fearful example to all succeeding ages, he made Moses cry to all that were
near him, Depart from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of
theirs, lest you perish in all their sins. Jonas might learn by these. And
Christians unless they will tempt God, by presuming of his mercy, or of their
own merit are bound to depart from all such places, where they know that
deservedly the rod of the Lord does hang over. If it come once to that pass,
that the sins of whorish Babylon be gone up into heaven, and God remember her
iniquities, we must take it as spoken to us, Apoc. 18.4.
Go out of her my people, lest you be partakers of her sins, and that you
receive not of her plagues. Yea we should so much fear, to be overtaken with
the sins and sufferings, of men infamously wicked, that when we have no
special warrant, nor any revelation but Gods general justice, that
punishments will follow, yet we should by all means decline them. It was Saint
John's case, who coming into the Bathe, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. 3.22.
where he found the Arch-hereticke Cerinthus washing, he went hastily out and
called to his company, Let us fly away with speed, lest the bathing house do
fall upon us. It were much to be wished, that as he did by the heretic, so
all who love religion, or ciuility, or honesty, would do by noted sinners, that
if they come in place, where drunkards or swearers be, or ruffianly companions,
whom only filthiness of speech or disguised hair, or other swaggering
behavior full of rudeness Thraso-like, does commend shall I say? or much
rather does condemn, they would secretly slip away, or fly back, as as a man
who has trod upon a serpent. For if plagues do wait on sin, as undoubtedly
they do, why may not God strike suddenly between cups and crowzings, Dan. 5.30.
as almost befell to Balthazar? Why may he not turn the weapons of one against
another, like the Centaures and the Lapithes? Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 12*
And what assurance is there, that he who is with the wicked wilfully, and
amidst their follies, should not suffer with the wicked? It is good to fear
the worst, and to avoid the occasion of plucking any evil on us, although God
do not say before, that there and then he will strike.

5 But it is manifest that destruction is to come to Niniue, therefore Jonas
were very unwise, if he would not get him packing, if so be that yet he had not
intelligence, that the Lord would spare the place. And withal it is likely,
that Gods spirit did suggest that to be done of the Prophet. Wherein the scope
at which the Lord did aim, might be double. First to sauegard his servant,
that the just with the unjust, the Israelite with the Niniuite, might not be
overthrown. For oftentimes the Lord disposes so, 1. Reg. 22.37.
as that Ahab alone shall dye, and Iehosaphat shall escape. But at the siege of
Jerusalem, when it was taken by Titus, this manifestly appeared. For when the
rest of the city most miserably dyed, by the sword and grievous famine, and
havoc was made of all things, both within and without, the Disciples of the
Apostles, Epiphan. de mensuris and ponderibus.
that little faithful flock, being forewarned by an Angel, had gotten
themselves to Pella, a city not far off, where they remained in safety.
Another cause why the Lord might make Jonas remove, might be the more to
fright and terrify that people: for if he had stayed there still, they
forthwith would have gathered, that it had been but a bugge; for why should he
who brought the news of evil to other, expect the extremity of the evil with
the other? But now when he departed, and left them all to the vengeance, they
might justly suppose, that some sore thing was following. Then if they grieved
not before, yet they might begin upon this occasion: if they did repent before,
they might proceed more earnestly, to continue it and increase it. So merciful
is the Lord toward those whom he will save, that one thing or another shall be
represented to them, yea peradventure diverse matters, this heard, another
seen, a third supposed or imagined, all which shall quicken on unto grace. As
those whom in his purpose he has designed to evil, shall have all things to
the worst (as all the miracles were to Pharao) they shall either have their
sight blinded, that seeing they shall not see, or they shall have ears and not
hear; so where the Lord has co^passio^, that he may show himself admirable in
his mercies, many matters shallioyne to help forward, as affliction^, sickness,
poverty, reading, good counsel, threatenings, hope, fear, and a thousand other
things. If the Ninevites shall be called, they shall not only hear the Prophet
preach the word, but they shall behold his example, of going out of the city,
more lively to avoid that by repentance, which they see another fly from by
wisdom. And this be spoken of his departure.

He sat on the East side of the city.
6 Being come out of the city, he sits him down not far off, against the
East of the city, as Hierome does translate it, or on the East of the city, as
other more plainly have it, which place why of all other he chose for his
abode, may be very well worth the doubting. At first I was of opinion, that
some of the Popish writers, might make this as a figure of some thing in the
Church, for so far sometimes do they strain. The matter which I minded most,
was that his sitting upon the East side, might foreshew the manner of the
Christians service, which was accustomed to be toward the East, as Gregory
Nazianzene writes, Greg. Naz. Epist. 66. Aug. lib* 2. de Sermon. Domini in
monte. Just. Ma^t. Quaest. 118.
and Saint Austen also, who took on him to give a reason for it, and Iustine
Martyr in his Questions, where he yields another reason. Now if I had found
this, then had I spoken somewhat largely, concerning that custom of praying
toward the East, with some consequents of it, as the building of Churches
Eastward among the Christians, and the manner of burial observed likewise,
from the East to the West. But because I find none who have intimated so much,
and I love not to discourse that, whereof there is no ground, I pass it over,
and rather come to more probable reasons, of the which one is given, that he
sat on the East side, because the holy city Jerusalem (in the which most
apparently of all the earth, the Lord resided) was Westward, toward which he
did look, as well as toward Niniue. For that thing being true, which David
has recorded, In Iewry is God known, Psalm. 76.1.
his name is great in Israel, At Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling in
Sion, and whatsoever was to come, being to come from thence-ward, he might
rather look that way, then to any other coast or quarter of the heaven. 1.
Reg. 8.44.48.
And since we do find in that prayer of Solomon, at the dedicating of the
Temple, that the Israelites being in strange lands, were to look toward that
place, when they begged any thing of God, our Prophet in blind zeal might
turn himself thither, to ask the consummation and performance indeed, of
that which he had spoken. Again if the Lord had promised, to send from that
place, comfort to his being in distress, whenever he was pleased to show
mercy, it might well be coniectured, that now intending anger and judgment in
high measure, he might from thence send it upon the city Niniue. Which way if
it should come, then Jonas was so wise, to be as far of-ward as possibly he
might, and be within the sight of Niniue also. If a pestilence should be, he
would not have that pestilence come over his body: if fire and brimstone came,
he would not have that fire come over his head, but so far as it might be, he
would be out of danger. But concerning the withdrawing him from the peril, I
spoke but even now, in his going out of the city; and that the Jews looked to
Jerusalem, I formerly touched, when I opened the second Chapter, Ionae. 2.4.
and therefore of that no farther.

7 A second cause there is more commonly assigned, why he sat on the East
side, and that is, because there as it may be supposed, was a hill, from which
he might look downward, and see this mighty place, which now was in such
hazard. You must think that all his heart and soul was now on Niniue, as
imagining that therein was his making and his marring, his credit or disgrace,
and therefore he was much eased, that he had such a hill, where his eye might
be upon it. And certainly if he were fit to fret, as it is most plain that he
was, such a hill might make him fret the more, when each hour he should see
those houses stand, which he wished might fall; those men alive whom he wished
dead; that multitude in safety, after whose ruin he thirsted. Nothing grieueth
envy more, then that which it beholds. The Scripture makes mention of a
wicked evil eye, Matthew. 20.15. Chrysostom. in Genesim. Homil. 16.
as being a grudging sense. Chrysostom writing upon Genesis, supposes that to
be one of the greatest temptations, wherewith Satan oppugned Adam, when he was
in the bliss of Paradise. He brings him in speaking thus: What profit is it
to you to be here in this Garden, and not to enjoy those things which this
delicate place does yield? Nay therefore is your grief the more bitter and
smartfull, that see these things you may, but use them you may not. What he
urged there as an argument, to a wanton lustful eye, no doubt he plieth much,
to an envious spiteful eye. What a grief is it, to see the thing which thou
do hate, and not to see thy will on it? How careful should we be, to pray
to God, to remove us from the causes of such temptations, that he do not set
before us things, whereon we may set our mind, with an evil passion or
sinister affection; that he do not place us on hills, or in rooms fit to behold
them, lest our sin be thence increased; but especially that he suffer not our
heart to be defiled, with lusting or malice, or our eye to be infected; but
both of them to be single. The greatest fault in Jonas was, that envy and
bloody cruelty had filled his heart before, but it now did help his sin
more forward, that he had a hill to behold that, which was a spur to his envy.

8 If he had been a man of any mercy, or but of common pity, it had wrought
with him otherwise. For if of himself he would not be content in piety, that
an increase of his masters retinue should be made, by the coming in of so
many, by repentance and sorrow: If in charity he would not joy, that so many
men who were dead, should revive and live again, and so many which were lost
should be found; yet in ordinary humanity and manly commiseration, when he
had been up in the mount, and seen so many houses, so goodly and glorious
workmanship, as must needs be in that city, such temples and such palaces,
so sumptuous and delightful: when he saw that in such a mass of houses as
there was, there must needs be thousands of people, some of them morally
honest, some infants who never actually deserved to perish, this rigor of his
fury, and cruelty of his stomach, must at the last have relented. If
magnitude and multitude, and both before his eyes, could not work, nothing
could work with him. Yet the heart of Gods son was far more tender, then
this of his servant. For when Christ who doubtless was to bring a sharp
sentence against the Jews, Luc. 19.41.42.
came within the sight of Jerusalem, and beholding looked upon it, how great
it was and stately, he could not forbear to weep, and utter words of
compassion, Oh if thou had known at the least in this thy day, those things
which are for thy peace, but now they are hidden from thee. Yea heathen men by
that light which nature yielded to them, when it came to that pass, that they
saw great things must perish, they have wept that it should be so, and could
have wished the contrary. An example of this in some sort, may be that gentle
and soft and kind Titus, who deserved to be called Deliciae human generis, the
delicacy of mankind, for he being to see that executed, which Christ foretold
should happen to Jerusalem, Joseph. de Bell. Iud. lib. 6.14. and 7.10.
stretched forth his hands, and called heaven and earth to witness, in great
bitterness, that he was not to blame, that the Jews perished in such sort,
but they themselves: and would not by any means, that fire should be set on
the Temple. Liuius lib. 27*
But that sturdy and rough Marcellus, who neither winning nor losing,
conquering nor conquered could let Hannibal be in quiet, shall not lose his
praises here. Lib. 25.
For Liuye recounteth of him, that when after three years spent in the siege,
he was entering Siracufa, whereof he had taken one part, and was like to win the
rest, looking down upon the city, from some hill-side or ouerground, and
beholding it to be one of the fairest which then was on all the earth, he could
not choose but weep. Which as partly he did for joy, to see such a conquest
gotten, so the author does not dissemble it, that partly it was again, with
remembrance of the ancient glory of that brave city, where when so many things
of fame, had been done in former ages, and so many gallaunt things now were,
yet at this time the glass being fully run out, and the period being come,
in a moment of time it was all to be burnt to ashes. He made better use of his
hill, then Jonas did in this place, and so also did Scipio of his seeing of
Carthage, when it could not be remedied. Appianus de bellis punicis.
For as Appian mentions, he wept when he beheld the walls and buildings
thereof to be utterly overthrown, and openly deplored the fortune of his
enemies, considering long and deeply, that even cities and kingdoms are
subject to dissolution, and great states as well as those of private men.
Perhaps therein he imagined, that the time might come, when Rome his country
and the earths glory, might drink of the same cup. Our Prophet in his looking
upon Niniue, might have dreamed, that Jerusalem or Samaria, this of Israel,
that of Judah might come to the self same misery, which now hanged over other,
and what he could have wished should in like extremity have been done to his
own, that he might have wished to this other. That is a great oversight in
men, when they long for the falls of their brethren, and help to set them
forward, not remembering that the same may very well be their portion. What
measure we meat to other, shall be measured to us again. Most men are beaten
with their own rods. The stone cast at our neighbor, may rebound on our own
heads* Therefore it is good, that evermore we should do reason to other men,
that the thing which falls on us may be so much the milder. And this be
spoken of the East side.

He made himself a booth and sat in the shadow.
Genes. 28.11.
who are most dear unto him. Jacob shall be glad when he goes to his uncle
Laban, to have a stone under his head instead of a pillow, and that the ground
may be his bed. Moses must not think scorn to keep sheep in the
wilderness. Exodus 3.1.
David shall be forced to send to that churlish Nabal, 1. Sam. 25.8. 1. Reg.
17.6.
to beg bread for his train. Elias shall think himself well, if he may
drink of the brook, and have the ravens to bring him bread and flesh in the
morning. Luc. 16.21.
Lazarus is not the worse in Gods sight, that he lies at the gate, when other
be in the house; and would be well apayd with the c^ummes (which is a short
reuersion) other in the mean time sitting at full dishes; and when the dogs
with their licking, did yield him more comfort then all mankind, in whose
possession were so many things fit to relieve him. Yea the son of man
himself, he who made the world and all in it, that thereby he might teach us
patience, was in worse state then the birds, in worse case then the foxes: for
the one of them have nests, Matthew. 8.20.
and the other of them have holes, but the son of man had not where to repose
or rest his head. If it were thus with those holy ones, who were dear to the
Almighty, that although they lacked many things of beauty and of pleasure, yet
he loved them not the less, and so showed that worldly accidents, are not
those which make men blessed, then why does wormes-meate boast of that which it
holds his glory, but indeed is but a toy? of pyed and colored clothes, which
sheep and worms send unto them? Habac. 2.6.
of gold which is but thick clay? of music all whose sweetness is ended
with the stroke? of curious sumptuous houses, which have less rest then a
cottage? of dainty fair which once eaten, has no farther use in the world?
Why should other be despised, for the want of these vnnecessaries, when the
worst often times enjoy them, and the holiest seldom touch them? It is a vanity
of all vanities, to set our rest upon that, without which a man may well be.

10 Now concerning the impatient soul, which does vex and disturb it self,
with the wants which it endures, what reason has it for that? This party
fares not, or lodges not, or is not clothed with the best. Therefore the
spending of the day is anguish and bitterness; and murmuring complaint is his
passing of the night. And wherefore is all this? Give me leave to speak to him
a little. Art thou not the child of God, and do thou not call him father?
Thou art not. Then he does justly punish thee, because thou art none of his.
But do thou love him and serve him? Why then will thou be wiser then he, who
is perfection of wisdom? Is it not a most likely thing, that he best
understands, what it is that is good for thee? When he sees thee fit for
better, then thou shall have better from him. These things are but as fire,
wherewith thou would play like a child, or as a sharp pointed knife,
wherewith thou would hurt thy self, and therefore he puts them from thee.
But in the mean while thou live, and have clothes and such food, as whereby
nature is sustained. Yea but other men, who serve not God nor fear him, have
more. Why, but that is only to fat them, and make them fit for the slaughter.
Yea but Gods children have more. Yea and many of them have less. But
impatiency replieth: there was never any like to my self. Indeed he who
bears a burden, thinks that no other man bears so much. But what is
that, wherein never any was so plagued as thou art? Art thou sick and full of
sores? I hope thou will not offer to compare thy self with Job. Job. 2.7.
Art thou ragged in thy clothes, and have no house but a poor one, wherein is
nothing but want? I trust that thou art short of them, who wandered up and down
in sheepes-skinnes and in goates-skinnes, Hebr. 11.37.
on the mountains and in caves. Thou can not well have a meaner house, then
this booth of Jonas was. Art thou forced to drink water? I believe thou art
not farther urged, then our Savior Christ himself was, Johan 4.7.
when he begged water of the woman of Samaria. Art thou glad to get an apple
from a tree, or roots out of the ground? Suppose that Christ was as far
driven, when he desired to have a fig off from a fig tree, Matthew. 21.18.
and yet missed of it when he came thither. But surely the Apostles were in as
hard state, when for pure hunger they rubbed the ears of corn in their hands,
Marc. 2.23.
and eat it when they had done. Perchance thou have not a penny to bless thy
self withal. Have thou less then Peter had, when he said, Act. 3.6.
and cared not who heard him, Silver and gold have I none. Is thy ordinary no
better then a little mess of pottage, and a small morsel of flesh? 2. Reg*
4.38.
The children of the Prophets did fare but so, and gave Gods thanks for it.
Yet peradventure (as Daniel did with his pulse) thou may look better, then
other with many dishes: Daniel. 1.15.
but thy mind may be more fraught with knowledge and understanding, then scores
and hundreds of them. Then be content with thy lot, and do not so much reckon,
what it is which is wanting to thee, as what it is which thou have. And when
thou have made thy account, and find that thou have least, yet thou
possessest more then thou deferuest, as sight and hearing, and reason and
breath, and many more good gifts: set the one against the other, and rather joy
in thy hauings, then murmr at thy wantings: Or if thou will needs contemplate
on such things as thou lackest, think on the Prophets and Patriarchs, the
Apostles and holy martyrs, and repute thy self no better, then they were in
their sufferings. The shroud of Jonas was a little shadow, and he thought that
he sped well too.

11 He sat there in the shade, and so did take the benefit of that creature
which did ease him. As he was not to grieve, that he had no better matter to
cover himself withal, so he is not so stupidious, and blockish of conceit,
but he would use that which was offered. And that is the Lords will, that since
he has made man so eminent amongst his creatures (him alone to be the
governor, and other things to obey) that he should take comfort of such
supplies, as are brought unto him in his necessity, and on the one side should
not stand by as timorous and fearful, nor on the other as Stoicall and
insensible. He may take shade against the Sun, and cover against the rain.
Yea if so be that he abuse it not in circumstance and quality (as unlawfully to
seek it; to use it beyond his calling; to hinder better things by it; to
embrace it with too much desire and greediness; without thankfulness to God,
and other points of like sort) the everlasting father does grant unto a man
great prerogative, to use things of delight, Psalm. 104.15.
wine to glad the heart of man, for so David does speak; Genes. 21.8.
feasting and delicate fare, so Abraham made a feast at the weaning of his
son, and the Israelites kept many: Es^h. 5.1.
Glorious and costly attire, for Hester did wear such, Genesis 24.22. Eccles. 9.8.
and Abraham's servant gave to Rebecca Isaacs spouse, both earings for her
ears, and bracelets for her hands. Let thy clothes be white says the wiseman,
intending neatenesse and cleanliness. The coat of Christ himself was of
workmanship more then ordinary, Johan. 19.23.
either wouen, or knit, or needle-worke, for there was no seame therein: Where
we may also remember that coat which Jacob made for Joseph, Genes. 37.3.
of various diverse colors. Yea in hunting and in hawking (taken how and when
and by whom, it ought of right to be taken) as Gods glory appears, who has
so disposed dumme creatures to persecute one another, so is man's good creation,
and making of him fitter to serve God in his calling. Genes, 27.3.
Isaac would eat of venison which he sends his son to hunt for. But most
pregnant is that place, where Jacob giving his blessing to the twelve tribes of
Israel, thus describes the lot of Aser: Concerning Aser his bread shall be
fat, Genesis 49.20.
and he shall give pleasures for a king. Then there be delights and pleasures
royal and fit for kings, which the Patriarch would never have recounted as
Gods blessings, but that some men may use them. I speak not this, as
encouraging men to a voluptuous life, but mentioning the pre-eminence of man,
while he keeps a moderation in it; distinguishing the use of things from the
abuse, and not doubting but worldly persons do strain these matters too far.
Hereupon there is crept in among all, drunkenness and gluttony, and
intolerable pride in gew-gawes and devises, so that now they are rather noted,
who have means to maintain them and do not use them, then they who will not
want them. But these shall rather answer for abusing with superfluity, then
for warrantably using them. But in the mean while concerning all persons,
Jonas may well instruct us to take benefit of all things, which God does offer
to us, or wherewithal honestly and justly our labor and our wit may furnish
us. We may use them in our need, and help to relieve our selves, and give the
Lord thanks for them. Not shadows only of boughs, but of great men to defend
us, and encourage us in good things: of Cyrus so far forth as we may help
on the Temple: Ezr. 1.1. Esth. 5.1. 1. Reg. 1.22.
of Assuerus, so that we may protect the innocent. We may come to the court
with Nathan; if it be to requite a Sunamite, 2. Reg. 4.13.
we may with Eliseus speak for something to the King or the Captain of the
army. In like sort we may take the shodow of a privilege or a law, not shaming
with Saint Paul, Act. 22.25.
to profess that we are free of the Imperial city Rome, and that we are ill
entreated and unjustly dealt with, to be beaten uncondemned. And when we see
our selves to be ouerborne, with the malice and impudent importunity of the
priests and the people, Act. 25.11.
we need not fear to appeal to a court of justice, if it be to Caesar's
seat, where although we find all worse then before, yet that is not our fault:
we have sought the lawful means, and God guide it as he sees best. And this
be spoken in the third place, of his sitting in the shadow.

That he might see what should be done in the city.
12 If he came out of the city, before that he knew the mind Quid non speramus
amantes? for his fancy does suggest unto him, that although in general he
knew, that God was merciful and pitiful; although he saw that they repented,
from the king to the beggar, in sackcloth and ashes, in fasting and strong
prayer; although of late he had understood, that the sentence was reuersed, and
the whole judgment revoked, yet there might be good expectation, that they
should be whipped and lashed, with some meaner kind of punishment, if they
utterly did not perish. And if he might see but some thing, yet he should not
loose all his longing. Yea there might be a farther hope, that they who at the
first day of the forty, were by his preaching stirred up to repentance, yet
within a little while after, might turn unto their vomit, and wallowing in the
mire. For nothing which is violent does use to last too long. Heavy things may
be forced upward, but they will back to the center. A bowl will to his biace.
Thus he feeds himself with conceit, thinking every hour a year, before
that he might see his will on them. Now if it had been referred to his
discretion, to give the sign of inuading, or to put fire to some mine, which
might have blown up all, he would willingly have done it. His fingers would
have itched, till all had been effected. How filthy is man's nature, how prone
to blood and all naughtiness, if Gods grace be a little from us, when an
Israelite and a Prophet, shall sit and watch every moment, (as Aegeus did for
his son Theseus) when such a city as Niniue shall come to desolation? Liuius
li. 45.
When that noble Paulus Aemilius had received from Perseus (who was now
enforced to misery) a letter which imported the yielding of himself, and the
kingdom of Macedonia, to the mercy of the conqueror: although this was like
to be much for the gain and honor of Aemilius, yet now thinking that his fall
was the ending of that monarchy, which while Alexander lived was renowned in
all the earth, he broke forth into tears: But our Prophet, when a kingdom of
far greater esteem, then Macedonia at that time was, is to be dissipated and
ruinated, albeit he gain nothing by it, neither wealth, nor ease, nor honor,
can be content to rejoice, and take much pleasure in it. And so he is on fire
upon it, that nothing can persuade him, but that it will be done, because done
he would have it; and if it should not be done, yet he will try the uttermost,
and know a reason for it, why he should be put from his purpose: but indeed he
will not otherwise believe, but still it shall be so.

13 Such doubting as this is, where so ever it be found, and a striving to have
things be, according to man's project, against the apparent truth of Gods
designs, or his word, is derived from the capital or chief enemy of our
soul, who like the old man in Horace, Horat. de Art Poetica.
is spe longus, long in hope, and will not quickly give over, if he have a mind
to a matter. He sped in his encounter against our first parents Adam and Eve in
Paradise, when there was much reason to the contrary, and therefore he will
not distrust but that he may reach other also. Hence it is, that although he
hear from the mouth of Christ himself, Matthew. 16.18.
that the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church, yet still he will
be doing; by heresy or hypocrisy, or persecuting by tyrants, to do his best
against it. When he knows, that where the Lord begins a good work, he
will perfect it, yet he will not leave to oppugn the regenerate man, even to
his death: he thinks still, that he may do good on him. But it never appeared
more in him, then in his behavior toward our Savior Christ, of whom although
it were foretold, that he should be the Messiah, yea the mighty God, Isa. 9.6.
as Esaias speaks, and the everlasting father, though he were miraculously
borne, and many apparent signs of his D^itie were then given, though
afterward he tried with him when having fasted for forty days, Mat. 4.1.
he endured three such temptations, as none but Gods son could; though he had
raised up the dead, and given sight to the blind, yea casting out many devils,
had enforced them to acknowledge him; though voices had come from heaven, to
agnise him for Gods child, and therefore in all likelihood nothing could happen
to him, but exceedingly to his honor, and to the good of his Church: yet he
could not be quiet, till he had him upon the cross; here he pricketh Judas on
for the desire of gain, there he spurreth the Priests forward, for envy and
cruel hatred, he sets Pilate on work, to bring him to his end, for
contenting of the multitude; not knowing whether if once he brought it to that
pass as to lay him in his grave, with weight or watch or somewhat, he might
happen to keep him there. Who knew whether that his fortune or policy may be
such, as to hold him there when he had him? But indeed he was ouer-matched: for
when he brought him to the cross, he brought him as to a chariot, whereon he
was to triumph, and when as a fish he had catched at his body being put into
the grave, as if he had taken it for a bait, with the hook of his Divinity
which was covered underneath, him self was catched and choked. But until that
he had fully felt it, he would never be brought unto it. Then if it be a
practice of Satan, to use such a diffident incertainty, and yet a confident
kind of doubting, and our Prophet borrowed from him whatsoever he had thereof,
1. Ioh. 4.1.
let us learn another lesson, first to try all spirits, that we be not
deceived in taking error for truth, that so we may not yield to each
suggestion, of appearance or probability, for that is not Christian wisdom,
but to harken what the Lord does say of us, and of all men. But secondly when
we see by the assurance of the word, and the motions of Gods spirit, that this
or that he would have, then with constant resolution, with patience and
obedience, let us yield our selves unto it, not with humming or standing like
Lots wife, Genes. 19.26.
who desired very feign to be safe in the mountains, yet would she be in Sodom
too. God loves a cheerful obedience, a ready resolved submission, to take
well what he would have. And although we miss of our minds, as Jonas did here
in his, yet if we renounce our selves, and will be led by him, the end shall
still be with comfort. But no kicking against the pricks, Act 9.5.
no spurning against heaven, no wrestling against God, but obey and live for
ever. The Lord direct us so with his grace, that making use of such lessons, as
the word in every petty circumstance does yield unto us, we may serve him with
alacrity, never swayed aside by our will, till we come unto his kingdom, to
the which the Father bring us for his own Son Christ his sake, to both whom
and the holy Spirit be praise for evermore.

THE XXVIII. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 3. It has been controuersed what green thing it was,
which grew up unto Jonas. 5. What it was in truth. 6. Gods power in helping his
servants. 7. His providence disposes smallest things. 8. in our grief God
refreshes us one way or other. 9. The unwise joy of Jonas for the gourd. 10.
Our mind runs too much on worldly things; as children, 11. beauty and long
hair^. 12. Hasty mat^ers are soon gone. 13. All things here are unconstant.
14. God in his love takes many of them from us.

Jonah. 4.6.7. And the Lord God prepared a gourd and made it to come up over
Jonah, that it might be a shadow over his head, and deliver him from his
grief. So Jonah was exceeding glad of the gourd. But God prepared a worm,
when the morning arose the next day, and it smote the gourd that it withered.


Our Prophet being earnest on every thing, save that which he ought to do (for
therein he is slow enough, Jonah. 1.3.
as appears in the first Chapter) with a burning desire to see Niniue
desolated, sits him down near the city, thinking every minute long before
that was effected. Albeit these people were far more, Genes. 18.23.
yet he does not for them as Abraham did for Sodom, that is, double and triple
a passionate request, that they might be forgiven, but having a desire that
himself might seem no liar, he does wish and could willingly put to his hand,
to help it forward, that all were overthrown. But when he takes notice, that
without his motion God would spare that multitude, he fretteth and rages at
it, and in exceeding coffeehouse, remains not far off, even hoping
beyond hope, that some evil would befall them. Being thus in his anguish,
because he might not have his will (for so the most do interpret it, and the
literal proceeding, and going on of the story do seem to enforce it) or being
troubled otherwise (as some other would have it) with the scorching heat of
the Sun, while he remains there expecting what should be the end, God
raises up a certain plant, or growing kind of creature, to yield some relief
to this angry person, that so consequently some little comfort might accrue
unto him. Whether this were prepared at the first, when he came out of the
city, that he made his booth only with that, or whether having cut down some
other boughs, and enjoyed them in manner of a sommer-house, and those now being
dried, the other did spring up as a better sort of succor, more natural and
more fresh, it is not much to our matter: but by Gods special work he had it,
and sat under it. There is a double drift which is aimed at, by the sending of
this green thing to the Prophet, one to teach him by a parable, and
demonstratiue instruction, that he was much to blame, that himself loving such
a trifle, would have had no reckening made, of such a city as Niniue. But of
that I shall have occasion to speak in the end of the Chapter, where the Lord
himself apparently deduceth it in that manner.

2 The other thing to be considered by us for the present, is the plain direct
narration, wherein we are let to know, that Jonas to comfort him, and appease
him for the time, has a little tree raised up upon the sudden out of the
ground, which the Lord of purpose stirred up, so that it had not been there,
but only upon that occasion. Which when it had brought unto him a delicate
pleasing shadow, fitting to his opportunity, he took as much joy in it, as if
it had been some great treasure. But when he was more proud of it, then a wise
man would have been, the glory and beauty of it, was dashed quite on a sudden.
There comes a little gnawing worm, which destroyed the life of this green
thing, so that it proved to be dry and withered, and the cover was now as
nothing, the shadow was clean ceased. Then he who very lately thought
himself a happy man, in having somewhat to refresh him, is now as far to
seek, as ever he was before. That you may the better conceive this whole case
of the Prophet, so plentifully teaching us as it does, may it please you to
note with me those three things, which the text does orderly offer to us. First
the provision here made for him, of purpose

The Lord God prepared a gourd.
3 What that was which is here spoken of, has not only been doubted, in the
ancient primitive Church, but it has caused some stir also. The Septuagint
expressed it by (...), which our English translation does apparently follow,
and names it to be a gourd. The later Greek interpreters, to wit Aquila, and
Symmachus, and Theodotion, not liking of that word, did render it by (...),
which is as much as Iuy. When Hierome afterward took on him to translate the
old Testament, out of the Hebrew into Latin, he following those later ones,
put it hederam that is Iuy. And his translation now in his own time growing to
be read, and that commonly in Churches, it seemed strange to the people, who
were before used to copies taken out of the Septuagint, to hear such an
alteration. The matter was most exasperated, by occasion of a Bishop which was
in Af^ica, who reading to his people, as Hierome reads, Iuy, they rather
believing that, whereunto themselves had been used, by their former books and
copies, fell to brauling with the Bishop: but especially the Greeks in honor
of their Septuagint, would have nothing but a gourd; and exclaiming of the
falsifying, and deprauing of the text, wrought much trouble to the Bishop. Here
the good man was enforced, to have recourse to the Jews, to know the Hebrew of
them, who either upon ignorance, or malice to the Bishop, or perchance to all
the Christians, whom they could be glad to see ^arring, pronounced it to be a
gourd, and Hierome to be deceived. Austen who at that time lived at Hippon, not
very far off, understanding of this matter, and having other sayings to
Hierome, August. Epist. 10.
(as men who are most learned, do not evermore agree in all matters and
circumstances) with humility and great modesty, but yet roundly to the point,
does challenge Hierome for it, and relating all the tale of the Bishop,
desires to be satisfied. Hierome knowing his own worth, and by his skill in
the Hebrew, which was then rare among the Christians, being sure that he had
advantage over all that would oppugn him, spares not to keep his own, for
credit and reputation; and first disclaimeth the Jews for ignorant or
malicious, and then secretly girdeth at them, who would needs have it a gourd,
calling them Cucurbitarios. Augustine. Epistol. 11.
This is to be found in that Epistle, which is counted the eleventh in Austen,
where but briefly showing the truth, he refers the reader farther to his
Commentary on Jonas. Then from those two places put together, this is the point
of the matter.

(...)
4 The word says he in the Hebrew is Kikajon, or Kikejon, for I find them both
in Hierome, although our common Hebrew Bibles do read only Kikajon, and it is
says he a kind of little shrubbe, or tree, which has broad leaves like a
vine, and a very thick shadow, Hieron. in Ionae 4.
which with his stock or stalk bears and holds up it self. This grows
much in Palestina, but most of all in sandy places. In the Syriake and Punike
tongue, it is called Elkeroa. He adds this of it further; that it is of that
strange nature, that throw the seed of it into the earth, and there very
quickly proouing, it grows to the quantity of a tree, so that within few
days, after that it has been an herb, and new green, it is in show a pretty
tree. And this Hierome acknowledges to be the true thing, which here suddenly
grew up to Jonas, which could be neither gourd nor Iuy; as for diverse other
reasons, so because they had need to be held up, and sustained by other
proppes, like to the vines amongst us, but this shrubbe of it self, bears
and shoots upward. Yet the reason why he expressed it by Iuy, was especially
to give the name of such a thing as was known in other countries, and Iuy did
best please him, because Aquila and his fellows thought good so to expound it.
Now having no apt Latin word, I thought it not fit says he, to use the
Hebrew, Kikajon, the Lord prepared a Kikajon, lest Grammarians lighting on it,
when they could not understand it, should imagine it or conceive it, for some
strange beast of India, or mountain of Baeotia, or some other monstrous
matter. Thus was Hierome put to his shifts, neither ignorantly nor faithlesly,
perverting the holy Scripture, but putting such a word, as according to that
reason which God had given unto him, he judged to be most convenient. This is
an instruction to us, that either in translators or expositours of the
Scripture, we should not be too severe, to censure them or control them,
especially when their learning and faithfulness is known to all, and that
they willingly would not swerve: For as sometimes they cannot sound to the
depth of Gods judgments, the knowledge of all men being by measure, so other
times again when they may take things rightly, they may want a word for their
matter, because the tongue will not bear it; or they may be forced by a
Periphrasis, to circumscribe and delate that, which themselves could wish were
shorter. (And yet afterward, another may come, who at the first sight, lights
on a word or phrase, whereof the former could not think.) Here to show a man's
integrity, in obscurities and great difficulties, the translatour shall do
well, to give a reason of his deed, in some observations or illustrations, that
those things may appear in the margent, or after the Chapter, Hieron. in Ionam.
which do not in the text: and this way did Saint Hierome much make amends, by
his commentary, which clears all this doubt in Jonas.

5 I said that one might see that, which another had not revealed to him: and
so it is in this case, time having opened that, which formerly was not known.
For our later interpreters, discovering that Kikajon in the Hebrew, Dioscor.
li. 4. 164. Theophrast. Hist. 1.16. Gal^n. in Simplicibus. (...). Nature. Hist.
15.7
is the same that (...) in the Greek, which is spoken of by Dioscorides, and
Theophrastus, and Galen, and whence that oil does come, which is commonly
called (...), and that (...) in the Greek, is the same also with (...), have
found out Latin words, which may express them both. Pliny speaking of oils,
names one made of the tree cici, of which kind there is much in Egypt. Other
says he, call it croton, and some do name it trixis, and some sesamum
siluestre. He has that last name without question, from the writings of
Dioscorides, who calls (...), and (...), also (...). But now the Latin word
Ricinus, is best known for this tree, whereof the oil which is made is called
Olium ricininum. The Christian Philosophers and Physicians of later time,
commonly term it Palma Christi. So that for the Latin translation we have now
words fit enough, but wanting for the English, it is still read a gourd. Then
to take the tree as it is, it appears by the description, first that it is
one of those things, which do grow up very quickly, and therefore God bred
here, and prepared such a matter, as most agreed with nature: not an Oak nor an
Elm, which needs a long time for growth, but that which might shoot up
hastily. Secondly that the leaves of this, being large like to the Plane-leafe,
as some have set it down, or to the Vine-leafe, as the most agree, were apt to
yield a shadow, which is the point here intended. Whereunto this may be added
as the third, which I did not mention before, that this plant is very subject
to the gnawing and hurt of worms, which more clears that, which anon
follows in the third place.

6 Now we have that whereon all the working was, agreed upon; whence it
follows to be considered, who it was that sent it thither. The Lord God
prepared this Ricinus. And manifest it is, that he prepared it suddenly, for it
follows afterward, Thou have pity on the gourd, Jonah 4.10.
which grew up in the night, and perished in another night. Therefore if it were
not made in a moment, which may probably be disputed, yet it was but one night
in growing. This shows the power of God, in the general dispensation of all
things in the world, that when he lists, he can make and send creatures on
the earth, which shall complete his designements. He can raise up unto us, both
trees, and fruits, and grains; when the earth seems to be barren, and the
seed to be rotten in it, by too much or too little moisture, he can amend all
with a word, and make the fields to be fruitful, and the drowned ground to be
cheerful. Of him David says truly: Psalm. 107.33.
He turns the floods into a wilderness, and dries up the water-springs. A
fruitful land he makes barren, for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein. Again he makes the wilderness a standing water, and water-springs
of a dry ground. Where it pleases him to visit, the basket shall be blessed,
and blessed shall be the store, Deuteronomy. 28.5.
blessed the fruit of the cattle, and blessed the fruit of the ground,
blessed the coming in, and blessed the going out. In the time of dearth in
Samaria, within the space of a day he can make a measure of fine flower to be
sold for a sicle, 2. Reg. 7.1.2.
and two measures of barley to be at the self same rate: when to the
unbeliever it seems a thing incredible, though the very windows of heaven
should open, and rain down corn. We have had some late experience of his
power in this behalf, when after years spent in moisture, and haruests
seasoned with tears, he has sent a more blessed reaping, and gathering in of
corn. It is a great comfort to his servants, that evermore he can, and
oftentimes he does provide for his in their need, not a shadow only with
Jonas, to hang over their heads, but satiety or sufficiency of all good things
besides. If he do not yield abundance, yet patience and obedience does hold it
self content: it has to do with a father; it has to do with a Lord; a father
who surely loves, a Lord who can do all things: in his wisdom he best
knows, what it is which will serve the turn: in his kindness knowing of it,
he certainly will bestow it. But if it were for our good, what combining or
conspiring of all the world against us, what adversity or extremity, shall
hinder us from our happiness? If among our own, we find not that comfort
which we should, Genes. 39.2. Dan. 2.48.
then as he did to Joseph, and as he did to Daniel, he can send it among
strangers. If both our own and strangers, and all mankind should leave us, yet
birds and beasts he has for us, 1. Reg. 17.6. Luc. 16.21.
the ravens to feed Elias, the dogs to lick the sores of Lazarus the poor
beggar. If all living things do forsake us* yet the dumme and the dead, shall
bring protection to us; Exodus 14.21. 2. Reg. 2.13.
the sea shall part for the Israelites, and Jordan for Elizeus. So powerful
and so mighty is the Lords right hand, to to those who are his unfeigned
servants: they shall ^ant nothing that is good. He means not such as they
think of in their fancy, but as he surely knows. Some fig trees whereof they
thought not before, shall yield them meat: some strange tree shall yield them
shadow, that even when they deserve it not, as here it was with Jonas, they
might sit in the shadow.

7 As the raising of this plant does note his unmeasured power, so the word
which here is used, does note his all-seeing providence. He prepared this
Ricinus. I find this word in the first Chapter, Jonah. 1.17.
the Lord prepared a fish, but here it is thrice together: he prepared this
tree to shadow him: and in the next verse after, he did prepare a worm, and in
the verse after that, he prepared a fervent East Wind. What? is a little blast
of wind, the immediate work of God? and a little tree for a shadow, was it made
by his finger? yea was the worm his ordinance, such a base and creeping
creature? Does God take care of these things? Where is the Atheist and the
Epicure, who if he will be so good, as to allow the being of an high power,
which sits above in majesty, yet he will not be persuaded, that he means
to trouble himself with inferior and small matters. Perhaps he regards the
tumbling about of heaven, and the going out of the Sun, or Moon, or stars,
but for these lower bodies, no care nor account of them. Or if the earth in
general, or the sea be thought upon, yet these individual substances, which
be of lesser kinds, come not within his reckening. Who will think that God will
be busied, about the riding and going, the inventions and devises, the trades
and occupations, of wise men and of fools? Hearken Atheist and listen Epicure,
not the meanest man on earth, not the smallest child in the womb, not a
sleeping or a waking, a waxing or decreasing, yea not a thought of the heart,
Psalm. 94.9.
but is distinctly known, and severally considered of. He that planted the
ear, shall he not hear? or he that made the eye, shall not he see, or he that
teaches man knowledge, shall not he understand? Thou art about my path, Psalm.
139.2.
and about my bed, and spiest out all my ways. There is not a word in my
tongue, but thou know it altogether. Nay, do thou make any doubt of man?
Very trees, and winds, and worms, the smallest dust and Atomus is made and
guided by God. Genes. 2.1.
He who in the first creation, framed the heaven and earth, and their armies,
has not the least soldier there, not a gnat, not a fly, but he knows and
counts on him. It was he who made the frogs, and grasshoppers and flies, and
very creeping lice in Egypt. Luc. 12.6. Mat. 10.29.
Not a sparrow lights on the ground, not a hair falls off the head, but by
his leave and license. Therefore tremble thou unbeliever, and think what a
case thy case is: thou have lived so many years, and in every moment of them
thou have been watched and looked on: thou have spoken so many foolish words,
and uttered so many froward sayings: thou have done so many wicked things,
thou have thought so many wanton and irreligious thoughts, and thou must have
all discovered, Apoc. 20.12.
and disclosed to thy face, when the throne shall be set, and the books shall
be opened, when the sea shall yield up her dead, and the grave shall yield up
hers, and there shall not be any escaping, but thou must hear thy doom. Then
thou shall feel him condemning, whom thou would not believe calling. But
thou poor and mild one in spirit, whosoever thou art, which trustest in
Christ, and have a will to serve him, lift up thy head at last, and hang it
down no longer, for the sufferings of thy sorrows, the troubles of thy heart,
the endurings of thy vexations, the conflicts of thy conscience, are known and
daily seen. Aug. in Psalm. 39.
God cries to thee from heaven, It is I who look upon you, do you wrestle and
I will help you, do you conquer and I will crown you. He who takes such care
as God does, of winds and trees and worms, certainly reckeneth all thy
flights, puts thy tears in a bottle, Psalm. 56.8.
notes all things in a book. Thy hands are not lifted to him, thy breast is
not beat before him, thy cheeks are not deawed unto him, but he notes it and
remembers it. There is not a cup of cold water given, Mat. 10.42.
which shall lose his reward. Then we serve a blessed service, who live under
such a Lord. But to say no more of him, (either for his power or his
providence) who provided this for Jonas, in a word let us see the use of that
which is prepared.

8 The end why God sent this pretty tree, was to cover the head of Jonas, that
it might be a shadow for him, to comfort him in his grief. That the man was
out of tune, I have showed before so often, that I need not again repeat it.
The everlasting Father, most of all to teach him, to bear a good mind to
Niniue, but in present to sustain him, that he utterly sink not down by his
peevish and froward grief, does send him here a small thing, to serve his
turn the while. The nature of fretting persons is, that when they have
apprehended any great cause of coffeehouse, as they persuade themselves,
they are sorely troubled with it: but if a second cause be heaped upon the
first, and another upon that, no measure does contain them, but they rage and
storm, as if all things had conspired to work their bane, and they were men
accursed. And indeed by this means, the wicked oftentimes do come to their
final destruction. But God being better minded to all those whom he loves,
does moderate their vexations, and measure out their grieuaunces, that they
many times shall have their back burdens, but they shall not have too much.
Either one thing or another shall stand up in the gappe, although it be so
small a matter, that taken by it self, it seems rather contemptible: but for
that present time, by the fancy of the party, may be thought worthy the
having. When the mother has beaten her child, whom she would have to be
chastised, but not his heart broken, she reaches out an apple to him, or some
trifle to appease him. In comparison of God we are as babies, especially when
fury and passionate vexation has surprised all our affections, and therefore
as a child is pleased with a little, (but that endures but a small time) so a
little thing does stay us, although I dare not say does content us. When we are
ready to drown, a little twigge being suddenly catched on, does relieve us.
When we are ready to famish, a little food does preserve us, and hold our life
for the time. And it is marvel to see (so humerous is our nature,) how small
things bring breathing to us, even as little ones as this shadow, which was
here over the Prophets head. When Jeremy was oppressed with misery upon
misery, nothing was more heavy to him, Ier. 38.6.
then his thrusting into the dungeon. Yet when by the blacke-Moores means, he
was gotten out of that hole, although he were still restrained in the utter
court of the prison, and had evils enough upon him, yet this appeased him well;
as may easily be gathered, Ier. 39.17. Iudic. 15.19.
in that the blacke-Moore had his life for a recompense of his kindness. When
Samson was most in need, some water out of the iaw-bone of the Ass did quiet
him. When Jonathan in the battle had ouer-fasted himself, a little honey taken
up upon the end of a stick, recovered his dimmed eyesight. Doubtless the
conflicts of Paul were many while he lived at Rome, with Gentiles and Jews,
with the learned and unlearned, with the persecuting tyrant, yet I verily
suppose (because Gods spirit does mention the matter) that it was a good ease
to him, Act. 28.30.
that he might hire a house by himself, and at home be free from their
baiting. In this point let every one of Gods children look to himself, and
remember, if oftentimes when his fretting has been greatest, he has not had
some allay, by the coming in of a friend, by receiving of some letter, by
hearing somewhat else which better does content him, by some thing before not
thought of, which pleases for the time, and if by nothing else, yet by falling
on sleep. These be mercies from the Lord, who will not have his to sink; and
there is not the least of these, seem it never so base a thing to the standers
by, but it is sent in unto thee, even from heaven and the Highest, to refresh
thee as his child, as this shadow was here to Jonas. And thus much be now
spoken of these three circumstances, arising from my first general note, what
it was that was prepared, by whom, and to what end.

And Jonas was exceeding glad because
9 We are now in the second place, to look in what sort he embraced this
favor. He was exceedingly glad. The opportunity of the thing, which so served
him for his purpose, to refresh him withal, and peradventure the rareness of
it, (for rare things in every kind do most of all delight) put the Prophet into
such gladness, as if he had found some precious treasure. If it were not, that
we all are such, it were strange to see of what metal this messenger here was
made, that a little makes him grieve, and a lesser thing makes him glad, and
as a child or a boy, moderately he takes nothing. What a matter was this, that
Jonas who had been trained up in Israel, and had done the Lord service there,
who was sent in a message to such a City as Niniue, where his words might
concern a Monarke, and Princes, and great Peers, should be so silly a
creature, as to joy in a thing so brittle? In dehorting men from too much
embracing the delights of the world, we figuratively use to call all pleasures
here, but very fumos and vmbras, no better then smokes and shadows, not that
we really imagine, that men set their hearts upon such things. But here is one
who in earnest is much in love with a shadow, and that not the shadow of
himself, Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 3.
as the Poet fained of Narcissus, but of a little tree. Here if he had had some
company, it is likely that he would have led them round about this his joy, and
showed them all his pleasures, which with some admiration he had received from
it. If this man had been some Solomon, that he might have had in all
magnificence, whatsoever his heart desired, he would have been much in love
with it: but if he had been in Paradise, he would have been mighty proud of
his trees, and fruits, and shadows; very likely that doting on them, he would
not so soon have parted with the^ as Adam did. Yes, possibly much sooner, if
possibly that might be: when he showed himself so fantastical; any toy would
soon have turned him, who was up and down with such trifles.

10 Hereafter do not marvel, that the Lord forbids men to glory in greater
matters: Ierem. 9.23.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his
strength, neither the rich man glory in his riches; but let him that glories,
glory in this, that he understands and knows me, when a Prophet shall be
pleased in such silly shadows, as if it were in some celestial joy. For the
emphasis of the word does intend that he was very highly pleased. And yet it is
a thing much vain, to set too great affection on strength, or wit, or wealth,
or any terrestrial matter. For do we not a wrong to God, and much spoil him
of his honor, Matthew. 22.37.
that when we are to love him with all our heart, and all our soul, to think
of him, to rest in him, to make him our meditation, and to use all other
creatures but as his gifts and blessings, by a million of degrees subordinate
to himself, and only to be employed to the setting forward of his service: we
will dream of them, and think of them sleeping and waking, in company and
alone. Do not parents thus oftentimes, set their hearts upon their children,
and make almost Gods of them? at every word my son, or my boy, or little
girl: and when they grow somewhat bigger, there are no children like their
children: the wind may scant blow on them: the very ground is the better that
they do go upon: the sleep is never too much broken, nor the belly too much
pinched, to heap up trash for these children. Yea from whom will they not
pull, even the widow, and the fatherless, to enrich this their delight? Do
they not grieve to part with a penny to the use of the most holy businesses,
because it may diminish their portions? This made Saint Austen say, August. in
Psalm. 48.
For whom do they keep their riches? for their children he answers, and
they again for their children, and the third descent for theirs. But what is
here for Christ? what is here for thy soul? Is every whit for thy children?
Among their sons on earth let them think upon one brother above in heaven,
on whom they should bestow all, or at the least divide with him. But Christ
and God shall stand back, when it comes to these dainty children. Now to
speak plainly, was this the end wherefore thou beggedst children at the hand
of thy maker, to delight thy soul with them? Was this the cause wherefore God
gave them, that they might thrust him out from the habitation of thy heart?
Thou do use his blessings fairly, to joy more of the gift, then thou do
of the giver, not to think who sent the tree, but to joy only in the shadow.
It is odds of many to one, but that thy wantons, 1. Sam. 2.22.
afterward will work thee as much joy, as Elies children did to their doting
father, that is, bring a curse on thee or them; 2. Sam. 13.1.
or as David's sons did to him, when Amnon ravished Thamar; and Absolon slew
Amnon.

11 Look what is here said of children, is as true also of beauty. God does
give to some the countenance of a Joseph, or a Hester, of purpose to remember
them, that as their bodies exceed, so their souls should go beyond their
fellows in devotion, in sanctity, and all virtue: else the outside will be
fair, and the inside will be foul; it will be but a painted sheath, it will
be but a whited sepulcher. But it falls out oftentimes, that in steed of
thankfulness and humility, there grows such an ouer-liking of this frail
and brittle show, that God is displeased therewith. Heathen men have thought
upon the fading of this flowe^, Forma bonum fragile est. Vir. Eclog. 2.
Beauty is but a brittle good thing. O formose puer nimium ne creed colori. O
fair boy do not trust too much to thy color. Both Solomon and his mother,
although she were a woman and certainly very fair, yet have recorded this for
ever, Prou. 31.30.
that favor is deceitful, and beauty is but vanity. Yet do we not know, that
some take more pleasure in this, then Jonas did in his shadow? For he did this
only for a day, but they do it all the prime of their youth, and that with
such affectation, such earnestness and such labor, (as indeed pride is
painful) that in the morning and evening, their cogitations are set on their
clothing and kemming, 2. Reg. 9.30.
yea perhaps on Iezabels art, and it may be that in their sleep they dream of
it too. If that Pambo of whom Socrates does write, were now alive, he might
have work many times. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. 4 18.
For he once beholding a woman most curiously trimmed, and exquisitly tifted
up, broke forth into bitter tears, and being asked the reason, he assigned
two causes of it: one was, that she should take such pains to help forward
the destruction of her own soul; and the other was, that she was more
careful of her face, to entise men unto lust, then she was of pleasing God. I
think now he might much sooner find examples of such things, then Diogenes
could find a man. But for the male sex, are there not which take more care of
their slicking and of their platting, then of the kingdom of heaven? Did Jonas
more set his heart on the shadow of his head, then they do on their hair? He
chode with God for the one: and they will stand to the uttermost with Gods
officers, his vicegerents upon earth, for the other: yea be thrust from a
society, or be clapped up in prison, rather then part with that fleece. There
were such in the days of Seneca, whose words if they be too bitter, lay the
fault upon him, and imagine that I do but cite them. How are they angry says
he, if ought be cut off from this mane? Seneca de breuitate vitae. cap. 12. Si
quid ex iuba sua. In annulos suos. Comptior esse mallet quam honestior.
if ought be out of order? if every thing fall not into those round rings or
hoopes? Which of these had not much leifer, that all the state should be
troubled, then his hair be displotted? who is not much more careful of the
grace of his head, then of his health? who makes not more account to be count,
then to be honest? Will you think that these men are idle, who have so much
work as they have, between the comb and the glass? If this speech do seem
somewhat hard, the fault must lie upon Seneca: but surely he saw some as proud,
and glad of their tricknesse, as Jonas was of his shadow. Saint Austen was not
so Stoicall, but a more sociable man: August. in Psalm. 32. Cum talibus
cincinnis in^^dere.
let us rather therefore hear him. Thou art not well powled, says a grave man
unto a wanton youth: it does not become thee to go with such feakes and locks.
But he knows says Austen, that his hair does please I know not whom. He
hates thee, reprehending him with true judgment, and keeps in himself,
what he likes with perverse counsel. But to follow this point no farther, let
nothing which God gives, be delighted in too much: let us take such things as
he offers us for helps, and use them accordingly; but let us not esteem of
moale-hils, as if they were mighty mountains, not of shadows as of graces,
not of transitory trifles, as of heavenly and spiritual joys, not of
creatures, as of God. Our great joy must be in the Lord: other things must be
but appendices, and additaments, and circumstances. As we need not be
insensible, when such things are bestowed upon us, so we must take heed of
exceeding gladness, and overmuch ioying in them, lest besides the offense to
God, that end come on them quickly, which did light here upon the cover of
Jonas, which now comes in the third place to be delivered to you.

The Lord prepared a worm.
12 When Jonas thought with himself, that he had such a When we behold green
things to show themselves, as with a kind of violence, we may fear a quick
dissolution. The fruit which is soonest ripe, is found to be soonest rotten.
When children in tender years, do abound with incredible wits, as being over
forward, they hold out few times long. God does recompense that in
towardliness, which he denies in time, and when he has made them fit, he
takes them to himself. When the greenness, and the freshness, and shade is
more then it should be, then fear some worm which may gnaw, some sickness
which may dissolve this rath-ripe soone-rotten fruit.

13 But this doctrine is yet more general: for if there be any thing, (come it
soon, or come it late) whereon the heart is too much set, God has means to
destroy it, and the more our joy is on it, the rather he does remove it. For
there is nothing here of longer lasting, then seems good to himself: and to
speak generally, here is nothing of continuance. Rocks themselves do consume:
great towers come tumbling down: the timber has his rottenness, the iron
has his rust: the garments have their mothes. The favor of mighty Princes
has a sudden worm of mutation. 1. Reg. 2.5.
Ioab the greatest about David, is by the mouth of David designed to execution.
Parmenio and Philotas as they felt the sweet of Alexander, Plutarch. in Alex.
magno Tacitus Annalium. li. 15. Job. 1.1. Ester. 7.10.
so they felt the bitter also. Honest Seneca had hard measure at the hands of
his scholar Nero. So riches have their wings to fly away when we most need
them. Job the mightiest in all the East, is poor even to a Proverb. Haman who
was so glorious, that he thought to have devoured a whole nation for one pray,
is suddenly stripped of all, yea and put from his life too. Li^. lib. 1.
So it is for health, and so for wit. Tullus Hostilius the king of Rome, who
before was healthful and an able stirring man, lies afterward drowping with
sickness. The Emperor Justinius who thought that he had wit at will, lost it
all and became a mad man. Euagr. Hist. Eccles. l. 5.11
Then what is there here, wherewith a wise man would be in love, especially to
joy in it so, as to count it his high contentment, when there is not the least
moment, but in it all may be dissolved, and a departure made of this felicity:
but i^ none of so many good things (as the world reputeth them) be diminished,
yet there comes some small matter besides, which spilleth all the glory of
them. Augustine. de cathechiz. rudibus. Insanagaudiae
Hear what Austen says of this: It is a true and worthy saying: Although mad
joys be no joys indeed, yet be they as they be, and delight they what they
can, the gloriousness of riches, the swelling pomp of honor, the devouring
of dainty fare, Pru^igo thormarum.
the wars which are seen on stages, the uncleanness of harlotrie, the
wantonness of bathes, yet if there come but a little ague, it takes away all
these, Vna febriculae
and depriueth men while they live of this false beatitude. There remains an
empty and wounded conscience, which must feel the Lord for a judge, whom it
would not have for a keeper, and find him a rough master, whom it did despise
to seek unto, and love as a sweet father. Such is the known uncertainty and
vanity of those things which this world yields to us, and therefore we are
well helped up, to set our hearts upon them.

14 To weane us from such thoughts, and make us see our folly, when we let our
eyes be dazeled with the brightness of such a glass, God does take away that,
wherein our pleasure did most consist: that when we have admired some things of
this world as excellent, and thought them to be great, yet lose them in a
trice, we may see how vain they be, and so direct our thoughts, our hopes and
meditations, unto that which is more lasting. And this he does to us in his
fatherly discretion: for as the burned child dreadeth the fire, so when by
sound experime^t it shall be beaten into us, that we have leaned but on that,
which is like a broken reed, which fails and peradventure hurts too, we
may afterward pass by such things, as not esteeming them at all, or but think
of them in their place. And this is a certain argument of Gods friendly mind
unto us, that in the end he means to bring us home to himself, because he
cutteth off such snares, and intanglements, and impediments, as would pluck us
from heavenly studies: he makes the wilderness tedious, and bitter, and
smartfull to us, that we may the more long for Canaan. But he suffers the
worldlings and Epicures to enjoy their fill: their pleasures do stand with
them, and follow one another, that they may have their heaven here, and their
glory upon earth, (for elsewhere they shall not see it) that being full fed
with earthly and temporary delights, they may be in love with those follies
and choking vanities. And that is the cause, why wicked and unmortified men
being ready to dye, do account it a hell unto them, to leave all and depart
with death Gods messenger, which comes for them, and must be the end of all,
when they see themselves housed with glory, and lodged with all kind of
beauty, their fish-pooles and their orchards without door to please them,
their music of all instruments within door to delight them, their cattle
about their ground, their children about their table. Whereas the man who has
been used to bear the yoke from his youth, Lam. 3 27.
and to leave, and lose, and lack, never stands nor staggereth at it, but
when he is bid come, he slippeth his coat with Joseph, and with a good will
springs away, being assured that he leaves nothing which may be reckened of,
but shrubs, and leaves, and shadows: but he goes to such a Savior, Redeemer,
and Intercessor, as he long has thought of and longed for, whom until he
saw, he was never contented and in quiet, and who will welcome him when he
comes, who will keep him when he is there; who will dwell with him for ever.
God imprint into our hearts a true desire of this Savior, that esteeming all
worldly things but tra^sitorie and vain, we may only aspire to him, to whom
with the blessed Father, and the everlasting Spirit be praise for evermore.

THE XXIX. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 3. It is to no purpose to murmr against God. 4 What
Eastern wind was here sent. 6 Too much heat and prosperity do hurt. 8. 11
The impatiencie of men in afflictions. 10 The manner and matter of Gods
reproof. 12 Of sin grows sin. 13. Jonas would justify his fault. 14 The
using of weak instruments glorifieth God the more. 15 Doctrine gathered from
the fall of Jonas.

Jonah. 4.8.9. And when the Sun did arise, God prepared also a fervent
East Wind, and the Sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and
wished in his heart to dye, and said, It is better for me to dye then to live.
And God said unto Jonah, Do thou well to be angry for the gourd? And he
said, I do well to be angry unto the death.


AS by that which went before, in part may be seen, that the patience of the
Prophet is once again to be tried, so by that which now follows, it most
evidently appears. While he sat in expectation for Niniues destruction, much
pained with the burden of his distempered thoughts, God a little to appease
him, whom each small thing perplexed, raises up a certain tree, or growing
kind of creature, to shadow him and refresh him. Wherein when he had taken more
contentment and delight, then a Prophet should have done, or then a wise man
would, the same hand which did send it, by a very abject body, a worm, did
overthrow it. We need not doubt, but he who was so proud of that trifle, would
be much out of quiet, to be stripped of all his joy, (for the more we love what
we have, the more we grieve to leave it,) but the Lord goes one step farther,
and when he has taken from him, that which so highly pleased him, he sends
him the contrary, another thing to displease him. The wind and Sun are set to
warm him without, who was so hot within, that since he was prone to anger for
the loosing of his shadow, he might see what it was to miss it, when there was
now such use and necessity to enjoy it. Jonas being like himself, very
quickly apprehends this, and boiling in impatiencie, would be no less then
dead, to be rid of this vexation. In his very heart he does wish it, such a
fiery heart was his heart, that his life were removed from him. And his tongue
secondeth his mind, so that he fears not to speak it out, that it were
better for him to die then to live. So because he had not his shadow, he would
not have his life.

2 God who had a double purpose, first to reprove his impatiencie, and
intemperate kind of carriage, and secondly by his own words to school him,
that he should not be so hard-harted, and very cruel to Niniue, does not let
him wast himself in his choler, no not for a moment, but asks of him mildly,
if he did well to be angry for such a green growing cover: so giving him to
understand by an insinuation, (if his judgment had been capable thereof) that
he went much awry. But the other in his fury, will not be checked therewith,
but comes on him again, I do well to be angry, that I do, even to the death.
You see he makes no spare at God, but fondly having thought, he does utter it
more foolishly; and he makes no stay, but come what will come of it, out shall
his passion go. Thus yet farther is offered matter of the Prophets weakness,
who makes no care to bind one sin upon another, and in the same
transgression of anger and impatiencie, to lay lode upon lode, which yet the
Lord does bear with, and turns to our instruction. Which that we may the
better fasten on to our edification, we may note in the former verse, Gods
trial, and Ionahs patience: Gods trial which was little, and his patience
which was none. In the latter verse, the Lords reproof, and his entertainment
of it: the one mild, which had great cause to be rough and severe: the other
frowning and boisterous, who if he had looked well to it, had great reason to
bend and carry a lower sail. In all these the first thing offered, is the
plain direct narration of that which befell to Jonas.

Of the East Wind and the Sun.
3 If we love our own ease and quiet, we had need be very vigilant, that we
strive not with God, nor show our selves discontented with any thing that
pleases him, since he has such power over us, as to cross us and curb us,
in as many sorts as he pleases. Because we are his creatures, and he is Lord
of all, we lie open on every side to be beaten and stricken by him, in taking
away our liking, and sending us that which we loath, and doubling it and
tripling it, as seems good to himself. When David had lost that child of
his, 2. Sam. 12.1^
which was conceived in adultery, he had gained much by the bargain to have
fretted and grumbled at it; because it was immediately in Gods hand, to let
Absolon rise against him, Cap. 15.1. Cap. 16.22. Cap. 17.2. Cap. 16.5. Job.
1.14.
first to defloure his concubines, and then to seek his life; and after to
suffer Shimei to rail on him, and revile him. When Job had the news first
brought unto him, that his oxen and his asses were seized on by the Sabees, his
case had been much amended, to have grudged and grieved at it: whereas his
Camels and his sheep, yea his very children were under the same hazard, yea
his flesh every hour lay subject to be stricken with blaines and sores. This
messenger sent to the Ninevites, who thought to have found his harbor in the
morning, as green for him as he left it in the evening, had been well helped
up, to mutter that all was dry and withered, when he was within ones fingers,
who (to teach him that no sorrows do use to go alone, but one waits on
another, when he is disposed so to send them) could bring a second cause of
vexation on his head, which immediately he does. For when the Sun did arise,
whose appearance is most pleasing, for dispelling of the darkness, and
bringing light to the world, and therefore by all creatures is naturally
desired, God accompanied that Planet, with such a more then common heat, that
this weak man could not bear it. He stirred up an Eastern wind, which had in
it such a quality, that it made the heat of the Sun the stronger, and less
to be endured by him.

4 I do not find that the Expositors speak so fully to the matter of this
wind, as me seems this text does wish, but look what I find any where fitly
spoken, I shall deliver that to you. Commonly the Eastern wind is a strong and
ruffling wind. As in Exodus, Exodus 14.21.
when the red sea was miraculously to be made to part it self in sunder, to
give passage to the Israelites, God caused a strong East wind to blow upon it
all the night, and that made the sea to become dry land. In the eight and
fortieth Psalm, God is said to break the ships, Psalm. 48.7.
and it is with the Eastern wind, which intends it to be boisteous and
blustering. In the Prophecy of Esaias, Isay. 27.8.
when God speaks of such afflictions as he would in some measure lay upon his
people and Church, he says, that he will keep that measure, when he blows
with his rough wind, in the day of his East wind, which imports a very great
storm. This made some think that the wind which was sent here, was a vehement
and great East wind, and so they do translate it. And none herein are more
forward then the Rabbines of the Jews, being the more encouraged thereto,
because the adiunct here used, does come of the radix (...), which signifying
surdum esse, or surdum se facere, to be deaf or thick of hearing, makes them
render it by this speech, vehemens Eurus, that is, such a one as while it
blows, men are made deaf, because they can hear little or nothing. But see
whether this imply not a very flat contrariety. For whereas the Sun with a
marvelous parching heat, did beat upon him, (which matter is evident in the
text) if so great a wind had been added thereunto, it had brought all to a
temper, which might tollerably be borne. For what the Sun had warmed, the
great breathing had cooled; and what the wind had hurt him, by the too cold
blowing on him, had been helped by the Sun heating, and so of the two
extremes had been made a mediocritie, which needed not to have offended this
patient so impatient. Then we must look farther yet, and find some other
meaning. The word in the original will best unfold it to us; for (...) before
mentioned, does signify silere or tacere, to be silent, as well as to be
deaf. So the East wind which was here sent, was a silent and calm East wind:
which Iunius and Tremelius did very well observe, when they put it Eurum
silentem, Iunius in Ion. 4.
a calm or quiet East wind, and noted thereupon, that that word was put to
distinguish it from the violent and big East Wind spoken of in other places.
This was then so small a wind, as that it violently did not pierce through the
air, to trouble and cool it, but rather joined with the Sun to warm it. And
this has the true analogy, and reference to that meaning which is aimed at in
this place.

5 Saint Hierome helps us well here, Hieron. in Ion. 4.
who in the words of my text, has vento calido and vrenti, a hoate and burning
wind, and in some other Scriptures does interpret the words used here (...),
by ventus vrens, a burning wind, for an East wind, as if the name of the East
wind in Hebrew came of burning. So he does in the nineteenth of Ezechiel,
Ezech. 19.12 Ose. 13.15.
and so in the thirteenth of Osee, in which places other men only put it an
Eastern wind. Now that the wind has some force of an extraordinary heat,
may be gathered from such blastings, as are spoken of in the Bible: Agg. 2.18.
as when it is said, I have stricken you with blastings, meaning their corn,
or the blossoms of their fruits upon the trees; which if it be not
sufficiently declared, by the experience of husbandmen, who (if I be not
deceived) do call it a red wind among us, Genes. 41.6.
yet let the dream of Pharao confirm the one and the other; that the wind
does blast, and especially the East wind of all winds. For the seven thin
ears of corn, which are there mentioned, are said to be burned or blasted,
and that with the Eastern wind, as supposing that in those East parts, near
Egypt or Palestina, that wind is much accustomed to it. Then that which
parcheth the corn and makes it satty, that which scaldeth the blossoms by a
still warm exhalation, being now used of purpose (by him who rules all
things) to make the air to be sultrie, might well double the heat upon Jonas.
Luc. 12.55. Franc. Vales. de sacra Philos. cap. 86.
Our Savior has a saying, When you see the South wind blow, you say it will
be hot, and it comes so to pass. Franciscus Valesius taking on him to yield
a reason out of nature, wherefore it should be so, assigns this as the cause,
that the Southwind blows from that coast, wherein there is store of fire. I
doubt not but he means by fire, heat of the Sun, which is warmest in the
South-point. The Sunbeams and the blowing, coming both from the self same
place, make each other the hoter. This reason for the South Wind might increase
the heat of the East Wind, upon the head of the Prophet: for it is said in the
text, that it was at the Sun rising, (which we know to be about the East)
that the wind blew warm upon him. By all which we may find it evident, that a
faintie sultrie blowing, which might open the pores apace, and provoke sweat
in great plenty, might without any kind of miracle, effect what is here
spoken. Especially when the Sun, as the fountain of all heat, was joined
thereunto, Psalm. 121.6.
who as David describes, does use to burn by day; for smiting is there
burning: and concerning which, the spouse in the Canticles can say of her
self, Cantic. 1.5.
I am black, for the Sun has looked upon me.

6 Thus literally we have the true sense of the story: wherein it is added
farther, that the heat which came by this means, beating upon his head, made
him no less then faint, which befalls sometimes to travelers, or men
bathing too long when the vapor ouer-quelleth the^. There is nothing more
natural to our life then heat; for life consists in heat and moisture; and
heat moderatly tempered, is desired by man and beast; and the very earth does
more flourish by the warmth of the Sun upon it. But heat more then
convenient to the body which receives it, does more hurt and destroy, then
cherish and preserve. In this fitly resembling the prosperity of the world,
which so long as it is so moderate, as that men's minds can weild it, it
incourageth unto good, and stays from many falls, which necessity would
enforce: but when it is heaped upon us with such a weight as is beyond our
supportation, we sink under the burden of plenty and abundance. The wise man
saw this well, when he made request to God, Prou. 30.8.
Give me neither riches nor poverty, but feed me with convenient food: lest I
be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? or lest I be poor and steal,
and take Gods name in vain. Then it is ordinary, that as too much heat does
faint us, so too much wealth does choke us; while the Lord does not give to
every man the mind of Job, or of Abraham, or of Solomon while he stood
upright, that is, with thankfulness and te^perance, to dispose of great things
well. Oftentimes great wealth gives great spirits, and so puffs the
possessours up to pride, makes men despise their maker, and contemn their
brethren: it brings also much idleness, and so inflameth the lust, and
makes a God of the belly: it brings great store of care, and worldly
perturbations, and so does choke the seed of the word. Esth. 3.1.
What brought Haman to the height of his arrogancy and folly, but the plenty
which he had? What brought him in the Gospel to yield his soul to security,
Luc. 12.16. Lactan. Diu. Instit. lib. 2.1. Hier. in Ier. cap. 32. Horat. lib.
1. Epist. 18. Eutrapelus cuicunque nocere voleba^, Donabat v^stes, etc.
but that his ground brought forth much fruit? Of prosperity says
Lactantius, comes luxury, of luxury grow all vices, yea impiety against
God. So Hierome writing on the Prophet Jeremy: Plenty breeds security, and
security, neglect, and neglect breeds contempt. The heathen Poet Horace
alludeth to this, by naming his Eutrapelus, who when he meant to do hurt to
any, would give him gay clothes, for together with them, he knew that he would
alter his counsels, and his hopes from the better to the worse, as there he
does exemplify. I would that this were not true in very many other men, that
as their state increases, so does increase their sin.

7 This has made some dispute, I say not that a competent measure, but penury
and necessity, and adversity, and the cross, are rather preseruers of piety
and duty, then plenty and prosperity: Plutarch. de praeceptis co^jugalibus.
illustrating their intent, by that Parable in Plutarke so well known to every
man, of the Sun and the wind, who were at strife whether of them two should
sooner put a man beside the cloak which he had upon him. While the wind blew,
he held it the harder, but the Sun with the strength of his beams made him
throw it from him. Prosperity makes many lay aside that clean vesture of
purity and innocence, which they buckled hard to them, while they were duly
exercised in carrying the cross. Peradventure this point has too often been
verified in the Church. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 8.1.
They who in the ancient persecutions loved one another, fell to discord and
dissentions, and shameful stirs each with other, when the Emperors once grew
to be Christians, and peace shined in the world. Has it not been too true,
that some who in the time of bloody persecutors have lived admired lives, in
exile beyond the seas, yet have scant retained their first love, and kept their
ancient zeal, but have thought that to be fence enough, to shield off some
not commendable actions, that they might say, that the time was, when for
Christ's sake they left their country. How fitly may men in such a like case be
compared to the ice which hangs down from the house in frosty weather, which
is able to endure the sharp blast of the Northre^ wind, but when the Sun
once breaks forth, it melts and falls away. Again, were there never
such, who when in this place they were masters but of small things, and the
greatest part of their maintenance, so depended upon Gods providence, that in
the beginning of the year, they could not make account to reap one half of
that, which would satisfy, and yet God sent it in unto them, were then
studious and diligent, and laborious in their calling; but afterward when they
came to more eminent and noted preferments in the Church and commonwealth,
have been dumb as the fish, and go the Church as it will go, neither tongue nor
pen shall once move to ruinate the forts of Antichrist, or to build one foot
for Christ. Shall I say that they have left the net, because they have that for
which they fished? Or shall I rather liken them to the Adamant stone, (although
peradventure you will say that that is too severe) whom no cold nor hammer can
dissolve, Solin. cap. 65
and yet as Solinus writes a warm thing makes it yield and fly in pieces.
But that is the blood of a goat; and these men touch not blood. I could wish
that blood did not touch them, and that the blood of better things then goats.
Their idleness in abundance, and abundance in their idleness, is stained
with the blood of the sheep of Gods pasture, who perish for want of food. How
much better had it been for these persons to have lived still private men, and
to have pleased God, by consecrating their little to Christ Jesus, which
doubtless they would have done, if they had risen no higher, the^ to have so
much, as by their usage of it, extinguisheth both the fire and sparks of
devotion? Shall God the more he sends us, be the less honored for it? Shall
we in our small wealth pay him much, and fly off from him in the greater? It
was a fault both noted and condemned in the Carthaginians, that whereas they
were sprung from Tyrus, Diod. Sicul. lib 20.
and used yearly to send the tenth or tith of their incomes to Hercules the
peculiar God of the Tyrians, which custom they observed while their
commodities were small, they neglected afterward (when they grew to be masters
and possessours of greater matters) to send at all, and so by little and little
came to contemn that Hercules. In the service of the true God, let this never
be said of Christians, of learned men and Ministers, that they so forget
themselves. When we think that we are at the highest, let us not then indeed
be lowest: most knowledge and best place may do the Lord best service. But no
man while he is on earth, is at the highest of his desires: there remains yet
one step to heaven, before the obtaining of which, if any settle his
thoughts, it is no better then in the depth of folly. My conclusion of this
point is, that we should take heed of prosperity, as a most entising thing:
it was too much heat that brought Jonas to his last enormous crime. Let us
know who it is that sends all, and let us still be thankful unto him: let us
know that worldy felicity must be reckened for, in the day of great account:
in the height thereof, let us remember to be humble: let us think that it may
soon end, and be tumbled vp-side down. Gregor. Nazien. Orat. 8.
That which Gregory Nazianzene reports of himself, can never sufficiently be
commended; for his custom was, that when any matter fell prosperously out unto
him, (to the end that he might make his mind modest and lowly as it ought to
be) he would read over Ieremies Lamentations, a fit book for such a purpose.
A wise course and a godly, and most worthy of such a man. And this be spoken
of that trial, which here was laid on the Prophet.

He fainted and wished in his heart to dye.
8 When the heat had plied him in this sort, that both and he speaks it,
that he willingly would be dead. Some think that which they in wisdom
forbear to speak: some speak that in fury, which themselves scant think.
But this man is no dissembler, he thinks it with his heart, and he utters
it with his tongue. Franciscus. Guicciard. Hist. lib. 6.
Caesar Borgia and his father Pope Alexander the sixth had a Proverb fastened
on them by the Italians of that time, that the one of them never thought as he
spoke, and the other never spoke as he thought. But it is plain that Jonas was
of another metal. His mind and mouth went together; and both were most
unadvised; for needs he will be dead. Some think that his vexing anger was,
because he saw what the Lord intended in all this matter, that is, to spare the
Ninevites, whose destruction in truth might more justly be displeasing to him,
then that of the tree to Jonas. I deny not but the same reason stirred him up
to his former anger mentioned in the first and fourth verse of this chapter;
Ion. 4.1.4.
but here the cause of vexing was apparently for Job. 1.21.
Few in misery say with Job, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken, blessed
be the name of the Lord. This made Bernard complain, Bernard. Ser. 6. in
vigilia Natalis Domini.
that many acknowledge Jesus, but do not acknowledge Christ, (so he descanteth
on these names) they love him as a Savior, and while he heapeth good things on
the^, but they endure him not anointing them with medicines and afflictions.
Perhaps they can speak of patience, and suffering all occurrents, with
fortitude and constancy, and settled resolution, but when it comes to the
trial, Dion. hist. 38
(as Tully sometimes said of himself, to his friend Philiscus) It is one thing
to say it, another thing to suffer it. But a champion is not known, till he
have one to assail him. It is the tempest which tries the ship. Strength
appears not but by a burden. In Saint John's Revelation, when captivity and
the sword had been mentioned close before, Apoc. 13
it follows, Here is the patience and the faith of Saints. It is but peevish
hypocrisy, to make show to love the best virtues, but to fly from all things
that make trial of them. Concerning men who use that fashion, Gregor. Moral.
lib. 7.
Saint Gregory does speak thus: Humble says he, they will be, but without
any despising from other: they will be content with their own, but so that
they must want nothing: they willingly will be chaste, but without^pulling down
the body: so they will be patient gladly, but without any to reproach them. But
this is not it, the performance whereof is looked for at the hands of a
Christian man: there goes somewhat else to the reckening.

9 Although Satan were much mistaken in the person of Job, yet it seems that
he shrewdly gessed at the manners of me^, when he said that Job did not serve
God for naught, Job. 1.10.
Thou have made a hedge about him, and blessed the works of his hands: but now
stretch out thy hand against him, and he will curse thee to thy face. But it is
an iniquity of iniquities, that when we have received good things, we will
bind God to maintain and perpetuate them upon us; else we will be out of all
quiet, and ready to renounce him. If we could once learn that lesson, to use
things of this world, as though we used them not, to run and lick, Plin.
lib. 8.40
and lick and run, as the dogs in Nilus do; to know in what sort we hold
all which we have, life, and lands, and goods, and children, and necessities,
and delights, but as tenants at will, we would repress in our selves all
turbulent affections, which arise for transitory matters, resolving that
howsoever they please our distempered humors, yet they are nothing but motions
of refractarie flesh, which strives against the spirit, and is heavy to the
soul. And then we should know, that we may use temporal things while we have
them, but not vex or murmr, or grumble for them when we lose them. But to
wish our selves dead, that if there were in us any goodness, which might
advance Gods glory, that might clean be extinguished; and to wish our selves
off from this earth, before we be prepared to come before such a Judge as he
is, who is known to be of pure eyes, Hab. 1.23.
and to judge of all things uprightly; is both folly and impiety. Let Jonas in
this case, be an example of infirmity to be avoided in other men, who because
he had not some accident, would needs part with the substance: who because he
had lost that shadow, which he he neither had, nor needed in all his life,
before those last four and twenty hours, would needs depart with his life.
That which was of all humane things the most precious, should be lost for that
which is of small moment. Yet there be some in our time, who tread the steps
of the Prophet, nay do go a great way beyond him, (for what he said they
perform) most damnably working their destruction, for vain trifles in
comparison of that soul, which the Lord suffers to breath within them. But I
have handled that question twice before in this Prophecy, and therefore I
leave this whole matter, and come to the second verse.

Do thou well to be angry for the gourd?
10 Here the manner of Gods reproof might yield good matter to us, to note in
what mild sort he does it: that whereas it had been fitter that Jonas should
have been meek, and the Lord should have been moved, Jonas is the stirring
party, and God himself does speak calmely. But I have touched this before in
this present Chapter, In verse. 4.
and what we should learn from it. Again it might be noted, that he speaks
not here simply, thou do ill to be angry, but by an interrogation, which as
in Rhetorike we are taught, does urge and pierce the deeper. And therefore even
in the Scripture, for more veheme^cie sake, things are propounded by questions.
But to leave all this concerning the manner, the matter is it which I do point
at, wherein God does as much as demand thus; Son of man art thou wise, or
art thou obedient, to rage thus for the gourd? See what thy wisdom is, thou
ragest at the death of this green thing, and why do thou ask for thine
own death? Thou can not endure the spilling of that which is as nothing, and
yet thou will preasse earnestly to the killing of thy self, a creature far
more excellent. And is there not great reason, why thou should be thus
offended? to chafe and brawle with thy maker? It is on the one side for a
gourd, and on the other for a sweat, procured by the wind and Sun. Are not
these great spurrings and prouocations to anger, a blast of wind and a shadow;
because thou have too much of the one, and too little of the other. I did look
that thou should suffer far greater things for my sake; not the shadow
only of thy head to be taken from thee, but thy head it self by the sword;
not the heat of the Sun alone, but of the fire to burn thee as a martyr if
I would. I see that thou would shrink at great things, as at torture or
cruel torment, when thou sinkest so at a little. But where is thy obedience,
that as yet thou have not learned to subscribe to all my pleasure? Thus might
God justly reprove him, and by his words illustrate the malignitie of his
humor, if we only will understand it, that now he meant the gourd. But if we
will conceive it, that he blames him for all his anger, and not alone for the
gourd, but because Niniue should be spared, then Jonas lies more open to him;
for that he who had been favored, should not grieve that other men should find
the self same mercy. He sinning had been delivered from drowning and the
whale, therefore he did ill to vex, Mat. 18.24.
that others also sinning should live. When one servant has found favor,
peradventure for a hundred talents, he should not grudge if another his fellow
servant do find the self same measure. But I will not extend this doctrine so
far as to this point, because the text evidently delivers it, that the
reproof of him was for his anger about the gourd.

11 We may make this use thereof, that if it were such a fault, fit to be
blamed by Gods own mouth, to be so much disquieted for a matter of so small
consequence, I will not say far from Gods kingdom, but from the life and
being of a man, see whether we may not justly be taxed by the self same Lord,
for fretting and such distemper in things of like importance. If an office or
small preferment, which is a thing of more burden then recompense any way, be
desired or intended by us, and we fail in our hope, how do we grow
male-contented with our Colleges and studies, with our calling and vocation?
who would live to be thus disgraced? This arises from some root of
preposterous emulation, or avarice, or ambition, or such a plant as by right
should not have place in the heart. But because we have not more, shall we
loath that which we have? How worthily may the Lord take from us that which we
do enjoy, when we will so prescribe unto him? But because we have too much
learned to embrace these worldy things, although they be but shrubs and
shadows, therefore we so take the loss of them, and use worse means to gain
them, even dissembling and deceiving, and lying, and forswearing, (such parts
as become not Christians.) May not God now say to us, as here he says to
Jonas: Do you well thus to be moved, for the gaining or the loosing of matters
of so small moment? May it not be much suspected, that in the day of great
trial, when temptations shall grow strong, you will slip your neck from the
yoke, or sink under your burdens, when such petty points overthrow you? Would
you with the Apostles leave all, or be offered up with Saint Paul? Marc. 10
28. 2. Tim. 4.6.
How would you break faith or honesty, if it were for a kingdom, since you
do thus for a moale-hill? how would hundreds or thousands lead you, when thus
you do transgress for a few pieces of silver? I wish that this were laid to
the heart of all of us in this place, that with consciences content, and
resting upon Gods providence, we might chearefully go forward, with that which
is assigned to us for our share or lot, to the honor of the Lord, the Church,
and University. In a wife religious man, nature is content with a little, and
if we could defalke and pluck that away from our mind, which otherwise may not
be had, there be few but have enough, until God do send more. And by reason of
the want of this mind in us, it falls out oftentimes, that they have least
contentment, who seem to enjoy the most. But beware of coming to that pass
of murmuring, and of fretting, when we have not what we would. If we needs will
follow the Prophet, let us follow him otherwise, then in that, for the which so
justly he is in this place rebuked.

12 But himself still like himself means not thus to give over, but he
comes on with an answer. Do thou well to be angry? Yea that I do says
he, to be angry to the death. Was there ever man under heaven so testie and so
peevish, to chop thus with his maker? And still the further he goes, the more
to be out of square? Yet his moderation was far greater in the fourth verse,
Ion. 4.4.
where being asked the same question, he took it for a check, and answered
all with silence, not replying a word again. But here as if he had meant, to
vie who should speak last, he will break if he hold his tongue, and therefore
answer he must, though with such extreme perverseness, as never man did the
like. If we may guess by his words, all the gesture of his body was suitable
thereunto, his teeth set, his eyes glowing, his countenance very red: but his
words are plain, that he did well to be angry to the death. How do we fall
without measure, if Gods grace preventing and following us, Gratia praeueniens
and s^bsequem.
be not over us, and lead us all the way, when such a choice man as Jonas, who
was singled out for a Prophet, shall be thus overtaken? We had need pray for
assistance, and diligently take heed, that in all our deeds we yield not Satan
the least footing; for if once we let him land, and give a consent unto him to
abide with us, although it be but in a corner, 2. Sam. 11.2.8.13.1^.
he will certainly have more. When David by the door or window of his eye, had
let it into his heart, that Bethsabe must be fancied, it works him on to
adultery; then to cousening of Vrias; after that to make him drunk, and las^
of all to slay him. Jonas is first content to desire the death of the
Ninevites: then he is angry to think that it should be otherwise: afterward
he who had no love to a city of that quantity, yet is in love with a tree,
and more sets his heart upon it, then a man should on any creature: then he
grieueth because he had lost it, and being rebuked for it, he chideth
hand-smooth with God. So one sin breeds another, whereas obedience at the
first had marred all that rank. Let us all take heed of too much delighting
in any earthly thing, in husband, or wife, or children, o^ any matter of like
nature, because sin which grows from the loss of these, will spread it
self far; as first to grieve (...) Gentiles, ^.These. 4 13
and heathens who have no hope; then impatiently (...) murmr against the
divine dispensation, and that is suited with like effects. Perhaps changing of
religion, as if when the God of the mountains being coldly served, 1. Reg 20 23
would not help and save from such perplexities, they would to the God of the
valleis: peradventure refusing to come to church, as if they had bin holy too
long: yea perhaps fasting or soli^a^inesse, till that the understanding and
memory being ^razed almost past recovery, give such an entrance to Satan,
that there is little power of nature, or faith, or grace left, to resist
fearful temptations, or to take comfort or counsel. The enemy of our souls
so windeth in by degrees, that he is hardly expelled, if at first we yield
unto him, to give him place but a little. I do well to be angry unto the death.

13 What would he have done to men, who deals thus with God? or how bravely
would he have spoken, if he had done some good deed, who in so foul a matter,
(his judgment is so depraved by self-love, and selfe-opinion) both excuses
and commends that, which was in truth so outrageous? David was very far gone;
2. Sam. 12.13
but being once touched by Natha^, he stands not on his own justification,
but out he cries, Peccaui, I have sinned against the Lord. Genes. 4.13.
Yea Cain when he was convicted of murdering his brother, took knowledge that
he deserved much ill. And concerning Judas himself, indeed I find that the
Cainites (who were a kind of heretics, Epiphan. haeres. 38.
as Epiphanius writes) did commend him, that since he saw that Satan's force
was to be diminished by the death of Christ, he made all the means which he
could to hasten him to his death: but I do not find, that Judas for his own
part did so think of it, but confessed that he had sinned, Matthew. 27.4.
in betraying innocent blood. But our man, for want of good neighbors,
stands in his own commendations, (for it is more then an Apology) I do well
to be angry, yea if I should do more, it were so much the better, even to be
angry to the death. How far is he out of temper? he who should have been a
light to other, is in darkness and desperatnesse: he who should have been mild
to men, is now cocking with God: he who should be renoumed for patience, is
impatient in the highest degree: he whom much should not move, is vp-side
down with a little: the Preacher worse then the people, the Prophet more to
seek then any private man. Paul writing to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.20.
says that they were built upon the foundation of the Prophets and the
Apostles, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone. If our Prophet had been
taken now, he had been full unfit to have been in this foundation, yea in any
part of Gods building: for those who are therein, must be wrought and squared
stones. But God knows he was not near that: Gregor. Homil. 21 in Ezechielem.
for as Gregory does remember us; Whosoever in prosperity is not puffed up
too high: whosoever in adversity is not cast down too low: whosoever by
persuasion is not drawn to evil: whosoever by dispraise is not kept back
from good, he is a squared stone. Then was Jonas out of square, who being proud
of his gourd, a matter far from prosperity, and vexed with the losing of it,
and the heat beating upon his head, loved what he had too dearly, and lost
what he left too grudgingly.

14 But we doubt not but he recovered this, and grew to grace again: for the
Spirit of the Lord was not ext^nguished in him, although now the fire thereof
seemed to be raked up under the ashes: now the sap of his election seemed to
lie hid within the root, and not to flourish above the ground: but although
his heart did seem frozen, yet afterward it thaweth again. For as Saint
Austen speaks, Aug. Sermon. 88. de tempore.
as when the water congealeth with too much cold, and when the Sun comes on
it, it resolves again, and the same Sun again departing, it begins
again to be hard, so with the frost of sin the love of many does wax cold,
(he might have said so of their obedience) and they are hardened like the ice,
but when the heat of the Lords mercy comes again on them, they are
resolved and relent. So doubtless it was with Jonas, else he had never been
reckened among the Lords holy Prophets, from the which, as we see, his grievous
fall did not seclude him. But in the mean while, here is a marvel never
sufficiently wondered at, that God who has the choice of all things in the
world, will use such brittle means, to the ministry of his word, and
building of his kingdom, shall I say heardmen with Amos, Amos. 7.14. Matthew
4.18. 1. Sam. 17.34 Mat. 9.9. Act 9.1. Exodus 32.2. Number. 11.11. Ier. 15.10.
or fishermen with Andrew, or shepherds as was David, or customers as was
Matthew, some unlearned, all of base calling, nay men nore-able for their
weakness, and reprochable for their folly: not only Paul before his calling,
but Moses and Aaron who in their calling were oftentimes much to blame, Jeremy
who raged bitterly, and Jonas who was made of fretting and impatiencie. This
shows how great God himself is, omnipotent, and Almighty, who by weak
confounds the strong, by foolish confuteth the wise, by base conuinceth the
noble, by men under exception, does things beyond exception, and all because
his name therein may be the more glorified.

Exodus 10.13. (...) Iud ^.31. cap. 1^.15.
15 It was his greater praise, that by grasshoppers and flies, he could make
Pharao crouch; by hornets drive out Kings; make Samgar with an Oxe-goade
destroy six hundred Philistines; and Samson a thousand of them, with the
iaw-bone of an Ass. What could more sound out his honor, then the ouerturning
of Hierico, Ios. 6.4. Iu. ii^. 7.20. 1. Sam. 17.49
with trumpets made of rams horns? and the victory of Gedeon upon the
Madianites, or the slaying of Goliath with a sling and a stone? It had been
less fame to have brought great things about, with great and mighty means.
In like sort it demonstrateth his powerful ability, that he can so dispose of
his creatures, as that a Cock should fright a Lion, a mouse trouble an
Elephant, Solin. cap. 38
an Ichneumon a little serpent, destroy a huge and big Crocodile. Even so in
the course of the Gospel, it declared Gods own finger, when fishers converted
Orators, and poor men persuaded Kings. And so it sings out his salvation,
that sinners should bring home sinners, and faulty persons, men blame-worthie.
As it was answered to Paul complaining of his weakness, 2. Cor. 12.9.
My grace is sufficient for thee, for my power is made perfect by weakness: so
where the grace and strength of God, do accompany the toungs of sinners, in
proclaiming forth his word, they shall prevail and prosper, albeit not for the
comers cause, yet for the senders sake. Though it be but an earthen vessel,
which contains that which is brought, yet because there is treasure in it,
some there be which shall receive it. This is no protection for sin, for all
faults are worthy blame, but especially in the Minister, in whom all things
are conspicuous, like spots in the fairest garment. If the eye be dark, what
shall see? if the guide be blind, who shall lead? if he who should shine for
purity, be impure beyond other men, who shall profit by good example? Matthew.
5.14.
You are a city set on an hill. Yet this is a just defense against our
runagates, and Seminary priests of Rome, who take occasion by reason of some
slippes in our Clergy, and defects in our ministry (which yet may easily be
demonstrated to be greater at this time in their Papacy; and in the highest of
their Hierarchy, their own stories resound them to have been exceeding
filthy) to vnder-mine any good opinion of our religion in the simple: But this
is practiced most of all to the ignorant, and to silly women, 2. Tim. 3.6*
into whose houses they creep, and lead them captive being laden with sins,
and led with diverse lusts. In like sort, it is an answer to Atheists, and
hypocrites living among us: who to cover their oppression, their avarice and
extortion, pretend it to be no fault, to detain and hold away any thing from
men so culpable; by that means requiring, that their brethren the Preachers of
the word, should be no less the^ Saints, when they themselves who require it,
are most far off from all sanctified and good things. God has made his
Pastors and Ministers of like mould with other men: he expects it not,
neither can it be that they should live here like Angels: for this is the way,
Via no^ patriae.
and not the country: yet by his Spirit he keeps his servants, from
delighting and persisting in gross sins, and he covers their errors, and
imputes them not unto them. But he pinneth not the verity of his doctrine
upon men. As Moses chair was Moses chair, Matthew. 23.2.
when the Pharisees did sit in: as Christ's faith was the assured faith,
although the traitor Judas might preach it: and the Prophecy was Gods
message, when weak Jonas did carry it, so the Gospel is the Gospel, when
ignorant men, and young men, and sinful men do deliver it. Blessed be the God
of our hope, who will not have us depend on flesh, or blood, or man, but on his
assured truth, and his ouer-ruling Spirit. God guide us so by his grace, that
by the good we may learn good, and by the evil to fly from evil, that so we
may be fit members of that body, whereof his Son is the true and living head,
to both whom and to the holy Ghost, the Trinity in Unity, be honor for
evermore.

THE XXX. LECTVRE.
The chief points. 3. Parables may be used, 4. and all good eloquence by the
Minister. 6. Ionahs words returned upon himself. 7. The comparison between
God and Jonah. 8. The multitude of inhabitants in Niniue, 9. with whom the
gourd was not to be balanced. 10. God provides blessings for man, without his
labor. 11. Gods care over infants and all beasts. 12. Therefore parents should
not be too careful. 13. Jonas at length yields. 14. The conclusion of the
Prophecy joined with exhortation.

Jonah. 4.10.11. Then said the Lord, thou have had pity on the gourd, for the
which thou have not labored, neither made it grow: which came up in a night,
and perished in a night. And should not I spare Niniue that great city, wherein
are six score thousand persons, that cannot discern between their right hand
and their left hand, and also much catt^ll?


IN that which goes before, the intemperate fury and unadvised rashness of
the Prophet has been such, that he is ready to take an occasion of chiding
with the Lord, upon a most trifling cause, even the withering of a gourd. And
being reproved for it, not by his fellow servant, but by his masters own
mouth, he stands on his own justification, that he did well to be angry, yea
if it were to the death. In which mood if he had departed, his judgment now
was so perverted, that he would have thought that he had had a great hand upon
God, that he himself had been in the right, and the Lord had been to blame,
because he had not fitted his fancy. But the inconceiuable wisdom of the
everlasting Father, does so far ouermatch him, that where he expected
victory, although it were but in words and thoughts, he is taken at that
advantage, that he is for ever put to silence in this matter. For his own
speech is so fitly returned upon himself, and he is so caught and entangled in
the words of his own mouth, that he is enforced to yield a greater thing, then
that whereof the present question was, and that is concerning Niniue: that
since justice was pleased to turn it self into mercy, and severity into
clemency, nothing was done unjustly, or unbeseeming him, who is the rule of
truth. For that was it which the Prophets master in this place especially did
aim at; that his servant should be satisfied, and thereby all the world be
advertised to the full, that the holy one of Israel is delighted to show pity
upon the sons of men: that where repentance ascends from the earth to the
heaven, there a pardon will come down from the Highest upon his creatures:
that Niniue it self whose sins did cry for vengeance, upon submission and
conversion, should be spared from destruction. So that mankind in general
taking notice of such grace, and propensenesse unto clemency, might confess
that the Lord is gracious, and that his mercy endures for ever.

2 But to make this the more evident, and so to work in the Prophet a manifest
conviction of his error and mistaking; from that which had been done, and said
before of the gourd, he does gather a kind of Parable, which is rather real
then verbal, full of wisdom and art, familiar to Gods spirit; which does
naturally yield a most significant comparison both of persons and of matters,
and in the vp-shot conclude the equity and integrity of the Lords
proceedings. Will thou assume to thy self a privilege to be moved with
affection, and will thou deny me my prerogative in the like? will thou wish
that ought should be saved, and will thou grieve that it should be spilled, and
shall not I much more take a delight in preserving that which otherwise would
perish? Yea is all thy love fixed on that green thing, wherein the pleasure was
small, but the profit none at all: which was but the son of a night (for so
it is in the Hebrew) quickly up and quickly gone? And shall not I more respect
a city, and such a city as is that mighty Niniue, wherein, besides store of
cattle, the life of the worst whereof, is far to be preferred before things
without sense, are young and old, male and female of reasonable creatures, to a
very great sort of thousands. By such not disputation, but demonstration
rather, is warranted the favor which was showed to that city, and the mouth
of him who murmured is to such purpose stopped, that there follows no more
reply. In handling all which matter, I shall omit to divide that which very
well will not bear it, and shall touch such observations successively and in
order, as the text does offer to me. Wherein first I must say something of this
Parable, and of other the like used in the Scripture.

3 The use of speech is one of the rarest gifts, that the divine Psalm. 49.4.
I will says he incline mine ear unto a Parable. Psalm. 78.2.
And in another place, I will open my mouth in Parables. The wise sentences of
Solomon, which the holy Ghost thought fit to commit to eternal memory, are
inscribed with that title, Prou. 1.1. cap. 10.1
The parables of Solomon. Yea the Son of God himself, who spoke as never man
spoke, whose words were with authority, and not as the Scribes, whose speech
provoked reverence, and amazedness, and astonishment, to hear that it was so
gracious, spent not the least part of his doctrine in Parables and similitudes,
the mysticalnesse whereof prevailed much with the auditors. Matthew.
13.1.24.31.33.44 45.47.
See the thirteenth Chapter of Saint Matthew, and there you shall find seven
Parables, of the sower, of the mustard seed, of the leven, and of the
treasure, and other things beside. These made the people wonder, and give more
honor to him.

4 The Ministers of the Gospel, who have a general warrant to be imitatours
of Christ in any thing that they may, 1. Cor. 11.1.
may here behold the liberty which is left unto them in the performance of
their calling; not only nakedly to lay open the truth, but to use helps of
wit, of invention and art, (which are the good gifts of God) so to remove
away all disdain, and loathing of the word from the dull hearts of the
auditorie. Similitudes, and Comparisons, Allusions, Applications, yea Parables,
and Proverbs which may tend to edification, and illustrating of the word. For
they have to do with weak ones, as well as with the strong, with some of
queisie stomachs, with some of dull capacity, with some which must be entised
and allured with a bait of industry and eloquence, of pretty and witty
sentences. And where should labor be spent, but in the work of God, which he
who does negligently is accursed; Ierem. 48.10
or where should skill be showed, but in fishing for men's souls, after whom
Christ himself so caught? And such is the weakness of sinners, that they are
as much moved with the form and with the utterance, as they are with the
matter. Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 4.24
Saint Austen tells that in Caesarea a city of Mauritania, where himself
sometimes lived, was a brutish senseless custom, that on certaines days of
the year, the people of that place did gather themselves together, and as if
they had been mad, the father against the children, and the children against
their fathers, and the neighbors against their neighbors, did throw stones
with that violence, that not a few were killed with it. Who would think that
any one, who had the face of a man, would grow to that stupidious foolerie? Yet
let it not seem incredible. For first so grave an author as Saint Austen is
does witness it, and that of his own knowledge: and secondly I find that Leo
Africanus does make mention, Leo Afric. in descript. Africae. lib. 3.
that a custom not unlike this, does remain until our time, in places very
near that, to wit, in the kingdom of Fez: and thirdly such absurdities have
elsewhere been experimented. But concerning this of Saint Austen, he aduoucheth
of himself, that being to dissuade his neighbors of Caesarea from this so long
a settled custom, he speaks to them in a lofty and eloquent kind of oration,
in grandi dicendi genere, and prevailed in his desire. It is easy to be
gathered from the narration of the author, and whole course of his report, that
his opinion was, that if he had spoken coldly, but frigide and ieiune, as of a
common matter, he had failed of his whole purpose. So it is with other
pastors, in other people and places.

Quint. Orat. Instit. 2.17. Si mihi sapientes Iudices de^tur sapientum
conciones atque omine consiliu^. Nec enim qui recta via depulsus estreduci ad
eam, nisi alio flexi^ potest.
5 Quintilian that good Orator has this saying concerning eloquence, If in my
cause I were sure to have the Judges wise, and wise men to my auditors, that
envy might bear no sway, nor favor, nor fore-conceit, nor false witnesses
might hurt, then the use of eloquence were small, and it should serve only for
delight: but if the minds of the hearers be so moveable and inconstant, and
truth be subject to injuries, we are to contend by art, and to use any thing
which may profit. For one who is out of the way, cannot be brought in again
but by another turning. This is as true of the Preacher, as it ever was of the
Orator. If we had none to hear us, but Lidia or Cornelius, persons right
devout, and affected with religious attention, Act. 16.14. cap. 10.1.
we needed not be very careful; but because among such as come to us, some are
weak and must be comforted, some rude and must be informed, some drousie and
must be awaked, some hard and must be suppled, some perverse and with full
stream of power must be overwhelmed; to please the tastes of so many, and to
help on those which hang backward, all good means are to be used, that God
himself may be glorified, and our brethren may be bettered. See whether Paul
writing to the Corinthians do not thus, 1. Cor. 15.36.39.40.
when handling the resurrection, he proves and illustrateth it, by natural
similitudes of seed sown in the ground, of difference of flesh, of the
stars in heaven, and the like. Such liberty for comparisons, for Parables,
for Examples, is left to us, in time and place to be used in Gods business.
Provided evermore,

6 As this may most generally be said of Parables, that they have an use in
divine things, so to speak a little more specially, we find some of these in
the Scripture, which in particular cases go exceedingly to the quick of that
which is in question, and being personally applied, do very much confound the
guilty. Such a one was that which Iotham uttered to the Sichemites, Iudic. 9.8.
where the trees would choose a king, and the Bramble must be he; by the which
he does reproach unto them, their unthankfulness toward him and his fathers
house. Such a one was that of Nathan to David, 2. Sam. 12.1.
of him who had many sheep, yet took one from his poor neighbor, whom when
David had condemned, the Prophet so turned all upon him, that as David
sometimes killed Goliath with his own sword, so Nathan took him in his own
word. That is the wisdom of God, that he can deprehend another man; as in the
Gospel he caught the bad servant in his own talk, Luc. 19.22.
and replied: From thine own mouth I shall judge thee. That which was said in
the person of a stranger, if another will apply to his own person, he will
then amend his judgment. This was the case of Jonas, to whom the Lord used a
Parable, but rather real then verbal. He had a gourd and enjoyed it; then he
loosing it raged at it; but knew not what all this meant. The Lord then to
bring him forward, and make him see his hard heart toward that great city
Niniue, asked if he did well to be angry. Jonas balketh him not at all, but
forth with replieth, that he did well to be angry, yea if it had been to the
death. Here indeed the Lord does come on him. Thou have pity upon this
trifle, and shall not I upon Niniue: Thus with his own rod he beat him, and
with his own net he caught him. After the battle of Cannae, Liu. lib. 23.
when Mago being sent from his brother Hannibal, had in the Carthaginian Senate
much boasted of the victory; how many armies and Generals of the Romans they
had overthrown, and withal for the finishing of that conquest, desired a new
supply of soldiers and money. It is written that one Himilco a friend to
Hannibal, took occasion to insult over Hanno another noble man, who was of the
adverse faction, and who evermore had dissuaded their making war with the
Romans: That he was a proper counselor, who had sought to hinder that which
had brought them such advantage, such a victory, and such honor. But it was
the wisdom and art of Hanno being thus provoked, to retort the matter upon
him ex tempore as he did. You speak of a glorious victory; but what gain we
thereby? for if you had lost the field, what could you have asked more then now
ye do, that is fresh men and money? Have the Romans yielded unto you? or have
they sued for peace? If they have not, then their stomach is as great as it
was before: and if their force be diminished, so is yours as well as theirs: so
that peize the one with the other, you are as far from your purpose, as you
were at the beginning. It was there the praise of Hanno, that he turned their
own tale upon them. In this place God being so much wiser, as infinite and
unlimited may be beyond dust and ashes, turns both matter and words upon the
head of our Jonas, and does teach him such a lesson, that what the Prophet
thought made most for him, he showed made most against him. By his anger for
the gourd, he condemned his former anger. If he would grieve that the green
thing should be marred, because he liked it, how unjustly did he fret that
Niniue should be spared, when the Lord had a liking to it? So step by step, and
by degrees God is feign to teach him to know himself, and that wherein he
thought himself very cunning. Yet at length by a demonstration, plainly
gathered from the precedents, he euicteth what he desires. Now let us see what
that was.

7 The second thing which I note, is the form or expression to himself, the
other to his creatures. Now if the servant so loved the gourd, because he liked
it, how might the master love a city, because he had a mind unto it?

8 For the better opening of this comparison, the text observes unto us,
Jonah. 1.2.
that Niniue was a great city, which I have touched twice before, as first in
the first chapter, where that title a great city, is given unto it: and then
in the third chapter, where it is named an excellent city, Cap. 3.3.
and of three days journey. In which two places, both from the Scriptures and
other approved authors, I showed the greatness of it, for the compass and
for the walls, and made plain the reasons of it. Now here something is added
for the hugeness of the place, which agrees with all the rest; that there
were so many infants within the compass of it, A million is commonly taken for
ten hundred thousand: but sometimes for ten thousand.
as one hundred and twenty thousand: so many, as if we take a million for ten
thousand, do make no less then twelve millions, which arise to six score
thousands. And lest any man should imagine, that children of riper age were
comprehended there, the text describes these children to be all of them so
little, that they could not discern between their right hand and their left
hand: which seems to be some Proverb among the Hebrews, 1. Reg. 21.21
like that, I will cut off from Ahab every one that makes water against a
wall, that is, all that are males: and here are meant none but very young ones.
I know that some have thought the number set down here, to be a certain
number standing for an uncertain: and so they do interpret it, that there were
many thousand babes; and no more to be employed. But I will not do that injury
to the Spirit of God, as to doubt but this number must definitely be taken for
so many thousands full out: that there were at least of these little ones six
score completed thousands. The compass of the city, as in former times I have
showed, was threescore Italian miles, wherein that many thousands, yea a
hundred thousand houses might stand, may well appear from proportion of other
cities. Athens was never tak^ in the number of very great ones: yet as Xenophon
does report in that time when he lived, Xenoph. lib. 3. Memorab. Philo Iudaeus
in Flaccu^.
there were ten thousand houses in it. Philo Iudaeus shows that in his time,
there were many of the Jews inhabiting in Egypt and Africa. He names
Alexandria, which as we know was no huge city, as a place distinct against all
the other of that country, as if there were their special residence, and in
other towns, and cities, and shires, were but a scattering of them. But says
he, in Alexandria, and the other named places there were of Jews ten hundred
thousand. Then with the number of that people who were naturals of that
country, and with all other strangers and trafiquers in that place, how many
were the persons which lodged within those walls? Rome was famous, but never
great. When it was at the largest, it was never the sixth part so spacious as
Niniue was: Epitome Decad 6. l. 4. Censa sunt ciuium capita 428000.
not ten miles about in compass: and yet we find in that Epitome which Lucius
Florus left, gathered out of those books of Liuy which are lost, that the
Censors taking view of the citizens of that Rome, found of souls and of heads
full out four hundred thousand. That, for all the inhabitants, was more then
thrice the number of infants who were found in the mighty city Niniue.
According to which proportion if we will compare place to place, we shall see
that there needs no scruple to remain in this whole matter. Ordinarily there
are more of children in all places, then of any age by proportion. All who are
elder, have first bin infants: but all infants grow not elder: death cutteth
off many of them. Allow then that these children of three years old and under,
or four years if ye will, were the seventh part of the city: yet the whole
number of inhabitants, shall but little exceed the double of the Romans. If
you will suppose the children for the tenth or the twelfth part, and not so low
as the seventh, yet Niniue will still bear it. Then this must be accepted as a
justifiable truth, not only ratified by faith and the word of God, but
probable and most likely in the natural course of things. Which being so, then
it is no marvel, if the Lord who oftentimes pittieth his creatures sole and
single, did take such open commiseration upon so populous a place.

9 Now what like thing had Jonas which he might balance against this? Such a
small thing, such a light thing, such a vain thing in comparison, as is scant
worth the naming. When they should be weighed together, how justly might he
stand backward, and hide his face for shame? It is a gourd-like Kikajon, a
thing of one days antiquity, whose wood was not for building, whose fruit
was not for feeding, but the use was only a shadow, and yet so too, that a
little worm might destroy it all in a moment. When at that time Niniue had
stood and flourished a thousand years. How is the judgment of man besotted,
when we are left to our selves, to stick upon things so contemptible, and
pass by that which is of moment? Socrates the Historien does tell of some,
Socrat. Hist. Eccles. 5.21.
who accounted of whoredom but as of a thing indifferent: but if question were
concerning an holy day, they would strive for that as for their life. Our
Savior says that the Pharisees stood to tith mint and anise, Matthew. 23.23
but let go judgment and mercy. An absurdity of absurdities: but yet short
of this in our Prophet. For if ever man strained a gnat, and swallowed up a
camel, 24.
it may be said to be he. Indeed Adam went beyond him, when in the height of
his wisdom, he preferred the taste of an apple, or some such other fruit of a
tree, before the perpetuated joys which should have been in Paradise. And so
consequently they do, who embrace the fraud of this world, and contemn the
bliss of eternity. But between eternal and te^porall, there should be no
comparison. And as little almost is there between a gourd and Niniue. Yet, so
that in his melancholy, he might sit under the one, he cares not what
becomes of the other. An unsociable part, and exceedingly inhumane. What man
of kind affection would not leave pleasure and profit, to do well to a many?
Camillus, and Aristides, and Cato would have done it. But they are wretched
creatures who care not what sink or swim, rather then themselves be
disquieted the wagging of a finger. A^l. Gel Noct. Artic. lib. 10.6.
It is recorded by Gellius, as an everlasting blot against the daughter of
Appius Caecus, that when coming once out of a play, she was thronged by a
multitude, she wished that a brother of hers were alive again, who lately
before had lost many thousands of the Romans in Sicily: that he might make a
hand with more of them. The Aediles of the people set a great fine on her head
for that her cruel conceit; because rather then her self who might have
stayed at home, would be thrust at a play, she would wish the death of so many.
Jonas deserved higher punishment, in as much as when his case was no more
serious, yet he wished a greater matter. But God willing to include his
messenger in his mercy as well as the strangers of Niniue, will not deal
with him so severely, but only talking with him, does let him see his folly,
and so secretly reprooueth him. By an argument which is drawn a minori ad
maius, he does open his understanding. Thou a man do love a plant; I a God
do love a people: thou likest that which has no sense, I stand for that which
has reason: thou carest for that which is but of thy new acquaintance; I
respect mine ancient charge. Thou desire that which did grow without any of
thy labor, I preserve that which I planted and watered with great diligence:
thou regardest that which is most momentanie, I that which may stand thousands
of years: thou one indiuidual body, I millions of more worth: thou only
carest for thine ease; but I do this for mine honor, that all the earth may
know it. In all which we may consider that, /, is put with an Emphasis, still
designing the highest Majesty. And this may be said of the comparison.

10 If I should proceed at large to observe unto you every point, which may
fitly be deduced hence, I might justly offend your patience. I will therefore
but briefly touch that which may be enlarged farther. In speaking of the gourd,
it is said that did never buy. Gods selected and choice instruments our
honorable founders, have provided these things for us, wherein we had no more
finger, then Jonas had in his gourd, and the enjoying whereof we could no more
promise unto our selves, then they which least partake them. It behooves us to
remember, that these consecrated things are not disposed by God, nor dispensed
by his servants, for idleness or luxury, or pampering of our selves, but
there is another end which will exactly be required of us, the glorifying of
Christ, an attendance at the altar, a service in the Tabernacle, or at least a
doing of good in a civil and sociable life, that it be not ill spent upon us,
which might better be spared. Now as some do plentifully taste of wels which
they never dug, so there is not the poorest man, nor most discontented
creature, but herein he has a share. For does he live and move? what pains
did he take for that? It was given unto him when he thought not of it. Has he
the earth to bear him, the water to refresh him, the air to return him
breath? what does he for all these matters? We are very dull if we see not,
that all the treasure upon earth, is not like to these gifts: the worth whereof
we conceive not, because we have them, but let us want them but a little, and
we shall easily see at how high a rate they are to be esteemed. But who is he
that will earnestly enter into himself, and call his wits to remembrance, who
may not see that from his cradle unto this day, many things according to his
proportion have been bestowed upon him: which came wholly by Gods providence,
and quite without his travel. The conscience of each private man may best of
all testify this: but every one has had more or less; the most needy many
an alms, and other men other matters. He who sent the gourd to the Prophet
when he did not labor for it, sent these good gifts to them, and it was none
but himself: his name be praised for it.

Psalm. 147.4.
He who calls the stars by their names, knew their kindreds and their
houses, and the account of the children. And did he then precisely know, how
many and whose they were, and does he not so now? Was there knowledge under the
law, and is there not in the time of grace? was there favor to the Gentiles,
and is there not to the Christians? Yes, he is the Lord and changes not: his
goodness shall never decrease. Then certainly as he is not ignorant of the
reprobates, so he takes note of the faithful with a peculiar knowledge: he
understands how many be in each of all their families, what old ones, and
what impotent, what young ones and weak ones there be, and there is not one of
them, but by one means or another, he feeds him and sustaineth him. If we
could look back a little, and remember those pinching seasons which not long
since griped our land, it would teach us this point; when some poor who had
many children, were miraculously so kept alive vnfamished, as no man's wit could
devise. Psalm. 147.9.
He who feeds the young ravens, then provided for them. He never made a belly,
but he made meat for that belly: he never framed a back, but he made clothes
to cover it. Perhaps in that hard season, the poor sold and pledged that
little which they had. But the time was in Egypt, Genes. 47.13
when the rich ones were glad to do that; when first money and cattle went, and
then afterward land and liberty. But suppose that some sold their stuff to
relieve themselves and their children: yet was not their life preserved? and
may not God send a time to restore those things again? Who gave them that
stuff at first, but he who may give it them a second time? And it may be that
in the mean while, he did teach unthrifty persons not to wast as fast as they
get, but by diligence to provide somewhat against a day of need. He who fed
the hungry then, is the same God for hereafter: when we seek to him we shall
try it: he knows the houses and little ones of Oxford and of London, and of
the country villages, as well as those of Niniue.

12 Therefore let not any virtuous and religious mother, be too much careful
and troubled for the multitude of that issue wherewith the Lord has blessed
her; what shall become of each of them, if her self or their father dye, what
friend shall provide for them. Even that Father who sits in heaven, who has
most right unto them, Psalm. 10^.3. Psalm. 27.12.
(because they are sheep of his pasture) will give them what is convenient.
When David's father and mother forsook him, the Lord took him up. So he
deals with all his servants. He who could rain bread from heaven, and bring
water out of a rock, can touch the heart of some friend, or kinsman, or
neighbor, or peradventure of some stranger, to take them to his protection:
or work some other means, which it is not in man's power specially to
prescribe. And the more to strengthen the faith of such whom this concerns,
in our age he aduanceth men of low estate to great places: as Saul from seeking
the Asses, 1. Sam. 9.3. Psalm. 78.70.
and David from the Sheepe-fold, to be rulers over Israel; so the children of
poor parents, by wisdom and by learning, by Divinity and by Law, by skill
in nauigatio^, or military service, to stand before the greatest, yea to sit
sometimes with Princes. Then let heathenish solicitude and caring without end,
never trouble the hearts of Christians: they have to do with a Lord who knows
them and their retinue: he has them in a roll, and makes provision for the^:
their dimensum, that is, their portion shall not be detained from them. Yea to
make them the more assured, that the Lord does think on the meanest men, in my
text he speaks of cattle, that in Niniue they were not forgotten. They are
also his handy-worke, and therefore he neglects not them, but he accompteth
of them in their due place. He made them to beautify the great frame of the
world, that the earth should not be solitary and naked in any place: he
created them as attendants, and servants unto man, to do him many offices: his
eye is daily upon them, to multiply them and feed them, and therefore it is no
marvel, if he do forget them no where. But in Niniue by an open Proclamation
from the King and his Nobles, Jonah. 3.8.
they were forced to abstain from their food, and to cry to God as they
could, and therefore as they bore some burden in the penance, so the Lord
meant that they also should have a part of the mercy. Now if these brutish
creatures be so thought on by the Highest; if by so many respects he has tied
them to himself, then how precious is the life and lasting of man, how is that
eye which never slumbereth nor sleeps, fixed upon him? An horse, or ox, or
ass is respected by his maker, and therefore a man much more. The infants are
cared for by him, and accounted of, and considered, and therefore elder folks
more.

13 I should not leave these children yet, but show that the Almighty God, who
is gracious to all creatures, old and young, and man and beast, according to
the course of his ordinary proceedings, had great reason to spare the little
ones, and with them all the City. For the Lord neither uses elsewhere,
neither does practice it in this place, to send any extraordinary punishment,
only for original sin; and yet there was little actual transgression in
these silly infants. That which should have happened unto them, was most for
their parents sakes; and they already had repented in sackcloth and in ashes;
therefore together with the reconciling of the elder sort, they also were
undoubtedly reconciled. But he who would have spared Sodom, Genes. 18 3^.
if ten righteous persons had been in it; this propense one unto mercy, might
have been pleased, if he had liked it, to have spared all the rest for the
innocent infants sake: for so in some sort I may call them. He might have urged
Jonas thus: If the men and women have deserved to be destroyed, yet what have
the children done? But I will prosecute this no farther. Thus every way the
integrity of Gods deed stands upright: his threats were to their good: his
forbearing was a sign of his endless commiseration, which the most rigorous
man, if he would not put off the bowels of all humane affection, must not only
acknowledge to be blameless, and free from reproof; but also graciously
admire the same. And if any would be so impudent, as yet to rest unsatisfied,
although God had debased himself, to come to yield a reason, and capitulate
with his servant; yet this must stop his mouth: He likes it, and therefore who
dares dislike it? But it is not so with our Prophet: for although in former
times he wanted no faults, yet he is not still so refractarie, as stubburnly to
stand out, but his cursed heart at length comes down, and he yields as he
should. For as if he had been fully answered by this last demonstration, we
find not that he replied: but he is as mute as a fish. Which may be a good
instruction, to men the most peremptory and settled in their opinions, that
with the strength of their fancy or preiudicate conceit, they be not too
straightly laced in their thoughts to other men. For where an ill mind toward
other is entertained, by mistaking or wrong informing, or whispering tales of
slanderers, if an answer may be heard, or reason compared with reason, fury
may be quickly appeased. 2. Sam. 19.24. cap. 16.1.
When Miphiboseth was heard speak, the strength of Ziba his former slander
was presently laid on ground. But if we will be so headstrong, that nothing
can reclaim us, let us consider other folks, and not only our selves, and
grief will soon be appeased. If Jonas had had the grace to think that it
might be his case, as it was the case of the Ninevites, or that it might be the
portion of Jerusalem Gods own City, he might have been patient before. But
being now as he was, when he looked upon the Lord, and saw that it more
concerned him, for the b^azoning of his pity, over all the coasts of the
earth, and for the safe-garding of such a City, then it could concern his
fond and unadvised fancy, he had no more to say. His silence shows his
consent. Because he gave no reply, it seems that he was satisfied. He ends
well who began ill, and better late then never. Thus albeit the entrance was
rough, the close was very calm. Jonas is freed from his transgression: and the
Ninevites from their punishment: God is merciful in great plenty, and honored
in his mercy.

14 And thus by the assistance of the Lord, at length I am come to the end of
this message, delivered by the Prophet, wherein as occasion has served, I have
from time to time, in this place discharged my duty, with faithfulness, and
that measure of utterance which I had. And although it has been long in
coming, yet am I the more bound to give praises to the Lord, who has given
strength, and a mind, and every way opportunity, to finish this, be it
whatsoever, without any great interruption. Whereunto if now I should add any
thing, it should be but to stir up our selves to a duty; us I say, upon whom
a like burden lies, as did here upon Jonas. For although it be not so
immediately, as it came to him, yet we have received a Commission, to be
executed in Gods name. And we need not seek far for Niniuie, either travel
much by land, or take a ship to find it; it is every where among us. Not the
greatness of that City, but the greatness of sin which cries to heaven
for vengeance. Where may we not find matter, for the hammer of the Law, to
beat down strong iniquity? Where may we not find place, for the Tweete
balm of the Gospel, to supple the wounded conscience? Here now if we will
find starting holes, to pull our hand from the work, and to slip our selves
from the business; if we will deceive our own heart, by fayning of excuses,
and entertaining discouragements, which may slake the zeal, which is or ought
to be within us, let us ^eare lest Gods wrath attend upon us as it did upon
flying Jonas: nay let us fear somewhat worse. Surely he who lives in this
pilgrimage, shall find many great impediments, to way him down from his
duty; his own defects and inabilities which do most displease himself,
because he is most privy to them: the Critical curiosity of such as come to
hear: their preiudicate opinions that men preach not for Christ's glory, but
upon vain ostentation, and because they love to be doing: the small return
and unfruitfulness of the seed, which is scattered by them: the danger to
displease: the vnwelcomenesse of so reverend a message to the world: the
scorning of many hypocrites: the small reward for great labors, and a thousand
things best known to the particular mind of each man. But what are these,
when we look to the dignity of our calling? to the burden which we bear? to
the charge that lies upon us? to the account which we must make? to the
pleasing and the recompense of him whose the work is?

15 If these matters should have stayed Gods servants, how had the Apostles
gone to spread the word at first? Or if you would except against that their
example, because they were so furnished, with special gifts and graces, how
should they who were our fathers, and begetters in the faith, men of quality
like our selves, clothed with the same infirmities, have adventured upon the
service? If some should not have been doing, and set light of the taunts of
other, how should we ever have had monuments and books of learning, to
instruct our selves withal? Is it not far better in the eyes of God and men,
(since no man lives upon earth, but subject to the censures of other) to be
blamed unjustly, for laboring to do somewhat after our mediocritie, then
justly to be taxed, because we will do nothing? If we must needs be reproved,
how much better is it to endure that for doing of our duty, then for sitting
still and doing nothing? I dare pronounce this, as first of all from out the
Scripture, so secondly from some other matters which my self have heard and
seen, that at such time as we come to our deathbed, (when it were ten
thousand follies to flatter our souls in vanity, and sooth our selves with a
lie) it is one of the hardest and heauiest burdens, to think that we have
neglected the ministry of the Gospel: our own hearts cannot be satisfied, by
exclaming against that oversight. And on the other side, it is a joy of all
joys, inconceiueable and unspeakable, that our conscience shall give
witness, and that before the Lord, that we have not refused to bear the heat
of the day, to stand up in the gap, but have planted and watered duly: we have
passed on with cheerfulness, to the mark which is before us, and have not
lived as a byword, or a burden of the Church. This meditation alone, should
be of more worth unto us, then all snares and intanglements, to withdraw us
and pluck us back. And before that we come to this, God be praised we need
not say, that we are left without comfort, but good things are provided for us.
But that should be the least respect, for not for gain or ought else, should
virtue and religion be loved, but for virtues sake. That virtutis amore, to
love virtue for virtues sake, and religion for religion, is the right that we
should aim at. Let us shake off all incumberments, and if we have a message in
our mouths, at one Niniue or another, let us do it, let us deliver it. Let the
punishment upon Jonas detracting his masters business, be a spur to all,
who with judgment and sobriety are able, to remove away that accusation,
which I simply profess, is not most unjust upon this place; and the guilt
whereof I pray God be not one day required of many of us.

16 If we will quicken the Spirit, and stir up the grace which is in us, God
may give us the same blessing, which he gave here to his word, out of the mouth
of his Prophet; that we shall not beat the air, nor spend our spirits in
vain, but although our selves be weak, yet we shall make others strong; and
although we our selves be poor, yet we shall make others rich. We shall raze
the forts of ignorance, and ouerturne the holds of sin, we shall bring
persons and places, as stubborn and as stout as ever was mighty Niniue, to
compunction and remorse, to fasting and lamentation. For the force of that word
is great, which comes from the most high majesty of the Almighty: and
especially when it is uttered with a zeal, which is mixed with sober
discretion; and when Gods honor is principally shot at by the speaker, and his
omnipotency is thoroughly solicited with frequent and holy prayer, to give a
blessing to the labor. And what a joy is it, to be an instrument not
contemptible, in saving the souls of men; to have had a piece of a finger, in
completing that for which Christ Jesus came from heaven? Lord send us thy best
direction, that we may make conscience of our calling, that nothing do abash
us, or detain us in the exercise of our vocation, but that with an upright
foot we may cross the way of this pilgrimage, that so we may be admitted, to
reign with thy Son Christ Jesus, to whom with thee and the everlasting
Spirit, be glory and praise eternal.

Soli Deo honor.
To the Reader.
CHRISTIAN Reader, having learned this lesson, that a Minister of the Gospel
is to do good, in and to the Church of Christ, so farrefoorth as possibly he
may while he lives in this world; I do not refuse to publish to the view of
many men these small labors of mine, that either learned or unlearned may
reap some profit from them. And if in the perusing of them, thou do find
either directly or by circumstance, that mention is made of some things, which
were done or suffered now some years past; understand it for a truth, that I
first adventured on the handling of this Prophecy in the year 1594, and
brought it to an end in 99. For it is the manner of our University, that no
one man does continually keep and read our English Lectures or Sermons, as it
is in diverse other charges in this Realm; but in as much as there be among us
many, who are furnished with great gifts and graces from above, our exercises
here are supplied by sundry persons; who when they have performed any of these
solemn ones, are not immediately called again, but have a convenient space
left to employ their talent, in other Churches of the city, or country
adjoining, or in their private Colleges, or where else it pleases God to
offer them opportunity. But among other the most holy, religious, and fruitful
exercises in our assembly, there is none in my opinion more honorable to the
Almighty, nor more profitable to our brethren among us, then those Lectures,
which with solemnity are kept both winter and summer on the thursday mornings
early; where sometimes before daylight, the praises of God are by preaching
sounded out in the great congregation. For there even on the working days, not
only our youth which are sent hither for good education from most places of
this land, are trained up in the knowledge of godliness, which makes them
afterward the more devoutly able, to do service and perform a duty in Church
and commonwealth: but the elder and strongest sort, by fresh and various
remembrances are quickened to go forward in the way of righteousness, the weak
are comforted, the straying are recalled, the obstinate are convinced, and all
kinds of men which will repair thither are duly instructed. It were great
pity therefore, but that the reverend and godly Vice-chauncellers, and chief
governors of this body, should from time to time take faithful care, to
perpetuate this holy service and business, by stirring up the spirits of many
of their brethren with alacrity and cheerfulness to continue this free will
offering to the Lord, which he himself certainly will requite, and already in
his mercy has not left unrewarded in many of them who have taken pains this
way. There is no man that in the end loses, but gains by the true service of
our Almighty maker. In the turns of this voluntary Lecture, have the most
part of these Sermons upon Jonas been preached: which has been the cause that
I have been forced to be so long, in perfecting and consummating this work.
But yet, now that I am resolved to communicate it farther, I think it not
unfit therein to recount those things, which upon special occasions of the
times, had their first and most direct use before; in as much as I have warrant
thereof by examples of holy Scripture, where there be plentifully recorded to
us matters past: and in the Sermons and Homilies of the ancient Fathers of the
Primitive Church, we at this day read mention made of famines, or pestilences,
or wars, or unseasonable weather, or such other like occurrents, from which
great utility may now be reaped; as to teach the people (for their comfort in
misery, or warning in prosperity) that God deals by men in this age as in
former times; and the Minister, that he should not be blind but quick-sighted,
to make application to his auditorie, of such benefits or punishments, as are
sensibly represented to his congregation. The same or the like use we may make
of hearing that good or evil, which lately before befell our selves or our
brethren, that so by things which are past, as well as by the present, Gods
name may be glorified, and our consciences religiously edified. As for the most
part of matters handled here, be they either exhortations, or applications, or
doctrines, or refutations of any opinions, Popish, or otherwise erroneous, they
have their perpetual commodity, and somewhat may evermore be sucked out of
them. In the reuoluing whereof if any man shall take profit, I shall be right
glad, and account it a blessing of God on me, that he makes my weakness the
means and instrument to build any thing, be it but little in his spiritual
house. The Lord direct us aright in our knowledge and understanding: the Lord
guide our ways, that we may evermore walk in his fear, that passing over the
days of this pilgrimage with comfort, we may in the end dwell in joyful and
everlasting habitations. Amen.

FINIS.

