A Defense of the Old, and True profession of Christianity, against the new,
and counterfaite sect of Jesuits, or fellowship of Jesus: Written in Latin
by P. Boquine a Frenchman, borne in Borges, and Professor of Divinity, in the
University of Heidelberge: Translated into English by T. G.

Whereby may be perceived, how falslye the Jesuits usurp the name of
Jesus, and how far off they are, from the thing signified thereby, and what
their profession, and purpose is in truth: otherwise then they bear the world
in hand.



VBIQVE FLORESCIT.

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf, and Henry Kirkham, and are to be sold at the
little North door of Paul's at the sign of the Black Boy.

To the Right Honorable, his very good Lord, the L. Fraunces Russell, Earl
of Bedforde, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, and one of her
Majesty's most Honorable privy Council, T. G. wishes increase of grace,
true zeal, and knowledge, together with all spiritual gifts in Jesus Christ.
AS our Savior Christ (Right Honorable) has builded his Church, which he has
so 1. Cor. 3. 11. Ephesians. 2. 20. Math. 16. 18.
dearly bought, and purchased, upon him self the only sure rock, and
foundation thereof, then the which (as th Apostle says) no other can be laid:
So on the other side, has Satan always sought nothing more, then to
undermine, shake, and (if it were possible) to overthrow the same. For he well
perceives, that so long as this spiritual house, and glorious buylding
stands firmly, and surely grounded, and founded upon Christ the everlasting
truth, the way, and the Io. 14. 6.
life, contained in the doctrine of the Prophets, and Apostles: (which they
not only have delivered to the Church by lively voice: but as the faithful
Notaries, and Secretaries of the holy Ghost, have also registered, and committed
Romans 15. 4.
to writing in the sacred Scriptures, for the continual comfort, and
instruction thereof:) it remains unremovable, and invincible against hell
gates, and all the forms, and tempests raised against it, by him, and all his
Math. 7. 24. 25. Io. 8. 44.
instruments. Wherefore he lays all his battery, and bends all his forces
against this foundation, laboring by falsehood, and lies, whereof he is the
father, to corrupt, deprave, alter, obscure, and deface the Gospel of Christ,
and the word of life: and thereby to subvert, and ouerturne, or at the least,
to weaken, and shake the faith of the faithful, resting wholle thereupon. This
has been ever from the beginning his practice, and is at this lay, and shall be
until his kingdom be vttterly removed, and taken away. Wherefore he is fitly
named Io. 8. 44.
by Christ, a liar, and a murderer from the beginning. For as by lies he
laboreth either to extinguish, and abolish, either to discredit, and pervert
the truth of the word: So does he thereby intend, and purpose the murdering,
and destruction of mankind both body, and soul. For the which cause our
Savior Christ, as a most wise, and provident, and therwithall loving, and
careful head, and governor of his people: foreseeing the dangerous, and
malicious attempt of his, and their adversaries, gives warning thereof unto
them before hand, that they might not be found unprovided, and unfurnished,
when they should be assaulted, and so by security, and carelesnes, loose the
field, and the victory. Therefore as Deuteronomy. 13.
well Moses, and the Prophets, before the coming of Christ, inspired with his
spirit, as also at his coming in flesh, he him self, and his Apostles do
give us a watchworde, and often admonish us to avoid, and take heed of false
Prophets, false Apostles, and false teachers, Math. 7. 15.
though they work signs, and miracles, and come in sheep clothing, that is,
make never so great a show of the true Prophets of God in outward appara^ce:
yea though they (following the steps of their father Satan, who transformeth
him self, the sooner to 2. Cor. 11. 14. 15.
deceive, into an angel of light,) turn them selves into the Apostles of
Christ. Herehence is it, that the Apostle* Paul charge the Galathians Gal.
1. 8. 9.
not to believe an Angel coming from heaven, but rather to hold him
accursed, if he should teach unto them any other doctrine, then that which at
his mouth they had recevued. In which words he implies a high, and a weighty
reason, to wit, that the truth of the glorious Gospel of Christ is such, and
so great, that not only no humayne authority, and way of persuasion
whatsoever, should move us to forsake the same: but that no angelical, or
heavenly messenger whatsoever should persuade us to the contrary thereof. To
the same purpose John wills the faithful no^ to 1. Io. 4. 1.
believe every spirit, but to try the spirits whether they be of God,
because many false Prophets are entered into the world. But albeit this warning,
and ca^eat against false Prophets be in diverse places given unto us: yet then
especially does our Savior Christ, and his Apostles labor to stir up the
godly to a more continual, and earnest watchfulnes, and warynes, when they
foretell of the state of the later days, wherein we live: by how much they
foresawe those times should be more perilous, then any other, in the which
Satan, perceiving Apo. 12. 12.
his time, and kingdom to be short, should rage most violently, and use most
extreme tyranny, and put in ure most strange, and unwonted practices to drive
them from the only foundation Christ. Take heed Math. 24. 4. 5. 11. 23. 24.
25. 26. Mar. 13. 21. Luke. 17. 23.
(says our Savior, speaking of these later times) that no man deceive you,
for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many,
and there shall arise false Cristes, and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs, and wonders, so that (if it were possible) they should deceive the very
elect, behold I have told you before. Paul the Apostle likewise says, that
in the later times, 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3. 2. Tim. 3. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
which he therefore calls perilous, men should depart from the faith, and
should give heed unto spirits of error, and doctrines of devils, which should
speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned with a hot
iron: that moreover some should have a show of godliness, but should deny the
power thereof, from which he wills us to turn away: that as James, and
Iambres resisted Moses, so should these resist the truth, being men of corrupt
minds, and reprobate concerning the faith. Peter also, and Jude, declare that
there 2. Pet. 2. 1. 2. 3. and. 4. 18.
should be false teachers, which should privily bring in damnable heresies,
even denying the Lord that had bought them, and that many should follow their
destructions, by whom the way of truth should be evil spoken of, and should
turn the grace of God into wantonness, and deny God the only Lordae, and our
Lord Jesus Christ. But that is chiefly to be 2. These. 2. 3. 4. 8. 9. 10. 11.
considered, and marked, which the Apostle Paul writes of Antichrist, and his
coming. For before the later day, he shows that there should come an
Apostacy, and departing from Antichrist.
the faith, and that the man of sin should be disclosed, even the son of
perdition, which is an adversary, and exalts him self against all that is
called God, and is worshipped: so that he shall sit as God, in the temple of
God, showing him self that he is God, that even in his time the mystery of
iniquity began to be wrought, that his coming should be with the effectual
working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders: and in all
deceaueablenes of unrighteousness among them that perish, because they received
not the truth, that they might be saved: and that therefore God should send
them strong illusions, that they might believe lies, that all might be damned,
which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. In these The
lively description of the kingdom of Antichrist.
words the Apostle does most fully, and lively set forth the whole kingdom of
Antichrist, to wit, that he should bring with him a departing from the faith,
as the word does sound, that he should be openly discovered to the world to be
the man of sin, full of all abhominall and heinous attempts against the
majesty of God, that he should be the child of perdition, working his own
and others destruction: that he should not only directly set and oppose him
self, but also exalt and lift up him self against God: that he should sit
with authority in the Church of God, and advance him self as God: he
declares further, that even from the time of the Apostles, Satan has privily
sought to lay the foundation of this his Antichristian kingdom: and the
means to bring the same to pass, he also describes, to wit, that it was done
by the effectual and mighty working of Satan, with all power, and lying
signs, wonders, and miracles, and all subtlety, craft, and deceit. Finally
he shows who they are that shall be seduced, and deceived thereby, namely,
they that are castawaies, and ordained to destruction: and he adds
therewithal a reason thereof: the contempt of the truth, whereby they might
be saved: and that this shall be the just judgment of God, to give them
therefore over to the strong illusion of seducing, and erroneous spirits, to
their utter confusion, and destruction.

These things (Right Honorable) being considered, and laid together, and
compared both with the former, and the present state of the Church of Christ on
the one side, and the pernicious practices of Satan in both: we shall easily
perceive that in the later, he has far passed the former: and that in both,
he has ever striuen against Christ the foundation of his Church: and the very
effects do declare the same, if we look but a little thereunto. For immediately
at the first publishing of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 1. 23.
he brought to pass, that Christ became a stumbling block, and a rock of
offense unto the Jews, as he is also at this day: and to Jews.
the Greeks and Gentiles foolishnes, as likewise Gentiles.
in their offspring, the Cerinthians, Marcionites, Maniches. Arrians,
Nestorians, Eurichians, Heretics.
and such like heretics oppugning his divine and human nature: and at last
in the Turks we see it evidently come to pass. All which waying the doctrine
of Christ crucified, with the balances, and waightes of humayne reason, the
course of nature, Philosophy, and man's wisdom, have accounted it but mere
folly and plain vanity. Nevertheless these Antichrist and his doctrine.
being open, and professed enemies, and cast out of the body and bowels of the
Church, have not bin so hurtful and dangerous, as Council. Florent. did 22.
22. Sacrosancta.
Antichrist, privily lurking (as it were) in the very bosom, and sitting in
the midst thereof: pretending him self not only to be a true Christian, but
also to be the head of the Council. Triden. 1. decret. Sess. 4. Lind. li. 1. ca.
4.
Church of Christ, the Vicar of Christ, the successor of the Apostles, and his
Romish religion and doctrine only, to be the Christian Catholic, and
Apostolic, though it be never so expressly, and directly to the contrary: and
by his Traditions, Canons, Councels, and determinations, chalenging unto him
self Bonifac. 8. Extra. vnam sanctam.
authority upon the consciences of men, in making them equal, and of like
force with the written word of God, and exacting obedience thereunto, upon
pain of condemnation. Trid. Council. sess. 7. ca. 1. Cath. Romans
To be short, erecting a blasphemous sacrifice of the Mass expiatorie, and
satisfactorie for the quick and the dead, against the only most sufficient
and perfect sacrifice of Christ, robbing him at once of his kingly, Priestly,
and Prophetical dignity and office: and so consequently spoiling him of his
sovereign titles, and names, Jesus and Christ, and therewithal his Church of
the benefit, cause, and end of his coming in flesh. By this Romish
Antichrist, and his members, Satan has more mightily prevailed against the
Antichrist a more deadly enemy to Christ and his kingdom, then all other.
Church of Christ, and shaken the foundation thereof, more daungerously,
subtly, secretly, and continually, then ever he did before. For although he
has not in flat words with the Jews, Turks, Arrians, and such like
heretics, denied the Godhead of Christ, or his manhood: yet in effect has he
done the same, in depriving him of his office, as I have said, and the end and
scope of his coming, which is, to be the only Christ, the anointed, and holy
one of God. Therefore John describing 1. Io. 2. 18. 22. 23
Antichrist, says, he shall deny Jesus to be that Christ, and that therein he
should deny the father, and the son, because whosoever denies the son, the
same has not the father. And again, Every spirit that confesses not Jesus
Christ to have come in the flesh, is not of 1. Io. 4. 2. 3.
God, and this is the spirit of Antichrist, of whom ye have heard, how that
he should come, and now already he is in the world.

But to omit the monstrous* and manifold The means used by Antichrist to set
up his kingdom.
errors, drawn from the sinkes and puddles of all heretics, wherewith this
confuse, and huge Babell of this Antichristian kingdom have bin builded up:
the means, and instruments whereby the same have bine brought to pass, are
rather at this time shortly to be noted and marked, as serving most unto my
purpose. The Apostle Paul, as I have touched before, shows, 2. These. 2.
that Satan should to the accomplishing thereof, use all power, falsehood,
deceit, and strange illusions. And the same does the spirit of God Apo. 17. 1.
2. 3. 4
set forth in the Revelation, by the image of a whore gorgeously arrayed with
purple, and searlet, and attyred with gold, precious stones, and pearls:
having a cup of gold in her hand, full of the abominations, and filthiness
of her fornication, wherewith she makes drunken the kings and inhabitauntes of
the earth. Hereby the spirit of God paynteth out the hypocritical, and goodly
outward show, which as well Antichrist, and his ministers, as his doctrine
should make unto the world, thereby to seduce, and deceive the same. This
although it may be perceived to be most true from time to time, in the
hypocritical swarms of Popish Abbots, Monks, Friars, and such other
religious orders, as likewise in the scholmen, and Canonistes, the spiritual
enchauntments, and bewitchings of whose gloses, distinctions, definitions, and
conclusions, have as strong illusions beguiled the world, and not only the
simple sort, but the very wysest them selves, and most learned: yet especially
the same is to be seen at this day, in the new, and lately invented Sect of
the Jesuits which the Romish Antichrist has set forth as the last proppe,
and stay of his totering, and ruinous kingdom. For he perceiving, (that as
the Apostle Paul has foreshewed,) Christ has begone 2. These. 2. 8.
to consume it with the breath of his mouth, and abolishe it with the brightness
of his coming, that is, the preaching of his glorious Gospel: and seeing
moreover the world to grow to a disliking, and contempt of the ignorance,
sluggishnes, and lewdnes of their other orders taken from men, as Dominicke,
Benedict, Fraunces, and such like: has sent abroad into Christendom this
new Sect, hypocritically adorned with the name of Jesus, and furnished with
more show of learning, holiness, and godliness, the^ their other Popish
fraterternities: to the intent that Jesus Christ may Mat. 26. 49.
be the sooner betrayed, while these holy Jesuits give him a Judas salutation,
and kiss. The Jesuits give Jesus a Judas salutation and kiss.
And because he stands in good hope that these be the men, by whom he shall
recover again, that so large a circuit of ground, which he has lost, and
Christ by his Gospel has gotten in Germany, France, England, Scotland,
Denmark, Swethlande, and other countries in Christendom: he makes great
account of them, and chiefly favors, cherishes, The Jesuits the Popes
chief hope.
encourages, and aduaunceth them: bestowing upon them to the mayntenaunce, and
increase of their nurceries and Seminary houses, great Abbasies, lands,
livings, and sumptuous buyldings, in Italy, France, and some parts of
Germany. Furthermore, he uses this special policy, to cause them by all
means Our Universities of Oxforde and Cambrige have had to much experience
thereof.
privily to allure, and entice the youth of the Universities, and countries,
where the Gospel is preached, to depart from the places where they are, unto
these their Seminary houses, to the end, that being there for a time nouseled,
and trained up, until they be hardened in hypocrisy, obstinacy, and malice
against the truth, and poisoned with the pestilent errors of the Romish
Antichrist: they may be sent out as new false Apostles into their own
countries, or else thither, where it is thought they may do most harm. Whenn
they follow their forefaithers the Scribes, and Pharisees, the like hypocrites,
who (as Christ says) compassed Mat. 23. 15.
the sea and land, to make one proselite, or of their profession: and when he
is made, make him two fold more the child of hell, then they them selves: And
therefore that heavy woe which Christ pronounced against the Pharisees, must
needs, if they repent not, light upon these Jesuits, whose wicked example, as
in diverse other things, so in this they do embrace.

The consideration of these spiritual practices of Satan in this new supplye
of false Prophets of Antichrist, wherewith he oppugneth our faith, besides the
outward forces, and worldly policies and enterprises, which he joins
therewithal: as also the pestilent seeds of Arrianisme, Anabaptisme,
Libertinisme, the Family of Love, Epicurisme, and Atheism, which he has
every where sown, (I fear me, Math. 13. 24.
while the Shepherds of Israel were a sleep:) ought to awaken all the
professors of the Gospel, and to make us to look about us, and to stand
continually (as it were) upon watch and ward, especially those whom the Lord
has appointed to be watchmen, and overseers of his people. Now the way to
withstand these The way to avoid Satan's and his ministers temptations and
assaltes.
strong temptations of Satan, and his ministers, is to stick fast unto Christ
the foundation of our faith, delivered unto us by the Gospel of truth: and
(as he gives us warning) as good Eagles to flee to the carkase, and thereupon
to Mat. 24. 13. 28.
rest and persevere unto the end: stopping our ears at the voice of all false
prophets, and lying spirits, which go about to withdraw us Io. 10.
from the same, and acknowledging only, as the good sheep of Christ, his
voice being our true and only head shepherd, speaking unto us in his holy
word. And to the intent our countrymen, which as yet are not so well
acquaynted with the name, profession, doctrine, and purposes of these Jesuits,
(and therefore are the sooner to be deceived thereby) may be the better armed,
and provided against them: I have thought good to translate this little
Treatise into our mother tongue, written in Latin by a learned, and godly man,
being public professor of Divinity in the University of Heidelberge, who as
well for that he remained in that place, near unto the which they have builded
some of their ^eastes: as also for that he had diligently read some of their
books, had good cause to know them. The method, and order which he uses,
and the matter therein contained, I trust is such as can not mislike the godly:
and I had rather the same should be gathered by the reading thereof, then by my
report. Only this I will say, that I think it to be very necessary, and
profitable for this present time, and occasion: wherein we are newly and
freshly assaulted by these Antichristian Champions, albeit with the old and
rousty weapons, somewhat scowred and burnished: but of the same edge and force
that the other were of. They may be perhaps terrible to those, which only
look upon the brightness thereof, but not to them which have more regard to the
sharpnes, and strength of the same, as in the late combat with them by trial
it was found. As for the causes which have moved me to dedicate this small
labor unto your Honor, they are two. The one, because the Author making his
choice, has offered the same unto a most godly Earl: and therefore has moved
me to tender the same, to a personage of no less honor and godlynes: that it
may come into the hands of men, with the better acceptance, and liking.
Secondly, for the private duty, and thankfulness, which I owe unto your Honor,
in respect of that courtesy, and good will your Honor has extended as unto
all other, of my calling, so also unto me. And because I was not able to do
that which other have done of their own ability in this matter, I have
(rather then I would do nothing) borrowed of an other to supplye my want.
Howsoever it be, my good will has not wanted. This only is my desire, at the
Lords hands, that, as I hope, your Honor will not refuse this so simple a
duty of my part: so the fruit and benefit thereof may come unto many. The
Lord increase his singular gifts, and blessings in your Honor, to his glory.
From London the third of November. 1581.

Your Honors in the Lord most humble to command T. G.

To the Honorable, and noble Earl Lewys a Seyn, Earl in Witgenstein, and
Lord in Homburge, chief Governor of the Palsgraue his Court, Peter Boquine
sends greeting in the Lord.
I Am persuaded with some of my friends often exhortations (noble Earl) to
suffer to be published, such things as I have thought upon, touching the
new order of Monks, which Italy an other Affricke in this kind, has lately
brought into Christendom. For since I hard both of the title wherewith this
new army of Satan bewtifieth it self, as also the suttletie with which it
insinuates it self to the world: many thoughts entered into my mind, as
well of the continual hatred of this enemy against Christ: as of his craft,
and power in assaulting the Church. For The consideration of Satan's continual
hatred, and craft against the
as he shows a singular wylines in his devises: So in the execution, and
performance thereof, he declares a marvelous power, wherewith he is endued:
the Church profitable to the godly.
earnest meditation, and consideration whereof, I think to be a great help,
and furtherance unto godliness. Wherefore I suffered my self the rather to be
persuaded, to communicate to the gentle readers (for others I make no account
of,) such things as came into my mind. And whereas I see the custom of
dedicating, and inscribing unto some man new works, to have been received of
all men: and the same to be both ancient, and not ungodly, it may be perceived
by the only example of our Evangelist Luke: who Luke 1. 4. Act. 1. 3.
doubted not to dedicate his history of the Gospel, and the Acts of the
Apostles, to a man which in deed loved God, and godliness: I thought good to
follow him. Now while I considered, unto whom I should offer this my labor,
who might be not so much a Patron, as an indifferent judge thereof: you
especially (noble Earl) for your singular godliness, learning, and courtesy,
joined with great wisdom came unto my mind. For I know your judgment to be
such, and so sound: that those which profess them selves to love, and favor
the truth, and godliness: may safely, and worthily rest in him. Therefore I
trust, you will accept the same, according to your courtesy, with the like
mind, I present it unto you: that is to say sincere, and well meaning. And so
you shall have me now already sundry ways indebted unto you for your singular
gentleness, hereafter most beholding unto you.

At Heidelberge the Calendes of January. Anno. 1576. Your Honors most
duetifull, P. Boquine.

TO THE GENTLE REAder, P. B. wishes health in the Lord.
THey that earnestly consider the state, and condition of the Church of
Christ while it is a stranger in this world, and do diligently mark the
course, and proceeding thereof: do easily perceive, how truly, and aptly it
is commonly compared to a ship The Church of Christ like a ship in the sea.
tossed with diverse winds in the midst of the troublesome sea, and shaken with
many tempests following one the other: and how rightly also it is called of
some the militant, or warfaring Church. For it is, as it were an army which is
always in the field, and is always besieged of the enemy: and is often The
Church of Christ ever assaulted by satan.
times assaulted, and continually set upon with new policies, and attemptes.
For it never enjoys sure peace, no not so much as safe truce: but if there
seem to be any, the same is full of treachery. For that perpetual enemy of
Christ, is never quiet, is never weary, does always envy his dignity, glory,
and power: and he never cease to lie in wait for the life, and salvation of
the godly, and is never satisfied with their blood. And although he may seem
sometime to abate, and slake a little of the fiercenes of his endeavor, yet he
still remains one, nothing ceasing his hatred, and desire to work mischief.
Therefore he raises up ever new soldiers against the host of Christ, and
sends the^ forth furnished with new weapons, Satan raises enemies out of the
Church, against the Church.
and deceits. And that which is more to be marvelled at, this enemy and
wonderful practiser, even from the beginning has craftily sought out of the
very bosom, and as it were the very bowels of the Church, those by whom he
might under the pretense of truth, and godliness, trouble, shake, and labor to
overthrow the kingdom of Christ, to wit, his church. Which thing they that are
readers of antiquity, and skillful in the Church histories, do well know.
Yea, and our age is full of plain, testimonies, and examples thereof: insomuch
that there is nothing to be wished, but that we diligently consider of these
things. Neither Christ for good cause exhorts us to watchfulnes, especially
the shephcards of the flock.
ought any man to marvel that our best guide Christ, does so often and so
earnestlye exhort his unto continual watchfulnes: especially those, whose
duty it is to watch, and to have charge over the salvation of the people.
Unto the which care even their Captains continual presence, and defense ought
to edge them, and to stir them up. For as he is never absent, so he never
either sleeps, or cease, being much more readier, and abler to give
salvation promised unto those that believe in him: then the enemy is to bereave
them of the same. Wherefore if any thing be wanting in this behalf to them
that fight under his banner, the fault is altogether in them selves: neither
have they to blame any thing, but their own either perfidiousnes, either
slouthfulnes. Verily it were a shameful thing, and worthy grievous punishment
in this case, to be overcome, or yield to the enemy. For what can be more
blame worthy, then that there should be more endeavor, diligence, and pains
taken in mainteining of falsehood, then in defending the truth, in establishing
ungodliness, the^ in upholding of godliness: in procuring an others destruction,
then in preserving our own salvation? Many examples we have old, and new of
the diligence, and faithfulness, that as well all Christians, as chiefly they
that sustain the persons of teachers, ought in this behalf to render unto
Christ. That some are ignorant of the old, I easily do believe: but that any
almost should not know the new, I can not be persuaded. The attempts of the
ministers of satan, and Antichrist to put out the light of the Gospel lately
by ^^e goodness of God restored.
For as yet they are well near before every man's eyes. For who knows not at
what time within this few years the light of the gospel, by the exceeding
goodness o^ God, was restored unto the world: so soon as it began to appear,
and to cast forth some small beams, that therewithal came forth certain
Ministers of Satan, and Antichrist: who as Owls, and Battes accustomed to
darkness, labored by all means, and force they could, to let it, that it
should not spread forth his beams, and to put clean out the shining
sparkles thereof? But on the other side many The great zeal and godly travels
of the true Ministers of Christ in the defense thereof against them.
notable men, for godliness, and learning, kindled with the zeal of the glory
of Christ, forced with the love of the truth, and moved with the desire of
their own, and other men's salvation: withstoode stoutly, and constantly their
wicked attemptes: and so brake with strength, and courage their weapons bent
against them: that mawgre the enemies, though never so many, mighty, and eger:
that heavenly light issued out, and spread forth his beams both far and
wide, as it is at this day to be seen. Wherefore the faithful servants of
Christ, following the zeal, and industry of the old Jews, which the
history of Nehemiah does set Neb. 4. verse. 17.
out to all posterity to be followed: did so represle with the one hand the
violence of them that set them selves against them, that with the other they
ceased not to build the Temple: to wit, to gather a church unto Christ. And God
our best father did so assist, favor, and blesle their continual labors, and
invincible constancy: that the enemy might seem to have thought that his
kingdom had been overthrown. Wherefore as it comes The Jesuits a new
supply of satan to recover his decayed kingdom.
to pass in sudden chances, and extreme dangers: he has suddenly provided
a new supply of aid, which he has secretly brought into the chiefest
tower of his kingdom. For it was so shaken, and battered, that he perceived it
near overthrown. But while we which have succeeded into the places and seats
of those holy men, do pitifully strive together, Certain spurns, and byters
amongst us raising up new brawls, and troubles,) by the policy, watchfulnes,
and industry of this new aid: the enemy has so restored The course of the
Gospel hindered by dissentions raised by some professors thereof.
within these few years that same his tower: that it may appear, that the
whole crew of Antichrist stand in great hope, shortly to recover their former
authority, dignity, and power. And I persuade my self, that not only the
authors, favorers, and Patrons of this so great evil: but all that give
occasion thereunto, by what color, or pretense so ever they do it, shall at
length be punished of God the most just judge, and most vehement defendour,
and mainteiner of the kingdom of his Son. And forasmuch The hinderers of the
Gospel shall not escape the judgment of God.
as I am also persuaded, that he will take an account, of all those unto whom
he has committed his talentes be they never so small: I thought my self not
to be free from either fault, or punishment: if I should through fear, or
idleness refuse to bestow that, which I know, is committed unto me, though it
be never so simple: The cause mo^ing the Author to write.
to put away the shame joined with manifest destruction of the Church: which I
perceive to be laid upon Christ, by this vpstart host of Satan. For seeing
these galants stand before our doors, and build vper fortresses, aduauncing
their Capitaines engines into our Schools and Churches near about us: if we
should any longer forbear, might we not worthily be thought willingly, and
wittingly to betray the cause of Christ, and his church: and to withholde in
unrighteousness the truth of God, which we hear, and see to be by these men
turned into falsehood? But as concerning the first offspring, to wit, the true
father of this deuillishe brood, which have ^ayned unto them selves, and
usurped no less arrogantly, then strangely a name from Jesus: and in what
place, and time, it first sprang up, although it be lately begotten: yet I
perceive diverse reports to be made: nevertheless I thought not good to travel
in the searching out, and examining thereof. It is well known, to be an
invention of man. And if I must at once speak my mind hereof, I will do it
in few words. If the judgment of that great Basile be true, that parents are
known by the likeness appearing in their children: and if by duty, and
obedience unto their parents, true, and natural children are wont to be
known from bastardes: this new impe can have no other true parents, then the
Romish Antichrist, and whore of Babylon. For that is most plainly proved both
by the resemblaunce which is between them, and the good will, that the one
bears the other. My The Authors purpose in this book.
purpose is at this time, to withdraw the visor from this monster
counterfaited both by the name, which it proudly chalengeth unto itself: as by
the thing, which that goodly title bears the world in hand. I will only
touch the doctrine which these new masters maintain, so far forth as my
purpose suffers me* or else craves of me* I undertake not at this time,
purposely to refuse it: knowing that it is all one with the Popish doctrine,
which now already is sufficiently confuted. Some also of our men has even
namely examined the same neither slenderly, nor vnluckely. I promise such
modesty as the matter can bear. To reprove errors, and to rebuke vices, the
love of truth, and virtue enforces: as for the desire to cavil, much more to
slander, who so loves godliness, does hate, detest, and abhor it, I will
deal faithfully. I likewise crave of the readers, that they bring with them to
the reading hereof, aloue and zeal of the truth, joined with godliness, and
desire of their own salvation.

P. B.

A DEFENSE OF THE old and true Christianity, against the new, and counterfaite
sect of the ^esuites, or fellowship of Jesus.
CAP. I. That they do greatly offend, that take upon them names, in matters
of religion, which are not agreeable unto them.
THe Holy Scripturs do plainelye teach* and experience it self cuide^tly
prove, that men sin as well in word, and talk, as in deed, and fact.
Wherefore they that are of a sound judgment, will easily confess, that as
many as have any care, and love of religion, ought to The Godly ought to have
as great regard of words as things.
have as great regard of words, as things. The same also persuades the
affinity, and conjunction, which is between words and the things which
they signify (for it is certain that the use of words stands in the
signification thereof) being so great, Arist. in lib. (...)
that in speech, in the stead of things, as he says, we use the names thereof,
and for that cause, those words in the judgment of the wise, are counted
best, and fittest which express things, so as they may be most plainelye
understood, and do represente them to the hearers mind, eue^ as a glass does
lay before the eyes of the beholder the shape of the countenance, which is
before it. Hereof it may easily be perceived that it is the part of a well
meaning, and godly mind, to avoid earnestlye, not only filthy, and
corrupt speech: but also doubtful, dark, Ephesians. 4. verse. 24
fond and such as breeds offense, yea and further that brings not grace
unto the hearers, and ed^fieth not, as the Apostle says. For whereas no part
of our life ought to be void of religion, but our mind, our hand, and tongue,
should be agreeable thereunto: who so has a religious mind, will make choice
as well of words, as of Colos. ^. verse 6.
things: and he will endeavor in good words seasoned with salt (that I may
again speak with the Apostle) and plain, to utter that which he does well,
and rightly conceive, and to be short, because his mind so affected,
thinks it a shameful thing, as to err and to be deceived, so to deceive
The Godly ought to use the words of the scripture to express things
belonginge to religion.
any man: he will chiefly take heed, that whatsoever belongs to religion, be
setfoorth of him with godly and religious words, whereunto I hold it a most
ready, and sure way, to use the tongue of the holy Ghost, for so it likes
some to speak) that is: to use the words, which the Prophets, and Apostles
the instruments of the holy Ghost have used. For who can doubt, but that this
heavenly master, that has revealed these heavenly mysteries unto them, has
therewithal delivered words, meet to open such great mysteries, and such as
are most fit for the capacity of men, the hearers thereof? Saint Augustine
therefore most wisely, in my judgment, has August. lib. 10. de ci^^ dei. cap.
2^
thus written of this matter in his 10* took of the city of God, the 23.
chap. The Philosophers (says he) use, The Philosophers ou^^*
words at will, and in things not much liberty in speech, and words
reproved by Augustine.
hard to be understood, they fear not to offend the ears of the godly. But
we must speak orderlye, least the liberty of our words, breed in us an ill
opinion concerning things which are thereby signified. By the judgment of
this learned, and holy man, we understand, that it becomes not the godly to
speak as they lust, and carnally to conceive of matters of religion: but that
religiously, and reverently they use a certain manner of words. Before Saint
Augustine his time, we read that Jeremy a good Irenaeus.
writer did woorthely reprove in the The same also reproved in the Valentinian
heretics.
Valentinian heretics the liberty of such kind of words. For the holy
Ghost would have us so framed, that we should neither think, neither say any
thing but by his direction. The history of the holy Scriptures sets forth
unto us many examples, of a mind so framed, and ordered unto godliness: that it
will take in hand all things religiously, but that comes nearest to my
purpose, which Moses writes in many places, of the holy endeueur the godly
had, in geuinge names unto men even from the beginning There it is to be seen,
by the reasons which are joined almost to every name, that they attempted
nethinge, no not in that matter, which may seem to be of no great waighte,
upon fleshly affection: but that they did al things, having the fear of God to
guide them, and his holy Spirit to teach them: which thing I would have
well marked, least any man Genesis 17. verse. 5. 32. verse. 28. John. 1. 42.
should lightlye esteem thereof, and think it nothing material unto
godliness. Yea, and the self same writer, as do also other, witnesses, that
God himself, has either given, or changed the names of some, whom he had
made choice of, for great matters. And the same to have been done also of
Christ, the historye of the Gospel does diligently and that not without
cause rehearse. Uerely he that is touched with the fear of God, will never
suffer himself to be persuaded, that those things, are either nothing worth,
or triflinge which are so earnestlye repeated by the holy writers. Neither
let any man say, that this was only done in some few men. For we read the
same to have been The names of offices and functions in the church given by
God, and why.
used, in all orders, and degrees of men, which God by his wise counsel has
chosen, and appointed: both to teach, and to rule others, and to establishe
comely and orderly gouernemente in his church: then which nothing can be
imagined either more profitable, or more honest: and herehence is it that he
would have some both to be, and to be called Apostels (to speaks nothing of
the manner of the old people,) Ephesians. 4. ver. 1^.
some Evangelists, some Prophets, Bishops, Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and
Deacons: Which titles, it is well known, to be neither idly, neither rashly
either devised, or given. For they that see not the reason of their offices,
and functions to be conceived therein, are worthy to see nothing. For they to
whom those offices are committed, are plainly admonished, what their duetye
is, or what they owe unto other: and what other should look for at their
hands, and what account they ought to make of them. That all these things are
comprehended in one word, it is clear: so that whosoever knows what these
words means, does also easelye understand the same. Neither shall it be
amiss in my judgment, to know in these titles some steps of Gods wisdom,
such as appear in the visible signs of the Sacraments: which to have been
most wisely chosen out, and ordained: all that are of sound judgment do
confess. For they know which are rightly instructed in these mysteries, that God
by these signs, as it were visible words (as Augustine.
Saint Augustine is wont to call the^) does speak unto those that have their
eyes to see, and by these means does teach them that are willinge to be
taught. Like as then these sacramental signs has every one their
significations apt, and agreeable to the institution of God: so by these
titles, they that are chosen, and placed in those functions, are put in mind of
their duties. Wherefore even as in the sacraments, they that understand not
what the signs mean, do receive them to their destruction, as prophaners
thereof: so they that usurp the titles of these orders and adorn themselves
therewithal, and yet perform not the things signified thereby: doubtless they
shall be justly punished in their due time of God the revenger of so great
wickedness, as unjust usurpers of holy things. And let these jolly fellows
tell me (I pray you) which no less fondlye, or rather unpudently, then boldly,
do feign and take to themselves names at their pleasure: if any man in a well
ordered common wealth, should take upon him, any name belonginge to the chief
Magistrate, as of a king, or such like, or should use the title appertayning
to any other dignity: should not he (unless he were holden of all men for a
fool,) be said to have usurped the magistracy, and be proclaimed guilty of
high treason? Now if in civil dealinge, man does thus offend, and therefore
cannot escape unpunished, may the same be done lawfully in the church of
Christ? Surely religion is defaced as much also in the very names and words.
And to add this by the way, those that have been esteemed wysest among the
profane Plato in Crat^. and alibi.
Philosophers, have written, that it is not for every man to give names unto
things: and that he has been holden for most wise, that first invented names,
and applied them unto things: whose opinion is manifestly warranted in that
Moses in Genesis 2. Genesis 2. verse (...).
cap. the 19. verse shows that Adam being made unto the image of God,
appointed names by the commandment of God for every living thing. Yea and
there are some that write, that it skilleth much and is very behoufefull for
the common wealth, what name every one man be called by: who so list to way
these things which I would briefly point at, not stand upon: will resolve, I
trust, that it is not the part of a godly, or wise man, to feign at his lust,
and openly to use either the name, or the surname, which agrees not unto any
thing.

CAP. II. That the name of Jesus, and title of Christ, were given by the
commandment of the Father, unto the Son of God manifefled in flesh.
AS Christ did not take upon him as witnesses the Author of the Epistle unto
the Hebrews Ca. 5. the Hebr 5. verse. 5
office of a Bishop: so it is manifest by the history of the Gospel, that he
took not upon himself, neithere the name of Jesus, neither the title of Jesus.
Christ: but that he was honored therewith, by the decree and express
commandment of his everlasting Father. As for the name of Jesus, both Matthew,
and Luke are evident witnesses, Matthew. 1. verse. 21 Luc. 1. verse. 31.
that it was given him by the Angeles appointment: and least it might seem
unto any man, either a thing coming by chance: either not of purpose in
flat words, a most just cause was therewithal joined by the heavenly
messenger. He shall save (says he) his people from their sins that is to
say: the thing it self shall answer this name, least any man should think
it to be a vain imagination. I will not at this time dispute either of the
original or etimologie of the name. Is there in ye reason which Ioshu^. 1.
the Angel utters, any thing either doubtful, either dark? And why may it
not be well said, that the successor of Moses, captain of the people of
Israel, to wit, that brought them into Palestine, bare as well in name, as in
office the pattern of this true Savior? And what lets it, but that we may
both think, and speak the same of that high Priest the son of Iosedeck?
for Eusebius writes, that this name was well Iehosuah. Zach. 3. verse. 1.
known unto the ancient Fathers. What need many words? The everlasting
decree of the Father revealed by the heavenly messenger to his mother Mary, and
to Joseph reputed, by Luc. 1. verse. 3^. 2. verse. 21.
the counsel of God, his Father: by whom Luke witnesses, and that by name,
that the same was fulfilled, as likewise, that of John the forerunner of
Christ, may satisfy the godly. Now that the thing meant by that name, is so
peculiar unto the son of God, that not so much as the least part thereof,
can without grievous sacrilege, be turned over unto any other: hereaster I
hope it shall most clearly be declard. As for the title Christ, the writings
Christ.
of the Prophets, and Apostles does with one consent witness, that it has
been given unto him by the same authority, For whatsoever has been, by the
one foreshewed, and promised of the Messiah: the other shows every where,
after his coming to have been performed. But to what purpose should I
rehearse these things being so well known. I will only speak a few words,
which seems to me, to serve to the fuller openinge of my purpose. First that
the name I
of Jesus, is the proper name of the Jesus the proper name of the son of God,
Christ the name of his office.
Son of God, manifested in the flesh: as the name John is the proper name of
the forerunner. For in Luke it is certain, that both these names were given
unto them both, by the commandment of God, and warninge of the Angel. But
the word Christ, is a title of dignity, noting his office, given as the
words Prophet, Forerunner, Baptist, signifies the office laid by God upon
John: which thing as not unworthy the marking, is of learned and godly Fathers
often Tertull. od^ersus Praxeaus.
tunes noted. Tertullian, to pass over other, writes against Praxaes, that
the word Christ, is rather a term of office, then a name, and does signify a
thing which is accidental unto the name. Secondly we must understand also that
this title, before the coming of the son of God in flesh, was without
controversy given unto diverse other: in as much as they bare the figure of
him, in some part of his office. By the same reason Moses, The title Christ
given unto the old kings and Prophets as figures of Christ.
Aaron, David the prophets were in old time called Christ's, but he for an
especial cause was with this title honored of his Father, as the head, Psalm.
105. ver. 15
fountain, and scope of all other. As touching the name of Jesus, some learned
men doubt, and hold not only the thing signified by the name to be proper
altogether to this only Son of God by nature, but also the very name it
self. And albeit this controversy may seem to be of no great weight: yet it
serves to increase their wickedness, which even sine the opening of this
mystery, and the most clear revealing of the Fathers counsel: are not
afraid to take this name unto them selves as chieke mates with the Son of
God. Thirdly it 3
is more to be noted, that the unbelieving Jews did move no question against
Christ touching the name of Jesus, yea rather they yield it willingly unto him
as apeareth by the storye of the Gospel namely after John. But as for the
title of Christ, so far of was it, that they yielded it unto him: that they
excommunicated from their Sinagoges, all that gave the same unto him: whereof
there is a plain decree of theirs in the 9. Cap. after John. Herehence also
was it, John. 6. ver. 42.
that they complained unto Pilate of John. 9. Cap. ver. 22.
the title fastened to the cross of Christ and that they besoughte him that he
would not entitle him King of the Jews: wherein, as also when they denied
that they had any King besides Caesar, they plainlye signified, that they
withdrue that title from Christ, as John flatly shows in the John. 19. ver. 22
19. Cap. And Luke acts 78. does in this respect praise Appollo the Jew well
trained in the writtinges of the Prophets: that he confounded the Jews,
declaringe by the scriptures Act. 18. ver. 28.
that Jesus is Christ. Therefore Peter and Martha in the confessions which they
made by the direction of the holy Ghost did flatlye profess him to be Christ
the son of God: from the Mat. 16. ver. 16.
which no not satan him self disagreed, if we confider the words which are in
Luke cap. 4. verse 42. Therefore John. 11. ver. 27. Lu. 4. cap. ver. 41. John. 1.
cap. 2. ver. 22.
John 1. Epistle cap. 2. ver. 22. pronou^ceth him to be Antechrist which
denies Jesus to be Christ. All which things while I attentively do considee
and do lay together: those that at this day challeng to themselves the title
of Jesuits and delighte them The Jesuits do seem to come nearer to Iudaisme
and Antichristianisme, then very Satan him self.
selves with that name, seem to have more affinitywith Iudaisme, and
Antichristianisme, then Satan himself.

CAP. III. That the Beleuers in Christ by the direction of the holy Ghost were
named Christians even from the beginning of the gathering together of the
Church.
IT is apparent by their writings, that the Apostles did set forth with
diverse titles those that believed in Christ, by preaching of the Gospel: and
joined themselves unto his flock, that is to say, his Church. For it is
thereby clear, that they called them sometimes brethren, as the children of The
beleuers in Christ, called at the beginning by diverse names
one heavenly father: so intime Saints, as much to say, as severed, purged,
and consecrated unto God by the holy Ghost, where with even openly some were
then endued* also that they were called in the beginning Disciples, as tramed
up in the ^^h^^^ of Christ and taught by the holy Ghost: it may be perce^^^^
by ^^^er^ plates of has story of the acts of the Apostles. And Act. 6. ver. 1.
and 2. 9. ver. ver. 1.
thereby likewise it is well known that at last they were first called
Christians at Antioche: no doubt because they freely professed after the
example of Peter, and Martha, that Jesus was Cap. 11. ver. 26 Cap. 17. ver. 18
Act. 24. 5
Christ the son of God. Albeit, it may same that the same came to pass after
the Philosophers guise, whom it is clear, yea by the history of the acts of
the Apostles to have been divided into sundry Sects, which took, and kept
their names, of their Authors and the pickthanke Tertullus does odiouslye
name the profession of the Gospel, the heresy of the Nazareans: yet are we
not to doubt, but that name came from the holy Ghost, the teacher and guide of
the Church. For from the tune that it coming forth out of the borders of
Iewry, and being spredds, far and wide amongst diverse nations, began to
increase: it is evidently known that the company that professed the name of
Christ The faithful called Christians by the instincte of the holy Ghost.
were commonly called by this name, as well by an other place of the same story,
in the which is showed that King Agrippa somewhat moved with the vehemency of
Paul's speech: answered him, thou do almost persuade me to be a Christian: as
also by the words of Peter 1. Epist. Cap. 4 wherewith he exhorts the godly to
suffer afflictions patiently. Let not any of you (says he) b^ pumshed (...)
murderer, or a thief, or an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's
matters, but if any man suffer as a Christian, The name of a Christian hated
and persecuted of the wicked at the first.
let him not be ashamed, but rather let him glorify God in this behalf. This
place of Peter does very plainlye declare that* this title was now commonly
both known, and usually received to signify the which embraced and openl^^
professed the doctrine of the Gospel and therewith all that it was hated as
wicked or rather condemned: and that it did draw with it all kind of
afflictions, as the East, Northeast wind does clouds according to the
Pr^^erbe. For the Apostle compares (...)th most grievous, and det^stable
sins, as are ^^uther, theaft, wickednes^ yea and afterward that it became
most hateful it may be perceived; by the most ancient, Athenagoras. Iustine.
Tertullian. Eusebius.
and best writers Athenago^r as; Iustine the Martire, Tertullian Eusevius, and
such (...)* For so at that 10
time did profane men deteste that name, and shutting their eyes (as says
Tertullian) did so wilfully rushe and ramble to the hatred of it, that the only
profession thereof was accounted worthy death: and the denial thereof a matter
for the which a man was acquitted and discharged* as if the name contained in it
a fault, and that therewith either it was taken on, or put of* Such was the
blind outrage of the wicked, whom satan the God of this world had bereaved of
the eyes of their understanding: which suffered them not to see the most clear
light, Athenagoras. Iustine.
and to consider what Athenagor as did allege as a most just defense: to wit,
that names were not worthy of hatred, but that wickedness did deserve
punishmente, and that which Iustine writes: neither praise, neither punishment
to be gotten by a name. And I would to God this our age did bring forth, or
behold no examples of such horrible blindness and madness. Thus then at those
times wherein ye doctrine of the gospel did most flourish, godless men did
think of ye naine of a stian. But the godly thought far otherwise The name of
a Christian most comfortable and glorious to the godly.
thereof. Unto whom nothing was either more acceptable, either more pleasant,
either more honorable then this name: for they acknowledged it to be invented,
and given unto them by God him self: partly to discern, as in deed, so i^
name, the new people, that is, the church gathered of the Gentiles: from the
old, that is, the Jewish Sinagog^es. Partly also to store up, and nourish faith
in Christ, by renewing eftesoones by that title, the remembrance of the
benefits received by him. For every one ought to think with him self, that he
is therefore called a christian, because he is ingraffed into Christ, as a bough
into the body of the tree, or as a member unto the body, and so to be made
partaker of the sap, and life thereof: or to be endued with the spirit of
Christ, and withal to be admitted into the fellowship The cause why the godly
are named Christians.
of his benefits. For there is no other word which does effectually express
that most strait conjunction which is set forth by the goodly allegory of
marriage: and by the which we are said to be, and to believe that Ephe. 5. 29.
30. 32
we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones. Does there not as soon as
we hear this sweet name, that which Peter and John have recorded 1. Pet. 2. 5
Apoc. 1. 6 Psalm. 133. 2
come to our mind, that we are made kings and Priests, or that we are made
a kingly priesthode to offer up spiritual sacrifices? What shall I say? this
word is as it were, a certain mystery to all that are but meanlye informed in
the Apostles doctrine, unto whose ears it sounds that, which, that holy
anointing whereof mention is made out of the old Testament Psalm. 133. did in
times past set before the eyes of the godly. For God, who is both good and
true, does never deceive them that put their trust in him, he would have his
most dear Son honored with the title of Christ, and the same not emptye or
vain: but such as the thing it self should agree with all, for he anointed
him with the oil of gladness, as witnesses the prophet David, above his
fellows. Therefore he anointed them with the same oil, to wit, the holy
Ghost: although beneath him, being the chief, and the first be gotten.
Wherefore as many as clea^e unto him with a true faith, do perceive that it is
no bare and vain name: but persuade them selves, that they are admitted as
well into the fellowship, yea, and the possession of the thing* that is, the
gifts of the holy Ghost, as of the name. Uerely The title of a christian no
vain, but a most effectual title. Psalm. 105. ver. 15 Hierome. Esaias. cap. 65
ver. 15.
it is a title both honorable and profitable, as they know and perceue which
are not ignorant of the divine mysteries. I pray you how not only honorable,
but also profitable and comfortable, is that speech of God, touch not my
anointed? Does not God evidently declare that they are dear unto him, and that
he is careful for them, whom he does vouchsafe of, and honor with this name?
Truly Hierom thinks it to be that name, whereby God promises by Esaias, Cap.
65. that he will call his servants, that is, the faithful, that in the stead
of those divine titles, Jacob, Judah, Israel, Ephraim, Joseph, they should be
called of Christ, the christi^ people. How much so ever then this title has
bin, either contemned, or hated of profane men, yet has it worthily on the
other side, been had in great honor of the The godly prefer the title of a
Christian, before al worldly title^. Hier* ad Furiam.
godly, and preferred before all other wordlye titles, be they never so
glittering and glorious.

Hierome writing to Furia, and making mention of her father, doubts not to
add, that he did more honor him in that respect, that be was a christian,
then that he had been a Consul, Christians ought in deed to be such as they
are in title.
or Senator of Rome. Nevertheless, we must remember that this is then true,
when we are in deed the same that we are called. And as they are very fond
(to say no more) which entitle them selves most Christian, and will so be
called: notwithstanding they have in them no godliness aunswearable to the
name: so they are far deceived, which either are ashamed, or weary of this
name: if they believe that they are partakers of the thing signified.

CAP. IIII. That all they are ignorant of Christ, and depart from him, which
challenge unto themselves any other title in Religion, then the Christian.
Paul in the very beginning of the 1. Cor. 1. verse. 12. Schisms and Sects in
the Church of the Corinthians in Paul's ^ime, which he sharply reproves.
first Epistle which he wrote unto the Corinthians, complayneth very
gree^ously, and sharply inueieth against the^ which straight upon his departure
from the church, had sown certain seeds of discention and scismes: while
some addicted themselves to other techers, and professed themselves to be their
scholars, whom they esteemed above others, and whom they chieflye loved, and
followed: in so much that they took upon them their names, and blased them out
with the full of the mouth, as the proverb goes. Out of Profitable doctrine
may be gathered out of this reprehension of Paul.
which so sharp and earnest complaint of the Apostle, a man may gather and
learn diverse and profitable things. First, we see Satan the sworn enemy of
Christ and his church, to be most busily bent, so soon as any company is
gathered together under the name and banner of Christ, to trouble, divide,
sunder and scatter it. Verily it is most Satan ready to set up his Synagogue
where Christ has his Church.
fitly and most truly said, as soon as this enemy perceyueth that there is
any church set up in his name, that he byldeth near thereunto a chapel to him
self, to work the overthrow thereof.

Secondly, we learn how tender a thing the unity and consent of the church
in Christ is, and how easilye it is shaken and dissolved, if once any chinke be
made: and this enemy get in by never so little a creuice, he suddenly breaks
the whole lincking together thereof. Those therefore, which wish The unity of
the Church easily broken.
well unto the church, and the safeguard thereof, ought chiefly to take care
that they keep the band of unity, and to maintain it unbroken: which ought
The unity of the Church ought carefully to be preserved.
to be the common endeavor of al men as of them that are carried in one ship
that there be no entrance for the water thereinto.

Lastly, to pass over many other things which this plentiful and godly place
of the Apostle does offer. It is evidently perceived by the reasons which he
brings, and utters with great vehemency: that they which cleave not wholly
unto Christ, and depend They that stick not wholly to Christ, divide him and
deceue themselves.
not altogether of him, but are carried with affection else where, and do glory
as the Apostle him self says in men, do divide him and break their promise
made unto him: and moreover do cut of themselves from him, and therewithal he
clearly shows, even by the things which he charge them with, to their
shame, for attempting thereof: that they knew nether fully, neither rightly,
Christ crucified, notwithstanding they were baptized in his name. But in stead
of very Christ, to speak plainly, that they had devised unto themselves a
certain shadow, and a very image or idol of him. Which thing not only to have
happened unto them, he shall easelye perceive, who so hardly wayeth those
beginninges, with the proceedinges, even until our time, and shall compare
with a judgment void of all prejudice, the first and latter together, those
things that the Apostle did before hand write of in bot* his Epistles unto
Timethie, touching the latter times, does most plainly witness, that the Apostle
did even then forsee what The Apostle foresaw what Satan went about by these
his first atte^pts to bring to pas at last to the ruin of ye church.
the adversary of Christ did go about in that his first onset: he saw that he
laid the foundation of a mighty buylding, to the overthrow of the church of
Christ: he marked how he was, as it were, great with monstrous and strange
birthes, which at length he would bring forth to the destruction of many.
Herehence comes that his zeal, and so great earnestnes of speech against them
that did further and help forward with their endeuoures, this naughty
buylder. And I pray you, what a huge heap of Sodismes, and by goings did
follow those small beginninges? And I pray you how great an increase did
spring up of that little seed? To compare these thing^s together, is not only
to match small things with great, but also the least with the greatest, to be
short, it is to match a fly with an Elephant. But to the intent all men
Satan's subtle beginnings, and proceedings in vnderminig the church of Christ.
may somewhat better judge of the matter, let us a while consider the slight
and cunning of this deceiuer Satan. Let us behold, as it were through a
window, what has been his beginninges, and his proceedinges, when he purposed
to weaue this long web, to wit, when he once determined with him self either
to overthrow or shake the kingdom of Christ, which against his will he saw
continually to increase: he would craftily begin with small beginninges, that
his craft might not easily be espied.

Moreover, he woue his web suttlely, Satan began with small beginnings to hide
his intent. Satan made his way under the pretense of rare holiness and godliness.
under the color and show of godliness. For this deceauer knew that religion
could not be more sharplye assaulted, then under the visor of religion. He knew
that the desire of honest solitarines, hatred of the world, or (as John
descrybeth it) of the things that are in the world, made a goodly show in
men's eyes: that secret places gave great opportunity to the reading and
meditation of holy Scripture, to continual prayers, and the endeavor of all
kind of good works. All which things seem to give a taste as it were of the
heavenly and everlasting life. With this pretense of religion departing into
solitarines, men began to The simplicity and purity of the Gospel forsaken.
depart from the simplicity, and therwithall the purity of christian
religion. The way was forsaken which Christ and his Apostles by word and deed
set forth. And the eyes of many being bewitched with these sleightes of Satan,
and their minds being moved with novelty, (such is man's vanity and
curiosity) they suffered themselves wholly to be overtaken, and possessed of the
enemy of true godliness. For after he had once made his way, under this goodly
cloak, to change, and innouate things, he so proceeded in The proceedings of
Satan in corrupting the Gospel more and more.
changing, innouating, and adding to, that at last he left nothing of the old
trade, and made all things new: the thing it self shows how true that
common saying is, A little error at the beginning, proves to be great in the
end. Because these beginnings were not stopped, and such remedy was not applied
as Paul used in the church of Corinth: this pestilent disease ouerran welnere
ye whole church of Christ For ye enemy so by little and little brought in, and
set out to lyking, his darcknes, that is to say, his deuyses: that not only he
darckned, but also welneare extinguished the light of the doctrine of the
gospel: certainly nothing remained sound, nothing not corrupted with his
additions.

As touching Christian ceremonies which the Son of God would have to be very
few in number, but in signification, (as Augustine well writes) most
effectual: Good God who The Church of Christ laden with Jewish and Heathenish
ceremonies.
is able to declare with how many, and what supplies has this deceauer laden
and overwhelmed them? Most evident truly it is, and can not be denied, but
those that are obstinately lewd, that they have bin so as it were by little and
little increased, and heaped up, some being partly borrowed of the Jews, by fond
imitation: and partly received of profane Gentiles, insomuch that the state of
the old Jews in this behalf is more tolerable then of the new Christians.
And the true Christian religion became rather Heathenish then Christian.
worship which Christ with his own mouth had taught, and the Apostles both by
voice delivered unto ye church, and left in writing to the postoritie, (these
two parts as I have said being corrupted) did so wholye deraye: that it
seemed rather to be called Heathenish then Christian. At length christianity
thus being utterly overthrown, me^ sell so to loathe the very name, so that many
began to be ashamed, and weary thereof, and other titles were sought out from
the names of men, being partly ungodly, partly obscure, and to say nothing
bitterly, foolish. Therefore this marvelous practiser The name of a Christian
loathed, and the names of men received.
Satan has by his subtleties brought to pass that Christ should be banished
out of his own kingdom: should be a stranger in his own house: and should be
withdrawn and quite taken away from their eyes, ears, and minds which
pretended themselves to fight under his banner. For Christ by these practices
made a stranger in his own kingdom.
they that were baptized in the name of Christ: and had made promise unto him,
would never either take unto themselves, either suffer themselves to be called
by the names either of Angels, or men, or any other thing were it of never so
great value: if they had truly known him to whom they had addicted themselves:
and if they had rightly understood what he required of them, and had couenanted
with them: or what they had promised unto him. For it could not have come to
pass, that they should have joined themselves unto any other, unless first
they had departed from him. Uerely this may thereby be plainly perceived, which
is writter of some ancient writers: that the Emperor Tyberius Tertul. in Apo.
August. de ci^^t. dei.
did in time past, refer to the judgment of the Senate, whether Christ were
to be placed amongst the number of their Gods: unto whom the Senate would not
consent, for that cause, that Christ would be honored alone. For the Senate
castly perceived that they were to let go all their other Gods, whom they had
received, if they should receive him. Which reason if the Romish church The
Heathenish Romans may teach the Romish Church to worship Christ alone.
had diligently wayed, it would never have entertained such a company of
Mediators, as it does now. For it would lightly perceive, that it could not
hold Christ together with them. For christian religion acknowledges and
worshippeth as one God, so one Mediator, and does adorn or honor with the
only christian name all those that worship him.

CAP. v. That this new Sect by the very name drawn from Jesus does show it
self guilty of novelty, Schism, and Sacrilege.
Diverse things have heretofore of some been written touching the original,
the reason, and sundry allusions of the name Jesuit, which I need not to
repeat. What I think I will utter simply, and without cauils. For to jest,
much less to cauil, it likes me not in so earnest a matter. I will easily
grant unto the deuisers thereof, that they have derived it, from the name of
Jesus after the same manner, by which sometimes they yt canie of Israel were
called Israelites: and at this day they are called Ioanites, and Iacobites
which will be called, and thought to be followers of John and James. For the
knot we now seek, lies not in that thing. For we are in hand now not with
the property of the word, but with the truth and godliness of the Jesuits
profession. First as I do like very well that these new fellows (that I may
not The Jesuits wherein to be liked in taking their names of Jesus, and wherein
not.
defraude them of their praise) by this name fained of themselves, do plainly
signify that they do reprove, and condemn the authors of former Sects
which gave them names, taken from men's names (by which thing it is manifest
that they spread abroad no small seeds of S^ismes and superstitions, and do
call them back to Jesus Christ as the only fountain and head (from whom
those names do testify that they have fallen away, and have dug to
themselves pittes that can hold no water,) so I cannot but much mislike, yea
and sharply reprove their rashness and boldness, that forsaking the common
title of all christians, now already heretofore received, whose author, to
have been the holy Ghost, and which to have been always had in reverence with
our godly forefathers, it has been already declared: they dare fame, and upon
their own heads, take unto themselves an other, hitherto unheard of, and
nothing agreeing with them, and which is joined with no small reproach of Christ
the Savior of all the faithful. Every man knows that the name of Jesuits
is new. Now that Novelty in religion to be avoided.
novelty as in all other things, so especially in the cause of religion, is
greatly to be avoided, all the godly and learned do well warn us, which thing
the Apostles, by their example have approved. For when the doctrine of the
Gospel was at the first slaundered by the enemies, with the name of Novelty,
we plainly perceive by their writings: that they, especially Paul did
diligentlyendeuour to shake of this slander. And in such why should new
names be devised, but to signify new things? it is not misliked of the
learned, that new names, be devised for new things. For that does Hierome
in the first Epistle to the Galathians, Hier. in 1. Cap. ad Gala^us.
maintain against certain froward, and deintie men, but he then thinks it
lawful to be done, when either profit, either necessity does exhort or
rather force them thereunto. But where as these of this fellowship, When it is
lawful to invent new names to new things.
will seem for that purpose, to have flockt together, and to have come forth
into the world, that they might restore the ancient godliness: what either
profit could lead, or necessity force them to devise this name? First 1
of all by that new name they promise an other thing then they perform, and
so it comes to pass that they themselves are contrary to themselves.
Secondly, how agrees this new 2
name with the ancient doctrine, and religion? Truly no more then a piece
Math. 9. verse. 16
of new or raw, and undressed cloth, with an old garment, as Christ says.
For what is this new title but a certain mark engraven in then forehead,
which warns all men, and clearly pronounces, that there is nothing else but
that which is new, and lately devised to be looked for of these vpstartes or
new fellows. Paul 1. Tim. Cap. 6. verse. 20.
not without cause warns his scholar Tymothie whom he entirely loved (...).
as his natural son, the 1. Epistle, Cap. 6. verse 20. That he would abhor
new terms, although I know other do read vain tanglinges of words. For
it skilleth little, which way we read: seeing there is very great affinity
between ye things signified, and the words. Verily new things are often also
vain. Luke notes in the Athenians. Acts 17. The Acts 17. verse. 21
desire of novelty and vanity to be things that go always together. And
surely it was very wise counsel that he gave, who when his friend said unto
him, he had some new thing, answered, I had rather have some profitable and
available thing.

Furthermore this late sect undertakes either to set forth, the doctrine and
religion of the Prophets, and Apostles: either some other contrary thereunto.
If it profess that it brings the same, what fondness is it, to make that
thing suspicious, and odious, with a new name, which as it is most true, so is
it most ancient? But if it brings a contrary, there is no cause why it
should be offended with us, if we bid it to be gone with his forgeries, and
pronounce it to be accursed: seeing the Apostle of Christ, Gal. the first
wills Gal. 1. verse. 28.
us to do the same, yea against an Angel of heaven. For as Christ is said to
have made new all things, and the world it self with his first coming: so
before his return again, the doctrine of the Apostles promises, or wills
us to look for no new change in this respect. Let us also see, whether The
Iesuires new name a mark of Schysme.
this newly devised name, do not manifestly mark in the forhead with the
print of Schism this new sect? For God who is most desirous of peace,
concord and unity, has endeavored to commend the same by all manner of means
unto his Church: as the place of Paul to the Ephesians, 4. Chapter Ephesians. 4.
verse. 3. 45.
does most plainly teach. For those whom he had chosen before the foundations
of the world, in his most dear Son, he would gather together at his
appointed time being scattered through the whole world, and assemble them
unto him, his first begotten Son, as the Captain, and shepherd of all: and
couple them as members of one body unto their head. He commanded nothing so
diligently as unity, which he has established with a fellowship of all
things amongst them, which appertain unto godliness: as with the word,
faith, the Sacraments, the spirit, and such like: in the which, as the
Apostle witnesses, there is no difference between the Jew, and the Greek,
the wise and the ignorant, the master and the servant, man and woman, but all
are one, that is one Christ. And who so sees not herehense, that it came to
pass by the will and counsel of this father: that all were called by the only
name of Christians, even from the beginning of this assembling together by the
preaching of the Gospel? Therefore it is plain, that this name is as it were
a certain oath, and band of that unity: which he utterly breaks, and
loses, that takes to him self any other, under whatsoever pretense he
does it: which thing also the place before cited out of the first Epistle and
1. Cor. 1. verse. 12. 13.
first Chapter to the Corinthians, manifestly teaches.

Moreover in this common name, besides the pledge of brotherhode, and
admonishing us of natural love, it appears that there is also contained a
profession in religion: to devise therefore any other without necessity, is it
not a certain kind of denial, and forsaking? There is extant in Gratians
decrees 11. Cause. and 3. Quest. Gra. d^o. can. 11. Quest. 3. ex August. in Io.
tract. 1
a sentence taken out of Augustine upon John the 1. treatise, which shows
that he that denies himself to be a Christian, is convicted to have denied
Christ. What shall I say, that those of this fellowship will seem for that
cause to have bin assembled, that they might gather, and join together others,
and to separate themselves. If this be their purpose, as they bear in hand,
why do they not first in themselves show a token of unity, and not having
neither author nor cause, by evil and hurtful example, further division and
breaking asunder. Why do they by dividing, overthrow that which has been
ordained by the authority of our master Christ, and is confirmed by the
consent and example of all the godly antiquity? I remember The Sorbonists
ridiculous articles.
when as our masters the Sorbonistes were once very careful and circumspect on
every side to provide, not for the common good of Christendom, but for their
own belly and authority: did publish articles (for so these Prophets forsooth
did call those oracles, to wit, their determinations and decrees set forth
against them whom they call Lutheranes) In one of the which, the last saving
one to my remembrance, it was flatly forbidden, that any man in teaching should
utter Christ severally from Jesus. Which decree were it never so foolish, was
urged so straightly, that I being accused by four Franciscan The Authors danger
for naming Christ without Jesus.
Friars, and having the bishop of Claremount the chief Patron of the
Jesuits, plaintiff against me, was constrained with danger of my life, to
answer at the bar, before Peter Lizet, that worthy presidente forsooth, a
little before he was made of President, Abbot. Nevertheless we see Peter and
Martha in their confessio^s, and Paul every where in his Epistles, to have
offended against that article* without any co^troleme^t. I marnel therefore that
these worthy watchmen, do not rather bend their lightnings against these of
this fellowship: which contrary to the oracle and decree of the holy Ghost, and
the ancient custom of the church, call themselves Jesuits, rather then
Christians. Why the Jesuits and Sorbonistes do shun the name of Christ.
But perhaps between these two orders of these good men, there is this
agreement, that they being niece, and deyntie, do shun the cross of Christ:
which we perceive to have been in times past, joined with the profession of
the christian name: But we read not any where that I know, that the name of
Jesus carried with it any such thing.

Lastly, the deuisers and usurpers of this new name, cannot avoid the offense
The Jesuits sacrilege and profanation of the name of Jesus.
of sacrilege, and profanation of the name of Jesus. For it has been
declared, that the same was given by the commandment of the heavenly Father,
to the son of God, manyfested in flesh, as proper unto him only, and noting a
very great misterye belonging unto his person. With what Objection.
boldness then, with what forhead, yea, with what conscience do(...) they
challenge it unto them, and unseal that which God has sealed up, make common
that which is proper, and defile that which is holy? But peradventure they will
say, that they have devised and taken that name, to signify and to profess by
the name, that they are worshippers of Jesus: that is, to believe in him, to
trust in him, and to seek for all their salvation of him. I answer, Answer.
what, not only curiosity and vanity, but also what wrong is it for a few to
challenge to themselves that which is common to all the godly, and is contained
under the name of a Christian, and is intimated by the revelation of the
heavenly Spirit: and for y^ cause upon private authority, to invent and choose
to themselves a new title: should not this in profane things be accounted
theafte? why then in holy things should it not be counted sacrilege? If this
new order pretend any privilege or prerogative, let it The Jesuits have no
privilege above other Christians, to take upon them the name of Jesus
bring forth a true and very Apostolic charter: that is, brought not from the
court of Rome, but from the court of heaven: and let it deliver it to be
examined and scanned of all that has to do therewith, as every one has. Now if
it please them to take this their new title not passiuely, but actiuely, that
is, to speak plain, not for such as are saved, but are Sauioures, as which
profess What the Jesuits do mean by their name.
that they bring help to those that otherwise being in heavy, and as it were
in desperate case, are like to pearish, as we read, that God in times past,
raised up, and sent sauioures, or deliuerers to his people of Israel, oppressed
Judge, 3. 15
with their enemies, they go, as the proverb has, from the lymehouse, into
the colehouse: that is, from Whether the Jesuits be Saviors or no.
one ill defense to another. Nevertheless, the lately invented description of
this name, and which of some is set before their wrytinges, to qualify the
hardness and absurdity thereof, as far as I conjecture: to wit, the society
of Jesus seems to come near to this interpretation: as though Jesus had
lately chosen the^ to be his colleagues, How the Jesuits be fellows of Jesus.
and fellow companions, to help wretched men. I demand again of them a sure
testimony, and authentical instrumente or wrytinge of this their choice,
otherwise it will be objected unto them, and that not without cause, that they
have taken this honor to themselves, which the Apostle heb. Heb. 5. 5.
5. denies to have been done of Christ himself.

Now the holy scripture witnesses, that this is the part of thieves, robbers
and woolues. Again, it is no single* John. 10. 8. A manifold impiety to be
fellow therein with Christ, wherein he will have no fellow.
but manifold wickedness, for a man to profess himself a fellow of Jesus in
that point, which the doctrine of the Apostles, do witness to be so his own,
that he will suffer no fellow therein to be joined with him: for he alone
brings and gives salvation. As many as have it, must needs have received
it at his hands: and he that receaueth it from him, receaueth it for him
self, not for another. In this behalf he accepts no vicars, or none in
stead of other, much less desires them. For faith, the only fit and meet
instrument to obtain salvation, reaches unto him alone, and The founders of
popish sects injurious to Christ the only foundation. 1. Cor. 3. 11
therefore I said, that the former sects were worthily condemned of this
latter sect, in that respect, that they turned over unto their fathers, or
founders, The founders of popish sects injurious to Christ the only
foundation. 1. Cor. 3. 11
that which the heavenly father would have to belong only to Christ. But if
this new faction thinks as I have now said, it sins more grievously then
all the other: which gives that to every member of their faction, which they
ascribe only unto their founders, for so they call their fathers, which know
not the only and common foundation. Notwithstanding, least I should seem to
consider other men's words either too hardly either maliciously, I will follow
the interpretation, which is both most gentlest, and also draws with it fewer
inconveniences: to wit, that they profess this only, that they have
fellowship with Jesus, to the intent they may obtain salvation of him, which
the holy Scripture promises to all that believe in him. Whether they say this
truly or ^al^^y, and worthily hope for it, i^ cannot more certainly be known,
then by the matter it false. Let us therefore now entreat thereof, and examine
the same as it deserves.

CAP. VI. That without the fellowship of Jesus, there remains no hope of
salvation.
I Trust that they with whom I deal, will not deny, but that a man must
otherwise reason against them, which openly profess themselves to be enemies
of the name of Christ, and christian Religion: then with them which will seem
to be called, not only mainteyners and defenders, but also restorers and
delyuerers thereof, therefore I will be content at this time with the only
example of Paul, in stead of many arguments, to prove the matter. For it is
most plainly perceived Act. 13. 14 15. 17. 18
by the Acts of the Apostles, that this most skillful disputer, did otherwise
handle the cause of Christ with the Jews, then the Gentiles. I therefore
following the steps of this excellent Doctor, as well as I can, will reason
against these reformers of christian doctrine, and vpholders (forsooth) of true
Religion, out of these only principles, and points of this doctrine, which
are common to both parts, and granted, and received of all men. First I doubt
not, but the Authors, and Patrones of this new sellowship, hold for a true and
undoubted ground, that which in the second chapter has been rehearsed out of
the Evangelists Matthew, and Luke, touching the name of Jesus, and the reason
thereof given by the Angel. It remains therefore, that I show the thing
both contained in the name, and uttered in the reason laid down, not only to
agree with the name, but also, to belong only to this person, no less then
the name it self. Peter being fill of the holy Ghost, as Luke the fourth of
the Acts Acts. 4. verse 10. 12.
writes, was a most faithful witness, and best expounder of those words: when
being demanded of the counsel of the high Bishops of the Jews, a reason of
the miracle wrought, and the benefit bestowed upon the lame man: did no less
plainly declare, then constantly confess, that it was all done by the name of
Jesus: whom they had crucified, but God had raised from the dead: adding with
all* that salvation is so offered and given through this man: that he denies
the same, may be given by any man under heaven. What could be said more pithely
and expressly. The universal negative cutteth of all occasion of cauilling, or
quarrelling, joined twice to that so weighty an affirmation.

The self same does Paul almost Romans 5. 17. 18. 19 1. Cor. 15. 21. 22
every where in his Epistles make good: and does also in some places set
forth with a very proper contrariety of a twofolde Adam or man. He sets
these fathers one against another, as two contrary fountains, which beget two
contrary ofsprings: to wit, him whom he names old and earthlye, those that
are infected and altogether Adam and Christ compared together as two
contraries, with their effects.
defiled with sin, and therefore are in danger of the wrath of God, and
everlasting death: The other, which on ye contrary side he calls new, and
heavenly, those that be garnished with righteousness, and foreappoynted to
everlasting and happy life. For as children do each of them retain the nature
and property of their parents, so whatsoever belongs to the fathers, comes
at length also to the children, for as destruction, and everlasting death is
the just reward of sin: so salvation, and a blessed life, is by the goodness of
God, annesed unto righteousness. Romans 6. 23
Wherefore, even as whosoever is borne of that first man, for as much as he
brings with him original sin, cannot avoid the punishment of everlasting
damnation: where by it comes to pass, that as one well says, every man is
first condemned before he be borne: so, for as much as none, but those that
being elected, adopted, and borne a new of the heavenly father: are justified,
or made righteous in the latter man, to wit, Christ. It is meet also that
those only be made partakers of everlasting John. 5. 3
salvation, which thing Christ himself most clearly witnesses. As, says he,
the Father has life in himself, so likewise has he given to the Son, to
have life in him self: and for that end, as in another place he adds, that
he that believes in him, should not pearish, but have everlasting life.
Whereunto agree those things, which Matthew and Luke do write, that he said of
his coming into this world. The son of man (says he) came to Mat. 18. 11
Luke. 19. 10
seek, and to save that which was lost. Therefore without* him there is nothing
Without Christ there is no life, nor salvation.
else but death and destruction, and in him alone is life and salvation, and
into him must all those be ingraffed, which will receive life of him, and they
must put on him, as many as desire to have their filthiness covered and wiped
away: which thing is most plainly showed of John also the first Epistle, and
fist chapter. This is the testimony of God, that he has given 1. Ioh. 5. 11.
12.
us life everlasting, and this life is in his son. He that has the son
has life, he that has not the son, has not life. Christ also himself has
so depainted John. 15. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
and expressed it, in that proper allegory of the vine and the branch, that
every man may easelye perceive it.

And hetherunto does plainlye belong, that the Apostles call him in some
places, the savior of the world. Now this title in Greek, as it very well
agrees with the Hebrew name name, whereof I have spoken before, so is it so
great (if we believe Cicero, a fit witness herein) that it cannot be uttered
and expressed with one latin word. For it notes him that brings health, or
salvation. Neither forces it that this title is given sometime to the father,
and is also yielded unto men, as to the Judges of the old people, Romans 11. 14.
1. Tim. 4. 16
and the ministers of Gods word. Romans 11. and 1. Tim. 4. For that which draws
nothing either from the office or honor of Christ, but rather streyneth that
which has been said hereof. For it is manifest, that the Father, as the
chiefest fountain of salvation, from whom all salvation flows unto the
Son, and is as it were committed unto him, of very How men are called
saviors in the Sctiptu^es.
good right is called a Savior. But as touching men, this honor is for no
other cause given unto them, then for that they are chosen and appointed by our
Savior Christ, that he might distribute and pour abroad upon others, by them
as his in strumentes, that power of saving which he has of his own, and
resting in himself, which thing the author of the Epistle to the Heb. 2 Chap.
seems unto me very Heb. 2. 10
fitly to have noted and laid down in naming him the Prince of our salvation.
Now that which this writer using a manner of speech which the Hebrews are
acquainted with, does signify as it were with one word. We read that Peter
Act. 5 ver. 31. did part Act. 5. 31
in two, when he had mainteyned this cause before the high Priests of the
Jews. Him has God lift up with his right hand, to be a Prince and Savior,
and so forth.

By these most sure grounds (for to allege any more it is needelesse) I
think that does sufficiently appear, which I purposed to declare: that without
the fellowship of Christ, there remains no hope of salvation unto any man.
Whereby it is evidently proved, that they are utterly deceived, and err very
far, which seek elsewhere, or otherwise, salvation. Wherefore I neither must,
neither will reprove this new order of Friars, if they speak in earnest, and
believe that they see^e salvation in Jesus, and be willinge to draw it thence,
as from a continual welspring: but I accounte it a very unreasonable thing,
for a man to go about to draw all that to himself alone, and to challenge it
as his own, which is common with him to al me^, of what state and condition
soever they be: and therewithal, that they are fowly deceived, if they think
it cannot be had without that kind of life, which they have newly devised unto
them selves.

Lastly, I take them to be very far deceived in this, that they take another No
other way to obtain salvation, then that which Christ has delivered.
way to obtain salvation of Jesus, then he himself has laid down and
declared.

CAP. VII. That to the intent true fellowship be had with Jesus, the way that he
has declared is to be followed.
IT is the part of a trustye and wise Physician, not only to show the sick
person a fit and wholesome medicine, but also diligently to deliver the
manner, and how to receive the same: especially if he perceive he has to do
with one that is unskillful, and ignorant of Physic. For as it is an easy
matter herein to miss, so it is well known, to be very dangerous, and daily
experience proves the same. Therefore the holy Ghost to the intent he might
perform the part of a true teacher, and most faithful Physician unto the
elect, and sufficiently provide for their salvation: understanding well how
great, not only the vanity* but also the blindness of man's mind is,
especially in seking, and providing for their own salvation, thought it not
sufficient to set forth and point out, a true, sure, and necessary medicine:
but also thought good to declare plainly and largely how the same is to be
used. Wherefore it behooves al those that are in deed desirous of their own
salvation, to resolve with themselves that not only the remedy against sin,
Christ the only way to God, all other are bywayes.
which the heavenly Father does offer in Christ, is to be unbraced of them: ^^t
that therewithal they must in every point follow the way to receive the same
which he has laid down. For they are very much deceived, and altogether
err, which imagine other ways and means, or being devised of others, seem
they never so plausible and plain, accept of the same. Certainlye they tire
themselves in vain, which run out of the way, and as he said, it is better
to haste in the way, then to run space out of Augustine.
the way: for it is so far of, that they should ever come unto the true end,
that in stead of salvation, they procure to themselves grievous destruction.

The holy Ghost does most plainly No man comes to Christ of himself, but
called by God, and moved by his Spirit.
teach, and that not in one place, that the father is known of no man, and
that no man comes unto him, but by the teaching, and leading of the son:
who not without cause calls him self as the life, and truth, so the way
also thereunto. For so the same spirit teaches, that no mar comineth, or is
received into the fellowship, or communion of the son, but by the motion, and
leading of the Father. Mat. 11. 27
God is faithful (says Paul to the Corinthians) by whom you are called Io.
1. verse. 4.
into the fellowship of his son Jesus Christ our Lord. Herehence it
appears, Io. 14. verse. 6.
that there is no coming to this fellowship for any man, but by the Fathers
calling. And it is not 1. Cor. 1. verse 9.
meet that any should be called, but he that hears his voice, and follows
it: that is to say, that hears him speaking, and obeys his counsel, and
goes after him, being guided, as it were, by his hand. Which thing John 1. Io.
1. verse. 1. 2. 3.
does plainly show, in the beginning of his Epistle, teaching that he
declares to the Church, that which he had seen, and heard, that they might
have fellowship not only among themselves, but also with the Father and with
his Son Jesus Christ. The God salleth us by the voice of the Gospel, unto
Christ, and by no other way.
voice therefore of the Gospel is the way, whereby we have entrance unto this
holy and healthful fellowship. By it the Father calls those, whom he has
given unto his Son, before the foundation of the world was laid: and
brings, and assembleth them unto their shepherd. And that voice of the
Father soundinge* clearly from heaven, contains the effect of the heavenly
voice: This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. By
these few words, but Mat. 17. 5.
very significant, he notes both the end, and shows the way. For the end
or scope, unto the which we must leauell, as it were, with both eyes, ought to
be that dear Son unto his Father, in whom only he is so appeased: that he
is offended, with all those, whom he does not reconcile unto him. The way
whereby we must go, is even his voice, and word whereunto we must altogether
give ear. Therefore Christ the guide, the way and end, of our salvation.
this Son alone, and no other, is both the way, the end and the Guide. For so
those demonstratiue speeches are to be taken, that we understand him to be
severed from all others, and all others to be excluded from that office, and
honor. Whosoever endeavors by any other way to come to the end, he loses
his labor. For all the sharpnes of man's wit is so dull in this point as a
brute beast. Whatsoever men either think, or determine of this matter, are
errors, and wanderinges from the way, not paths, not furtherances, but
hindrances thereto. Have not this been plainly enough set forth in times past
by the Prophets, whiles they so often oppose the ways of men, to the ways of
God, as clean contrary one to the other? For this time, one place of Esaias the
55. Chapter, verse 8. shall suffice. He brings in God, speaking to Israel in
these Esa. 55. Cap. verse 8.
words. My thoughts are not as your thoughts, neither my ways, as your
ways. For by how much the heavens are higher then ye earth: by so much are my
ways higher the^ yours, and my thoughts, then your thonghts. What could be
more plainly spoken? And do we yet doubt whether ye son shines at noone day?
To what end does David so often, so earnestly, so flatly desire of God, that
he would teach him, and show him his ways, and paths? If we believe him, whom
we know to have been most plentifully lightened by the holy Ghost, to have
spoken this in good earnest, and to have desired it, from the bottom of his
heart, what shall we think that we ought to do? Shall we think that we are
wiser then he? Do we see further then he did? Yea, and to what end, had we
need of a heavenly teacher, and guide, if he might have been found in the
earth? It is notable that Augustine in his August. li. 1. de consens.
Evangelist. Cap. 15.
first book of the consent of the Evangelists, 18 Chapter gathers, out of
that godly saying of Socrates, (whereof he makes mention also in an other
place) reproouing the Romans, which therefore refused to worship the God of the
Hebrews, and Christ, because he would be worshipped alone. It is (says he)
the opinion of Socrates, that every God ought to be worshipped, as he has
commanded him self to be worshipped. Wherefore these men (to wit the
Romans,) were forced of necessity, not to worship the God of the Hebrews:
because if they would worship him any other way the^ he him self had said
he would be worshipped, they should not verily worship him, but that which
they themselves had devised. A (...)* truly* worthy to be most deeply*
rooted in Torrensis the Jesuits fond opposing the
our minds, which if Torre^sis the Jesuit had well weyed: he would never
confession of August. against the confession of Augusta.
so much as have thought of setting of Augustines confession, against the
confession of Augusta. Neither is it Libr. eiusdem. Cap. 10.
less worthy the noting, and bearing away, neither less repugnant also to
these men's imaginations, which the same Author writes the 10. Cap. of the
same book, against those, which said, that Christ wrote certain books to
Peter, and Paul. Which error he supposes that they took therhense, because
they saw them in many places painted together. Therefore afterward he says: So
have they deserved wholly to err, which have sought for Christ, and his
Apostles, not in ye holy books of the scripture, but in painted walls.
Neither is it any marvel if fayners be deceived of Painters. We hear the
judgment of this most learned, and Augustines judgment is to find out, and
learn Christ in the scriptures only.
godly man, concerning the way to seek out, and learn Christ, and godliness.
Forsooth not by the imaginations, and fancies of men, but the holy books of
the scripture, that is, the doctrine delivered us from God: which only well
knows, how he will be, and ought to be served. Every way sought elsewhere,
ought* not only to be suspected of us, but also utterly abhorred, and avoided.
Neither are we to look to come any other way unto the fellowship of Jesus, but
by that, which he has declared. And in deed it were No other way to be joined
to Christ, the^ that which he him self has deli^^^ed.
a thing void of all reason, for any man, either to enter into an other man's
friendship: either to be admitted to his fellowship, and league: but by those
couenantes, laws, and conditions, which he should set down, and appoint,
that should receive an other into his friendship, or fellowship, and league. And
is it not without all reason, that he which receives a benefit, should tie
the giver thereof to covenants, and conditions of his own making? To the
intent therefore all men may the easier see, and understand, upon what cause,
and condition, a man must, and ought to have fellowship with Jesus Christ* I will
lay forth to the view, the manner thereof, fetched from the public tables
of the ho^e Ghost, that is to say* the writings of the Prophets, and
Apostles, divided into their parts, in that order, which, as I judge, is fit,
and agreeable with the nature of those things entreated of. Against the which,
in like manner, I will set the way, which these of this new fellowship have
begun to take, and do yet follow, that it may more evidently appear: both
that they themselves, and all those that will follow these blind guides, do
wander very much, and to be greatly deceived.

CAP. VIII. That the first step necessary to have fellowship with Jesus, is
true faith in him.
THat the doctrine of the fellowship The doctrine of the fellowship with Jesus
the chief scope of the scriptures.
with Jesus, or communion of man with Christ the Son of God, stretches very
far, and contains within his compass, the doctrine of the Prophets, and
Apostles, as the which is the chiefest argument, and principal scope thereof:
they do easily perceive, that know, what is the cause of man's salvation: and
well understand whereunto all parts of holy Scripture do belong, and ought to
be referred. For nothing is delivered in the same, which does not tend
heereunto, to bring man to God the only fountain and author of his happiness,
and salvation. But I purpose not at this time to handle every part of this so
large a matter: but those only, which properly appertain unto man himself:
that is, I entend to show, by what means Jesus receives man into his
fellowship, or to speak yet more plainly, what I mean my purpose is at this
present, to declare, by what marks and testimonies we may, and ought to
know, that either we our selves, or other do belong to the fellowship of
Christ. Paul of all others, seems unto me to have opened most largely, and
exactly, this mystery of the fellowship, or knitting together the members with
the head. For he makes mention thereof almost every where, but in the Epistle
to the Ephesians, he prosecuteth* namely all Ephe.
the parts, and causes thereof, and unfolds them every one; touching in most
flat words, the beginning, proceeding, and end thereof. Who as he plateth the
last end thereof, in the participation, or fellowship of the kingdom of Christ
in heaven: So he puts the first beginning in the good pleasure, and purpose
of the heavenly Father, from the which springs our election before the
foundations of the world were laid* But letting pass at this time, those two
extremes, to wit, the beginning, and the end: I will only entreat of the
means, and proceeding: which the ^^me Author Romans Romans 8.
8. Chapter does comprehend, as it is apparent, under the names of vocation,
and justification. Now ^ayth goes Faith follows vocation, and goes before
justification. Faith the first step to come to Christ.
between our vocation, and our justification: which as i^ follows the one,
so (...) it needs go before the other. Therefore both this place, and (...)s
other do teach us, to hold faith, to be as the first step of the coming of
the godly unto Christ* And especially Christ him self shows it, whom ^he
history of the Gospel declares* to have always first required ^ayth, of
(...) he had to do with all. But (...) ^se (...) be a^ (...)t infinite
testimonies thereof. I will (...) use out a (...), and chiefly out of the
Gospel after (...) John, which is verieful^ thereof. I ^^ Io. 1. Cap.
only allege those place ^ that seem (...) one most clear: and to begin
with the first Chapter, there it is flatly uttered, that all those that believe
(...) Christ, are en^^^ded, and honored with this p(...), and pr^hen^^^ nence,
that there should be the Sons of God. Unto whom: Paul agrees Gal. 3. verse
26* Year are all, ^^^eth had Gala. 3. 26.
the Sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus: the pledge, and zeals of which
adoption, he straightway adds, to be the Sacrament of baptism, as whereby the
faithful do put on Christ: that is, are joined to him: yea, and that which is
more, are coupled with him* as in an other place he writes, And so are 1. Cor.
6.
made bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. For so it pleased him to
describe Ephesians. 6.
that most straight, and near fellowship.

For the which cause Christ also; as it is in John the third chapter: After
that he had reasoned with Nicodemus Io. 3. Cap.
the Pharize about the second, or heavenly birth, he thereunto joins a ^
goodly Sermon of the force, and very great effects of faith. In the 4. and 5.
chap. There are many, and plain testimonies to this purpose, but I pass them
over, hastening to the sixte chapter. Wherein this matter is so handled, so
fully set forth, and so plainly opened, that I marvel, that there should be
any yet in the church, that should doubt thereof, much less strive about it.
But unto Owls, or night Crows, even the noone light is dark: and there will
ever be some, that esteem ^^hornes better then corn, according to the
proverb. Christ in this 6. chapter Io. 6.
does not only manifestly show, that the way to have fellowship with him,
consists in faith, and teaches the same to be most necessary: but also
instructs, and sch^leth faith: that is to say, declares what it ought to
be, holds it ought to embrace him, or after what manner it ought to apprehende
him: or else, what way it ought to take, to know him. It is evident that there
are in Christ (...) natures, whereof, one is fetched from our nature, or as the
Apostle speaks Taken, and therefore altogether like ours, except sin.

And even as he him self, has thereby We must come by the fellowship of the
human nature of Christ, to the fellowship of divine.
joined him self to us, so by the same must we come unto him, to the intent,
we may come into the fellowship of the other nature: to wit, the divine, which
is natural unto him. Of the which thing Augustine diligently August. de ciuita.
Dei, lib. 9. Ca. 15.
entreating in the 9. Book, and 15* chap* of the city of God, at length
adds this: Being made partaker of our humanity, he made a ready way for us
to be partakers of his divinity* L^k^ as therefore we are joined to the Father
by the Son: so also we are united unto the Son, by that nature* which he
has received of us: insomuch that i^ is, as it were a certain hand, or as* I
have else where written* a solder ^a^tening together things, that otherwise are
most far asunder, and ^^^e^s. Now as whosoever has fellowship with the
Son, must needs also have fellowship with the Father, otherwise the Son
should he di^^ded from the Father: So whosoever is received into the
fellowship of the flesh of Christ, (for by this word, in this place, as else
where, by the name of the Body, he comprehends his human nature,) must also
have fellowship with the divine nature: unless we will part those two natures,
joined together with a most sure band. It remains therefore that we know, how
we have fellowship with the human nature, or flesh of Christ. That does he
him self plainly declare. First he signifies the same, by the name of Bread,
taking occasion of the miracle Bread.
wrought before, and mention being made of Manna by the Jews, at last after
further reasoning, he calls it his Flesh, and says it is true meat.

Moreover, to open more fully this mystery, he makes mention of his Blood,
fitly joining blood unto flesh, as Blood.
we see them joined in living men: the separation whereof brings death,
whereof also by the way he speaks, when he said, that it should be given
for the life of the word, the life; I say, not the death. For he dyed, that he
might destroy death, not to bring it unto any: but to restore life which was
lost, unto all them, which should have fellowship with his flesh. And h^ has
showed by diverse words the way to obtain this fellowship. First he has urged
the word Shall Eat, applying Shall eat.
it to the Metaphore of Bread, and to the word, Flesh, which he also calls
true meat. For they are communicated, and received by eating He likewise has
used the word, Shall* Shall drink.
drink, respecting the Wine, which (...) says to be true drink. He has fur^
there mentioned the word, Has come* Has come.
which he does else where use. Lastly* he has added the word, Believes* by
Believes.
which, as being proper, and single* he expounds, that which in those former
figuratuie speeches, lay hid. And so he has plainly declared, that the way to
come by this divine fellowship, is faith, whereby only we eat and drink him,
and come unto him. For as he is the way, and the door for us to come to the
Father: so we come unto him by faith, we are joined to him, and he to us: so
that he ^^^^eth in us, and we in him* that is, dwells in our hearts, as the
Apostle says to the Ephesians the 3. chapter. The Fphes. 3. Cap.
sumine then of all, is this: that Christ joins us unto his fellowship by
faith, and by no other mean, or way, Wherefore As the believers in Christ,
cannot but have fellowship with him, so the unbelievers cannot have any at all.
as it can not be, that he, which believes in Christ, should not have
fellowship with him, and through him, which the Father, (as he must needs be
lightened with his light, that beholds the Son:) So whosoever believes not
in him, it is as impossible, that he should have any fellowship with him: as
it is, that a blind man (...)lde see the light of the Son. Whereof it
follows no less certainly, The Jesuits which teach that they may, teach
deuilish doctrine.
then clearly, that all that grant any fellowship with the flesh, and body
(...) Christ unto unbelievers: do utterly shake the grounds or foundations of
christian doctrine, and do not only weaken, but also clean rent a (...) the
harmony, and agreement thereof. Neither does this opinion se^^^^ to be called
rather deuilish, then h(...), or to proceed from a man: for that only cause,
that it has broken the rule of faith, and truth, which our godly fathers have
so named (...)but also for the manner, by which it is w^nt to be defended of
th^se men. For it is The deuilish defense of this doctrine by the Jesuits, and
Papists.
not avouched* and maint^ined with the weapons of Divines, but of tyrants:
that is, not by the estimonies of the scripture, or sure reasons drawn
therehense: but by cauilles, reproaches, slanders, banishmenis, proscriptions,
fire, and sword. These are ^he Io. 8.
weapons not of truth, and godliness, but of falsehood, and wickedness, the
father, and mainteiner whereof is he, which was a murderer from the
beginning: whom they follow, which are his: abusing the color of truth, and
religion, to overthrow the ^ame, that they may the better provide for their
own gain, which is the only thing that they seek.

But the scripture, left us by the Apostles, acknowledges no other followship
with Jesus, then that which is ^y* faith^: neither does the ancient church* to
wit, the Apostolic; an^ Catholic, or universal. Now this, that these man The
Papists by their transubstantiation, dream of the
have devised, they dream to be(...) with the mouth, which are y^ Author^ of
transubstantiation, and have brought in receiving of Christ with their mouth.
to ye church, not of Christ but of Rome together both their transubstantiation
and their fellowship with Christ, imagined of themselves: the latter whereof
received, as it were by hands from them, they which have invented
transubstantiation do with tooth and nail defend, as agreeable with their new
imagination, and uphold it egerlye with the same weapons that they do.

But they whose minds are void of preindice, do easily perceive that a man
being upon the earth, can neither follow Christ with his bodily feet, neither
touch him with his hands, neither see him with his eyes, neither hear him with
his ears: So as no man can either eat, or taste him with his mouth, teeth,
tongue, or rooffe. All Christ not to be received by any outward and carnal
way, but by faith only.
these things as they are done only with the heart and mind, so it is to be
confessed, that it can be done by faith only. Therefore he erreth greatly, that
trusts that he can have any fellowship with Christ by outward apparel or
gesture, or any bodily actions. Now let us see whether these new fellows of
Ie^^, have taken a right way, or no.

CAP. IX. That this new, and vpstart fellowship of Jesus, have no true faith.
THere is no man, but does acknowledge that the mind and The heart of a man,
the proper seat of faith.
the heart of a man, is the proper and peculiar zeal of faith, and his true
dwelling place: and that thereof it follows, that it belongs to God only*
to judge and give sentence properly, and truly thereof: which thing I
confess, notwithstanding the holy Scriptures do every where witness, that one
man may, yea and ought to judge of another man's faith, as of all ungodliness,
and that neither vncertainlye, neither vainly. This ought to be taken for an
undoubted truth, that the faith of Christ, or christ(...)h, i^ that which is in
Christ: that is, which Faith aymeth to Christ, as the true and principal mark
in the scripture.
aymeth unto him as the (...) mark, and lays hold upon him as the true
objects. For albeit true faith does embrace the whole Scripture, both of the
Prophets, and Apostles, as the voice of God, containing verelye the most
certain will of God: yet for as much as all parts thereof tend unto Christ,
faith also it self has respect chiefly unto him. And that faith only What
true faith is,
is to be accounted for true, which truly knows and apprehends him: that
is, in such sort as he is in deed: even such as the heavenly father has set
him out, and offered him in that scripture, which is (as it were) a most
brighte glass, liuelye representinge Christ, and in him, God. For the wit Man's
wit cannot comprehend Christ.
of man (be it never so sharp by nature) cannot conceive the true, and lively
Image of Christ, and how can it, seeing the things which are uttered of him
unto us, in the Apostles doctrine, are unto flesh and man's reason, not only
Paradores; but also foolishnes, that is, such as he confesses and takes to be
extreme folly?

Neither was it without cause, that Christ, after that Peter had in flat Mat.
16. 1^
words pronounced him to be Christ, the Son of the living God, which came
into this world: by and by made answer: Flesh and blood has not revealed this
unto thee* but my Father which is in heaven. Yea, and Paul most clearly
teaches, that faith is Romans 10. 17. 18
conceived, and bred by hearing* and that of the word of God* The which
therefore a little before these words, he calls the words of faith. For as
that heavenly word is not perceived of man but by faith, so there is no
faith, but that which grows in the mind, out of the same word, through the
heavenly The word and faith inseperable.
Spirit. For which cause it is w^^^e to be set forth with diverse names or
titles taken from those things which (received by faith) it brings to pass:
for it is named the word of grace, of everlasting life, and salvation. And
Christ acknowledges for his true disciples, those only which abide and
continue in his word*

Hereunto I suppose our ^^^^rs, which were (truly) godly, and Apostolic John.
1. 31. The word the rule of our faith
men, had an eye, when they named the chiefest points of doctrin^^^^tayned in
the wrytinges of the Prophets and Apostles, the Rule of our* faith, and the
books in which is contained, the Canonical books. For as by these words
they meant that all The Canonical Scriptures only sufficient for faith to rest
upon.
things contained in those books were true, certain, and sure: so nothing
without or besides those books, were either to be sought for or followed, but
that faith ought to hold himself content within those bowndes and lysts,
Damasc in Pr^oem. Lib.
As Damascene (a writer nothing suspected of our very adversaries) no les fitly
then truly writes in the Preface of his books.

Christian faith, then is that which acknowledges, loves, and imbraceth
Christian faith what it is.
Christ, in such sort as the holy Scripture expresses him, and as Paul by his
lively preaching painted him out, and cru^yfied him before the Galathians eyes:
and passes by with closed eyes and ears, as the vain counterfette of Christ,
whatsoever are spoken and uttered without those books*

Therefore I suppose it lawful for me to judge of the faith of this new
fellowship out of their own doctrine, or rather The Jesuits faith to be judged
by their Doctrine.
I am so commanded to do of God. What that doctrine is, how should I more
certainly know, then by their wrytinges published abroad, in the which they
gave their censure of other men's doctrine, and maintayn The Jesuits doctrine.
and defend their own? Now they do most evidently show, that there cannot be
in that school, so much as a sparck^ of true faith in Christ. A man may meet
with ^om^ things well said in these wrytinges, to confess the truth, as
certain (...)owers cast abroads amongst much filth, and as small pieces of
gold amongst a great heap of dongue. It seems that those things happened,
either whiles the writers took no heed (as it comes (...)me to pas) either
that they were wr(...) from them by force of the truth: either that the some
chanced unto them that did to Balaam, and Cay(...)her (to be short) that they
would follow Satan* the true father of ly(...) whose ^^eights and (...)s
especially is accounted ^^e, that ^^ld and the^ he speaks the truth, but
for that purpose, that he might c^^^pe into men's bosoms, and afterward spread
his lies more boldly, and persuade the sooner. To think with my self that
this latter should be true, that makes me, that The Jesuits pretense of the
truth, the sooner to deceive in their Cathechisme of Austria.
I see in the very beginning of their Cate^his^^ of Austria, a definition of
a christian to be placed, which pretends great purity of doctrine. For it
pronounces him to be a Christian, which contenteth himself with the doctrine
of Christ, and condemns, and refuses the contrary unto the same. It lays
down afterward a description of faith, which carries with it great show of
true godlynes: and shuts it up with a goodly defense of Chrysostom, Faith
is the light of the soul, the door of life, the foundation of everlasting
life. He that reads these words in the very entrance being well affected to
godliness, and truth, does he not go on, full of hope, and very desirous not
only to read, but also to know, and learn all that follows?

But he that is endued with judgment, and armed with the Spirit of
discretion* will by and by find out* the deceit, and step back, for neither
those things that are in the midst, neither the later, do agree with the
first: but the matter it self shows, that they are most dangerous poisons,
covered with honey. A man might call them those whoorish intisementes which
Solomon the 5. and 7. of the Proverb. 5. 7
Proverbs does lively paynt out: and wherewith some will have the practyses
that heretics devise to s^are and allure the minds of the simple, to be
setout.

What I pray you is there in the parts following of that book which they
entitle The Sumine of Christian The titles of the Jesuits books, and the
doctrine therein contained, contrary.
Doctrine, like unto that front? yea rather* what is there not unlike* what not
corrupted and perverted? what not contrary to the purity of the Doctrine of
the Apostles? And that I may not to ^^ch a number of other, I lay forth one
point, of the means or ways to purge and clen^e men from their sins, the
103. leaf. Wh(...) The Jesuits make 6. ways and more to purge sins, not so
much as naming Christ or faith in him.
they rec^ei^ by fire ways and says that there are also more* (as
superstitious ignorance is always fruitful,) yet there is no mention at all
made either^ of ye blood of Christ, or faith in him: Un to ye which only
remission or forgiveness of sins is to be imputed. Is this to be achristian,
and to content themselves with the doctrine of Christ? Thus falshode is wont te
be contrary to it self, and to overthrow it self. But let us come to other
points, what this whole fellowship thinks nerally of yt scripture, it is
manifestly known by their censure of Coleyn, hy certain propositions, and
Censura Colomensis.
other their public wrytinges. If we believe these holy teachers the sacred
Scriptures are darck, doubtful, wavering, easy to be turned on which side a
man list, maimed and imperfect. What account the Jesuits make of the
Scripture.
This if they think as they write, which christian charity wills us to judge
what faith have these holy Doctors? Verily it is a great deal more certain
and true, that faith takes her light from the Scripture, then that the What
the Jesuits faith is.
moon does from the sun. Therefore their faith must needs be darcke,
doubtful, wavering, changeable, and imperfect. For faith must hold, follow,
and resemble the nature of the Scripture, as the child does of his father, the
river of his fountain or head, and the bough of his root. And what place I
pray you with these men, has the Apostles perswation and assurance of faith?

Furthermore it is manifest what Paul and James do speak of a doutfull Romans
14. 22 Iac^b. 16
and staggering faith. Even as faith ought to stay it self upon true and sure
grounds: so a christian teacher ought to be persuaded, that he speaks and
teaches the things that are sure and true. I say nothing now of the
Sophisters implicity, or folden up and unformed faith: which dreams (as al
others) there is no doubt, but these masters do allow. This only I desire The
Jesuits faith wavering and doutfull.
to hear and learn of them, whether they do not also doubt whether they
themselves, as well as others, be worthy of love or hatred? I do not believe
that they stand in doubt, whether the son of God be dear to his Father. For
that heavenly voice takes away all scruple of doubt, which testifies that the
Father so loves the Son, and so does embrace him, that Mat. 17* Luke. 4
he is wholly well pleased in him. Now if they think and persuade themselves in
deed, that they are the companions of Jesus, how can they doubt, but they are
also beloved of him? can he choose but love the members, unto whom the head is
most dear? can he set light by the flock, that makes account of the
shephearde? should he not love those whom he has chosen before the
foundatio^s of the world were laid, being called, justified, and sanctified?
Ephe. 1. Romans 8
he that doubts of this thing, will any man believe he believes in Christ?
Again, who can say that they have faith in Christ, which know not The faith of
the godly certain and stable.
Christ? certainly ye true faith of Christ does receive and keep Christ, as a
glass does the face which is before it, and a ringe, and a precious stone,
enclosed within it. And as Ambrose witnesses, even as the arms of old Simeon
Ausbrosan Luc. Cap. 2
did embrace Christ. Paul also affirms, that Christ dwells in the hearts of
the godly by faith. But the doctrine which these men profes, does most clearly
show that in their hearts as in their Temples, there is nothing but a shadow and
vain counterfette of Christ. For that which the write of remission of sins,
and justification, (that is) of the chiefest point of christian religion, of
man's ability, of merits and good works: does so spoil and rob Christ of
those gifts, with which The Jesuits rob Christ of his office of redemption.
his father has honored him: does so likewise re^tin pieces his office.
Finally so make fruitles and of no effect, his sacrifice, and merit thereof,
that I see we have nothing left to say, but that of the Apostle, Christ has
dyed in Galat. 3.
vain. Truly they that think the same that these men write, cannot have
Christ but without his office and without his benefits.

Lastly, to knitte up all at once, they The Jesuits pretense of reformation,
and their doings contrary.
that will seem to be raised up, and sent of God, for that purpose, that they
might lift up those things which were fallen down in the church, restore
again things corrupted, amend things amiss: do not only deceive the
expectation of all good and godly men, but also do mar again the things
that began to be amended, and to heap errors upon errors, yea, and by all
shifts and drifts, labor to make the diseases incurable, whereunto medicines
were provided with great hope of recoueringe of health. They The Jesuits more
impudent in the defense of popish errorr, then other papists, and the pope
himself.
that before these men, took upon them the defense of popish errors, were
stayed with some shame, that they durst not stubbornly maintain the grossest,
and such as were flatly contrary to the Doctrine of Christ: and they confessed
willinglye, that many things creapte into the church whilst the shepheardes
were a sleep, which needed reformation: as plainlye witnesses certain
orations openly made and pronounced, in the Counsel of Orat* in Council.
Trident. (...).
Trent, both in the Popes own name and other catholic Princes: which being
also put in Printe, remain at this day in men's hands.

But there is nothing so gross, so rotten, so filthy, so fond and wicked in
the popish puddle and sinck, which sauoureth not well unto those purgers and
reformers. They allow, uphold, and defend all things, be they never so
foolish and unreasonable. This can the reading of the books set forth by
them, most certainly declare. Nevertheless, I will allege one example, to
persuade the^ of the truth hereof, which either have not so much leisure to take
that pains, or are not disposed to lose time in turning over these filthiness.
It is well known almost unto al me^, that Ariacletus the bishop of Rome, Pope
Anacletus impudent and ridiculous forcing of the scripture to prove his
supremacy.
being bewitched with the opinion of his soueraintie, or as they call it,
popish supremacy, when he perceived that it stood upon weak foundations,
took upon him to make Christ the founder and author thereof, which to bring to
pass, he would use a metamorphosis or transformation, not unlike that whereby
he turns bred into the body of Christ. For of a stoane he thought to make
flesh, that is, did translate Cephas. John. 1. 42
the hebrew word Cephas, a head. He was laughed to scorn of all those that
take no delight in such foolery, and are not so light of credit yt they would
receive every thing without examination and trial. When Antonius Contius the
polisher of the popish canons, and one of the chiefest flatterers of the Romish
Antichrist, lighted upon the 22. Distinction, and met with the Distinct. 22.
place of the Epistle of Anacletus, he feared, being otherwise a bold and
shameless man, (as Runnagates are Contius the Popes flatterers shifte to help
Pope Anacletus.
wont to be) to allow of that interpretation, (which to be unsavory, his very
conscience forced him to confess) but cunningly indeauored to slip away from
the place where he could take no hold. First he confessed that that
Etymologe was laughed at by some, then by and by he secretelye reprooueth it,
bringing the true interpretation out of Hierom. But on the other side, fearing
least he should offend his gods, as some are wont to say, that is, purchase no
thanks of them, whose good will and favor he endeavors by all means to
procure, immediately he does after a sort, excuse Anacletus, and almost
discharge him, bringing forth an example of like error in Optatus the
Affricane a man otherwise both godly and learned.

Within these bowndes did this most earneste mayntener of Popish errors, hold
himself. But Turrianus Turrianus.
a great man amongst the companies of Jesus, and a follower, or rather a
flatteer of cardinal Hosius, did not stick to leap over the bars and listes.

He excuses not Anacletus after a The Jesuits impudent defense of Anacletus.
sort, and indifferently: but does plainly commend and defend him as a
skillful and diligent man: as a follower of the Prophets and Apostles, and the
learned auncientes. So much preuayleth with these men the smoke of the Popes
court, and his fat morsels, The Jesuits in flattering the Pope, shake of
all fear of God, and shame of the world.
that they do quickly shake of out of their conscience all the fear of God,
and drive from their face all shame and blushing, while they turn black into
white. Whosoever therefore do think that in these new companions of Jesus, (who
as they are themselves seduced so endeavor what they can to pervert others)
there remains any sparcle or ^rum of true faith: it must needs be, either
that they are not acquaynted with their disposition and manners: either that
they are them selves scarce sound in faith.

CAP. X. That the second step to keep fellowship with Jesus, is a life
worthy the name of Christ.
THat Christ is after two manner of ways in the holy scriptures described,
Christ in the scriptures delivered unto us after two sorts.
and set forth unto all the godly, we do read it well noted, and for good
cause written, by many godly, and learned expounders of the same. For they
teach first, that he is the Author and giver of remission of sins, 1
righteousness, life, and salvation to those that believe in him. And they
witness Christ only ^ Savior.
the same, to be so proper, and peculiar unto him, that no piece, or part
thereof may be turned over unto any other, without great wrong, and manifest
sacrilege against him. Secondly, they 2
describe him, as a most singular example, and pattern of a godly, and holy
life, ordered, and framed unto the most straight, or exact rule of the law of
God: which as by his words he taught, and prescribed: so did he by his deeds
express, and lay forth, to be followed of all those, that desire as well to
be, as to be called his scholars: whereof there is a plain testimonye the
13. Chap. of John. For this heavenly Io. 13.
master was nothing like those, whom Paul sets forth, the second of
Timothy, 3. chapter. Which carry 2. Tim. 3.
a show of godliness, but deny the power thereof: of which sort were they also,
whom he does lively paint out. Romans 2. chap. He has therefore both Romans 2.
delivered in word, and expressed in his deeds a true form of godliness: that
all that covet to have any place in his school, and household, might
understand, that it is required of them, as well to profess the same with
their mouth, as to perform it in work. For this being True love a sure mark
of the Discipler of Christ.
comprised under the name of love, he have said to be the proper mark of his
profession, and schooling, whereby his true Disciples are discerned from
counterfaite. Io. 13. chapter. As likewise Io. 13.
he has willed, that Wolves, and false Prophets should be known by their
fruits. Math. 7, verse. 16. To be Math. 7. 16.
short, it is evident, that Christ, would have our obedience, joined with our
faith in him, which is the head, and sum of all the service, which he would
have done unto him. Yea, and Faith must be joined with obedience.
the Apostle in some places shows, that faith it self, is comprised under
the name of obedience.

Moreover, he witnesses, that God It Is. 1.
is denied, as well in deeds, as words: Even as he teaches the doctrine to be
commended with the example of holy life. The Apostles therefore being the best
expounders of the mind, and words 1. These. 4.
of Christ: Like as they do always teach, that we should believe and trust in
him, the Author of our righteousness and salvation: So they do every where
admonish, and exhort us, to follow him the Schoolemaister, and singular example
of holy life. For he has not, as Paul says, called his unto uncleanness, and
looseness of life, but unto holiness. Neither was he made only unto the
faithful (as he writes to the Corinthians,) their wisdom, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
and righteousness, but also their sanctification, and redemption. For as by his
wisdom* and righteousness, he drives away the natural darkness of man's
mind, and does kindle in them the light of the true knowledge of him self,
and his father: and forgiving of our sins does endue, and adorn us with his
righteousness, wherewith we being covered do please the Father: So he does give
us his holy Spirit, which does renew our minds, that they may have holy
desires, and pure affections, which at last may bring forth holy works.

And touching the effects of the holy Ghost, in the faithful, and endeavor of
holy life, it is every where entreated Romans 6. 7. 8. Ca.
in the Epistles of the Apostles, but chiefly, in the Epistle to the Romans the
6. 7. 8. Chapters, the same is handeled diligently, and largely. And the very
same also does James, and John in their Epistles of purpose teach. The desire
therefore, and endeavor of a holy and new life ought so to be coupled The
endeavor of holy life can not be separated from true faith.
with true faith in Christ, that it is a harder matter, or as impossible, to
pluck one of them from another, as it is to separate light from the Sun, and
heat from the fire. For Christ, as the same Apostle witnesses, gave him self
for us, that he might deliver us from all iniquities, and purge us to Ti. 2. 14.
be a peculiar people, unto him self, zealous of good works. And verily, if
the Philosophers do discourse of manners, and deliver precepts, not so much to
make men skillful, as good: how unseemly a thing were it, that Christian
Philosophy should go no The true believers do feel Christ working in them
by his holy Spirit.
further, then to infourme men's minds with the knowledge of godliness, making no
account of leadinge a godly, and holy life? Whosoever has faith, he must
feel in him self Christ, so working by his holy Spirit, that he truly say
that which the Apostle does, Gala. 2.
I live, yet not I any more, but Christ lives in me. For as the body having a
soul, does receive, and feel his force, and actions: So he that is
ingraffed into Christ, and is made his member, can not but be partaker of Why
the company of the godly are called the communion of Saints.
his Spirit, life, and holiness. For the which cause, the Apostolic, and
Catholic faith, calls the body, or fellowship of the church, the communion
of Saints: plainly declaring, those only to appertain unto that fellowship,
which do mind an holy life, and do bend and endeavor them selves hereunto:
that they become such as Paul exhorts the Thessalonians to 1. These. 5. 23.
be: that is, wholly sanctified, sound in Spirit, and such as are kept
blameless in body and soul, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. They
that are otherwise minded, and do otherwise lead their life, and nevertheless
say they be of the fellowship of Jesus: do vary from them selves, and their
life does manifestly reprove their tongue of a lie.

CAP. XI. That there appears not in this new fellowship of Jesus, any
endeavor of holy life.
I Doubt not but the title, or drifte of this chapter, will seem unto many at
the first sight, not only strange, but also unreasonable, and no less, then if
I should go about to prove, heavy things to go upward, and light things
downward. For where as I say, that The Jesuits no such men as they bear the
world in hand.
I do not find in this vpstart kind of monks, integrity of life, and
endeavor of holiness: I shall seem unto a great many, to do no otherwise, then
if I should say that I find no light in the Sun or whitenes in Snow. So
verily is the outward visor, or show wont to dasell their eyes, which gaste
thereupon, and do not withdrawing the same, look into the matter more
narowly. Of these therefore I request, that they would suspende their judgment
a while: and remove all preiudices out of their minds, and to judge of the
matter, hearing attentively the reasons, which I shall bring. First of The
Jesuits in their dealing against the professors of the Gospel in the point of
Justification, malicious and slanderous.
all, I say that I do worthily find wanting in these brethren, plain dealing,
and good meaning, namely, in those things that they write against us: as which
in the most weighty controversy of justification, cease not wrongfully to
burden us, or rather the truth it self, to the intent to make it not only
suspected, but also hated of all men: with that heinous, and rank slander,
of naked, or bare faith, and void of good works. And yet these men cannot but
know what our mind and judgment is, which have by flattery^ declared, and set
down in wrytinge, a thousand times by our men. They do easily perceive that
we do allow that faith, and do attribute unto it only What iustifiing faith
the professors of the gospel teach.
that effect of justifying, which the Apostle does define to be effectual by
love, and fruitful by good works, and so, that we do not separate the good
Gal. 5. 6. (...). 12. 33.
fruits from the good tree, although in that effect, it be discerned from
them. When one reasons of the sun, fire, and a man, does not he reason of the
sun that shines, fire that heateth, and a man that lives, albeit in flat
words it be not added: nevertheless, every man does distinguish them one from
another by their effects. Therefore Lies and slanders the notes of the enemies
of truth and godlynes.
let these masters cease to slander us, if they will persuade us, that they
are lovers of the truth, and desirous of holiness, for to cavil, much more to
lie and slander is the part of the enemies of godliness and truth. But
letting this pass, let us come to the examination of the rest of their life. I
will not here charge them all by rehearsing those things, which I have often
times heard and understood to be almost in every man's mouth, before their
eyes, and in their hands: that certain grievous offenses have been lately
committed of some, which are of this order of companions. They would perhaps
make answer, that the wickedness of some ought not to be prejudicial to the
whole felowwippe, even as no wise man does condemn the Apostleship, for the
falshode and treason of Judas.

Moreover, I am not so curious, and desirous to pry into other men's lives,
that I should desire to touch those things that are done within private
walls. I leave such things, first, 1. Cor. 4.
unto God, who will once make manifest things that are hid in darcknes, as the
Apostle witnesses, next, unto time, the mother of truth, as they use to say:
lastly, unto them that are in those cloisters or dens, and abide willingly
amongst them: which if they would, happily also might bring to light those
things, that as they are soul to commit, so should be shameful to speak and
to hear: I will only make mention of those things, which the very Sun does
behold, and are in every man's eyes.

First, that the hatred of the world is joined with the true love of godlynes,
Iac 4. ver. 3. The love of the world, and y^ love of god lines can not agree.
it is as certain, as that the Sun does shine at high noone. For God and the
world are of such contrary desires one to ye other, that James doubts not to
say, that the friendship of the world is enimity with God, and that whosoever
desires the friendship of the world, is made an enemy unto God. Whosoever
therefore is not an adversary unto the world, and has not bidden battle unto
it, and does not declare the same, rather in deed, then in word, is not to be
counted ye friend, much les ye fellow of God. For Christ also has sufficiently
showed, that no man can be addicted to them both, and Math. 6. 2. Timoth. 4.
ver. 10.
love them both. Paul allegeth no other reason, why Demas forsook him, but
that he had embraced this present world.

Furthermore, John in his first Epistle, and second chapter, has liuelye
painted out the nature of the world, and what his lusts are, wherein also he
confirms the former sentence of James. Whatsoever (says he) is in the world*
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of
the father. Now it is to be The lusts of the world do rain chiefly in the
Poopes, and his prelates courts.
considered, amongst whom these affections do reign, and these marks
appear. If there be any that dare deny, that they are chiefly to be seen in
the courts of the Bishops of Rome, of Cardinals, and of Bishops: I will not
doubt to affirm, that he is touched with no feeling of conscience, and with
no shame. For who, unless he be marvelously shameless, will deny, that their
palaces, or houses more stately then kings, are schools of all kind of
pleasures? Who knows not, that they, and their reteyners, do live in
excessive riot, and do fare most delycately and dayntely? Truly that
Pontificalis cana.
old proverb, a Prelates feast, did never so well agree unto any, as unto
these men. I speak nothing of the monstrous outrages, which are done in
secreate: those that are openly done, do suffice and give evident testimony
thereof. If it has been heretofore truly, and worthily said, let him depart
from the court, that minds to be godly, how much more truly, and rightly,
I pray you, may it be said of these men: whosoever desires to have fellowship
with Christ, and friendship with God: Let him beware, flee, and abhor these
companies, and fellowships? For he that goes about to join the one of these
with the other: he thinks, and does as wisely, as if he should endeavor to
make fire, and water agree together. If these new The Jesuits in hauntinge
the popes and prelates courts and kitchinges, show what hatred they bear to
the world.
fellows are so desirous of the Apostolical temperance, continence, and
abstinence, as they profess them selves in their apparel, iesture, words,
and writings: how comes it to pass, that they covet so much, to nestle
themselves so near the Popes kitchins? It is marvel that they avoid not smoke,
which is, noisome to students of learning, and the savor of roasted meat, which
is wont to be unpleasant unto those which are fasting. They that in deed hate
wickedness, do diligently remove, from them all those things, which entise
men thereunto, and do diligently cut of all occasions thereof. Yea, their
ears can scarce abide their names. And many not without cause The verse
occasions of eviles, to be avoided of the godly.
do think, that this cause especially brought forth, the old solitary
life. For those goings aside from the multitude, and company of men, do seem
to have tended to that purpose, as the monumentes of antiquity touching the
same, do plainly declare. But these vpstart fellows, of whom it is reported*
that they mean to raise up the godly antiquity, being as it were The
Jesuits for sake not the world but embrace it and run into the midst of it.
buried, take a clean contrary way from it. To the intent they might flee from
the world, they seek the very marowe, and fat of the world, to the intent
they might avoid filthiness, they cast them selves into the gutter.

Turrianus writes, that he was, Turrianus the Jesuits vain and ridiculous
brag of his forsakinge die world.
before he took upon him the profession of the sect of the Jesuits, in the
world, and so he would conclude, that he is now out of the world: following (I
think) them; which cast themselves into hot burninge coals, least they
should be burnte: or which for fear of rain, least they should be wet, do
dreanch themselves in a river.

Furthermore, they that are desirous of godlynes from the heart, and endeavor to
go before others, and provoke the^ by their example to virtue, do even avoid
all occasions which might cause men to suspect the contrary of them. The
Jesuits frequentinge the kitchinge give men occasion to suspecte that they
love belly chere and not temperance.
Now who would not believe, much more suspecte, that those which follow the
savor of the kitchen, be rather given unto voluptuousnes, then to temperance:
and albeit they feign themselves to be abstinent, yet that they do live
ryoteously? For it is not said for naught, if thou dwell by a lame man, thou
shall learn to be lame. But these Objection.
men will say, that their purpose, and end is, to cure the diseases of ye
church, and that they do follow cunning and wise Physicians, which do very
well think, that it ought to be the chiefest endeavor, to take away the causes
of the diseases: and for as much as they perceive the Bishops of Rome, and
Prelates to be the fountains of all those evils wherewith the church is
greatly pressed, and well near oppressed, (as all men likewise do confess,)
that therefore they have most just cause to begin amongst them their cure.
Answer.
These things are well said, but their deeds must answer their sayings.
Verily How the Jesuits play the Physicians in curing the diseases of the sick
popish church.
they are but vain bragges, whether they hold their peace, or say any thing
to the contrary. For it is no wise man's part, as one well says, to believe
more those things which thou hear, then which thou see. Neither are there
more sure testimonies of our intentes, and wills, then the effects thereof.
Therefore we do then especially believe, and confess that the causes of
diseases are cured, when we see the diseases to be assuaged, and diminished.
But now, what signs, and tokens of this assuaging of the diseases do there
appear unto us, or what can these new Physicians show us? whom have they of
so many naughty and leaude persons, brought unto a better trade, or a sounder
mind? Errors and naughtines amongst them are not only not diminished, but
more, and more increased. In some of these governors of their church,
superstition together with ignorance of heavenly doctrine grows daily more
stronger: in other some, the contempt of true religion waxes greater, in most
part either Atheism, or Epicurisme do openly reign. Their manners are very
corrupt, all discipline, yea, that which the Popes themselves have invented,
and devised, is quite decayed. And what should I bring any witnesses hereof,
seeing the thing it self sounds it out? Who knows not ^se. 4. ver. 1. 2.
that, that most grievous complainte which is in the Prophet, Ose the 4.
Chapter, was never more justly either spoken, or heard of, then at this day:
to wit, There is no truth, no mercy, and no knowledge of God in the land,
by swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring they break out,
and blood touches blood: for these things are done without controlement, and
these wounds are seen, both every where, and especially amongst them, about
whom these new Surgions are always present, and conversant. But Objection.
again me thinks I hear them say, that in deed they do apply remedies,
nevertheless they find by experience the force of the diseases to be so great,
that no remedies can prevail with them, and that they are without all fault,
seeing they do their duty truly. But I would feign hear, what Answer.
they call their duty. Where is first, to use the Apostles word, soundness
2. Time. ver. 1. 2. 3.
and wholsomenes of doctrine? Again where is that freedom, continuance,
franknesse of speech, and holy boldness, which the same Apostle commands, in
teaching, exhorting, reproving in season, and without season: where is the
feruencie of Spirit, and zeal of the house of God? Briefly, where are the
fire, and burning yrons against dangerous diseases, and such that can not be
cured with lighter remedies? And if they are not able to cut them of by
excommunication from their churches, by reason of the great power they have,
why do not they cut themselves of from them: that is, why do they not forsake
them, as Physicians do those sick folks which are wilful, and past all hope?
So Paul seems to have excommunicated the Jews, whiles forsaking them, he
turned him self unto the Gentiles, as the Lord commanded him. If a man may
judge Act. 13. ver. 46
by the effects, (which is a ready rule in this kind of matter) these
gadding, or rouing Merchants have some other purposes in their minds, and do
follow some other respects. It is not the desire, and hope to cure evils, not
the love of truth and godliness, not the endeavor of holy life, which draws
them to the porches and precinctes of Prelates: but the same desire that
allureth Dogs, and Ravens to seek carcayses and carraine. For the thing The
true cause of the Jesuits frequenting the palaces of popish prelates.
it self witnesses, that the wickedness, riot, and sluggishnes of the Popes,
are not amended, and diminished by the endeavor of these teachers: but rather
nourished, and established by their flatterings. So far of is it, that they
do bridle the old riot, and madness, that they incite them, being of them
selves forward enough, thereunto. For they have brought to pass by their
counsels, and incouraginges, that in steed of an whorish, they have put on an
iron forhead. What should I say? we find by experience that the former
tyranny is so increased, and confirmed, that it may seem that these new
counselors were heard, and accepted of the Popes, even as the history of the
old Testament declares, that Roboam sometime accepted the counsel 1. Reg. 12.
of young men. And as Ezechiel in Eze. 34.
the 34. Chapter does set out in the person of the Jewish shepheardes, the
slouthfulnes, riot, and tyranny of these of our time: So in the 13. Chapter,
under the description of false Prophets, teaching the people the counsels The
Jesuits purposes bewrayed by their doings.
of their own hearts, he seems to have painted out in their colors these
new Foxes. All things truly do very well agree together. But what need many
words? the endless hatred they bear, and war they bid, and undertake against
all those, which can not wink at, and away with the Popes disorder, and
dissolutenes, and do labor to shake of his wicked yoke, does most plainly
argue, and declare, what mind and purpose these men are of. And whether they
do allow, or disalowe their disposition, manners, and kind of life, hereby it
may certainly be determined. Paul the first to the Romans, To 1. Not only
the doors, but also the allowers and incoragers of wickedness, guilty before God.
does end a recital, or bedroll of most grievous, and hamous sins, with
this conclusion: They do not only the same them selves, (speaking of the
Gentiles) but also like, and allow of them that do the same. In which words
he shows manifestly, that they that further, and favor sins, whether it be
by allowing, or flattering, or mainteining them which commit the same, do sin
more grievously, and are more wicked, and worthy a greater punishment. Solomon
also the 17. of the Proverbs witnesses, Prou. 17. ver. 15
that he that acquitteth or justifies the wicked, and condemns the just, are
both an abomination unto the Lord. Now that these men do commit both these
offenses, the hatred they use against those, that teach, that both such
ungodliness, and also naughtines is not to be borne with, do evidently declare.
Who, I pray you, would not think, that those shepheardes, which keep of, and
beat away dogs, when they bark against Wolves, do conspire with the
Wolves against the flocks: and that they are more dangerous, and therefore
more to be avoided of the flock then the Wolves them selves. To conclude,
there must be either some secreat virtue, such as they say is in the loode
stone, to draw iron to it: either some very great likeness of dispositions,
manners, and counsels, which has so suddenly, so quicklye, so straightly
lincked these Jesuits unto The Jesuits and popish prelate^ conspire both
against Christ.
the Romish Bishops and prelattes. And for as much as we are not certain of
any secret virtue, but are most sure hereof, by the consent of all wise men,
and experience of all times, that, that proverb is true, likelihood is the
mother of friendship: what other thing may be gathered, and concluded, then
that there is very great likeness between them, and conspiracye in assalting
the kingdom of Christ, although there be in outward show never so great an
vnlikelyhood? for it is as well known, and as certain, as snow is white that
they help one the other in bringing to pass this matter. wherefore these new
companions have taken to themselves a name from Jesus, with the like right, and
no better title, then the Bishop of Rome the open How truly the Jesuits
take their name of Jesus.
enemy of Christ, does call himself vicare: and the prelates do boste them
selves to be the successors of the Apostles, from whom they do utterly disagree.

CAP. XII. That the third step, Whereby the fellowship with Jesus is
confirmed, is the bearinge of his Cross.
AL wise men do confess that likeness, and equality are most sure bands of
felowshippes, which thing also daily experience does teach, and confirm. For
men's minds are by no other means so much won and knit together: and
friendship, and concord, the foundations of felowships by no other means are
so much gotten, and preserved, unlikeness verelye Likeness and equality the
cause of fri(...)dship and concord, as the contrary of hatred and discord.
and inequality do quickly breed complaints and braules, which are the
destruction of societies, and the occasions of discordes, and seditions: and
contrariwise equality is ye nourisher of peace and concord. The most wise God
therefore when he would have his Churches, to wit, Christ's, and all the elects
fellowship to be most nere, and sure: he also would, that there should be in the
same both a very great likeness, and equality, saving that there should be a
certain diversity, and difference, which we se likewise to be necessary to
make, and keep society. As in ye body of similitude.
man there is diversity of members, so in a common wealth, and a family there
is a difference of offices, and degrees, which does so appertain unto good
order, that thereunto it is altogether necessary* but in all other things
there ought to be very great equality, and likeness. Moreover 5. Paul the 8.
Romans 8. ver. 24.
To. ver. 24. entreating of afflictions of the godly, makes plain mention of
the likeness which God would have, and has ordained should be, in the church
between the head, and the members. The members of Christ must be made like to
him their head.
Those says he, whom he has known before, he has predestinate, that they
may be made like to ye image of his Son, that he might be the first borne
among many brethren. The Apostle shows that it is the purpose of the Father,
that the first born son, to weete, Christ, should be the mirror or samplar,
whereunto all men should conform themselves, so that every man should
resemble, and express him. The Author of the epistle to the Ebr. Hebr. 2.
the 2. chap. describes the beginning of this conformity, and likeness,
teachinge that the Son of God, being true God, was made partaker of flesh,
and blood: because the children, whom God had given unto him, to wit, the
elect, were made partakers thereof: that through one, all might be made
brethren, unto whom he was made in all things like, sin only except And
the Apostle Paul the 3. to the Philippians ^ bil. 3. ver. 21
ver. 27. touches the end, and full conformity, foreshewing, and promising
that it should come to pass, that Christ returning from heaven, should change
our vile bodies, and make them like to his glorious body. What the way is, to
be made like unto Christ
Therefore he was made like unto us, that he might make us like unto him self,
according to that power (as the Apostle says) whereby he is able to subdue al
things unto him self. Now after what manner, and how he is willing, and wont to
bring this to pass, he has expressed and declared in him self, to wit, his
flesh and blood, which he has taken of us. The author of the Epistle to the
Heb. the 2. cha. verse. 10. Heb. 2. ver. 10.
shows, that it became the Prince of the salvation of the elect, to be
consecrated or made perfect through afflictions. And Christ him self declared
unto his disciples being heavy for his cross, and death, that he must so
suffer, and dye, that he might enter into his glory. Wherefore he made the flesh
Luke 24. ver. 25.
that he took upon him, to become like the elect, to wit, his brethren: fit,
and meet for the everlasting glory, and heavenly dwelling, by the cross and
afflictions. But if this were the state of him which is the first begotten, who
is the head, the captain, yea the king The cross the way to be like unto
Christ.
and author of everlasting salvation, and life: what shall we think that their
state ought to be, which are called, adopted, and engraffed, to the intent they
may be partakers of salvation? And Christ did plainly signify the same, what
time he gathered, and chose his disciples into his family, company, and schole:
and they themselves as best witnesses thereof, do in diverse places report and
testify, that he joined and bound them to himself: making in plain and flat
words, as it were, a covenant with them, and adding expressly a condition that
they should bear his cross. Afterward Math. 16. Mar. 8. Luc. 9.
when they were co^uersant with him, he often times forewarned them of things
to come, and of such miseries and afflictions, which they were to have at the
hands of those, especially which were household felows with the^, after Christ
exhorts his, to the patient bearing of the cross.
his departure from them: unto the patient bearing whereof, he exhorted them,
and encouraged and strengthened them with diverse reasons, but chiefly with such
as were drawn from his own person, as most weighty, and such wherewith they
ought principally to be moved. For in this respect also, he sets forth him
self for an example, and would be so taken, of all that are his, whereof Peter
flatly does admonish us. If (says he) when 1. Pet. 2. ver. 19. and 21.
ye do well, nevertheless ye suffer wrong, this is acceptable to God. For
hereunto are ye called: because Christ also has suffered for you, leaving you
an ensample, that you should follow his steps. Then he wills them to Cap.
4. 13.
rejoice which suffer for the truth, and righteousness, as the partakers and
fellows of the sufferings of Christ: which shall also be fellows and
partakers of his glory. Of the which sequel, and hope, Paul, discourses at
Romans 8. ver. 17.
large the 8. to the Romans. For after that he had spoken much of
sanctification, or leading of a holy life, by the guiding of the spirit of
God, according to the rule delivered unto us from God: (which endeavor I showed
before to be necessarily joined with justification which is by faith) going
about to declare, and with most strong arguments to prove, how all the They
that look to be partakers of everlasting blessedness in the life to come with
Christ, must bear the cross with him in this life.
children of God, ought to come to the possession of the enherita^ce, to wit,
blessedness with Christ: he begins the matter with this sentence: If so be we
suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him: teaching both upon
what condition we are received into the fellowship of Christ: and also what
way we ought to take to come to the end thereof, to wit, everlasting glory, or
salvation. Which thing also shortly, but sweetly he teaches the 2. to
Timothy, 2. chapter, verse 11. If we dye with him, we shall 2. Timoth. 2. v. 11.
also live with him: if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him. These are
the laws of this fellowship, that all things should be common: that there
should be a likeness, and equal state in labors, and in rewards. Wherefore Paul
oftentimes, as it appears, has pronounced this law generally: All (says he,
the 2. to Timothy the 3. 2. Tim. 3. ver. 12.
chapter, that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution: and in
certain Churches he repeated this, that they must enter into the kingdom of
God by many tribulations. Acts. 14. For the cross is so joined Act. 14. ver.
22.
with the profession of the cross, that it can not be separated from it. As
for The cross can not be separated from Christian profession*
the sundry use of the cross, and why he would have his to be afflicted: yea
rather why he him self does oftentimes afflict them, at this present here is
no place to speak thereof. By these places, which I have now alleged, and
diverse other, which I do willingly pass over, it is plainly proved, that none
belongs unto Christ, which is not partaker of his cross: for as much as that
is the mark, as it were, of the children of God, wherewith the most dearest of
all was chiefly marked, and honored. Yea the author of Heb. 12. ver. 8.
the Epistle to the Hebrews sticks not to call them bastards, and no true
children, which are not partakers of discipline, and chastisement. As
therefore; to conclude this part, they that are given of his father unto
Christ, being first ingraffed to him by faith, have fellowship with him: and
are made partakers of all gifts, and goodness, which otherwise are proper to him
only: and then by the endeavor of a holy life, do continue this fellowship,
and keep the right of the sons of God: so by the bearing of the cross, they
do both testify unto all men, and persuade their own minds more and more: yea
and do seal up in their consciences, that they are the members of Christ, and
do belong to that fellowship, whereof he is the head: and thereby do conceive
most assured hope, that they shall be heirs of the kingdom of God with
Christ, whom with great joy of mind they look for.

CAP. XIII. That in the new fellowship of the Jesuits, there appears no sign
of the cross of Christ.
I Doubt not but that these men, whom I impugn, will say, that they
ackowledge, like, and embrace as most true, whatsoever now has been said,
touching the bearing of the cross of Christ: but that it is so far of, that
they make against them, that they make most for them. So in most points of
doctrine we agree in words, but we disagree very much in understanding, and
sense. Wherefore we must have a touch stone, which may discern the true sense
from the false. The doctrine therefore of the cross of Christ, is to be
discussed in a few more words: and this cross is to be severed from all other.
And they are to be discerned the one from the other chiefly by their causes.
For that saying of Cyprian that notable writer, is no Cyprian.
less true, then common: The cause, The cross of Christ is to be discerned
from all other by the cause. Augustine.
and not the punishment, makes a Martyr. Which also was used after of most
godly writers, namely of Augustine against the Donatistes, which did falsely
challenge unto them selves the name, and praise of the Martyrs of Christ, unto
whom also Augustine does very well object, that Christ did not simply
pronounce them blessed which suffer persecution, but therwithall did add, for
me, for righteousness, and the truths sake, and so forth. Moreover Peter also
does most clearly disseuer them in his first Epistle 1. Pet. 2. ver. 19. and
4. Ca. ver. 15.
the second Chapter, verse 19. and the 4. Chapter, verse 15. not only bringing
in the true cause, to wit, the profession of the name of Christ, but also
forbidding the contrary, and removing it away by an opposition: what praise is
it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye suffer it patiently? whereunto
likewise that seems to pertain, which Paul the first to the Corinthians the
13. Chapter 1. Cor. 13.
writes of him, who being void of charity, does deliver over his body to
be burned. But here chiefly stands the doubt, that our adversaries do
chalendge to them selves, the place, and part of Augustine: and ascribe unto us
the part of the Donatistes, and such like. Nevertheless they that see not, how
far the doctrine, and religion of Augustine does differ from the doctrine,
and religion of these vpstartes: and which can not judge Where the true cross
of Christ is to be found.
how unlike our cause is to the Donatists: it is marvel if they know how,
and are able to discern a coal from snow. Wheresoever the name of Christ is,
there is ye cross of Christ, and where Christ is rightly known, or rather
acknowledged, there it is to believed that the name of Christ is. But it is
evident, that these men do The Jesuits have not true Christ, but an Idol of
him.
not know Christ, and that they have, and do worship a painted, and
fantastical Idol, in the stead of the living, and true Christ. Then they
only can be afflicted for righteousness Purity of doctrine a sign of the
truth.
sake, which follow true righteousness, which thing they only do, which hold
the truth, and follow it as a light going before them. And who they be which
have the truth on their side, the purity of doctrine declares: which as it
is, the soul of the church, as it were, so is it a light to discern, and
find out darkness: the Rule which teaches us to try straight things from
crooked: the touchstone also, which seuereth true things from counterfeit.
Furthermore, what doctrine this new faction does profess, and follow, and
contrarily, what we do, partly it has been showed before: and partly a little
after shall be showed, for it is not unknown. For they differ as much as men's
inventions do from Gods decrees, that is, as much as darkness differs from
light. Thus much touching the discerning the causes of affliction. Now let us
entreat of the diverse, and sundry kinds of the cross of Christ, least we
should wrongfully exclude any man from the same, by the fleshly understanding
of man. Cyprian a true Doctor, and Pastor Cyprian.
of the church, and a most faithful, and constant Martyr of Christ, has left
behind him to the posterity, a learned and godly book of two sorts of
martyrdom, the reading whereof, I judge most profitable for all men. Out of it
I will gather some flowers, but changing the order which he kept. For in the
first place. I think best, that we consider of that kind of Martyrdom,
which he calls secret, and is common to all times. For it belongs also
unto all persons, which Two sorts of martyrdom, inward and outward.
do come unto that age, in which judge meant is ripe, and the discretion, or
discerning of good, and evil, is gotten. Neither can there be any place for
that kind of martyrdom, which we may call outward, and manifest, neither is
The inward martyrdom must go before the outward.
it for all either persons, either times, unless that, first go before. Neroes,
Diocletians, Decians, or Maximians do not always rage, as he says,
nevertheless the Devil never cease to trouble them, that are the professed
soldiers of Christ. They are never without an enemy, which do love Christ,
godliness, and righteousness. For even the most holiest, do carrye with them,
whether soever they go, a familiar enemy. We must always fight that battle,
which Paul lively Romans 6. ca. 7. cap. 8. cap. Gal. 5.
painteth out, the 6. 7. and 8. Chapters to the Romans The war is continual,
whereof he speaks the 5. Chapter to the Galathians, in the which the godly
oftentimes receive wounds, and sometimes also do take the foil: So that they
do that, which they would not. Moreover whither so ever they come, that are
desirous to defend and set forth the truth, they light upon The inward
martyrdom and conflicte in the godly continual.
the world, which can not hearken thereunto without repining, and grudging.
Whosoever is not willing to forsake it, and to depart from it, (as all those
ought to be willing, which will have any fellowship with Christ,) he must
always undertake the combat with it, he must always look for, and bear the
hatred, reproaches, and assaults thereof. By these exercises 2. Tim. 3. verse.
4.
they are easily known, who are, (to use the Apostles words) lovers of God,
rather then of pleasures. Now of which part, these new confederates are: the
tents, which they follow do manifestly bewray. Besides the enemies which
consist of flesh, and blood, they that have fellowship with Christ, are always
besieged with the powers of darkness, the rulers of this world, and
spiritual wickednesses, which do always lie in wait for them: with these
enemies all the children of God do continually wrestle, and strive. All that
are of this number and band, do prepare, sense, and defend them selves with
the weapons, and armor which the Apostle notes out, and describes the 6. to
the Ephesians. Ephesians. 6. The godly never want their spiritual combats with
Satan.
Hereby, as by sure marks, they that fight under the banner of Christ in this
field, are known. They that draw unto themselves a cross, or devise What is
the true cross of Christ, and what not.
unto them selves armor of their own making, have no cause at all to say,
that they bear the cross of Christ. For that only is to be said to be his,
which he lays upon our shoulders: and which they shall never want: which
make account to live godly. For the only sight of the wicked life of the
ungodly, does oftentimes bring unto the godly a hard, and bitter cross: as it
befell sometime to Noe, and Lot, as Peter witnesses the 2. Epistle and 2. Pet.
2.
2. Chapter. Briefly the life of a godly Christian, is a continual combat in
this our exile, or banishment, as Job Job.
truly witnesses, who was greatly, and long practiced in this warfare.
Neither does Christ grant unto those that are his soldiers, any release, or
time of ease, and giving over: but so Dum spirant, non modo sperare, sed etiam
suspirare eos vult.
long as they breath, he would have them not only to hope, but also to sigh,
and groan. Therefore then at length shall they have fully ended the fight, The
godly must always in this life bear the cross of Christ.
when they have likewise ended their lives. It is well said also, that the life
of godly men is a continual repentance: which if it be true, never lacks a
cross of Christ.

Now whereas these new fellows The life of the godly a continual repentance.
do not know, what true repentance and turning to God is, (as it is plain by
their own writings) neither understand by what means the mortification, The
Jesuits ignorant of true rapentance and mortification.
and burial of the old man, and quickening of the new is brought to pass,
they have no cause why they should say they bear the cross of Christ: and
challenge to them selves a place in his fellowship.

Besides this kind of Martyrdom, The outward martyrdom what.
which partemeth to all the godly, and is chiefly wrought inwardly in the
theater of the mind only: there is an other, which belongs neither unto all
times, neither all believers, but to them alone which endure torments even unto
the death for the profession of the name of Jesus Christ: and have as it were
sealed up with their blood amongst unbelievers, the Indenture of the Gospel,
as Cyprian speaks: Cyprian.
whose captain is the finisher and accomplisher Instrumentum Euangelicum.
of our faith Christ, as the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews Heb. 12. ver.
2.
the 12. chap. verse. 2. does very notably set him forth, to be followed of all
the godly. And they only follow him, whom there unto he chooses, and calls,
that is, whom he vouchsafes of that honor. For to suffer reproaches in this
behalf, the Apostles by their example have taught, Acts 5. ver. 41. Act. 5.
ver. 41.
to be reckoned a matter of great honor, and gain. The same also have This
martyrdom for Christ glorious.
they taught in words, especially Paul, whose life apeareth to have bin a
continual Martyrdom. For he so Paul's life such a continual martyrdom.
carried about both in his mind Christ crucified, and so set him forth, and
painted him out with his talk, and so expressed him in his life: that he also
carried about him in his flesh, his Friar Frauncis fained to have wounds as
Christ, by the Franciscan Friars.
marks, not painted, or feigned, as the Franciscan Friars Idol, but printed in
all parts of his body: as the which mused upon, and practiced this only
thing, since Jesus chose him to be of his fellowship: that he might fulfill the
rest of the afflictions of Christ in his flesh, for his body sake, which
Colos. 1. ver. 24.
is the Church. It is not, in sooth, the part of a godly, and wise man, to
draw unto him rashly the hatred of the world, or without just occasion to
enter into danger under the pretense of truth, or religion: but to reject and
refuse it, being offered of God, it is the part of a faint hearted and
faythles man. Wherefore although it be not necessary that al men should
witness their profession of the Gospel, by outward suffering and torments,
much less seal it up with the sheadding of their blood: nevertheless The
godly ought ever to be willing to suffer this martyrdom, when just occasion is
offered.
all those that will be accomted of the heavenly father, and Jesus Christ, for
sons, and brethren, and not be thrown into utter darkness, and everlasting
fire with faith breakers, and hypocrites, ought at least to seal the same,
with the preparation of their minds thereunto, as some speak: that is, ought
so to have their minds bent, or settled, that they be ready not only to enter
into dangers, but also suffer death, if the glory of Christ, the salvation of
the Church, and cause of the truth does require the same. Whether these new
companions of Jesus, carry such minds or no, it is not hard to judge, by these
The Jesuits have not this willingness to suffer this martyrdom for Christ.
things that they have hitherunto done, and yet do. For they that are always
present with the sworn enemies of Christ, and do take secret counsel with
them, do encourage tyrants, are to tormentors as it were bellows to kindle
flaming fyres, against the sons of God, the brethren, and members of Jesus
Christ: finally which apply all their intentes, and purposes to that end, that
they may crucify the true professors of Christ, how can they have minds
prepared, and ready to bear the cross?

CAP. XIIII. That the Jesuits have a great resemblaunce, and likeness with
these heretics which are called Nazarites, the enemies of the cross of Christ.
IT is evidently known by the history of the Acts of the Apostles, that
as soon as the light of the Gospel began to spread abroad his beams, Satan
raised up against it diverse kinds of enemies: which although they were very
unlike one the other amongst them selves, yet they did all conspire together in
this, that they hated Christian religion, and labored by all their devises,
and endeavors, either wholly to let, either to hinder the course of the
G(...)ll. Amongst the Jews there were especially the High Priests, the
Pharisees and the whole scomme of y^ Priesthode. There were also amongst the
people very many, which were oftentimes stirred up by those bellows. Amongst
the Gentiles there were diverse kinds and states, as those times did require,
of the which perhaps somewhat shall be spoken at an other time. Now I will
speak of a certain kind, which that perpetual enemy of Christ, and his
Church had set forth by a special devise, and instructed with a peculiar
subtlety. It was a kind of men both very crafty and very pestilent: the The
Nazareans described, and their practices, against Paul.
which as it did the more secretly undermine the Church, so did it hurt it more
daungerously. First it crept in subtly to the duty of teaching: for it
insinuated it self, as it appears, under the color of spreading abroad the
Gospel. And for as much as the name of Paul was very famous, for his
marvelous dexterity in preaching the Gospel, and his happy success in
publishing thereof, (which thing also got him the hatred of very many) these
hypocrites thought best chiefly to set them selves against him: thinking that
to be very profitable for their purposes, and devises. For they thought that to
be the readyest way for them to come to glory, and gain, which they only
regarded, and whereunto they turned all their doctrine. Therefore taking upon
them the person The Nazareans took upon them to be Apostles.
of Apostles, they sought by all kind of lies and trecheries, to remove Paul
from his place, and to thrust him from his seat: that is, to take away all
authority from him, and they troubled him wonderfully with diverse slanders.
Now as they had taken upon them to vex, and to backbite him above others: so
he dealing with a good conscience in this his vocation, did set him self
stoutly, and constantly against these ministers Paul's constancy and boldness
in the defense of the Gospel against them.
not of Christ, but of Satan: well perceiving what this enemy by them did go
about to bring to pass. As therefore he well understood the craftiness of
these deceivers, so he most clearly discovered them unto all congregations,
paynting them out, as it is said, in their own colers, and that not in word
only, but also by writing, that ye memory thereof might remain with the
posterity, to their great profit. For the Church has in Paul in these
paynteth out al false teachers to the posterity for ever.
that description of the Apostle a lively picture of all false teachers, and
heretics: which if all that profess the name of Christ, did mark, and note,
it would be far better with a great number, and the Church of Christ should
feel less hurt. Verily in that picture of the Apostle, these new kind of
deceivers of who^ we now speak, seems unto me most of all to be expressed.
For there is such a likeness between them both, that the one may worthily
seem to be, and to be called* not only the image, and lively portrature, but
the fathers also of the other. Only this unlikeness I do The Jesuits worse
then the Nazareans.
note to be between them, that the children do many ways pass their fathers
in wickedness, and craftines. But that ought neither to seem to be a new
thing, neither to be marueyled Satan's later devises worse the^ his former.
at. For Satan the common father of them both, by long use, and experience of
many things, does every day ware worser, and craftt^r then him self.
Wherefore it is no marvel if his second devises be more wylier (as the Proverb
goes) and the last egg of this crow be more hurtful then the first. Herein
they do agree well first, that as that enemy of Christ, so soon as the
Gospel began to be published amongst the Gentiles, brought them in subtelly
under the pretense of the law, and religion of Moses: So immediately when the
light of the gospel began to shine again, and to be restored, craftily he
stirred up, and not only conueighed into the Church, but also by, and by
advanced these, being covered with the title of Jesus, and decked with the
show of godlynes, and furnished with many practices to deceive. And to the
intent that every man may the sooner understand, what great likeness and
agreement there is between both the sorts, I have thought good to lay
before all men's eyes a comparison of them.

The false Apostles which Hierom and other do call Nazares, or Nazareans, as
touching their doctrine, were
Enemies of the cross of Christ. Phil. the 3. ca. Teachers of an other gospel,
the^ that which was delivered of Paul, and corrupters of the same. Gal. 1.
Teachers of other doctrines, 1. Time. 1. ver. 3. disobedient, vain talkers, or
talkers of vanity, and deceivers of minds. Tit. 1. ver. 10. Such as gave heed
to fables, and the commandments of men, that turn away from the truth. Tit.
1. ver. 14. Authors of fables, and genealogies which are endless, which breed
questions, rather then godly edifying which is by faith. 1. Tim. 1. verse. 4.
Disturbers of the congregations. Acts. 15. verse. 1. Gal. 5. verse. 10. Authors
of dissentions and offenses. Romans 16. verse. 17. Authors of profane, and vain
bablings, and oppositions of sciences falsely so called. 1. Tim. 6. verse. 20.
The sum, or effect is, that the (...)e Apostles doctrine is contrary to the
doctrine of Christ, that is, the Apostolical: that it is fabulous, vain,
unprofitable, breeding dissentions, and offenses, or (as these Romish Censors
are wont to speak) Schismatic and offensive.

In the manner of delivering their doctrine, they were wont
To transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ. 2. Co. 11. To make a
show of god lines, but to deny the power thereof. 2. Tim. 3 verse. 5. To make a
fair show in the flesh. Gal. 6. ve. 12 To boast in the flesh, Philip. 3* To
deceive the hearts of the simple, with fair and smooth speeches, and
flatterings. Romans 16. verse. 18. To bark like dogs at godly, and notable men.
Philip. 3. and 1. cap. To set to sale, and to handle deceitfully the word of
God. 2. Cor. 2. verse. 7. and 4. verse. 2. as deceitful workmen 2. Cor. 11* verse.
13. and evil workmen. Phi. 3. verse. 2.
The sum, or effect is, that they were counterfeit hypocrites, that they did
nothing singlely, or plainly, that they used speech framed to deceive, that
they corrupted craftilye those things that were whole and round.

The end and scope of their purposes and doings, was
To serve their own bellye, and not Christ, and to honor their belly for their
God. Romans 16 ver. 18. Philip. 3. ver. 18. To seek their own, and not those
things that are Christ's. Phi. 2. v. 21 To teach things that they ought not,
for silthy lucre sake. Tit. 1. ver. 11. and to subdue whole houses. To bear
rule imperiously, and to play the tyra^ts in the Church, with the reproach
thereof. 2. Cor. 11. ve. 20. To bring other into bondage. Gal. 2. verse. 4. To
flee persecution for the cross of Christ: and to glory in other men's flesh.
Gal. 6. ver. 12. and. 13.
The sum, and effect is, that they referred all things to their own gaynes,
to wit, their own ambition, and covetousness, two plagues or pestilences of the
Church* and the welsprings of all evil: that they were inflamed with the
desire to bear rule, that they were in respect of the^ selves lofte and
gentle, that they were cruel and fierce to others.

Those things that Paul has written, not so much against his own enemies, as
the enemies of Christ, The image of true teachers set forth in Paul, of
false teachers in the Nazareans.
and has in his Epistles h^^e, and there insearted: I thought good to refer
unto these heads, placed in this order, that they might the more easily both
be seen with the eyes, and conceived with the mind* And as both in these men's
persons, and doctrine there is set forth unto us an image of all false
teachers, and ^ure marks of corrupt doctrine: (...)in Paul, and his doctrine,
we have a true, and lively picture both of the true ministers of Christ, and
also sincere, and pure doctrine: for they must both be joined together, if we
will judge aright. Neither is any man's doctrine so much to be wayghed, and
esteemed by his tongue and talk, as by his life, and deeds. For of such
deceivers writes Paul, Tit. 1. They profess them selves to Tit. 1. ver. 16.
know God, but deny him in their deeds. It is also well written of Cyprian,
Cyprian.
that the testimony of the life Men's doctrine to be judged by their life, not
by their tongue.
is more effectual, then of the tongue: and that works has their tongue, and
their eloquence, yea when the tongue keeps silence. For as there can not be a
holy life, which is not ordered according to the rule of holy doctrine: so it
commonly comes to pass, that he which leads a life not agreeable unto this
rule: is willing, and endeuoreth to break, and corrupt (if he were able) the
very rule of good living: as every naughty man desires that good laws might
be banished, and destroyed, although he praise them sometime in his talk.
Briefly, the record of the life does not The tongue does sooner deceive, then the
life.
so much deceive, as of the tongue: the which the sentence of Christ does
confirm, willing us to try out false Mat. 7. ver. 15.
prophets, and wolves covered with Math. 7. ver. 15.
sheep clothing, by their fruits. For albeit they cou^terfayt never so much,
and often times also deceive wise men: yet at length their woluish nature does
bewray it self. But chiefly The end and scope of men's doctrine, a sure token
thereof.
a sure judgment may be had, by the scope and mark unto the which every man
drives, and whereunto he refers al his counsayles, and endeavors: as Paul
does plainly signify in certain 1. Tim. 1. and 6. 2. Tim. 2.
places, noting this especially in false teachers, renegates, and deceivers:
that they erred from the mark, and turned aside else where. Uerely it is
chiefly the care of true teachers, to apply all their thoughts, and doings to
the doctrines delivered unto them by God: as the which regards nothing more,
and counts nothing better, The end of the true teachers doctrine, to seek the
will of God: of the false, to seek their own lusts.
then to submit their wills to Gods will, and to be obedient thereunto. But it
is a common thing with falseteachers, to turn the heavenly doctrine to the
mark, which they have set before them selves: to the intent they may force it
to serve their own purposes, commodities, yea and their own lusts. The same
does Paul writing to the Corinthians the first Epistle, and 14, chapter,
sharply reprehende, 1. Cor. 14.
speaking of them which abused the gifts of tongs: the which place of the
Apostle, Chrysostom Chrysostom. ho. 35.
that godly Bishop, and good interpreter of Paul expounding, says: Mark how
here again he squareth the stone to the squier, seeking every where the
edification of the Church. So that the Apostle does teach both in this place,
and else where, that all things are to be referred to the edification of the
Church. Which mark, who so will regard, shall not easilye err, but he that
has any other respect, must needs miss often times.

Now let us consider, unto which sort these new Apostles do belong, and unto
whom they are more like, either Paul, or those disguised Apostles. What the
doctrine of Paul was, his Epistles do witness: but what his adversaries was,
it may certaynely be known, partly by Luke, Acts 15. chapter: partly by
Paul him self, namely out of the Epistle to the Galathians: and partly by
Hierom, especially out of his commentaries upon Ezechiel, 16. chap. and
certain other old writers. The effect is, they went about to couple the
keeping of the old law (these are Hieromes own words) with the grace of the
Gospel, and to join Moses unto Christ. But how small The Jesuits not like
Paul, but the Nazareans, in their doctrine.
a matter is this, I pray you, if it be compared with the riffe raffe of the
Jesuits doctrine, in the which there is scarce a leaf, wherein there is not
read some, much more greeuouser reproach against Christ, then that was? If for
that doctrine the Apostle doubted not, and that with indignation, to call them
the enemies of the cross of Christ, which inuerted the gospel, which he
having received of Christ, had preached: are not these to be taken The Jesuits
deface God, and his glory, in sanctifying, and deifying men.
for the very sworn enemies of Christ, and his Gospel, of all those that
have professed Christ, that love him, and are careful for his glory? For
what Christ, I pray you, should we have, if we harlten to these new masters,
and follow them? For almost all the ornaments which the father has bestowed
upon him, are plucked from him: and turned over, not unto Moses the rare Prophet
of God: but unto infinite obscure, and unknown, either Saints, as these men
term them, either false gods, which have b^^ sanctified, or deified by
filthy, and loud men. His grace The Jesuits deface Christ's grace, by man's
merits and works.
procured by his death, sacrifice, and merit, is not only obscured, but also
extinguished, and buried by these men's doctrine, of the merits of man, and
works which were not good, but partly superstitious, and partly wicked. For
what, I pray you, does that huge heap of evils, that shop of wickedness, and
nurse of mischiefs, The Mass injurious to the grace of Christ.
the Mass leave unto it? Again what soever these men teach of the fire of
Purgatory, prayer to the dead, worshipping of images, pardons, the Popes
supremacy, the authority of the church, and such other like matters: what else
are they but men's dreams, and devises more vayner then old wives tales? Is it
not mere vain babbling the greatest part, of those things, which under the
title of the traditions of the Apostles, are delivered as the Oracles of God,
unto Christian people, and are thrust upon them both to be believed, and
observed? What need I to speak of many ceremonies? For it is certain,
Jewish, and heathenish ceremonies brought into the Church of Christ, by the
Papists, and Jesuits doctrine.
that almost all the Iewishe ceremonies, except circumcision, which these
adversaries of Paul, or rather of Christ, and the truth, did chiefly urge: are
raised up, and brought again into the church of Christ, many things also
therewithal mingled out of the superstition, and ungodliness of the Heathen.
And when at length men began to believe that religion consisted in them only,
their heap with continual additions grew so great, that it was altogether
intolerable, and began with the hugenes thereof to fall to the ground.
Nevertheless as if those things which were inverted, and brought in by the
predecessors, were not sufficient: these new workmen do labor to add to
the former, such as they have lately coined in their own shop. Is not this
to teach other doctrines, and to bring in darkness at the noone light, yea, and
to call again bondage, liberty being once obtained? Moreover, that unlearned,
brabling, hurtful, yea pernicious questions are joined with the Jesuits
doctrine, it is thereby well known: that they embrace all the consuse heap of
the Popish divinity: nor do signify in any place, that I know, that they
mislike the thorny or subtle trifles of ye scholemen. Whereby it evidently
follows, The Jesuits doctrine more c^^rupt then the Nazareans.
that these new false apostles, as touching the nature of their doctrine, do
not differ from the old: saving that these men's doctrine is more erroneous,
and corrupt then theirs, and further off also from the simplicity, and purity
of the Gospel. As touching The Jesuits in the ambitious manner of their
teaching like the Nazareans.
the manner of insinuating them selves, and creeping into men's bosoms, and
rushing unto the tower of doctrine: that is, the pulpit, or the chair: there
is to be seen very great likeness between them both. They were Jews by birth,
by profession Christians, but in very deed, of that sort of men, which of
some are called neuters, that is, which embraced earnestly neither religion:
abusing notwithstanding craftily both unto their gaynes. What course these new
hypocrites have taken, and by what practice they have mounted, and are come unto
this degree, and place, which now they have, it is not unknown unto many
which are yet alive. Having atti^ed them selves cunningly with a visor of
godliness, they came abroad when the times were miserable, and lamentable: that
is, when all things in religion were out of order, The Jesuits counterfeit
holiness, and hypocrisy, to win credit at the first.
and tumbled vpside down. The manner of their countenance, of their voice, of
their gesture, and the behavior of their whole body, was so squared and framed
to the time, and all occasions: that many began to hope, that all things that
were decayed, and corrupted, should shortly be restored, and repaired by the
faithfulness, pains, and diligence of these new teachers. And herein stood
not the least part of Satan's subteltie, that they did disse^ble finely, that
they and the Monks did not join hands together, whose slouthfulnes, and
rioteousnes had now already brought them into hatred, and contempt with all
men. They signified plainly, that they had no dealing, nor conference with the
Priests, who^ they knew to be infamous with all me^, for their notorious
ignorance, and filthiness of life. But now it is known in very deed, that they
intend this one thing, to enriche them selves with their spoils, and deck
them selves with their feathers, and place them selves in their seats, and
rooms. Which purpose of theirs whiles I consider, that came into my mind,
which Josephus in the Ioseph^ll. A^^. Judah. 11. ca. 8.
11. book of the Antiquities of the Jews, the 8. chapter mentions, touching
ye sleight of the Samaritans. The Samaritanes, says he, in the distresses, and
afflictions of the Jews, deny themselves to be their kinsmen, saying them the
truth: but when they see them to have good success, by and by they thrust
them selves into their fellowship. Hereby it sufficiently appears, that it is
no new, but an old policy commonly used of the corrupters of the true
worship of God: The Jesuits do use the policy of all false worshippers of God.
to wit, to be touched in deed with no religion, nevertheless to feign, and
profess, as occasion serves, any religion: and to bend, and turn their
minds thither, where any hope of lucre, and gain does appear. Does not these
disguised Apostles, even as The Jesuits pleasers of men.
those ancient, being vain glorious, and pleasers of men, chiefly endeavor to
make a fair show in the fieshe? for what else are they, then the parasites of
wicked Popes, ignorant princes, and the superstitious vulgar people? Is not
this a common endeavor, and practice with these men, to make such as they smell
to be little favored of them, for their free and frank profession of the
truth, and godlynes, more odious unto them by inuenting of slanders against
them? Against The Jesuits slaunderers, and backbiters of godly and learned men.
godly and learned men, either which are absent, or which are dead, whose sight
they can not abide, and whose voice they can not bear: they practice their
doggishe eloquence, as the proverb is, and they gnawe them, even being dead,
with their spiteful teeth. Hierome amongst other things, Hicrome.
writes of those whom he calls (as I have said) Nazareans, thus: a
testimony which in his right place agrees with one sense, or meaning, they
labor to make to serve to an other. The which not only agrees with the words
of Paul, but does also in a manner expound them, especially that which was
spoken of before out of the 2. to the Corint. 2 that they used to set to sale,
and to corrupt the word of God.

In this point, these new hucksters The Jesuits chop and change and corrupt
the word of God, to get the favor of men.
do diligently follow them, when either they speak of the scriptures to
please the Popes: either tickle the ears of Princes, whom they have bewitched
with their inchauntments, either labor to stir up, and inflame the rage of
the furious vulgar people against us, whom they know as well as those that
inhabit those regions of the earth, wherein Antipodes.
they go directly foot to foot contrary unto us. Certainly they do then
declare how truly they call the Scripture a nose of wax. For they turn, or
rather wrest it, whither it pleases them. The words of the Scripture sound
with them what they list, and therein they see, what their affection leads
them unto, and what they like, is a matter of religion, and holiness. But they
are greatly deceived, if they judge us by their own disposition. We have
learned out of Paul, to handle the holy oracles more religiously. Verily we
acknowledge the mind of the holy ghost to be contained in the words, whereunto
we are wont to submit our judgment, will, and affections.

It remains, that we look upon The end of the Jesuits doctrine
the scope and end of their doctrine. Whereunto the vile and slauishe
flattery, and cruel backbiting of these new masters does tend: their life
and doings, as effects thereof do plainly declare. For we find daily by
experience that very many purposes are not known but by the euentes. It is
reported, that a certain Friar A Franciscane Friars hypocrisy to climb to
the Popedom.
of the order of the Franciscans, which bredde up hither unto many cruel
wolves, and subtle foxes: came unto the Popedom by a wonderful practice. At
the time of his meals, he causes his table to be covered with a fishers
net: which fact of his, diverse did take to be a sign of rare holmes. But
what came to pass? When this notable hypocrite had gotten the pray he hunted
after, that is, was mounted to that lofty seat: then at the length he ceased
to cover his boorde with that mystical net, and it was understood what
mind, and purpose that Fox had. So if there be any man, which either knows
not, either doubts, to what end the title of the Jesuits, being no less
holy in show, then strange, have bin invented, and usurped of these
confederates: and why they have taken upon them this color, or rather visor of
godliness, and learning: let him consider what has bin brought to pass, within
these few years, by these masking religious men, and where unto they are come
within so short a space, from very obscure, and sclender beginnings: and he
shall easily perceive, if he have but a spark of judgment, whether they have
sought their own* The Jesuits sudden aspiring to high rooms, and great
livings, show what their end is.
or the things that are Christ's: whether the worship of God, or the care of
their own bellies, has led them to put upon them this person, and has
brought them into this state. Has ambition, and the desire of their own glory,
or of Christ's, advanced them from the lowest seats, to the highest chayres?
Has the desire of the salvation of the Church, and pity of the ru^e, and
calamity thereof, or the regard of their private commodities drawn them out
of the dust, and as the prophet speaks out of the dunghill, into so stately
houses, and palaces of prelates, whereunto are joined livings, and wealth of
equal rate, and valewe? Let the old, and true The Jesuits f^rre unlike the
Apostles of Christ.
Apostles be a little compared with these new, what thing is there, wherein they
may be said to be like, or rather not unlike? Let also the ancient Monks be
compared with these vpstartes, who would believe that this issue sprang of
those fathers? but if you list to compare them with the Monks of the middle
age, and those of later times, although they do all The Jesuits far more
forward in advancing themselves then the old tolerable, and later intolerable
monks.
take their beginning from that only father of lies: yet they in comparison of
these may seem to be b^outhfull, doltishe, and wretched. For the thing it
self witnesses, that te^se men have within very few years found out, and
gathered together more riches, and rise also higher, then they could in many
ages. Verily the later has far ouergone the former: and that is fallen out,
which oftentimes we see to come to pass amongst travelers, that they that
took their journey last, do leave them a great way behind them, which went
on their way first. So much in the compassing of matters, can diligence,
speed, and industry do, wherewith Satan their common father, has furnished
them above al other. And in this thing we may perceive yt which diverse times
comes to pass amongst The Jesuits the Popes their fathers dearlings, in
respect of the monks their brethren.
men: that the youngest of many children are better beloved of the fathers, then
the other. For the rest do seem in comparison of them, to be cast of, because
they are not regarded, these only are their dearelings, these are enriched,
and advanced to honors, and dignities. To be short, a man would say, that
these were the lawful, and true children of the Romish sea, and that the
other were now bastards. Furthermore, whether these do follow also filthy
lucre, The Jesuits covetous.
the inheritaunces which they have gotten under the pretense of godliness,
defeating the lawful heirs, do sufficiently testify.

These good fellows of Jesus (of Jesus, I say, which openly professed him self
to be poorer then foxes, and byrds,) Mat. 8. ver. 20.
do refuse gifts yea being offered: but do most greedily accept of great
houses, and riches. Whether likewise The Jesuits ambitious, and seek a
tyranny over the Church.
these holy men be kindled with the desire of bearing rule, and do covet a
tyranny joined with the contumely of the Church: those can be fit
witnesses, amongst whom they have gotten, and do yet hold courts (as they call
them) of inquisition of men's faith. Verily they lay upon The Jesuits hold
cruel courts of inquisition.
the necks of the godly, and force them to bear the cross of Christ, (which
they are more afraid to touch, then Mat. 27. ver. 32.
were sometime the soldiers of the Romans) more cruelly, then they did lay
it upon the shoulders of Simon of Cyrene.

By these, and other things, which it were to long to touch severally, they
that are not altogether blind, do easily perceive, how great a likeness there
is in all points, between these counterfayt fellows of Jesus, and the old
adversaries of Paul. And for as much as they can not deny, that this Apostle
was the most true fellow of Jesus Christ: all that are well in their wits may
judge, whether we ought not to call these me^ more rightly Anti Iesuses, and
Antichrists, the Jesuits true titles.
Anti Iesuses, and Antichrists, then Jesuits, and Christians, of which name
they seem to be ashamed.

CAP. XV. That the ancient title of Christians is to be kept together with the
ancient godlynes.
WE hear the daily complaints of many for dissentions in religion, which
almost are infinite* uttering that old saying, that they see in deed who^
they may shun and flee, Against comp(...)t of dissent(...) in the C(...)e.
but that they see not whom to follow: and for this cause we not only hear* but
also with great greef see most part of men to cast away all thought of
religion, much more the care thereof. As I confess that complaynt of the
number, and diversity of dissentio^s to be most true, which thing also greueth
me very much: so whereas they deny they see whom to follow, it is most certain,
that it co^nteth not of the true desire of religion, but of the hatred,
wearisomnes, and lothsomnes thereof. For if they were earnestly touched with the
love thereof, they would quickly see whom they are to follow. Verily these
co^plaining, and ouerde^nty felows seem unto Similitude.
me to do no otherwise, then if many should strive together, a great many
Dissentions no just cause, why men do not come to the truth.
torches being lighted at noone day, which of them were to be taken, and
followed for the brightest: one offended with that striving, and multitude of
lights: should hide him self in a dark hole, and should sh(...)e all light.
As though he might not rather, and also ought not to look upon the ^unne, and
follow his light, making no account of all the other lights. God calls us
with a loud voice unto him self, why then does the horesy clamors of men
hinder us? He has opened an enteraunce unto us by his son, as a most right
and straight way, and sure gate unto him self, why does the bypathes devised
by men trouble us? His voice is clear, if so be we give ear, and be willing
to be taught: the way also is plain, and dark, or hard to find out unto no
man, but unto them which refuse to open their eyes. All men cry out, that they
love the truth, and bost that they seek it: but this speech is in many men's
mouths very rise, yet their minds muse upon other thoughts, and intend
other purposes: Io^. 19.
and are moved with no more A great cause of dissentions, that men are not
desirous to speak the truth in Gods word, where it is to be found.
love of knowing the truth, then was Pilate, when he heard Christ speak of the
truth. And this is not the least cause of dissentions, as I trust I shall at
some time, or other make evident. If we love, and seek the truth, why do we
more regard and harken unto men, then God? Why have we not rather recourse
unto the very fountain it self, then stick so much unto the rivers? Why are
we rather tied unto things present, then call to remembrance things that are
past? Why do we not rather fetch The Jesuits newly sprung up, bost falsely of
antiquity in their doctrine against us.
the form of godliness, and rule of truth from ye godly, and learned
antiquity, then run upon new rocks? But to return to this new garrison of
Satan, omitting at this present al other: these confederates lately sprung up,
being but yet children, where as they endeavor to innouate all things, cease
not nevertheless to boast of antiquity, and object it forsooth against us: they
commend in words, that which they condemn in their doings: they labor to
establishe, and auouche with their tongue, that which they overthrow and
ouerturne with their hand? We do love, reverence* and desire to have restored*
and as much as we can, have restored, the doctrine, and form of religion and
godliness, which is, ancient, and Apostolical: notwithstanding these
innouators are not ashamed, to cast us in the teeth with the desire of
novelty. We account it to be* extreme impiety, and that it does as i^ were
condemn God of folly: to go about to raise up being buried, and to bring to
light again, those old ordinances of Moses, which God, as he did once
appoint, so did he after The Jesuits forbid that which Christ has commanded,
and command that which he has forbidden.
abrogate, and repeal. Contrarily these men, even as did those Jewish
Christians, do hold that they are to be kept: and do disanull those things
that Christ by his Apostles has placed in their room, that they might show
them selves two manner of ways, to be enemies of God, and of Christ: in that
they not only ordain that which is not lawful by Gods word: but overthrow,
and repeal, that which is lawful, or rather, that which is ordained, and
established. The thing therefore it self shows, The Jesuits stirred up by
Satan, and why.
that they have bin suborned, and substituted by Satan, not to call back
again the ancient, and true religion: but to nourishe the confusion which he
has brought in this last, and as it were, old age of the church: partly by
considering the errors, which he has already spread: partly by increasing
them: and by corrupting more and more the face of true religion deformed many
ways by their predecessors: to establish superstition, and Idolatry: and that
according to the manner of this Iuggler, under the color of reformation, and
buylding up. But it is well, that this enemy did somewhat lately think of the
mustering of this supply of soldiers. For the light of the Gospel has now
spread his beams so far, and wide, that it is no easy matter for them to
extinguishe it: the truth has taken such deep roots in the minds of many,
that it is an hard matter to pluck it out. Notwithstanding, it is to be
lamented, that in ye mean while, the The Jesuits seduce child^sh and foolish
men. 1. Cor. 14. ver. 20 Gala. 3. ver. 1.
eyes of many unwary, and ignorant men, or to speak more flatlye with Paul
such as are children in understanding, and foolish, are so bewitched, and
deseled with these men's charms, and doting tales, that they entertain, hear,
have in admiration, and follow these obscure vpstarts, as if they were Angels
sent from heaven. But such Ioh. 3.
is the disposition of many, that according to the saying of Christ, they love
darkness more then light: and had rather follow blind guides, then those that
can see clearly: briefly, that prefer cruel wolves before faithful
shepherds: and had rather buy their destruction dearly, then receive
salvation The lamentable blindness of those that are sedu^ed by the Jesuits.
freely offered. Truly it is a wonderful, and a pityfull thing, that these
vagrant, and wandering persons, thrusting upon men, under the pretense of the
traditions of the Apostles, most absurd things, and most contrary to the
true, and ancient form of godliness: should be harkened unto, and embraced:
and in the mean time those things should be let pass with closed eyes, and
stopped ears, which Luke in the history of the Acts of the Apostles, has as
faithfully delivered, as he wrote the history of Christ: to wit, the Gospel,
concerning the infanc^e of the Catholic and true Apostolic Church, and the
first ordeining and founding thereof. Who can doubt, unless he be utterly a
godles person, that as Luke is the only writer, so the holy Chest is the only
author of both the books? Neither is there any doubt, but that this spirit,
the governor, and guider of the Church of Christ, would have that manner, and
form committed to writing, to be delivered, and leaft to the posterity: to
the intent it might have continually a pattern to look unto, and follow.
Verily Erasmus Erasmus.
thought very conveniently, and truly: that it was meet that Christians
should with greater desire covet to understand the original, and beginning of
their own people: that after they have known, by what means it has grown
up: they might perceive, that religion being decayed, was by the self same to
be restored. For albeit that history of the Acts of the Apostles be very
short, nevertheless there wants nothing, that belongs The acts of the
Apostles co^tein a full platform of the Church of Christ, whereby to discrye
all seduce^s, and namely the Jesuits.
to the right buylding of the Church. Here a man may see what was the Apostles
doctrine, faith, discipline, and good government: and what ought the Christian
and Catholic to be. By these beginninges, and foundations, a man may surely
know, what afterward has been fitly, and rightly builded up, and added, and
what otherwise. By this rule who so has but a mean judgment, may quickly
perceive what ought to be received, and borne with in religion: and shall
discern with little ado things that are right, and true, from those that be
counterfaite and false. And namely he shall very easilye find out the
hypocrisy, and deceitfulnes of this diuelishe felowshippe^ both in the name
that it has newly invented unto it self, as in the very thing likewise, which
it falsely chalengeth unto it self. For what is more meet, and contienient,
then that they which believe in Christ, and profess themselves to be of his
schole, We ought to be Christians not only i^ name, but also in deed.
and household: should receive, and hold their name of him, and should be
called Christians? what also is more just, then that they which profess them
selves to be his disciples, should keep, and follow his doctrine? And as by
their name they witness the affinity, conjunction, and fellowshippe they have
with him: so likewise that they show forth, and as it were seal up al these
things by their life, and deeds. Therefore we must t^yne unto the name, the
thing that agrees thereunto: least that our life deny that, which the word
or name does affirm, and at length being shut out from his fellowship, we be
cast into utter darkness with all hypocrites. If so be we love the thing, that
is, Christian godliness, and religion, there is no cause why we should be either
a shamed, or weary, of the name which professes it. But The Jesuits seem to
be ashamed of the name of a Christian.
as touching these new companions, where as Jesus is the same, that Christ,
and they signify plainly that they are ashamed of the name of a Christian:
and it is manifest, that they are destitute of the thing, which ought to be
joined with the profession of the name: there is no cause why they should call
them selves Jesuits, and say that they have fellowshippe with Jesus: but if
they will say the truth: that is, desire to express by their name, the thing
that is proper unto them, they may call them selves both most truly, and aptly,
in steed of Jesuits, The Jesuits true name.
Gehezites.

FINIS.
Matthew. 12. verse. 37. By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned.

