The book for to Learn a man to be wise in buyldyng of his house for the health
of body and to hold quyetnes for the health of his soul, and body.

The book for a good husband to learn.

We Masters of Astronomye, And doctoures in Phesycke co^fyrmeth this saying
woodcut to be good and true both for the body, and also for the soul.

The table of this Book.
THe first chapter does show where a man should build or set his house, or
place, for the health of his body. The second chapter does show a man, how
he should build his house, that the prospect be good for ye co^seruacion of
health. The third chapter does show a man to build his house in a pure and
fresh air for to length his life. The fourth chapter does show under what
manner a man should build his house in exchewyng things yt should shorten his
life. The.v. chapter does show how a man should order his house, consernynge
the implementes, to comfort the spyrites of man. The.vi, chapter does show a
man how he should order his house and how should, to live in quyetnes. The vii.
chapter does show how the head of the house, or howseholder should exercise
himself, for the health of his soul and body The.viii. chapter does show how a
man should order him self in slepynge and watch, and in his apparel werynge.
Explicit tabula.
The first chapter does show where a man should build or set his house or
place for the health of his body.
A Man of honor, or worship, or other estate, the which does pretend, to
build a house or any mansyon place, to inhabyte him self: Or else does
pretend to after his house, or to after old building in to co^modyous and
pleasant buyldyng, not only for his own proper co^modyte. wealth and health,
but also for other men, the which will resort to him, having also a respect
to his posteryte. First it is necessary and expedyent for him to take heed
what counseyll god did give to Abraham, and after that to take heed what
counsel God did give to Moses, and to his children of Israel, as it apereth
in the.xiii. chapter of Exodi And the.xx chapter of Numeri. And the.vi. chapter
of Deuttonomu. And also in the book of Levites, saying first to Abraham. Go
thou forth of thy country, and from thy cognacion or kynred, and come thou in
to ye country. the which I will show to the a country abundyng and plentyful of
milk and ho^ny. Here is to be noted that where there is plentye of milk,
there is plentye of pasture, and no skarsyte of water. And where there is
plentye of ho^ny, there is no skarsyte, but plentyfulnes of woddes. For there
be moo bees in woddes, and so consequently abundau^ce of ho^ny, than there be
bees or ho^ny or wax in the hyues in gardynes, or orchardes. Wherefore it
apereth that who soever that will build a ma^syon place or house, he must
cytuat and set it there where he must be sure to have both water and wod,
except for pleasure, he will build a house in or by some city or great town,
the which be not desty^^de of such co^modyties. But he the which will dwell
at pleasure, and for profit and health of his body, he must dwell at elbowe
rome having water and wod anexed to his place or house. For if he be
destytuted of any of the pryncipalles, that is to say, first of water for to
wasshe and to wrynge, to bake and to brewe, and diverse other cause specially
for peril the which might fall by fire it were a great disco^modyous thing.
And better it were to lack wodde, than to lack water, ye premysses co^syderyd
although that wod is a necessary thing not only for fuel, but also for
other urgent causes specyallye co^sernynge building and reperacyons.

The second chapter, does show a man, how he should build his house or
Mansyon, that the prospecte be fair and good for the conseruacion of health.
AFter that a man have chosen a conuenyent soil and place according to his
mind and purpose to build his house or mansyon on. He must have before cast in
his mind, that the prospecte to and fro the place, be pleasant, fair, and
good to the iye, to behold the woddes, the waters, the feldes, the vales the
hills, and the plain ground. And that every thing be desent and fair to
the iye not only within the precynct of the place appointed to build a mansyon
or a house to the co^modyties about it, but also it may be placable to the iyes
of all men to se and to behold when they be a good dystaunce of from the
place, that it does stand co^modyously. For the co^modyous building of a
place does not only satysfye the mind of the inhabytour, but also it does
comfort and reioyseth a man's heart to se it, specially the pul^^use
prospecte. For my conceyte is such that I had rather not to build a mansyon or
a house, than to build one without a good prospecte i^ it to it, and from it.
For and the iye be not satysfyed, the mind can not be co^tentyd And the mind
can not be contentyd, the heart can not be pleased, if the heart and mind be
not pleased nature does of horre. And if nature do abhor, mortyfycacion of
the vytall and anymall and spyrytuall powers do consequently follow.

The third chapter does show a man to build his house in a pure and a fresh
air, to length his life.
THere is no thing except poison that does putryfye or does corrupt the
blood of man. And also does mortyfye the spyrytes of man, as does a corrupt
and a contagyous air. For Galyen cerapentice no no says, whether we will or
w^l not, we must grant to every man air, for without the air no man can
live. The air can not be to clean and pure consyderyng it does close and does
compass us round about, and we do receive it in to us, we can not be without
it, for we live by it. as the fysshe lives by the water. Good air therefore is
to be praised For if the air be fryske pure and clean about the mansyon or
house, it does conserve the life of man, it does comfort the bra^ne and the
powers natural, and ingendryng and making good blood, in the which
co^systyth the life of man. And contraryly evil and corrupt ayers does infecte
the blood, and does ingendre many corrupt humors, and does putryfye the
brain and does corrupt the heart, and therefore it does bread many deseases,
and infyrmities thorough the which man's life is abreuyated and shortenyd.
Many things does infecte putryfy and corruptyth the air, the first is the
influence of sondy sterres, and standing water stynkynge mystes and caryn
syenge long about the ground, much people in a smallrome lyeng uncleanly and
being fylthe and sluttysh. Wherefore he that does pretend to build his
mansyon or house, he must provide that he do not cytuat his house nygh to any
marshe or morysshe ground. And that there be not nygh to the plate stynkynge
and putr^fyed sta^dyng water pooles, nor morysh, but at lest wise, that such
waters do stand upon a stony or a grauellgrounde myxt with clay and that some
fresh spryng have a recourse to noryshe and to refreshe the said standing
waters. Also there must be circu^spection had that there be not about the
house or mansyon stynkyng dyches, gutters nor canelles nor corrupt dunghylles,
nor synckes except they be often diverse times mundyfyed, and made clean: Swepyng
of howses and chambres ought not to be done, aslonge as any honest man is
within the precyncte of the house, for the douste does putryfye, the air
making it musty and dence. Also nyghe to the place, set another hemp nor flexe
be watered, and beware of the snoffe of ^audelles, and of the sauoure of
apples, for these things be contagyous, and infectyue. Also mystye and clowdy
days impetous and vehement wyndes, troubelous and vaperous wether is not good
to labor in it to open the poores to let in infectious air. Furthermore
beware of pyssyng in drauftes, and permyt no common pyssynge place be about
the house or ma^syon, and let the common house of element he over some water,
or else clongatyd from the house. And beware of emptyeng of pyspottes and
pyssyng in chymnes, so that all evil and contagyous ayers may be expellyd, and
clear air kept vnputryfyed. And of all things let the buttery, the celler,
the kytchyn, the larderhowse with all other howses of offices be kept clean,
that there be no fylth in them, but good and odyferous savors. And to expel
and expulse all corrupt and contagyous air.

For when the plaages of the Pestylence or the swetynge syckenes is in a trowne
or country, at Mountpylour, and in all other high regyons and countres, that I
have been in, the people does fly from the contagyous and infectyous air,
preseruatyues with other council of Physycke, notwithstanding. In lower and
other baase countres, howses the which be infectyd in town or city, be
closed up, both doors and wyndowes, and the inhabytours shall not come abroad,
not^er to church nor market, for infectynge other, with that syckenes.

The fourth chapter, does show under what manner and fasshyon a man should
build his house and mansyon in exchewynge things the which should shorten
the life of man.
When a man does begin to build his house or mansyon place, he must provide
(says Ihesus christ) before that he begin to build, for all things
necessary, for the performacion of it, lest that when he hah made his
foundation, and can not fynysshe his work that he has begone, every man will
deryde him saying. This man did begin to bylde, but he can not fynyssh or make
an end of his purpose, for a man must consider the expense before he do begin
to build, for there goth to building many a nail, many pynnes, many lathes
and many tyles or sklates, or strawes, beside other greatter charges, as
timber, bowdes, lyme, sand, stones or brycke, beside workemanshyp, and the
impleme^tes. But a man the which have provide, or has in store to accomplysse
his purpose. And has chosen a good soil and place to cituat his house or
mansyon, and that the prospecte be good. And that the air be pure fresshe and
clean. Then he that will build, let him make his foundation upon a gravel
ground myxt with clay, or else let him build upon a rock of stone, or else
upon an hill or a hills side. And order and edyfy the house so that the
pryncipall and chief prospectes may be East and West specially Northest,
Southest, and Southwest, for the merydyall wind of all wyndes is the most
worst, for the South wind does corrupt. and does make evil vapors. The Est
wind is temperat fryske and fragra^t The west wind is mutable. The North
wind purges evil vapors. wherefore better it is of the two worst that ye
wyndowes do open plain north, than plain south, although that Jeremy says
from ye north dependyth all evil And also it is written in Cantica ca^ticorum.
Ryfe up north wind, and come thou southwynde and perflat my gardyn, make the
hall under such a fasshyon, that the parfoure anexed to the head of the hall.
And the buttery and pantry be at the house end of the hall, the seller under
the pantry, set somewhat abase, the kytchyn set abase from the buttry and pantry
coming with an entrye by the wall of the buttry, the pastry house, and the
larder house anxed to the kytchyn, than deuyde the lodgings by the cyrcuyte of
the quadryuyall court, and let the gate house be opposyte or against the hall
door standing abase, and the gate house in the mydle of the front entering
into the place, let the pryue chamber be anexed to the great chamber of estate
with other chambers necessary for the byldynge, so that many of the chambers
may have a prospecte in to the Chapel, if there be anvtter court made make it
quadryuyall with howses of casme^tes, but one stable for horses of pleasure,
and se no fylthe nor dunge be within the court, nor cast at the backesyde, but
the dunge to be carried far from the mansion. Also the stables and the slauter
house a dyapery if any be kept should be elongatyd the space of a quarter of a
mile from the place. And also the bake house and brewe house should be a
dystance from the place and from other byldynge. when all the mansyon is
edyfyed and bylt there be a moote made ahoute it, there should some fresshe
spring come to it, and diverse times the moote ought to be showryd and kept
clean from mud and wedes. And in no wise let not the fylth of the kytchyn
descend in to the mote. Furthermore it is a co^modyous and a pleasant thing
to a mansyon to have an orochorde of sondrye fruytes, but it is more co^modyous
to have a fair gardyn repleatyd with herbs of aromatyke and redole^t
sauoures, in the gardyn may be a poole or two for fysshe, if the pooles be
clean kept. Also a park repletyd with dear and conys, is a necessary and a
pleasant thing to be anexed to a mansyon. A done house also is a necessary
thing about a mansyon place. And among other things a payer of buttes is a
decent thing about a mansyon, and other while for a great man necessary it is
to pass his time with bowls in an aly, when all this is fynysshed, and the
ma^syon replenysshed with impleme^^es, there must be a fire kept contynually
for a space to dry the contagyous moystnes of the walls and the sauoure of the
lyme and sand And after that a man may lie and dwell in the said mansyon,
without taking any manner inconuenyence of syckenes.

The.v. chapter does show how a man should order his house consernynge the
implementes to comfort the spyrytes of man.
When a man has bylt his ma^syon, and has his howses necessary about his
place, if he have not howshold stuff, or impleme^tes, the which be needful,
but must borow of his neighbors, he than is put to a shyfte, and to a great
afterdele, for these men the which do brewe in a botell and bake in a walet,
it will be long or he can ley Jack and salet. Yet every thing must have a
beginning, and every man must do after his possessions or abylyte, this
notwithstanding better it is not to set up a howseholde or hospytalyte, then
to set up howsholde lacking the performacion of it, as now to run for
maler, and by and by, for salt, now to send for bread, and by and by to
send for a shepes head, and now to send for this, and now to send for that,
and by and by he does send, he can not tell for what / such things is no
prouysion, but it is a great abusyon. Thus a man shall lose his thryfte. And be
put to a shyft, his gooddes shall never increase, and he shall not be in rest
nor peace, but ever in carke and care. For his purse will ever be bare.
Wherefore I do counceyll every man, to provide for him self, as soon as he
can. For if of implementes he be destytuted, men will call him sight wytted. To
set up a house, and is not able to keep man nor mowse. wherefore let every man
look or he lepe. For many corns makes a great hope.

The.vi. chapter, does show how a man should order his house, and howsholde.
And also therein to live quyetly.
WHo so ever he be that will keep an house, he must order the expenses of his
house according to ye rent of his lands. And if he have no lands, he must
order his house after his lucre winning, or gaynes. For he that will spend
more i^ his house, than the rent of his lands, or his gaynes does attain to,
he shall fall in to pouerte, and necessyte will urge cause and compel him, to
sell his land or to waste his stock, as it is daily seen by experyence of
many men, wherefore they the which will exchewe such prodygalyte, and
inconvenience, must deuyde his rentes porcyon and expenses, whereby he does
live in to three equal porcions or parts. The first part must serve to
provide for meat and drink, and al other necessary things for the
sustentacion of the howseholde. The second portion or part must be reseruyd
for aparell not only for a man's own self, but for all his howsholde, and
for servants wages deductyng some what of this portion i^ alms deed to
pore neighbors, and pore people fulfyllynge other of the.vii. works of mercy.
The third portion or part must be reseruyd for urgent causes in time of need
as in syckenes reparacion of howses, with many other cotidyall expenses beside
rewards and the charges of a man's last end, if a man do exsyde this order he
may soon fall in debt, the which is a dangerous thing many ways beside
the bryngyng a man to troble. And he that is ones behind and in trouble, he
can not be in quyetnes of mind, the which does perturbe the heart, and so
consequently does shorten a man's life / Wherefore there is no wise man, but
will exchewe this inconuenyence. And will cast before what shall follow after.
And in no wise to set up a howsholde before he has made prouysion to keep a
house. For if a man shall bye every thing that belongs to the keeping of a
house with his penny, it will be long or he be rich, and long or he can keep
a good house. But he is wise in any conceyte yt will have or he set up his
howsholde.ii. or.iii. years rent in his cofer. And if he have no lands, then
he must provide for necessary things or that he begin howsholde, left he
repent him self after, through the which he do fall in to pensyfulnes, and
after that in to syckenes and dyseases, living not quyetly whereby he shall a
breuyat his life.

The.vii. Chapter does show how the heed of a house, or a howsholder, should
exercise himself, for the health of his soul and body.
AFter that a man has provided all things necessary for his house, and for
his howsholde: expedient it is for him to know how he should exercise himself
both bodily and ghostly. For there is no catholic or christian man living, but
he is bound in conscience to be more circumspecter about the wealth of his
soul, than the health of his body. Our sauyoure Jesus Christ says: What
shall it profit to man if he get all the world, and lose himself, and bring
himself to a detryment. Wherefore it appears that a man ought to be
circumspect for the health and wealth of his soul, for he is bound so to live,
that night and day, and at all hours he should be ready, than when he is called
for to depart out of this world he should not fere to dye, saying these
words with S. Ambrose, I fere not to dye, for we have a good God. When a man
has prepared for his soul and has subdued sensualyte, and that he has
brought himself in a trade or an usage of a ghostly or catholyke living in
obseruyng the commandments of god. Than he must study to rule and govern
them the which be in his howsholde or under his custody or dominion, to se
that they be not idle. For king Henry the.viii. said when he was young. Idleness
is chief maystres of vices all. And also the heed of an house must over se,
that they the which be under his tuission serve god the holy days as
dylygentlye se, and more dylygentlyer, than to do their work, the feryall
days refraynyng them from vice and sin, compellyng them to observe the
commandments of God, specially to punyshe swerers, for in all the world there
is not such odeable sweryng as is used in England, specially among youth
and children, which is a detestable thing to here, and no man does go about
to punyshe it. Such things reformed, than may an howsholder be glad, not
ceasyng to instruct them the which be ygnoraunt, but also he must continue in
showing good example of living, than may he rejoice in God and be merry, the
which mirth and reioysyng does length a man's life, and does expel syckenes.

The.viii. Chapter does show how a man should order himself in slepynge, and
watch, and in werynge of his apparayll.
When a man has well exercysed himself in the dayetyme as is rehearsed, he
may sleep soundly and surely in god, what chance soever fortune in the night.
Moderate sleep in most praised, for it does make perfyte dygestion. It does
noryshe the blod and does qualyfy the heat of the liver. It does acuat,
quycken, and refreshe, the memory. It does restore nature, and does quiet all
the humors and pulses in man, and does any mat and comfort all the natural,
animal, and spyrytuall, powers of man. And such moderat sleep is acceptable i^
the sight of God, the premises in the aforesaid chapter observed and kept. And
contraryly, immoderat sleep and sluggyshnes does humiate and make light the
brain, it does engendre rewme and Impostumes, it is evil for the palsy,
whether it be universal or pertyculer, It is evil for the falling sycknes
called Epilencia, Aualencia, and Cathalencia, Appoplesia, Soda. With all other
infyrmytes in the heed, for it enduseth oblyuyousnes, for it does obfuske and
does obnebulat the memory and the quyckenes of wit. And shortly to conclude
it does perturbe the natural, anymall and spyrytuall, powers of man, and
specially it does in stygat and led a man to fylle, and does induce and
infarre breuyte of life and detestably it dyspleaseth God. Our Lord Jesus
Christ did not only bid his dysciples to watch, but did animat them and all
other so to do, saying. (I say not only to you watch) but to all men I say
watch. And to Peter he said might not thou one hour watch with me.
Although these holy scriptures with many other mo, the which I might allyg^t
for me, although they be not greatly refarred to this se^ce, yet it may stand
here with my purpose and matter without reprehension. These matters her: need
not greatly to be rehearsed. Wherefore I do return to my purpose, and say that
the moderacion of sleep, should be mesured according to the natural complexion
of man, and in any wise to have a respect to the strength and debelytie to age
and youth, and to syckenes and health of man. First as consernyng the natural
health of man. Sanguyne and colorycke men.vii. hours of sleep is suff^cient for
them. And now consyderying the imbecilite and wekenes of nature a flumaticke
man may sleep.ix. hours or more: melancoly men may take their pleasure, for
they be the receptacle and the dredges of all the other humors. Secondly youth
and age would have temperau^ce in slepyng. Thyrdly strength may suffer a bront
i^ watch the which debelyte and wekenes may not. As I will show by a famylyer
example. There was two me^ sat at the dyce together a day and a night, and
more, the weke man said to him, I can play no longer, the strong man said to
him, fie on the bench whystler wylt thou start away now, the weke man to
satysfy the strong man's mind, appetyte and desire plays with his fellow
through the which he does kill himself, the strong man does himself little
pleasure, althynges consydred the which I do pass over. Wherefore I will
return to the sick man, which may sleep at all times, when he may get it but
if he may sleep at any time, best it is for him to refrain from sleep in the
day and to take his natural rest and sleep in ye night and to eschew merydyall
sleep, but if need shall compel a man to sleep after his meat, let him make a
pause, and than let him stand and leave against a cupborde and sleep, or else
let him sit upright in a chair and sleep: slepynge after a full stomach does
ingendre diverse infyrmyties. It does hurt the splen, it relaxith the synewes,
it does ingendre the dropses and the gowte, and does make a man look evil
colored. Bewale of venerious acts before the first sleep, and specially beware
of such things after dinner, or after a full stomach, for it does ingendre
the crampe and the gowte and other displeasures. To bedward be you merry, or
have merry company about you, so that to bedward no anger nor heuines, sorrow nor
pencifulnes do troble or dysquiet you. To bedward and also in the morning use
to have a fire in your chamber to waste and consume the evil vapoures within
the chamber: for the breath of man may putryfy the air within the chamber: I do
advertise you not to stand nor to sit by the fire, but stand or sit a good
way of from the fire, taking the flamour of it, for fire does aryfye and dry
up a man's blod, and does make sterk the synewes and Joints of man. In the
night let the wyndowes of your house specially of your chamber be closed. When
ye be in your bed, lie a little while on your left side, and sleep on your
right side, and when you do wake of your first sleep make water if ye feel your
bladder charged, and than sleep on the left side, and look as often as you do
wake, so often turn your self i^ the bed from one side to another. To sleep
grouelyng upon the stomach and belly, is not good, unless the stomach be slow
and tarde of digestion, but better it is to lay your hand or your bedfelowes
hand over your stomach than to lie grouelyng. To sleep on the back upright
is utterly to be abhorred when that you do sleep let not your neck, another
your shulders, another your hands, nor fete, nor no other place of the body lie
bare vndyscouered. Sleep not with an emptye stomach, nor sleep not after that
you have eaten meat an hour or.ii. after. In your bed lie with your heed
somewhat high lest that ye meat which is in your stomach through eructuacions
or some other cause, ascend to the orife of the stomach, let your night cap be
of skarlet, and this I do aduertyse you, cause to be made a good thycke quylte
of Cotton or else of pure flocks, or of clean wolle, and let the coueryng of it
be of white fustian, and lay it on the fether bed that you do lie on, and in
your bed lie not to hot nor to cold but in temperau^ce. Old ancient doctors
of Phisycke says. viii. hours of sleep in so^mer: and.ix. hours in winter is
suffycient for any man, but I do think that sleep ought to be taken, as the
complexion of man is. when you arise in the morning, rise with mirth, and
remember God. Let your hosen be brusshed within and without: and flauer the
insyde of them against the fire, use lynyn sockes or lynyn hosen next your
legs. When you be out of your bed stretche forth your legs and arms and
your body, coughe, and spyt, and than go to your stole of egestyon, and
exonerate your self at all times that nature would expel, for if you do make
any restriction in keeping your egestion or your vryne or ventosyte, it may put
you to displeasure in bredynge of diverse infyrmyties. After you have vacuated
your body, and trussed your points, kayme your heed often. and so do diverse
times in the day. And wasshe your hands and wrestes, your face and eyes,
and your teth, with cold water, and after that you be apparaylled, walk in
to your gardayne or in to your Park a thousand paace or two. And then great
and noble men does use to here the Communyon. And other men that can not do so,
but must apply there busynes, does serve God with some prayers, surrendrynge
thanks unto him for his manifold goodness, with asking him mercy for their
offenses.

And before you go to your refectio^, moderatly exercise your body with some
labor or playenge at the Tenys, or castyng of a bowl, or pasyng weyghtes or
plommettes of lead in your hands, or some other thing, to open the poores,
and to augment natural heat. At dyuer and supper use not to drink of sundry
drynkes, and eat not of diverse meats, but feed of two or three dysshes at the
most. After that you have dyned and supte, labor not by and by after but make
a pause sitting or standing vpryghte, the space of an hour or more with some
pastyme, drink not much after dinner? at your supper use high meats of
dygestyon and refrain from groose meats, go not to bed with a full nor an
emptye stomach. And after your supper make a pause or you go to bed / and go
to bed as I said with mirth.

FVrthermore as concerning your apparayll. In winter next your sherte, use you
to were a petycote of skarlet, your Doblet use at your pleasure, but I do
aduertyse you to line your Iaket under this fasshyo^ or manner, bye you fine
skynnes of white Lamb, and black Lamb, and let your skynner cut both the
sorts of the skynnes in small pieces tryangle wise, like half a qu^^ell of a
glass wyndowe, and than sewe together a white piece and a black? like an
whoole quarrel of a glass wyndowe, and so sewe up all together, quarrel wise
as much as will live your Iaket. This Fu^re for his holesomnes is praised
above Sables or any other kind of furre. Your exteriall apparayll use
according to your honor. In so^mer use to were a skarlet Petycote made of
stamell, or of fynse wolf, in winter and fo^mer keep not your heed to hot,
nor bind it to straight, keep ever your neck warm. In Summer keep your neck
and face from the son, use to were gloves made of Goote skynnes, perfumed
with Ambre degrece And beware in standing or syenge on the ground in the
reflection of the son, but be mouable. If you shall common or talk with any
man, stand not still in one place if it be on the bare ground, or grass, or
stones, but be mouable in such places, stand (...) sytte, upon no sto^^ o^
ston^^ st^^de nor sit not long bare (...) under a (...) of stone. Also beware
(...) do ^ot (...) in no old chambres w^^^^ ^e not (...) specyallye such
chamb^e as (...) and Rattes, and S^^^ses ^^so^te^^ unto lie not in no such
(...) the which he depryued clean from the Son, and (...) air. Nor lie in
no low chamber, except that it be bowrded. Beware that you take no cold on
your feet, and legs. And of all wether beware that you do not tide nor go in
great and impytous wyndes.

Explicit.
Of folyshe Physycyons.
WHo that uses the art of medycyne
Ta^^^ge his (...) ^ge^ in the feelde
He is (...)
So to take (...) sheelde
We^^ynge (...) to ^^eelde
Which to not (...) know
All their vert^^ (...) and low.
Of dolorous ^^^^partyng.
(...) puyssaunt
O^ go^ (...) ^^age
But the (...) death did him daunt
By p^ocesse (...) some straight passage
Yea, were (...) of such an age
For he spa^ (...) yther young nor old
Fa^^e no^ (...) fyerse nor also bold.
(...) descripcion.
(...) such is prudent
D^ (...) where ever he go
Gyuynge examples excellent
Unto them the which are in woe
Teaching them in all vertue^^
That they may not in to sin all
If that they hertely on God call.
Of Phylosophye.
At this time doctrine is decayed
And naught set by in no place
For every man is well appa^ed
To get good with great solace
Not carynge how nor in what place
Putting the fair and dygne sophye
Under feet with Phylosophye.
Finis.
(Imprynted by me Robert Wyer, dwelling at the gne of S. John^ Euangelyst, in
s. Martyns parysshe in the field beside the Duke of Suffolkes place, at
Charynge Cross.

Cum priuilegio, A^ imprimendum solum.


