RELATIONS OF THE MOST FAMOVS KINGDOMS AND Commonwealths thorowout the WORLD:
Discoursing of their Situations, Religions, Languages, Manners, Customs,
Strengths, Greatness and Policies.

Translated out of the best Italian Impression of Boterus. And since the last
Edition by R. I.

Now once again enlarged according to modern observation; With Addition of
new Estates and Countries. Wherein many of the oversights both of the Author
and Translator, are amended. And unto which, a Map of the whole World, with a
Table of the Countries, are now newly added.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND, and are to be sold by JOHN PARTRIDGE at the
sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1630.

TO THE READER.
THat this Author has been so carefully translated into the Latin, Spanish,
French and English languages, is a concluding argument (to me) that no man of
those Nations has hitherto written so well in this Argument: else, what needed
they to translate him? Nay, and doubly translated he has been; not only
into their tongues, but into their books; seeing that all the Writers of
Geographie, since his time, have translated no small part of him into their
Writings. Of some of which, what is from hence borrowed, is their very chief
credit and ornament. How much (I pray) has that voluminous French Writer
(translated into Latin by Godofredus, and into English by The States of the
world.
our Mr. Grimestone) been beholding unto this Author? How much has that
Petrus Bertius.
Turncoat Apostatizing Plagiarie, that Enemy and Threatner of our English
Nation, closely lurcht out of this Author? Some of our own have been more
ingenuous, to name him when they quote him: and that's fair play.

What the Setters forth of the two former Editions, in our language, meant in
concealing his name, we will not do them so much wrong as to guess at. Our
Title page acknowledges him to be that famous Borero, the Italian: a Writer,
that still passes amongst his own people not only for a Wit, but for a
Judgment. His way of writing is his own; for it is New: and to commend the
usefulness of it let this be enough, that the nimblest Politico's of these
active times could (perchance) have wished, That the Relations of Giovanni
Botero had only been in their own Libraries. That in this third Edition we
have taken upon us to add some new Discourses, and to Augment diverse of the
old; we were emboldned unto by the voices and judgments of the Buyers, whom we
perceived to be better pleased with those inlargements in the second Edition,
than with the first. In what we have done, we have bound our selves to the
Authors way and method: and how much we have added, the next Page shall tell
you.

We must not in the mean time conceal from you, how that diverse of the
Italians (who are as natural haters, as they are fearers of the Spanish
greatness) have taken the same exceptions to Botero, that the French of old
did to Proislart: who for writing so gloriously of the English victories, and
so truly of the French overthrowes; have thought to disgrace his whole story,
by calling him a Pensioner of England, and a man hired to write by the good
Rose-nobles of England: In like manner has Botero (say some) been suspected
to have had a feeling of the Spanish Pistolets, for that he has written so
magnificently of that Nation. This has made us so wary and so careful
withal, by the truth of history to examine whatsoever might that way seem
hyperbolicall. Some things in that kind we had rather leave to be amended by
your judgments, than either too much to wrong that Nation, or to correct our
Copy by bringing it under our Index Expurgatorius.

Our Author deserves rather to be numbered among the Politicians, than amongst
the Historians or Geographers. It Is to his purpose sometimes to deliver you the
situation of the Country he discourses upon; so to show you, first the
Greatness of each Kingdom: Secondly, how formidable or helpefull each Prince
is likely to prove to his next neighbor; out of which two considerations,
arise most of those leagues, Alliances, and those other Ties of State, betwixt
Kingdom and Kingdom. Thirdly, we hence learn, how suddenly either Forces or
Merchandises may be transported from one Nation to another. And all these
help him to relate of the Greatness and Riches of each Kingdom; which to
do, be two of his maine purposes. The History that he makes use of, is to
show you the valors of people, the power of taking opportunities, the
advantages of the use of several weapons, etc. and that is also to his
purpose. Both Geographie and History together (which be the two favorite
studies of the times) do serve finally for the delight of the Reader; and do
altogether make up our Author into a complete and a fine companion for
Gentlemen, for Soldiers, for Scholars, and for all men to pass the time
withal: and for such an one we here commend him to your acquaintance. Fare
well; and make him your own.

Relations newly added, or very much enlarged in this Edition.
Newly added.
MOst of the Chapter of Observation. Navarre. 194 The Lords the Estates part of
the Low Countries. 200 Vrbine. 361 Mantua. 362 Millaine. 316 Savor. 364 Malta.
373 Transylvania. 394 Estate of Bothlen Gabor in Hungaria. 399 A brief
Chronicle of his birth and fortunes. 399 The Palatinate. 285 Brandenburg. 300
Enlarged.
ROman Empire. 284 Bavaria. 301 Genoa. 337 Tuscanie. 324 Sicily. 369 Bohemia.
376


With diverse others altered and amended through out the whole: and some new
Additions in the Indies, not here mentioned.

RELATIONS of the World.
THE FIRST BOOK.
Of Observation.
BEing to relate of the Customs, Manners, and Potencies of Nations and great
Princes, my scope shall not be to trouble your Readings with proofs out of
such obsolete Authors as are accounted very ancient, for with these Themes (by
reason of Indiscoverie) those Ages were not so well acquainted: Again, their
Observations, Rules, and Caveats being not so well digested, nothing so
certain as ours of these lightsomer times, were neither so pleasant nor so
useful as these more assured and more modern Relations. Time and the Wars
have altered much since Aristotle and Ptolomies days; whose Rules and
Observations have since grown partly out of use, and been partly bettered. I
cannot certainly subscribe to the opinions of such Philosophers, who building
all upon Influences and Constellations, will have the faculties of Souls and
Bodies to be governed by the Stars and Climates: But my meaning is to lay
down some few Observations arising from the immutable providence of Nature,
which remains constant, immortal, and is never changed, unless by Accident,
Violence, or Times tyranny; which notwithstanding in the revolution of an Age
or two, returns again to its prime operation. From thence I will descend to
discourse of such Reasons, as may in all probability give occasion or
advantage to one Prince or Nation to excel another either in keeping or
enlarging. Thirdly, I will lay down some Instructions for travel. And coming
in the last place to the particular Relations of our Author, we will premise a
more exact and large description of the Country, and the chief Cities of note
in it: Leaving all to your favorable construction.

Of the division of Temperature.
FIrst therefore, according to best Authority, let us firmly believe, That
the Creator of all things has not bestowed upon any particular Region like and
semblable blessings to another; but that (as experience may warrant) to some
one Country he has given this good favor, to another that; partly in regard
of situation, partly by operation of his ministers, as stars, winds, heat,
cold, water, air, diet, etc. Athenis tenue coelum, Thebis crassum: Athens
enjoyes a clear sky, and Thebes a foggie. And therefore without offense, by
the testimony of good Authors, we may be bold to conjecture, that the people
and Nations inhabiting diverse climates of this vast Universe, are endowed with
diverse, strange, and opposite dispositions: It is natural to the Inhabitants
bounding upon the North, to be biggest boned, strongest set, and aptest for
labor: and to the nations of the South, to be weak, yet more subtle.
Acuriores Attici, valentes Thebani; The Athenians are the sharper witted, but
the Thebans are the abler bodied.

Now, how far these Influences of North and South stretch in operation; or
wh^re the East and West put periods to their own potencies; or what, in
general truth, is to be affirmed of their diverse manners and qualities, is
hard to say; and the harder, for that no man hitherto has presumed to
undertake the task amidst so many obscurities. For if all credit should be
given to Hippocrates, (whose authority was ever held oraculous) he will tell
you, That the people of the North are slender, dwarfish, lean and swarthie: And
Averrois will be bold to affirm, That the mountain people are most pious and
witty: whereas universal experience does condemn them of rudeness and
barbarism. The ignorance of the Ancients (says Bodin) was once so gross,
that not a few of them deemed the Ocean a River, all Iberia but a City.

And because all the Ancients in like error (except Possidonius and Avicen)
limited the possibility of habitation, to consist wholly between the Tropikes
and the polar Circles; affirming, that beyond there was no health, no place
peopled, etc. let this erroneous imagination for evermore be silenced, by the
authority of all modern Navigators, who have found the wholsomest and best
peopled Countries of all those parts, to lie under the Equator: and the
regions situated under the Tropikes, to be tormented with more rigorous heat.
Alvarez reports, that the Abassine Ambassador arriving at Lisbon in
Portugal, was that day almost choked with heat; and yet is Abassia or Prester
John's country from whence he came, near upon 30. degrees more Southerly than
Lisbon is: yea, and between the Tropike of Cancer and the Equator also, part
of it lying even beyond the Line. And Purquer the Germane reported, that he had
felt the weather hotter about Dantzike, and the Baltike Sea, than at Tholouza
in a fervent Summer; notwithstanding that Dantzike be far more Northerly than
Tholouza. And this is no paradox: The cause with good judgment being to be
ascribed to the grossnesse and thickness of the air; considering that Europe
and the North are full of waters; which bursting out from hidden and unknown
concavities, do produce infinite bogs, fens, lakes, and marshes, in the
Summer seasons causing thick vapors to ascend. Which (without doubt) being
incorporated with heat, scorch more fervently, than the purer air of Affrike,
being stored with no such super-abundance of watery elements: Even so fire,
being invested in the body of liquors, or metals, scaldeth more furiously than
in wood; and in wood, more fervently than in flame. And if the keepers of
stoves and hot houses, do not sprinkle the ground with water, that the vapor
being contracted and the air thickened, they may thereby the longer and better
maintain heat, and spare fuel; you must (for me) wander into the schools of
more profound Philosophers for further satisfaction.

Of the Situation of Nations.
NOw to the South-wards, we will limit the hithermost Spaniards, the Siculi,
the Peloponnesians, the Cretensians, the Syrians, the Arabians, the Persians,
the Susians, the Gedrosii, the Indians, the Egyptians, the Cirenians, the
Africans, the Numidians, the Libians, the Moors, and the people of Florida in
America, to be situated: but with this caveat, that those wholly to the
West-wards in the same latitude, live in a more cold temperature.

The people of the North, I mean to be those, which live under the fortieth
degree to the sixtieth: and those of more temperature, who extend to the
seventieth. Under the first are situated, Britain, Ireland, Denmark, part of
Gotland, Netherland, and those Countries, which from the River of Mase stretch
to the outmost borders of Scythia and Tartaria, containing a good portion of
Europe, and the greater Asia.

The inhabitants of the Middle Region, as being subject neither to extreme
heat, not to extreme cold, I place between both Extremes, and yet able to
endure both, with indifferent content. I also term that the Middle Region,
which lies between the Tropike and the Pole; and not that which lies
between the Tropike and the Line: because the extremity of heat is not so
forcibly felt under the Line (as aforesaid) as under the Tropikes. So that,
that cannot be accounted the temperate climate, which extends from the
thirtieth degree to the fortieth; but that which begins at the fortieth, and
ends at the fiftieth: and the nearer East the more temperate. Under which
tract, lie the further Spain, France, Italy, the higher Germany, (as far
as the Mase) both Hungaries, Illyria, both Mysiaes, Dacia, Moldavia, Macedon,
Thrace, and the better part of Asia the less, Armenia, Parthia, Sogdiana, and
a great part of Asia the great. And the nearer the East, the more temperate,
although they somewhat incline to the Southward, as Lydia, Cilicia, Asia,
Media, etc.

The ancient Greeks and Romans both to set forth their own skill in
Geographie and Philosophy, and withal to make show of the largeness of their
conquests; with ignorance and idleness enough, did like the Chinois at this
day represent their own kingdom in the map, as big as all the rest of the
world besides. They therefore dividing the heavens into five Zones, made three
of them utterly inhabitable: In those two next the Poles their philosophy
judged not much amiss; for though no man of Europe has been near to either
of them, yet at that distance were the discoverers, yea the Seas themselves
frozen up with most insufferable cold; and these the Ancients rightly called,
The frozen Zones. But in that which is called the Torride Zone, their
philosophy was much mistaken. This Zone takes up all that space which is
betwixt the two Tropicks, and is equally divided by the Aequinoctiall line; the
whole breadth of the Zone being 47. degrees, that is, 2820. Italian miles of
ground. Now in this vast tract to imagine, all heat and no temperature
sufficient for a man to live in, was but an error of the times, bewraying
their own unexperience, and the uncertainty of speculative philosophy.

It is true indeed, that near unto the North pole men thinking to draw in
their breaths, are in danger to have their throats pluggd up with an Isicle:
and the Dutchmen wintering in Nova Zembla, had their house covered with snow
for nine or ten months together, nor could they get themselves a heat with all
the fire they could make. But there is not the same reason for the
insufferablenesse of heat, that there is of cold. Heat is the friend of life
and nature, and cold the great enemy and nipper of vegetation: And whereas
cold can without doors receive no temperer; heat on the contrary is capable of
very many. For so has the most wise God ordered his Creation, that under the
Torride Zone, there is most abundant plenty of waters; Rainwater, Snow-water,
Seawater, Lake-water, River-water, and Spring Water. As for their raines, even
the heats cause them; for in those months, when the Sun is vertical, and
right over their heads, and at that time of the day when he scorches from the
height of his Meridian, at high noone days, even then most plentifully does
he dissolve the clouds; and the raines at that time quench his flames most
temperately. At midday also have they (and that constantly) those cool and
gentle winds, which the Spaniards call the Brizes. In those parts have they the
most mighty Rivers; witness the Orelian 70. leagues in breadth, and that of
Plate, 40. leagues over; with diverse others not much streighter than our narrow
Seas. There have they the Lake Ticicaca, 80. leagues compass; Nicuragua, 300.
miles long; and the Lake of Mexico 1100. miles about. To come on this side the
Line (yet still under the Torride Zone) where can you find such impetuous
raines continually falling for some whole months together, and such vast Lakes
and Rivers as in Aethiopia? the mouth of the River Zairo is 20. miles wide;
nay, and in these places the rivers content not themselves with their own
channels, but in the hottest months they then overflow the whole country,
witness the Nile and the Niger: Another commodity of these waters is this,
that the winds skimming over the face of them, fannes the cool vapor all over
those quarters. Nay, as if this were not enough, we see that God has provided
water even in living and growing Cesternes; the hollow truncks of most
tree-like canes being full of water, and those cool a little also; such be
plentiful in the Moluccas, even under the Aequinoctiall. Besides all this,
has nature provided those parts of many high mountains, which cast long
shadows, and mightily keep off the Sun; yea, and which you would wonder at,
even in that continual neighborhood of that great Thawer have you hills
perpetually covered with frost and snow: so is it in the I Will of Saint Thomas,
which is just under the Aequinoctiall; and so are the silver hills of P^tossi
also. The general causer of these snowes and colds is held to be the length of
the nights (whose long and frequent intermissions be another maine occasion of
temper and cooling) and these are generally, and all the year, the nearer the
Line, the longer, being there equal with the days themselves; so that there
it snowes and freezes as much in the night, as the Sun thawes in the day; these
snow-waters being naturally more cold than other waters also. For these and
other reasons have our men of Europe found not people alone, but even white
people, and most delicate and temperate dwelling (perchance the best in the
world) in this Torride Zone, yea, under the very Aequinoctiall; yea, much
cooler Summers, than in Estramedura in Spain, or Apulia in Italy. To conclude
this point, the ancient Romans who looked for nothing but rost-meat in that
Zone, and that raw men could not possibly live there, were a great deal worse
scorched in their own Italy; nor have those under the Torride Zone so much
need of the Roman Grottaes or- Freskataes for to cool them.

Of the Constitutions, Complexions, and Natures of the Northern man.
GEnerally, both in the North, in the South, as also in the Middle, you shall
observe great difference both of fashion and quality, occasioned (no question)
through the intermingled resort from both Extremes. But in the Extremes you
shall see. no such apparent diversity. For the assured token of a Scythians
countenance is, his reddish eye like those of the Owl, which also do dazzle at
the sight of the light. Such eyes (says Plutarch) have the Cimbrians, and such
at this day the Danes. The Germans and the British have them not so fiery,
but rather gray, intermixed with a bright blackness, most resembling the
color of water. And this bright-shining color (says Aristotle) argues heat:
but black (the color of the Southern people) betokens want thereof. The
gray eye (and such is theirs who inhabit between both) is sharpest of sight,
seldom troubled with dimnesse; and according to Aristotle, denotes good
qualities: the Red, cruelty and austeritie, as Pliny and Plutarch observed of
Sylla, Caro, and Augustus.

The blood also of the Scythian is full of small strings, such as are
discernable in the goare of Bulls and Boares, and betokens strength and
courage. The people of the South have their blood thin and fluent, like to
that of the Hare and Heart, and denotes fear. Whereupon it may be conjectured,
that those Nations which are spread from the fortieth degree to the seventie
five Northward, are hot within: but the people of the South, what they borrow
from the Sun, that they want in themselves; the inward heat being dispersed
and drawn into the outward parts by the vehemency of the outward heat: A
reason why in frosty weather our minds and joints are courageous and strong: in
heat, idle, and lazy; and so our appetites and digestion more vehement in
Winter than in Summer, (especially if the Northern winds be stirring.) The
Southern winds effect the contrary in all living creatures (says Aristotle)
as may daily be observed amongst the English, the Germans, and the French,
traveling into Italy and Spain: where if they live not sparingly, they fall
into surfets; witness Philip Duke of Austria, living in Spain after his
Germane gourmandizing fashion.

Again, the Spaniards, who in their own Countries live most niggardly, in our
parts of the world prove better trencher-men than the natives. And this
experiment falls not out true in men only, but also in beasts, which (as
herdsmen affirm) being driven toward the South, fall away and lose flesh: but
if they feed toward the North, they prosper and wax fat. Which I the rather
believe, for that Leo Afer writes, that throughout all Afrike you shall almost
see no herds of Cattle, nor Horse, few flocks of Sheep, and scarce any milk
at all. On the other side, the goodly droves of the English, the Germans, and
the Scythians, are celebrated of all writers: not because their pastures are
better, or sweeter than those of the South, (by the censure of Pliny) but for
the nature and temperature of the Heavens, and the Air.

And as the Northern man by nature is hot and moist, (the Elements of
fecunditie) so there is no question, but that of all people they are, and have
been, the most populous. For from the Goths, the Scythians, the Germans, and
the Scandians, not only vast deserts, and goodly Cities have been founded,
and inhabited, but from their loins also have Colonies been derived thorowout
all Europe. Well therefore might Methodius, and P. Diaconus resemble their
Armies to swarms of Bees. And most true it is, that Iornandes and Olaus term
the North, the Storehouse of mankind; because from thence the Goths, the
Gepidae, the Hunnes, the Cimbrians, the Lombards, the Alani, the Burgundians,
the Normans, the Picts, the Heruli, the Swevians, the Slavi, the Swizzers, and
the Russians have not denied to fetch their pedigrees.

Which makes me to muse, upon what reasons Hippocrates could build to say,
That the Northern Nations were unapt for generation, causa frigiditatis;
whereas the conjectures of heat and moisture, argued in their hot and fervent
breathings, proceeding from the stomach, and more apparent in Winter than in
Summer, are not so effectually verified in any people, as in the inhabitants of
the North. The true motives, I say, of promptness to generation, and not of
sensual concupiscence, as Aristotle also would have us to imagine: A vice more
proper to the Southern man: performance to the Northern man.

Which indifferent limitation, was (without doubt) allotted to either climate
by the handy-worke of God; that those who were of sufficiency for generation,
should not greatly be addicted to pleasures; and the residue which wanted of
that measure of heat and moisture, should delight in wantonness, to raise
their appetites; without the which, they would neither propagate their issue,
nor by inter-marriages maintain humane society.

And that this inward heat also makes the people of the North more courageous,
taller, and stronger, than the Nations of the South, is apparently discernable,
not in our parts only (by the operation of nature) but also in the people
dwelling beyond the Tropike of Capricorn: where the more they decline from the
Equator, the more they spread in stature and tallnesse. For the land of the
Pentagones (of some termed Giants) is situated under the same latitude that
Germany is.

Which assertions holding true, it is no wonder that this strong and courageous
people, the Scythians, have from the beginning cruelly invaded the South,
erecting therein many goodly Trophies: whereas from the South has scarce ever
been attempted a journey worth speaking of, to the indammagement of the North.

The Assyrians vanquished the Caldeans: the Medes, the Assyrians: the Greeks,
the Persians; the Parthians, the Greeks: the Romans, the Carthaginians: the
Goths, the Romans: the Turks, the Arabians: the Tartars, the Turks: and beyond
Danubius, the Romans were ever unwilling to attempt. Indeed Trajan erected an
admirable bridge of stone over that River; for it had twenty arches, the rumes
whereof (by report) are to be seen at this day. But after that the same Trajan
perceived, that those Nations were neither easily beaten, nor being beaten,
would or could away with subjection, he commanded the bridge to be broken.
Semblably, the English have given the French, and Spanish, many famous
overthrowes, especially to the French in France it self, even to the hazard of
their State; and yet never could either of both the Nations, at any time,
(though often attempted) set sure footing in England.

These inrodes of the aforesaid barbarous Nations, I would not reiterate, but
that in them (to mine understanding) the grievous threats of Ezechiel, Jeremy,
Esaias, and the rest of the Prophets, That from the North should arise wars,
footmen, horsemen, and the ruin of kingdoms; have been, in, and by them
accomplished: and most properly ought to be referred to that fore-divided
partition, which stretches from the five and fortieth degree, to the fiftieth
and five, where Biarmia is situated. For those which dwell beyond (being either
none, or very few) are dried up (to use Hippocrates his term) with as vehement
cold, as the people living under the Tropikes are with heat: Not by reason of
their inward heat, (as Aristotle in his Meteors dreamed) but by the rigor of
the cold, piercing their bodies, and wasting their humors; unto which humors,
the Northern people are generally subject. A manifest sign whereof, is their
immoderate drinking, which in the Saxons, and the inhabitants of the Baltike
Sea, could never yet be moderated by time, nor statutes. And that these humors
cause the body to spread, let the Monsters of the Sea resolve our doubts, who
grow to that immensive vastness, above all other living creatures, propter
humiditatis copian^.

But (as I take it) this overmuch moisture in the Northern people, turns
them often into many grievous inconveniences. For if you observe any of those
Nations to travel toward the South, or to make wars in hot Countries, you
shall find them to faint and perish through immoderate sweating: as Plutarch,
in the life of Marius, observed in the Rhewmatike bodies of the Cimbrians: And
as experience manifests in the Horse, who being by nature hot and moist,
lives barely in Aethiopia, and likes well in Scythia; whereas on the
contrary, the Ass, being cold and dry, is lusty, and of good service in
Afrike; in Europe, poor and base; in Scythia, not to be found.

And what now we have spoken of the strength and courage of men, is observed
also to be true of horses. The Turkish and Barbary horses, are like their
Masters, rather well limbd and well spirited, than for labor or long
journeyes. The Spanish Iennet, like the men of his nation, quickly proves good
for a soldier, both best, when best caparisond. The Hungarian is a fierce
assailant, and his horse must be looked too for fear of running away with the
Coach. The high and low Dutch are big boned, but foggie people, and the
Germane horse is not to travel above thirty miles a day; that nation admires
a poor English Hackney. The Tartar is a stubbed squat fellow, hard bred, and
such are their horses. And so for our English.

Of the people of the South.
THe people of the South, as concerning the constitutions of their bodies, are
said to be cold, dry, thickeskin'd, thin and short hair'd, weak, brown,
small timbred, black eyed, and shrill voiced: the Northern men contrary, and
the middle people indifferently participating of both. The Spanish women term
the Germane^, Mallespisces, that is, spongie fishes, for their continual
drinking; and in Italy and Provence, the inhabitants do much wonder at the
English, the French, and the Flemmings, for their nightly complaints of the
bitings of the Gnats and Cimeces (a kind of worms breeding in their beds and
bedsteads) whereas they themselves do little regard them.

But as the bodies of the Northern people are endued with strength and
courage; so the weak constitutions of the Southern Nations are supplied by
the extraordinary gifts of the mind; term them what you please, either wit,
or subtlety.

Of cruelty also they have ever been taxed: Read Leo Afer his History of
Afrike, and the Carthaginian dissentions: or if Antiquity please you not, then
turn your eyes to the late butcheries of Muleasses and his children, and
diligently weigh, if ever your ears heard of more hellish furies than those
which these Princes have put in execution, either upon their vassals, or
against their own lineage. Which if you undertake, then you shall see miserable
Muleasses deprived of his kingdom, with his eyes burnt out, his face
disfigured, and in lamentable distress (by the cruelty of his brother)
prostrating his complaints at the feet of Charles the Emperor.

For to speak uprightly, from these Nations (more than from any other) have
tortures of more exquisite device taken their originals: as exoculations,
tearing of memb^^s, flayings, gashings with swords, slow fires, and impalements
on stakes: all which the Italians, the French, the Spanish, the Greeks, and
the people of Asia, have ever abhorred, and never admitted, but upon occasions
of horrible treasons, and that unwillingly too, as borrowed from their
neighbors.

And, that no man should conjecture, as does Polybius, that evil education
should produce this disposition of cruelty, I would advise him to look into
the nature of the Southern Americans, who also bathe their children in the
gore of their slaughtered enemies, then drink their blood, and lastly banquet
with the quartered carcasses of their enemies. But if peradventure any man will
object the like cruelty in the Northern man, I would wish him to put this
difference: that the man of the North is transported into fury by the heat of
courage, and pursues his revenge in open field; where being provoked, and
passion assuaged, he is easily pacified: whereas the Southern man is not
easily provoked; nor once in passion, is easily to be reconciled: and in
actions of war, he wholly sets his hopes on policies and stratagems,
tormenting with great indignity and cruelty his slain or vanquished enemies,
and that in cold blood. A disposition base and brutish, arising partly (I deny
not) from that instinct of fury, which evil education, and their inveterate
desire of revenge, do engender in nature, but more properly increased by the
unequal distribution of humors, and these humors by the inequality of the
elements. By the influence of celestial providence, these elements are
proportioned, and by these elements humane bodies are transported and blood
infused in the body, life in the blood, the soul in life, and understanding
in the soul: which, although it be free from passion, yet by proximitie it
cannot but participate of neighbour-imperfection: the reason wherefore the
people dwelling on either side our Midst, are more prone to vice and foul
behavior.

For as melancholy can no more be wanting to blood, thanlees to wine; no
otherwise can these passions, which arise from melancholy, be extracted from
the body.

Now, the Southern people having the greatest portion of their other humors
drawn out by the heat of the Sun, the melancholic (wherewith they most
abound) remain, and as dregs settle at the base of all their actions, being
the more exasperated by their froward and perverse dispositions. That men of
these constitutions are utterly implacable, Ajax and M. Coriolanus may serve
for presidents; the former of whom, for that he could not have his will on his
enemy, in a madding mood fell upon droves of cattle: the other would in no
wise be reconciled to his Country, before he saw the Cities thereof on a
flaming fire, in danger of irrecoverable destruction.

But that the Northern people have also their faults, and are subject to
choler, I must not gainsay, but advise you to consider, that when this
passion happens to overruled reason, it burns the blood, and incenseth the
mind to quarrelling and revenge, but in a far fairer measure (as I said
before) than melancholy does in the nature of a Southern man. According to
Cicero: Passion may over-beare a wise man; madness cannot.

Now, that the people of the South have been given to the studies of
contemplation, (a profession befitting their melancholic humors) let their
excellent Writers, and Inventors of many noble Sciences, as the History of
Nature, the Mathematikes, Religion, and the operation of the Planets, plead
their properties.

The Northern people, being less given to contemplation, by reason of their
plenty of blood and humors, distempering their minds, and hindering it is
faculties, have, without teaching, found out such Arts, as fall within the
compass of understanding and apprehension; as Mechanical workmanships,
Ordnance, casting of metals, Printing, and Minerals.

Being also the Darlings of Mars, they have always, and that with incredible
eagerness of courage, embraced the Art Military, loved Arms, levelled
Mountains, and turned Streams; giving themselves wholly to Hunting, to
Tillage, to Grasing, and to those Arts which are managed by labor: insomuch,
that a man may well affirm, That their wits consist in their hands. The reason
why the Astrologers (if you please to believe them) affirm, That those who
have Mars Lord in their Nativities, become either Soldiers or Tradesmen.

Of the people of the Middle Region.
OF this division are those, who at this day, understanding the reciprocal
bounds of Government and Subjection, and inured to civil and sociable
conditions, are sufficiently enabled to frustrate the policies of the South,
and to oppose against the furies of the North. Out of this mould would
Vitruvius have a Commander to be chosen; and how judiciously, let others say:
we will only maintain by historical experience, that the Goths, Hunnes,
Heruli, and Vandals, wasted Asia, Afrike, and Europe; and yet for want of good
counsel, could never maintain their Conquests: whereas far weaker forces,
assisted by wisdom and politic government, have not only brought barbarous
Nations to civilitie, but likewise perpetuated most flourishing Empires.

In approbation whereof, the Poets fained Pallas to be armed, and Achilles to
be by her protected. It is recorded also of Cato Censorius, that he was a
valiant Captain, a sage Senator, an upright Judge, and a great Scholar: of
Caesar, that he was a Politician, an Historian, an Orator, and a Warrior: of
Agamemnon, that he was a good Governor, and a tall Soldier. And therefore no
wonder, if the Scythians, hating Learning, and the Southern Nations, abhorring
Arms, could never make good their conquered acquisitions. The Romans embraced
both, to their great good fortunes, and according to Platoes rule, intermingled
Music (as the saying is) with Martial exercises. From the Grecians, they
deemed it no discredit to borrow Laws and Letters: from the Carthaginians and
Sicilians, the Art Marine: the Military they had in perfection by continuance
and assiduitie. Before these times, Scythian-like, they struck downright
blows: afterward, they learned of the Spaniards (says Polybius) to thrust
with the point.

Thus much, by way of Reading and Observation, for Inclination and Industry:
for mine own part, I cannot but attribute these qualities of Strength in the
Scythian, Wit in the Southern man, and Indifferency in the Middle man, to the
Divine providence; who in his praescience adjudged it best, upon cruel and
barbarous men, as upon Bulls and brute beasts, not to bestow these good gifts
of the Mind: neither upon subtle and vafrous people, Courage, and Strength of
body; left both should abuse both, to the destruction of each other. For as
Aristotle says, There is nothing more dangerous than armed fury.

Wherefore, sithence all Nations have their faults, as well as their virtues,
let us neither reproach the laudable sobriety of the Southern man, nor tax
the free drinking of the Northern man; faculties (without controversy)
peculiar to either people: but rather, according to reason, let us weigh with
our selves, that the Southern man, for want of natural digestion, if he
should gourmandize, would fall into Surfets, Apoplexies, etc. and the Northern
man, if he would, cannot constrain abstinence, by reason of thirst,
proceeding of inward heat. And this should have been the consideration of all
Authors, before they had proceeded to rash condemnation.

So again, if the Greek, the Egyptian, the Arabian, or the Chaldean, be to
be taxed of Superstition, Sorcerie, Cowardice, Treachery, or Lasciviousness;
yet let them not be so rejected, but that we vouchsafe in them, to imitate
what has been commendable, what excellent: For from these Nations, in truth,
have Letters, Arts, Learning, Discipline, Philosophy, Religion, and the rules
of humane Society been derived, over the face of the habitable earth.

Neither let us detract from the industries of the Northern Nations, neither
take exceptions against the frailties of those whom God has allotted to
possess the Middle Regions. For albeit (as I said at first) that no
overweening credit be to be given to Stars and Planets, yet so far let us
lean to the learned, as experience may seem to verify what they have
observed.

The Aphorisms of the Signs in the Zodiake (says Bodin) are intricate, and
not understood by us, considering, that by the Astronomers own observations to
these times, all the points of the Zodiake, and the Signs, have wholly changed
their stations.

To the Southern people, they place Saturn as Lord and Governor: To the
Middle, Jupiter: To the Northern, Mars. And these in general. But because of
particulars, they put Venus in conjunction with Saturn, Mercury with Jupiter,
and Luna with Mars. The Sun, as Moderator, they have confined as indifferent.

The Chaldeans say, That the influence of Saturn operateth in apprehension:
the influence of Jupiter, in action: and the influence of Mars, in execution.
The Hebrews term Saturn, quiet, peaceable, contemplative; Jupiter, just,
wise, etc. and Mars, strong, and full of courage. Saturn (they say) is cold,
Mars hot, and Jupiter moderate.

But the people of the Middle Region are neither borne so apt to the studying
of arcane Sciences, as are the Southern men; nor so eagerly given to
Mechanical labors, as are the Northern men: but in management of civil
affairs they prove most eminent. Let any man confer Time and History, and he
shall find, that by this people the rudiments of civil behavior, of Laws,
good Customs, Statizing, Merchandising, Oratorie, and Dialect, have been
bettered, if not invented. And no marvel: for Jupiter and Mercury are said to
be the Schoolmasters of Sciences, and they that are borne under either, are
exceeding apt thereto of their proper inclinations. Witness Asia, Graecia,
Assyria, Italy, France, and the higher Germany (which lies between the Pole
and the Equator, from the 40. degree to the 50.) From hence the greatest
Empires, the best judges, the wisest Lawyers, the eloquentest Orators, the
skilfullest Merchants, and finally the most exquisite Historians and Actors of
Comedies, that ever were, have proceeded. In Africa have few such been found:
In Scythia, fewer, no, not one, Anacharsis excepted.

Thus has God and Nature decreed, That the Scythian (or Northern man) should
carry the reputation of Strength; the Southern man, the praise of
Contemplation; and the people inhabiting between both, the Attributes of
Wisdom. And yet in all places (according to their Situations) shall you find,
some more strong, some more contemplative, and some more wise. Sed a
particulari non est syllogizandum.

Of East, and West, what more can be spoken? To places parallel, the Sun
neither rises, nor falls. When it approaches the South with us, (being
about noone-tide) then is it said to fall, by the Eastern people; and
contrariwise, then to rise by the Southern. And therefore, as well to
reconcile the doubts of the Ancients, as to satisfy the Curious, in these
unrevealed works of God, and his servant Nature; the Modern Cosmographers
have been bold to suppose the finite limitation of the East, to determine in
the Islands of the Molucca; and of the West in the Hesperides. For herein (say
they) stands the center of the Globe, the Meridian of both Islands being 180.
dedegrees distant one from another. On the other half of the Globe lies
America, divided from either angle by so immensible a tract of Sea, that it
deserves by it self, peculiar Bounds of East and West.

As for that great Globe (commonly termed Australi^) I had rather say with
Bodin, That as yet, it is better set forth for show than for certainty.

And therefore in excuse of oversight to be objected to the Ancients, in
attributing peculiar influences to diversities of Climates, as the North-east,
North-west, South-east, or South-west; let all be referred to the operation of
the Cardinal points of nearest situation, and all (without doubt) may pass
for tolerable construction.

Of the world, and the greatest Princes therein; and of the means to enlarge
dominion.
IT now remains, that I undertake the second branch of Observation; which is
to relate unto our traveller, of the greatest Princes and Potentates, which at
this day sway the world, and how they have attained to their Sovereignty.

This earth, all created by one God, was not all given to one man; nor did God
for ever intaile the possession and sovereignty over the same people, unto the
same family. Four Monarchies we have had, and this last much mangled and
invaded in the declination of the Empire; those Commanders who at first built
their nests with the Eagles feathers, falling out afterward amongst themselves
about the division of the spoil. Hence the Risings, and the Ruins, the
Decayings and Inlargements of several kingdoms, just as men's ambition and
means did enable them. Since the decay of the four Monarchies, the greatest
Princes of the world are these at this day; The King of Spain, and the great
Turk, both risen out of the ruins of the Roman and the Macedonian
Monarchies. Next is the Emperor of Russia, and the Tartar in the North of the
world; The great Mogore in East India, and the great Xeriff in Africa. And
these be the most renowned Potentates; and yet, me thinks, that in this one
respect, no one nation comes near the honor of the Persian; which (first) was
once a Monarchy; and secondly, since the decay of that, it has ever continued,
a rich, a great, an active, and a glorious kingdom, which neither Assyria,
Macedonia, nor Rome it self can boast of. This one thing let me note, that the
glory of these Northern Princes has been much more powerful, but nothing
comparable to the state and Majesty of the Eastern Monarchs. That of Assyria
was planted in the very garden and treasury of the world, both for wealth and
delicacie; and whereas the meanest subject may put a petition into the hands of
one of our Princes, the Kings of Persia kept such state, that it was death even
for the Queen herself to come near the throne, until Ahashuerosh held forth
the golden scepter. The King of Spain wears at this day (perchance) a homely
Cassocke of black Serge, many a Curate in his Country having a better; whereas
the King of China gives not presence, but rarely at the great suit of his
people, and that out at the window of a gilded chamber, himself gloriously
shining in Rubies, in Gold and Diamonds; and that at such time too, as the
Sun shining upon him, even dazles the eyes of his adoring subjects, with the
glitter of the reflection; and this they think the Sun does in favor of
him, whence they call him, The Son of the Sun. No Northern or Western
Prince at this day keeps state, but the Emperor of Russia, and the great
Turk; nor are any so obeyed: but their governments (as those of Assyria and
Persia of old, and the great Mogore and China at this day) are rather Tyrannies
than Monarchies.

Now most certain it is, that all these Monarchies and mighty kingdoms
arrived not to that height of Empire, but by time, by means, and by degrees:
Time indeed perfected the design, but it was the means that effected it. Let
this be therefore laid for the ground of our discourse, that there be many
(though secret, yet) irresistible causes of enlarging of Empire; which being
made the right use of by a wife Architect of State, presently shows the
advantage to lie on his side, that has the true knacke of King-craft. It Is
true, That no man by taking thought can add one cubite unto his stature; but
yet in that vast frame of commonwealths, by observing off me natural and
casual advantages, and by introducing of some good ordinances and
constitutions, there may be found out that Art of Themistocles; To make a small
town to become a great City, and to sow greatness to posterity.

And these means conducing unto the enlargement of Empire, we will reduce unto
seven heads: First, numbers of men. Secondly, valor of the Natives. Thirdly,
pretense of Religion. Fourthly, plenty of money. Fifthly, advantage of
weapons. Sixthly, happiness of situation. Seventhly, the prudent apprehending
of an opportunity.

The enlarging of Dominion, Numbers.
is the uniting and establishing of diverse Territories under one Sovereign
government; whereunto is necessarily required such numbers of men, and those
not mercenarie, if it may be avoided, as may exceed the fatal dangers and
doubtful chances, incident to casualties. For small numbers are soon consumed
by diseases, or oppressed by a more mighty enemy; overthrown in one battle,
or extenuated by a long war: to which inconveniences great numbers and
populous Nations are not so subject. By these advantages, the Barbarians, the
Egyptians, the Assyrians, and the Persians, have for the most part brought
their attempts to happy ends. The Romans (if in respect of their honor) they
did not ordinarily use huge Armies, yet they always prevailed, by reason of
their populous territories, or their indefatigable continuance; being thereby
able the second and third time to reinforce their Legions, and finally with
fresh supplies to overcome their enemies, being weakened with overcomming. And
to multiply and maintain these numbers, as they sometimes received into their
territories their very enemies, so at other times they sent forth Colonies of
their own people. By means whereof, and other such like policies, they grew
to such multitudes, that in the eighth year of the reign of the Emperor
Claudius, the people were numbered to be six millions; a number at this present,
not to be found in the bounds of all Italy; whereby they became conquerours of
the parts of the world then discovered. Conquest (say I) undertaken by them, as
much in regard of their numbers, as of their valor.

A good Manroode is an inexhaustible stock. By populous armies did the
Northern Nations (called officinae hominum, the shops of men) overrunne far
greater Nations than their own. Small numbers are quickly consumed by
mortality, or one overthrow: whereas the Romans by frequent re-inforcing
their legions with new Recruites, put Pyrrhus (who had often overthrown them)
to confess at last, That if he overcame the Romans once more, he should be
utterly undone; Saepius possunt vinci, quam tu vincere: Multitudes can endure
to be overcome oftener, than a few are able to overcome them. But most expedient
it is, that the body and flower of the Army, be made up of the natives, and
not of strangers: for he that trusts to mercenaries, may suddenly rise and
spread his feathers, but he will mew them soon after. The Auxiliaries that the
Romans made use of, were either first made their own by Indenization, or as
good as their own, by entering a league offensive and defensive, against a
common enemy. Necessary it is withal, that amongst those numbers there be a
race of military men: such be the Timariotes amongst the Turks, and most of
the Gentry amongst the Polonians and Hungarians. Let every Prince think
soberly of his forces, unless his militia of natives be good and valiant
soldiers, able, and hardy bodies, and stout and sturdy stomachs. The plough
('it is true) breeds the soldier, that is the Foot which makes the body of the
Army, but they must expect much time to harden, to drill and exercise them;
and therefore the sudden French nation, though they must have an Infantery of
Foot, yet their maine trust and glory of service they lay upon their Cavallery,
which be their Gentry, which use themselves to horse and Arms continually.
But the chief secret of all for enlarging of Empire is, the maintaining of a
sufficient number in Arms, such as has been on both sides in the Low
Countries these 60. years; and such an Army may well deserve the name of a
School of War, and of a true Militia indeed. The Venetians (contrary to the
former discipline) do with great wages levy sudden forces, and when the
service is done, as suddenly disband them: but they do it merely to keep
Empire, and not to enlarge it: their subjects be but few, and therefore their
dominion enlarges not.

True Valor consists partly in judicious apprehension, Valor.
(whereby both convenient opportunities are discerned and entertained, and all
difficulties discovered and prevented:) and partly in the forward resolution of
the mind: by conjunction of which two Virtues, great enterprises are
undertaken with good success; dangers almost inevitable made light, and
weighty attempts brought to happy conclusions. Of these two I do not know
which to Prefer as most necessary, and of greatest importance: but most
certain it is, that the one without the other, little avails, to the
atchieving of any matter worthy enterprise. For wisdom without courage, may
rather be termed subtilty, than judicious carriage: and courage without
discretion, is rather furious rashness, than true valor; neither let any man
suppose, that from wiliness without force, nor force without judgment, can
proceed any project of worthy consideration. For all designs which have in
them greatness, have also in them difficulty and hardness, and to master
uneasy actions, it is necessary both to use judgment in foreseeing of
dangers, and courage to overcome them once undertaken. These two joined in one
man, or in one Nation, are apt means to raise their fortunes above their
neighbors. As we see amongst birds, the Eagle; among beasts, the Lion; among
fishes, the Dolphin; (in whom do appear some shadows of wit and courage) are
esteemed as it were Princes above their Fellow Creatures.

But if any man affirm, that true judgment cannot be severed from true
valor, yet give me leave to affirm, that ordinarily the one does appear more
discernable above the other in diverse subjects. For we may note in Philip King
of the Macedons, and in Amilcar the Carthaginian, great foresight and wisdom,
and in Alexander and Hannibal (their sons) more courage and valor; In
Fabritius, judicious wariness; in Marcellus, courageous forwardness: both
which were alike fearful and disastrous to the valiant Hannibal.

Yet I say not, but some actions are better dealt in, by the one, than by the
other. For generally, to conquer and win, courage is more availeable than
wit; but to establish and keep that which is gotten, discretion is more to be
desired than it; as may well be discerned in Spaniards, who have surer settled
themselves in that which they have gained by their wariness and judgment,
than did the French by their fury and hazard.

But, if any man should urge me to speak my opinion, whether courage or
wisdom be more necessarily to be required; I would give my consent with
courage: My reason is, that wisdom is given but to few, and that must be
gotten by travel, by long time and study, whereas courage naturally is by
diverse means, and upon sudden casualties imparted and dispersed in the minds
of many: which many having to deal with few, will casually find opportunity
to vanquish and overcome. As we read of the Goths* the Vandals, the Tartarians,
and the Turks, who with courage only have achieved great conquests, and have
brought to pass such enterprises, as a man would have thought unpossible: The
reason whereof is, that their sudden and speedy movings, and their unexspected
boldness, has confounded the Counsels, and amazed the judgments of the
wisest Commanders. Besides, in sudden hurly-burlies of war it is commonly
seen, that courage opens more gaps, and affords more relief, than
policy; for that in such cases, reason is jealous, suspicious, and fearful,
and men stand as it were amazed at the greatness of the present danger:
whereas courage does oft-times gather strength in extreme despair. Vna salus
victis nullam sperare salutem.

Yea, it is commonly seen, Wisdom.
that those people who are more commended for their wit and policy, than for
their courage and valor, have given place to those who have been more
esteemed for their resolution, than for their skilfulnesse as the Greeks and
the Macedons do at this day to the Turks: the Gauls of old, to the French:
the Egyptians, to the Persians: the Sarazens, to the Chaldeans: and other
Nations to the Persians and Parthians. Yea, it is the received opinion, That
the French did range Italy at their pleasure under Charles the eighth, and gave
them the Law, because in those times the Italian Princes did wholly give
themselves to the study of good Letters.

Multitudes are nothing without valor: it never troubles the wolf how many
the sheep be; and surely a small Army of well trained and resolved old
soldiers, under a prudent General, will not much care for a confused rabble
and multitudes of a Barbarous enemy. Let the Turks come into Epyre with 50. or
60000. men, Scanderbeg never cared for above 9000. to go against them; and his
few well led men came ever off with victory: When Tigranes the Armenian, having
encamped his mighty Army of 400000. men upon the advantage of the hills, saw the
Romans upon their march toward him not with above 14000. in their whole Army,
in a pleasant humor says he, These men be too many for an Embassage, and too
few for a fight. But before night he found them enough, for they gave him both
the chase and slaughter. True valor (now) is a due mixture of judgment for
the discovery of difficulties, with a quick resolution to execute. Part them,
and they are but subtilty, and fury; where they light together, they both
advance the cause, the man, and the Nation. Both these have their several
activities: Courage, is able at a pinch to man up it self, and with a sudden
assault to surprise the unperfected consultations of the enemy. Judgment has
its scouts ever abroad, to prevent such like fallies and cavalcadoes, that he
be not taken sleeper. Resolution atchieves the victory, and judgment keeps
it. Shall we go less? and for Judgment take Policy, and for valor courage?
which of the two now is to be preferred? The question was anciently answered by
the Orator; Parva sunt foris arma, nisi sit consilium domi; an army in the
field is nothing so potent, unless the General receives his instructions from
the councell-table at home. Policies office is to prevent dangers, and to plot
designs: in both which it may be abused, either by fear, or want of
intelligence. Against the first, courage is provided; the second it regards
not, as accounting no difficulty insuperable. The French slander our English
victories with imputation of rashness, rather than valor; saying, We overcame
dangers, because we were ignorant of them. And let us do so still: Dummodo
pugnando vincam, tu vince loquendo; We can give losers leave to talk. Finally,
politic enemies, have still given way to resolute, yea even when they were
vanquished: A resolved or a famished enemy that would get loose or die, make
him a bridge of gold to flee upon. Certainly, a courageous enemy is never
despised, a politic one may be.

Moreover, their is a certain fierceness, or rather fury, Rashness.
which comes near to valor: for that excess of boldness, where with the
Gauls, and afterward the Frenchmen, have achieved notable exploits, is in
some sort commendable. But withal it is worthy of observation, that such like
acquisitions are commonly of small continuance. Whereupon it was well said;
Moderation to be the Mother of continuance, to States and Kingdoms. The
Swissers showed themselves notable herein, especially in the wars of Navar;
insomuch as James Trivultio reports, that their battle seemed rather to
consist of Giants, than of ordinary Soldiers. Neither has any Nation ever
dealt more at adventure, or has used more boldness and blind fury, than the
Portugals, whose voyages beyond the Cape of Good-Hope, and the Straights of
Sinca-Pura; their conquests of Ormus, of Goa, of Malacca, and the Moluccos; the
defense of Cochin, of Diu, of Chaul, and of Goa, are more true and commendable,
than in reason likely to have prospered.

Military valor (now) is usually increased by some such like means as these.
First, by using them to the wars: Secondly, by treating them like free men, and
not like slaves: Thirdly, by inuring them to Arts manly: Fourthly, by
appointing military rewards and honors for the soldiery.

When people are inured to the wars, I Use.
it takes away the horror and hideous fear of it, and makes it but a kind of
trade to the followers, who desire it, to live by it. One of our lusty
ploughmen of mid- England, would at fifty-cuffes or cudgels soundly beclowt a
Hollander: but yet for that he never saw men with iron faces, he durst as well
take a sheet of an hedge, as come within the crack of a pistol: whereas it is
usual for the Bores of Holland, some with firelocks, and some with
Loapestaves, to make out parties of foot to go a-bootehaling, and even to set
upon the horse of the enemy. And all this is, because the Englishman is not
used to it, and the Hollander is. For the same reason there is much difference
betwixt the same people in time of war, and after a long and effeminating
peace. That felt Hannibals soldiers after their long and lazy quarter in
Capua. Before Da'lvaes coming into the Low Countries to provoke the
Hollanders, there was not a more simple cullion in the world than a Dutchman,
and now, no where a braver man: and what has effeminated our English, but a
long difuse of arms. Finally, though in a hard battle there would appear a
great deal of difference betwixt an old beaten soldier, who had seen men die
familiarly, (even the sight of blood making men fierce and fearelesse) and a
man of our train bands of London: yet surely would the Londoner much sooner
prove fit for a battle, than the unexperienced countryman, even for that
little use which he has had of his Arms in the Artillery garden, and Military
yard: of such force is use and custom to the increase of military valor.

Most requisite it is, that what people a Prince would make valiant, 2 (...).
he should use freely, and not like slaves. A Nation overlaid with taxes, will
never prove military. In France therefore where the peasant is but the
day-labourer for his Landlord the Monsieur, and never suffered to eat good
bit, to wear good ragge, or scarce to lay up a quart-deseue at the years end;
the Prince does not much trust to the Enfantery, which is made up of this
slavish people. Enforced impositions, mightily abate peoples love and courages:
and the blessing of Judah and Issachar will never meet, That the same people
should prove the Lions whelpe, which is used like an Ass between two
burdens. But where the yeoman or husbandman may eat what he breeds, spend what
he earnes, and have the benefit of the Law against the best gentleman of the
Country, there are they fit for an helmet. And all this is in England: in no
Nation under heaven does the common man live so freely, or dares spend so
frankly; no where so free minds, or so able bodies.

Three other usages have we had in England, which have kept our people in
spirit and valor. One was, the tenure of Knights service: by virtue of which,
when the Lord of the Manor was called to serve the King, he drew his Tenants
after him, who would not budge a foot, but live and die with their Landlord
and Captain: for if they proved cowards to their Landlord, how should they
look his son in the face, and how disgraced should they be at their return
into their own Country? Thus proved we victorious in France.

The second usage was perfected by King Henry the seventh, which was to reduce
the Farms and houses of husbandry to a standard, assigning such a proportion
of land to each, as might breed a subject to live in a convenient plenty;
neither with so much, as should effeminate him into the ease of a gentleman;
nor with so little, as should discourage him with beggary.

The third usage was, the frequency of Serving-men and Retainers, who before
that the sin of drunkenness had overflowed their gals and courages, were no
whit for valor and service inferior to the Yeomanrie. All these being kept in
freedom, were maintained in courage, able and willing to serve both their
Prince and Country.

A third thing necessary to breed courage in a Nation, 3 Manly arts.
is (if other reasons of State will bear it) that there be more addicted to
arts manly, than unto sedentary and within-doores occupations. Such I mean, as
require the strength of the back, and brawne of the arm, rather than the
finenestle of the brain or finger. Some have thought that the multitudes of
Monks and Friars, would if need were, be a great strengthening to the Papacy,
and fight hard for their Grandfire of Rome. But most assuredly those cage-birds
have no military minds at all. When Rome was beleagred by the Duke of Burbon in
Charles the fifth his time, and taken too, not a Friar came to the rescue. The
Kings of England have sometimes made bold with the treasure of the Monasteries,
but never thought their persons serviceable. Had they been martiall-minded,
such multitudes would never have suffered themselves to be turned out of their
warm nests, in King Henry the eighths time, without stroke striking. And
surely the taking in of the Dutch and Waltons into our Cities of England, was
more out of charity than policy: for they being all given to neat and delicate
manufactures, may seem rather to bring riches than strength to the kingdom.
Nor have our Kings hitherto tried any of them in their souldierie. Studious,
delicate, and sedentary arts, are not fit for arms: it is the whip, the
plough-stafte, the slayle, the hammer, and the hatchet, that breeds the lusty
soldier, that makes able bodies and courageous spirits.

Another great maintainer of courage is, 4 Military rewards.
the invention and worthy bestowing of military honors and rewards, after the
service is done.

The Romans had their Triumphs and Ovations, their Garlands and their
Donatives to inhearten their soldiers. Orders of Knighthood were also invented
for this purpose. But what is all this to the common Soldier, who has no
reward assigned until he be lame, and that a little from the Treasurer. As for
relief in an hospital, a serving-man can make better means to get into it
than a poor soldier after twenty or thirty years service. This is a
discouragement. But nothing so bad as the Spaniards, whose practice has been
for these many ages, to reward most of his great Captains (especially if they
were not naturally Spaniards) first with an empty title, and lastly (being not
otherwise able to pay or recompense them) with a Spanish sico.

A great and a maine advancer of a cause and enlarger of Empire, 3 Religion.
is Religion, or the pretense of it. Religion is well called the soul of the
State; and is ever the prime thing to be looked into; most bitter dissentions
and hindrances of all great actions, still proceeding from discontentments in
Religion. Anima est actus corporis, says the Philosopher; It Is the soul that
gives action and motion to the body; and if the affections and passions of the
soul be composed to a well ordered and contented tranquillity and serenity,
there follows health, strength, and growth in all the limbs and members of the
body. The conscience is an active spark, and can easily man up all the powers
of soul and body, either for the maintenance or enlargement of it is liberty.
Bonum est sui communicativum; Religion (contrary to counsel) desires ever to
be made public: the spiritual man as well as the natural, ever having a
desire generare sibi simile; to beget others in his own likeness; to compass
Sea and Land to make a Proselyte. As therefore Princes have still accounted it
a dangerous thing to arm Religion against themselves; so have they most
willingly accepted of the countenance of Religion. No such encouragement could
come to the Israelites, or disheartning to the Philistines, as when the Ark of God was in the host of Israel: who is able to stand against these mighty gods,
say they. Most surely is the kingdom of the Pope founded, whose ground is
laid in the conscience. The Turk pretending to propagate his Religion with
fire and sword, we see how that has advanced his conquests: and what advantage
has the Spaniard more made use of in these late wars, than a specious
pretense of rooting out the Protestants, and the reestablishing of the
Catholic Religion; by which secret he has not only staved off the popish
Princes and Erectors of Germany, not only from defending the common liberty
of their country, but to enter that which they call the holy league with him,
whereby for zeal of enlarging their Religion, they in the mean time weaken
themselves, that he at last picking a slight quarrel with them, may swallow
them up one after another, having long before designed them (Papists as well as
Protestants) to a common destruction; for though the Spaniard pretends
Religion, yet he intends Monarchy. This plot beginning to be discovered, we
see most of the Princes of Christendom drawing to a leaguer, war, that is, to
a co^federacy of all Protestant Princes against all Popish; and who sees not,
that if the Romish religion prevails, the King of Spaines Monarchy must needs
prove as Catholic (that is, universal) as his religion; and then will he
prove the Catholic King indeed.

Now that the pretense of Religion may take the better, it is necessary that
there be an union in it among all the subjects of the grand pretender; or at
least, that those of the adverse opinion be so few and weak, that they be not
able to put an Army into the field: tolerations of Religion are most
dangerous: and surely, should the King of England much exhaust his land forces,
to make a potent invasion upon the Spanish dominions, the Jesuits would
presently stir up our Papists to call him back again for the stinting of a
domestike rebellion: for to be feared it is, that though all our Recusants be
the King of Englands subjects, yet too many of them be the King of Spaines
servants. No sooner (on the otherside) did the French King this present year
lead his Army over the Alps into Italy, but the Duke de Rohan thought it a fit
opportunity for the Protestants to struggle for their liberty. And therefore
plainly as of all good causes Religion is the chief, so in Religion there must
be unity; and that makes it irresistible. Finally, as natural bodies are best
nourished by things of that nature and kind whereof they consist; even so that
Empire which is gained or enlarged by Religion, must ever be maintained by it:
It Was therefore the old rule amongst the Conquerours, to bring in their own
language, laws, and religion among their new subjects. The Romans did this
every where, and the Norman did it in England. The Spaniard indeed has not
much stood upon laws and language, but has ever been diligent for his
Religion: and though in the Palatinate he suffered some Protestant Ministers
awhile, (to make the conquest the sweeter) yet those being either dead or
wearied out, he never suffered another Protestant to succeed. The diligence and
fury of the Emperor for rooting out those of the Augustane confession in
Bohemia, etc. may well confirm the truth of this observation.

The qualities of weapons, 4 Weapons.
and the order of discipline are important instruments of this martial
greatness. Advantage of weapons is like good casting, and strict discipline
like skillful playing, both which must needs win the game. The Macedonians by
their Pikes, and the Romans by their Pyles; the Parthians and English by their
long bows, have still been victorious. The same thing does engine and
fortification. The gunne has brought all weapons to an equality: that only
domineeres now. Nothing resists it but the spade. It Is a weapon of terrible
execution, serviceable both by Sea and Land; and yet are not the slaughters
made by the gunne, any way comparable for numbers, to those bloody battles
won by the sword. The charges of this, disables Princes from levying Armies
equal for multitudes to the Ancient; which now adays begin to be
incredible. Infinite were it to speak of the new invented engines and
fire-workes, and of the several provisions to prevent them: and whether
after-ages shall invent a more terrible weapon than the gun, is to us
uncertain: which if it proves, the Inventor gets incredible advantage.

Treasure is an advantage of great importance: Treasure.
forasmuch as there is nothing more necessary in wars, or of more use in
peace. By means hereof the Florentines became Lords of a great part of
Tuscany: they bought many Cities; they freed themselves from the incursions of
diverse enemies; they maintained the wars many years against the Pisans, and
against the prowess of those peoples, and the power of those Princes which did
aid them; and at the last brought that war to good end. By means hereof, the
Venetians made themselves Lords of a good part of Lumbardy, and endured the
forces of the King of Hungary, the Archduke of Austria, and of diverse other
Princes. Whereby it appears, that money works two notable effects, to the
augmentation and continuance of the greatness of kingdoms and estates: The
one, to provide and gather forces, and those being gotten, to uphold and
maintain, with supplies of Soldiers, victuals, munition and arms: The other,
that it does offer us opportunity, (if not to weaken and vanquish the enemy,
having gotten the advantage) yet at least, it does enable us to endure and
withstand him; that by drawing out the war in length, we may make him weary
of continuance, and gives us benefit of time. By this temporizing, the
Venetians being overthrown in all places by the league of Cambray, in the end
became Conquerours. So that, as to him that has a populous army, and finds
himself mighty and strong, it is most convenient to hasten the encounter, and
to fight without prolonging of time; for delay (the overthrow of many actions)
can afford him no other, but loss, sickness, infection, scarcity, famine,
mutinies, and dissolution of forces: So for him that is better furnished with
money than with men, it is most advantageous to prolong the war, and to stand
upon the defensive; for in the end, his money may gain him victory.

Finally, although some men will not suffer money to be called the sinews of
war; because as Solon answered once to Croesus, (who in ostentation showed
him his gold) Sir, if another comes that has better iron than you, he will be
master of all this gold: yet notwithstanding, where numbers, policy, valor,
and weapons have not either singly or altogether prevailed, there has money
alone done the feat. For this, have Towns and Kingdoms been bought of
traitors: with this, purchase we either peace or victory. No place is to be
held impregnable, whither an Ass laden with gold may get up. Two great effects
it works: First, it levies forces suddenly, and withal, keeps them long
together: Secondly, a monied enemy may fight when he will, and but when he
will, and must needs therefore weary out his adversary, and so at last endanger
either to overthrow him, or force him to a fair composition. For want of pay
Armies mutiny, and will neither muster nor fight; and especially the Germans.
But Spinola has made great use of a secret of war, how in scarcity of
moneys to awe these mutiniers; and that is by paying and contenting the horse,
and they shall keep the foot in obedience. But this trick will not always
serve, for in an Army a man can hardly tell which is most necessary, arms,
victuals, or money; this last always fetches in both the other.

The advantage of site, is of much importance, Situation.
for the defending or enlarging of dominion, and does chiefly consist in this;
that it be convenient for the making of an assault, and uneasy to be again
assaulted. For a Country being as it were naturally fortified, has easy
means to make conquests, and get victory, to the enlargement of their own
dominions, and to the overthrow of another. Of this quality are the situations
of Spain and Araby, for both these are (as it were) pene-Insulaes, having
their greatest parts encompassed with the Sea, whereby they may assail the
Countries near adjoining, and cannot without great difficulty be assaulted
again. The one has dangerous shores without harbors, and is environed with
mountains (having few and secret passages) the other is enclosed with sands
and deserts. Of like quality is Italy: And among the Islands, England. But this
advantage of situation I hold not sufficient (of it self) to effect any
notable exploit: for besides, there is required plenty of victuals, store of
munition, arms, horses, and diverse other necessaries, without which, there is
no hope to accomplish any famous expedition. Moreover, such a disposition and
quality of the country is necessarily to be required, that the aforesaid
habiliments may easily be brought together, and removed to places, whither
occasion shall command. And although those, which possess the mountains and
higher places, may with advantage come down upon the plain and low countries,
and by reason of the craggednesse and hard passages of their country, can
hardly be assaulted again; yet have not such people done any thing which may
worthily commend them. For the mountains be ordinarily long and narrow, or at
the least, much broken and divided amongst themselves (which must needs hinder
the speedy drawing together, and uniting of their forces and necessaries;)
again, are they unprovided of victuals, and of all other things requisite of
the wars, and therefore altogether unable to continue in action. So that they
war rather after the manner of robbers and thieves, than of true soldiers:
It may also be added, that the mountaine-men cannot live any long time, without
intercourse and traffike with the men of the plain Country. And therefore if
upon any attempt, they do not prevail at the first brunt, their best course
will be to capitulate with their enemies, and to return home again, although
with loss; as did the Helvetii at the overthrow of Mount S. Claud.

So we may see, that the Englishmen which inhabit a plain and plentiful
soil, have always prevailed against the Scots and Welshmen, who upon
presumptions of their natural situations, have diverse times molested them. For
the plain Country by reason of the fruitfulness, does minister all things
requisite for war, and to defray charges; conveniencie to join forces, and
being gotten together, able long time to maintain them: Whereas on the
contrary, the Mountains (by reason of their barrenness) afford no provision
for a long journey, nor are any way able to bear the charge of any notable
enterprise.

Whereupon it does proceed, that small Islands having the foresaid qualities of
situation, have never attained any great Sovereignty; because the advantages of
the Land are far greater than those of the Sea. Moreover, their command
cannot be great, unless it be enlarged by means of the firm Land; for
Islands hold the same proportion with the Continent, that the part does with
the whole. Besides, they be for the most part long and narrow, as Candy,
Cyprus, Spagniola, Cuba, S. Laurence, and Sumatra, and therefore cannot readily
bring their forces together. Neither will I stick to say, that Islands (if not
strong in shipping, as England and the Netherlands) although they may with
advantage come forth and assail others, are not withstanding, as it were
Cities without walls, laid open to the spoil of all Invaders. As it happened to
Sicil being assailed by the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians, and afterward by
the Carthaginians, and the Romans. But the Provinces of the firm Land, being
for the most part of a proportion more round, and square, have their forces
continually near together, and to be speedily united; and therefore more ready
and apt for opposition.

Yet to small purpose are all these aforesaid advantages, if opportunity give
not aid thereunto. This opportunity is a meeting and concurring of diverse
cadences, which at one instant do make a matter very easy, and at another
time, being overslipped, it will be impossible, or at least very hard, to bring
to like facility. Wherefore amongst many and diverse, I will here note the most
principal. The first grows by the baseness and negligence of the neighbor
Princes, arising either by reason of a natural jealousy, defect, and
dullness, or of too long a peace. So Caesar possessed himself of Italy, and of
the Commonwealth, being ready, and in Arms, the State being disarmed, not
looking for any such innovation. So the Barbarians, subdued the Empire of Rome:
The Arabians the Empire of the East, of Egypt, and of Spain: Charles the
eighth King of France, gained Italy: The Portugals, India; The Castilians, the
new world; and Soliman, the Kingdom of Hungary.

The division of the neighboring States, Petty Seigniories.
either into Commonwealths, or into petty Seigniories, and those of small
power, gave courage to the Romans to make themselves Lords of Italy, and made
an easy passage for the Venetians into Lumbardy. This also made the attempt of
Thusian light unto the Florentines, and no less that of Barbary to the
Castilians; which they would have found very hard, of either the one, or the
other, had expected them with armed forces.

The variance and jarring of the adjoining Princes did open the way to the
Turks to enter so far into Christendom, and with little trouble to invest
himself of many kingdoms therein. So Amurath the third, presuming upon the
civil discords of the Princes of the blood Royal of Persia, made that attempt
with great advantage. So again the Persian, upon the difference of the
Scrivano, and the Bashawes of Syria, has resumed the advantage, and
accordingly prospered. Neither does the whole mischief arise out of these
intestine jarres only, but in all factions one part will be sure to entreat
the aid of some foreign Prince against the other: than which, no man can have a
better occasion, because then he comes armed into the owners house at his
own request. So the Romans, set foot in Sicil, being called in by the
Mamertines: In Greece by the Athenians: In Numidia by the sons of Micipsa: In
Provence by the Marsilians: In France by the Hedui, and so from time to time by
diverse others. So Amurath the first King of Turks got hold in Europe, being
requested in aid by the Emperor of the East, being then in war with the
Princes of Greece. So Soliman, in Hungary, being entreated by Queen Isabel,
and afterward by King John. So the Aragons, in the kingdom of Naples, being
drawn thither by Queen Ioane the second: and so Henry the second King of
France, made himself Lord of three great Cities of the Empire. Often has it
been seen, that he that is now called in as a friend, does after prove an
enemy; and if one party in a civil war calls in a foreign arbitrator, both
parties cannot get him out again.

But another no less successful opportunity has also been made use of, and
that by way of marriage. By apprehending the opportunity of a marriage, were
the two houses of York and Lancaster, and the two kingdoms of England and
Scotland united. But no Prince has made so great advantage of marriage as the
Spaniard. The match of Ferdinand and Elizabeth was the very foundation of their
greatness. By marriages were the several Provinces of the Low Countries
united, all which fell to Spaines at a clap. Finally, for this advantage has
the house of Spain three times purchased dispensations from Rome for
incestuous marriages, and more they intended too: Charles the fifth Emperor,
was solemnly contracted to our Queen Mary, and Philip the second King of
Spain, son to the said Emperor, both wedded and bedded her: nay, upon
strong appearances suspected it then was, that King Philips courtesies to Queen
Elizabeth were for his own ends, that if Queen Mary should die without issue,
he might marry her also; which he afterward attempted by the Count de Feria,
promising to obtain a dispensation: so should England have been laid to
Spain, and what should then have hindered his Monarchy?

Now besides those advantages of humane policy and strength (before mentioned)
God himself has reserved a power at his own disposing, in the giving away of
victories, and in the cutting short, or enlargement of Empire. And to this end
has ordained these natural Agencies and Assistances of Seas, Rivers,
Mountains, Marshes, Wildernesses, and the sandy Deserts. By these, helps he
the weak to hedge and ditch out their incroaching neighbors; and by granting
the mastership over these to another Nation, he can at pleasure scourge the
rebellion or unthankfulness of those people, whom before he defended by them.
And of these helps of nature something will we say, and in their order. And
first for the benefit of the Sea.

Concerning the profits of Merchandise, (both for importing and exporting of
commodities) I will not here speak; 1 The commodities of the Sea, for the
defending or enlarging of Empire.
(though even that tends so much to the inrichment and augmentation of the
honor of the State, that in all treaties of war and peace, I see, that the
articles concerning traffike, are sometimes two thirds of the treaty; for so
were they I am sure, in that politic and nice-driven negotiation of the peace
betwixt England and Spain, in the beginning of the Reign of King James; the
Lord Treasurer Cecil, Northampton, and the greatest Sages of the kingdom,
being Commissioners on our party; and the best pates of Spain, for theirs:)
but here I will only treat of the Sea, as of a Sovereign friend and bulwark
to that Nation that is neerliest situated unto it; and a maine help toward
the keeping or enlargement of dominion. The Poets you know made a God of
Neptune that obtained the soveraingty of the Sea as well as of him that had the
government of the Land: and truly to be Lord of the narrow Seas, and to enjoy a
royalty, That the ships of all Nations shall strike fail to one of the Kings
ships, is none of the least honors: and to be master of the Sea, is more of
it self than a petty Monarchy. He that is so indeed may give the law, as
well as he that is master of the field. The Sea Fight at Actium was it that
made Augustus Caesar sole Emperor of the world: and Pompey learned it of old
Themistocles, that he that had the best Navy, would in the end prove the
Conqueror: The victory that the Christians got at Lepanto, so arrested the
in^^^aching of the Turkish greatness, that they have done little upon
Chirstendome never since. I mention not 88. nor that the resistance that the
Hollanders have been able to make against the greatest Monarch of the world,
proceeds merely from the advantage they have of him by their commodious
situation upon the Sea, and by having more havens and ships than he.

This certainly will prove true; that if ever the Monarchy of Spain be
broken, it must be by Sea, even by the Fleets of England and Holland; and that
know the Counselors of the Emperor and Spain well enough; who to make
themselves masters of some good ports, have supplied their defect of a Navy, by
a chargeable land army. For what think you else should be the design of
Monsieur Tilly, but to take the Sea by Land, to make his master Lord of Stoad,
Hamborrough, Luckstadt, with other Hansee towns, and the Sowndt of Denmark?
and what makes the Emperor (who yet had never greater vessel than a Punt or
Yaugh upon the Danuby) to buy and hire ships so fast at this very present, at
Lubecke, Rostocke, and other coast towns, and to appoint Mansfelt for his
Admiral? Such a friend is the Sea to those that border upon it; and of such
importance toward the defending or enlarging of Empire. But as for Islands
(such as ours) wholly situate in it; certainly that wall of water and sand
about us, is a surer fortification, than Friar Bacons wall of brass could have
been. Our Almighty Creator (in an humble and a thankful sense be it spoken)
has even married us to his own providence and protection; the sand about us
seems to be our wedding Ring, and the riches of the Sea our Dowry. By benefit
of the Sea (as long as we have kept our selves masters of it) we have enjoyed
peace, and have heard of, rather than felt, the miseries of other Nations: and
(certainly) so long as we keep our selves so, we are at liberty to take as
much or little of the war, as we please: and at length (verily) even the
wealth of the Indies will be but an accessory to the command of the Seas. The
Indies being but like the Bets at play; he that winnes the game, gets not only
the maine Stake, but all the Bets by follow the fortune of his hand. This
finally, is the advantage of an Island, that it cannot be taken if it be master
at Sea: it is not so much matter what the Landforces be (in the resisting of the
landing of an invading enemy,) seeing one Fleet is worth three Armies. We had
two Armies drawn together on foot in 88. and one of train bands to be called
for upon occasion; yet our Fleet (blessed be God) did more service than they
all; and good reason is there for it; For suppose an enemy this evening he
discovered at Sea upon the coast of Kent, thitherwayes presently make the Land
forces; but ere morning the wind chops about, and the enemy is ready within
four and twenty hours to land Northward, or Westward, where the Army cannot
possibly be to attend him; but a Fleet (now) is ever ready to dog him with
the same wind; and is ever and anon bearing up to him, still beating upon his
Rear; and if it be able to do no more, can yet at least hold him play, till
the beacons be fired, and the Country forces come in to hinder the landing. And
thus much for situation upon the Sea, and the strength which that affords us
either in offending or defending, in keeping or enlarging of Empire.

Of all creatures in the world, 2 Rivers.
a River most resembles a monster. The head (like that of Rumor) is oftentimes
not to be found; the mouth far bigger than the head, and withal, farthest
off from it; The head has no motion; the veins feed the body; the mouth
serves not but to void the supersfluities: How monstrous not withstanding
soever it be, yet most beneficial it is. The next advantage to that of the
Sea, being the commodity of great, navigable, and impassable Rivers. The Roman
conquests never made stand in Germany till they came to the banks of the Rhine
and Danuby. but there they did for many ages. The swift River Oxus in the East
of the world, has been the fatal bounder of two Monarchies: the River Don in
Russia, has the honor to part Europe, and Asia; and the River Dee by Chester,
did a long time keep our Welshmen thereabouts unconquered. Nothing awes a
great River so much as a bridge; whose Arches he labors to overthrow with all
his forces: for a bridge is the saddle to ride this Seahorse: The Emperor
Hadrian thought he had done such an act, when he had laid a bridge over the
Danuby, that he expressed the memory of it (as of a victory) in medals and
coins. That mighty Armies have been defeated in their passing of Rivers, need
not be stood upon. When Spinola in these late wars, (being guided by a
country butcher) had once passed the Rhine, and undisturbed set footing in the
Palatinate: Be of good comfort fellow soldiers, (says he to his Army) I Will
warrant you that we shall never be fought withal by this enemy. For in
passing of a River the enemy has so many disadvantages, what by the swiftness
of the stream, the smalnesse of the boats, the unsteadinesse of the footing,
and the disorder in the approaching; that he that to save his own will not
then fight, will never fight: And thus see we, that though Rivers be not (like
the Sea) so apt to enlarge Empire, they be most commodious to guard it, being
once acquired: and that is no small benefit, seeing wise men have anciently
accounted it, That Non minor est virtus quam quaerere, parta tueri: It Is an
argument of no less valor or fortune, to keep what a man has, than to get
that which a man has not.

None of the weakest boundaries to Conquerours and Monarchies are the
Mountains; 3 Mountains.
for were all the world a level and Campania, what should hinder him that were
strongest in horse, to scowre it all over; and (as it is seen in the Low
Countries) to make all men pay contribution to the master of the field, or the
stronger party of horse even at pleasure?

Mountains be natural swellings of the earth, above the usual level or
surface of it: which make the same exception to the definition of the
roundnesse of the earth, that a wart or pimple may to the smoothness of a
young face. They may seem to be some heaps of rubbish and offals, left of the
creation of the world. The difficulty of the ascent up to them, the horridness
of their cragges, the savagenesse of their wild inhabitants, (beasts or
people,) the chillnesse of their frostie tops, with the inhospitable
barrenness of their rugged sides, may give scandal, or leave an imputation of
beggary and barbarousnesse to that country that has most of them; if their
commodities be not thought upon as well as their discommodities. For as they
keep their neighbors poor, so they keep them safe; witness our unconquered
Wales and Scotland, which, nor Romans, nor Danes, nor Saxons, durst ever
thoroughly set upon. The Emperor Severus lost the greatest part of his Army in
the hills of Scotland: and how have our English Armies been moyled in the Welsh
mountains? and we have finally, rather conquered the people, than the Country:
Mountains are natures bulwarks, cast up (as the Spaniard says) at God
Almighties own charges; the Retreats they are of the oppressed, the scorns
and turne-againes of victorious Armies. That knew the Barbarians in Q. Curtius
well enough, who having retreated from Alexander the great, to the fastness of
an inaccessible mountain, and Alexanders Orator in his parley and persuasive to
them to yield, telling them of his masters victories, and of the Seas and
Wildernesses that he had passed; It may be so (said they) but can Alexander
(...)? Over the Seas he might have ships, and over land horses, but he must
have wings if he get up hither.

Where (now) mountains have naturally wanted, there has Art supplied the
defect: either by military Fosses, as in that great bank or trench upon
New Market heath, which served for a boundarie to the kingdom of the
East Angles: and by raising up wonderful and stupendous walls, as namely in
that wall of China, which where the hills brake off, was continued and fortified
for six hundred miles together: and that admirable Roman wall in the North of
England, (even cross the Island from Sea to Sea) for the keeping out of the
Picts. To conclude, mountains and walls made good by the natives, preserve them
in safety, but being once mastered and overpassed by the Conqueror, give way
to a fatal and a sudden enlargement to his Empire, and set a small period to
the others liberty. When Hannibal had once passed the Alps, within a little
after, he presented his Army before the gates of Rome. When Tamerlane had won
the wall of China, he did what he list afterward in the Country: the Britains
losing their wall, could not hinder the Picts from setting up their kingdom:
and surely since the Spaniard has gotten the passage over the Alps, and made
himself master of the Valtoline, he has in expectation swallowed up all
Germany, and in a manner besieged even France it self.

Of those other fortifications of nature, 4 Marshes.
Marshes, Wildernesses, and Sandy deserts, I have less to say. It Is well
known what advantage the Irish Kernes have made of their bogges and woods. Two
famous Cities in Europe are built in marshes, namely, Venice in Italy, and
Dort in Holland; and both of them be called maiden Cities; for that hitherto
they could never be ravished, never conquered. La Fert one of the strongest
towns in France* is thus situated: and in our Barons wars, have many
sheltred themselves in the I Will of Elie. He that is to beleaguer towns thus
situated, fights not against men, but nature. Marshes admit no dry lodging
for the foot, no approaches for the horse, no sure ground for Ordnance, or
heavy carriages: The town fears no undermining; and a marish (finally) is
not (except by long siege and famine) otherwise to be conquered but as
heretics be, and that is with faggots: and when that way approaches be made
over it, the town is ours, and Empire is enlarged.

Amongst Woods and Wildernesses, those of Hercynia and Ardenna have of old
been famous, 5 Wildernesses.
and were sometime bounders to the unlimited Roman Empire it self: nor have
they been conquered by force, but by time. 6 Deserts.
As for Deserts and Sands, I will mention no more but those vast Deserts of
Arabia, which the Turk calls his, but cannot conquer. An unknown Sea and
solitude of heath and Sand, is said to keep the two mighty Empires of the
Chinois and great Mogor, from incroaching one upon another. In such sands have
whole Armies and Caravans been buried: over these they travel (as at Sea) by
observing the stars, and by Card and Compass. Of all the rest before named,
these be the surest fortresses, and the most insuperable: no Army (that is
wisely led) dares venture to march over the hot sands of Lybia. Deserts afford
no towns for shelter, no food for men, no pasture, or so much as water for
horses; all must be brought with them: and he that shall think to enlarge his
Empire by making an invasion this way, shall find it worse than a long suit
for a dribling debt, the charges will amount to more than the principal. To
conclude this tedious discourse: man looks upon the world, upon Seas, Rivers,
Mountains, Marshes, etc. as upon things set there casually, or by chance; but
God made them there, upon most wise design: here he casts up a mountain and
that bars a conqueror; here he powers out a River, and in passing of that,
overthrowes an Army; there plants he a wood, and by dressing an ambush in it,
gives away a victory; and upon changing the fortune of the field Empires take
their beginnings or periods; laws and religions their alterations; the pride
and policies of men are defeated; that his own power and providence might
only be acknowledged. For by help of these natural causes, says God
silently unto Tyrants and conquerours, as at first he said unto the Sea;
Hitherto shall thy proud waves go, and no further.

Of Travel.
LAstly, sithence Plato, one of the Day-starres of that knowledge, which then
but dawning, has since shone out in cleerer brightness; thought nothing
fitter, for the bettering of our understanding, than Travel: as well by having
a conference with the wiser sort in all kinds of learning, as by the Eyesight
of those things, which otherwise a man cannot attain unto, but by Tradition.
(A sandy foundation either in matter of Science, or Conscience.) Let me also in
this place be bold to inform you, that all purpose to Travel, if it be not,
ad voluptatem solum, sed ad utilitatem, argues an industrious and generous
mind. Base and vulgar spirits hover still about home: Those are more Noble and
Divine, that imitate the Heavens, and joy in motion.

He therefore that intends to Travel out of his own Country, must likewise
resolve to Travel out of his Country fashion, and indeed out of himself:
that is, out of his former intemperate feeding, disordinate drinking,
thriftlesse gaming, fruitless time-spending, violent exercising, and irregular
misgoverning whatsoever. He must determine, that the end of his Travel, is his
ripening in knowledge; and the end of his knowledge, is the service of his
Country, which of right, challenges the better part of us.

This is done, (...).
by preservation of himself from Hazards of Travel, and Observation of what
he hears and sees in his Traveling. The Hazards, are two: of the Mind, and
of the Body: that, by the infection of Errors, this by the corruption of
Manners. For who so drinks of the poisonous cup of the one, or tastes the
sower liquor of the other, (...) the true relish of Religion and Virtue,
brings ^ome a leaprous Soul, and a tainted body, retaining nothing thing but
the shame of either, or repentance of both: whereof in my Travel I have seen
some examples, and by them made use, to prevent both mischiefs, which I will
briefly show: And first of the better part.

Concerning the Travelers Religion, Of Mind.
I teach not what it should be, (being out of my Element) nor inquire what it
is, (being out of my Commission;) only my hopes are, he be of the religion here
established: and my advice is, he be therein well settled; and that howsoever
his imagination shall be carried in the voluble Sphere of diverse men's
discourses; yet his inmost thoughts (like lines in a Circle) shall always
concenter in this immovable point; Not to alter his first Faith: For I know,
that, as all innovation is dangerous in a State; so is this change in the
little Commonwealth of a Man. And it is to be feared, that he which is of one
Religion in his youth, and of another in his manhood, will in his age be of
neither.

Wherefore, if my Traveller will keep this Bird safe in his bosom, he must
neither be inquisitive after other men's Religions, nor prompt to discover his
own. For I hold him unwise, who in a strange Country, will either show his
mind, or his money. A true friend is as hard to find as a Phoenix, of which
the whole world affoords but one, and therefore let not this my Traveller, be
so blind as to think to find him every where, in his own imagination. Damon
and Pithias, Pilades and Orestes are all dead, or else it is but a dead Story.
And therefore let him remember that Nature alters, like humors and
complexions, every minute of an hour.

And as I would not have him to change, Of Religion.
so would I wish him, to beware how he hear any thing repugnant thereto: for
as I have tied his tongue, so must I stop his ears, left they be open to the
smooth incantations of an insinuating Seducer, or the subtle arguments of a
sophistical adversary. To this effect, I must precisely forbid him the
fellowship or company of one sort of people in general; those are the
lefuites, underminers and inveiglers of green wits, seducers of men in matter
of Faith, and subverters of men in matter of State; making of both a bad
Christian, and a worse Subject. These men I would have my Traveller never
hear, except in the Pulpit; for being eloquent, they speak excellent
language; and being wise, (therefore best knowing how to speak to best
purpose) they seldom, or never handle matter of controversy.

As for other orders of Religion, Friars of Monks, or whatsoever, let him use
them for his bettering, either in matter of language, or other knowledge. They
are good companions, they are not so dangerous; they talk more of their
cheer, than of their Church; of their feasts, than their Faith; of good wine,
than good works; of Curtisans, than Christianity. The reason is, because few
of them are learned, many careless in their profession, almost all dissolute
in their conversation.

I have excepted against the Persons: I will now protest against the Places. Of
Persons and Places.
These are, Rome, Rhemes, and Doway, but these two last, being out of all
ordinary road of Travel; I say, he that goes that way, goes doubly out of his
way, and shall neither have this discourse for his direction, nor me for his
companion. Let me only say of Rome, because it is the Seminary and Nursery of
English Fugitives, and yet a place most worthy to be seen, (vel antiquitatis
causa, vel novitatis) that it is suspected of all, known to many, and proved
by some, to be dangerous that way.

Thus much of the Persons and Places have I noted, he that shall meet with
others of like condition and danger, let him see and shun. It remameth I speak
of bettering the mind, by the knowledge and understanding of tongues: for, as
for learning the liberal Sciences, he has much better means at home; their
manner of teaching, and orders of Universities, being far inferior to ours.

For the attaining therefore of Language, Of Language.
it is convenient, that he make choice of the best places: These are, Orleans
for the French; Florence for the Italian; and Lipsicke for the Dutch tongues:
for in these places is the best Language spoken. And as we observe a difference
of speech in our Country; of the North, from the South; and the West, from
both: or as we have learned of the Greeks, that they had five several kinds
of Dialects: so differ they infinitely in Germany, but that of Misnia is the
best, where Lipsicke stands. More in France, where the Picard speaks one, the
Norman another, the Eri^^an his, the Gascoigne his, the Provenciall and
Savoyard theirs, the Inlanders theirs: but of all these, the Orleanois is the
best. As also in Italy, the Roman has one kind of phrase and pronunciation;
the Neapolitan, another; the Venetian a third; the Bergamasco, a worse; but the
best of all is the Tuscan, where Florence stands: yet I prescribe not these
places so precisely, as that he may not live in others, and learn the Language
as well: for in Tuscany, Stena, and Prato, are some places, where the speech is
as good, as that of Florence, and more retired, and of less charge: therefore
fitter for some, whose proportion for expense is but small. So have ye in
Germany, Heidleburge as good as Lipsick. And in France, Blois as good as
Orleans.

Having made choice of the place, Of Reading.
his next care must be to make choice of a good Reader, whereof he shall find
in Travel great scarcity. Let good acquaintance, or good fortune, bring him to
the best.

For were it, that there were good Readers, it were here needless to set down
a course of learning: for he might have a better direction from them. But for
the cause alleged, I will presume to advise him, that the most compendious way
of attaining the tongue (whether French, or Italian) is by Book; I mean for
the knowledge. For as for the speaking, he shall never attain it, but by
continual practice and conversation. He shall therefore first learn his
Nounes and Verbs by heart, and specially the Articles, and their uses, with the
(...) words, Sum and Habeo: for in these, consist the greatest observation of
that part of speech. Let not your Reader read any Book of Poetry and the
first, but some other kind of Style; and I think meetest, some modern
Comedy.

Let his Lecture consist, more in questions and answers, either of the one or
the other, than in the Readers continued speech; for this is for the most part
idle and fruitless: by the other, many errors and mistakings, either in
pronunciation, or sense, are reformed.

After three months, he shall quit his Lectures, and use his Master, only to
walk with, and discourse, first the one and then the other: for thus shall be
observe the right use of the phrase in his Reader, hear his own faults
reproved, and grow ready and prompt in his own delivery: which with the right
strain of the accent, are the two hardest things in language.

Privately he may for his pleasure read Poetry, especially, if at his
return, he mean to Court it: but for his profit, if he be a man of means,
and likely hereafter to bear charge in his Country: or if a man of endeavors,
and willing to prefer himself by service, I wish him to History: If one
that would make a fortune by the wars, I commend him (beside History) to the
Mathematics, discourses of war, and books of fortification.

To this Reading he must add a continual talking, and exercising of his
speech with all sorts of people, with boldness, and much assurance in
himself: for I have often observed in others, that nothing has more
prejudiced their profiting, than their own diffidence and distrust. To this I
would have him add an often writing, either of matter of translation, or of
his own invention, where again is requisite to the Readers eye, to censure
and correct: for who so cannot write the language he speaks, I count he has
but half the language.

These then, are the two only means of obtaining a language, of speaking and
writing: but the first is the chiefest, and therefore I must advertise the
Traveller of the one thing, which in other Countries, is a greater hinderer
thereof: namely, the often haunting, and frequenting of our own Contrymen,
whereof he must have a special care, neither to distaste them by a too much
retiredness, nor to hinder himself by too much familiarity.

It is thought also, that one language is a hinderance to the pronunciation (if
not learning) of another: which if it be in any, is in the pronouncing, not the
learning: and in the Italian to the French, not contrary. To this effect
therefore, I would wish the Traveller, first to spend his time in France, which
language will much help to the understanding, and nothing hinder the speaking
of the Italian, especially in us; who of all other Nations pronounce this
language best next themselves, by their own confession.

There is also another reason, why I would have him see Italy last, because we
best remember the last impressions; and I would rather he should come home
Italianate, than Frenchified: I speak of both in the better sense: for the
French is stirring, bold, respectlesse, inconstant, sudden. The Italian,
stayed, demure, respective, grave, advised. I would wish the Traveller
therefore (because I speak now of bettering his mind by conversation) observe
with judgment, what he sees in these Nations of Italy, France and Germany,
(for further I guide him not) and out of their better parts, leaving the worse
to themselves, gather so much to his use, as may make him a complete Gentleman.
For example, he shall observe, that the French has valor; but he has
withal, Vanitatem and Levitatem. The Italian has a discreet fashion of
carriage; but, with this he has Proterviam and libidinem: The Dutch has an
honest and real manner of dealing, but non sine commessatione and ebrietate.
Let him now of these three, learn their three virtues, so shall he come home a
Valiant, Wise and Honest man. This is a better purchase than the Italian huffe
of the shoulder, or the Dutch puff with the pot, or the French Apishnesse,
which many Travelers bring home.

Touching conference, observe these rules: For the time, Of Conference.
let it be, when you give leave to your mind to recreate your spirits, that
you may the better conceive what you hear, and best digest things subject to
your understanding. Let therefore the hours be in the morning, and in the
Evening, when the senses are fresh, and the wits quiet. But if you find your
senses dull with melancholy passions, quicken them shortly with some good
society. Touching the persons, let them be of some good years for the most
part, though sometime to hear a young man, will prove no prejudice. Observe
opportunity, sometime discoursing with the learned concerning History, the
better to benefit memory by application of examples. At other times, frequent
the company of the expert, that by noting their observations, and suting them
to particular judgment, you may discern the difference between Art and
Nature, Experience and Learning. Sometime discourse with the soldier, that in
hearing of a drum, you be not daunted in a skirmish. Confer much with
Travelers, that by their discourse of foreign natures, you may the better
discern of domestical disposition: Forget not the Divines for the comfort of
your souls, nor neglect the reading of Scripture, for the better direction of
your life and conscience. Talk not with women upon idle occasions, lest you
trouble their wits, or displease their humors. To confer with fools is
frivolous; with the wicked dangerous; but with the honest availeable, for they
are virtuous; and with the wise profitable, for they are gracious.

It now follows, Of the body.
that I speak of the Body, which is preserved in good state, by diet and
exercise: For his diet, I neither prescribe what, nor how much to eat, I
presume him able before he set out, to keep his nose from his sleeve, feed
himself, and be his own carver: Only, I must advise him to beware of their
Wines, which agree not with some natures, and are hurtful to all, in those
hotter Countries, except sparingly taken, or well qualified with water. As for
his viands, I fear not his surfeiting; his provision is never so great, but ye
may let him loose to his allowance. For I would not have him live at his own
provision, (especially in France) it will hinder his profiting, and only
further him with some few kitchen and market phrases. Let him be still in
pension with others, so they be such, whose language he learneth. His care
shall be the less, his profit the greater, and his expense nothing the more. I
shall not need to tell him before, what his diet shall be, his appetite will
make it better than it is; for he shall be still kept sharp: only of the
difference of diets, he shall observe thus much; that that of Germany is full,
or rather fulsome; that of France, allowable; that of Italy, tolerable; with
the Dutch, he shall have much meat, ill dressed; with the French, less, but
well handled; with the Italian, neither the one, nor the other.

As for his Exercises, there is danger but of one in France, Of Exercises.
and this is Tennis play: this is dangerous (if used with too much violence)
for the body: and (if followed with too much diligence) for the purse, a maine
point of the Travelers care. There is another exercise to be learned in
France, because there are better teachers: and the French fashion is in most
request with us, and that is Dancing. This I mean to my Traveller that is
young, and means to follow the Court; otherwise, I hold it needless, and in
some ridiculous.

These former therefore are two exrcises, which I permit, but with their
limitation. There remain two other, to which I persuade: those tolerable,
these commendable; those of grace and complement, these of use and necessity,
to him that will return ably qualified for his Countries service in war, and
his own defense in private quarrel. These are Riding, and Fencing. His best
place for the first (excepting Naples) is in Florence: and for the second
(excepting Rome) is in Padua.

I must now advise him, Of outward necessa^ies.
of such things as are without himself, but within the compass of his own
care: Those are Money, Books, Apparel.

Money, the finewes of war, and soul of Travel, as at home, so abroad, is
the man. They say he should have two bags, the one of Crowns, the other of
Patience: but howsoever this last be empty, I could wish that other were still
full, whereout he must proportion his yearly expense, not exceeding the limits
of his propounded allowance. If he Travel without a servant, fourscore
pounds sterling is a competent proportion, except he learn to ride: if he
maintain both these charges, he can be allowed no less than an hundred and
fifty pounds: and to allow above two hundred, were superfluous, and to his
hurt. And thus ratably according to the number he keeps.

The ordinary rate of his expense, Of Money.
is this: ten gold Crowns a month his own diet, eight for his man, (at the
most) two Crowns a month his Fencing, as much for Dancing, and no less for
his Reading, and fifteen crowns monthly for his Riding: but this exercise
he shall discontinue all the heat of the year. The remainder of his hundred
and fifty pound, I allow him for Apparel, Books, Traveling, Charges,
Tennis-play, and other extraordinary expenses.

Let him have four bills of exchange with him, for the whole year, with
Letters of advice, to be paid him quarterly, by equal portions: so shall he
not want his money at the day, nor be driven to those shifts, which I have
seen diverse put to, by long expecting Letters out of England; which either
their friends forgetfulness, or the Carriers negligence, or the miscarrying of
their letters, by intercepting or other accident, has caused.

If he carry over money with him (as by our Law he cannot carry much) let it
be in double Pistolets, or French crowns of weight: by these he is sure to
sustain loss in no place: and in Italy to gain above twelve pence in the
pound.

Concerning his books, Of Books.
let them be few or none, to carry from place to place: or if any, that they be
not such as are prohibited by the Inquisition: lest, when his Male is searched
(as it is at every Cities gate in Italy) they bring him to trouble: whatsoever
they be, they will put him to charge, for he pays Tole for them at every such
Town. I would only have him to carry the papers of his own observation;
especially a Iournall, wherein from day to day, he shall set down the diverse
Provinces he passes, with their commodities; the Towns, with their manner of
buildings; the names, and benefit of the Rivers; the distance of places; the
condition of the soil; manners of the people, and: what else his eye meets
by the way remarkable.

When he comes to the place of his residence, let him furnish himself with
the best books of that profession, to which he addicted his study, or other he
shall find, not to be got here in England; and at his departure, send them
home by his Merchants means.

I must advise as well for his Apparel, as for his Books: Of Apparel.
that upon his journey, he be not overcharged with overmuch luggage; even a
light burden far carried, is heavy: beside, somewhat is like wise to be paid
for these, at the entry of every City gate. Let him also take heed, that the
apparel he wears, be in fashion in the place where he resideth: for it is no
less ridiculous to wear clothes of our fashion among them, than at our
return to use still their fashion among us. A notorious affectation of many
Travelers.

And lastly, because it is not amiss, Manners of Nations.
to be acquainted as well with the diverse natures of Nations, soyles, and
people, as with theorike of instructions: first, I counsel my Traveller, not
to make any long abode in any Region, which he finds not agreeable to his
natural constitution; neither let him be ignorant of such comforts, as may
prove best preservatives for his health: for although I hold it not best
discretion to use the body to much physic, yet in causes of extremity, to
know the help of Nature, I hold it no vanity.

For the Soil (wherein Towns and Cities are seated) if it be sandy or
gravelly ground, Nature of Soiles.
and near unto some fresh brooks, springs, or river, it may probably promise
health, both to the inhabitant and stranger: but if the earth be moorish, and
stand much upon springs, and low toward the Sea, it may prove healthful to
the inhabitant, yet hurtful to the stranger, coming from a more healthful
Soil.

For the people, let him choose chiefly, Of people.
and longest to stay amongst those kind of Nations, who stand most affected to
the nature of his native Country, and let him be never persuaded, that his
nearest neighbors are his greatest friends; for you shall often find no
greater an enemy, than within the walls of thine own house.

I will first speak of the Spaniard: Of the Spaniard.
Him you shall find in nature proud, yet cunning. He will ordinarily use a
kind of courtesy, and seem wise touching the world, and politic in plotting
his will: valiant where he may either purchase riches, or reputation: jealous
of his mistress, envious of worthiness, malicious upon suspicion, and bloody
in execution.

The Italian is more courteous, Of the Italian.
but no less cunning, affable where he seems to affect, but deadly dangerous
where he grows jealous: thrifty in his purse, valiant in his kind, and only
bountiful to his masters. Sharply conceived, of fresh memory, and for the most
part excellently spoken. Many of them are good Scholars, some very good
horsemen, and for such Courts as their Dukedomes afford, you shall find many
fine Gentlemen. Their Ladies and chief women for the most part are painted,
but witty in speech, modest in carriage, and where they affect, very
bountiful. The chief men (as the Lords, Governors, and great Magistrates)
are commonly ambitious, covetous, and vicious. And if you have the good hap to
come into their houses, you shall seem to see the nature of a devil solacing
in Paradise: For you shall observe a stately house, richly furnished; a Lady
fairly painted, and gorgeously attired; you shall see a Garden full of sweet
flowers, and dainty fruits, a cage of singing birds, and perhaps a consort of
sweet music; a banquet of excessive charge, and amidst all those, you shall
see an old sheep-biter, with a nose too tedious for his face, his beard like
the bristles of a hog, with a slavering lip, a bleare-eye, and of a swelling
speech, courting of a comely Lady, and couching of a cold piece of comfort,
being no less youthful in desire, than aged in performance. But take heed
that in too much eying of his Lady, he grow not jealous of your affection, and
suspicious of her favor, to the assured shortning of your days, by a
poysonsome trick of an Italian fico, when he pretends most kindness.

For the younger sort, rather follow their good exercises, than confer with
their capacities: and above all company, avoid the haunting of brothell houses,
which are there most infinite in number, and common in use. They will impair
your health, impeach your purse, abase your credit, and increase the ruin of
your content and fortunes.

For France, The Frenchman.
you shall find the people proud, and fantastical, kind, but variable,
jealous in being a friend, and lost upon a light humor, cunning in policy,
and bloody in revenge. The Noblesse commonly learned, the Soldier more
desperate than valiant: much given to venery and irreligion; and making no
conscience of abuse for the purchase of a commodity. The Governors wise, the
Merchant rich, and the peasant a poor slave. The Ladies witty, but apish, and
in their fancies as humorous as amorous: few of them beautiful, and commonly
all painted and deceitful, except some few of rare worth; which may be the
wonder of the country: And therefore as you find them, so let them have their
due honor. For Germany, The German.
you shall find the Nobles and chief Gentlemen, either great Scholars, or
valiant Soldiers; rather resolute to gain honor, than proud of Authority:
their Cities strong, and their Merchants very rich, and their Countries well
peopled. For their Ladies and Gentlewomen, by the grossness of their diet,
and too much delight in drinking and banqueting, they are for the most part a
corpulent kind of people; yet many of them strong and of big bone, (as we
commonly say) good bearers, and good breeders. The younger sort, as well men as
women, very industrious, and the elder sort rather politic than Religious:
their Laws very severe, and therefore the people in better order and obedience.

For Poland, the Cities are strong, Of the Pole laque.
and the people rather wise than wealthy: the Gentlemen for the most part given
to arms, and the peasant in much subjection to the Gentry. The Merchant rather
covetous than honorable, and the Scholars rather beloved than advanced: the
women indifferent fair, and better witted than spoken: the old men studious,
and the younger sort seldom idle; little given to drink, and as little
accounting of honor, except it be in the field.

For the Low Countries and Denmark, Of the Netherlander and Dane.
you shall find them much to agree in nature, but that Denmark will admit a
King, which I find not willing in the Low Countries. Their Magistrates are
rather wise by experience than by study; and the Soldier fitter for the Sea
than the field. Denmark is governed by the Kings law set down: but the
Low Countries have diverse forms of Government, in a manner according to the
disposition of the States and Governors: much given to drink, and yet serving
their times: politic in their government: their old men wise and covetous;
their young men thrifty and industrious; and their Merchant very ambitious. For
their religious, think of them as you find them; I have seen them much
reverenced, and well maintained. And as for their Ladies, they are witty and
of a good complexion; for the most pa^^ many of them are very fair, and much
given to honor virtue; rather neat than proud in their attire; very kind
where they take affection.

The Muscovite is proud, The Muscovite.
stately, malicious: and those which be slaves are slaves indeed, especially
when their Emperor or Lord controlleth: Superstitious, tending almost to
idolatry; jealous, as having many wives; and bad performers of promise; nor
must you challenge him of the same; for the good which flows from him,
comes commonly from the fountain of free will. Their women are very private,
fearful to offend; but once lascivious, intolerably wanton, beastly, idle,
and ill attended.

The Greeks are merry, The Grecian.
liars, blasphemers, promise-breakers, buggers, strong membred, and black
haired. Their women are stately, comely of person, proud without doors; no
lovers of dalliance, yet desirous of the company of men; cleanly in washing and
shaving themselves: whom the Italians imitate, as also do the East hot
Countries, by reason the company of many men, may grow otherwise to great
inconvenience, mercenary, fantastical in apparel, and loving those who speak
their language.

The Turk is a warlike proud man; The Turk.
a scorner of other Nations and languages; no idle talker, or doer of any thing
superfluous: a judicial sound fellow, hot and venerious; comely of person;
majesticall in gate; a slave to his Emperor, and a lover of Mahomets race and
Religion. Their women small of stature, for the most part of good complexions,
and not to be seen or spoken to abroad: jealous, revengefull (when they have
opportunity) lascivious within doors or in their baths; very pleasing in
matters of incontinency, and cleanly.

The Persian is lordly in his complement; The Persian.
rather fantastical than curious in his apparel, yet sumptuous; and in his
expenses magnificent: maintainers of Nobility; lovers of learning and good
qualities: fearful of troubles, desirous of peace, and superstitious in his
Religion. Their women gorgeous in attire, with high Tiaras and veiles, like the
Sultaneses amongst the Turks: long sitters at feasts, delightsome in
sequestration of pleasure; as beginning with a modest shamefulnesse, but ere
you have concluded, delicately wanton; cleanly in much washing, but withal
using perfumes and odours; loving truly, and desirous to be preferred in the
first place of her husbands affection: For having many wives, they are desirous
to please.

The Armenians are very merry, sluttish, The Armenian.
careless of greatness, desiring peace and ease, though it tend to slavery
and bondage: having great bodies, comely, and willing to be soothed in any
thing. Their women tall, and not fair, soon old, poor, loving their
children, and incontinent.

The Tartars are swartish, illfavoured, with a great thick lip, The Tartar.
flattish nose, careless of outward ornaments, swift on foot, vigilant,
laborious, warlike, yet loving presents, and desirous to be much made of: their
women suitable, only wanting or scorning money, they will bedecke themselves
like the people of Virginia, with gewgaies of copper and latton about their
arms and necks.

The Moore is comely of body, The Moore.
stately of gate, of sufficient constitution to endure any work or travel,
implacable in hatred, treacherous, tumultuous, and superstitious. Their women
have delicate soft skins, sumptuous in jewels, odors and perfumes, incontinent,
good bed-fellowes in the dark, beautiful in blackness, and revengefull; yet
being bought a slave, extraordinary loving to their masters, so they be well
pleased and used accordingly, but being once got with child, they expect
manumission according to the custom of the Mohammedan Law.

The Savoyen is penurious, The Savoyen.
foolish, and ill-nurtured, yet do the better sort imitate the Spanish pride,
and by reason of his neighborhood to France and Millane, are reasonable good
Soldiers, and the better enabled by the hardness of the mountains. The women
are strangely apparelled, ill-favored, scolding, must be discommended, and for
the most part wenny, that is, having great bunches under their chinnes with
drinking snow water, like the Helvetians and 13. Cantons.

The Switzer is strange in his attire, The Switzer.
yet not transgressing the limits of his inheritance; have great bodies, and
are mercenary, as performing what he is commanded, and one that best approves
of his own Country and habit; even preferring his own snowy hills and
coldness, before the fertillest places of Lumbardy. Their women are honest
somewhat better favored than the Savoyen, ill brought up, plain dealers, and
so loves her husband or friend, that she will go with him to the camp, and
dress his meat.

As for the Kingdoms of Saca, Bactriae, Sogdiana, and many like Nations,
invironing the East and South of the Caspian, I mean not to relate of, because
I find the best Authors unacquainted with their properties and discoveries.
The Armenians report them to be tyrannous, their chief exercise to be rapine,
and murdering of passengers; without form of government, or control of
superiors. Which done, they fly to the mountains, and in despite of any
forces, continue unsubjected; howsoever, unpunished.

And therefore since I have deciphered the persons, let me in a word advise
thee of their properties: that is, to take heed of the pride of Spain, the
poison of Italy, the treason of France, and the drink of Flanders. Beware of
company, and let not rash trust in friendship produce matter of fruitless
repentance: Remember that Damon and Pithias, Pilades and Orestes, are all dead,
or else it is but a dead story. Nature alters like humors and complexions,
every minute of an hour. And should I not speak too much to the worlds shame,
I would advise thee to think, that there is no one man faithful to another in
the world. And therefore in this dangerous age, since every man is nearest, and
only near unto himself, and he is held the only wise man, who has the
world at most command, let no man so presume of his own sufficiency, as to
neglect the benefit of counsel. Take a young man for thy companion, rather
than for thy friend. The world affords but one Phoenix, and let not any man be
so conceited, as to think to find him in his own imagination. Serve God with
devotion, and then care not for the devils illusion.

When thou returnest from these foreign men, and foreign places, resolve then
also to leave their foreign manners. First, come home to thy self, and then
fashion thy carriage, thy apparel, thy studies, thy conscience, and thy
conversation, to the best pattern of the place, from whence at first with good
intent thou began'st thy pilgrimage. So shall the remembrance of thy travel be
pleasant, the profit infinite, and thy return an ornament to King and Country.

THE SECOND BOOK.
Of Europe. The Commendations, Bounds, Religions, and Languages of it.
IT now remains, that I begin to tell you, how according to our best and
latest Cosmographers, this great Globe (for parts and parcels whereof, so great
and universal quarrels have from the beginning been entertained amongst
Princes, Peoples, and Nations) has been divided into seven parts: The first
three whereof, viz. Europe, Africa, and Asia, were known to the Ancients. The
fourth is America Septentrionalis, containing the Provinces of Estotilant,
Terra de Labrador. Terra de Biccaleos, Nova Francia, Norimbega, Florida, Nova
Hispania, and others. The fifth is, America Meridionalis, which is a
peneinsula, and disjoined from the former by a small Isthmus or neck of Land,
containing the Regions of Brasil, Tisnada, Caribana, Peguana, and Peruvia. The
sixth, is termed Terra Australis, wherein lies Psitaicorum regio, Terra del
feugo, Beach, Lucach, and Maletur, situate between Iava major, and Iava minor.
The last being under the Northern Pole, is the least of the residue, all
almost unknown, and divided by Mercator (upon a mere fabulous report of one
that was never there.) into four Islands, lying in a manner under the very
Pole. This part has not hitherto been discovered, the nearest approach that
any man of Europe ever yet made to the North Pole was by one Marmaduke, who in
a ship of Hull arrived in 82. degrees, that is no nearer than within 8. whole
degrees of the Pole, mountains of Ice keeping him from discovering further.

Of all these seven parts, because Europe is farrelesse than any of the rest,
and yet exceeds them all in Nobleness, Magnificence, multitude of people, in
might, puissance, and renown; we will first begin with the description
thereof. It is bounded on the North, with the North Ocean Sea, on the South
with the Mediterranean, on the East with the flood Tanais, and on the West with
the West Ocean. It contains more than four and twenty Christian Kingdoms at
this day, as far excelling the residue of the Provinces in Religion, Arts,
Valor, and Civilitie, as in elder age it did surpass them in Prowess and
Reputation.

The principal Provinces, are Spain, France, Belgia, Germany, Italy,
Sclavonia, Greece, Hungary, Poland, Lituania, Moscovia, and that toward the
North, called Scandia; wherein are Denmark, Norwey, Swethland, Iutland, etc.
The Islands are Britain (containing the Kingdoms of England and Scotland)
Ireland, Island, and Engroneland, in the North Ocean. In the Mediterranean, are
Sicilie, Candia, Corsica, Sardinia, Majorca, Minorca, Nigropont, Malta, Corsu,
Salamine, Mit^lene, Sciros. with many other in the Archipelago. The air hereof
is passing good, wholesome, temperate, and soil exceeding fertile. Therein are
many goodly Cities, famous Mart-Townes, and learned Universities. The people
thereof have in all ages excelled all other Regions, in Courage, Arts,
sharpness of Wit, and all other gifts of Nature. In times past, it commanded
Asia, and Afrike, by the Arms of the Greeks and Romans; and at this day, it is
of great force by the power of the Turks and Muscovites, and of no less
reputation by the Navigations of the English, Dutch, Spaniards, and Portugals:
so as it seems, that Nature has given unto this people a precedence to rule
and govern foreign Provinces, as men far surpassing all other Nations, in
wisdom, courage, industry, and invention.

This least and best part of the greater portions of the world, was so named of
Europa daughter of Agenor King of Phoenicia, brought into these parts by
Jupiter; in honor of whom the Phoenicians (being the first Navigators, and
discoverers of these countries) might as well leave her name to all their new
discoveries, (the habits, manners, and languages of these parts especially, at
those times being all one, or not much different) as the Turks, Aethiopians,
and all those of the East, call us by one name of Franks, and the Kingdoms of
France, England, Spain, Germanies, etc. are in the histories of the wars of
the Holy Land, all together called the Kingdom of the Franks, our Languages
the Frank tongue, and our Religion the Franks Religion. The figure of Europe
is fancied to resemble a Queen, and so is she indeed, of all the world; her
Princes having some dominion or other in all parts of the world, and they none
in her: The Crown and Head of this Queen is Spain; her Neck must be that
part of France under the Pyrenaean mountains; her Breast, France it self; her
Arms Italy and Britain; her Belly Germany; her Navell, Bohemia; the rest of
her Body hidden under her lower garments, are Denmark, Sweden, Lituania,
Prussia, Poland, Hungaria, Dalmatia, Grecia, Moldavia, Tartary, and Muscovia.
This Queen at this day commands 28 Kingdoms, all gathered up by three
Emperors, the German, Turk, and Muscovite; and eight Kings, France, England,
and Spain, hereditarie; Bohemia, Hungaria, Poland, Denmark, and Sweden,
elective Princes. States and Commonwealths in Italy and the Germanies, many
and potent, some one of them ( Venice, or the Low Countries by name) too hard a
match for the most potent Prince of Asia, or Africa, could they but come at
him. For Riches, we have the most useful and substantial; for goodly Cities,
Italy alone has more than Asia, Africa, and America, all together; if other
parts have any fortified towns, thye here saw the first patterns.
Universities endowed, we only have. Our Arms and Navigations have made us
Lords of the Universe. Our Arts mechanicke are incomparable. And all these has
God Almighty blessed with the seat of the Christian Religion among us.

Europe is much enlarged to the Northward since Ptolomees time. The bounds are
best seen in the map; the length of it is about 3600. Italian miles, the
breadth 2200. miles.

The Religions are such as are professed in several nations, either by
toleration, as the Jewish, by the Turk, Emperor, Pole, Pope, Venetian, and
Amsterdam: or the Heathen, in some remoter parts of Lapland, Finland, and
Norwey, where they are rather Witches than Christians. Religions established by
command, are, first Mahometisme under the Turk. Secondly, the Greeks religion
in the same parts, and in Russia. Thirdly, the Romish, in Spain, Italy,
France, Poland, most of the dominions of the Emperor and other Princes of
Germany, the Wal^^ns and Archduchesse Countries Fourthly, the reformed
Churches, and they follow the doctrine either of the Scriptures, Fathers, and
Councels, according to their pu^^ty, as in England; or else have they a
relation to the opinions of Doctor Luther, as those of Sweden, Denmark, the
dominions of the Electors of Saxony, Brandenburgh, and diverse others of
Germany: or of Master Calvin; as in France especially, the Palatinate,
Hessenland, and Low Countries; Calvinisme is also received in Hungaria, and
Transylvania; where there be many relics withal of Antitrinitarians,
Arrians, Ebionites, and Anabaptists: Lower likewise in five of the thirteen
Cantons of Helvetia, and amongst the Grisons, do the Calvinists profess
publicly. In Bohemia, Mo^avia, Silesia, etc. the Protestants of the Augustane
confession were esteemed two third parts. Of these several Churches, though
some follow the Augustane confession, as the Lutherans; some the Helvetian, as
the Switz^^s; some the Gallicane, as the Calvinists; yet all of them agree in
the fundamental and saving points, and all accord in their detestation of the
Roman; as is to be seen in the Harmony of Confessions.

Of the Languages of Europe, Scaliger finds eleven mother tongues, the four
noblest of which, be the Greek, Latin, Sclavonian, and Dutch; each subdivided
into her daughter-dialects. ^^e learned Greek is no where vulgarly spoken at
this day: The modern, is nothing but a barbarous composition of Turkish,
Sclavonian, and Italian, with the old Greek corrupted. The Latin (worn also
out of vulgar use) is degenerated into the Italian, Spanish, and French, all
which three were anciently called Romanse. The Sclavonian is a large and a
stately tongue; it has these dialects, the Bohemian, Russian, Polonian, (...),
Windish, and the Dalmatian: The Characters be of two kinds; the ancient,
called the Dalmatian; and the Russian letter, corrupted from the Greekish.
These Sclavonian dialects and tongues do differ, yet not so much as the
Italian and Spanish. The worst of the four best is the German tongue, and that
varied into the high and Low Dutch; as also into the Saxish, Fris^an, English,
North-Albing, and the Danish; which last is variously spoken by the Danes of
Denmark, Sweden, and Norway; whence the Island speech also comes, if these
two last be not the ancient Gothish.

The other seven of meaner elegancie are, first the Albanian, spoken by the
Epirotes. Secondly, the Tartarian. Thirdly, the Hungarian, brought out of Asia
by the H^nnes. Fourthly, the Finns and Laplanders speech in the North of
Sweden. Fifthly, the Irish. Sixthly, the Welsh, whose worth (being most
expressively significant, and having been the language of the ancient Celtae,
and ^oken in the most part of Europe) could not be valued, because not
understood, by the learned Scaliger. Dialects if this (but much varied) are our
Cornish, and that of Brittaigne in France. Seventhly, The Biscaigners
inhibiting for seven days journey on both sides the Pyre^^^ mountains. It Is
the relics of the ancient Spanish, before it was altered by the Latin.
Scaliger never heard of the Monks language, spoken by ours of the I Will of Man,
the most of which is surely derived from the Irish. The Wallons also of the Low
Countries have a French dialect, scarce to be understood by a peasant about
Paris.

Ireland.
THis kingdom, by the English, Spanish, and French, is termed Irland, or
Ireland; by the British Yuerdhon, by the Inhabitants Eryn. According to the
Celestial Globe, it is situated between the Artike Circle, and the Tropike of
Cancer, but nearer the Artike, containing in Latitude four degrees and an
half, and according to the computation of our late Writers, between the
twenty and the 25. Paralels. In the South parts, their longest day is of
sixteen hours, with three fourths: In the Northern, of almost eighteen.
According to the Terrestrial, it stands between the greater Brittanie and
Spain: on the East, disjoined from England which a tempestuous sea, termed
Hibernicum, not above one days sailing: upon the West beats the vast Ocean:
upon the North (where the Deucalidon Ocean disgorgeth) it has Island,
disjoined no further than a ship in one day may sail unto: upon the South, it
beholds Spain (distant three days sailing) and the Vergivian Sea: From
South to North it represents an Ovall form, and by half is less than
Brittanie. Amongst many writers Camden, whom a man may best rely upon,
reports that it contains 400. miles in length, and in breadth 200.

The air hereof is most wholesome, the situation mild, the weather temperate,
but not altogether good to ripen fruit: For neither in Summer season, the heat
is so parching that it drives the Inhabitant to seek the shade, neither the
cold in Winter so rigorous, but that he may well live from the fire side: By
the influence of the air, all parts of the year are tolerably warm. It
brings forth no venomous creature, neither nourishes any brought from other
places. The quality of the soil and constellation of the Heavens is moist with
the most; whereupon it comes to pass, that both inhabitants and strangers
are troubled with the flix and Rheumes, and helped or prevented with drinking
Aqua-vitae. The Land is of diverse Natures, in some place rough and mountainous,
in others, boggie and waterish; shadowed with huge woods, and exposed to the
winds, with intermixture of many great Lakes. Yea, in the ridge of their
highest hills (mountains indeed I cannot term them) you shall find pooles and
marshes. It has goodly havens, and delectable plains, but neither comparable
to the woods for largeness, nor greenness. It is generally fertile except
Vlster, (which in some parts is fertile, in othersome barren;) And Conaght,
which (in times past) through idleness has been less manured than any other
Country, is fuller of hills and bogges, and for the greatest portion woody. The
hills swarm with cattle and sheep, from whence they reap plenty of butter,
cheese, and milk. The wheat thereof is small and short, and those vines which
they cherish, serve rather for shade than profit. For in those countries the
sun entering into Virgo, causes cold gales to blow, and in Autumn the'
after-noones heat is so faint and short, that it cannot ripen the clusters of
the vine. It brings forth a race of excellent horse, fit for journies in
regard of their ambling paces, but not commendable for indurance. It breeds
the injurious Wolf, and the Fox, as also all other creatures tame and gentle,
necessary for life, but of lesser growth except the Greyhound. Almost all the
woods are replenished with Dear, (and those so fat, that they can frant run
for fatness,) with Bores, Hares, in great abundance, Goats, Fallow-Deere:
Hedg-Hogges, and Moales, are seldom seen, but Mice infinite. it abounds
also with Falcons, Merlins, Eagles, Cranes, and in the Northerly parts with
Swannes. Storks are very rarely heard of through the whole Island, but such as
are there found are black. Pies and Nightingales are altogether wanting. By
reason of the Sea, their famous Rivers, and spacious Lakes, it is served with
most excellent Fish, and that peculiar to this Island only. For to let pass
many other, in Vlster, the Ban being a most fair and clear water, and arising
out of the Lake of Eaugh, is the most plentiful River for Salmon that is to be
found thorowout all Europe. For plenty and variety, the like is to be reported
of Sineus and Erno, a Lake by Camdens report, thirty miles long, and fifteen
broad: Report says, that this was once a delicate plot of ground, and well
inhabited, but for the bestiall abuse of the people, it was suddenly swallowed
in the waters. And to prove this true, men say that in fair seasons, the
Turrets and tops of houses, are in the bottom to be discerned.

The Island became subject to the Crown of England, about the year of our
Lord 1175. Henry the second then reigning. At what time Roderic, King of
Conaght, intituling himself King of Ireland, enforced the residue of those
petty Roytelets, to crave assistance of the King of England, under whose
protection they voluntarily yielded their obeisance.

It has fifty Bishoprics, whereof Armach is a Primacy, and Metropolitan of
the whole Island. Cassils is another Archbishopricke, authorized by Pope
Eugenius, and has under it nine suffragan Bishops: Dublin is another, and Toam
another.

It is divided into four Provinces, (viz.) Leynster, which Eastward respects
England. Mounster, which lies toward France Southward. Conaght, exposed to
the West. And Vlster, situated in the Northerly part of the Island. Some add a
fifth, placed in the midst, and term it Mead.

Every one now is subdivided into Counties, and each County into Baronies, and
hundreds; and every Barony into Parishes, consisting of Manors, Towns, and
Villages, after the manner of England. ^ That parcel of territory which
anciently was termed the Pale, is about the quantity of Yorke-shire in England,
and is a Country at this day inhabited by Noblemen and Gentlemen, descended of
Engli^^ race, being civil men, and have continued their obedienc^ to the
Crown of England, and retained their English language since the first
conquest. This people do commonly marry within themselves, and not with the
mere Irish, who could never in their sundry rebellions, draw the said
inhabitants to join with them by flattery, or expel them by force. The first
Colonies planted therein, were composed of worthy and noble Englishmen, and
especially seated in Dublin, and other Cities, and borough towns thorowout the
Realm: whose progeny having the mannagement of the affairs of the kingdom,
subdued by degrees the greatest part of the Irish, and brought them under
subjection to the Crown of England. And so long as they and their posterity
were employed, as principal Officers in time of war and peace, (being men
thoroughly informed of all passages within the Kingdom, and acquainted with the
dispositions of the people) the Realm was worthily governed, and duly
increased in civility, and yielded some profit to the crown without charge.
Other English Colonies at sundry times have there been since planted, and
especially by our late and modern Sovereigns, in the Provinces of Mounster
and Vlster, by the name of Undertakers: whereupon it grows, that the Realm
is now inhabited with English, and Irish descended of English race; and with
the mere and ancient Irishmen, unto whose Nobility and Gentry, the sir-names
of Mac or O are commonly added. Upon the Conquest, Government.
Henry the second established the laws of England, then being divided into
kinds, viz. the Common law, (as that the elder should inherit his fathers
lands) and Custom law, that (by the particular custom of Manors and Towns,)
lands should be divided by the custom of Gavelkinde, amongst all his sons;
or that the youngest son only should inherit the same, by the custom of
Borough-English: whereunto is to be added a third, viz. the Statute law.

He and his successors held the possession thereof, with (...) sovereign
royalty, and kingly prerogatives, by the n^me of Lords of Ireland; until the
day of king Henry the eighth, who by act of Parliament was acknowledged,
entitled, and entered King of the said kingdom, and so continues it unto this
day, being governed as a distinct kingdom by a Lieutenant, for Authority
(Train, Furniture, Provision, etc. far surpassing any Deputation thorowout
Christendom) wherein Courts of Parliament are and have there been held,
con^^sting of the three Estates of the kingdom, in the same form as is used
in England, by commission from the King under the great seal of England,
authorizing the Viceroy, or Deputy, to summon a parliament there, and to give
the Royal assent unto such acts, as are agreed upon in that Parliament:
wherein the King and his Council of Estate of England, are to be informed by
certificate under the great seal of Ireland, by force of a Statute made in
Ireland, in the tenth year of Henry the seventh. And after the kings
allowance, the bills to be enacted and propounded in the Parliament there; So
the Lord Deputy by force of the said Commission, gives the Kings royal assent,
to such acts as are agreed upon in the said Parliament there.

So (as I said before) Ireland is not only governed by the Common laws of
England, by certain ancient customs of that realm and this; and by diverse
statutes here and there also, upon occasion enacted; but also the like Courts
and forms of Justice are there (according to the said laws) used and
administered: And also the Judicial records are made in Latin, and the Judges
and Lawyers do plead in English, as is accustomed in England.

For the studying of which Laws, the Irish Gentlemen do send their sons to
the Innes of Court in England, being always such as are descended of English
race, and not of mere Irish: who are allowed to practice in England, after
they are called to the Bar, as Englishmen are also allowed to practice in
Ireland.

Neither the Nobility nor Commons of Ireland have any suffrage in the election
of the Viceroy, or blazing of Sovereign Magistrates, but all is done by the
King, and such as are especially authorized. And the inhabitants of Cities, and
Borough-townes in Ireland, by their charters, (which they have from the Kings
of England) do elect their Magistrates and Officers, as the Cities and towns
of England do.

In England, the ancientest Earls of Ireland do give precedence to the Earle^
of England, for that they have no voice in the Parliament of England: neither
has the Nobility of England any voice or prerogative in the Parliaments of
Ireland. so Irishmen borne, are denizens by birth in England, and may bear
Office, and inherit lands in England, (as experience teaches) without charters
of denization, as Englishmen are, and do in Ireland. And so Irishmen pay only
such customs and duties in England, as Englishmen do, and ought.

The Wards of the Nobility are disposed of by the King; and of inferior
persons, by the Viceroy, and certain of the Council there, according to their
Commission. Even so titles of honors, lands and offices are usually granted by
the Kings of England, under the great seal of England, or Ireland, according
to pleasure.

The incivility (wherewith this so goodly a kingdom has been much branded)
has chiefly arisen from want of education and learning: And secondly, for that
the Country abounds with idle men, having no trade whereupon to live: which
only abuse has encouraged rebellion, the Ringleaders not doubting to be
followed by these swarms of dissolute persons, ready to take arms upon any
occasion for desire of spoil.

But verily, sithence that now of late the King of Peace and Pietic, has wiped
away all distrust of former neglects, by his continual industry to plant
Religion and Arts, to re-people the wasted Provinces, and to extirpate the
innated idleness of the worst bred Irish; there is no question (under God) to
be made, but that this beautiful Island, being so near a neighbor, so
fruitful in soil, so rich in pasture (more than credible) beset with so many
woods, enriched with so many Minerals, watered with so many Rivers, environed
with so many Havens, lying fit and commodious for Navigation into most wealthy
Countries, will in time prove profitable to the Church, advantag^ous to the
Prince, pleasing to the Inhabitants, and comparable to any the best and
civillest kingdoms of the Christian Commonweal.

Great Britain.
THe whole Island of Britain once divided, now reunited, The Situation of
England.
under the name of the kingdom of Great Britain, is an Island situated in
the maine Ocean, over against France, and divided into four great Provinces:
The first whereof the Englishmen do inhabit; the second, the Scots; the third,
the Welshmen; and the last, the Cornishmen. Every one of those do differ from
other, either in language, in manners, or in customs.

England, so termed of the Englishmen (the Inhabitants thereof) is by much the
greater and goodlier portion, and divided into nine and twenty Provinces, which
they term Shires. Of the which, ten do make the prime part of the Kingdom,
and inclining toward the South, have their existence between the Thames and
the Sea. Next as far as the Trent, which runs through the midst of
England, are sixteen other Shires proportioned, whereof the first six lie
toward the East, and the other ten lie more to the Inland, other six border
upon Wales, and are bounded toward the West. About the heart of the Kingdom
lie Darbishire, Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Cumberland. And upon the left hand,
inclining toward the West, Westmerland. Upon the contrary side lie Durham, and
Northumberland; Provinces opposed to the North, and sometime appertaining to
the Crown of Scotland.

These Shires are two ways divided: first, into six circuits, parted among the
Judges, who twice a year go over them for the holding of Assizes. Secondly,
into two Archbishopricks; Canterbury, who has two and twenty Bishoprics
under his Province; and York, who has three in his. These are by the Grecians
termed Dioceses, Bishoprics.
and take their denominations from the Cities wherein the Bishops have their
Seas; the chief whereof is London, and was once the seat of an Archbishop, now
translated unto Canterbury.

This prime part, upon the East and the South is bounded with the Ocean: upon
the West with Wales and Cornwall; upon the North with Tweed; the bounder also
of England and Scotland.

At this River of Tweed ends the length thereof; which being accounted to
begin at the Shore which lies most Southerly, is from thence reckoned to
contain about three hundred and twenty miles.

On this side the Humber it is accounted the fertilest for corn; beyond,
mountainous, but excellent for herbage. For albeit, to one that beholds it
afar off; it seems all champi^n, notwithstanding, it has many hills, and
those for the most part destitute of wood; as also most pleasant valleys,
wherein especially the Gentlemen have their mansions: who according to their
old customs dwell not in Towns, but approach the Valleys and Rivers, and
inhabit the Villages, as I think, the better to avoid the fury of tempestuous
winds, whereunto the Island is sometime subject. Whereby it comes to pass,
that the Yeomen conversing with the Gentry, do in every place savor of some
good fashion, and the Vpland Cities are the less famoused.

The land generally is exceeding fertile, and plentiful in beasts: whereby it
comes to pass that the English people are more addicted unto Grazing, than
unto Tillage: so that almost the third part of the soil is reserved rather for
Cattle, Dear, Conies, and Goats a (for of this sort also there is great store
in Wales.) And in every Shire you shall see Parkes impaled, and Forests
replenished with these beasts; in the hunting whereof, the Nobility and Gentry
do much delight; there being more Parks in England, than in all Europe besides.

For provision of the Inhabitants, neither is it less stored with corn, wild
foul, and fish, so that for plenty, goodness, and sweetness, it needs
neither the help of France, no, nor of any neighbour-bordering Country. Among
other things, the flesh especially of their Swine, Oxen, and Veales, have the
best relish of any part of Christendom; and of Fish, their Pike and Oysters.
It brings not forth Mules nor Asses, but of Horse, for pace the best in the
world, and of those infinite proportions, for service, running, and coursing.

Wealth.
The wealth hereof consists in the never-decaying Mines of Tinue and Lead, of
Copper, Iron, and Coals; On the Downs grows a small and tender kind of
grass, neither dunged nor watered with spring or river; but in Winter nourished
with the moisture of the air, and in Summer with the dew of Heaven; which is
so grateful and pleasing to the Sheep, that it causes them to bear fleeces
of singular goodness, and exceeding finenesse. The Island breeds no Wolves,
nor any other ravening beast; and therefore these their flocks wander night
and day, by Hills, Dales, and Fields, as well enclosed, as common, without fear
or danger. Most delicate Cloths are woven of this Wool, which from thence are
transported in great abundance, into Germany, Poland, Denmark, Sweveland,
Italy, Turkey, and the Indies, where they are in high request. There grow all
sorts of pulse, great store of Saffron; yea, infinite quantities of Beer are
transported from thence into Belgia; as also Pelts, Hides, Tallow, and
Seacoale. The Island is so commodiously seated for the Sea, that it is never
without resort of Portugal, Spanish, French, Flemmish, and Easterling
Merchants. The traffike between the English and the Flemmish, arises to an
inestimable value: for Guicciardin writes, that before the tumults of the
Low Countries, they bartered for twelve millions of crowns yearly.

The air is somewhat thick, and therefore more subject to the gathering of
clouds, rain, and winds; but withal, less distempered with heat or cold, for
the same reasons of crassitude. The nights are lightsome, and in the
Northermost parts of the Land, they are so short, that the falling and rising
of the Sun is discernde but by a small intermission; for that the Island is
situated almost full North, and the Sun in the Summer time moving slowly, and
staying long in the Northern Climates, does almost compass it round above. In
the Winter, it is as far removed, when approaching nearer the South, it
runs toward the East. I my self have observed, that in the City of London
(being seated in the Southerly part of the Island) about the Summer Solstice,
the night has not been above five hours long. At all seasons of the year
the Country is most temperate, being subject to no extraordinary evil
influence of the Heavens, so that diseases are not there very common, and
therefore less use of Physic than in other places: yea, many times some
people there are, who attain unto one hundred and ten years of age; yea some
to one hundred and twenty.

Earthquakes are here seldom heard of: and lightnings almost to speak of, as
seldom. The soil is very fruitful and plentiful, and of all necessaries it
yields abundance, except of those things which are peculiar to hotter, or
colder Regions. Vines are fostered rather for the pleasure of their shadows,
than for the increase of their profits: yet prosper they in all places, and
bring forth Grapes; which notwithstanding hardly wax ripe, unless an unusual
hot Summer, or an artificial reflection do help them. Wheat, Rye, Barley, and
Oats, are sowed in their seasons: other grains they commonly use not; and of
Pulse, only Beans and Pease. The fruits suddenly knot, but ripen slowly; the
cause of either is the overmuch moisture both of the soil and the air. Wine
(as aforesaid) the Land affords not; in stead whereof, beer is in request;
without controversy by use, a pleasant and wholesome Beverage. Wines are
transported from France, Spain, and Canaie. The Woods are full of fruit trees,
and most plentiful of Mast. The Rivers fair, and run through many
Provinces. The Downs are many, yet neither cumbred with wood, nor overlayed
with water, which by reason thereof brings forth a tender and short grass,
grateful and sufficient for the pasturage of infinite flocks of sheep; And
whether it be by the influence of the Heavens, or the goodness of the land,
they yield the finest and softest freeces through the whole world.

And first I must put you in mind of a Miracle; how this beast, besides the
dew of Heaven ordinarily tastes of no other water, so that the shepherds of
purpose do drive them from all watery places, upon true observation; That to
let them drink, is to let them bane. Without doubt this is the true golden
Fleece, wherein the maine wealth of the whole Island consists. And for to buy
this commodity, immensive treasure is yearly reconveyed into the Land by
Merchants; from whence it is never conveyed, because it is provided by the
Laws of the Kingdom; That no person transport Gold or Silver, Plate, Jewels,
etc. Whereby it comes to pass, that no Country under the Cope of Heaven is
richer than England. For, besides those masses of Coin, which pass this way
and that way, through the hands of Tradesmen, Merchants, and Gentlemen; there
is almost no person of mean condition, but for the use of his daily table, he
has either a Salt, Cups, or Spoones of Silver, and according to his estate,
more or less, for diverse services.

It is no less stored with all kind of Beasts, except Asses, Mules, Camels,
and Elephants. It brings forth no material venomous Creature, or Beast of
prey, save the Fox, worthy talking of: for the race of the Wolves is quite
extinguished, and therefore all sorts of cattle stray as they list, and are in
safety without any great care-taking for an Heards-man: so that you shall see
Herds of Rother Beasts and Horses, and Flocks of Sheep, in all places
wandering by day and by night, upon Hills and in Valleys, in Commons, and
enclosed Grounds, (by ancient Customs laid open after Harvest) wherein every
Neighbor claims community to feed his Cattle.

For in truth, the Ox and the Weather are Creatures especially ordained for
the Table, than whose flesh there is not in any place a more savourie or
delicious service. Of the two, the Steer is the best, especially if it be
seasonably powdered: of which there is no marvel, for that this choice is
altogether exempted from labor, and fed up for food, and withal the diet of
the English Nation consisting most upon flesh.

The people are tall of stature, fair of complexion, Qualities of the English.
for the greater part gray-eyed; and as in pronunciation they approach the
Italian, so in constitution of body and fashion they do well-neere imitate
them. They are civilly qualified, and take counsel by leisure; knowing that
profitable proceedings have none a more dangerous adversary ^han rashness. Of
their own dispositions, they are courteous, and in all good offices forwards,
especially the Gentry, even toward strangers. Their acquaintance they invite
to their houses, and there entertain them kindly, and feast them both at noone
and at night merrily, neatly, heartily, and bountifully: and this they term
courtesy, or neighborhood. In battle they are fearlesse, excellent Archers,
and in service unindurable of temporizing, and therefore the sword being once
drawn, they forth with set at all upon the hazard of a battle, knowing that
all good success attends the fortune of the Victor. Fortresses they build
none, but rather suffer those which heretofore have been built, and are now by
age grown ruinous, utterly to perish: but being once in foreign parts, they
retain all military discipline to the utmost. For Booke-men, their maintenance
is bountiful, their proficiencie commendable, and their number numberless.
Their attire differs not much from the French; their women are amiable and
beautiful, and attired in most comely fashion. Their Cities are honorable,
their Towns famous, Hamlets frequent, and Villages every where magnificent.

So that if any courteous Traveller would desire of me to behold an Idea of
happiness in abstracto, fitting for the general necessity of life and
upright conversation, viz. the use of diet, clothing, sociable feastings,
solemn festivals and banquets, with approbation of magnificence: Or demand to
see the place, where Law, indifferent to all sorts, permits the private man
to thrive, to purchase estates, to devise chattels and inheritances to his
children and kinsfolks; to reward servants; or to countenance followers; with
liberty of civil conversation, of comely burials and mourning for the dead,
of rejoycings at marriages, of honest and friendly visitations, and harmless
recreation; where every man eats under his own Vine, and does what seems
good in his own eyes, so it tend not to scandal: Then let me be bold to show
him the noble Kingdom of England; which to approve, I intend by way of
comparison, (wherein most of our Gentry are well acquainted) to make good
what, I think, without offense, may be truly avouched.

And first we will begin with those Countries, England compared with Russia,
and Aethiopia.
of which we have only knowledge by way of traffike, and so travel into
Russia and Aethiopia. But there (alas to say nothing of the government, the
sole load-starre of goodness and happiness) the two extremities of heat and
cold debar both Plenty and Abundance, from unloading their laps amongst the
Inhabitants, comparable to our happiness and satisfaction. As for their
government, and uniformitie of a Commonwealth (the name of Emperors only
excepted) there is nothing worthy observation, more than the tyrannous
controlling of Laws, and the immediate prostitution of all sorts to the
imperious will of the prevailer; nor in truth have they temple, palace,
wisdom, peace or tranquillity, such as Royalty or good government intends,
but both Empires (especially Russia) have suffered many convulsions from
ambitious Usurpers and unworthy Princes, who have traitorously supplanted one
another, and by indirect courses brought the subject into the house of
slaughter; which undoubtedly is the maine reason why they cannot come near
magnificence, provision in housekeeping, navy, multitude of Princes, Nobles or
subjects, with the equality of obedience to advance a true Scepter, or to
manifest the glory of a king, by the flourishing condition of all estates. In a
word, their Cities and Towns are subject to such bestiality and confusion,
that they seem rather routed troops of deformity, than men orderly disposed
to the mannagement of affairs, either of commerce, or of Noble trade: And so,
in all other particulars, there is a mere disparity between them and our
proposition.

Shall we come nearer home, With Germany.
and with prying eyes (like the Censors of Rome) look into the Empire of
Germany? there the Princes are so absolute, and the Emperor so timorous to
reign (as Asueroth did) from India to Aethiopia, over 127. Provinces, that
neither the Queen of Saba will come to hear his wisdom, nor to view the
order of his Palace; neither will the King of Arabia send him presents, nor the
Confederates admire his magnificence: The Merchant will not bring him horse,
and fine linen from remote places, nor supply his wants according to the
prerogative of Kings: Nor are the Cities ordered by the appointment of his
Ministers, nor can he send his chariots to this place, nor his horsemen to
that; nor his Army whither he lists, nor fill the streets of Jerusalem, when he
would solemnize a Passover? for the people live divided, and the Burger
boasts of his policy, in manumitting themselves, and giving their Towns the
usurpation of chief commandery; as for the having of many commodities, tending
either to necessity or pleasure, alas, the commutation consists in the
enriching one another, wherein all the corruptions of ava^ice are put in
practice, finally (God wot) to the augmentation of the Empires Majesty. So that
their Marts and Faires, are as so many boothes of drunkards, where with in
stead of Ships at Sea, they fill the fields with wagons full of strange
creatures, who make their bellies as great devourers, as the Sea. Nor can he
go with the wise King to view his navy at the red Sea shores, not in person
visit the Cities which want fortification or repairing; nor in truth, do any
thing to come near the six steps of gold on Solomon's throne, but eat and
carouse, yet far from the mean of mirth.

Shall we venture over the Alps, With Italy.
and the gulf of Venice into Italy; and there search the Apennine Hills, the
fields of Campania, the garden of the World, Lombardy; the territories of Rome,
or attractive Naples, for an instance of this our Greatness and Happiness? No
surely, For throughout this goodly territory, in one corner rules the
Spaniard, at another end the Savoyen; then is intermingled a confused
government of petty Princes. Next lies the Venetian state, who merely out of
parsimonie (like their adjoining neighbors, the Florentines) have obtained the
reputation of wealth and greatness. As for the Duke, he is but a voice
unsignificant; for the Senate carries the sword. And lastly, the Church, with
the mercenary contraries of blessing and cursing, keeps Saint Peter's
patrimony as safe, as if the indubitate heir of some noble family, should
maintain the privileges of his deceased Ancestors.

But should I knit all these models together, and set up the walls of Rome,
encompassed with her seven hills in such an order, that the fabric might boast
of twenty miles circuit, and the government lift up a head of Daniels vision
again: Or that in a year of Iubile, I could settle you under the wings of an
Angel on the top of the Popes Palace, as the Devil carried our Savior to the
pinnacle of the Temple; And there show you the consistory of Cardinals, triumphs
of a Popes Inauguration; his stately carriage (adorned with his triple crown)
on men's shoulders, with all the appurtenant shows and ceremonies; yet would
all come short to our example. For the very provision of our Kings Palace would
exhaust the Country, consume the commodities, and like barren ground, drinking
up the rain, devour the plenty of the Land, and pull in pieces their best
compacted husbandry. As for their drinking in vessels of gold, well may it
serve to divulge the glory of some ambitious triumph, but nothing verify the
bounty of an overflowing cup; considering the wines are not only small, but
the vintage so barren and penurious, that to conceal the scarcity thereof, by
parsimonious custom of the Country, women and children are forbidden to drink
thereof. As for the Villano, he is glad of water to quench his thirst, fetched
from muddy channels, falling from the mountains of snow, and cleansed with
much ado by the swift course of Eridanus.

Many other defects do bespot the face of this goodly creature, and debar it
from the boast of our essential happiness. For though the Inne-keepers
daughter go in a satin gown, and that the bravery of Italy be discovered in
the attire of the people, as if every burre had golden kernels, and every
corner were full of silkwormes; yet is there neither method of government, nor
can the inhabitans rejoice under unity, or any privileges of a strong compacted
Administration, tending to the assurance of love, true alliance, or obedience:
so that in a manner all the defects, deforming the beauty of Kingdoms (more
than some private blessings, and those scattered as it were by the hands of
divine goodness) may be here looked upon with pitiful eyes, and much lamented
with judicial hearts. And however the ostentous heaps of stone transport the
slight credulity of the ignorant; that it surpasses for Cities, buildings,
and outward magnificence; yet when you come to examine particulars, you shall
find it like a rotten post gilded on the outside. For what says Tacitus;
Cities are compacted of men, and obedience of people, subject to a good form
of government, and not of houses and palaces made of lime and stone,
unfurnished of dwellers, void of hospitality, and jealous of each others best
inclinations. So that besides all natural imperfection in Italy, there is
neither room in the house for servants, nor litter forthy Camels; neither
can thou fetch the well-sed Veale from thy droves, nor dress fine Venison,
nor kill the fat Calfe, as in other Countries; which makes me to remember a
pleasant jest of one of the same Country, spoken to a stranger, demanding the
reason why the Muttons and Cattle were so small and lean: Because (quoth he)
we (Italians) eat up the grass in sallets, and by robbing the pastures,
deceive the Cattle. In another place, a Curtizan being questioned of the
conditions of men in her faculty, concerning business of Incontinency, only
answered, Seignior Il Italiano pisciarum molto. Neither to slatter them
(according to the ridiculous soothing of Princes) can I exemplify any of their
glorious actions abroad, or famous attempts at home, more than the ruining one
of another, and making of forts and fortifications, which sometimes have proved
as fatal as Perillus his Bull to the Inventor; imboldning disobedience to
rely on a wrong security, and at all times augmenting distrust and foul
suspicions amongst their best Cities and governments. How is Millan and Naples
curbed, and the brave liberty of the Gentry strangely fettred, by the terror of
late built citadell? Of which notwithstanding even the Spaniard himself is
transported to imagine; That soldiers may be corrupted, and no place to be so
impregnable, but the endeavors of men can frustrate and overcome.

And were it not to overlooke them with a malevolent aspect, I could inform
you, that notwithstanding their dispersion of their wares and Merchandises,
throughout all the Ports of Europe and Turkey, yet is is bounded with such
wants and oversights, and that within the compass of their Mid-land Seas
(except in pursuing of some small pyracies) as that I never read nor heard,
that ever they made true use of navigation, nor admitted the just conditions of
Sailors and Soldiers. In so much, that on my knowledge, even the potentest
state there, boasting of the bravery of 200. galleys, and eight or ten
galleasses, neither has sufficient men to man twenty, nor can without time and
great expenses (amongst themselves) fill up the inventory of that scarcity.

Shall we then come to Spain, With Spain.
where the Grands of the Kings Court have golden keys to his chamber, and are
privileged by patent to stand covered before his Majesty? where the Exchequer
is full of gold from India, and the Treasurers bring in accounts of 100000.
Soldiers in garrison with other employments yearly paid, and orderly supplied?
where the Nobleman insulteth for his Gotish-bloud, and will prove a true
Castilian, more ancient in Gentry than the race of Othoman, and every man
wears his sword point-blancke, looking as high, though not so big as a
German, who has eat and drunk more at a meal, than a Don does in a week?
where so many kingdoms are united, making a more perspicuous show over the
universe, than the seven stars do in the Firmament, over the single planets
in their separated spheres? where they can without boasting, I will not say
vainglory, tell you diverse Histories of their voyages at Sea, discoveries and
plantations of Countries, conquests of both the Indies, and Armies in the
field: shall we (I say) here cast Anchor, and look out a match for our
example? Me thinks I am answered by every man that wears a great ruff, and a
full pair of hose; If Spain do not equal it, who can do it? I will not
tell you that as yet, but presuming to shut Spain out of doors, for entering
into the privy chamber of our example; let me assure you upon subsequent
proof, that (would Apollo pardon the comparison) I can compare his Indian
wealth, to nothing so like, as to Midas wish, who (notwithstanding his golden
fortunes) wanted, as all men know, the use of natures benefits, and could
neither eat nor drink without choking. But to particulars.

What has Spain worthy commendation, much less what prerogative of
happiness? Canaan flowed with milk and honey, blessings of food and increase,
that the King had not only his provision without repining, but Israel (as the
sand of the Sea) ate, drank, and made merry, which Spain cannot do. The
burnt hills, and desert places will pregnantly prove the assertion. The Country
man hides his garlike and onions, as ashamed of his diet. The Citizen powders
fish, and buyeth cheese of the Dutchman. The Gentry is limited what he shall
eat, and how much meat he shall carry home. The Court has much ado to be
supplied, and many concussions are put in practice from the Kings prerogative,
to furnish the offices with reasonable allowance; and in truth the provision is
far short from the expenses of other places. For in general, they are
sometimes afraid to want bread, inploying certain Agents for transportation
both of corn and victual, even from remote Countries; tempting us with gold
and payment of ready money: For which purpose only is there a Proviso in their
Acts of Parliament, concerning the exportation of coin. Of which, at a word,
though they have great cause to boast, yet by the way let me demand, how came
the discontents in Flanders, Brabant, etc. who incited the garrisons of
Antwerp, Brussels, and other Towns to mutiny? who distasted sundry times
whole Armies upon their marches and employments? who counseled the Treasurer
to be so slack in payment of Liberances, and Soldiers pensions? who does
every year thrust the garrisons into penury and scarcity, in so much that not
only in the Low Countries, but even in the governments of Millan, Naples, and
Sicil, the Soldier wants, and many times is compelled to remit the one
half, to purse up the other? Is it not for lack of Treasure, the pride
whereof has made his heart fondly to swell, or by disorderly distributions? Or
more truly, to procure humane necessities, the magazin whereof continually
lies in the English and Dutchmans hands. Let not man therefore be afraid of
this monster Opinion, nor sedu^ed with the vanity of reports. For put them to
skirmish ^f understanding, and the wealth of Spain will prove but false fire;
according to the late and near experimented Proverb; The King of Spaines pay
is the greater, but the Dutch the better.

As for their hungry boasting of fruits and herbs, it is in a manner an offense
to Nature; For God made the beasts of the earth to have sustenance from the
same, but man to command all: So that Adams wisdom gave them titles, and his
superiority prescribed subjection; but how? to man's use, for man's sustenance,
for man's necessity; and lastly, for man's delight. Thus does oil make a
cheerful countenance, and wine a gladsome heart. Thus did the Kings table
furnish it self, in this sense the songs of David praise God for his many
blessings. Thus were incense and odours provided, and the love of brethren
compared to the dew of Hermon, and the costly ointment on Aarons vestures:
which blessed allowances, make me to remember a speech of Sir Roger Williams
to an idle Spaniard, boasting of his country citrons, orenges, olives, and such
like: Why (says he) in England we have good surloines of beef, and dainty
capons to eat with your sauce, with all meat worthy the name of sustenance; but
you have sauce and no sustenance: and so mich God dich you with your
sustenancelesse sauce.

Canaan had neighbourly meetings, feasts of triumphs, and times of private
rejoycings: Spain dares not, nor can bid you welcome. Idle jelousies, private
hate, or hateful pride, fear of expenses, and vainglorious speeches, will
quickly debar you from the pleasure of invitation, from the freedom of
conversing one with another, which cannot savor the noble entercourses of
mutual amity. Canaan had the Temple furnished, as God commanded, the Priest
obedient to the King, the Prophets in estimation, and the Feasts orderly
celebrated: Spain is polluted with worse severitie than Paganism has
invented, viz. the cruel Office of Inquisition, wherewith the Kings themselves
have been so overawed by the insolence of the Clergy, that some of them have
not spared to commit repentant error, to please the Pope. Canaan was a
receptacle of strangers and Princely solemnities; Spain hates all men,
commits them to fire and sword, and cannot order one solemn Festival, unless
at a Kings Coronation, a Princes marriage, or a Cardinals jollitie; where yet an
Italian invention shall fill a table with painted trenchers and dishes of
China, but a hungry belly may call for more meat, and he never the nearer.

Canaan had cities of refuge, cities of store, cities of strength, cities for
horses, and all for the Kings magnificence; to all which the ways lay ordered,
and men passed to and fro without danger and want: In Spain you must have a
guide, yea sometime a guard, and are so far from expecting relief after your
days travels, that if you have not a Borachio before your saddle, and made
your provision on the back of an Ass, you may happen to be tired for want of
sustenance, and faint with Ismael for lack of water.

Canaan had beautiful women, and the Scripture sets it down, as a blessing of
God: But Spain must mourn for strange disparity, and either lament that her
women are painted, (like the images of the grove) or sit in the highway as
Thamar did, to deceive Judah. For in truth they are for the most part unpleasing
and swartish, or else by coming to be Curtizans, dangerous and impudent. Thus
as yet Solomon must sit without compare, and his kingdom unmatchably triumph
with a noble prerogative.

But what must we think of France, With France.
(says one) is not your breath now almost spent? and will you not be satisfied
with the goodliest kingdom of the world? The answer shall not be peremptory,
nor derogate from the merit of its least worth of virtue: yet are they traduced
for many defects, and I believe will fall short to our expectation, at least I
am sure dare not abide the touch of trial.

In Salomons Court, the Queen of Saba commended the obedience of the Princes,
the sitting of the Kings servants, the ordering of the Palace, and the
multitude of the provisions daily brought in: In France the Princes contest
with the King, and the Clergy affront the Princes, and bear down the States;
the Pages mock the Gentlemen, and the Gentlemen are proud of nothing but
slovennesse, unbeseeming familiarity, and disorder. So that with much ado, the
mechanical man stands bare to the King, and the Princes sit at meat like
Carriers in an Hostry, without reverence, silence, or observation, and a vile
custom having got the upper hand, has depressed the Majesty of such a place,
which indeed reduced to uniformity, would much augment the glory of Europe.

A wise State, and potent Kings, have built Navies, and traveled themselves in
person to view them, raising customs from their Merchants, loving and
maintaining good Mariners and Pilots, contracting leagues with remote Princes,
and making the confirmation of them honorable and advantageous: But France
wants shipping, is careless of Navigation, can raise no good Sailers,
seldom attempteth voyages or discoveries, and consequently has its Cities and
Merchants conversing without form or noble condition. For in Paris they dare
talk of the Kings mistresses, intermeddle with all tractates of Parliaments
and State, call any Prince Hugonet, who dares only say, That Nostre Dame is
but a dark melancholic Church; and finally, justify very monstrous and
abusive actions. So that to tell you of their inconstant and refractorie
dispositions at all times, would sooner discover their loathsome effusions of
Christian blood, than prevent the customary and mischievous practices of this
people.

As for the Court, by reason of inveterate disorders, it is a mere map of
confusion, and exposes many actions, more ridiculous, than worthy of imitation.

The Husbandman, he is termed a Peasant, disparaged in his drudgery and servile
toilsomnesse, lives poor and beastly, is afraid of his own shadow, and
cannot free the Vineyards from thieves and destroyers. Yea, all the Country
swarmeth with Rogues and Vagabonds, whose desperate wants drive them to
perpetrate many heinous murders, although for the most part the Provosts of
every government are very diligent. The cause, as I conjecture, for that the
passages are toylesome and disordered, yea, many times dangerous, to which may
be added, the much connivencie at notorious crimes, with many particulars
choking the breath of happiness, from giving life to a glorious kingdom
indeed, if the reciprocal duties between Prince and Subject were but
moderately extended.

But now to produce England, shall we say, that it is matchless, or
faultlesse? Surely no; we have (no doubt) our imperfections as well as other
Nations. But certainly, by that time the Reader in the balance of judgment
has poysed the differences of plenty and scarcity, of necessaries and
abilities for Peace and War, the one for life, the other for defense: M Paris
fol. 68^.
I make no question, but for the first, when he has read the censure of the
Pope, how that England was vere hortus delictarum; vere puteus inexhaustus; his
Holiness, if he might have it for catching, had no reason but to conclude:
Ergo ubi multa abundant, de multis multa possunt extorqueri.

For the second, how ever France and Spain have been always accounted the
balances of Europe, yet has England stood as the beam to turn the Scale:
which particularly to prove, I will never go about, by recital of our
Ancestors undertakings, or our Merchants adventures over the face of the
universe of French or Spanish Victories, releevement of neighbors, or
expatiating of honorable reputation amongst the M^s^ovites in the North, or
the Mogores in the East; but unpartially bid you look upon the face of the
kingdom as now it stands.

If the glory of a King consist in the multitude of subjects, The King.
how honorable is the State of England at this day, which most harmoniously
and absolutely commands over the English, Scotch, Irish, Welsh, and the
French of Gernsey and Iersey: If you desire to behold Palaces and goodly
buildings, where are so many, and so good belonging to any kingdom in the
world? If a Court, The Court.
I verily believe for State, good order, expenses, entertainment, and
continual attendancie, other places will be found to come far short. If
shipping, and a Royal Navy, I hope you may depart with satisfaction,
especially if you were instructed in the secrets of their service and strength.
But let late trial performed in the face of the world make due report of those
virtues. If you will m^^ter us at land: who can show such companies of foot,
such sufficient troops of serviceable horse, and so many worthy ^^^^tors, and
so well appointed? what subject living in a civil Commonwealth, can show me
(as I can do many in England) a Gentleman of his own tenants, able to bring
such fair companies of men into the field?

If martial spectables be distastefull, then look upon the Nobility, and
grave Counselors; The Nobility.
but withal prepare a reverent respect, and settle your esteem so resolutely
toward them, for their orderly life, their sweetness of manners, integrity
in deciding of controversies, and affability in admitting of Suitors; that
although you come from the Grands of Spain, the Princes of France, and the
ostentous pomp of Cardinals, yet be not too prejudicate, nor transported with
selfe-conceited wilfulness, and you shall see as great bravery, retinue, and
observation amongst us, as any subject in the world dare challenge.

After them, look upon inferiors, you shall see them generally so many, and
so well attended and appointed, that I protest them far exceeding other
places, both for graceful show, and sufficiency of execution.

Will you be ravished indeed, and transported with the love of the world? Come,
and behold the beauty of our Ladies, and their disposing at a night of
solemnity: to which if you add the general contentment, which our English
women afford, without sophisticate and adulterate favors, there is no man can
hold his peace, but proclaim our pre-eminence.

If you would see justice proud of her entertainment, Courts of Justice.
and how she presents both praemium and poenam to the several attendants at
the bar; look into our Courts, and view the same in most perspicuous
eminence, without so much as the least cloudy respect of persons.

If you will enter our Gentlemen's houses, I hope there are no such cupboords of
plate, beds of velvet or imbroidery, hangings of tapestrie, variety of rooms,
duty of servants, order of housekeeping, store of pastime, and all in gross
(that man can desire) in any Country in the World.

If you will search our Cities and Towns, The Gentry.
what they want in outward deceit of formality, it is supplied in sweetness
and delicacie within doors, surpassing the best of them in wealth and
furniture. As for expenses, I am sure some Citizens of London are at more
annual charge of diet, than the Dukes of Venice, Florence, or Genoa. If you
will examine our Merchants, however some great Fowker or Agent for a whole
Kingdom, for Genoa, Antwerp, Brussels, or other Cities, may surpass us for
usury, and supposition of wealth, there died not two such in one year, and out
of one Town in the world, as Sir John Spencer, and Master Sutton. Generally
all the rest surpass for curious fare, stateliness, education, and orderly
contributions. Besides, they live at home in case, purchase Land with security,
bring up their children daintily and decently, maintain their families in
obedience, and cannot be matched by any foreign opposition.

Finally, The Citizens.
if you would be acquainted with the tradesman, artizan, and other of manual
occupations; look how he lives, look how he fares, look where he dwells,
look what he wears, look where he goes to buy his meat; to such markets and
shambles, that the very sight astonisheth all strangers, being once made
acquainted with their rarity and goodness.

But indeed if you would have cause of wonder, The Husbandman or Yeoman
compared.
then look upon the husbandman, and compare him to men of like rank in other
places, and I believe upon mature consideration, our adversaries will repine at
their felicities, and our friends embrace our noble freedoms with desire of
limitation.

In Turkey, Compared with the Turk.
with the rest, he is a poor and unfortunate slave; and whether Muscelman, or
Christian, he dare not manure his ground to the best profit, and therefore
lives poorly and sluttishly.

In Hungary, With the Hungarian.
and those parts, they resemble carrion; for living under the Turk, nothing is
his own, and in the Christian government all is taken from him, either to
furnish the wars, or to maintain the soldier.

In Italy they are a little better, With the Italian.
as long as they be able to pay their rents, and husband their grounds. Yet do
they seldom live of their own, or lead a life beseeming the freedom of
conversation. Besides, in many places they are so terrified with the wretched
troops of the Bariditie, who make prey of their labors, that they know the
robbers, yet dare they neither detect them, nor deny to entertain them. After
the fashion of Italy, they will be a little gawdie (especially the women) in
apparel, and are very industrious, as having in one selfsame field, (if the
soil will yield it) though it consist but of an acre, both Corn, Vines, and
Fruit Trees; Honey, Roots, Sallets, Bees, and Silk-wormes. He is now called a
Villano, and serves to no other use than to enrich his Lord, feeding himself
upon Garlike and Onions, and is acquainted with no good thing, but
superstition, a few gaudy clothes, and the incontinent life of Curtizans.

In Spain it is far worse; With the Spaniard.
the Contadini are numbered amongst the reproaches of their government, and
esteemed almost as the Asses, that bring their Cabages, Melons, and such like
trash to the markets. For he dare not attempt to cheapen any thing appropriate
to the use of the Gentleman; As flesh, fish, wheat, or excellent fruits. Nor
must he, if he have of his own, but furnish the market with the best, feeding
himself on the worst and vilest stuff. Besides (the error of Italy) if the
mother have a comely daughter (or worse) she is contented for money to yield to
prostitution, etc.

In France, the peasant is not only beastly within doors, With the Frenchmen.
but churlish, savoring nothing but his labor, with base and servile
behavior, with poor and miserable expenses, with obscene and filthy lodging,
with jealous and malicious entertainment, with illiberall and ill-becomming
freedom of speech against both Court and Commonwealth.

In Germany the Boore is somewhat better, With the German.
for he eats flesh sometimes, though vilely dressed; will be drunk and
merry; must be always employed, and always an hungered, or desirous of drink;
And can apparel himself handsomely to go to Church on Sundays, or
Holidays. But they are dangerous in their tumults and rages, and not to be
trusted upon reconciliation after a wrong.

In Ireland he is termed a churl, With the Irishman.
in England a Clown: but look on him truly, as he lives indeed, and you
shall find him a careful maintainer of his family, in continued descents, and
in times past he would not have altered his addition of rich Yeoman, for the
vainglorious title of poor Gentleman: You shall see them dwell in neat
houses, Manors, Lordships, and Parks, to the annual value of a thousand pounds
sometimes: their sons knighted, their daughters well bestowed, their other
children so dispersed, that Lawyers, Citizens, Merchants, are raised throughout
the kingdom, from the sons and kindred of these countrymen. Yea, you shall
see them invited to the Court by service, or promotion, and knowing that the
breath of Kings advances or dejecteth, can attend the good ho^re, and such
graces, as a Princes favor may distribute to a well-deserving subject.

Thus lives our Countriman, and is able, though but a Farmer, to lodge you
sweetly and handsomely, to set a piece of plate on the Cupboord, five or six
dishes of good fare on the Table, with fresh and fine linen, and a cheerful
welcome. He is so nurtured besides, that he can tell his Lawyer a formal tale,
and complain to the Justice, if a far better man wrong him. And finally, in
a carowse of good liquor of his own brewing, can chaunt it with the Poet;
Anglia Liberagens, cus Liberamens, etc.

Concerning traffike and employment at Sea; Concerning traffike.
what kingdom has more commodities within it self, wants less, or is
better furnished from foreign parts? So that whether for gain sake they make
sale of the best things, or that there is a secret in importation, or that our
Merchants are curious in selecting the choicest, I know not, but am sure, that
our England is the very shop of the World, and Magazine of Natures dainties. If
it be a blessing for every man to eat under his own roof, to sit with the
pleasure of conversation in his Orchard or Garden, to enjoy the fruits of the
earth with plenty, to live in neighbourly gratuities, having in a manner our
doors open all night, to have many children, servants, and store of cattle,
to purchase great estates, marry our daughters beyond expectation, and
strengthen one another in worthy families, and suitable kindred; Then look upon
England, and tell me, where is the like? If it be a blessing not to be
suppressed with superiors, not to have the Commonwealth rent in pieces by
tyranny, not to see others enjoy the fruits of our labors, not to be
tormented with intrusion, usurpation, or malicious looks of covetous
Landlords; Look amongst us, and demand, Who can complain? Or at least, who is
so wronged, but he may have satisfaction or redress? If it be a blessing, to
enjoy the preaching of the Gospel, to be freed from corrupt and absurd
ceremonies, to rejoice in the liberty of an upright conscience, to continue in
a true, perfect, and established Religion, to abound with reverend learned men,
to have liberal exercise and dispute of our faith, to be resolved of our
doubts, with moderate persuasion, and disswasion, and to have all controversies
tried upon the touchstone of Gods truth; Come and hear us, and tell me
wherein you are not satisfied. If it be a blessing to have sociable
conversation, and yet with convenable respect, to continue the freedom of
neighbourly meetings, exempted from the intolerable yoke of jelousie, to love
one another with those comfortable conditions of charity, to feast without
scandal, to entertain without repining, and to be merry without
incontinencie, examine the conditions of us all generally, and setting men's
imperfections aside, which follow life, as the shadow does the Sun, and tell
me, where is offense? If it be a blessing to make the best use of Natures
blessings, to be rather helpful, than stand in need of others, to take and
leave war with all Kingdoms of the World, to have confining Princes
congratulate us by Embassage, and to welcome all comers with a noble and
correspondent invitation; take up our example, put us to the trial, and see
whether I speak vaine-gloriously. To conclude with the best of all blessings,
if it be a blessing to live under a Royal Monarch, to rejoice in the kindred,
alliance, and strong confederacy of Kings; to have adjoining Countries study
our observation, and to see our Country and people flourish in all good things;
Look upon us, pencell out our defects, (if you can) and let not emulation,
which attends on virtuous desires, be turned into envy, or so corrupted with
malice, that you will not yet confess our blessed prerogatives.

But you will say for all this, we neither fetch gold from Oph^r, nor are our
Cities of sufficiency to march in the first rank of magnificence. To the
first I answer directly, we may if we list, either fetch treasure where it is,
or be the cause that it shall be brought us, even to our own doors in peace.
For I am sure we have not only Ships and Men, but such hands and spirits, as
with David's Worthies can pull the spear out of the hands of the Philistines,
and sweetness from the strong^ and who shall hinder us? I hope neither Spain,
if there were occasions, not the Galleys of Messina or Malta; nor the
Confederate Princes of Italy, nor the Navy of Turkey, nor the fortifications
of China, nor any one worldly Prince, unless our sins and profanation cause
the Angel of the Lord to keep us back, or strike us with terror: But happy
be the conditions of true worthiness: true valor, even for conscience and
honors sake, will do no wrong.

As for our buildings, and Cities, I answer, Ars non habet mi^^cum
^s^^gnorantem, and men are too prejudicate, that either say or think so. For
of my own knowledge, there are not so many beautiful Churches, and stately
houses, within the circular dimension of so much ground in the world: so that
if our Gentlemen admitting the custom of living in Cities, as they do in most
parts of Europe, could range all the edifices of eminence in a Shire, within a
wall; or that we were sited in a Continent like the thorow-fare of France,
Germany, or Italy; we should questionless have more glorious, great and
populous Cities, than any Kingdom: which with Ahasuerosh can hold up a Scepter
of potency, to keep Majesty from violence, though a decree of defiance were
published never so terribly: yea I will avow, that our Towns and Villages,
(esteem of them as you please,) considering the use and necessity of travel,
do far surmount the Hosteries and entertainment of all other nations: And am
sure, if you will let loose the Queen of Cities, as they term Paris, to look
big and angerly upon us, our London can affront her with a matching
countenance, and over-match her in many several excellencies.

And surely, The disposition of Malcontents abroad.
if any man should materially object against these my assertions, I should
deem him either some young humorist, some petulant factor, discontented
traveller, or headstrong Papist: of which profession, I misdoubt not, but to
find many amongst men, who being either distressed at home, or unsettled
abroad, to their private ends will not blush with the King of Assyria, to laugh
at the weakness of Judah, for being confident in the promises of God, will
rail on religion, condemn government, extol petty Princes, and with Naaman
the Syrian, prefer the waters of Babylon, before the wholesome River of
Jordan. But come to particulars, they stick in the clay, and like an unbroken
colt, fl^^ging up and down, and sweating with rage, and neither able to go
forward in a handsome course, nor remain patient in expecting the will of the
Rider: Or, open them but one window, to let in but the light of our glory, by
discoursing of our Navy, the general musters of the Country, the arming of
every Gentleman's house, a Noblemans attendance, a Ladies jewels; the Majesty
of our Universities, the happiness of our Husbandman, the wealth of our great
Cities, and order in the administration of the same^ Then stand they with Niobe
transhaped into stone, and remain confounded, by reason of their former
perverse and ignorant wilfulness. But I will not be uncivil in exprobration,
only let me tell them, that because in beastly Galata and Constantinople, the
Merchant may go into diverse Bashawes and Greekish houses, and there by
entertainment transported with outward deceit of colors (as painting, gilding,
in-laid works, and such like) he makes a wonder at the cost and pompous
expenses; not remembering how their best masters in England, are scarce admitted
up stairs into many worthy houses of our Noblemen and Gentlemen, which being
admitted, would afford other manner of discoveries, both magnificent and
wealthy, even to true admiration. Because in Venice they have overlooked the
Bucentaure, S. Marks Palace, and Piazza (a dainty front of buildings on the
grand Canale) the College of Jesuits, a Mercer or two that sells Copes and
rich clothes of gold for high Altars, the fundamento novo, the Arsnall, etc.
Therefore England has but poor furniture, wants the essential means of
Princelinesse and Majesty, is only gawdie in colors, a little imbroidery,
and gold lace, which they allow to Players and Mountebanks, both in Venice,
Florence, Verona, and the rest of her Cities.

Because in Genoa, Naples, Rome, and some other places, they may see an even
street of houses, with a pillar or two of jet, jasper, and hard marble; a
Cardinals Palace, and six moils in a Carosse, to attend him but to the
conclave: a stately Mosque in Turkey, the Domo in Florence, new Saint Peter's at
Rome, and some other ostentous buildings, they say our beauty is eclipsed, and
we must submit the controversy to the apparent bravery of foreign
magnificence: whereas in truth they hold no more comparison for Majesty,
(though dispersedly) either with our Courts, late Country buildings, demesnes
adjacent, and commodious houses about the City for receipt, capacity, and
entertainment, than bird-cages do to delightsome Arbours.

But who are they that so entertain Tables with this return of discourse?
surely none but our fashion-follow-Travellers, who with many long looks,
expecting in an Almanacke for a year of Iubile, fly over Sea by flocks
toward Rome. Where by the way, in Ausburg, Noremberg, and some other Cities of
Germany, meeting with a flaggon of wine, wherewith the Burgers (according to
custom) with such entertainment use to welcome strangers, they presently write
over, with what state they were feasted, and how graciously admitted into
Cities resembling new Jerusalem, in respect of our disproportion of building,
and unequal fashion of our streets.

Because in France they may drink wine of Orleance, or Lions, and for their
money satisfy incontinencie, (wherein yet they confess Italy to surpass) Oh!
say they, England is a barren Country, and far from becircling her forehead
with the garland of Bacchus, or wreath of Abundance, but sits desolate like
a widow, having the curse of baldness inflicted upon her.

Because in Padoa they are told of Antenors Tomb in the streets, seen the
Amphitheatres in Verona or Rome, (monuments truly resembling the wrinkles of an
old face) or beheld the walls of Constantinople, the ruinous Colosses of the
City, with the Aquaduct in the Country; Oh! these be Kingdoms that make aged
Time young again, and surpass our new Nation for wonders and works of
Majesty.

Because they have beheld, though peradventure with little understanding, the
forts of Mount-m^lian, and Saint Katherines; the citadels of Millan and
Antuerp; the Castles of Naples and Saint Angelo; and have been acquainted with
the examination of passengers at Lions, Millan, and the frontier Towns of the
Princes of Italy; They presently exclaim against our weakness, and
ill-advised discipline, which leaves our Country (as it were naked) to all
inconveniences of wind and weather.

In the next rank, come up our malcontents, and they are such as being
merely gulled with pride, self-conceit, and fantastic vainglory, have run
a prodigal hunting-journey with Esau, until being weary and hungry, they have
been enforced to sell their birthrights for a mess of pottage. Then with
York and Stanly, and thousands more, they enter into violent courses, curse
David, rail on their Country, and accuse Authority of injustice and
partiality: With the Dukes of Guise and B^ron, they set up the praises of the
Spanish King, and the tender-heartednesse of the Pope for the decay of
Religion, supposing themselves sufficiently magnified for contesting with
Kings, and sleighting the Princes of the blood.

In the rear, slily steals up the obstinate Papist: To him urge honesty,
reason, yea the Scriptures, and he will discharge no other shot, but the
Ordinance of the Church. Put him from that slanker, and you shall see him like
an Adder lurking in the grass, to sting the heel of the passenger; And that
is with telling you, that in France the Church at Amiens has delicate
Pictures; the nostre Dame at Roan and Paris maintain brave processions; Our
Lady at Sichem works only miracles; yea, more than miracles: for they will tell
you of a Virgin got with child in a Nunnerie by one of her sisters: For (say
they) she protested before our Lady, that she never knew what the company of
man meant.

But leaving these men to themselves, and the sting of their own consciences,
we will proceed to show you with what affections other Nations do at this day
Court us.

France is so strengthened and beautified at home, What other Nations conceive
of us.
by the multitude of Princes and noble Gentlemen, that now (at this day
enjoying the Kingdom entirely to themselves) they are confident to defend it,
not seeking ambitiously to offend others, though happily envying to see the
contraction of both Nations unto unity and obedience; fearing thereby lest we
should the rather be imboldned and encouraged to revive our old claims, or
else to erect our remembrances to search the records of our former fortunes.

Spain both knows us, Spain.
and has of late had some feeling of us, retaining the opinion of our wealth
and forces. By reason whereof, for that his dominions lie more open, by
dispersion into many numbers, he stands in doubt, that we may not only put
him to the double charge of a Navy; (the one abroad, for convoy of his
Treasure; and the other at home, for safety of his Harbors:) but also that we
may attempt the uncharitable visitation of his chiefest Towns, and richest
Ports. Therefore he will continue correspondencie amongst us, and corroborate
his friendship whatsoever it cost. Of which mind is also the Archduke, though
covertly repining a little more against us; as knowing that our affection to
the Hollanders has somewhat crossed his first resolutions, and indeed abated
his absolute hopes of binding the seventeene Provinces together in one sheafe.

The Emperor and Germans, The Emperor.
or if you please the Imperials, have a reasonable good opinion of us, as
worthy Seamen and resolute Soldiers, especially upon hope of glory or
purchase: Yet think they us factious, unconstant, the Apes of the World, and
wonder at our patience, especially to see us endure the imposturing deceits of
the Catholic pretenses.

The Pole and Moscovite are so far off, The Pole and Moscovite.
that they can give us small occasion of offense, and are both afraid of our
intrusion amongst them, or against them, as somewhat fearful of our desperate
wanderers. And being well acquainted with our state at home, cannot endure we
should be sharers abroad.

The Grand-Seignior never names us with dignifying titles, as being proud in
himself, The Turk.
and we too remote from him. He supposes us only fit for merchandise, and
that our Island is a barren place, as sequestered from the pleasures and opulent
commodities of the South and East Countries. Neither does he stammer in his
comparison of twenty Bashawes within his conquests, whose several commands and
jurisdictions lift up such Crowns of principalities, as surmount us in number
of people, and expense of Treasure.

The States of Italy, Italy.
(birds of a feather) most upon envy of Trade, and generally all, in despite
of Religion, are thus induced. The Duke of Savoy, and Gran-Prior of Malta, (the
first in midst of troublesome mountains, the other of a turbulent Sea) are as
careless of us, as we of them, yea, many times wreake their hatred where they
may, viz. upon our Merchants; whom they spare not, if they can overmaster,
either fraighted with Turkish goods, or supplying their wants with prohibited
wares. To whom in such businesses the Florentine is not only presidiarie, but
picketh other quarrels upon collateral employments.

In the Duchy of Millan, Millan.
the Governor is very politic and severe, in searching after books and
uncustomed wares, though it tend but to a pair of stockings: from whence arise
so many inconveniences, that the office of Dacii is grown odious, and subject
to the abusive conditions of very base companions. As for falling into the
snare of the Inquisition, it is a danger irrecoverable, as those our
Countrymen can witness, who of late years were in sudden danger, both here,
at Rome, and at Florence, for having Friar Paul's books about them (though
printed at Venice) against the Popes temporal jurisdiction. The trust of some
friends, and the help of a dark night, were their best securities.

Besides, he entertained Tyrone, and all his attendants, though not with such
sufficiency as the expectation of such a guest deserved, yet with malice
enough against us notwithstanding: he is a dogged examiner of the English, not
trusting our fugitives, though allowing their unnatural defections; railing
upon them (even the Kings Pensioners) as the Prince of Parma long since taught
him, in the tumultuarie business of the Low Countries.

Mantua.
The Duke of Mantua and Modena (as less interessed in affairs of Sea, or
passages by Land) and now allied with Savoy, think not of us, either as
friends, or enemies; but questionless willing to assist their own allies, as
occasions may offer themselves.

The Venetians seem to hold good correspondencie, Venice.
if not outward: for in terms, they have not spared to exprobrate us with the
nickname of Cursore Englese, since Ward and other English Pirates have so much,
indammaged them. In diverse shipwracks about Candie, they have sometimes dealt
very unkindly with our Merchants.

And in the late business at Constantinople (about precedencie between
England and France) the Bayliffe was my L. Ambassadors absolute enemy: yea,
and in their last peace with the Pope, although they would pretend to stand on
our help, and to entertain our Captains, yet proves it a matter of
difficulty and dispute amongst them.

The Florentine, or great Duke, is a mere hater of us, except it be to serve
his own turn, The Florentine.
and has ever been forward to entertain factious persons amongst us.

In the latter end of her Majesty's reign, you shall find him a mere
neglecter of us, nothing respecting how the Queen was distasted, or the State
disturbed. Afterward he succored diverse Rebels, and discontented English. When
the Merchant Royal was sunk in the harbor of Ligorne, he was so transported
with passion, that he would have laid an imposition upon the English, for the
waying of her up. And presently he employed Sir R. D. about the new building of
a Man of War, a ship of 600 Tunns: but disappointed him in the command,
making him an apparent subject of disgrace and discontent; yea, although at
first he had welcomed him with the offensive title of Earl of Warwick. And
many times, by pretext of confederacy with the Galleys of Malta, the Popes,
and his own imperious prerogative, he affronteth our Merchants, and impeacheth
their trades, as far forth as he may.

The Pope is our irreconcilable enemy both ways; The Pope.
I mean in animating turbulent and traitorous Papists within our own bosoms,
teaching them, with the Viper to devoute their own mother; And in exciting of
foreign Princes, as much as in him lies) to violent courses of open hostility
against us, as against all others professing the same Religion. As for
entertaining of fugitives, enticing over of young wits, and unstayed students,
gracing of Jesuits, advancing of Traitors, searching and imprisoning of
Traveller^, railing at our King, and traducing Henry the eighth, and Queen
Elizabeth: these absurdities are not only frequent and familiar in all places
amongst his partisans, but every day blundered out of Pulpits by the Friars and
Jesuits.

Naples and Sicil, N^ples, Sicil.
though under the King of Spaines protection and Viceroyes, yet are all
conspiring against us, and run one race with their neighbors. Witness the
taking of our ships, and the ill usage of our Merchants, when Master Wali was
Consul: with the reviling of our Religion, and their usual imprecations: One
day to see a smoke of througing discontentments, turn to a flame of furious
disconsolation amongst us.

Neither is this the full scope of their continued envies: Religion is the
pretense, but malice and private respects procure these bad effects: Saevit
post funera virus. At Venice the English have no burial allowed them, but the
Sea: neither at Zante are they better used, but feign to be carried up into
Morea amongst the Turks. At Lygorne, and other places of Italy, an Englishman
dying without confession, is thrown into some ditch, to be devoured of beasts
and birds: And in Spain he is interred in the strond, the field, or a Garden.
How far more charitable was Alexander to Darius, Hannibal to Marcellus,
Caesar to Pompey, Turks to Christians, and Man to Man, if not a Romanist?

But now (leaving these premonitions to your better considerations) as I have
made you acquainted with those blessings, which in truth do make a Kingdom
really happy; So again for the strength of situation, I hope to make you as
perfect beholders of the two properties which Aristotle wished (above all
projects what ever) to be regarded in the building of a City. The one is, that
it be difficult to besiege; the other, that it be easy for conveying in, and
transporting out of things necessary. The situation of England.
These two commodities has England by the Sea, which to the Inhabitants is a
deep trench against all hostile invasions, and an easy passage to take in, and
send out all commodities whatsoever, being situated in the bosom of the maine
Ocean, which even by natural courses fortifieth the Island, more than any Sea
does any other Kingdom. For, on the West lies the Irish Ocean, a Sea so
turbulent, and so full of rocks and flats, that it is very dangerous for great
Ships; and on the East, South, and North, the flowing and ebbing of the
British Ocean, is so accidental, the removing of the sands and shelves so
uncertain, and the rising and falling of the water between twelve and
fifteen fathom (a thing wonderful to be spoken of) so ordinary every twelve
hours, that without an English Pilot, no stranger shall be able to bring in a
vessel in safety: And he likewise must bring his Tide justly with him, or
otherwise it is impossible to land without peril. The Sea coast on every side
is cliffie and inaccessible, except in some certain places which are strongly
fortified, as Barwicke, Dover, Dartmouth, Plimmouth, Portsmouth, etc. so that
the whole Island may well be reputed for one impregnable fortress.

To this strength of situation, Forces.
sithence of late a worthy Gentleman (and that truly) has not doubted to
aver, that ten such Merchants ships well provided of munition and men, as in
these days trade into the East Indies, would not much fear the Navy royal of
some Kings in Christendom; why should we fear to rejoice in the flourishing
estate of that Kingdom, in whose Havens (besides the Navy Royal) two
thousand vessels are reported to traffike yearly?

And be it as it may, to prove what we speak, and to pass over the much
famoused passages of Edward the third to Callis, and Henry the eighth to
Bulloigne; we will fly no further for examples, than the fourth year of
Queen Elizabeth, when in her journey to New Haven, the Navy lately neglected,
was now again so well furnished, as both the Spaniard and Frenchman envied her
Abilities.

But 88. was the year which gave both terror and admiration unto all our
neighbors. A year, by the Germans foretold, to be the worlds climactericall,
and by Regiomontanus, Admirable. And so indeed it proved; full of rumors,
anxieties, and menaces. The King of Spain having of late days added unto his
Seigniories of Spain, the kingdom of Portugal, and boiling in revenge against
this kingdom, suggesting unto his imaginations, that if his destinies would
vouchsafe as facile a victory against England, as elsewhere upon like
suppositions they had bestowed upon him at the Terceras and Portugal; then,
even then at once had the life of the Low Countries lien a bleeding, his
navigation to the Indies warranted, and his hopes finished. To the
accomplishment whereof he presses, forces, hireth, and borrows from sundry
Nations, the strongest vessels, and therein imployeth his utmost means to have
tamed the English, and confounded the Netherlands.

But that ever memorable Lady, wary and provident, summoneth her subjects,
relieth on their loves, and to the Westward opposes a Navy consisting of 100.
sail, there to wait the approach of this Invincible Armada: And because from
Flanders the Duke of Parma threatened no less danger, upon that coast also she
laid twenty other good ships to attend his attempts, besides those of the
Low Countries.

From the West the enemy was discerned, and fight with present courage
entertained, but precisely ordered, that none of the English ships should
voluntarily (if otherwise it might be avoided) lay any Spaniard aboard, but
always fight at best advantage; endeavoring by all means to keep into the
weather; whereby at all times soundly to have interrupted them, if they had
offered to land; So to leave and take as occasions presented; they coming to
invade, and the English ends being only to keep them from landing. The which
directions were so punctually observed, as that this invincible fleet for all
their force and appearance, without either gaining or sinking one of our
vessels, was feign to fly away by the back door, I mean by the North Seas;
wherein they found a miserable and tedious flight, lost an hundred and odd of
their best ships, and in recompense, never got so much as one dishfull of fresh
water, not ever landed one man (prisoners except) upon the English coast.

Whereat, neither let the Papist mutter, nor the ignorant detract by saying,
That is was the only stormy winds, and tempestuous Seas, that afflicted our
enemies, and drove them from our coast. These excuses argue bad spirits; for it
could not be avoided, but that the English ships should also be engaged to
like violent accidents of wind and waves, as were the Spaniards. The English
had no determination to leave them, no, not to look into any of their own
ports, or those of their friends for succor. And surely, foul weather, and
high grown Seas did more hinder us than them. For then could not we carry out
our lower ports, being our best tyres; which the Spaniards might do, their
ordnance lying nothing so near the water as the English did. Notwithstanding
we always affronted them, and galled them with our great ordnance, as our best
opportunities served; our ships being more proper for these Seas, than their
huge Lee-ward Carts. Always in spite of their hearts we kept into the weather
of them, to our great advantage; which in truth was no small means of victory,
and of their disgrace, that made so great preparations to so small purpose.

If they longed to be fought withal, and were not; why did they never offer to
dispatch the business, whereabout they made the world believe they came so
resolutely determined? why did they not make a trial for landing, or adventure
the surprisall of some famous port, for want whereof in former ages Xerxes
suffered that terrible defeature at Thermipola? Before this was done, why ran
they away? of what were they so fearful, who came like soldiers and resolute
men, under the title of assurance, to conquer such a Nation? Did the terror of
a storm only drive them from hence in such haste? were they not resolved to
endure such weather (as should happen) in so great an enterprise? Did they
think to win England with big looks, or to have tamed the people by
tricks and dalliance, as they had done the surly Portugues and fine Italians
their neighbors? Surely, it seemed the Southern winds had only inflated their
minds, as it is reported, it does their mares in the Asturies.

Where, let us leave them, and wish that some of those Worthies who yet live,
and were eyewitnesses of those great and fortunate expeditions, undertaken and
effected, within the 44. years space of Her Royal government, would take the
pains to commit the Relation thereof to everlasting record. Which done, I make
no doubt, but that it would appear beyond all objection; That although the
English Nation had long breathed under the mild aspect of so gracious a Lady,
yet (...) it no less exercised in military discipline abroad, than in
peaceable pleasures at home. Yea, that the politic Regiment, and heroical
actions of a maiden Queen, have hardly since the conquest been exceeded by any
her Majesty's most famous progenitors. For be it either in the wise
reformation, or wonderful reestablishment of Christian Religion (wherein she
showed no less constancy, than true sincerity:) or otherwise, in continual
comfort, or liberal assistance of her distressed neighbors and allies,
(whereof she had a royal and Christian-like regard) or else in resolute
repelling, and fortunate invading her most mighty enemies, wherein she was
always blessed from above with happy and victorious success, her enterprises
evermore were crowned with happiness; and in regard thereof (throughout all
nations) her Counselors were reputed grave and prudent, the Realm flourishing
and powerful, and herself magnanimous and renowned; the fruits whereof, I
doubt not, but we enjoy at this day.

The force at land is nothing inferior to that at Sea; At land.
for the kingdom is divided into 52 Shires, in one only whereof (commonly
called Yorkshire) it is thought seventy thousand footmen may be levied. Every
shire has a Lieutenant, who sees to the election and training of soldiers
when necessity requires. In choosing of soldiers, they take the names of all
the inhabitants: In the Country, from above sixteen years of age to sixty;
and out of these they choose the likeliest and ablest for service. The taller
and stronger are chosen for footmen, and these divided into four kinds. The
first are Archers, by whose dexterity they conquered the greatest part of
France; took King John captive, and held Paris sixteen years in subjection.
The Arrows of the Parthians were never more dreadful to the Romans, than the
Bows of the English to Frenchmen. The second sort used brown Bills, well
headed with Iron, with which they would strike, and also pluck a man from his
horse. This was the ancient weapon of the Britons. The other two, use and
experience of latter times has taught them; the one is the Harquebuze, the
other the Pike, a fit weapon for their constitution, by reason of their tall,
strong, and man-like stature. For their service on Horseback, they choose men
of small stature, but well set, active, and nimble. These horsemen are of two
sorts; some heavy armed, and those for the most part are Gentlemen; other
lighter armed, and some riding after the manner of the Albannesses; some after
the fashion of Italy, using a Scull, a Jack, a Sword, and long light Spears.
And although they are able to bring to the field 2000. men at Arms, and
infinite troops of light Horsemen; yet their Horsemen never carried reputation
to their Footmen: For Edward the third, and Henry the fifth (which made so many
journeyes into France, and obtained so many famous victories) to show what
confidence they reposed in their Infantely, ever left their horse, and put
themselves into the battle of their footmen: whereas the French Kings not
daring to inure the Commons to warfare (left leaving their manual occupations
and trades, they should grow insolent in the wars, to which humor they are
greatly addicted) always put themselves and their hopes upon the fortune of
their Cavalry, being all almost Gentlemen. But, forasmuch as the French
maintain no good races of horse, and to purchase them from other places, is a
matter of great charge, and good cannot always be gotten for money; for these
reasons, and for that Horsemen are nothing so serviceable in the field as
footmen, I think the French have often been so defeated by the English.

To show what force the Kings of England are able to bring into the field, let
these examples stand for many. Henry the eighth passed to Bullvigne, with an
Army divided into three Battalions: In the Vantguard passed twelve thousand
footmen, and five hundred light-Horsemen, clothed in blew Iackets with red
guards. The middle ward (wherein the King was, and passed last over) consisted
of twenty thousand footmen, and two thousand horse, clothed with red Iackets
and yellow guards. In the rereward was the Duke of Norfolk, and with him an
Army like in number and apparel to the first; saving that therein served one
thousand Irishmen, all naked save their maneles, and their thick gathered
skirts: Their Arms were three Darts, a Sword, and a Skeane. They drew after
them one hundred great pieces, besides small: an Army by the censure of
Guicciardini, not more notable by the multitudes of soldiers, and
consideration of their valor, than most glorious by the presence and Majesty
of their King, in whose person appeared at that instant, being in an age
disposed and active, all those tokens of honor and magnanimity, which rising
after to their full ripeness and perfection, by degrees of time, study, and
experience, made him the most renowned and mighty Prince that lived in his age,
in all this part or circuit of the earth, which we call Christendom. Their
carriages were so many, that therewith they entrenched their Camp like a wall.
And for the conveyance of their Ordnance, their baggage, and their provision,
they transported into the Continent, above five and twenty thousand horse,
beside all other kind of cattle.

In the aforesaid year of 88. after that Queen Elizabeth had provided fully
and sufficiently to prevent her enemies at Sea, then ceased she not to be as
careful at Land, over her own and her peoples safeties. And therefore to be
ready against any sinister accident, which it might have pleased the Almighty
to have given her at Sea: at land she appointed five and twenty thousand
soldiers to attend the enemy all along the Southern coast. At Tilbury lay the
Earl of Leicester, with one thousand horse, and two and twenty thousand foot,
there to have entertained the enemy, if he had kept his resolution; which was
by the Thames mouth to have assailed London upon the sudden. For the guard of
Her person (under the command of the Lord Hunsdon) she levied out of the Inland
shires, fioure and thirty thousand footmen, and two thousand horse, besides
those goodly troops which the Nobility and Gentry presented unto her Majesty's
view, to their mere love and zeal to Prince and Country.

For neighborhood in France, Neighborhood.
it may be supposed that the Princes of the reformed Religion will be always
glad to find good correspondency from those, France.
who are interessed in like disadvantages as themselves. What may be done by
the persuasions of the pestiferous Jesuits, God only knows. But this is
certain, that between nations engaged in ancient quarrels, and both aspiring
to one and the same greatness, Alliances may easily be made, friendship never.
At worst, the Frenchman is a tolerable friend, though a doubtful neighbor.
Francum amicum habe, sed non vicinum. The like says He, for us.

As for the Spaniard, it is a proverb of his own, The Spanish.
That the Lion is not so fierce, as in printed. His forces in all parts of the
world (except those in the Low Countries) are far under fame. And if the late
Queen would have believed her men of war, as she did some others addicted to
peaceful courses, she might peradventure have broken that great Empire in
pieces, and made their Kings as in old times, Kings only of homebred
commodities. Well was it for them, that her Majesty (always inclinable to
peace) did all by the halfes, and petty invasions, which indeed was her only
error; for future to teach the Spaniard how to defend himself, and to see his
own weakness; which till her attempts had taught him, was hardly known to
himself; four thousand men would have made a shrewd adventure to have taken
his Indies from him; I mean, all the ports by which his treasure passes:
wherein he is more hated by the natives, than the English are by the Irish. And
then, what shall his Low-countrie Armies do, if the Indies pay them not?
nothing but mutiny, and spoil their own territories as they have often done,
and that of late years, almost to the ruin of the Archduke.

So again, in 88. if that Queen would have hearkened to hazard, yet not
without reason, we had burnt all his ships and preparations in his own ports,
as we did afterward upon the same grounds and intelligence in Cadiz. He that
knows him not fears him, but excepting his Low-countrie army (as aforesaid)
which has continued in discipline since Charles the fifth his time, he is no
where strong, they are but follies that are spoken of him elsewhere: He
knows that we are too strong for him at Sea, and have the Hollanders to
help, The Netherlands.
who are now by their industries in way to be strongest of all. They are a wise
people, and took it somewhat in ill part, that we made peace without them;
which in truth forced them to conclude their long truce: They were the last
that put down arms, and though they compounded upon the greatest
disadvantage, ( France and England having first capitulated) yet they made a
far more noble peace than their associates did. Since that time (we find)
the people to be more provident, and by degrees less respective of their
neighbors. All histories will tell you, it is a point worth the looking unto.
For unto whom they fasten themselves, he that enjoys them will be the
greatest, and give law to the rest. If any man doubt it, he knows not much,
all nations have their imperfections, and so have we; faults have at all times
troubled the eye of understanding. For whereas in her Majesty's time, it is
well known, that one of her ships has commanded forty of theirs to strike
sail, they will now undertake us one to one, and, but for the jealousies of
time, scant vouchsafe us a good word. But Kings are not like private men, they
forsake not one another in adversity; though not always for their sakes who
are oppressed, but for their own securities, because they watch (and reason
good) the surmounting power of confining neighborhood.

These are the greatest States to be looked after: The Archduke.
As for the Archdukes, these united Provinces for their particular interests,
will well enough attend him.

Let us no more therefore be frighted with the Spaniards greatness, the
Venetians wealth and Arsenall, the confederacy of Florence, Malta, Genoa, the
Pope, Naples, and Sicil; yea, worst of all, with report of the Mahumetan
invincible fleet. Let none save fools admire wonders without knowledge. Why,
Ward and the rest of the Pirates, who at their first coming into the Seas,
might easily have been choked, from becoming a terror to all the Levant, let
wise men judge: for my part, I can give no other guess, but the president of
that admirable fight, which Captain John King (when he was Master of the
Merchant Royal) made against three great ships and fifteen galleys, laid
purposely in wait in the mouth of the Straits, to intercept all English
passengers. And surely some Seamen have been of opinion, with twenty good men
of war, in contempt of the proudest Armada, or fry of Galleys (as they have
termed them) that those Seas can afford, to perform actions beyond credit.

Neither let fugitives flatter themselves with conceits of foreign greatness.
No people were more beholding to Tyrone and Terconnel than the Spanish, in
their miserable shipwreck upon the Irish coast. No men received larger
promises; The great King should remember his humanity and noble respect: The
Pope himself shall gratify him with a Phoenix plume, as he did King John with
a crown of Peacocks feathers, yea, they can complement with him, that he is
more worthy of a Diadem, than a subjects prostitution. But is Tyrone in
distress, and after shipwreck of his loyalty, driven to make trial of his
Spanish and Romish requital? At Millan he is like to lie without doors, if
his stomach cannot brook the entertainment of a common Inn; and at Rome be
welcomed with the allowance of a subject of charity.

As for defamations breathed from the poison of malice, I make no question, but
by the generous disposition of noble Governors, they will return to the
disgrace of the brocheri. As it fell out to Captain R. York, by the
worthiness of an honorable enemy Count Mansfield: who hearing this traitorous
Captain to transgress the bounds of patience, in undecent railing upon the
government of England, and the life of the late Queen: Sir Rowland (quoth he)
in plain terms I assure you, that the custom of my table will allow of no
such irregular behavior.

Thus have I showed you the love of some, and the malice of others abroad, with
our own happiness at home, if we can be thankful for it. Amongst the which,
as last, but not least, I account the continued tranquillity of England,
especially to consist in the moderate, yet honorable respect of our Nobility;
wherein though they possess few Castles or strong places, environed with
rampires and ditches; neither that the Titles of Dukes, Marquesses, or Earls,
are more than titular, as bestowed (upon desert) at the pleasure of the Prince;
yet have they the government of Provinces, with subordinate authority over the
people, to the great quiet of the State, and the prosperity of the kingdom:
where, on the contrary, the Nobility in France, possessing some absolute, and
some mixed jurisdiction, with hereditary titles, etc. being Lords not only of
Towns, but of great and goodly Cities also, and receiving homage and fealty
of their tenants, do (as we have often seen) but badly and at pleasure
acknowledge the soveraigntie of the King, and the Arrest of the Parliaments.

SCotland, Scotland.
another portion of Britain, in times past began at the Mountain Grampius,
and from thence to its utmost border was extended Northward: But in future
times, by the extinguishment of the Picts, it reached also unto Tweed, and
sometimes also to Twine: the chance of war so moderating in these
counterchanges, as in all other worldly occurrences. Whereupon its longitude
from Tweed unto the utmost limit, is thought to be four hundred and fourscore
miles. But, as this Province is longer than England, so is it narrow, for that
it ends like unto a wedge. For the unshapeable and rough Mountain Grampius
(whereof even Tacitus in the life of Agricol^ made mention) runs through the
very heart thereof, even from the German shore (that is, from the mouth of the
River Dee) unto the Irish coast, and unto that Lake which the Inhabitants call
Lomund, which lies between that country and the said mountain.

The Kingdom has every where safe harbors, creekes, lakes, marshes, rivers
and fountains replenished with fish: As also mountains, and in tops thereof
large plains, yielding abundance of grazing to cattle, and woods wonderfully
abounding with venerie. By the advantages of which place, the people being
sustained, could never be fully conquered; for every Province, Woods and
Marshes, were ready refuges to their safeties; and wild beasts, and plenty
of cattle, remedies against famine for their bodies.

Those who inhabit the Southern part, as by much the best, so are they the
better qualified, the civillest, and speak the English language. And sithence
that Nature has denied them plenty of fuel, their firing is of a black
stone, which they dig out of the earth. Pit coal, or Sea-coale.
The people who dwell in the Northern and Mountainous parts, are a very savage
and uncivil kind of men, and termed Silvestres, viz. Highland-men. These
after the Irish fashion were accustomed to be clothed with a mantle, and a
shirt colored with Saffron, and to go bare legged as high as their knees.
Their weapons are Bow and Arrows, with a very broad Sword and Dagger, sharp
but on one edge. They all speak Irish, and feed upon fish, milk, cheese, and
flesh, and have great store of cattle.

They differ from the English both in Laws and Customs; for the one retains
the Civil Law, as almost do all other Nations: but the English have their
peculiar or Municipall Laws. In other things they differ not much. Their
Language (as aforesaid) is one and the same, the same constitution of body,
equal courage in battle, and semblable addiction unto hunting, even from
their Childhoods.

Their houses in the Villages are very small, and covered with straw or reed;
wherein as well their cattle as themselves, in manner of stables, do reside.
Their towns (except that of S. John's) are environed with no walls; so that it
should seem, that their courageous minds do repose the safety of their lives
in the only virtue of their bodies. They are also ingenious, which their
learning manifests, so that unto what Art soever they do addict their
capacities, they easily profit therein. And those also who meditate nothing but
sloth, ease, and laziness, (though by refusal to take any pains, they live
most basely and beggarly) yet will they not let to boast of their Gentry, and
that so presumptuously, as if it were more commendable for a man well descended
to beg, than to betake himself to any ingenious profession, for the
sustentation of his carkase. But withal they are accounted naturally to be
very zealous in Religion.

About Scotland, in the Irish Ocean, are more than forty Islands, by Pliny
termed Britaniae, but by others Meraniae, and Herbrides. The biggest of these
in length exceeds not thirty miles; in breadth, not above twelve. Amongst them
is Iona, famous for the ancient sepulture of the Scottish Kings. All the
Inhabitants speak the Irish tongue: a pregnant argument that they are
descended from the Irishry.

Beyond Scotland Northwards lie the Orcades, in number (says Ptolomy) thirty,
being partly seated in the Deucalidon Ocean, and partly in the German. The
chief whereof is called Pamonia, and therein is an Episcopal Sea, being
subject unto the King of Great Britain. The Islanders speak the Gotish
tongue; a record, that they are descended from the Germans. Of stature they are
all, of a sound constitution; whereby it comes to pass, that for the greater
part they are long-lived, although most commonly they live upon fish. The soil
is in a manner always covered with snow: in many places it will scarce bear
grain, but of trees almost none.

Beyond the Orcades heth Thule, from whence but one days sail (says Pliny)
is the Frozen Sea, and therein Island, whereunto at this day, our Merchants do
make an annual trading, to fish themselves, or to buy fish of others. Which
for that it is nearest unto the Pole, some do judge to be Thule. And this is
all that I have to say concerning the situation of Scotland: now will I turn
my pen to the nature and fashions of the Inhabitants.

WAles is accounted the third portion of the Island; Wales.
In regard of the heart of England, it lies upon the left hand, and in manner
of a Peninsula stretches into the Ocean, on all sides incircled with the Sea,
save toward the East, where it is bounded with the Severne, the separatresse
of Wales and England; although many late Writers, (as abovesaid) make the City
of Hereford the bounder thereof; and will have Wales to begin at Chepstow,
where the River Wy being united with Lugge, and passing by Hereford, falls
into the Sea. This River (as Severne) arises from an Inland part of Wales,
from one and the selfsame Mountain, but whether from one and the selfsame
Fountain, I am not able to show; and it Cornelius Tacitus (as aforesaid)
terms Antona. For even thither reaches a huge arm of the Sea, which cutting
in between the Land by the West, watreth Cornwall on the right hand, and Wales
on the left. This Topography we follow, as the Modern, and therefore say, that
Wales from Chepstow (where it takes beginning) is extended Northward a little
above Shrewsbury, as ^arre as Chester. Hither it was (as Memory records) that
the relics of those Brittons, who over-lived the general slaughter after the
loss of their Country, in their utmost extremities retired themselves; and
there, partly by the strength of the Mountains, and partly by the fastness of
the Woods and Bogs, (where with that Province was for the most part
replenished,) they purchased unto themselves places of safety, which unto this
day they have made good, and retain. Thence-forth the English styled the
Country Wales, and the Inhabitants Welshmen, which denomination in the German
language, signifies a Stranger, an Alien, a Guest, or a New-come person, that
is to say, one that speaks a different language from that of the German; for
in their understanding, Walsh signifies a Forrainer, or Stranger, whether it
be Italian or Frenchman, if he differ in language from the German; and Man is
as Homo, in Latin. The Angles therefore being a people of Germany, becoming
Lords of Brittanie, after their Country manner, termed those Brittons who
escaped the ruin of their Country, Wallons, or Welshmen; for that they spoke a
language contrary to that of their own; and also the Soil, whither they fled
to inhabit, Wallia; which Name the Nation as well as the people, retain unto
this day. And so the Brittons lost their name, together with their Empire.

The soil of the Country, especially of that which adjoyneth unto the Sea, or
consists of Champian, is most fertile, which both to Man and Beast supplieth
great store of provision: but contrariwise, for the Major part it is barren,
and less fruitful, and (peradventure) for that good husbandry is wanting,
which is the cause that the Husbandmen live hardly, eat Oaten-bread, and drink
Milk, sometime mingled with water. In it are many fine Towns, with fortified
Castles, and four Bishoprics; if Hereford be accounted in England (as
aforesaid) according to the Modern description.

The people have also a different language from the English, which they (who
boast to derive their pedigree from the Trojan Line) do affirm to participate
partly of the Trojan antiquity, and partly of the Grecian. Verily, however the
case stands, their pronuntiation is not so sweet and fluent, as is the
pronuntiation of the English; for that the Welsh in my opinion, do speak more
near the throat; whereas on the contrary, the English truly imitating the
Latins, do pronounce their words a little between their lips, which to the
Auditor yields a pleasing sound. Thus much of Wales, the third portion of
Brittany.

THe fourth and last part follows, and that is Cornwall. This Province
takes its beginning upon that part of the Island which looks toward Spain,
and the setting of the Sun. To the Eastward it stretches ninety miles, even
a little beyond Saint Germains, a fine Village, and seated toward the right
hand upon the Seashore; where its greatest breadth is but twenty miles over.
For this portion of ground upon the right side is incircled with the Ocean;
upon the left, with that inlet of Sea, which (as before we told you) pierces
into the Land as far as Chepstow; where taking the similitude of a horn, it
runs along, first narrow, and afterward broader, a little beyond the Town
of Saint Germans. Eastward it bordereth upon England; upon the West, the
South, and the North, the maine Ocean incompasseth it. The Soil is very
barren, and yields profit rather by the toil of the Husbandman, than its
own good nature. But for Tin, it is admirable bountiful, in the Mines
whereof consists the better part of the Inhabitants happiness.

However the Language is greatly different from the English, but with the Welsh
it participateth with no small affinity: for either language has the
denomination of many things in common. The only difference is, that a Welshman
hearing a Cornishman speaking, rather understands some words, than his whole
speech: A thing worthy admiration, that in one and the same Island, there should
be so different a confusion of Languages.

Cornwall pertains unto Exeter Diocese, and in times past was thought
worthy to be accounted for a fourth part of the Island; partly for the
dissimilitude of the language, and partly for that it received the first
inhabitants (as aforesaid.) But afterward the Normans, who constituted a new
form of a Commonwealth, admitted Cornwall amongst the number of the Counties.

THe first are the Sorlings, and lie against the Cape of Cornwall. Islands
belonging to the Crown of Great Britain.
They are now termed Silly, and are few less than 145. covered with grass,
and enclosed with huge and massy rocks. They are fruitful enough for Corn,
but are used altogether to the feeding of Conies, Cranes, Swannes, and
Sea-Fowle. Some of them yield Tin, and the fairest thereof is called Saint
Mary's, being fortified with a Castle and Garrison. The residue of less fame,
for brevitie we will willingly omit.

In the Severne Sea lie Chaldey, and Londay: Londay is two miles long, and as
many broad; full of good pasture, and abounding with Conies and Doves, and
those Fowls which Alexander Necham terms Ganimed his birds. And though it be
wholly incircled with the Sea, yet it yields fresh water from the Mountains,
and opens but one only passage, where through two men can hardly pass afront,
the residue is enclosed with high and horrible overshuts of Rocks.

MOna or Anglesey is a famous Island separated from Wales by a small fret, the
ancient dwelling place of the Druides. It is two and twenty miles long, and
threescore broad. Camden and Gyraldus.
Although that in ancient times, this Island seemed barren and unpleasant, yet
in these days it has been so well husbanded, and become so fertile, that it
is styled the Mother of Wales. It is sufficiently stored with Cattle, it
yields the Grind-stone, and the Mineral earth whereof Allom and Vitriall are
confected. It once contained 363. Villages, and is at this day reasonable
populous. The Ilanders are wealthy and valiant, and altogether speak the Welsh
tongue.

MAn lies just between the Northern parts of Ireland and Britain: In
length it contains little less than thirty Italian miles, in breadth where it
is broadest, not above fifteen, and in some places hardly eight. In Bedas time
(says Camden) it contained three hundred families, but now it can show not
above seventeene parish Churches. It yields plentiful store of Flax and
Hemp, Tillage and Pasture, Wheat and Barley, but especially of Oats, whereof
for the most part the inhabitants feed. There are also droves of Rother beasts
to be seen, and flocks of sheep without number, but generally all sorts of
Cattle are less of growth than in England. In stead of Wood they use a
bituminous Cole, in digging whereof, sometimes they light upon trees buried in
the earth. The Inhabitants above all things hate theft and begging, being but
weak by nature. Those which inhabit the Southern parts, speak the Irish
tongue, those which dwell toward the North speak the Scottish.

THe Hebrides are four and forty in number, and lie upon the South of
Scotland: the Orcades are thirty, and extend toward the North. The Inhabitants
of the former speak Irish: the people of the latter, Gottish.

Wight is seated in the British Ocean: the Inhabitants (says Camden) are
warlike, the soil grateful to the Ploughman, and well replenished with
pastures. It has in it six and thirty Villages, Hamlets, and Castles: in
Beda's time twelve hundred families.

Iarsey, lying over against Constans, an ancient City of Normandy, contains
about thirty miles in circuit, and is environed with Rocks and dangerous
Shallowes. It is very fruitful in fruit and cattle, in plenty of fish, and by
reason of their many Orchards, abounding with that kind of wine which the
English call Sider. In stead of wood, which the Island wants, they make their
fuel of Sea-weed dried in the Sun, and growing so thick upon the Rocks,
that a far off a Seaman would judge them to be whole Acres of Copice. With
the ashes hereof they manure their grounds. It contains twelve Parishes.

Garnsey is twenty miles distant from I^rsey, somewhat less, and nothing so
fruitful. It nourishes no venomous creature, as does the former. It is better
fortified by nature: and from the tops of the broken Rocks (wherewith it is
incircled) do the Lapidaries and Glasiers fetch that most hard stone, where
with they cut their Jewels and Glass. The Haven likewise is more secure and
safe for shipping and Merchants, especially at the harbor of S. Peter, where
by ancient privileges of the Kings of England (says Camden) is continual
truce, be the war never so open and furious between the French and the
English. For in these times may the Merchants of either Nation resort without
wrong or danger. They want wood likewise, and therefore either use the foresaid
weed for fuel, or Sea-coles brought out of England.

France.
FRance has been much larger than now it is; as of old containing
Switzerland, Piedmont, and Lumbardy beyond the Alps; and on this side extending
to the banks of Rhine; yea, the Wallon Countries were then reckoned unto
France, and some others, which later Geographers have laid unto Germany. France
as now it is, is on the North bounded with Lou-Germany, a strait imaginary line
(in stead of a better bounder) being drawn from Calais all along beyond
Lorraigne within a league of Zaverne in Alsatia, three or four leagues short
of Strasburg: on the left and North side of which line, lie Flanders, the
Wallons of Hannow and Luxemburg: and on the right side, Picardy, part of
Champaigne and Lorraine: on the North-west it is washed with the British
Ocean; on the West with the Sea of Aquitaine: on the South it is thwarted by
the Pyrenean Mountains, which part it from Spain: being toward the East lickt
with the Mediterranean Sea. On the fu^l East do the Alps divide (...) from
Italy; being on this side trenched upon by that part of Germany which lies
between it and the Rhine, which was the old bounder of this kingdom: And this
is the accuratest limitation. It lies under the Northern temperate Zone,
within the 13. and 19. Parallels: The latitude beginning about the middle of
the fifth Climate, where the longest day is fifteen hours, and extending to
the middle of the eighth, where the longest day is sixteen hours and an
half. In longitude it takes up all those Meridians which are betwixt the
fifteenth and the nineteenth. There is no Country in the world better situate
than that of France; for it participateth of the Climate, both hot and cold. It
is in length, from Bologne to Marseilles, two hundred leagues, after the rate
of three English miles a league; and in breadth, from Mount S. Bernard, to S.
John de Luze as much: for it is holden by some Authors to be of figure
quadrate; which notwithstanding Bodin denies, avowing it to be in form of a
Lozenge, with whom La Nove consents, measuring it thus; From Calais to
Narbone, North and South, it is two hundred leagues: from Rochel to Lions, West
and East, it is 120. leagues: from Mets to Bayon North-East, and South-West, it
is two hundred leagues; and from Morley in Bretagny to Antibe in Province,
North-West, and South-East, it is as much. True it is, that many places within
this compass are not holden of the King, as Avignon, and what else the Pope
has. Toul, Verdun, and Mets are holden of the Empire: and Cambray, of the
house of Austrich: in like case of protection, as Constance in Swisserland,
Virich in the Low Countries, and Vienna in Austria; and as Lucca and Genoua in
Italy, are protected by the King of Spain, so do Lorraine also and Savoy hold
of the Empire. As contrarily, there be places out of this circuit, which
notwithstanding hold of this Crown in right, and owe him fealty and homage; as
the Spaniard for the Counties of Flanders and Ar^o^s, which he has ever since
the time of Francis the first, denied to render.

The diverse Provinces of the Country, are very many: Provinces.
the chief are these; Picardy, Normandy, I Will of France, Beauois, Bretaigne,
Anjou, Maine, Poictou, Lymosin, Zantonge, Champaigne, Berry, Salogne, Auvergne,
Nivernois, Lyonnois, Charrolois, Bourbonois, Dolphein, Provence, Languedocke,
Tourraine, and Burgundy.

The thing of best note in each of these, Commodities.
is their singular Commodities and fruits, where with they are blessed for the
sustenance of the Inhabiter. Insomuch, that as they say of Lombardy, that it is
the Garden of Italy: so may we truly say of France, that it is the Garden of
Europe. Picardy, Normand^, and Languedocke, are goodly Countries of Corn, as
any in Christendom; All the Inland Countries are full of Wine, Fruits, and
Grain: in some great store of Wood; in others of Flax; in others of Mines of
Salt; in others of Iron: Insomuch as one says; All things necessary for man's
life over^low there in such abundance, that in counterchange only of the
Corn, Wine, Salt, and Wood, transported into foreign Countries, there is
yearly brought into France, twelve hundred thousand pounds sterling. And
another no less approved, and as well practiced in the state of France, says;
The springs of Salt, Wine, and Corn, are not to be drawn dry. In which place
he complains, that the Kings of France were wont in times past to help their
need with sales of wood, which are now of late years so spoiled, as France
shall shortly be forced to have their Lard from other Countries, as also wood
to build and burn: a complaint which I have often heard in England. Other
Provinces have also their especial commodities, wherein they excel their
neighbors: as in ^^^nosin, the best Beeves; about Orleans, the best Wines, in
Auv^rgne, the best Swine; in Berry, the best Muttons; where there is such
store, as thereof they have a Proverb, when they would tax a fellow for his
notable lying, that tells of a greater number than the truth, they say; ^ie,
there be not so many Sheep in Berrie. They partake also in Sea Commodities: as
upon the coast of Picardy, where the share is sandy, they have store of flat
fish: upon the coast of Normandy and Guyen, where it is Rockie, Fish of the
Rock, (as the French call them) and upon the coast of Bretaigne, where it is
muddy, store of round fish, as Lamprey, Conger, Haddocke; so likewise in diverse
seasons, diverse other sorts, as Mackerels in the end of the Spring, and
Herrings in the beginning of Autumn, as we have in England. etc.

And this Country must needs be well stored with Fish; for besides the benefit
of the Sea, the Lakes and Ponds belonging only to the Clergy, which at the
most have but one third of France, are reported to be one hundred fifty five
thousand.

The Rivers also of France are so many, Rivers.
as Boterus reports of the Queen Mother, she should say, here were more than
in all Christendom, but we hold her for no good Cosmographer. True it is, that
the Rivers here are many, and very fair, and so fitly serving one the other,
and all the whole, as it seems, Nature in the framing of our bodies, did not
show more wonderful providence, in disposing Veins and Arteries throughout
the body, for their apt conveyance of the blood and spirit from the Liver and
Heart, to each part thereof, than she has showed in the placing of these
waters, for the transporting of all her commodities, to all her several
Provinces. Of all those, these are the principal; the Seine, upon which
stands the City of Paris, Roven, and many other. It has his head a little
above Chatillon in the North-west of Lingonois, and receives nine Rivers of
name; whereof the Yonne, the Marn, and the Oyse are navigable; that is, do
carry Boats with sail.

The Soane whereupon stands the City of Amiens, Abbevile, and many other. It
has his head above S. Quintin, divides Piccardy from Artois, and receives
eight lesser Rivers. The Loire has standing upon it the Cities of Orleans,
Nantes, and many other: his head is in Auvergne, it parts the middle of
France, his course is almost two hundred leagues, it receives seventy two
Rivers, whereof the chief are Allier, Cher, Maine, Creuse, Vienne, all
navigable. The Garond, upon which stands Bourdeaux, Thoulouse, and other
Cities; it has his head in the Pereney Mountains, it divides Languedocke
from Gascoine, it receives sixteen Rivers, whereof Iarne, Lot, Bayze,
Derdonne, and Lis^e are chiefest.

And lastly, the Rhosne, upon which stands the City of Lions, Avignon, and
diverse others: It has his head in the Mountains; the Alps dividing Dolpheny
from Lyonnois, and Province from Languedocke, it receives thirteen Rivers,
whereof the Seane, the Dove, Ledra, and Durance are the chiefest.

All the other Rivers carry their streams into the Ocean: Some at S. Vallery,
Seine at New Haven, Loyre beneath Nantes, and Garona at Blay: only the River of
Rhosue pays his tribute to the Mediterranean at Arles.

The Seine is counted the richest, the Rhosue the swiftest; the Garond the
greatest, the Loyre the sweetest; for the difference which Boterus makes of
them, where he ornits the Garond, and makes the S^ane a principal River, is
generally rejected.

The Ports and Passages into France, Havens and Ports.
where Custom is paid to the King, were in times past more than they be now:
the names of them at this present, are these: In Picardie; Calais, Bologue,
Saint Vallerie. In Normandy; Diepe, Le Haure de Grace, Honnesleux, Caen,
Cherbrouge. In Bretaigne; S. Malo, S. Brieu, Breast, Quimpercorentine, Vannes,
Nants. In Poi^tow; Lusson, les sables d'Olonne. In Rochellois; Rochell. In
Xantogne; Zonbisse. In Guyenne; Bourdeaux, Blay, Bayonne. In Languedocke;
Narbonne, Agde, Bencaire, Mangueil. In Provence; Arles, Marseilles, Fransts. In
L^onnois; Lions. In Burgogne; Ausonne, Laugers. In Campaign; Chaumons, Chalons,
Trois. In the Territory Metzin; Metz, Toul, Verdun. In all thirty seven. Of all
these, Lions is reputed to be the most advantageous to the Kings Finances, as
being the Key for all Silks, clothes of Gold and Silver and other Merchandise
whatsoever, which come or go from Italy, Swisserland, and all those South-east
Countries into France, which are brought to this Town by the two fair Rivers
of Rhosne and S^^n: the one coming from Savoy, the other from Burgundy, and
here meeting.

For profit, next to Lions, are Bourdeaux, Rochell, Marseilles, Nants and
Newhaven: But for capabilitie of shipping, I have heard that Breast excels;
and for strength, Ca^a^^, especially as it is now lately fortified by the
Spaniard, which was not let long since to be called, The goodliest government
in the world, at least, in Christendom.

There are requisite in all Ports, to make them perfect, these four things: 1.
Room to receive many and great Ships: 2. Safe Riding: 3. Facility of
repelling foreign force: 4. Concourse of Merchants. The most of the French Ports
have all four properties, except only the last, which in the time of these
civil broiles, have discontinued: and except that we will also grant, that
Calais fails in the first.

The Cities in France (if you will count none Cities, but where is a Bishops
See) are only one hundred and four; there be so many Archbishops and Bishops
in all, as shall in more fit place be showed: But after the French reckoning,
calling every Ville, a City, which is not either a Burgade, or a Village, we
shall find that their number is infinite, and indeed uncertain, as is also
the number of the Towns in general. Some say, there be one Million and seven
hundred thousand: but they are of all wise men reproved. Others say, six
hundred thousand; but this is also too great to be true. The Cabinet rateth
them at one hundred thirty two thousand of Parish Churches, Hamlets, and
Villages of all sorts: Badin says, there be twenty seven thousand and four
hundred, counting only every City for a Parish: which will very near agree
with that of the Cabinet; and therefore I embrace it as the truest.

By the reckoning before set down, of two hundred leagues square (which France
almost yields) we must compute, that here is in all forty thousand leagues
in square, and in every league, five thousand Arpens of ground, which in all
amounts to two hundred millions of Arpens: which sum being divided by the
numbers of the Parishes, shows, that one with another, each Village has one
thousand five hundred and fifteen Arpens, which measure is bigger than our
Acre.

We may, if we will, abstract a third, because Bodin will not admit France to
be square, but as a Lozenge: For in matter of such generality as this, men do
always set down suppositions, not certainties.

If a man will look thorowout all France, I think that (some Castles
excepted) he shall not find any Town half perfectly fortified, according to
the rules of Enginers.

The City of Paris, Paris.
seated in a very fruitful and pleasant part of the I Will of France, upon the
River of Sein, is by the same divided into three parts: that on the North,
toward Saint Denis, is called the Burge: that on the South, toward the
Fauxburges of S. Germans, is called the University, and that in the little
I Will, which the River there makes, by dividing it self, is called the Vil^e.

This part no doubt, is the most ancient; for says my Author: Lutetia is a
City of the Parisians, seated in an I Will of the Seine: We may distinguish it
thus: into Transequana, Cisequana, and Interamnis: The part beyond the Seine,
that on this side the Seine, and that in the I Will incompast with the River. It
is reputed not only the Capital City of France, but also the greatest in all
Europe. It is about the walls some ten English miles: these are not very thick;
the want whereof, is recompensed with the depth of the ditch, and goodness of
the Rampart, which is thick and defensible, save on the South side, which no
doubt, is the weakest part of the Town, on which side it is reported, that the
Lord Willoughby offered the King in four days to enter, at such time as he
besieged it. Whereunto the King condescended, not by the counsel of the old
Marshall Biron, who told him, it was no policy to take the bird naked, when
he may have her feathers and all. On the other side, especially toward the
East; it is very well fortified with Bulwark and Ditch, fair and modern. The
Ramparts of the gates S. Anthony, S. Michel. and S. James, and elsewhere: were
made 1544.

This Bastile of Saint Anthony was built (some say) by the English; and indeed
it is somewhat like those pieces which they have built elsewhere in France; as
namely, that at Roven: howbeit, I read in Vigner his Chronicle, that it was
builded by a Provost of Paris, in the time of Edward the third of England; at
what time our Kings began their first claim, and had as yet nothing to do in
this City.

So in this Town, the Chastelet was built by Julian the Apostata: the
University was founded by Charlemaigne, Anno 800. who also erected those of
Bologna and Padoa.

The Church of Nostre Dame, was founded Anno Dom. 1257. If you would know the
greatness of the great Church of our Lady, the roof thereof is seventeene
fadome high, it is four and twenty fadome broad, threescore and five fadome
long: the two Steeples are four and thirty fadome high above the Church, and
all founded upon piles.

The Towne-house was finished by Francis the first, Anno 1533. with this
inscription over the Gate, S.P.E.P. that is, For his well-deserving Senate,
People and Burghers of Pari^: Francis the first, most puissant King of France,
commanded this House to be built from the foundation, and finished it, and
dedicated it to the calling of the Common Council, and governing the City; in
the year aforesaid.

This is as you would say, the Guild Hall of the Town. The Hostel Dieu in
Paris, was augmented and finished in 1535. by Antoine de Prat, Chancellor in
this City, his pourtraict with Francis the first, is upon the door as ye
enter. This is (as we call it at London) the Hospital. The Palace de Paris,
was built by Philip le Bell, 1283. purposing it should have been his
Mansion House; but since it has been disposed into diverse Courts, for the
execution of Justice, just like Westminster Hall, which likewise at first, was
purposed for the Kings Palace.

Here you have such a show of Wares in fashion, but not in worth, as ye have
at the Exchange. Here is a Chapel of the Saint Espirit, built by Saint Lewis,
1242. Here are all the seven Chambers of the Court of Parliament (which was
first instituted by Charles Martel, father to King Pep^^, Anno 720.) but of
them all, the great Chamber of Paris is most magnificently beautified and
adorned by Lewis the twelfth. At the entry, is a Lion couchant, with his tail
between his legs, to signify, that all persons how high soever, are subject
to that Court.

The Chamber also of Compts, built by this Lewis, is a very fair room; at the
entry whereof are five pourtraicts with their Mots. The first is Temperance,
with a Dial and Spectacle: her word, Mihi spreta voluptas; I despise pleasure.
Secondly, Prudence, with a Looking-glass and a Sive: her word, Consiliis rerum
speculor; I pry into the counsel of things. Justice, with a Balance and a
Sword: her Mot, Sua cuique ministro; I give to every man his own. Fortitude,
with a Tower in one arm, and a Serpent in the other: her word, Me dolor atque
metus fugiunt; Both pain and fear avoid me. And lastly, Lewis the King, with
a Scepter in one hand, and holding Justice by the other, and this written for
his word;

My happy Scepter in calm peace does flourish,
While I these Heaven-bred Sisters four do nourish.
The buildings of this City are of stone, very fair, high, and uniforme,
thorowout the Town; only upon the port N. Dame, our Ladies Bridge, which is,
as it were, their Cheapside: Their building is of brick-bat, all alike,
notwithstanding the fairest Fabric in the Town (and worthily) is the Kings
Castle or Palace of the Louvre at the West: It is in form quadrangular, the
South and West quarters are new and Prince-like, the other two very antique and
prison-like. They were pulled down by Francis the first, and begun to be
rebuilt, but finished by Henry the second, with this inscription: The most
Christian King Henry the second began to repair this time-ruined Edifice.

The University in times past was wont to have (by report) above thirty
thousand Scholars of all sorts, University.
but many of these, children, such as our petty Schools in the Countries are
furnished withal. The streets both in the City, University, and suburbs, are
very fair, strait, and long very many of them; the shops thick, but nothing
so full of wares, nor so rich, as they of London; in comparison whereof, these
seem rather Pedlars than otherwise: But for number, I suppose, there be three
for two of those.

The Faulxbourges are round about the City, ruined and utterly desolate,
except those of Saint Germans, which was very fairly builded, and was very
near as great as the fair Town of Cambridge.

The benefit of this Town is very great, which it has by the River; as by
which all the commodities of the Country are conveyed: whereupon Monsieur de
Argenton reports of it:

Of all the Towns that ever I saw, it is environed with the best and fertilest
Country.
And he there reports, that for twenty months that he was prisoner, he saw
such an infinite company of boats pass and repasse, but that he was an
eyewitness, he would have thought it incredible: which he also after proves,
by the maintenance of the three Armies, of the three Dukes of Burgundy,
Guiennae, and Bretaigne, which consisted of an hundred thousand men, against
the City of Paris, wherein they had besieged Lewis the eleventh, and yet
neither the Camp nor Town had any want of victuals.

Some say, this Town was builded in the time of Amazias King of Judah, by some
Relics of the Trojan war, and that it was called Lutece (a Luto) because
the soil in this place is very fat, which is of such nature, as ye cannot well
get it out, it does so stain: whereof they have a Byword, It staineth like
the dirt of Paris. Others say, it was called Paris of (Parresia) a Greek word,
which signifies (says this Author) hardness or ferocitie, alleging this
verse:

Et se Parrisios dixerunt nomine Franci,
Quod sonat andaces, etc.
And the Franks called themselves Parrisians, which signifies Valiant. And by
this Etymology would infer, that the French is a warlike Nation. But he is
much mistaken in the word; for it signifies only a boldness or liberty of
speech: which whether they better deserve, or to be accounted valiant, you
shall see when I come to speak of the Frenchmans humor and nature in
general. As for the nature of the people of this Town, their Histories tax it
of infinite mutinies and seditions, matchable to the two most rebellious Towns
of Europe, Liege, and Gant; and yet this last is praised in one thing, That
they never harm their Princes person: whereof the Baricades, as also the late
assasinations of Henry the third, and Henry the fourth, make Paris most
unworthy. And du Haillan says of them, when they stood fast to Lewis the
eleventh, against the three Dukes above named; That the Parrisians never held
good side, nor never showed any honesty but then only. But I can read no such
matter in Commines; for I well remember, that even then diverse of the chief of
the Town had practiced secretly with the enemy, and were upon terms of
concluding, when by the Kings wisdom they were prevented.

The Arms in this City were given them, Anno 1190, by Philip le Bell, who
creating them a Provost and Eschevins, (like Office as our Mayor and Aldermen)
Gave them for Arms, Gules, a Ship Argent, and a Chief seeded with Flower de
Lyce Or. Ye shall hear the French brag, that their City has been
besieged an hundred times by the enemy, and yet was never taken since Caesar's
time. The reason whereof, one of their best Writers gives; because (says he)
i^ is very weak, and therefore always compoundeth.

I compare Paris with London, London compared with Paris.
thus: Theirs is the greater, the uniformer built, and stronglier situate: ours
is the richer, the more ancient: for I hold antiquity to be a great honor, as
well to great Cities, as to great Families.

Yea, if to some comparisons would not seem distasteful, I dare maintain,
that if London and the places near adjoining were circum-munited in such an
orbicular manner as Paris is, it would surely exceed it, notwithstanding all
its attributes of a Winding river, and the five Bridges, sorting forsooth to
uniformitie of streets, as indeed we now behold it. And more than that, I am
nothing doubtful in opinion, that the Cross of London is every way longer,
than any you make in Paris, or in any other City of Europe. By this word
Cross, I mean, from Saint Georges in Southwarke, to Shoreditch, South and
North; and from Westminster to Whitechapell, West and East, meeting at
Leaden Hall: All the way she environed with broader streets, comelier
monuments, and handsomer buildings, than any you can make in Paris; or ever
saw, either in Millan, at this hour being the greatest City in Italy; in
Noremberg, or Ausburg, for Germany; in Madril, or Lisbone, for Spain; or
finally, in Constantinople it self.

Concerning populousness, For populousness.
if you please to take London merely as a place composed of Merchants,
Citizens and Tradesmen, (and so unite the Suburbs adjoining) it far exceeds
Paris: But taking all'together, and at all times, it must be confessed, that
there be more people of all sorts, two for one, if not more, in Paris than in
London. Or if you will behold it in a Terme-time, (according to our custom of
special resort) I doubt not but you may be encountered with equal numbers of
callings and professions. As for Paris, the better half are Gentlemen,
Scholars, Lawyers, or Clergymen: The Merchant lives obscurely, the
Tradesman penuriously; and the Craftsman in drudgerie: yet all insolent, and
tumultuously affected upon the least unaccustomed imposition, or supposall of
alteration of their ridiculous ceremonies.

Instead of a beastly Town and durtie streets, For neat and clean streets.
you have in London those that be fair, beautiful, and cleanly kept.

Instead of clouds, ill air, and a mirie situation, For Air.
London (for the greatest part of the year) affords a Sun-shining and serene
element, a wholesome dwelling, a stately ascension, and a delicate prospect.

In stead of a shallow River, For River.
bringing only Barks and Boats, with wood, cole, turfe, and such Country
provision, you have in London a River flowing twenty foot high, adorned with
stately Ships, that fly to us with merchandise from all the parts of the
world. And to descend to inferior observations, I say, that the River only
Westward matcheth that of Paris every way, supplying the City with all the
forementioned commodities at easier rates.

In stead of ill-favored wooden bridges, For Bridges.
many times endangered by tempests and frosts, we have at London such a bridge,
that without exception, it may worthily be accounted the admirablest Monument,
and firmest erected Collosseum (in that kind) of all the Universe; whether you
respect the foundation, with the continual and substantial reparation of the
Arches; or behold the imposed buildings, being so many, and so beautiful.

For a Castle.
In stead of an old Bastile and ill appearing Arsenall (thrust as it were into
an outcast corner of the City) we have in London a Fabrike of greatest
antiquity, for form majesticall, and serving to most uses of any Citadell, or
Magazine, that ever you saw. It contains a Kings Palace, a Kings Prison, a
Kings Armory, a Kings Mint, and a Kings Wardrobe, besides many other worthy
Offices; so that the residents within the walls have a Church, and are a
sufficient Parish of themselves.

In stead of an obscure Louvre, For places of Retreit.
lately graced with an extraordinary and immatchable gallery, the only Palace
of the King; In London his Majesty has many houses, Parks, and places of
repose; and in the shires confining, such a number, for state, receipt and
commodiousnesse, that I protest amazement, knowing the defects of other places.

Nor do I here stretch my discourse on the tenter-hookes of partiality, but
plainly denotate what many my countrymen can aver; that to the crown of
England are annexed more Castles, Honors, Forests, Parks, Palaces, Houses of
state, and conveniencie to resort unto, from the encumbrances of the City,
than any Emperor or King in Europe can at this day challenge proprio jure.

In stead of an old ruinous Palace (as they term their House of Parliament,
For seats of Justice, and concourse of Merchants.
Hall of Justice, concourse of Lawyers, and meeting of certain Tradesmen, or
Milleners, like an exchange) London has such a Cirque for Merchants, with an
upper quadrant of shops, as may make us envied for delicacy of building, and
stateliness in contriving. For a statehouse, we have in London the Guild Hall,
and for Courts of Justice, Westminster hall, two such fabriks, that without
further dispute, they make strangers ask unanswerable questions: when being
brought to the light of understanding by particulars, they lift up their hands
and say; For Colleges for students of the Laws.
Oh happy England! Oh happy people! Besides these public Receptacles, we have
private and goodly Colleges for Lawyers, fitted for their private and public
uses, receipt of their Clients, conveniently appropriated to their Offices. All
works rather of oftentation amongst our selves, than of imitation in others.

In stead of obscure Churches, For Churches.
we have first the goodliest heap of stones, namely Paul's, next the most
curious, viz. Westminster Abbey, in the world: and generally, all out Churches
exceed for beauty and handsomnesse.

In stead of Gentlemen riding on durty foot-cloaths, For decent riding.
and women footing it in the mierie streets, the one with an idle Lackey, the
other with no company at all; we have fashionable attendance, handsome comely
passage either in Carosse, Coach, or on horseback; and our Ladies and
Gentlewomen are never seen abroad, without an honorable retinue.

In stead of confused intermixtures of all sorts; For unconfused intermixtures.
as Citizens, Lawyers, Scholars, Gentlemen, Tradesmen, and Religious persons,
(so that you can scarcely know the one from the other, nor the master from the
man) in London the Citizen lives in the best order, with very few houses of
Gentlemen interposed; But in our suburbs the Nobility and Gentry have so many,
and such stately buildings, that one side of the River may compare with the
gran Canale at Venice: but if you examine their receipt and capacity, Venice,
and all the Cities of Europe must submit to truth: for in London, and the
places adjoining, five hundred several houses may bear the attribute of
Palaces, wherein five thousand persons may conveniently be lodged.

In stead of a poor Provost, For a Mayor.
and a disorderly company of Merchants and Tradesmen, we have a Podesta, or
Mayor, that keeps a Prince-like house, accompanied and attended with grave
and respective Senators, and comely Citizens, having several Hals; where every
craft and mystery is governed by ancient persons of the same society and
profession: At time of year producing such solemn and rich triumphs, that
strangers have admired the brave spirits of Mechanical men.

To conclude, if you look on, and in our London truly, as it is composed of
men following trades and occupations; there is not such a City, such a
Government, such a method of conversation, such an unity of society and good
neighborhood, such a glass to see loveliness and beauty in, such a chamber
of wealth, and such a storehouse of terrestrial blessings under the Sun
again.

Or, if you please to view it without at all times, and yet consider the
keeping of our Country houses, you may boldly say; There are not so many
Gentlemen to be seen in any place, nor to so good purpose generally: for
speaking somewhat liberally, like an Orator of Contentation, I ask, if the
pleasures of Paris can bring you into walks of such variety, with so little
charge and expense, as London can: Surely no. And with us, our riding of
horses, music, learning of all Arts and Sciences, dancing, fencing, seeing of
comedies or enterludes, banquets, maskes, mummeries, lotteries, feasts,
ordinary meetings, and all the singularities of man's inventions to satisfy
delight, are easy expenses: and a little judgment with experience will manage
a very mean estate, to wade through the current of pleasure, yea, although it
should run unto voluptuousness.

But shall I dare to speak of our Court, For the Court.
the map of Majesty, in respect whereof, Biron compared all others to
confusion? If I do, for stately attendance, dutiful service, plentiful fare,
orderly tables, resort of Nobles, beauty of Ladies, bravery of Gentry,
concourse of civil people, princely pastimes, and all things befitting the
Majesty of a King, or glory of a Nation; I may say for England, as the King of
France once answered the Emperors tedious Title; France, France, France, and
nothing but France: So England, England, England, and nothing but England, to
their proudest comparisons. Affirming, that if ever Country, Kingdom, or
Prince, came near Salomons royalty, plenty, peace, and beatitude; England, and
in England London has the pre-eminence.

Besides the Cities and Ports of France well fortified, Castles.
there be also infinite numbers of Castles and Cittadels (which the people call
The nests of Tyrants, and the Prince Chastivillains.) Of the Castles, the
number is therefore most great, and as uncertain, by reason that every
Noblemans house of any age, is built in defensible manner. An example of one
for many hundreds, you may take that of Roch-fort, belonging to the Seigneur de
la Tremouville, which in the civil wars endured a siege, and five thousand
Cannon shot, and yet was not taken. It is judged by the wisest, that in great
Kingdoms, such as France, no places should be fortified but the frontiers:
after the example of Nature, who armeth the heads and heels of beasts, but
never the bowels nor middle part: as in England, where except frontier places,
none but his Majesty have fortified places.

You must understand, that here in France, Charges.
all Inhabitants of Cities are liable to the common charges of the
fortification of their Cities, reparations of Bridges, Fountains, Highways,
and such like. And because the richer sort should not levy the money, and then
keep it to themselves, or employ it as they list; they must give information
to the Chancellor of the necessity of the Levy, and procure Letters Patents
for the same, by authority whereof they gather the money, and use it, yielding
after to the Kings Procurer their account.

And for their Watch and Ward, it goes by course, as in the City of Embden, and
diverse other in those low countries. As for Castles, the Seigneur or Captain,
may not force Vassal, ( fair le guet, to watch and ward) except in frontier
places, upon forfeiting of their estates.

After this general Survey of the Country it self, Governments.
we must observe something of the government, wherein I will not trouble you
with fetching their first Pedigree from beyond the Moon, as many of the^r
Histories labor, nor by disputing the matter, whether it be true or no, that
they came from Troy, into the marshes of Maeotis, whence, after some small
abode, they were chased by the Roman Emperor into Bavaria, and after into
Frankeland in Germany.

It shall suffice, that from hence this people came into France, wherein all
Writers agree. For after the declination of the Roman Empire, when the
Ostrogothes conquered Italy, the Visigothes Spain, and the Vandals Affrike:
then did the Burgundians and Franconians divide this Country between them,
conquering it upon the old Inquilines (the Gauls) who from Caesar's time till
then, had not tasted the force of a foreign power.

The Government was under Dukes till the year 420. when as Pharamond caused
himself to be entitled King. In this race it remained till 751. when Pepin
suppressed his M. Chilpericke, and usurped. His line lasted till 988. when Hugh
Capet gave the check to the succession of Charlemaignes line (who was Pepins
son) and invested himself with the Diadem. From him it has lineally
descended by heirs males to the house of Valois, and for want of issue mal^ in
them, is now come to the house of Burbon. In this space of time, you must
observe the three ages of France: her childhood, till Pepin; her manhood,
till Capet; her old age, till now. For, in the first age the Kings were like
children, content to be taught by others in matters of Religion, (as then ye
may note, that Clovis received the Faith, and was Baptized) as also in matter
of policy, they were content that others should bear the whole sway, and rule
them also, such were the Maieurs de Palais, whereof Pepin was one that usurped.

In their manhood they did like men, conquer Kingdoms, releeve distressed
Christians, overcome Saracens and Infidels, defend the Church against all
assailes, as ye^ may perceive by the History of Charles the great, and his
successors.

And lastly, now in her old age she grew wise, erected Courts for Justice, made
Laws and Ordinances to govern her Inhabitants, wherein no Country in Europe
has excelled her: for so says my Author; There is no Country in the world,
where Justice is better established, than in ours: which is true (but with this
addition of a later Writer,) if the Officers thereof were not too too many, and
if their places were rightly executed.

To force this Relation, with many notes of things here happening in former ages,
were both impertinent, and tedious; only I would wish you note, that in 482.
the Christian Faith was here received, and in the year 800. the Roman Empire
hither translated.

Concerning the Country of France, the State is a Monarchy, and the
government mixed: for the authority of Maieurs, Eschevins, Consuls, Iureurs,
etc. is Democraticall: the Paires, the Councels, the Parliaments, the Chambers
of Counts, the Generalities, etc. are Aristocraticall. The calling of
Assemblies, giving of Offices, sending Embassages, concluding of Treaties,
pardoning of offenses, ennobling of Families, legitimation of Bastards, coining
of moneys, and diverse other, to the number of four and twenty, are merely
Regal, called of the French, Droicts Royaux.

And sure it is, that no Prince in Europe is a more perfect Monarch than he:
for besides all these Privileges named, as we say of the Parliament of Paris,
that it has the prerogative to be appealed unto, from all other Courts, which
they call ( the last appeal,) so is it likewise true, that the King himself
has the mere and absolute authority over this. For though no Edict or
Proclamation, no War or Peace which he makes, be good, without the consent
and Arrest (as they call it) of this Court: Yet true it is, that when he,
sending to them for their confirmation and ratifying thereof, if at first they
refuse, and send Deputies to his Majesty to inform him of their reasons, with
humble suit to revoke the same, he returns them upon pain of his displeasure
and deprivation of their Offices, to confirm it. Sic volo, sic jubeo.

As touching the Laws, we must know, Laws.
that most of them are grounded on the Civil Law of the Emperor: but so, as
this State ever protests against them: insomuch as in former times it was
ordained, that he which alleged any Law of Justinian, should lose his head. Of
the Laws in force, some are fundamental, as they call them, and immortal*
Such as nor King, nor assembly can abrogate: others are Temporal.

Of the first sort, I will only remember you of two examples: the Law Salique,
and that of Appennages. As for the first, they would needs make the world
believe, that it is of great antiquity, where with they very wrongfully
tromped the heirs of Edward the third, from the enjoying of this Crown, which
to them is rightly descended by the Mother; and whose claim is still good,
were the English sword well whetted to cut the Labels of this Law. Of which
Haillan himself confesses, that before the time of Philip le Long, 1321. That
the Law Salique was never heard tell of, before this Kings time, who caused it
to be ratified by all the Nobles of his Kingdom, some by fair promises, and
others by force and threats. Whereupon, they have since this proverb, The
Kingdom of France cannot fall from the Lance to the Distasse^ which another
would needs as soundly prove out of Scripture, for that it is said, The Lillies
spinne not: that is, the Lillies or Flowerdelyces, being the Arms of France,
cannot descend to a Spinster, or woman.

Touching the Appennages, it is also a Law of great consequent for the Crown:
for by this, the Domaine cannot be aliened, and by the other, the Crown cannot
fall into the hands of strangers. You must note, that this Law imports, that
the younger sons of the King cannot have Partage with the Elder; which till
the time of Charlemaigne (when this was made) they might; they must only have
Appennage suas propriete. By which Charter of Appennage is given all profits
arising of the said Apannes; as Domaine, the Hundredth, Rents, rights of
Seigneurie, parties Casuelles, ^ots, Sales, Homages, rights of Vassalage,
Forests, Ponds, ^^^vers, Jurisdictions, Patronages of Churches, Provisions,
and Nomination of Chapels, Goods of Mayn-mort, Fifts of Lands sold, and all
other profits and commodities whatsoever, to return to the Crown, for want of
heirs male: But the levying of Taxes and aids, the minting of money, and all
other things of Regalitie are reserved.

Concerning the other sort of Laws in this Realm, they are infinite, which
argues (a consequente) that they be ill kept: for Gens humana ruit per vetitum
nefas: and (ab antecedente) that the people of this Country have been ill
inclined: for Evil manners cause good Laws.

These French Laws are too full of Preambles, Processes, Interims, and
Provisoes, as by all their Ordinances and Edicts appears: There is nothing
(me thinks) colder, than a Law with a Prologue: Let a Law command, and not
persuade. Of all these Laws I will only name you this one: That the minority
of the King, shall be assisted with a Council, chosen by the States of France,
wherein the Princes of the blood ought to hold the first place, and strangers
to be excluded: Which was enacted at Toures, by Charles the eighth, Anno 1484.
I tell you of this, as of the true source and spring of all the late civil
wars, because the Cadets of Lorraine by insinuation with the young Kings,
Francis the second, and Charles the ninth, under the favor of the Queen
Mother, took upon them to manage all public matters at their own pleasure, and
thrust out the first Princes of the blood of the house of Burbon. Whereupon
Navarre and Condie, the Princes of this Family, assisted by many of the French
Nobles, embarked themselves in the action of reforming such an abuse, and
displacing the Gursard out of this authorite, took it upon themselves, to whom
it rightly belonged.

Howbeit, out of that which I there saw, Officers of Court.
which I have heard of others, and read in Authors; I will adventure to relate,
concerning the Officers of this Court; for as for other great Offices, as of
Constable, Admiral, Marshall, Grand Master of the Eaues and Forests, Grand
Master of the Artillery, and others, I shall speak of them, when I come to
relate of the Kings Forces in general, to which place these Offices especially
appertain.

The first Office then of Court, Great Master.
is that of the great Master, which in elder times was called Earl of the
Palace, and after changed into the name of Grand Seneschall, and now lastly
into Grand Maistre. It is his Office, to judge of matters of difference,
between other Officers of Court. He had also the charge to give the word to
the Guard, to keep the Keys of the Kings private Lodging, and to determine in
disputes among Princes that followed the Court, for their Lodgings. In
assemblies, he sits right before the King, a staire lower, as you read in
the Dern. Trobl. Great Butler or Taster, was in former times a great Office in
the Kings House, they had place in the Courts of Justice, as Peers. This
Office was long in the Counts of Seulis: It is now vanished, and only there
remains that of the Grand Panetier. This Office is ancient: he has besides
the Kings House super-intendence over all Bakers in the City and Suburbs of
Paris. They which were wont to be called Pantlers, Tasters and Carvers, are now
called Gentlemen Wayters of the Court.

The Office of great Chamberlain was long in the House of Tankervile: he lay
at the Kings feet, when the Queen was not there. His Privileges are now
nothing so many as in times past. Gentlemen of (...)*
Those which were then called Chamberlaines, are now Gentlemen of the Chamber.
The Office of great Esquire, is not very ancient, though now it be very
honorable, and is the same that Master of the Horse is in the Court of
England: for it is taken out of the Constables Of^^^^* to whom it properly
appertained. It was first instituted at the time of Charles the seventh. In the
Kings entrance into the City, he carries the Sword sheathed before him, The
Cloth of Estate carried over the King, by the Mayor and Sherifes, belongs to
his Fee. No man may be the Kings Spur-maker, Mareschall, and such like
Officer, but he must have it of him, as also other inferior Offices belonging
to the Stables. He had in times past, the command over Stages of Posthorses:
but now the Controller general of the said Posts, has it. Mast^r or Stew^^d
of the Kings House.
The Office of Master or Steward of the Kings House, has charge over the
expense of the Kings House: For a mark of his authority, he carries a
truncheon tipped at both ends with silver and gilt, and marches before the
Sewer, when the Kings dinner comes to the Table.

No Sergeant can arrest any of the Kings House without their leave. They serve
quarterly: they were wont to be but four, but now I have heard it credibly
said, they be eighty in name, but all of these do not execute the Office. The
Great Provost of France, and of the Kings House, Great Provost of France.
was so called since Charles the ninth: for before, he was called Roy des
rebauds, King of the Rascals. His Office is to stickle amongst the Servants,
Pages, Lacquies, and Filles de joye (Punkes or pleasant sinners) which follow
the Court, and to punish all offenses in these people.

I should have named before these last, as a place more honorable, the Office
of Great Faulconer, and Common Hunt, Great Faulciner, and Common Hunt.
who have authority over all Officers of Chase. They of the Kings Chamber, are
either Gentlemen of the Chamber, of whom I spoke before, or Grooms of the
Chamber, which are but base Grooms and Yeomen.

The hundred Gentlemen of his Guard (though there be two hundred of them) they
hold and use a weapon, Gentlemen of the Kings Guard.
called Le bec de corbin: They march two and two before him: they are part
French, and part Scots. The Scot carries a white Cassocke, powdered with silver
plates, and the Kings device upon it: The French wear the Kings Colors. There
is also a Guard of Swisse, attired in partie-coloured-Cloth, drawn out with
silk, after their Country fashion: these follow the Court always on foot,
the other on horse.

There belong to the Court also, the Marshals of Lodgings, and Harbingers: they
have like Offices as the Harbingers in the English Court: there be also diverse
others which are here needless to be spoken of.

It follows I speak of his Forces, as well horse as foot, His Forces.
of which this Country is very well furnished, and indeed vaunteth (and I
think worthily) to be the best and greatest Gens d'armerie of any Realm in
Christendom: but on the other side, their foot have no reputation; Insomuch,
as at the Siege of Amrens, we should hear the Spaniard within the Town,
speak over the walls to our English Soldier in their Trenches, after we had
saved the Kings Cannon, from which the French were shamfully beaten by them
within, fallying out upon them:

You are tall Soldiers (say they) and we honor you much, not thinking any
foot to come near us in reputation, but you; and therefore, when you of the
English come down to the Trenches, we double our Guard, and look for blows:
but as for these base and unworthy French, when they come, we make account we
have nothing to do that day, but play at Cards, or sleep upon our Rampart. Of
both these Forces of horse and foot of France, you are to note this which
follows.

It is reported of the great Turk, that when he conquereth any Province or
Country, he divides the Lands upon his horsemen, and to each his po^tion, ^ith
an exemption of paying either Rent, Tax, or ^allage whatsoever; only they are
bound to serve the Grand Seig^ior, with a proportion of horse at their own
charge, and in their own person in his wars, except either age or sickness
hinder, which are the two only excuses admitted. These are called his
Timariots: of like Nature were the Calasyres, or Mamalucks of A^gypt.

So did the Kings of France in former times bestow upon Gentlemen diverse lands
and possessions, freeing them likewise from taxes and aids, upon condition to
have their personal service in time of need. These Lands were called Feifs,
instituted before Charlemaigne his time, but till then they were given only
for life (as at this day are those of the Turks:) but since, they be
hereditary. The word Feif, has his Etymology of (Foy) Faith: signifying Lands
given by the King to his Nobility or men of desert, with Hau^^^ et basse
justice, with an acknowledgment of fealty and homage, and service of the King
in his wars at their own charge. Some Feif was bound to find a man at
Arms; some an Archer, some the third, and some the fourth of a man at Arms,
according to the quantity of Land he held. He that had Land from the value of
five to six hundred Livres rent, (that is, from fifty to sixty pound sterling)
was bound to find a man on Horseback, furnished for a man at Arms: and from
three to four hundred a good light Horseman; who, if it please the Prince,
and upon occasion of service, shall quit his Horse, and serve on foot, provided
that he have with him a vallet Harquebusier. But they that had less than three
or four hundred, had a less proportion of charge. There be four exceptions
where a man is not bound to serve in person; If he be sick, if aged, if he
bear some Office, if he keep some frontier place or other Castle of the
Kings; for in this case he may send another.

They are bound upon forfeiture of their Feif, to serve three months within
the Land, and forty days without; not counting the days of marching. You must
observe, that as the Seigneurs hold their Feif of the King in Haute justice, so
other Gentlemen hold of them in Basse justice, upon charge to follow these
Seigneurs at all times to the wars. For the Feif is the thing, by the
acceptance whereof, they that hold it, are bound in oath and fidelity to their
Lords; and therefore are called their Vassals, of Wessos the old Gaul word,
which signifies Valiant: for to such were the Feifs given. As for Serfes,
Slaves or Villains, they (...) domesticke, and serve upon baser condition, for
wages and victuals. There is also the subject, that is, the poor pe^sant that
labors and tilleth the Feifs, and therefore ye shall hear Monsieur le
Gentleman speak of ses terres, ses hommes, and ses subjects: His lands, his
men, and his subjects: and yet himself is Vassal to the Seigneur, that holds
in haute justice. But you may note, that no word of service whatsoever in this
discourse, does prejudice the liberty natural of the Vassal. Neither the
subject nor the Serf are bound to go to the wars, but only the Vassal. The
mustering and gathering together of these forces, obliged by these Feifs, is
called the Ban, and Arrier-Ban, of the Alm^^^e words H^r^ exer^i^us, an Army;
and Ban, conv^^atio, a calling together. This Ban and Arrier-ban, consisted
anciently of twelve, and sometimes fifteen thousand Gens d'armes: But after
the corruption thereof, when the Feifs came to be in the hands of unable and
unworthy men, the Kings of France were forced of later times, to erect the Gens
d' arms des Ordonnances, the men at Arms of his Ordinances, in Charles the
seventh his time. For ye must consider, that there have been four principal
causes of the overthrow of this Ban and Arrier-ban. The first, were the gifts
to the Clergy, who, as is reported, have the sixth part of these Feifs in their
hands, and contribute nothing to the wars: for as one says, they will lose
nothing, pay nothing, contribute nothing toward their guarding, and yet
notwithstanding they will be guarded. The next, was the voyages to the
Holy Land; for when one had made a vow to go thither, to serve against the
Saracens and I^tidels, he sold his Feif, to furnish him to that purpose. The
third, was the wars with the English, wherein by force they lost them. The
last cause is, the sales of them to all sorts of people, without exception; as
the Lawyer, the Yeoman, or any other unable person whatsoever that will buy
them; which till Charles the seventh they might not do. Ye see then how
necessary it was (this old institution being corrupted and quite decayed) to
erect a new; which they called, Les Gens d' arms des ordonnances: because at
their first erection, there were diverse Laws and ordinances made for them to
observe, which who so brake, was severely punished. They were at first only
1500. But after, they were increased to an hundred cornets, and given to diverse
Princes of the blood, and Nobles of France to conduct and command, with an
honorable pension. In these troops should be 6000. for in some there are an
hundred, in others but fifty. Howbeit it is thought, in each troop there are
some dead pays, for the benefit of the Of^^cers, and that in truth there be
not above four thousand in all. For the maintenance of this Gens d' armerie,
there is a tax yearly levied upon the people throughout all France, called the
Taille.

Concerning both the number of the Gens d'armes, and their proportion of
allowance, by the Taille, it is thus, as La Nove judges: The horsemen in the
time of Henry the second, exceeded the number of 6000. lances, but they are
now but 4000. and in mine opinion, it were fit to entertain in time of peace,
four Regiments of Infantery, of six hundred men apeece.

As touching the Infantery, His Infantery.
Francis the first was the first that instituted the Legionaries, which were in
all eight, and every Legion to contain six thousand, according to the rate of
the ancient Romans. The first Legion was of Normandy: The next of Bretaigne.
One in P^cardie. One in Burgundy. In Champaigne and Nivernois one. In
Dolphenie and Provence one. In Lyonnois and Auvergne one. And one in
^ang^^docke. These companies were shortly after cassed, and again within
eighteen years erected; and are now again of late years dissolved, and in
their place the Regiments now entertained, are five in number: The Regiment of
the Guard, the Regiment of Picardie, the Regiment of Champaigne, the Regiment
of Piemont, and lastly, the Regiment of Gasco^ne, commonly called the Regiment
of Navarr^: In each of these is twelve hundred.

These are all now in time of peace bestowed in garrison-townes, and frontier
places, except those of his guard. Bo^^^ op^^ion is, that four Legions of
5000. apeece, would ^usfice to be maintained in this land: for (says he) the
Roman Empire, which was twenty times as great, had never but eleven Legions in
pay: but this is to be understood of them which were in pay ordinary in Italy,
besides those Legions which they had in other their Countries, as England,
Spain, Low Countries, etc. For otherwise, we read of those Emperors that had
thirty one Legions; and Bodin himself confesses, that Augustus had at one
time entertained in pay forty Legions, at eleven millions charge the year. But
this Writer though he be approved, as he well deserves, yet I think if he
failed in any of his discourse, it was in matter of war, the profession
whereof did ill agree with his long robe: ye shall therefore take the
judgment of a discreeter soldier of France for your direction, what force the
French can make, or entertain of others, which is this. If our King perceived
that any neighbor of his meant to invade his Frontiers, I think he might
easily compose an Army of sixty companies of men at Arms, twenty Cornets of
light horse, and five troops of Harquebusiers on horseback, amounting all to
ten thousand horse. To which he might add three or four thousand German
Rutters, and one hundred Ensigns of French foot, and forty Ensigns of his
good Confederates, the Swissers, and yet maintain his other Frontiers
sufficiently manned.

So that ye may conclude, that four thousand men at Arms, well complete, and
with a proportion of light horse and foot answerable, shows the whole flower,
beauty and force of France. Howsoever the Author of the Cabinet confidently
avoweth, that there may easily be mustred and maintained fourscore and odd
thousand horse of one sort or other; that is, lance, and light horse. But I
fear me we may say of them, as Plutarch says of the Nobles of Athens, having
usurped upon the Democracie of that City: They were indeed but four hundred,
and yet caused themselves to be styled, the five thousand. So I fear me, he
reckons after the Athenian rate, ten for one.

The Cabinets reason is this: There be in France 50000. Gentlemen that are able
to bear Arms: for (says he) rate this proportion at a Gentleman in each
league, by the measure of ^rance, (which are forty thousand in square) and it
wants but a fifth. Howbeit, says he, in some Countries, ye shall have
thirty or forty within the compass of one league, besides their children. Out
of these, if the King would, he might compose a Gens d' armerie of 8000. men at
Arms, and 16000. Archers: which body of 24000 Gentlemen, would represent in
the field 60000. horse. He aught also have a cavallerie Legiere, of four or
five thousand Gentlemen. He might also furnish the Ban and Arne^-^an, according
to the old fashion, with twelve or fifteen thousand Gentlemen. And yet might
he have besides all this, four or five thousand for the state of his Court,
and government of his Provinces. This is his computation: But you shall see it
proved, when we come to speak of the Nobility of France, that it is
exceedingly shortened in number, and decayed in estate, and therefore nothing
able to come near this number. As good a consequent it were to say, that
because ye have two or three millions of men in England able to fight, that
therefore our State can bring so many into the field, without considering the
provision of Arms, and all other things necessary. But this Cabinet was made
by one of the Religion, that was transported out of himself, by the heat of
his zeal, and hate to the temporal livings of the Church: Whose projects and
drifts are much like those of the Supplication of Beggars (a book made in King
Henry the eighths days) where he frames in his fan^^ an Vtopia and felicity,
not to be hoped in France, building Castles in the Air; and concluding, that
if it would please the King to alien the Church temporal livings, and unite
them to the Domaine, ( nihil est dictu facilius, a thing easily said, but not
easily done) that over and besides the forces o fourscore thousand horse
abovesaid, he might al^o maintain an Infantery of the French Gentlemen of
tw^lv^ thousand: Item, another of the popular, of forty ^^ght thousand: and
lastly, yet another Infantery legionarie of forty eight thousand.

The Supplication was answered by Sir Thomas Moore his book, called, The
Pitiful complaint of the puling souls ^^ Purgatory: How well I know not, but
of this I am sure, that if such a number of horse and foot should either be
^aintained upon the Church living, or upon the poor people, (upon whom all
these charges of the Gens d'armes lies) here would be many more p^li^g souls,
and pitiful complaints in France, than are in Sir Thomas Moors Purgatory.

It then remains, that we hold our selves to the judgment of La Nove, before
set down, who also confesses, that in Charles the sixth his time, there were
in the field twenty two thousand Lances; but since the Gens d'armerie was
in^^ituted, were never, but once at Valencie^nes above ten thousand. For as for
that great number, whereof ye read in M. d' Argenton, that besieged Lewis the
eleventh in Paris, they were the forces of three great Princes, and the better
part Burgognions.

The French reckon above an hundred and twenty strong Towns, some very strong
already, all the rest easy to be made defensible. Their Ordnance and
Field-peeces they have reduced to a proportion of boar and length, that so the
gartridges and bullet of the same weight may be service. able for most of their
pieces; and if a carriage breaks, the piece may be readily mounted upon
another. The usual length of their Field-peeces is almost ten foot, and the
length of the carriage fourteen foot; so that both together take up nineteen
foot being mounted upon the Battery. Of all Nations, the French confess that
they fear none but the Switzers, and them they do, for that being so near
neighbors, they may fall upon them at unawares. To prevent which, they have
fortified the Frontiers next to them; knowing well, that the nature of the
Switzer is, rather to hazard a field, than to sit down about a lingering
siege. But these Frenchmen have forgot that England is far too hard for them
at Sea, and that Spain and the Emperor together have in a manner besieged
them round about by Land.

I must now remember you of the Officers for the war in France: Officers of
wa^^e.
and because war is made both by sea and by land, I must also reckon the sea
Officers: but as for the French Kings forces at sea, I have not yet learned
that he has any, and therefore can say little thereof.

The first and principal, Constable.
and which commands all in the Kings absence, even the Peers and Princes of
the blood wha^soever, is the Constable; who, as has before been remembered,
has his name of Comes stabul^: for in former t^nes the Kings chief Officers
were called Counts, with an addition of their Office, as Comes Palatit, Comes
Praesidii, Comes re^^m privatarum, Comes sacrarum largitionum, Com (...), Comes
navium; Count of the Palace, Count of the Guard, etc. And though he has not
now the command of the Kings horse, yet keeps he still the name. This Office
was erected in Lewis le Gros his time: it was bestowed upon the house of
Memorencie, in Francis the first his time, and remains still in the same.

The ancient device of the house of Memorencie is this; God and the prime
Christian, and ancientest Baron of France. He has the keeping of the Sword
Royal. And as the great ^squire has the Sword in the Scabberd, Azure seeded
with Flowers de Lyce, Or, added to his Arms; so bears the Constable for an
honor, the naked Sword. The Marshals bear the Battell-axe; and the Admirals,
the Anchor. The Constable and Marshals give the oath to the King: He sits
chief Judge at the Table of Marble, upon all per^^^s, ^^its, actions, and
complaints whatsoever touching the wars. When the King enters a City in his
greatest pomp, or upon a deliverie, he goes before with the Sword naked: and
when the King sits in Assembly of the three States, he is placed at his
right hand. He that kills the Constable, is guilty of high Treason. The
Marshall.
The Marshals are named, as some say, of Marc. Cheval, a Horse, and Schal,
Master, or Commander of the Horse. Others of Marcha, that is, March or
Frontier, quasi Praefectus limitum, as it were, Governor of the Marches. Till
Francis the first, there were but two in all France; afterward four; and now
ten: for as is said before, when any that held either some strong Town or
place of importance, came into the King, he did always capitulate, to have
some one of these Offices, besides sums of money and governments also: such
was the necessities of the times, says Haillan. These, under the Constable,
have the command over all Dukes, Earls, Barons, Captains, and Gens d'armes;
but may neither give battle, make proclamation, or mustermen, without his
commandment. They have under them Lieutenants, whom they call
Pr^vost^-Marshals, Admiral.
who have the punishing of mutinous soldiers, such as quit their colors,
Rogues, and such like. There is the office of Admiral: Look what the Marshals
are in a Land-Armie, the same is the Admiral in a Sea-Armie: and these two
offices are several, because the subject of their employment is differing and
unlike.

This office is the most ancient of all France: for Caesar speaks thereof;
The Admirals of Provence, Bretaigne, and Narbon, are much commended for their
practice and skill in Sea-service.

I marvel therefore, why du Haillan reports, that they were first made in
Charlemaignes days, and that one Monsieur Ritland was the first that was made.
There are now four Admiralties, France, Bretaigne, Guyenne, and Provence: This
last is always annexed to the governourship of that Country: So, that of
Guyenne likewise, till the King that now is came to the Crown, who before was
Governor and Admiral of Guyenne: but since he has divided the commands. Ye
may observe in Histories, that all the while the French voyages were upon the
Levant Seas, either to the Holy Land, Sicilie, or Naples, or whithersoever, the
French always had their Vessels and Commanders out-of Italy. France borrowed
their Admirals from Genoa, Pisa, Venice, and Luca. These have the tenth of all
wrack, prize, or prisoners, that are taken at Sea.

Before the invention of shot, there was an Officer in France called, Great
Master of the Crosse-bowes and Engines: which office is now called, the Great
Master of the Artillery; who at first also, immediately after the invention of
shot, was called Captain General of the Artillery.

You have also Treasurers for the wars, which are either ordinary, or
extraordinary: Those pay the Gens d'armes; and these, the Regiments of the
Infanterie. Treasurers ordinary are so many, as there be places where they
muster: of extraordinary there be always four.

The Heraults of France are six; Normandy, Guyenne, Valois, Bretaigne,
Burgogne, so called of the Countries, (as with us in England) and Mont-joy, who
is the chief of the rest. Their ancient office was, to be present at all Iusts
and Tournaments, to denounce war or peace, to summon places, to defy
enemy-Princes, to give Arms to men new enobled. But now they be only used at
Feasts, Coronations, Solemnities, Funerals, and such like; for they are no more
used in the Treaty and negotiation with foreign Princes: I think the reason
is, because the office has of late years been bestowed upon unworthy and
insufficient persons. It shall here be needless to name all other his Officers
of the Wars, which are all one with those of other Countries, as Colonel,
Captain, Sergeant, Lieutenant, Ensign, Corporal, etc. I will only remember
in a word the French manner of Mustering, March, Charge, and service in
general, and then proceed to the next branch of this Relation. We must
observe, that (excepting the Gens d'armes, and the Regiments above named) when
any soldiers are taken up for the wars, they are not pressed, as with us,
but the Captain having his Commission gathers them up by found of Drum,
entertaining only such as will; (which may be some cause of the badnesse and
baseness of the French foot) for being commonly the Rascal sort, and such as
have no other means, there cannot settle in their abject minds, that true and
honorable resolution requisite in a soldier. This Commission must first be
showed to the Governor, Lieutenant general, Bailiffe, or Seneschall of the
Province, upon pain of death. Neither is it good, except it be signed by the
King, and one of the Secretaries of Estate, and sealed with the great Seal.
The soldiers levied, are at the charge of the Province where they be taken up,
until they depart the same. Their March (it should seem) is somewhat more
sharp than ours: for I remember I have heard say, that upon a time the old
Marshall Biron should bid Sir Roger Williams bring up his Companies faster,
taxing the slow March of the English. Sir (says he) with this March our
forefathers conquered your Country of France, and I mean not to alter it: A
memorable answer of an honorable Soldier. For the French charge, ye shall
hear the Spaniards opinion out of La Nove; The French Infantery skirmisheth
bravely a far off, and the Cavallery gives a furious onset at the first
charge; but after the first heat, they will take Eggs for their money. And
indeed, this is that which all Writers give them, and which best agrees with
their Nature: for we may say of them, as is said of Themistocles; He was so hot
at the onset, that he lost his wind in the midst of the carriers. Or say of
them, as Fabius of Hannibal; his valor is like a fire of straw, and a flame
kindled in matter of small continuance.

Concerning the French discipline, Discipline.
Caesar himself says, They had it first from us. It is said, the discipline
of the Gauls was first invented in Brittanie, and from thence translated into
Gallia; and now such as desire to attain the perfection thereof, commonly
travel thither to learn it. But they have long since degenerated from their
old discipline of war, and they themselves confess, that since the beginning
of the civil wars, where soldiers in all disordered and dissolute manner
have been given to pillage and thee every, that it is very much abastardized;
whereof La Nove complains in his discourses. As for the Military discipline,
we must confess, that she keeps her bed, sick of a very deadly disease. The
Noblesse fight always on horseback, and think it a dishonor to serve on
foot. But Commines says of the Nobility of Burgundy, in the wars with
Lewis the eleventh, that they all qu^t their horses: for they were then most
honored that lighted on foot, to the end the people might be the more
encouraged, and fight more valiantly: and this they learned of the English. And
it is no question, but if some of the French Nobility would do so, it would
much confirm their foot, by the example of their valor and abiding, and
recover that reputation which now their foot have lost in the world. Neither
do I think this the least reason, why our Ancestors have won so many
battles upon them; namely, for that ever we have had men of Noble Houses, to
lead and serve on foot with our forces. A notable cause to confirm and assure
the unsteadie headiness of a multitude.

And for the opinion that the world has of our foot, ye shall observe what
the same Writer elsewhere says; They be good foot, and better than their
neighbors, as we may say now adays, of the English and Swissers.

And in another place, where he opineth of the manner of service, he says: My
opinion is, that in battles, Archers are the weight that turns the balance;
And of Archers, the English are the flower: where he likewise discourses, how
dangerous a thing it is to abide a battle, except your foot be much the
better: which in my opinion was no little cause, why the French King fought not
with the Cardinal in the year 97, before Amiens, because the enemies foot
were holden in number eighteen thousand (though I hardly think they were so
many.) A number full as great as the French, and the soldier far better,
they being all French, except some three thousand English and Swissers; and
theirs, the choice men of all his Garrisons, and experienced soldiers in those
Low Countries. For true it is, that the Kings Gens d'armes were two for one,
and holden also much the better men, as well because there was in a manner all
the Nobility and flower of France, as also that they had the advantage in the
manner of weapon; for that the French serves with the Pistol, and the
Spaniard still holds him to his Lance. But I make no question, that the
consideration of the odds on foot was not the chief cause, why there was no
battle that day: for we had a goodly fair field, and plain as might be
possible, as also large; a singular advantage for him which is strongest in
Horse: So had we the wind and Sun in our backs, which are holden no small
helps.

But this was the reason: the King thought it no policy to play all his Rest
at once, where he might have lost more at one Game, than he had got in eight
years; he had no reason, but to make the Card that was now going, a Bridge of
Gold, (as the Proverb is) considering, that by this means he should gain the
Town of Amiens, re-assure other Cities that then stood wavering, and recover
his reputation in the world, which by the loss of that Town was much disputed.

It now remains I speak of his Expense, His Expense.
which chiefly consists in these two things before spoken of, namely, his
Court and his Forces: wherein it is very hard to relate an exact proportion,
considering not only the variety and difference of Writers, but also the
uncertaintie of the number of Pensionaries, or provisioned: And lastly, the
change and alteration of their allowance, not continuing always the same.
Howbeit, that which is most commonly reported, and seems nearest the truth,
is this: The maintenance of five Regiments of foot, at six crowns the month,
comes to four hundred sixty eight thousand crowns the year, besides the
pension of five Colonels, at two thousand crowns apeece; thirty Captains at
one thousand pension a man; as many Lieutenants at five hundred, and Ensigns at
three hundred apeece; which is in all, seventie four thousand: which added to
the first sum, makes the whole charge of these Regiments, yearly to amount
to the sum of five hundred forty two thousand crowns. This proportion
differs not much from that of Bodin, where he says: The King might maintain
in ordinary twenty thousand foot, at the rate of three million, and five
hundred thousand Livres, which if you reduce to crowns, and to one number of
six thousand foot, comes to a less rate than that other, namely, to four
hundred eight thousand three hundred thirty three crowns: but I think, that
former is nearer the truth. For the allowance of his Gens d'armes, which are
reckoning at six thousand, as is before said (though in truth there be but
four) for he pays thus many, I follow the proportion of them that say, that
51750. crowns is the ordinary allowance for one company of an hundred yearly:
for where are six thousand men at Arms in the field, are eighteen thousand
Horse in all. After this rate then of the hundred before set down, the whole
Gens d'armery amounts to 3105000. crowns.

For the expense of his Court, you shall hear it to be thus rated: The Table
of the King, and those of the Gentlemen of the Chamber, at 112000. crowns: for
his petty pleasures, a thousand crowns a day: in all 165000. (But this was a
proportion for the last King, who was a great giver.) For the great and little
Stable, 190000. For the Constable, 24000. For the Gran Maistre, great Master,
20000. For the Marshals of France, 18000. apeece, when they were but four; for
now it is a Title only, without either pension or command, save only in the
four chief. For the Admiral, 15000. For the Grana Veneur, great Hunt, 16000.
For the Governors of his Provinces in all, 188000. For the Gentlemen of his
Chamber, their pension 1200. crowns a piece; in all, six hundred thousand. For
the Captains of his Guards on Horse, two thousand apeece. For their
Lieutenants, eight hundred. For two thousand Swisses of his Guard, ten crowns a
month, 24840. For all other domestical Officers, one hundred thousand. For
Heraults, six thousand. For Marshals of lodgings and Fourriers, 4600. For
Prevost Marshals of Provinces, a thousand apeece, in all twenty four
thousand. For twenty four hundred Archers, to attend these Prevosts in the
execution of their Office, seven hundred and twenty thousand crowns. For his
Ambassadors in diverse Countries, two hundred and fifty thousand. For his
Officers of Finances, Treasurers, Receivers, Controllers, and such other like
Offices through France, an infinite and incredible sum: As also for such
numbers of horse and foot, as the Cabinet sets down, besides these Gens
d'armes and Regiments, which ye hear provided for, and in the Kings pay.

But ye must observe, that of all these Court-charges and others here before
mentioned (except those of his forces) ye are not to make any ground as of a
truth: they being only the supposed charges, set down by the said Author, who
for his errors in other matters, has also lost his credit in this.

To speak either particularly of the Court-expences, or generally what they be
certain, I cannot, not having heard any thing thereof, but only that it is
supposed, the charge of the Kings House, is five hundred crowns a day.

It now remains to speak of his Entrade, His Revenue.
or Revenue: for a Prince cannot have peace without war, nor war without
men, nor men without money, nor money without means: nor are there any means
but these: Domaine, Conquests, Gifts of his friends, Pension of his
Confederates, Traffic, Impositions upon Merchandise, brought in, or carried
out; Impositions upon Subjects. And yet one other, which the Kings of France
have lately invented, to help when all other failed; which is Sales of
Offices, more dangerous and prejudicial to the State, than any other.

Of these eight means, I will give you particular observations, and then
conclude, what is generally holden to be the whole Revenue of the Crown of
France, by all these means.

First, The Domaine.
the Domaine, is as it were the Dowre which the State brings to the King her
Husband, for her tuition, defense, and maintenance: And therefore one says: It
belongs not to the King, but to the Crown.

There are two sorts of Domaines; first, the Rent which the King holds in his
hands, of the Feifs given for service: Secondly, that which is united and
incorporate to the Crown. The rights of the Domaine are these: Rents, Feifs,
Payments at alienations, Tributes, Penages, Toll of whatsoever enters or comes
out of Cities, Woods, Forests, and diverse other.

That is Domaine, which belongs to the Crown: First, either by Possession,
time out of mind: Or secondly, by Reunion, for want of heirs males, as the
Apennages when they return: or by Confusion, for want to such as can make just
claim, much like our concealed Lands in England: Or lastly, by Confiscation of
offenders inheritances.

Of this last sort we read, that in the time of Saint Lewis, there were
confisked to the Domaine, the Countries of Dreux, Bray, Fortyonne, and
Monstrevil, Languedocke, Guyenne, Anjow, Maine, Turraine, Auvergne: And after
in the time of Philip, the Duchy of Alencon, the Countries of Perch,
Perigort, Poutieu, La March, Angoulesme, and the Marquisat of Saluzzes. But
Bodin says, most of this came to the Crown by force: La siur (...) Serre
says, it came by way of Exchange or purchase. But the Author of the
Commentaries of the estate of the Religion, and policy of France, is of the
first opinion. Thus great was the Domaine in former times, that of it self,
without oppressing the people with impositions, it was sufficient to maintain
the State and greatness of the Kings of France, but it is now utterly wasted.
It is well known, that the Domaine, which alone maintained heretofore the
beauty and luster of the Royal Estate, is not now such as it was in the
reigns of King Lewis the eleventh, Charles the eighth, and Lewis the twelfth.
The continuance of our wars has caused it to be engaged in many hands, in
such sort, that there is need of more than 15. or 16. thousand pounds sterling,
to redeem that which is worth above five millions of pounds. And Bodin says,
that almost all the Countries, Baronies and Seigneuries of the Domaine, are
aliened for the ninth or tenth part of that they be worth. Ye must observe,
that the lands of the Domaine are not alienable, but in two cases. 1. For the
Apennage of the Kings brother. 2. For the wars. And these must be confirmed
by the Arrest of the Parliament. For all other cases, all Lawyers and
Historians of France agree, That it is inalienable, and many Arrests have been
made of late years to confirm it. I have read, that the Charta Magna of
England says, the Kings when they are crowned, take an oath, not to alien ti:
so do they here in France. And there is no prescription of time, to make such
sales or alienations good, but that they may be recovered and repurchased,
whenever the Crown is able.

To this purpose Plutarch says well, Men cannot prescribe against God, nor
particulars against the Respublique.

2 Concerning the second means of raising Money by conquests, Conquest.
the present State of France can yield no example, it has been long but on
the saving hand.

3 For the third means, it is now out of season; it was used in that good old
world, when men wiped their nose on their sleeve, (as the French man says:)
for now Princes are so far from giving, as they hardly pay that they owe.

4 The fourth means also of Pension, Pension.
which Princes have upon some consideration of their Allies, helps the French
Kings coffers nothing at all, for they rather give than take: As for example,
to diverse Cantons of the Swisses, to whom at first they paid not above one
hundred and twenty thousand Livres yearly: but for these sixty years, they
never pay less the year than two Millions. For says Commines, Lewis the
eleventh entered league with the Swisses, and they into his Pension: to whom he
yearly gave forty thousand Florins, whereof 20. went to the Cities, and 20. to
particular men, upon condition to have a certain proportion of their forces to
serve in his wars upon all occasions. An advantageous alliance for the Swisse
in my opinion, who by this means enrich themselves, clear their Country of
many idle and bad members; and lastly, breed good soldiers, to serve
themselves upon need at another man's cost. The Turk has also a Pension of the
Emperor of Germany, for certain Lands he holds in Hungary: which he
notwithstanding vaunteth to be a Tribute. Many examples might be alleged of
this kind, as of Philip of Macedon, that by Pensions got all Greece partial
on his side: and the Kings of Persia by Pension, got ever the forces of Asia
diverted.

5 The fifth, Traffic.
which is of Traffic, avails nothing the French Kings: for they hold it
here a base and sordid kind of profession for a Gentleman, much more for a
King, to trade by Merchandise. And by the Laws of England, France and
Germany, he loses the quality of a Nobleman, that does Traffic.

Notwithstanding these Laws, and the disparagement that it brings to Nobility,
yet so sweet is the savor of gain, that many have used this, as no small
means to increase their Finances. The great Duke of Tuscane present, gains
infinitely this way, and the more by his most unlawful and tyrannous
Monopolies: for he commonly buyeth up all the Grain of his own Country, at
his own price: yea, and that which comes from other places also, and then
sends out a Bando or Proclamation, that no man shall sell any corn thorowout
his State, till his own be sold, forcing also all Bakers, and other people to
buy thereof. This manner of engrossing Alphonsus of Arragon also used, by the
testimony of Bodin. The Kings of Portugal also, and the Seignory of Venice,
have been great Traders by Merchandise, but it has been in an honester
fashion, at sea, and not to the grinding of their poor subjects. The Nobility
also of Italy, in all Cities (except Naples) hold it no dishonor to Traffic
in gross.

6 The sixth means of raising money upon all Wares and Merchandise, that come
in and go out of the Country, is the most ancient and best agreeing with
reason, and used by all Princes in the World. The particulars comprised under
this branch, are these: Customs inward, and outward. By these the Prince is to
have Impost, five in the hundred: So much just had the Romans, as Cicero
witnesses in his Praetorship of Sicilia. The Turk takes Ten in the hundred of
the stranger, and five of the subject: the French quite contrary. You must
observe, that which here I call the Domaine foreign, is generally called, the
Aides; first, granted by the Estates to Charles Duke of Normandy, when John
his father was prisoner in England: which was the payment of twelve Deniers,
upon all Merchandises and Wares which should be sold in this Kingdom, except
upon Wine, Corn, Salt, and all manner of drink: but since, it has been made
perpetual, and augmented by the imposition upon Wine sold every where, and in
Normandy by retaile.

This is like the slavish Gabell upon all manner of food, which the Princes
take of their subjects through Italy, or the Assize upon Bread and Bear, which
the States have in the Low Countries: a grievance, whereof we smart not in
England, as also we are free from many other burdens, which the people of this
Country are forced to bear.

Touching the Gabell of Salt (which is also comprised under this head;) Some
say it was first erected by Philip le Long: Others by Philip de Valois, 1328.
True it is, that the Ordinance of Francis the first, 1541. sets down an Impost
of 24. Livres upon every Muy: and in the year 1543. an ordinance was made, for
Gabell to be taken upon all seafish salted. And in 1544. it was ordained, that
all Salt should be sold and distributed into the Magazines, or Storehouses of
every several generality. The benefit of this one commodity has been very
commodious to the crown, till the year 81. when the king was forced for want
of money, to let it out to others; whereby he lost, as is in my Author proved,
eight hundred thirty six thousand crowns yearly. Here is also a kind of tax,
called the Equivallent, that is, an imposition laid upon some persons and
places (but not generally) to have liberty to buy and sell salt, and to be
exempt from the Magazines.

The Impost of Wine is laid upon all, without exception or exemption
whatsoever, it is the twentieth part to the King; besides all other rights, as
of Billots entering into Cities, passages by Land, River, and such like: Besides
a later imposition of five Sols upon every Muy, levied by Charles the ninth,
1516.

Concerning the (Traicte foreign) it is of like nature with the Aids, save
that it is leviable upon more particular sorts of merchandise: Besides, the
Aids is an Impost upon things spent in the Land; and the traicte foreign is of
such commodities as are transported out: as of wheat, rye, barley, oats, wine,
vinegar, verjuce, cider, beeves, muttons, veales, lambs, swine, horses, lard,
bacon, tallow, oil, cheese, fish of all sorts, silks and clothes of all sorts,
leather of all sorts; and finally, all other merchandise, as fruits, parchment,
paper, glass, wood, ropes, etc.

7 The seventh ground or foundation of Finances, is the Imposition upon the
subject: that is, not upon the wares or commodities, but upon the persons
themselves, according to their ability; and it is much like the levying of the
tax and subsidy in England, where every one pays ratably to the lands and
goods he possesses. And therefore Haillan judges well, to say, they be
neither personal, nor real, but mixed: Assessed in the place of their
dwelling, according to all the goods of the party assessed, in what part
soever they lie or abide.

These Tailles were first raised by Saint Lewis, but by way of extraordinary
subsidy. Charles the seventh made them ordinary for the maintenance of his
Gens d'armerie. And whereas at first they were never levied but by consent of
the three States, and to endure but while the war lasted, he made them
perpetual. Therefore says one, that which was at first yielded of favor, is
since exacted as patrimoniall and hereditary to our Kings. Yet is it to be
observed, that these Tailles are only liable upon the Flat Pais, all Cities are
exempt; as also all Officers of the Kings house; all Counselors, Lawyers, and
Officers of Courts of Parliament; all the Nobility, the Gens d'armes, the
Officers of war, the Graduates of Universities, etc.

The Taillon is another imposition, raised by Henry the second, Anno 1549.
which was to amend the Wages of Gens d'armes, who by reason of the smallness
of their pay, lay upon the poor Villages, and eat them up; for the ease
whereof, this imposition was devised: which also lies upon the poor
Countryman; whereby at first he was somewhat eased, but now all is perverted;
the poor is still oppressed, and yet he pays still both Taille and Taillon.

Lastly, there is the Sold, or pay of 50000. foot, which were erected by Lewis
the eleventh, into eight Legions; six thousand to a Legion, which with their
Officers came to about this number. To maintain these Legions, there was a tax
levied upon all sorts of persons privileged in the Taille, but only the Nobles.

There are also of the Decymes (Tenths) levied upon the Church. For the levying
of the Taille, Taillon, and wages of 50000. foot, you must note, that the King
sends his Letters Patents by Commissioners, to the Treasurers of each
generality. These according to the sum, rate each election (this is, as ye
would say, every hundred in a Shire, or Bailywicke) and then send to these
elections, to have the said sum gathered in their several Towns and
Hamlets, according as they be rated.

So do they to the Maicures, Consuls, Eschevins and chief Officers of every
City, that are liable to any of these payments; who rating every man according
to his ability, give these Rolls to certain Collectors to gather it up; these
are bound to bring it quarterly to the Receivers. These carry it to the
Receivers general, in the same species that they received it; and from them to
have an acquittance, after the accounts have been perused by the Controler
general.

And these are all the means by which Princes raise their Finances, whereof ye
see some nothing to pertain to the French King, but to others: and some to him
only, not to others.

There yet remains one other means (though extraordinary) to a Prince to get
money, Sale of Offices
which the necessities of the times, and the want of other means, have forced
the French Kings of late years to use. This is the vent or sales of Offices, a
very dangerous and hurtful merchandise, both for the Prince and subject. This
Lesson (says Bodin) the French Kings first learned of the Popes, with whom it
is still as familiar as old, to sell Bishoprics livings, and Ecclesiastical
promotions. This the Popes first began at Avignon in France, where their
means was scant, and they in many necessities: which still continues both in
the Courts of Rome and France, when there is no such necessity. Better is a bad
President, than none at all. A course, says one, of great and dangerous
consequence, but clothed with necessity. It is indeed thrice dangerous, because
sales of Offices cause sales of Justice: for what these Purchasers pay in
gross, they must needs get in retaile, forgetting what was said to Sophocles
the Governor of Athens: A Governor must not; only have his hands clean, but
his eyes also. They cannot say as Pericles did on his death bed, He had never
made, any Athenian wear mourning Robe. For these by selling Justice, and
robbing the poor of their right, give the Fatherless and oppressed. Widow
just cause to complain, and of wearing that mourning robe whereof Plutarch
speaks.

It is a strange thing to consider, and incredible to believe, what infinite
masses of money have been made here in France by these sales, where there is
not that Collector, Controller, Treasurer, Sergeant, or subalterne Officer
whatsoever, but he has bought it of the Prince, and at no small rate: for I
have heard it credibly reported, and ye shall read also in late Writers, that
these Offices are bought in France at a dearer rate, than our Lands in England
of twenty years purchase. Ye must observe, they have them for term of life,
and after to return to the King who is again to sell them. A man in his
sickness, or in danger of death, or upon any need whatsoever, may sell this
his office, or resign it to his son or friend whatsoever: which sale is
good, if the party live forty days after the sale or resignation is
confirmed, otherwise not.

Now we are to consider, what Entrade or Revenue the French King yearly makes
by any, or all of the means abovesaid.

The Estate of the Finances, Domaine, Riches.
and all in Charles the sixth time, Anno 1449. was but 1400000. Livres. Henry
the second, Raised upon his people by way of ordinary Revenue, fifteen
hundred thousand pound sterling a year: whereof some part has since been
aliened for the debts of the Crown, which notwithstanding the King raises as
much now.

But we may observe, that this sum is of late years grown much greater (by
two thirds) as is generally believed: For whereas in those days, some three or
fourscore years since, the ordinary sum was fifteen millions of Francs and
Livres, it is now so many of Crowns. And Monsieur Rivault, Treasurer to the
Duke of Mayen, shamed not (some twenty years since) to say, that his Master
had improved the Realm of France, to a better rent than any Prince had done
before times: For, says he, Where as it was worth but two millions of pounds,
it is now worth five millions sterling.

And another says, that only by the sales of Offices in twenty years space,
The King has raised one hundred thirty and nine millions, which is after the
rate of seven millions the year. So that it is probably to be inferred, that
the Revenues are at least fifteen millions of Crowns; wherein all late
Writers agree. Neither must we think that men are mistaken, by counting
Crowns for Livres, considering that Bodin and La Nove, and most elder Writers
speak only of Livres, not of Crowns. For the manner of account in France, is
by especial ordinance commanded to be made by Crowns, and that of Livres to
cease: So that whenever ye read in the stories of France, of any sum of
thousands, A good note.
millions, or such like, without naming either Francs or Crowns, you are to
respect the times when it was written: for if it was above thirty years past,
they mean Livres or Francs: If of later years than thirty, it is always to be
understood they spoke of Crowns; this rule will not fail them.

Having sufficiently spoken of these, Officers of his Finances.
it remains I keep the same course I have done hitherto; that is, after the
Relation of the Court, to reckon up the Officers of Court, and after the
discourse of his forces, to speak of his Officers of War. So here likewise,
after mention made of his Finances and Revenues, to remember his Financers and
Officers used for the collection, keeping, and disposing of the same. Of which
Officers we may say, as the Philosopher says of Wives; that they be
Necessary evils. And as he says of them; The less of evils is the best: so
say we of these, The fewer the better. But when we read, that the old Romans
had of these but one in a Province, you shall observe here in some Province,
not so few as one thousand.

The chief of these is Treasurer of the Exchequer, The Treasurer
instituted in Francis the first his time, in place of the Receiver general.
There is also another Treasurer of Casualties. The third sort are the
Treasurers generaux des Finances, whom they also call Treasurers of France.
For, as for the Treasurers ordinary and extraordinary of the Wars, we have
already spoken of them in the relation of his forces, and of the Treasurer of
his petty pleasures, when we spoke of his Court. The number of these
Treasurers general, as also of all other Officers of Finances, ye may partly
conceive by the number of generalities which are in France, and the several
offices of each one of these.

Of these Generalities are twenty and one in all France; Generalities.
Paris, Roven, Caen, Nants, Toures, Burges, Poictiers, Again, Toulouse,
Montpellier, Aix, Grenoble, Lion, Ryon, Dyon, Chalons, Amiens, Orleans,
Soissons, Lymoges, Maulin.

In each of these Generalities are diverse Elections; Elections.
that is, diverse places for the receipt of Finances: as in that of Orleans, are
eleven Elections; in the rest some more, and some less, to the number of 170.
in all.

In every generality are ten Treasurers; Receivers.
three Receivers general of the Finances; three Receivers general of the
Taillon; one Receiver general of the Dismes; two Receivers general of the
Woods: and for every Receiver, so many Controllers general; two Treasurers
general extraordinary of the War, for the payment of Garrisons and
soldiers in time of War.

Bes^des all these general officers, Controlle^s.
there are also in each particular Election, three Receivers of the Taille,
three of the Aids, two of the Taillon, and as many Controllers, besides all
other inferior Officers. If then there be thus many in one Election only, ye
may judge the infinite number in all France, upon which they lie, as thick as
the Grasshoppers in Egypt.

I must here also remember the chamber of Accounts, the chief Court of the
Finances: wherein are four Presidents, twelve Masters, eighteen Auditors,
four^ Correctors, one Procuror general, one Advocate, one Gressier, six
Huissiers or Sergeants, and other inferior Officers, to the number (as Bodin
says) of two hundred, besides servants; and it is likely the number is not
lessened since his time.

In conclusion, the Officers here, and of other places, are so exceeding many,
as a President of this Court showed the Estates of F^ance, in the assembly at
Blois, that of the Escu (six shillings) which was paid by the Subject, there
came but a Teston (one shilling six pence) to the Kings coffers.

The Court of Aides also is as full of Officers, as that other. These Finances
(says one) have been so shuffled, altered, changed, and reduced into so
obscure an Art, that very few either do, or can understand it, except they
have been brought up in their Cabale that have obscured it. No marvel
therefore, though there be much difference among men about the certainty
thereof, either for the truth of the sum, or number of the Officers.

The Coins of France are either gold, His Coin.
silver, or brass. In those of gold I must be better instructed my self, for
I know none but the Crown (which is of three or four sorts, whereof that of
the Sun is the best) and the half Crown. Those of silver are the Livres or
Franc, which is two shillings sterling: The quart d'escu, which is one shilling
six pence. The Teston which is half a sous less: The piece of ten sous, which
is one shilling sterling: the half quart d'escu, the half Teston, and the
piece of five sous, that is six pence sterling. Those of Brass is the price of
six Blanks, which is three pence: that of three blanks, three half pence. The
sous of twelve deniers: the liard of four deniers, the double of two: and
lastly, the denier it self, whereof ten make one penny sterling. This baser
and smaller kind of money, has not been used in France, but since the
beginning of the civil wars. The Teston is the best silver.

It remains I speak of the Administration and Execution of Justice, and of
those places and persons where and by whom it is done: I will therefore begin
with their assemblies, as the highest and greatest Court of all, which well
resembles the Parliament of England, the Diet of the Empire, or the Council
of ^^e Amphythrions in Greece.

There are three especial causes of calling these Assemblies. The first, when
the succession of the Crown was doubtful, and in controversy, or when it was
to take order for the Regency, during the Kings Captivity or Minority, or when
they had not the right use of their wits. Hereof ye have examples, Anno 1327.
Saint Lewis an Infant: and Charles the sixth, An. Dom. 1380. a Lunaticke: and
1484. John a prisoner. For all which occasions Assemblies were called, to
determine who should have the Regency of the Realm in the mean while.

The second cause is, when there is question of reforming the Kingdom,
correcting the abuses of Officers and Magistrates, or appeasing troubles and
seditions.

The third cause is, the want and necessity of the King or Kingdom, in which
case the Estates are exhorted to give subsidies, subventions, aids, and
gratuities. For in former times, the Kings contenting themselves with their
Domaine, and impost of such wares as came in, or went out of the land, (the two
most ancient and most just grounds of Finances) were not accustomed to levy
and impose upon their Subjects any tax whatsoever, without the consent of the
three States thus assembled.

The next Sovereign Court (for so the French call it) is the Court of
Parliament; The true Temple of French Justice: Seat of the King and his Peers:
And as Haillan calls it, the Buttresse of Equity. This Court very much
resembles the Star Chamber of England, the Arcopage of Athens, the Senate of
Rome, the Consiglio de' dieci of Venice.

There are no Laws (says Haillan) by which this Court is directed: it
judges, according to equity and conscience, and mitigateth the rigor of the
Law.

Of these Courts of Parliament, ye have eight in France. That of Paris, the
most ancient and highest in pre-eminence, which at first was ambulatory, (as
they call it) and ever followed the Kings Court whithersoever it went: but
since Philip le Bell, it has been sedentary in this City. That of Grenoble
was erected, Anno 1453. That of Toulouse. Anno 1302. That of Bourdeaux, Anno
1443. That of Dijon, in the year 1476. That of Roven, in the year 1501. That
of Aix, the same year. And lastly, that of Bretaigne at the year 1553.
Anciently all Archbishops and Bishops, might sit and give voices in this
Parliament of Paris: but in Anno 1463. it was decreed, that none but the Bishop
of Paris, and Abbot of Saint Denis might sit there, except he be of the Blood;
for all these are privileged.

The Presidents and Counselors of the Court of Parliament of Paris, may not
depart the Town without leave of the Court, by the ordinance of Lewis the
twelfth, in the year 1499. The Senators ought always to be present, because
things are carried with more Majesty when the Court is full.

To this Parliament they appeal from all other subalterne Courts throughout
the Realm, as they do in Venice to the Consiglio grande. Neither can the King
conclude any war, or peace, without the advice and consent hereof: or at
least (as Haillan says) he demands it for fashion sake, sometime when the
matters are already concluded.

The Parliament of Paris consists of seven Chambers: the Grande c^ambre, and
five others of Enquests; and the Tournelles, which is the chamber for the
criminal causes, as the other six be for the civil. It is called the
Tournelles, because the Judges of the other Chambers sit there by turns, every
three months: the reason whereof Bodin gives, that it might not alter the
natural inclination of the Judges, and make them more cruel, by being always
exercised in matter of condemnations and executions. There be of this Court, of
Presidents, Counselors, Chevalliers of honor, Procureurs, Advocates, Clerks,
Sergeants, and other Officers of all sorts, not so few as two hundred.

Besides this Court, there are also other Courts for the administration of
Justice in this City, as the Chatellet of Paris, with a Lieutenant civil, and
another criminal; and the Hostel de Paris, with a Prevost, and other inferior
Officers; which is, as ye would say, the Guild Hall of the City. So have ye
throughout the Realm certain places, (as all Cities in general) where there
be Chatellets (like our places of Assise) and in them a Lieutenant, civil and
criminal, to judge and determine all causes real and personal; and here many
Lawyers and Procurers (as our Counselors at Law, and Atturnies) who plead
before those Lieutenants and Prevosts, and certain Counselors, which are the
Judges in these Courts, whereof the number is incredible in France. Insomuch,
as you may well say of them, as is said of Sienna; There be more Readers, than
Auditors: so here be more Pleaders, than Clients. This Chiquanery
(Petti-fogging) and multiplicitie of Pleaders, came first from the Popes Court,
when his seat was at Avignon, (as my Author says) who in the same place calls
these Advocates, The Mice of the Palace.

The processes and suits in these Courts throughout France are innumerable,
wherein we come nothing near them; and yet there is no want of these in
England. For I have heard of 340. Nisiprius between parties tried at one Assize
in Norfolk: as many I think, as in half England besides. But these are only
twice in the year, that causes are tried at Assizes in our Country, whereas
here they are tried every day in the year, that is not festival. So that it
is not much unlikely, that here are as many Processes in seven years, as have
been in England since the conquest.

There are besides these Courts of Chatellets in Cities, the Courts also of
Bailywicks, and Sheriffalties, who as Haillan says, keep Courts in each
Province, and judge in all matters civil and criminal.

Here is also the Privy Council, or Council of affairs: of the Counselors
(among which are his four Secretaries) he calls certain every morning at
his rising, to whom he communicates apart, his principal and most importing
affairs, where are read all letters which come from other Princes, and such
like public business, and after a conclusion what is to be done, the dispatch
thereof is committed to the Secretaries.

The other, is the Great Council, or Council of Estate; which at first, was,
as it were, a member of the Parliament, and consisted of the Princes of the
Blood and Nobility, having only to deal in the matters of the policy general
of France, or of wars; or of the enacting and publishing of Edicts. But the
faction of Orleans and Burgundy, caused it to be changed to a choice number of
Counselors* provisioned of 1000. crowns pension apeece yearly. Of this
Council the Chancellor is chief, for neither the King himself, nor any
Prince of the Blood comes there. This is the Court of which the Frenchman
says, every time it is holden, it costs the King a thousand crowns a day. And
now, (says Haillan) he cannot keep them so cheap, so infinite is the number
of them grown. Where he also complains, that this Conseil d' Estat, which was
wont only to determine public affairs, as the establishment of justice, the
Reglement of Finances, and redressing of common grievances, is now so charged
with private contentions, as the glory thereof is much diminished.

The Chancellor anciently served as a Secretary, and so was called in the old
Charters of France, where he is likewise called the Grand Referendaire. The
Secretary does sign, and the Chancellor does seal.

The Secretary is next in office, who at first were called Clerks. They are
either of the Finances (which have their place among the Officers of the
Finances, before remembered) or of Affairs which we hear speak of. Of these
are four, which are called principal.

Governors and Lieutenants general of Cities and Provinces, are as it were,
Vice-royes and Regents of those places committed to them: and indeed the
persons sustaining these charges, are much more Noble than those of the
Secre^aries, as being for the most part conferred upon the Princes of the
Blood, and Peers of France.

The Governors of Cities were in old time called Dukes, and they of Provinces,
Counts. They were at first only in Frontier Provinces, but now since the
troubles of France, they have had the command over Cities and Countries, even
in the midst and bowels of the Land: So that now, says Haillan, France is
become a Frontier to it self on every side.

There are but few Cities, whereof anciently there were Governors, as Rochel,
Calais, Paronne, Bologne, Mondidier, Narbonne, Bayonne, and two or three
others: Others, that had keeping of some small Castle or Fort, was only called
the Keeper, or Captain at most. But now, says Haillan, lib. 4. every paltry
fellow that has the keeping of a Pigeonhouse, must forsooth be called, My Lord
the Governor; and my Mistress his Wife, My Lady the Governesse.

The Governor of Daulphenie has greatest privileges; for he gives all
Offices in his Province: in other places they can give none, except they have
it by express words in their Patent. The Governor may not be absent above six
months in a year; but the Lieutenant must never be absent, without leave of
the Prince, except teh Governor be present.

There is yet an Office, whereof I must remember you, which is one of the
chiefest in France, either for honor or profit, called grand Maistre des Eaues
and Forests. All matters concerning the Kings Chases, Forests, Woods and Waters
whatsoever, are determined by him, by the Grand M. Enquesteur, and by their
Reformateur, at the Table of Marble under him are infinite sorts of Officers,
and diverse others: As the particular Master of each Forest, their Lieutenants,
Overseers of the sale of woods, and the other Officers here specified.

But I will not load this short Relation, with reckoning up all the diverse and
infinite sorts of Officers, where with France herself seems t^ be
over-loaden, as partly ye have heard already:and ye shall read in Bodin, how
he complains, not only of the multiplicitie of Offices in general; but also,
that even the Council of Estate is surcharged with number: where you may
likewise observe, how he approves the Privy Council of England erected some
four hundred and odd years since, where are never, says he, above twenty,
by whose sage direction, the Land has long flourished in Arms and Laws. And
for the execution of Laws, and administration of Justice, ye may remember
what has been said before, that the Laws are good and just, but not justly
executed. Where Haillan comparing the time, says: Then great ones were
punished, but since, only petty fellows; and great ones go Scot-free.

Th'ensnaring Laws let Crows go free,
While simple Doves ent^ngled be.
HAving thus related of the Topography and Policy of France, it remains I
speak somewhat of the Oeconomie; that is, of the people of France, comprised
under the three Estates, of the Clergy, the Nobility, and Comminaltie: of the
several humor, profession, and fashion of each of them, which is the third
and last branch of this Relation.

The Church Gallicane, The Clergy.
is holden the best privilege of all those of Christendom, that have not yet
quit their subjection to the Pope. It has always protested against the
Inquisition; It is more free from payments to the Pope, than the Church of
Spain, as also to the King: For here in France they only pay the Disme: but in
Spain, the King has his Tertias, Subsidio, Pil^, and Escusado: in all, a
moitie of the Church living. Indeed it is reported of this Catholic King, that
he has founded many Abbeyes and Religious Houses: but what says his Subject?
He steals the sheep, and gives the Trotters for Gods sake.

In this Church of France are twelve Archbishopricks, one hundred and four
Bishoprics, five hundred and forty Archpriories, one thousand four hundred
and fifty Abbeys, twelve thousand three hundred and twenty Priories, five
hundred sixty seven Nunneries, one hundred and thirty thousand Parish
Priests, seven hundred Convents of Friars, and two hundred fifty nine
Commendums of the Order of the Knights of Malta. There are, says the Cabinet
du Roy, three millions of people, that live upon the Church of France: where he
particularly sets down in each Diocese, the number of all sorts of
Religious people, as also the number of their Whores, Bawds, Bastards, and
Servants of all sorts: And why not? (says he) as well as the Magitians
undertake in their Inventory of the Diabolike Monarchy, to set down the names
and surnames of 76. Princes, and seven millions, four hundred and five
thousand, nine hundred, twenty and six Devils.

The Church has, for all this rabble to live upon, The Temporal livings of the
Church.
these two things: First, her Temporal Revenues, and secondly, her Spiritual,
which they call the Baise-mani. Of her Temporal Revenues, diverse men judge
diversely.

The Cabinet, The gross errors of the Cabinet of France.
who in all his computations makes of a Mouse an Elephant, says, that they are
fourscore millions of crowns the year, besides the Baise-mani, which is as
much more, and besides an infinite provision, which they reserve, and is paid
them over and except their Rents, by their Farmers and Tenants; as of Wheat,
four millions, five hundred thousand quarters: of Rye, two millions, three
hundred thousand quarters: of Oats, nine hundred thousand: of Barley, eight
hundred thousand: of Pease and Beans, eight hundred sixty thousand: Capons,
one hundred sixty thousand: Hens, five hundred sixty thousand: Partridge
50000. Beeves, 12000. Muttons, one million two hundred thousand: Wine, one
million two hundred thousand Cuues: Eggs, seven millions: Butter, 230000.
Quintaux: Cheese, five hundred thousand: Hogs, one hundred thirty six thousand:
Pigges, three hundred forty thousand: Tallow, sixty thousand Quintaux: Hey, six
hundred thousand loads: Straw, eight hundred thousand: Wood, two millions: with
an infinite proportion of other necessaries, imaginary only, and incredible.
And yet he there a voweth all things, with as great confidence, as if himself
had had the true abstract from all the Books of Accounts in each Monastery and
Benefice in this Land. For how is it possible, the Church should have 200.
millions of crowns yearly Rent, when as by the computation, here are but just
so many Arpens of Land in all France, which to rate one with another, at a
crown an Arpen, comes to this account, which he allows the Clergy, and then
is there nothing left for the other two States, of the Nobility and people.

But inasmuch as the better half of their Revenue is by the Baise-mani, there
remains the better half of the Land to the other two States; which
notwithstanding is a proportion small enough.

Near unto this reckoning comes that which we read in Bodin, of Alemant, a
president of accounts in Paris, whose judgment must carry good authority in
this case, as a thing belonging to his profession, and wherein he was best
experienced: The Church Revenues in Land are reckoned orderly, at twelve
millions and three hundred thousand Livres: but I dare justify (says he) that
of twelve parts of the Revenues of France, the Church possess seven.

This opinion Bodin seems to allow: But it is rather thought to be true, that
the Comment de l' estat says, who of the two hundred millions of Arpens,
allows the Church forty seven millions, which by particulars of their
Vineyards, Meadows, arable-Pastures, and Heaths, with their Woods, is there set
down: which here to follow in particular were too tedious. Besides this
Temporal, they have their Baise-mani (as is said) that consists in
Churchings, Christnings, Marriages, Burials, Holy-bread, Indulgences, Vows,
Pilgrimages, Feasts, Processions, Prayers for cattle, for seasonable weather,
for Children, against all manner of diseases, and infinite such purposes; for
which the superstitious people will have a Mass said, which they pay the
Priest for particularly: over and besides all this, there is scarce that Arpen
in all France, upon which there is not some Dirige, or de profundis; some
libera me Domine, or some reckoning or other liable.

Concerning them of the Reformed Religion, whom here in contempt they call
Hugnonets; ye may note, that the number is not small, considering that after
the conference of Poissie, above forty years since, here were found 2150.
Churches of them; whereof not one has escaped without some murders or
massacres: and we may imagine, that since that time this number is much
increased.

But as for Religion, it has only been the cloak and shadow of their
ambitious pretenses, without the which, they could never have insinuated
themselves so far into the hearts of the people, who are always the gros de
la bataille, the maine Battle: and without whom, the Nobility may well
quarrel, but they cannot fight.

And therefore ye shall read in some of the same Religion reformed, That
there were Huguonets, as well of Estate^ as of Religion.

These have now free permission to profess, and places allotted for exercise,
with all liberty of conscience possible, save that in the chief Cities of
France they have no Churches allowed, neither can be buried in Christian
burial (as they call it) if any of them die among the Catholics, with whom
not withstanding they now live peaceably, thorowout the Country. But me
thinks, they have here small reason to let them live together in a house, and
not suffer them to lie together in a Churchyard.

And as for warring any long^r for Religion; the Frenchm^^ utterly disclaimes
it; he is at last grown wise, marry he has bought it somewhat dear; The
Italian is wise b^forehand: the Almaine, in the doing: and the French^ after
the thing is done, says one of their own writers, let us p^s^aetor sap^^^

Concerning the Nobility of France (says La Nove; (...).
They are exceeding valorous and courteous; and there is no State in
Christendom, where they are in so great number.

It has been argued before in this Relation, that there be at least 50000.
able to bear Arms, but that is thought with the most. Monsieur du Fay thinks
them about thirty thousand: in which number, ye must conclude all degrees of
Gentlemen, from the highest to the lowest that bear Arms: for so the French
call their Noblesse, whereas we in England make two distinct orders of the
Nobility and Gentry (as they call it:) Those are Noble, which can prove a long
tract of time, wherein a Fee and Knights service thereto belonging, has
resided in their family. And another Writer says, In France men are esteemed
Noble by blood and profession of Arme^.

And sure, if there be difference in Nobility, as there must needs be, because
the causes be different; for some are ennobled by their valor and Martial
knowledge, and others by their Offices and prudence in the manage of matters of
Estate: I see no reason, but that these last should be holden the more Noble
Nobility, (if I may so say) always giving the first place to them that are of
Noble Houses by Race.

For of all these three sorts the French Writers speak, when they say; There
is a difference of Nobles: The first by Race: The second by Ennobling: and of
Ennobling there are two sorts: One by Patent, duly proved in the Court of
Parliament: The other, by means of Offices to which they are advanced.

And howsoever Turquet hereof infers, that it is la virtue que fait la
Noblesse, car^ily a de nobles vilains, et de vilains nobles: Virtue that makes
Nobility, for there are Noble Peasants, and peasantly Nobles: yet sure it is,
that the degenerating of one from the Virtue of his Ancestors, cannot prejudice
the Nobility, nor Eclipse the glory of his Succeeder, who, as Histories show,
many times excel all the former of their house.

The highest degree of honor in France, ^ec^es of ^^ance.
is the Pairrie, in which order have been sometimes seven, sometimes eleven,
never above seventeene, and most commonly twelve. Whereupon they are called the
Twelve Peers of France. These have the precedence before all the rest of the
Nobility, and of these, they of the Blood, although they were latest called
into the Pairrie. Of these Peers, there be six of the Clergy. 1. Archbishop
and Duke of Rhemes. 2. Bishop and Duke of Laon. 3. Bishop and Duke of Langres.
4. Bishop and Comte of Beauvais. 5. Bishop and Comte of Novon. 6. Bishop and
Comte of Chalons.

Of Temporal. 1. Duke of Burgundy. 2. Duke of Normandy. 3. Duke of Guyenne.
4. Count of Toulouse. 5. Count of Champaigne. 6. Count of Flanders. Since these
were first instituted, many other houses have been admitted into the Pairrie,
by the Kings of France, and the old worn out: As to them of Burgundy and
Flanders, were added the Dukes of Bretaigne, Burbon, Anjow, Berrie, Orleans,
the Counts of Arthois, Ereux, Alenson, Estampes, all of the Blood in Charles
the fifths time.

Since also, in the times of Charles the ninth, and Henry the third, have new
Pairries been erected, as Nevers, Vandosine, Guise, Monpensier, Beaumont,
Albret, Aumal, Memorencie, Vzes, Pentheur, Mercoeur, Ioieuse, Espernon, Rets*
M^nb^son, Vantadoure, and others.

Ye must observe, that the five ancientest Pairries of the Temporality, are
returned to the Crown, the sixth which is of Flanders, does recognize it no
longer, as now being Spanish.

Some say, these Pairres (quasi pares^inter se) were first erected by
Charlemaigne, others by Hugh Cap^t, and others (which is holden for the truest)
by Lewis le yeune, 1179. to aid and assist the King in his Council (says
Bodin.) And therefore the Session of the King with his Pairres, was called The
Parliament without addition: as the Kings Brothers and Sisters are called
Monsieur, and Madame sans queve: whereas all other Sovereign Courts are named
with an addition, as Le Parliament de Paris: le Parl. de Roven, etc.

Ye may also observe, that they of the Laity have the right hand of the King,
and the Clergy the left, in all assemblies or solemn Sessions whatsoever.

I think this division of the Pairrie, into these two sorts, was derived from
that ancient order of the Gauls, of whom Caesar speaks: Of the Nobility of
Gallia, are two sorts; the D^^^des, and Gentlemen: where he likewise
discourses of their diverse Offices.

This Honor of Pairre of France, was at first given for life only, afterward
for them and their Heirs Males; and lastly, to the women also for default of
Males: who likewise are called to sit in Council and Assemblies (as are the
Queens of France;) as at the Assembly at Blois, and at the the Arrest of
Count de Clermont, in the time of Saint Lewis, where the Countess of Flanders
is named present among the other Peers.

Ye must note, that Peers and Princes of the Blood be privileged from being
subject to any Writ or Process, but in case of high Treason: and then also no
Process can be commenced against them, before any other Judges whatsoever,
but before the King, sitting in his Court of Parliament, sufficiently assisted
by the Peers of France. All other Judges are incompetent.

But to leave the discourse of this highest honor in France, and speak of the
Noblesse in general, ye shall read in history, that at the end of the second
Race of Kings, they began to take their surnames, of their principal Feifs:
Since when, of later years, some have contrarily put their surnames upon their
Feifs, which has so confounded the Nobl^sse (says Haillan) as it is now hard
to find out the ancient and true Nobility.

These are they among whom the Proverb is still current, A man of W^rre should
have no more learning, but to be able to write his own name: And therefore
their profession is only Arms and good Horsemanship, wherein if they have
attained any perfection, they little esteem other virtues, not caring what the
Philosopher says: One only, Anchor is not sufficient to hold a great ship. Nor
considering that the old Gallants of the World, were wont to join the one with
the other: and ancient Painters were accustomed to paint the Muses all together
in a troop; to signify, that in a Nobleman they should not be parted.

Hereof it comes, that the French Noblesse glorying in their Arms, call
themselves, The Arm of their Country, the Guardians of Arms, and Terror of
their Enemies; but they never style themselves the Professors of virtue.

This Estate of the Nobility, says one, of all the three Estates is smallest
in number of men, and poorest in living: which no question must needs be true,
after so long a civil war: and herewith accords he that wrote the late
troubles. The French Noblesse is fallen from their ancient wealth, wherewith
they were adorned in the times of Lewi^ the twelfth, and Francis the first. And
I durst affirm, that if all they that bear this Title were divided into ten
parts, eight of them are impaired by sales, morgages, or other debts.

The same Author yields five reasons of the poverty of the Noblesse of
France. First, the Civil Wars. Secondly, Superfluous expenses in apparel.
Thirdly, Household Stuff. Fourthly, Building. Fifthly, Diet and Followers. And
in another place, taxing the extreme prodigality and superfluity of the French
in their Apparel, Building, and Diet, he says, If the War has brought us
four ounces of poverty, our own follies have gotten us twelve. I will not
herein be mine own judge, (says he) but let us do as Players at Tennis, be
judged by all the lookers on, and they will confess, that by these excessive
expenses a great number of the Noblesse go a foot pace, others trot, and many
run post to the downfals of poverty.

I should in this relation of the French Nobility, do them great wrong, to
believe and report for truth, what the Cabinet du Roy, one of their own
Country, says of them; who according to the several Provinces, gives them
several Epithites.

The Noblesse of Berry (says he) are Paillards; Leachers: they of Tourraine,
are Voleurs, Thieves: they of Guyenne, Coyners: they of Toulouse, Traitors:
they of Narbonne Covetous: they of Province, Atheists: they of Lyonnois,
Treacherous: they of Rhoimes, Superstition^^ they of Normandy, Insolent: they
of Pr^^^die, Proud* and so forth of all the rest.

But I will do them more right, and conclude of them, that for privilege and
nobleness of Race, they may compare with any Nobility of Christendom. For
proof of the first; The King has nothing of his Noblesse, but Sword-service.
And for the second, says another; The French Noblesse is composed of so famous
houses, that there are a dozen of them descended by right line from Kings, that
have peaceably possessed Kingdoms.

Having briefly spoken of the two first Estates of France, the Clergy and
Nobility: It lastly remains, I speak of the people in general, and namely,
of their freeness of Speech; manner of Diet; kinds of Buildings; sorts of
Exercises; fashion of Apparel; diversity of Language; suddenness of
apprehending; rashness in executing; impatience in deliberation, and diverse
other natures and humors proper to the Frenchmen; wherein ye shall not look
for a methodicall and large discourse, but a brief and compendious remembrance
of such things, as I have read and observed in this Nation.

It is incredible to believe, and odious to hear, how the Frenchman will
talk, and impudently utter what he foolishly conceives, not only of all
foreign States and Princes of the World, but even of their own State and King
himself; of whom he will not spare to speak whatsoever he hears, and
sometimes also more than the truth; which insufferable vice of theirs, I here
put in the first place, because I hold it of all others the most disloyal and
unlawful. Hereof the wisest so^ of them much complain, and wish reformation:
but it is a thing so natural with them, as

-- Expellas furca licet, usque recurret.
He has besides this liberty of speaking, a property incident to such like
natures: namely, an inquisitive listening and harkening after news, which is an
old fashion of theirs, and has continued with them many hundred years. It is
usual with all the Gauls, both to constrain Travelers (though unwilling) to
stay, and to inquire of each of them, what he has heard or understood of
every matter: and with the popular in Towns, to flock about Merchants, and
compel them to tell from what parts they come, and what news they heard
there: And led by these rumors and heare-sayes, they determine many times of
most weighty affairs, of which determinations they must needs eft-soones
repent them.

Concerning the diet, it is, to keep no diet: for they feed at all times,
there being among them very few which (besides their ordinary of dinner and
supper) do not Gouster, as they call it, and make collations, three or four
times the day, a thing as usual with the women as men, whom ye shall see in
open streets before their doors, cat and drink together. No marvel therefore
though the Italian calls them the only Gourmands.

The French fashion is to lard all meats; whose provision ordinary is not so
plentiful as ours, nor his Table so well furnished: howbeit, in Banquets they
far exceed us; for he is as friand (licourish) as the Trencher-men of Media,
or Aesope the Tragedian, who spent fifteen thousand crowns at one feast, in
the tongues of Birds only. He lives not like the Italian, with Roots chiefly
and Herbs: nor like the Lacedemonian, that wears his hair shaven close to
his skin, bathes himself in cold water, eats brown bread, and sups black
broth. Nor like the Scythian, who faith, hunger is my best cheer, the ground
my bed, Beasts skins my clothing; but rather like Alcibiades, of whom Plutarch
reports, that he was over-delicate in his diet, dissolute in love of wanton
women, excessive in banquets, and over-superfluous and ^ffeminate in apparel.

As for the poor Paisant, he fares very-hardly, and feeds most upon bread
and fruits, but yet he may comfort himself with this; that though his fare be
nothing so good as the Plough-mans and poor Artificers in England, yet is it
much better than that of the Villano in Italy.

Of the French Buildings I have spoken before in the Relation of Paris, both
that it is lately grown to be more magnificent, than it was in former times,
and that many thereby have much weakened their estate.

You may therefore observe, that as I there said, the City of Paris was better
built than that of London: so are in general, all the Cities and Villages in
France, fairer than ours in England, comparing the one with the other.

As for the manner of Building here, how beautiful soever it be to the eye,
the Offices and rooms, me thinks, are not so well contrived as ours, to the
use. One thing there is, by which they are much beautified; namely, the bluish
kind of Tyle, which here they have in great quantity, the which is very hard,
and therefore durable; and very thin and light, and therefore not so
burdensome to a house, as is our Tyle in England.

Concerning their Apparel, Their Apparel.
if ye well observe that of the Citizen, both men and women, it is very
seemly and decent: that of the Paisant, very poor, all whose apparel for the
most part, is of Linen: As for that of the Noblesse, ye shall hear what La
Nove says; The Noblesse in their expense in apparel, are excessive and very
rich. And yet me thinks, nothing so rich and costly as ours; the only
excess whereof, is the greatest prejudice and hinderance to the Commonwealth.

This Author reproves two things in the French Apparel. First, that every
Gallant, forsooth, must have many suits at once, and change often in the year:
and therefore (says he) if in the Court they spy one in a suit of the last
years making, they scoffingly say: We know him well enough, he will not hurt
us, he is an Apple of the last year.

The second thing he dislikes, is this; that every two year the fashion
changes. And hereof it comes, that when ye see all other Nations painted in
the proper habit of their Country, the Frenchman is always pictured with a
pair of Sheeres in his hand; to signify, that he has no peculiar habit of
his own, not contenteth himself long with the habit of any other, but
according to his capricious humor, devises daily new fashions.

This variety of fashions, a man may well note in the Fripperies of Paris,
whereof says La Nove, if one would make a pourtraict in a Table, it would be
the most sportfull thing that may be.

I am now by order to speak of his Exercises: wherein, Their Exercises.
me thinks the Frenchman is very immoderate, especially in those which are
somewhat violent for ye shall see them play Sets at Tennis in the heat of
Summer, and height of the day, when others were scarce able to stir out of
doo^es. This immoderate play, in this unseasonable time, together with their
intemperate drinking and feeding, is the only cause, that here ye see them
generally itchie and scabbed; some of them in so foul a sort, as they are
unfit for any honest Table.

Among all the other exercises of France, I prefer none before the
Palle-maille, both because it is a Gentleman-like Sport, not violent, and
yields good occasion and opportunity of discourse, as they walk from the one
mark to the other: I marvel, among many more apish and foolish toys, which
we have brought out of France, that we have not brought this sport also into
England.

Concerning their shooting with the Crosse-bow, Shooting.
it is used, but not very commonly. Once in a year, there is in each City a
shooting with the Piece at a Popingay of wood, set upon some high Steeple (as
also they do in many places of Germany.) He that hitteth it down, is called
the king for that year, and is free from all Tax: besides, he is allowed
twenty crowns toward the making of a Collation for the rest of the shooters.
And if it happen, that three years together he carry the Prize, he is free
from all tax and imposition whatsoever, all his life after.

This custom, no question, is very laudable, whose end tends much to a
public benefit: for by this practice and emulation, he grows more ready and
perfect in the use of his Piece, and so more able and fit to do his Country
service. And I suppose, if in times past we had had like Prizes for the long
Bow (the ancient glory of our English service) we had not so soon quit the
exercise thereof, nor degenerated so far from ancient custom. So do I think,
that in these days, wherein the Piece is only prized, if we have this fashion
of France and Germany, in England, to reward him in every place that should
best deserve therein; that our Countryman would grow more perfect and expert in
the use thereof: at whose unaptnesse and aukwardnesse in their first training,
before they come to have served some time, I have often marvelled.

He has also his sports of Bowling, Carding, Dicing, and other unlawful, and
unusefull games; whereof I will omit to speak, being too common both with them
and us.

As for the exercise of Tennis-play, Tennis-play.
which I above remembered, it is more here used, than in all Christendom
besides; whereof may witness the infinite number of Tennis-courts thorowout
the Land, insomuch as ye cannot find that little Burgade; or Town in France,
that has not one or more of them. Here are, as you see, threescore in Orleans,
and I know not how many hundred there be in Paris: but of this I am sure, that
if there were in other places the like proportion, ye should have two
Tennis-courts, for every one Church through France. Me thinks it is also
strange, how apt they be here to play well, that ye would think they were
borne with Rackets in their hands, even the children themselves manage them so
well, and some of their women also, as we observed at Blois.

There is this one great abuse in their exercise, that the Magistrates do
suffer every poor Citizen and Artificer to play thereat, who spends that on
the Holy Day at Tennis, which he got the whole week, for the keeping of his
p^o^e family. A thing more hurtful than our Alehouses in England, though the
one and the other be bad enough. And of this I dare assure you, that of this
sort of poor people, there be more Tennis-players in France, than
Ale-drinkers, or Malt-wormes (as they call them) with us.

Neither would I speak of Dancing, save only, Dancing.
that I presume, ye will give me leave, for Methods sake, having undertaken to
speak of the French exercises, not to omi^ that of Dancing, wherein they most
delight, and is most generally used of all others. And I am persuaded, were it
not for this; That they of the Reformed Religion may not dance, (being an
exercise, against which their strait-laced Ministers much inveigh) that there
had long since many of the Catholics turned to their side: so much are they
all in general addicted hereunto. For ye shall only see the Gentlewomen and
them of the better sort, but every poor draggle-taile, even to the Cobblers
daughter, that can dance with good measure and Art, all your Quarantes,
Levaltics, Bransies, and other dances whatsoever: not so much but the
Chambermaid, and poor Citizens wife, dance usually in the City-streets, in a
round, like our Country Lasses on their Towne-greene, about the May Pole,
making music of their own voices, without any Instrument. And rather than
sail, the old women themselves, both Gentle and base, who have more toes than
teeth, and those that are left, leaping in their heads, like Iacks in
Virginals, will bear their part. This argues (I will not say a lightness and
immodestie in behavior, but) a stirring spirit, and liveliness in the French
nature: whereof also the music and songs they have, Music.
is no small argument: for there is not almost a Tune in all France, which is
not Ienicke, or Lydian, of five or seven tunes: a note forbidden youth by Plato
and Aristotle, because, says Bodin, it has great force and power to soften
and esseminate men's minds. The tune Doricke, which is more grave music, and
was commanded for the singing of Psalms in the Primitive Church, their
inconstant and stirring humor cannot brook by any means.

It remains, I speak of their Language, Their Language.
of whom the Italian has a Proverb: The French neither pronounce as they
write, nor sing as they prick, nor think as they speak. In which first
point, they differ from the Lutine, Italian, Spanish, and Greek, who fully
pronounce every letter in the word: whereas the French to make his speech more
smooth, and Ceulante, (as he terms it) leaves out very many of his consonants,
whereby it now is grown almost as sweet a tongue to the care, as the Italian
or Greek: which two, by reason of the many vowels, are questionless the most
delicate languages of the World.

It now remains I speak of the French nature and humor; which by the change
of his speech, apparel, and building, by his credulity to any tale which is
told, and by his impatience and haste in matter of deliberation, whereof I
shall not omit presently to speak, ye may judge to be very idle, 1. In
deliberation.
wavering, and inconstant. Says one, As the Frenchmens pronuntiation is very
fast, so are their wits very wavering. And ye shall read in Caesar's
Commentaries very often, how he taxes them of this leality and suddenness:
Caesar being informed of these matters, and fearing the unstablenesse of the
Gauls, (as being sudden and wavering in their resolutions, and generally
desirous of innovations) he thought fit not to trust them: And in another
place, Caesar understanding that almost all the Gauls were naturally hungry
of change, and unconstantly and suddenly stirred to war, etc. And again, Vt
sunt Gallorum subita and repentina consilia: As the resolutions of the Gauls
are sudden and unlooked for, etc.

To conclude, if ye will rightly know the Nature and Humor of the ancient
Gauls, ye must read the sixth of these Commentaries, and you shall observe how
strange it is, that though all other things in the world are subject to change,
yet the same natural of lightness and inconstancy still remains in the
French. This is aptly showed by Haillan, in his description of Lewis the
eleventh: If he had one thing, he straight casts his affection to another,
being violent, busiehea^ed, and impatient.

To this accords another of their own Writers; 2. In matter of War
Such is the condition of France, that if she have no Wars abroad against
powerful Neighbors, she must have broiles at home among her own Subjects,
and her working spirits can never remain long quiet. And therefore Tacitus
calls them, Levissima hominum gene^^: The most sickle kind of Men; sudden to
begin, and more sudden to end, apter to apprehend the action, than comprehend
the cause, ready to lay hold, not able to hold fast: as by the making and
revoking of so many Edicts, against the Reformed Religion in so short a time,
and by many other their actions appears.

For ye must observe of the French, that he entrech a Country like thunder,
and vanishes out again like smoke: He resembles the Waspe. who after the
first stroke, loses her sting, and can hurt no more.

He shows this his lightness and inconstancy, 3. Entertaining of friendship.
not only in matters of service and war, but also even in other his actions
and carriages: But in nothing more than in his familiarity, with whom a
stranger cannot so soon be off his hearse, but he will be acquainted; nor so
soon in his chamber, but the other like an Ape will be on his shoulder: and as
suddenly, and without cause ye shall lose him also. A childish humor, to be
won with as little as an Apple, and lost with less than a Nut: Quite contrary
to the nature of the Italian, of whom ye shall in your travel observe, that he
is of too fullen and retired a fashion, and a loupgarou (as the Frenchman calls
him) wherein I would wish you to observe the virtue of the Englishman, (for
virtue is a mediocrity between two extremes) who is neither so childishly and
^pishly familiar as the French, nor so scornfully and Cya^^ally solitary as the
other.

So are we in matter of Duel and private quarrel, 4. In managing (...)
in a (...) me thinks, between these two Nations: for we are (...) to
devillishly mind fall of re^e^ge, a, notarry seven or ^^n years for an
opportunity upon our enemy, as does the Italian not so inconsiderately hasty,
as we must needs either fight to day, or be friends tomorrow, as does the
French.

Of the French carriage, and manage of a quarrel, how childish and ridiculous
it is, I have seen two or three examples; wherein the parties have neither
showed judgment to know their own right, nor valor to revenge their wrong:
whereas the English Gentleman, with mature deliberation, disputes how far
his honor is engaged, by the injury offered, and judiciously determines his
manner of satisfaction, according to the quality of the offense: which done, he
presently imbarketh himself into the action, according to the prescription of
the old rule, Post quam consulueris, mature opus est facto: wise resolutions
should be speedily executed.

I will here remember you of one other instance more, wherein our Countrymen
keep the golden mean, between the two extremes of defect and excess, and
wherein these two Nations of Italy and France are culpable, and here worthily
to be taxed.

We may say of the Italian, (...) his wife.
who makes his house his wives prison, as Plutarch says of the Persians: They
are by nature strangely and cruelly jealous of their Women, not only of their
Wives, but also of their Slaves and Concubines, whom they guard so strainly,
that they are never seen abroad, but remain always locked up in their
houses: Whereas the French liberty on the other side is too much: for here a
man has many occasions offered upon any small entrance to come acquainted; and
upon every least acquaintance to enter, where he may come to her house,
accompany her arm in arm in the streets, court her in all places, and at all
leasons, without imp^tation. Wherein me thinks, the French married man does as
Plutarch reports of Pericles, take away the Walls and fences of his Orchards and
Gardens, to the end every man might freely enter and gather fruit at his
pleasure.

No marvel then, the bridle being left in their own hands, though sometimes
they be saddled, and their Husbands know not. You may observe therefore, that
in this matter of Wedlock also, the English use is better than either the
Italian or French.

It is also natural to the French, 6. In aptness to scoff.
to be a great scoffer; for men of light and unsteady brains, have commonly
sudden and sharp conceits. Hereto also their language well agrees, as being
current and full of proverbs; to which purpose I will remember you of two
answers, not long since made by two Frenchmen, wherein you may observe how
little esteem they hold of the Roman Religion in heart, though they make
profession thereof in show.

The one of these being very f^ke, and, as was thought, in danger of death, his
ghostly father comes to him with his Corpus Domini, and tells him, that hearing
of the extremity wherein he was, he had brought him his Savior to comfort
him before his departure. The sick Gentleman withdrawing the curtain, and
seeing there the fat lubberly Friar with the Host in his hand, answers; I
know it is our Savior, he comes to me as he went to Jerusalem, C^ est, un asne
qui le port: He is carried by an Ass.

The other Gentleman upon like danger of sickness, having the Friar come to
him to instruct him in the Faith, and after to give him the Host, and the
extreme unction (it was on a Friday) told him that he must believe, that this
Corpus Domini which he brought, was the very real flesh, blood, and bone of
our Savior. Which after the sick man had freely confessed, the Friar offered
it him to receive for his comfort. Nay, quoth the other, You shall excuse me,
for I^ eat no flesh on Fridayes. So that ye see the French will rather lose
his God, than his good jest.

The French humor also (faith one) Cannot away with patience vid modesty. And
therefore another says of him, that he is as shamefast and modest, As a Page
of the Court. Or as Hiperbolus, who, Plutarch says, for his boldness and
faucie impudency, was the only subject in his time, for all Satyricks and
Comedians to work upon.

He is also such a one, as Theophrastus calls immundus, uncleanly; Who being
leprous and scabby, and wearing long unpared nails, thrusts himself into
company, and says, those diseases come to him by kind; for both his Father,
and his Grandfather were subject unto them.

He is loquax, Talkative, who had rather seem more chatting than a Swallow,
than hold his peace: so willing is he to make himself ridiculous. With which
people (it is strange) ye shall talk all day, and yet at night not remember
whereof he has talked; such multiplicity of words he has; and so idle is the
matter whereof he treats.

He is also I^t^mpest^vus, unseasonably troublesome: Who (...) to his friend
f^^ll of business, will give him coun^^^, before he have imparted the ma^^er
unto him: Of which kind of people, Theophrasrus bids us beware, where he
says: If you will not be troubled with a sit of an Ag^e, you must run as
fast as your legs can carry you from such kind of men, for it is very
troublesome living with fellows, that cannot distinguish the seasons of
leisure and affairs.

He is Microphilotimos, that is, proud of trifles: Who, if he have sacrificed
an Ox, uses to nail up the head and horns at his gate, that all that come
to him, may take notice that he has killed an Ox. And if he be to pay forty
shillings, will be sure to pay it in new-coined money. This is he that comes to
the Tennis-Court, throws his purse full of coin at the line, which gives a
found as if there were no less than thirty or forty crounes, whenas sometimes
by mischance we have discovered that it was nothing but Paper, and a few Sols,
and doublesse of Brass that made it so swell, in all scarce eighteen pence
sterling.

He is Oftentator, a Craker: who coming to such as have great horses to sell,
makes them believe he will buy some: And at great Faires, drawing to their
shops that sell apparel, calls to see a suit of an hundred pounds; and when
they are agreed of the price, falls out with his boy, for following him without
his purse. Such a one was the Gallant, who in the midst of his discourse with
many Gentlemen, suddenly turned back to his Lackie, and says, Fetch me my
Clock, it lies in my lodging in such (or such) a place, near such (or such) a
Jewel. The Lalero bethinks himself that it is in his pocket: (which he knew
well enough before) presently he pulls it out, not so much to show how the time
passes (whereof he takes little care) as the curiousness of work, and the
beauty of the case, whereof he is not a little brag and enamoured. To speak
thus particularly of all his several humors and customs, would be very
prolix, and not much necessary: I will only refer you to the fourth of
Tullies Rhetoric, where he speaks of a bragging Rhodomonte, and to the first
Book of Horace Satyrs, speaking of an endless and needless Prater, a
fastidious and irksome companion. Where you shall see the French natural, very
lively, and admirably well described.

I will only speak of his impatience and precipitation in deliberations of
War or Peace, and such other affairs of greatest importance, and so end. To
this effect Bodin says of him: The French is of so sudden and busy
disposition, that he quickly yields to that a man demands, being soon tired
with messages to and fro, and other delays peculiar to the Spaniard. And in
another place; The Spaniard had need of a more ready dispatch than he has, and
the French of more moderation in his actions and passions. And whereas Commines
says of us, that we be not so crafty in our treaties and agreements as the
French; I think, saving the credit of so great an Author, he might better have
said, so headstrong and precipitate. But where he says, that he that will
treat and determine matters with us, must have a little patience; I yield unto
him, he has good reason so to say; for his Contrymen, the French, can
endure no delay; they must propound and conclude all in one day. By this haste
of theirs, they lost more, says Bodin, by one Treaty at Cambrey, Anno 1559.
to the Spaniard, than he had before got of the French in forty years by war.

Navarre.
TO the Title and Arms of France we see these of Navarre annexed;
notwithstanding that this Kingdom lies Westward of the P^rencan mountains,
touching upon Arragon on its South, and Biscar on its North part, two of the
Spanish Provinces. The old Inhabitants were the Vascones, the Berones, etc. The
present name of Navarre, it has either from the Spanish word Navas, signifying
a Campagnia, or woodlesse champaigne Country or field, naturally fenced with
trees round about, of which diverse are in this Kingdom: or else from Navarrin,
a town in the mountains, and a chief Fort against the Moors of old time.
About the year 716. Garcia Ximenes, freeing it from the Moors, gained it the
honor of a petty Kingdom; which his Ancestors so well increased, that within
three hundred years after Sancho the great wrote himself King of Spain, for
Leon he held by force, Arragon had been before united by marriage; and
himself obtained Castile in right of his wife: out of other parts he had
driven the Moors also. But this union himself again disjoynted, by a
division of (...) amongst his own sons. Navarre thus again dissevered, came
about the year 1483. unto Katherine Countess of ^^ix and Bigorre, and
Princess of Bearne; who unhappily marrying with John Earl of Albret, (a
French Coun^^^^ (...) those three of his wives also) lost the Kingdom to the
Spaniard. The quarrel was this; Lewis the twelfth of France falling at wars
with the Spaniards, Venetians, and Germans, was seconded by this John of
Albret, and both for this opposed and excommunicated by the Pope Julius the
se^o^d; Navarre being by a Bull exposed to the Invader. Upon this hint
Ferdinand of Spain puts in; demands passage through Navarre for his Army
pretended against the Moors: which upon denial of his request, he turns upon
Navarre: and before the slow succors could come out of France, carries the
whole Kingdom, not so much as a box on the ear being given in resistance.
Thus the Spaniard ga^ the possession, though Henry of Albret (son to
Katherine and John aforesaid) retains the title: from whom also the French
King challenges it; as being descended of this Henry, and his wife Margaret of
Valois, Sister to King Francis of France: from whom came Joan Albret, Queen of
Navarre, whose husband was Anthony Duke of Burbon: whose son was Henry the
great, King of Navarre first, and of France afterward, whose son in Lewis the
thirteenth, the present King of France.

The chief City of Navarre is Pampelona: the strength is made use of by the
Spaniard, as a Bulwark against France; there being but two passages through the
Pyrenean mountains out of this kingdom into Bearne in France, which he easily
keeps fortified.

Belgia, Netherland.
NExt lies the seventeene Provinces, called the Low Countries, the
Netherlands, or Germania Inferior, concerning whom, the world can but wonder,
how any Prince would neglect such a benefit and inheritance of goodness,
greatness, and wealth, which united with the love of the Inhabitants, would
have exceeded Spain for Revenues, multitude of people, Cities, shipping, and
all things else tending to worldly felicity. In observing the distraction
whereof, a discreet Reader may truly learn the inconstancy of worldly
prosperity, most commonly procured by Princes themselves in following ill
counsel and youthful distemperature.

The Region contains the Dukedomes of Brabant, Limburk, Luzzenburg, and
G^lderland: the Earledoms of Flanders, Artoys, Hennalt, Holland, Zealand,
Nemours, and Z^^ph^^: the Marquesa^e of the Empire; the Lordships of Friesland.
M^e^^lin, Virech, Over-isel, and Groaning, East Friesland belongs to a Prince
of its own, who ever disclaimed to be united to the residue, belike to
prevent all claim, that either Empe^our or King might by cavil lay thereunto.
They invented the Art of Printing, restored Music, framed the Chario^,
devised the laying of colors in Oil, the working of colors in Glass, the
making of Tapestrie, Says, Searges, Woosteds, Frisadoes, and diverse sorts of
Linen Cloth, with innumerable other small trifles: all sorts of Clocks and
Dials, and the Mariners Compass.

In these Provinces are numbered two hundred and eight great Towns munited with
walls, Towns.
ramparts, ditches, warlike ports, draw-bridges, and in which are continual
guards, either of the Burgers, of Soldiers lying there in garrison, according
to the proximitie of the enemy, the importance of the place, of necessity of
the time.

The Villages (or Dorps) are six thousand three hundred, beautified with
Churches imbatteled, and of many several fashions, besides Granges, Castles,
Religious houses, Towers, and Gentlemen's Manours. The air seems moist, yet
not prejudicial to the health of the inhabitants: for in the Campaine of
Brabant, men live an hundred years, and glory in the same, as if the promise
were fulfilled in them, to have their days long in the Land which the Lord God
has given them.

The Emperor Charles had an intention to erect it into a Kingdom, but the
difficulty consisted herein, that every of th^se Provinces being governed by
peculiar customs, prerogatives, and privileges; would never have yielded unto
one Royal Law, common to all, especially those that had the largest
privileges: for which cause he gave over his determination. It is seated
commodiously for all the Provinces of Europe and contains in circuit about a
thousand Italian miles. The air of later times is become much more wholesome
and temperate than in times past, whether it be by reason of the increase of
Inhabitants, or industry of the people, who spare no charge to amend whatsoever
is amiss.

Whosoever shall consider what commodity they raise by the fishing and traffike
only, may well say, that no Nation through the whole world may compare with
them for riches. For Guicciardine writes, that of their Herring-fishing, they
make yearly 441000. pound sterling; their fishing for Cod 150000. pound
sterling: and of their fishing for Salmon more than 200000. crowns, which is
of sterling money 60000. pound. The continual riches that grows in the
Country, of other sorts of fish taken all the year, is infinite. The value of
the principal Merchandise yearly brought in, and carried out, is likewise
infinite; the aforesaid Author esteems it to be about fourteen millions;
one hundred and thirty crowns: whereof England only brings to the value of
five millions, and two hundred and fifty thousand crowns. It is a wonder to
see, how that the Inhabitants of all these Provinces (especially of Brabant and
Flanders) understand and speak two or three languages, and some four or more,
according to their intercourse with strangers, yea, in Antwerp you shall hear
the women speak Dutch, French, Italian, Spanish, and English. The Country is
everywhere bettered by navigable Rivers, Nature of the soil.
and those not empty handed, but affording delicate water, and excellent fish.
It is reasonably beautified with woods, affording materials to build withal,
and pleasure for hunting. It is smally, or not at all mountainous, except about
Namurs, Lutzenburg, and Henalt: fruitful of corn, grass, and herbs fit for
medicine: in some places of Brabant and Gelder-land full of heath, yet not so
barren but cartell are well sustained there, their flesh having an exdinary
sweet taste.

It is free from those creatures which are either noisome or dangerous to man,
and wants none of those blessings wherewith the God of all blessings indoweth
a country, but a noble Prince, unity of Religion, and a quiet Government. Which
if it might please the Almighty to regrant, it would questionless shine as the
Sun amongst the inferior Planets, with the rest of their adjacent
neighbors, in treasure, potencie, content, and ordinary felicity.

For their Forces at Land, Forces.
of them it may truly be reported, that they have not only made their parties
good against the potent wealth and exact discipline of the Spanish, but have
also at all times prevented the intimations, intrusions, and underminings of
all their neighbors, and lately regained the freedom of their ancient
liberty, even to point of admiration; That where all other Nations grow poor
by war, they only thrive and become rich.

For the store of shipping they are also immatchable. In the year 1587. the
King of Denmark upon some pretenses of displeasure, arrested one with another
600. in the Sunds at one time. In 88. upon short warning they rigged to the
narrow seas 100. good men of war. And if suggestion deceive not, at this day,
Holland, Zealand, and Freesland, are said to rejoice in the possession of 2500.
good ships, from 150. to 700. tun a piece.

In regard whereof, other nations professing the same religion, and
accommodated with like advantages, may first observe, to what height of courage
and confidence this people is grown, by good order and faithful dealing; who
in truth (being but two or three small shires) have for forty years space
resisted and beaten the forces of a mighty King, who keeps Millan, Naples, and
Sicil, under great bondage, in despite of all the Italians, for valor and
policy notwithstanding proclaiming themselves to be the sole Minions of the
habitable world. But truth is; These petty Princes have not now those daring
spirits which they had in former times, when the Visconti, Neapolitans,
Fortibrachio, Francis Sforza, with other Lords and Commonweals, were of power
to invade the territories of the Church, and enforce the Romans themselves to
thrust their Pope Eugenius out of Rome, to save their city from sacking.

The Country now represents unto all Christendom nothing more livelier than
a School of Martial Discipline, whereunto all Nations resort to learn and
see the practice of Arms, and the models of Fortifications.

Whereupon no few considerations are to be observed: first, into what follies
and extremities Princes run, by inuring their people to the assiduitie of
warfare: and secondly, what great advantages a small or weak Estate gains,
by fortifying places and passages: for surely there is nothing that sooner
undoeth a great Price, than to be forced to besiege a Town which is
excellently defended; because herein he consumes his time, and most commonly
loses his reputation. As did Amurath before Belgrade: Soliman before Vienna:
Charles the fifth before Mets: Francis the first before Pauie: Maximilian
before Padoa: The Catholics before Rochel: The Protestants before Saint John
de Angeli: And Albert before Oastend. This manner of defense grew in use first
in Italy, by occasion of the coming of Charles to the Conquest of Naples,
whose manner of warfare, together with the terror of his Ordnance (never
before that time practiced in Italy) gave the Inhabitants occasion to raise
their wits to the utmost of resistance. Then followed the famous overthrow of
the Venetians at Caravaggio; where in an adverse battle, they almost lost all
they held upon the sin Land. By which examples, Princes being instructed in
the danger that came by fields so foughten, the most part afterward turned all
their imaginations of defense from the field to fortresses. And the first that
put this in practice to his highest commendation, was Prosper Collouna, who at
two several times most honorably defended the Duchy of Milla^ne against the
French, only by shutting them from victual, wearying them with all manner of
distresses, and opposing them to the want of all things requisite for an Army.

Whether the Netherlands borrowed this discreetnesse from the Italians, or more
lately provided for their best safeties, being by long time beaten with the rod
of experience, I will not here dispute; but sure I am, that by this manner of
discipline, they only of all Christendom have made best use thereof; As the
people to whose glory, industry, patience, and fortitude, and that in a good
cause, too much honor and commendation can never be attributed.

The States of the Low Countries.
ALL the seventeene Provinces of Netherland were sometimes under one Lord: but
privileges being broken, and wars arising, the King of Spain, (the natural
Lord of all these Low Countries) was in the treaty of peace, Anno 1606.
enforced to renounce all pretense of his own right to these confederate
Provinces; Since when, we may well handle them by themselves, as an absolute
and a free State of Government, as the Spaniard himself acknowledged them. The
Provinces united are these; Zeland, Holland, Vtrich, Over-Isell, Zutphen,
Groningen, three quarters of Gelderland, with some pieces of Brabant and
Flanders: This union was made Anno 1581. The Fleets and Forces of which
Confederation, are from the chief Province altogether called Hollanders.

The first of these is Zeland, whose name given it by the Danes of Zeland in
Scandia, notifies its nature, A land overflowed with the Sea. Broken it is into
seven Islands: whereof those three to the East beyond the River Scheld, and next
to Holland are Schowen, Duvelant, and Tolen: the other four be Walcheren,
Zuyd-beverlant, Nort-beverlant, and Wolferdijck.

T'land van Schowen is seven of their miles about, parted with a narrow fret
from Nort-beverlant. The chief town is Zierickzee, the ancientest of all
Zeland, built 849. The Port sometimes traded unto is now choked with sand,
Duveland (so named of the Doves) four miles about, has some towns, but no
Tolen, called so of the chief town; as that was of the Toll, there paid by
the boats coming down the Scheld. 4. The chief of the seven is Walcheren,
ten miles Walsh or Galls. In the middle of it is Middleburgh, the prime City
of Zeland, and a goodly Town; other Cities it has, as Vere, Armuyden, and
Flushing, all fortified. 5. Zuyd-beverlant, and Nort-beverlant, Bavarians. The
first is now ten miles about: The Cities are Romerswael, much endangered by the
Sea, and divided from the Island; and Goesse or Tergoose, a pretty and a rich
town. 6. Nort-beverlant, quite drowned Wolferdijck, that Wolfers-banke, has
now but two Villages upon it. Zeland has ten Cities in all. The land is good,
and excellently husbanded, the water brackish. Their gains comes in by that
which brought their losses, the Sea. Their wheat is very good; some store they
have the Cowes, but more of Sheep; great store of Salt-houses they have, for
the refining of Salt; of which they make great merchandise. The Zelanders were
converted to the faith by our Countryman Willebrord, before Charles the greats
time.

HOlland, so named, either quasi Holt-land, that is, Holland.
the Wood-land; which woods they say were destroyed by a mighty tempest, Anno
860. the roots and truncks of which being often here found; or quasi Hol-land,
Hollow and light land, as it is indeed. But most likely it is, that the Danes
also coming from Olandt in their own Country, gave name to this Province, as
they did to Zeland also. The whole compass is not above sixty of their miles;
the breadth in most places is not above six hours traveling with a Wagon; and
in some places scarce a mile over. The whole is divided into South-Holland,
Kinheymar, West-Freesland, Waterlandt, and Goytland. The chief Town is Dort,
but the goodliest and richest is Amsterdam; one of the greatest Towns of
merchandise in the whole world; they have almost twenty other Cities strong and
elegant. At Leyden there being a College and University. Their banks, mils, and
other works for keeping out the Sea, be most admirable, vast, and expensive.
Three of the four Elements are there and in Zeland stark naught; then Water
brackish, their Air foggie, and their Fire smokish, made of their Turses, for
which they are said to burn up their own land before the day of Judgment.
The men are rather big than strong; some accuse them to love their penny
better than they do a stranger. Their women are the incomparable huswives of
the world; and (if you look off their faces, upon their linen and household
stuff) are very neat and cleanly. At their Innes they have a kind of
open-heartednesse, and you shall be sure to find it in your reckoning. Their
land is passing good for Cowes: they live much upon their butter, and they
brag mightily of their cheeses. As for flesh-meat, I think that a Hawke in
England eats more in a month, than a rich Boore, nay, than a sufficient
corporal Burger does in six weeks. The industry of the people is wonderful:
so many ditches have they made through the Country, that there is not the most
I^land Boore, but he can row from his own door to all the Cities of Holland,
and Zealand. The Dutchman will drink indeed, but yet he still does his
business, he looks still to the maine chance; both in the City and Country,
by Sea and Land, they thrive like the Jews every where; and we have few such
drunkards in England: too many we have apt enough to imitate their vice, but
too too few that will follow them in their virtue.

THis Duchy lies on the East of Holland and Braban^, touching also upon Cleve
and Iuliers. G^lde^lan^.
It has two and twenty Cities and good Towns, whereof Nimwegen, Zutphon,
Ruremond, and Arhneim are the chief. Some pee^es the Spaniard here has ^ and
the whole Country having heretofore been infe^ted with the wars, makes ^ a
little to come behind his fellows. The land and people differ not much from
those of Holland, saving that toward Cleveland it is more mountainous: the
Champian is very rich pasturage for grazing.

THis touches Gelderland upon the South, Over-Isel.
West-Freesland upon the North, Westphalia upon the East, and the Zuydersee on
the West. The chief City is Deventer; others of the better sort be Campen,
Zwol, Steinwick, Oetmarse, Oldenzeel, Hessel^^, Vollenhoven, etc. This Country
was of old inhabited by the Franks, or Frenchmen; of which there were two
tribes, the Ansuarii, which gave name to the Hanse-townes, whereof Deventer was
first: and the Salii, which took name from the River Isala, upon which
Deventer stands: and these gave name to the Salique Law; which you see did
rather concern these Countries than France it self; and was made by a
barbarous people, in an age as barbarous: though this only was pretended to
bar women from the crown of France; and to hinder our Kings, and occasion
those wars and bloudsheds.

THe Bishopric of Vtrecht has Holland on the North, Vtrec^^.
and Gelderland on the West. The circuit is but small, yet has it five pretty
Cities, whereof Vtrecht it self is large, delicate, and rich; inhabited by
most of the Gentry of Holland. Much harassed has it been, but now well
recovered since it came into the union.

GRoningen is a City of West-Freesland, Groningen.
and the head of 145. villages about it: It has had a chargeable neighbor of
the Spanish garrisons in Lingen, and Oldenzeel, but by benefit of the Sea they
obtain both liberty and riches. It Is very full of Cattle and of Mechanics;
their breed of Oxen and Horses are the largest of Europe. And so much for the
descriptions of these united Provinces.

The chief Entrata or revenue of this people is gained out of the Sea, which
is not only invaluable, but incredible: The Riche^
it being reported that there be more ships belonging to Amsterdam alone, than
to all England; almost a thousand ships going in and out every tide. The
Custom paid by the Merchant is very great; and their Excise upon victuals does
almost maintain their wars; the Inholder paying as much for the Excise, as
he did at first for the thing. It Is believed, that for very butter and cheese
sold out of Holland alone, they receive a million of Gold yearley. All the
people be wonderful indu^^rious; scarce^ poor man's child of five or six
years old, which cannot earne the best part of his own living. Their gains
by fishing is inestimable; their Linen, Salt, and other curious manufactures,
are good merchandise all the world over: and finally, none of their least
commodities is the Wars, for whereas all other Nations are undone by them,
they have the secret to thrive, and to grow exceeding rich by them.

These are of two sort, Their forces.
Landforces, and Sea-forces. In their several garrisons they cannot have
fewer than four and twenty thousand in continual pay; By Land.
and their times of leaguer or being in the field, costs them a thousand pound
a day more than odinary. This very year 1629. the Prince of Orange is said to
have had off and on, near upon 60000. men at the siege of S'Hertoghenbosch,
his trenches being 18. or 20. miles about, and yet has he left his Towns
well garrisoned. They have had an Army on foot continunally for these 60.
years together, and such a one, as were it imploy^d in an invasive, as it has
been in a defensive war, I see no reason but it might long ago have
overtunne even Spain it self. It has still been the prime school of war
for all Europe.

Their Sea-forces increase every day, ^y Sea.
and yet were the three Provinces of Holland, Zeland, and Freestand able many
years ago to make three thousand lusty ships fit for war and burden. They
have for these eight or ten years together had two or three several Fleets
about the West Indies; as namely, that whereof Monsieur L'Ermite was Admiral,
which sent home many a rich prize. That which took Todos los Santos, and those
two which this very year took those two mighty prizes from the Plate Fleet,
and the Brasile Fleet, within the same space having oftentimes twenty or
forty ships employed against the Dunkirker. All this while have they
maintained their Trades and Factories in New Holland, the East Indies,
Muscovia, etc. where oftentimes have they been so strong, that they have
beaten our English from the Trades; once broke they our Muscovia Company: what
they did at Amboyna is too famous, and how much our East India Company has
been indammaged by them, let them tell you. This I repeat, not to refresh the
complaint, but to set forth their power; and plainly they are at least,
Quarter Masters of the Narrow Seas.

Finally, the Low Countries may say as Tyrus did in the Prophet, I sit like a
Queen in the midst of the Sea; So that were the Spaniard but Master of their
Ports, nothing could hinder him from his designed Monarchy. This is their
honor; that for these many years they have enforced the King of Spain to
spend his Indies upon them; they have still kept him at the staves end; if he
has besieged one of their Towns, they have besieged another of his; for
Ostend they took Sluice, Groll for Breda: and at this very instant all the
Spanish power was not able to beat them from the siege of S'Hertoghenbosch. But
at Sea, they are ever terrible to him, ever aforehand with him; and their
Coins are made of his Gold and Silver. They have still fifty sail of ships
upon the Coast of the West Indies, fifty sail more going out, and fifty more
coming home: with their Fleets they have this Summer beaten his Armada,
troubled Carthagena, and mightily inricht themselves by his Prizes. Finally,
they are the people, that next to the Spaniard, have the honor of it, both by
Land and Water; the greatest Monarchs are glad of the Friendship of this
Nation, whom our finicall people style no better, than a company of Boores and
Mechanics; and this also makes for their honor. For no where such Boores to
be found, no where such Mechanics: others derive honor from their Ancestors,
but they from their own valor and virtue.

Their Government is administered according to the Rules of the Civil Laws of
the Empire; respect being had to the privileges of each private people and
City, who enjoy the^^ ancient Customs and Laws municipall. The style of
their principal Governors is, The high and mighty Lords the States General.
These are chosen by the particular States of the several Provinces of the
Union, out of the Nobility and primest Magistrates both of the Provinces and
Citizens. And these receiving power from the rest, do in their meetings at the
Hage plenarily conclude upon all the great Actions of State, either for Peace,
War, Religion, Treasure, Leagues, Trafficks, and all public things
whatsoever. Amongst these the Legier Ambassador of England has hitherto been
admitted in all consultations; and so has the Prince of Orange, as being
General of their Armies: These States do every week choose a new President
among themselves: the proposition is made, and the Votes are collected by an
Advocate, who is a standing Officer for the purpose. From their Placaerts,
Proclamations, or Edicts, there is no appeal, as carrying the same power of
Law with them, that Proclamations and Acts of Parliament do with us. To enter
into the Governments of the Courts of Justice, and of the several Provinces
and Corporations, would require a volume by it self.

Liberty of Conscience being one of the maine pretenses of their falling off
from the Spaniard, Belgian.
they might seem to deal hardlier with others, than they did with themselves,
should they not now give what themselves took, Liberty of Conscience. Public
profession therefore of all Religions (except the Popish and Arminian) even of
Iudaisme, is there tolerated. Each Faction calls it self a Church; and every
new-f^ngled giddie Enthusiasticall Button-maker, is able enough to make a
Faction. The general Religion of the States and best people, is Calvinisme;
the profession whereof (though fatal to Monarchies) agrees well enough with
the parity of Free States, where the people and citizens have so much voice and
authority. Their Ministers are here better respected than in the French
Churches. But our men at home (zealous ones of the Geneva discipline) are much
deceived if they look for such a face of a Church, such decent Service of God,
such devotion, or strict observation of the Lords day, in any of the Calvinist
Churches, as in the Church of England: the Faires (and Kirck-masses, as they
call them) are on Sundays in the afternoon as much frequented there, as the
Churches were in the fore-noone. The States (I suppose) cannot on the sudden
reduce perfection in the profession of Religion: for that the Papists are both
subtle and diligent to work upon the discontents of the people, and to turn
them to a rebellion; unto which the Historians have noted these Nations to be
naturally not indisposed.

Denmark.
ALthough it may seem needless to make mention of Scandia, which is that
whole Pen-insula of huge circuit, which is almost encompassed with the waves of
the Sea, and abutteth Northward and Eastward upon the German and Sarmatian
Coasts, because it is as it were situated in another World; and with whom there
is no great intercourse of trading; yet for the spacious largeness thereof,
containing two Kingdoms (viz.) Norway and Sweveland, with part of Denmark, it
may well deserve a place amongst other Kingdoms spoken of in these Relations.
It is situate in that part of Europe which some term Scandia, others Scandavia
or Balthia; from whence issued the Goths and Vandales, the very rooters up of
the Roman Empire. It is subject both to the Danish and Swevian Crown. The King
of Denmark, besides the Cimbrian Chorsonesse, (where Holsatia, Ditmarsen, the
Dukedom of Slesia, Flensburge, Friesland, and Iuthland, Regions fruitful and
replenished with store of cattle, and wild beasts, do lie) retains other
spacious Islands, the best whereof-stand in the entrance of the Baltike sea,
being fifteen in number, all comprehended under the name of Denmark. The
chiefest of them is Seland, containing threescore miles in length, and little
less in breadth. It excels the rest, both for number of Villages, the
mildness of the air, and because that Copenhagen stands in it, which has
been and is the Seat of their Kings. He has also Gothland under his
jurisdiction, which is placed right over against Gothia. One of his Kinsmen
has the Government of Osilia or Oesel, a pretty Island in the greater Gulf
of Livonia; and rules those fat and plenteous Counties, which lie on the
Continent of Livonia. Scania likewise acknowledges his Soveraigntie, extending
from Nihuse to Timale, and he holds the Kingdom of Norway, which from the
Confines of Scania extends and stretches Northward a thousand three hundred
miles to the Castle of Wardhouse, upon which, border the Lappians. The Isles
adjoining thereto, Sania, Shetland, and Faria, (lying in the maine Sea) are in
his tenure. In times past the people of Norway have been of great puissance:
they afflicted England, scounged France, and therein obtained a Province,
called to this day Normandy. In Italy they conquered the Kingdom of Sicil and
Apulia. And in the holy War Boemond Leader of the Normans, won the
Principality of Anti^ch. In the North Ocean (besides that of Friesland, and the
Seacoast of Island and Groineland) he holds the Dominions of the foresaid
Islands of Shetland and Faria. The Orcades acknowledged the Kings of Norway for
their Lords, although they are now subject to the British Crown. Sithence
then the Kingdom of Norway became Elective, and turmoiled with civil wars
and intestine discords, it came to the possession of the Danish Kings, who,
that he may hold it surely, entreats the Inhabitants cruelly, spoiling them
of their substance, and to leave no hope of better fortune to this miserable
people, he holds fortified all the Creekes, and Havens of the Seacoast.

The wealth of the Kingdom consists in the abundance of cattle and
seafish, Riches.
whereof there is such store, that of the herring-fishing only, a mighty mass
of money is yearly gathered; so huge is the number of all sorts of fish, that
at some times of the year a ship can make but slow way in the Sea: and the
Marshes and Meadows adjoining thereunto are very pleasant and savourie to the
feeding of their cattle. Scandia is rich in corn and pasture, and well
replenished with people. Norwey has no riches of any moment, except Timber fit
for the erecting of houses and building of ships, (from thence transported into
Holland and Flanders) and cattle affording great store of cheese and milk.
Some profit also arises of a kind of fish dried in the wind, which the
Dutchmen call Stock Fish. It is taken in January, and laid in the wind and
cold, until it be indurate and hardened like Wood, and then carried into diverse
Regions as a kind of sustenance. The greatest matter of gain to the King of
Denmark, is the narrow Sea or Strait between Cronburg and Eltzenburg,
commonly called the Sont, or Sound, which is a passage so narrow, that no
shipping can pass that way, without the license and favor of the Watchmen,
keeping Garrison on either side, there to receive the imposts and customs of
the arriving Vessels. It is easily gathered, to what sum of money that impost
amounts, by the infinite number of shipping, of Holland, Zealand, France,
England, Scotland, Norway, and the Balticke Sea, that sail in those Seas, and
of necessity must pass the jaws of that narrow Strait. The Inhabitants are
as greedy of Rhenish, French, and Spanish Wines, the Spices of Portugal, and
the Fruits of Andaluzia, as they again are needy of the Wax, Honey, Skins and
Corn, which are brought thither from Prussia, Livonia, Moscovia, and the
bordering Nations.

The Entrada or Tribute due to the King, arises; First, out of the Sowndt,
through which sometimes pass two hundred, sometimes three hundred vessels in a
day, many of which are to pay a Rose-noble of gold, not only in value, but in
specie for their passage, and some more, some less, which cannot but amount to
an incredible sum. His gains likewise upon Herrings and other fish (of which
there is infinite store in all those Northern Seas) comes to a great matter.
Add to this his Customs upon Mast and Cordage, Pitch, Tar, etc. fetched from
him by the Hamburgers, Lubeckers, and others. Mighty droves of Beeves and other
Cattle are out of his Dominions sold into Germany, out of every one of which
he has his Geldt or tribute. In Dietmars^n (a Country for store of cattle
like our Rumneymarsh) is a place called the Gap, through which their infinite
droves must pass; where the Kings toll is about twelve pence English for every
hoof of greater cattle, that is, four shillings for a beast. Innland also is
as beneficial unto him in the same kind, and much more.

It has been observed, that 50000 Oxen have been driven out of these
Provinces into Germany, for which toll has been paid at Guithorp. He reapeth
some profit likewise of Ward-house, whither the English now of late years have
sailed between Norwey and Groenland; some to Colmogro, others to Stockholme,
not far from Saint Nicholas, where they traffic with the Russies for Wax,
for Honey, and for Flax: thither resort likewise Hollanders, Scots, and
Frenchmen. Almost in the middle of this Bay is also an Island and Town called
Warde-hu^s, which Frederick the second caused to be very strongly fortified,
and here the Merchants do also pay their Customs. In Scandia has he some
silver mines, about which were his late wars with the King of Sweden. Besides
all this, the Kings of Denmark of this present Family, have thought it no
disroyaltie to set up diverse manufactures, for which they take up the children
of such parents as are unable to keep them, whom the King brings up till they
be able to work, he in recompense taking the profits of their labors
afterward. Finally, it was ever held, that Magnum vect^gal parsimonia, Sparing
was equal to a great tribute: And truly the cold winters and durti^ ways of
(...) expect no great Gallanterie; nor is his Court and Retinue very chargeable
to him. By these and other ways came the King of Denmark (before these wars
with I^lly^ to have the reputation of the greatest monied Prince of Europe.

Touching his Forces for matter of Invasion by Land, Forces at Land
it has seldom been seen that he enterprized any journey of reputation, but
only that against Dietmarsen, upon whom King Valdemar laid the yoke of
subjection: but they falling again into rebellion, after many chances of war
beginning in the year 1500, were again utterly vanquished by Frederick the
second, in the year 1558. before which overthrowes, they once discomfited John
the son of King C^ris^terne the first. Since these troubles of Europe, this
present King has been enforced to take up Arms in defense of his dominions
of Holsteyn and Dietmarsen, and in favor withal of the lower Cre^^z, or
circle of Saxony, and those parts with which he was confederate. But his Army
of Danes and Germans being base and cowardly, Aids also from other places
failing him, he was still put to the worst by the Imperialists, many of his
Towns, much of his Land being taken from him; which upon composition were all
restored in the year 1629, the Emperor having his hands full otherwhere,
being glad enough of a peace with him.

What this King is able to perform at Sea, At Sea.
may be gathered by the Navy which upon occasion he once rigged up at the
entreaty of Henry the second, King of France; when Christierne the second sent
a Navy of 100 Sail into Scotland against the English, and 10000
Land-souldiers with them. And certainly forasmuch as it is apparent that he is
Lord of so ample a Seacoast, and possessor of so many Havens in Denmark,
Scandia, Norwey, and the many Islands both within and without the Baltike Sea;
it is most likely that he is able to assemble a great Fleet. It concern, him
also to have a sufficient Sea-force ever in pay and readiness for defense of
the Sowndt, and his many Ports; especially upon the coast of Norway, where they
willingly yield him no better obedience than he is able to ^^^ct of them by
strong hand. As for surprise or sudden invasion, he needs not much fear,
seeing that Denmark is nothing but broken Islands, and those sufficiently
fortified.

Norwey.
NOrwey upon the East respects Denmark, on the West it is bounded with the
Ocean; on the South lies Swevia, upon the North it is separated from Lapland,
by high and steep craggie Rocks. The Western and Eastern Tracts are rockie
and hard to travel, yet is the Air there temperate, insomuch that the Sea
freezeth not, neither do the Snowes long continue.

The Land it self is not very fruitful to sufficiency; for it is poor, and
toward the North, what by reason of the rocks and cold, yields no sort of
Corn. And therefore the Inhabitants (except the better sort) in stead of
Bread, eat dried Fish, (viz.) Stock Fish; which to their great profit they
transport through Europe, and exchange for Corn. The Country, especially the
Southern parts, transport rich Furs, Tallow, Butter, Tan'd-Lether,
Traine-Oile, Pitch, Clapboord, all sorts of Timber-works, and Masts, Firewood,
and Timber for building, and that with great ease and little charge.

Their own buildings are base and poor, and the Inhabitants honest, lovers of
strangers, liberal of gift, and most serviceable. Amongst them are neither
Filchers, Thieves, nor Pirates, though they dwell in a most convenient situation
for Pyracie. Birgis was once their Metropolis, a Hanse-Towne, and for its safe
harbor, one of the four chief Ma^t-Townes in Europe, (viz.) Birgis in
Norwey, London in England, Nugardia in Moscovic, and Burgis in Flanders: But it
is now decayed.

The cold, Northerly, and smally-frequented Islands of Schetland, Friesland,
Island, and Groneland, with the Navigations (such as they are) thereunto for
Fish, I imagine every man can conceive, and therefore forbear further to write
of.

Swethland.
THe King of Swethland reigns in part of Scandie, being a larger Province
than Denmark; for it is accounted to be a journey of five and forty days from
the borders of Scandia to Lapland; and the Coast of the Balticke Sea is little
less than four hundred leagues long, a tract of Land esteemed larger than
France and Italy. Swethland is encompassed with the Balticke Ocean on the
South, the Mountains on the West, the Icie Seas on the North, and Russia on
the East. In Livonia he possesses Rivalia, the Narve, Danovia, and other
pieces of good estimation; the Islands Vlander, Alandes, and other places (not
worthy speaking of) situated in the S^r^ve^an and Finland Sea. These Regions
(besides Livonia) are divided into three several Kingdoms, (viz.) Gothland,
Sweveland, and Vandalia, which again are subdivided into eleven Provinces, and
twelve Counties, amongst which the Lappians are not accounted, because this
people (though inhabiting a larger Country than Sweveland) cannot be termed to
live under any certain dominion, by reason of their misery, poverty, and
wandering from place to place, through woods and mountains; but they who have
any manner of certain abode, or settled habitation, are under the Swevish
dominion, and pay rich skins for their tribute. These are those Lapps which
inhabit the Countries of Biarmia and Scrisinia; the other Lapps being under the
Russian. Both of them are Idolaters. The Swethlanders are Lutherans in opinion,
and Dutch in language, but with a different Dialect.

Of the three Kingdoms whereof we spoke, Got^^^^.
Gotland bordereth with Scandia, and is divided into East and West, as also
into the Island of Gothia lying in the Baltike Sea, five of their miles (which
in some places of Sweden be seven or nine of our English) broad, and almost 18.
long. Sometimes the Danes, but now the Sweden possess it: The Metropolis is
called Wi^sbich. The firm land of Gothland is the hither part of that which is
called Scandia, and next to Denmark: In this is the mighty Lake Weret: in the
midst whereof the King (delighting in the pleasantness of the place) keeps
his Court. Twenty four Rivers do run into this Lake, yet it emptieth it
self but by one mouth. The Inhabitants for the excessive noise of waters, call
it in their tongue, the Devils Head. Gothia signifies a good Country, which
does well agree thereto for the abundance of sustenance; no Region being
comparable unto it for fertility of Flesh, Fish, and Corn.

Next follows Sweveland, which is larger than Norwey and Gotland both
together. In Sweveland is Vpsalia, their chief City, an Archbishopricke, and
an University, and Stockholme the Kings seat. Stringa, Envecopia, Orogundia,
Arboia, Arosia.

Then comes Finland situated between the Balticke and Finland Bay, Finland.
where stand Abo the chief City, Rangina and Augo, both famous Mart-Townes:
Vames, Viburge, and Castelholme, in the Alandian Islands. The Husbandmen do
not inhabit in Towns, but by reason of the plenty of Timber and Woods, the
Valleys and other places are so well defended from the fury of the Northern
wind, that they live here in very good sort, keeping in their houses flocks of
Cattle, and all sorts of instruments to dig, to build, or to make any thing
necessary for the life of man; and this is the reason that Towns here are
neither so fair nor so frequent, as in Germany or England. Over and above,
the Cities and Villages there are accounted 1433. Parishes; in some of which, a
thousand people, or (as they term it) a thousand householders or fires do
inhabit, but there are few of these Parishes, in which at the least there are
not one hundred families. By this a man (...) judge the number of this people,
especially if he consider the fruitfulness of their generation; for the Women
of Finland by a secret operation of their Beer (as some think) become
exceeding fruitful. The men live here very long chiefly in the most Northerly
parts; neither is it miraculous amongst them, to see a man live above an
hundred and thirty, or forty years. And in truth, this long living is the
cause of their propagation: for where men live shortest lives, there the virtue
of generation must needs soonest decay: and therefore our Lord God in the
beginning of the world, did permit mankind to live seven hundred years and
more, that the world might the sooner be peopled, and the act of generation
(which now for the shortness of our lives is determined within forty years)
was then more vigorous at one hundred and upward, than in this our age at
twenty.

There is not only Finland, but Finmacke also bordering upon the North Ocean
and lying beyond the Arctike circle, whose barbarous inhabitants be Witches and
Idolaters. They usually sell winds to Merchants to carry their ship to any
Port, and to bring them back again, which some making just scruple of, have
laid wind-bound in the harbor, whiles others have made prosperous voyages.
Bothnia or Bodia, (which gives name to the Sinus Bodicus) is also under his
dominion. To these may be added these new conquests which this present King
Gustavus Adolphus (the gallantest and most warlike Prince of these times) has
already made, or shall make hereafter in Prussia, where he has taken Elbing,
and other Towns and Lands from the Polander, with whom he is still in wars;
and now ready to come with an Army also into Germany. He has under him eleven
Dukedomes, twelve Earledomes, and seven Bishoprics: The whole is from
Stockholme one way a thousand Italian miles, and twenty days journey another.

The riches of this kingdom consists in plenty of victuals, Riches.
which this word Gothia (signifying an heavenly Region, as we said before) and
Finland (signifying a fine land or Country) do well witness. Their provision
is Flesh, fresh-Fish, salt-Fish, Fish dried in the smoke and Sun, Corn and
Beer; whereof there is so great abundance, that it is a hard thing to see a
beggar amongst them, and Travelers are there freely entertained: The Innes at
this day in the Villages being the Parsons houses, who expect some rare toy by
way of gift, rather than of pay, for they do it of courtesy. It is so rich in
Mines of Lead, Copper, Silver, and some Gold, that no Province in Europe may
compare therewith. And these Mines are to be found in every place, if the
Country people (bound to carry wood to the Mines, and to servile works) did not
hide and hinder the discovery thereof as much as in them lies. Most fine
Silver is found in the Province of Vestros, and more would be, were it not for
the envy of the Inhabitants, who though they know not the use of trying of
M^ttals, do notwithstanding murmr that any strangers should employ their
labors therein. And this their frowardness toward strangers arises not of
hat^ed, but upon a jealousy that they should be overreached, or otherwise
abused: for by nature they are simple and well meaning, not given to ambition,
nor infected with avarice.

The Kings revenue consists in four things; the tenths of Ecclesiastical
livings, Mine, Tributes, and Customs. The profits of the Church Livings amount
to a great sum of money: for in this Kingdom there were seven Cathedral
Churches; threescore Monasteries of Men and Women, endowed with most rich
revenues. First Gustan, and after his son Eric, seized the greatest part
thereof into their possessions. Of the Mines, some are wrought at the Kings
charges, some at the charge of private persons, allowing the tenth part to the
King.

Of three Copper-works, Co^per.
I have known the tenth part (which is the Kings) to amount to the value of
three thousand Dolars yearly: hereby estimation may be made of the Silver and
Lead. But his taxes do far surpass all his other In-comes: for he levieth
the tenth of Rye, Wheat, Barley, Fish, Oxen, Skins, and such like. Of the
tenth of Oxen, at some times he has gathered eighteen thousand, and with them
maintains his Court, his Officers, his Navy, and his Armies: for in the time
of war either with the Dane or Moscovite, he allows his Soldiers victuals,
and by this means provideth it at very easy rates, as well offending as
defending. The marriage of the Kings daughters is at the disposition of the
people, and they allow them besides Silver, Plate, and other gifts, one hundred
thousand Dolars for a Dowry. Of the Vplandish people and others which pay not
the imposition of victuals, the King is accustomed to exact of every poll
according to his ability, five Dolars or more yearly. The customs are paid in
the Haven-Townes; the chief whereof are Calmar, Loabuis, and Stockholme,
(whereat sometimes three hundred ships of burden are to be seen) Abo, Auge,
Revalia, Parnovia, and Narve. It is thought that the King does lay up in his
Treasury, six or seven hundred thousand Dolars, over and above the expenses
upon the fortresses of Revalia and Viburgh; for so did he in the year 1578.
out of two or three Mines only, and yet this was but the Kings tenth: whereas
if need be, he may take all the silver, and pay the masters of the work with
victuals, C^pper, or other commodity.

There are maintained in Sweveland and Gothland, Forces at land.
about thirty two Companies, every troop consisting of five or six hundred
Soldiers, all Harquebusiers, always ready to march whither occasion calls.
Because of the thickness of the Woods, the Horsemen serve with Petronels, and
seldom use Pikes or Lances. These are most excellent Footmen; for every
soldier is able to make and furnish himself with any furniture whatsoever,
even the making of his own Flaske and Touch-box; as likewise the common people
in Pervina, and the neighboring Provinces, being contented with a little, have
always accustomed to make all implements for their houses and bodies; to
build, to weave, to play the Tailors, to sow, to reap, and to forge tools fit
for their business. And as for these Trades, which are neither common nor
necessary, a to paint, to work in silver, and such like, there are
notwithstanding found among them very good worke-men, wanting rather matter
than Art to work upon. The Swevian Horsemen are divided into thirteen
Companies: Sweveland and Gothland maintain eleven, and Finland two; and upon
necessity they can raise a greater force: for the Dukedom of Vrmeland (as
report goes) is able to furnish better than ten thousand men with Horse. In
Marchland there is such plentiful breed of Horse, that there they are sold at
a very low rate: both these Provinces are in Gothland. Their Horse is not so
big bodied as the Frieslander. but exceeding hardy; active, able to endure
travel, and fed with a little. I will not omit to speak of two Noble usages
of the King of Swethland toward his Soldiers: one is that if a Soldier be
taken prisoner, he is ransomed at the Kings charges; the other, that if his
Horse be slain, the King bestows another upon him. To his Captains, and
those which serve on Horseback, in part of payment of their wages, he gives
yearly a Garment, which the Germans term Idolis, and may be taken for a
Cassocke.

The rest of the Captains means, if he serves within the Kingdom against the
Dane or Moscovite, is but four Dollars a month, and exemption for himself
and family from other duties and payments to the King. The common soldier is
not thus exempted, unless in time of war or danger: his other pay is one
Dollar and a quarter for a month: small pay, if you consider not the
cheapnesse of victuals. In their marches in loose troops, they are billetted
in the next houses at the countries charges: But when the Army is in the field
altogether, the King finds them victuals, without deducting it out of their
means. It was not long since that the Horseman in time of peace received more
than twenty Dollars standing for a year, with a Horsemans coat and his
exemptions: but this is increased in the wars. The Officers of Horse-troopes
receive monthly pay for themselves, their servitors, horse-boyes, etc. The
Nobility and Courtiers also (Privy Counselors excepted) which may be about
three hundred in all, are bound to wait on the King on horseback; every of
which for himself and followers, receiving each five Dollars a month. Every
Captain must be a Gentleman borne.

As touching their Sea-affaires, Sea-forces.
by reason of their huge Seacoast, and infinite Havens, the Kingdom swarmeth
with Mariners and shipping, which the King may arrest in his Dominions, as
other Princes are accustomed to do: he maintains commonly fifty Ships of
war, whereof every one carries forty pieces of Ordnance, more or less.
King Gustavus first brought in the use of Galleys. In the War which King John
waged with the Danes (before the Peace treated on at Stetin was agreed) he put
to Sea seventie great ships, besides other of smaller burden, in which were
22000. fighting men. In the Summer time they war at Sea; in the Winter at
Land: for then the Rivers are frozen, as likewise the Sea near the shore for a
great space. Seeing I have spoken of Guns, I will add thus much, that the King
is thought to have about eight thousand great Pieces, the most part of Brass,
and that he could cast many more if he had more store of Tin. In the Castle
of Stockholme only are numbered four hundred. Certain it is that the King can
on the sudden rigge up a sufficient Fleet both for defense and offense; and
that cheaper than any Prince of Christendom. For first he has store of
Mariners, and they easily paid; as desiring little more than clothes and
victuals. Their clothes are simple enough; and their victuals the Country is
bound to send them; a proportion namely of Beef, Bacon, Salt-fish, Butter,
Barley and Peason. As for materials for building a ship, he either has them of
his own, (timber, pitch, iron and cordage,) or else they are brought him but
from the next door. Brass pieces (such plenty of metal he has) that they
cost him little or nothing. So that well might King John the third of Swethland
affirm, that he would set out and maintain as good a Fleet for 100000.
Dollars, as the King of Spain could for a million of pounds. The chief of the
Kings Navy in time of peace, rides (like our Kings at Chatham) commonly in two
places; either at Stockholme, where they may lie safe, even afloat without
mooring, or so much as anchoring, the Harbor being thirty English miles within
Land, and the high cliffes keeping off all winds: The other Stations are in
Finland, still in a readiness against the Muscovite, and to watch that nor
Arms nor munition be brought them out of Germany.

The chief Fort of this Country is the Finnish Sea, Fortifications.
which breaking in about Dantzik, runs up with a long gut or free through the
midst of his Country, from South to North, a great deal beyond the Arctick
Circle, into Finmarch and Lapland: another Arm of it, near the first entrance
parting Liefland and Finland (of which it is called the Finnish Bay) flowing
even to the Frontiers of Russeland: Both of them are wonderful strengths,
eases, and riches to his Country: Fortified Towns and Castles he has in all
his Frontiers upon the Dane and Muscovite, some twenty in all.

Upon the West Side of Swethland is Denmark; Borders.
on the East Moscovie, with both which he has had long war. The Swevians have
suffered much loss by the Denmarkes: for King Christian the second besieged
Stockholme, and forced it, committing all kind of cruelty against the
Inhabitants, filling the City with blood and dead carkases. The title which
the Dane pretends to the Crown of Swethland, is the cause of their enmities.
The Havens, the situation of the Country, and especially Gothland (which is a
member of Gothia, and therefore the Swevian claims it as his right) affords
the Dane this facility of invading at his pleasure. After Gustavus recovered
the Kingdom, he and his son Henry and John reigned successively: and although
blood enough has been sh^^ in the wars between Gustavus and the Paris, yet
the Kingdom has retained her honor: and the Cit^e of Lubeck (the mightiest
State in that Sea) sometimes by consederating with the one, sometime with the
other, does in so even a balance poise the differences of these two Nations,
as it suffers not the one to practice against the other, upon the peril that
may ensue to the offender. In waiting with the Moscovite, the Swevian has most
advantage, because Finland (which bordereth upon Russia) by reason of the great
Marshes, whereof it is full, yields hard and perilous passage to the
Enemy, oftentimes swallowing up whole Armies in those congealed Waters: there
be Keepers of the Castles of Viburge, Narve, Ravelia, and other piles and
pieces upon the borders of the great Duke of Moscovia, excellent well
fortified, as bridles to stop his violent courses. In which, he does very
wisely; for those pieces which lie in the Territories of our Enemies, are to be
regarded most carefully, because they bring forth two notable effects: first,
they defend what is ours, and offend what is the Enemies. The further they are
distant from our borders, the better they stand us instead: for while the
Enemy is occupied in besieging thereof, our own State stands in quiet, and
time affords means for rescue, or delivery thereof at leisure, and that
without spoil to our own people, or loss of our proper revenues. They grieve
the Enemy with so much the more damage, by how much the nearer they are
situated unto him. Of this effect was Calais in the possession of the English,
and the places which the Spaniards and Portugals hold in Afric. But the
Fortresses built in our own borders, serve to no other end, than to defend
what is already ours, and that to our great disadvantage: for as often as they
are invaded, all things are done at a sudden, and it cannot be avoided, but
somewhat will fall to the spoil of the Enemy. To end with the King of
Swethland, he is so much better able than the Moscovite to defend his
Territories, by how much Sea-forces joined to Landforces are able to prevail
against a State furnished with Landforces only.

Spain.
EVROPE is in the Map shaped something like a Queen; and there is Spain
made the head of it; and perchance there may prove some fatalitie in it. The
shape of Spain does indeed resemble a Dragon, which is a creature of prey, and
for devouting. Spain indeed has in hope and design, already devoured all
Europe, and would be head of the Monarchy. B^ stay! the proverb is, That
Serpens nisi serpentem come devis, non fit Draco: Unless one Serpent eat
another, he never proves a Dragon: there be many Countries that Spain must
first eat up, before it proves the European Dragon and Monarch; England,
France, Netherland, etc. all must be care^ first. But soberly to consider of
the matter, Spain has already done very well toward it: for ^^hence the
remembrance of later times, a larger Empire has not befallen any Christian
Potentate, than that which the Spanish enjoys at this day, especially since
the union of the Kingdom of Portugal (with the dependencies thereof) unto this
Crown. For besides the large and fair Provinces in Europe, the goodly Regions
of Asia, and diverse rich Territories in Afric; he enjoys in peace and
security, without any corrivall o^ competitor, the New World, in circuit more
spacious than either Europe or Afric.

In Europe he is sole Sovereign of Spain, His dominions in Europe.
holding it whole and entire; A thing worthy observation, for that by the space
of eight hundred years before our age, it never obeyed any one Prince, but was
dismembered and peece-meale claimed by diverse Seigniors: He has very much
shaken Belgia, and Lordeth it over the Kingdom of Naples, containing in
circuit a thousand and four hundred miles: and retains Insubria, otherwise
called the Duchy of Mil^une, comprehending three hundred miles in circuit. Of
the Islands, he holds Majorique, Minorique, and Evisa: the first of three
hundred miles circuit; the second of an hundred and fifty; the third of eight.
Sicil is reported to contain seven hundred: Sardinia five hundred threescore
and two.

In Africa he holds the great Haven called Masalquivir, In Africa. Within the
Streights.
the most secure and safe harbor in the whole Mediterranean Sea. He has also
Oran, Mililla, and the rooke commonly called the Paevion of Velez: And without
the Streights, he possesses the Canary Islands, twelve in number; and the
least of seven, containing ninety miles. In the right of the House of Portugal,
he possesses the famous places of Sepra and Tangier: and of late he has
conquered Alarach: the which may rightly be surnamed the Keys of the
Streights, yea, of the Mediterran Sea, and Atlantique Ocean.

Without the Streights, he holds the City of Mazaga, Without the Streights.
and by the same Title in the vast Ocean, he claims the Terceraz, Port-Santo,
and Madera, famous for the Wines which grow therein, and the Lady-like Island of
all the Atlantique, containing by estimation 160. miles in compass: Then the
Islands of Cape Verd, seven in number.

Under the Aequinoctiall, he holds the Island of S. Thomas, Under the
Aequinoctiall.
some what more spacious than Madera, but most plentiful in Sugar, and from
thence rangeth over that huge tract of Land, which tends from Cape Aguer, to
Cape Guardafu. Lastly, he pretends to be Lord of all the Traffic,
Merchandise, Negotiation, and Navigation of the whole Ocean, and of all the
Islands, which Nature has scattered in these Seas, especially between the Cape
of Good-hope, and the promontory of Guardafu.

In Asia, in the aforesaid right of the Crown of Portugal, In Asia.
he rules the better part of Western Coasts (viz.) Ormus, Diu, Goa and
Malaca; Ormus for his commodious situation is become so rich, that these verses
are grown to a common proverb among the Arabians:

As in a Ring, the well set stone appears to the eye,
Such (to the worlds round circle) does rich Ormus-Ilandlie.
A great portion of Arabia Felix belongs to the Principality of Ormus, as
likewise Balsara, the Iland-Queene within that Gulf, for plenty, circuit,
variety of fruits, and the rich fishing of Pearl. But this goodly Island and
Castle of Ormus is since taken from him by the Persians, with the aid of our
East-Indian Fleet: and there are continual fights with the Portugal Frigates,
maintained by the English and Hollanders. So that on those coasts he rather
exercises Pyracie, than Dominion. In this Sea the Portugals possess Damian,
Bazain, Tavaan, and Goa; which City (to omit Chial, Canora, Cochin and Colan)
is of so great esteem, that it is thought to yield the King as great a revenue
as many Provinces in Europe do their Lords: and finally, the Portugals hold
all that Seacoast, which lies between the City Damian and Malepura; wherein
no Prince (except the King of Calecute) challenges one foot of Land. The Island
of Zeilan, wherein they possess a strong Haven and a Castle, commonly called
Columbo, may rightly be called the delight of Nature: They enjoy also Malaca,
which in those places is the bound and limit of their Empire, as also the
staple of the Traffic, and the Navigation of the East Ocean, and of all those
Islands, being so many and so spacious, that in circuit of Land they may well be
compared to all Europe.

To continue their Trade with the Chinois, and the Ilanders of Tidore, and for
their intercourse to the Moluccas and Banda, they have erected certain strong
places in all of them, but indeed resembling rather Factories than Castles.

Certainly it would amaze a man to think how many puissant Kings and fierce
Nations are bridled and yoked by the Arms of twelve thousand Portugues; (for
in so huge a tract of Land and Sea, there neither are, nor ever were, a greater
number inhabiting) and those few, not only to have discovered and conquered the
Atlanticke, Indian, and the East-Seas, but also ever since, till now of late,
to have kept and defended the Soveraigntie thereof against all Invaders. How
ever their fame and fortunes at this day seem to be eclipsed by the trading of
the Dutch and English Merchants; they will not stick to relate unto you, how
by the virtue of their Arms, they took the kingdom of Ormus from the Vassal
and Confederate of the King of Persia: as also how they drowned and defeated at
Diu, the Navy of the Sultan of Egypt, fully furnished with Mammeluks, a kind
of Souldierie no less famous for their valor and discipline, than the
Pretorian Turkish Ianizars: As also that they made good the said place against
the leagues of the Turks and Guzarits.

In the Red Sea they have often foiled the Turkish Armada. In the year 1552.
they defeated his whole Fleet at Ormus. In Taproban they affronted the Kings of
Decan, Cambaia, Calecute, and Achem; Princes favored, and thoroughly assisted
with the forces of the said Emperor: Yea, such have been their expeditions
into Cambaia, India, that Ocean, and along the coasts of Asia, that in desert
of glory and admiration, they are (by their own Writers) censured to be
nothing inferior to the victorious Alexander; yea, so much the rather to be
preferred, because neither in circuit, nor numbers of people, they were ever
comparable to the Macedonian: for with nineteen ships they overthrew the
Egyptian Navy, far more powerful in number and furniture: with two
thousand Soldiers they forced Goa, and recovered it (being lost) with fifteen
hundred. With eight hundred they won Malaca; and not with many more, Ormus.

But little need the Portugals brag of their victories achieved upon
effeminate, barbarous, and naked men, such as in the West Indies would by
troops run away from one of the Spaniards horses or dogs: I wonder that twelve
thousand Portugals have done no more against so little resistance. But let the
Portugals brag of their victories against the English and Hollanders. And
though there be but twelve thousand Portugals inhabiting there, yet are they
continually supplied from home, and they make the poor Blacks and Natives of
those Indies, to serve them in their Galleys, Wars, and drudgerie. Lastly,
the King of Spain can command his subjects at home in Portugal, yet these
(...) yield him but little obedience; so that here the Spa^^^ has no dominion.

Another member of the Spanish-Dominions lies in the New-World; In the
New-World.
wherein because he has no corrivall able to make head against him, he
challenges as his own, what soever either by discovery, or conquest, he
attaineth unto. This New-Worlds dominion is divided into Continent and Islands.

In the North-sea are so many Islands, Islands.
(most of them of forty miles in compass) that their number can hardly be
ascertained or known: and some of them are rich and spacious, sufficient to
erect a great and stately Kingdom. Of these, Boriquen is three hundred miles
long, and threescore broad: ^amaica is little less: Cuba is three hundred long
and twenty broad: Hispaniola contains a thousand and six hundred miles in
compass. On the Continent he is absolute Lord (say they) of all that Seacoast
which waters Florida, Nova-Hispania, Iucatan, and all that spacious So^therly
Peninsula, to the Cape of California, and Quivira. For even so far have the
Discoveries and Navigations of this Nation pierced. The coast of Nova-Hispania
counting his beginning at the Town of Santa Helena, and cutting by Panama to
Quivira, contains about five thousand and two hundred miles in length, to
which if you please to add the upland Regions, coasting toward the North, you
shall find no less than nine thousand miles.

Peru, beginning at Panama, contains by the Maritime coast twelve thousand
and six hundred miles: of which three thousand lying between the River
Maragnon and the River of Plate, and including Brasil, do acknowledge the
Soveraigntie of Portugal.

In the Continent are many Kingdoms and Seigniores, Continent.
amongst which, those of Mexico and Peru (once most powerful and wealthy
Dominions) were counted chief, and as it were two imperial Monarchies. These
Kings lived a long while in great Majesty, inhabited sumptuous Palaces, and
maintained a mighty troop of their vessels for the guard of their persons.

On one quarter they enlarged their bounds, and transferred their Religion and
Language to the skirts of Iegnan Pecan, two hundred leagues remote from Mexico:
and on another quarter as far as Guatimall, 300. leagues distant. In these
places they made the North and South Seas their bounds; but Mecoican, Tapcalan,
and Terpeacan, they could never bring under their yoke. Their differences with
the city of Tascala, encouraged the Spaniards to invade their dominions: and
being entered, made their victory easy, and the end fortunate: this happened
in the year 1518. This people (divided into seven Tribes) came into those
Regions, from that part of the North, where of late years the Spaniard
discovered a most wealthy and populous Province, which at this day they call
New-Mexico.

Besides Merchandise, incredible treasures of Gold and Silver are transported
out of Nova-Hispania and Peru. The riches of these places.
Of those treasures, commonly Peru yields two parts, and Nova-Hispania the
third, which is more rich in Merchandise than Mexico. Amongst the rest, it
yields Cochinolla, a commodity of inestimable value, and infinite store of
Hides. The Islands also afford plenty of Hides, Cotton, Wool, Sugar,
Cana-fistula, Hard wax, and Pearls.

Amongst these riches and treasures of Peru, Peru.
two things are wonderful: One, that in the Silver-Mines, which were
discovered in Potosie, in the year 1545, there is, and has been found so
huge a mass of Bullion, that the fifth part (which is the Kings) in the space
of forty years amounted to one hundred and eleven millions of Pezoes: neither
yet did two third parts pay their customarie due to his Majesty. The other is
the Quicksilver-Mines in Guas-valcan, found in the year 1567. out of which the
King has received forty thousand Pezoes, all charges defrayed.

And in truth, were it not for the tribute of these Western Mines, neither
could the pride of Spain be divulged, nor the Cities of Sivil or Lisbone, cum
multis aliis, be enriched, nor the Escurial blazoned, no nor life happily
maintained, nor the Ports frequented, nor the native commodities to
satisfaction of forien importation countervailed, nor the Garrisons paid, nor
such frequent troops of strange soldiers yearly entertained.

But it is a strange thing to note, (...).
that whereas Nature has interlaced so riotously her golden and silver Veins
in the bosom and womb of Peru, it has bestowed no such blessing upon her
nearest daughter Brasile; but instead thereof has enriched it with a most
temperate and wholesome air, with many pleasant Springs and large Rivers, not
without sufficiency of wood: she has divided the land into fruitful and
delightsome hills, clothed it with the beauty of continual greenness,
abounding above belief with Sugarcanes, which the Portugals have there
planted, and now transport in infinite quantity into foreign Regions.

The Philipinae may well be termed the appendances to this New-World;
Philipinae.
for although in respect of their site and proximitie, they may be thought a
part of Asia; yet the discoverers thereof traveled through New-Spaine, before
they could discover them: of which Islands, more than forty are subject to this
Soveraigntie, and by them have been reduced unto civil kind of life and
policy.

Having thus generally run over the spacious (or rather boundless) members of
this Empire, His greatness in Europe.
I will now relate unto you the true quality and State of this great Prince of
Christendom, (the matter being so much the more hard, by how much the more
copious in it self.) And not to weary your patience with long discourse, I
will restrain my self to things of most importance, with all possible
variety. In performance whereof, forbearing to tell, how out of this House of
Austria, in the space of three hundred years, ten Emperors have already
successively succeeded one another, from Father to Son; As also by what
casualties so many Kingdoms and Provinces have been united unto this Crown;
And in particular, how the Houses of Austria and Burgundy have in such sort
been conjoined, that had his enterprises against England and France fallen out
conformable to expectation, without question he had been much enabled to have
marched on with large paces, to the Monarchy of the whole world.

This his Empire is divided into four parts; Division of his dominions.
the Kingdom of Spain, the Estates of Italy, the Dominions of the Indies,
and the Countries of Flanders. Spain is by the Spaniards (for the greater
grace) divided into ten Kingdoms, Spain.
and has been always acknowledged for so wealthy, puissant, and so spacious a
Kingdom, that the Romans and Carthaginians continued so long and so cruel
wars for the possession and royalty thereof. The Goths and Vandals, when
(with the stream of their overflowing multitudes) they swarmed over the
greatest part of the Roman Empire, here sat them down, and made it the place
of their habitation. Trebellius Pollio termed it and France, The joints and
finewes of the Roman Empire. Constantine, when he divided the Empire, preferred
it before Italy: and in the division, when England, France, Spain, and Italy
fell to his lot, he little esteeming the last, and voluntarily leaving it to
his competitor, contented himself with the three foremost.

The Estates of Italy (the finewes and nurseries of his wars) comprehend the
Kingdoms of Naples, Sicilie, Sardinia, The Estates of Italy.
the Dukedom of Millaine, and the three Forts situate upon the Seacoast of
Tuscain, Orbatello, Vrcole, and Telemon.

The dominion of India is divided into the East and West: The dominion of India.
In the East he has but some Islands far distant from the firm Land, but in
the West he has diverse Provinces adjoining upon the Seacoast, yet not
penetrating far within the Land. And although he does daily conquer some of
the neighboring places, yet they be of no great value nor consequence.

From the Low Countries he reapeth small profit; The Low Countries.
for he has there lost his ancient Revenues with his reputation, being feign
to acknowledge the States of Holland, Zeland, etc. for free, before they would
yield to capitulate with him.

To entreat first of Spain, (because it is the center of this spacious Empire)
it is conserved by two means; that is to say, by Justice and Religion, keeping
this people in obedience more with severity and chastisement, than with
clemency and mercy. The Province it self is barren, if we consider each part
thereof by it self, but being reduced into one gross, it abounds with all
things necessary, especially toward the Sea coast: being also stored with
diverse Minerals. True it is, that it has few men, and is not populous, both by
reason that a great number are drawn from thence to serve in the wars, to
re-enforce the garrisons, and to defend the forts abroad, as well amongst the
Indies, as in many other places of his dominions: as also, for that many of
them do exercise Merchandise and Navigation; Which although it bring some
damage to the State, because so many leave the Country, yet proves it very
beneficial and commodious by their enricht return unto their own houses, and
ridding by that means the Country of the more slothful sort of home-livers.
Two parts are incompast with the Ocean and Mediterran Seas, the third is
secured from the power of the French Arms, not only by reason of the craggy
situation of the Pirenean, of Scialon, Pargnan, and Pampelone, where it is
mountainous and hard to pass, and by the forts: but also through the
difficulty that they should there find in journeying, and the incommodity and
want of victuals, entering into a Country so sterill and unfruitful. The other
part (confining (as aforesaid) upon the Mediterran Sea) remains only exposed
unto the Turkish Navy; from which it is well secured by having few Ports, and
those diligently kept and guarded with powerful forces. But amongst all the
offensive Potentates, the Kingdom of England is able to infest it more than
any other: for in the late wars, it did beyond measure trouble the Kingdom
of Portugal, in pitying the quarrel of Don Antonio (a man much favored of
that Crown) in such sort, that the City of Lisbon, once famous and well
inhabited, became poor, and well-nigh dispeopled. For whereas in (...) past
one might number a thousand vessels within her Ports, 500 of them were consumed
and taken by the enemy, which did not much displease his Majesty: for (some
said) he was well content to see the Portugals so impoverished and abased,
because they live male-contentedly under his obedience and government.
Whereupon at all times his Majesty is constrained to maintain a strong Armada
in these Seas, to safeguard the Navigation to the Indies, and to secure the
Merchants coming from thence into these Countries, over and besides twenty
four Galleys, which he keeps to guard the coast, and to defend it from the
Turkish fleet, and the incursions of Pirates; the charges whereof, with the
maintenance of the fortifications and defenses, amount yearly to half a
million of Gold. The number of soldiers in all the presidiarie places of
Spain, amount to eight thousand, not reckoning any man of sort, nor Mariners;
for instead of these, the Moors and Turkish slaves do serve in the Galleys.
This Kingdom does never send forth any Horsemen, because there be but few, and
yet not sufficient for their own affairs.

In the next rank follow the Italian Provinces; Naples, Millaine, and Sicilie;
wherein nature has confined, Italian Provinces under the Spaniard.
and heaped up as it were into her Closet, all those delightful happinesses,
which with her own hands she has here and there scattered and dispersed
through the residue of the European Provinces, whereof in their proper places.

The Revenue which his Majesty does principally raise upon the Ecclesiastical
livings, Revenues ordinary.
( viz.) the Tithes of the Church, the Bulls of the Cross, both amongst the
Indies, through all Spain, and the Kingdom of Sicilie, do amount to two
millions by year: and these may be well numbered amongst his ordinary revenues,
because they be yearly raised, and be the surest and most certain that this
Crown enjoys. Commendums and presentations unto benefices, do yield yearly
to his Majesty a great quantity of money. The whole revenues of the Clergy are
valued at six millions of gold by year, there being four and thirty
Cathedral Churches all very rich, of which some have fifty, some one hundred,
and some two hundred millions of crowns of yearly revenues: as in particular,
the Archbishop of Tiledo has more than three hundred millions, remaining over
and besides free to his substitute Prelate two hundred. Neither does his
Majesty care to bring these Churches to a greater number, for then should he
with greater difficulty make use of the revenues and riches thereof when
occasion required. And it is said, that the Cardinal Birago gave to his
Majesty at diverse times, more than a million and a half of gold, upon some
simoniacall occasion.

So it is thought that the ordinary revenues of Spain do amount to six
millions of gold, whereof much has been pawned for the debts of the Crown,
the rest is spent in charges of the wars, in the government of the Kings
household, and in the Galleys, which he maintains to safeguard the coast of
the Kingdom, as aforesaid.

In extraordinary revenues he raises much more; Extraordinary.
for in the Kingdom of Castile alone in one year, his Majesty had nigh eight
millions of Gold. And while I was at his Court, his Majesty sent a Jesuit
through all Spain, who went from house to house, requiring their benevolence,
as an alms for the expenses in his wars: by which means he raised a million
and a half of gold, but with much dishonor, saving that it was said, that he
did better to demand this money for the love of God, than to take it by force:
yet was not the request such, but that it had in it the effect of a command;
his Majesty excusing himself, that the Emperor his Father whilst he lived,
did the selfsame thing in his greatest and most urgent affairs and
necessities. There do not want also other means and devices to raise money,
as the imposition of the Millstone; which as it is supposed, if it once take
effect, will amount to two millions of gold yearly. There be also sales of
Offices, Escheats, Penalties, Amerciaments, and other like means to raise
money, as in other Kingdoms.

His Majesty has orders of Knighthood also, Orders of Knighthood.
( viz.) of Saint James, of Alcantera, of Callatrava, of Montesea, and of
Christ: this last Order is in Portugal, which all together do yield him
yearly 275. millions of crowns, and accrueth to them in rents paid by the
Iuccarie. The Order of the Cross is much desired, and greatly sought for by
the great men of Spain, because it yields both honor and profit, being in
number two hundred and fifty, which have in yearly revenues 15000000 crowns
of gold. But to some he gives the Order, and not the Fee; to others the Fee,
not the Order; but to many for their good service, both Fee and Order. There is
also the Order of the Toison, of which his Majesty is chief, which is the
most honorable, and most sought for of Princes, although it yields no
profit. Of this is made great account, and herewith only Princes and
personages of quality are honored.

In these Kingdoms are found diverse discontented persons, Malcontents.
and ill satisfied with the government, for that all those Moors which there
inhabit (being forced to turn Christians, and by the same force constrained so
to continue) are wonderfully displeased. And such as are called Jews, The
Jews.
or half Christians, do daily increase in number, and multiply in riches; For
they all marry, and never go to the wars, but continually intend their
traffike and commodity. Besides these, there be all the descendants of them,
that have at any time been condemned by the Inquisition, which live in Spain
most desperately, because they are thereby held infamous, even to the third and
fourth generation, and disabled to receive any dignity, honor, or office. Of
these sorts, it seems by the late proscriptions and banishment of the
Inhabitants of Valentia into Barbary, that he is most jealous.

Next these, the Portugals may be comprised in this number, The Portugals.
by reason of their ancient hatred which they have always borne to the
Castilians, and for the bad usage of the Spaniards, being always held under
their command, with minds cruelly affected.

The Provinces of Aragon also, The Arragonou.
for their privileges broken and annulled, for rising in Arms by means of
Antonio Perez, late Secretary to his Majesty, do evilly brook this
government. The chief Citizens whereof (having with loss of their lives, paid
the debt of that punishment due unto them) have left a memorial behind them
of that their fact, the stroke whereof is imprinted in all the rest, which are
yet for a long time ready to lay down their lives upon occasion. The Nobles.
Last of all, be the Nobles of Spain, which in times past were many in
number, and in great estimation with their Kings, are now much abased, and
brought to the number of 36. only, being unimployed by his Majesty, and
receive small charges from him, and those in places far remote, and of little
or no reputation: some of which do much blame the King therefore, inferring
that thereby he makes the people more insolent, in hating them and their
greatness, indeed because they would not, that they should much increase it
power; the State being served in most affairs with common persons, and those
of no great estimation; because these Kings for the most part suppose, that by
them he is the better served, as also, are very jealous of the greatness of
their Officers. For in truth the Spanish Nation by nature is very proud, yet
base, and such as cares not to be hated, so it be feared: in all passages
above all other Nations, using and imitating a kind of decorum, which they
call Respect, we complement, or a pish courtesy; being full of servility, yet
in public showing more severity over their own, than over strangers: which
may well be, if well understood. For where he conquereth and commands, no
people so intolerable as they; but mastered and subdued, no Nation of the world
so submissive and ^ouching. At home, in general, poor, timorous, and
unwarlike; abroad (by hardening and custom) a very hardy and valiant soldier
on foot, obedient to his Commander, and patient in the distresses and labors
of war; but by night they never go upon any service. By it self alone this
Nation has done nothing of reckoning, but accompanied with others, it has
made good assaies of its own valor, always boasting of the taking of the
French King, of the victories of Germany, of the enterprise of the Tercers, and
of the happy fight at the Curzolary, without once remembering their contrary
successes of Goletta, Algiers, and England.

Of ordinary revenues from Italy, Revenues from Italy.
it receives four millions of gold. Much of that of Naples is pawned; the
which the Kingdom of Sicilie does yearly supply, by sending thither ordinarily
four thousand crowns, and the Council of Spain taking order for the rest.
These States in Italy are defended from the forces of bordering Princes, partly
by nature of site, and partly by the aid of strong Forts; ordinarily
maintaining in the presidiarie places ten thousand Spanish footmen, 1200. men
at Arms, three hundred light horse, and thirty six Galleys for guard of the
Seacoasts: Of sixteen are of Genoa, twenty five of Naples, twelve of
Sicilie, and three of Savoy. This is the appointed number, but you shall
seldom see it so strong. For notwithstanding this Armada, the coasts are badly
secured; as it appeared by the late years example, in the damages done by the
Turkish Navy upon Puglia, and Calabria; amounting (as it is reported) to the
sum of more than a million and a half of gold. He serves himself also
(when occasion requires) with the Galleys of Malta, with the Popes, (which are
eighteen) and sometimes also with those of the great Duke of Tuscan. And all
these charges are nothing near defrayed by the four millions of revenue; so
that Italy stands the Spaniard in much more than he gets by it. The witty
Boccalini brings in Lorenzo Medices weighing the Estates of Europe; and when
the Spaniards saw the revenue of Spain alone, to weigh within a few millions
as much as France, with great cheerfulness they gate on their spectacles, and
would needs cast their dominions of Italy into the scale; but perceiving the
beam to turn contrary to their expectation, all ashamed they took them out
again, and durst not put in their dominions in Africa, and the Low Countries.

The minds of these his Italian subjects are exceedingly exasperated through
the insolency of their government, The Italian humou^^.
their intolerable charges, and the burden of infinite taxations, which are
continually imposed upon them, finding out daily one means or other to raise
new sums of money. The Neapolitans are most doubted for revolt, by reason of
the instability of that people, always desirous of change and novelties.
Millaine is also suspected, by reason of the damage which they undergo by
lodging of soldiers at discretion, being grown to a custom, with the small
desolation of diverse families.

The Indies are divided into Oriental and Occidentall, The Indies.
the King pretending to be sole Lord, both of the one and the other. The
Oriental not only are endangered by the English Navies, (which in time of
war do continually trouble them) but in hazard also, if not to be lost, yet
to be forced to share quiet and peaceable Traffic, both to the English and
Netherland Merchants. The King maintains there, for custody of those
Countries, many ships of War, having also distributed eight thousand
footmen, for the ordinary safeguard of the Forts.

The West Indies (exceeding rich and abounding with gold and silver) are
divided into two parts: Peru, and New Spain. These Countries are full of
Mines, in which is found great store of gold, keeping therein the Indians
continually at work, living very barely, and undergoing the punishment of
their ignorance and pusilanimity, in suffering themselves to be easily
overcome, and so basely subjected. The King has the fifth part of all
extracted from the Mines. These Indies, (...) year (...) is (...) made of
another.
in the time of Charles the fifth, ye^^ded no more than five hundred thousand
crowns of gold by year, but they now yield an exceeding commodity to this
King; for in some years past (comprehending the Bulls of the Cross, and other
confiscations in those parts) he has received from thence ten millions of
gold, yea, fifteen and seventeene millions many years since that. His
Highness Ministers do still procure some new gain in those parts, and the
people, still continue their Navigation thither with more gain upon their
return, than one hundred for another. The Merchants carry thither Wines,
Woollen-cloth, and other merchandise of these parts, and bring from thence in
lieu thereof (over and besides diverse sorts of Spices) a great quantity of
Goldi^ by extraction of which, the fruitfulness of the Mines is no whit
diminished, but it seems that they do rather daily more and more increase
and multiply; in such sort, that the Contrymen in tilling the ground, do
find great-store thereof, together with the clods of earth, when they dig it
up; and in my time, there was discovered a Mine of Quicksilver, which will
yield exceeding profit, and incredible gain. True it is, that all these
profits have their interest, but they arise not to above twenty in the hundred
laid out, by reason of Convoyes, for security of the Fleet. For there is
always maintained strong guards in the Isle of Iava, apt by reason of the
situation, to give the Empire of all these parts to him, that can make himself
once Master thereof. The soldiers which he sent into these parts, have for
their pay two crowns a month, in such sort, that the Land-souldiers, the
guarders of the Forts, and the Galleys which he maintains for this purpose,
is a special cause, that his Majesty expendeth in interests and charges
amongst the Indies, more by a great deal than a million and a half of gold:
Which makes me nothing to wonder, that although this King by reason of his
abundance of Treasure, and many other infinite riches brought yearly from the
Indies, should seem to be richer than other Princes, and his state much more
wealthy and abundant; yet in truth the great Turk, not having any mines of
gold, is more mightier and far wealthier: And so in true interpretation is
France, England, and Netherland, as late experience (the touchstone of
ambiguities) has fully discovered. Whereupon it must needs follow, that this
Crown is either much hindered by engagement in war, want of homebred
necessities, or by uncertain returns of its Fleets, subject every year to
the casualties of Seas, currents and surprisals. If these be not the causes of
so many crosses, as our eyes have lately discovered; then surely, his
neighboring Princes must be thought to be Lords of a valianter people, than
are his Spanish.

For, say they, it appears by record, from time to time, kept in the City of
Sivil, that in threescore and fourteen years space there have come into
Spain two hundred and threescore millions of gold. Of all which sum there
remains now in Spain, by conjecture, in ready money and plate (wherewith
this Nation is much delighted) about six and fifty millions: Five and twenty
the Genoese have had for interest: Seven millions were spent in the French
wars, and the conquest of Portugal: Eight were bestowed on that glorious and
stately building of the Escuriall. And the rest (which is more than an hundred
millions) has been all spent in the fruitless wars of Christendom and
Flanders. So that it may be truly said, that all the enterprises which this
State has undertaken, since the days of Charles the Emperor, have been
performed with Indian gold: being certainly to be affirmed without
contradiction, that Philip the second, during his reign alone, spent more than
all his predecessors, being in number sixty two, that have reigned since these
Kingdoms shook off the Roman yoke; considering that he alone spent more than
an hundred millions: and notwithstanding all this here spoken of, Spain is
very poor and smally stored with wealth. For although his Navigation to the
Indies was upheld, yet the Traffic which he had with England and Flanders,
(which brought him exceeding and most secure gains) was all cut off. Whence it
seems true that the Spaniards say in discourse of this Gold, (brought from
India into Spain) that is works the same effects upon them, that a shower of
rain does upon the tops and coverings of houses, which falling thereon does
all at last descend below to the ground, leaving no benefit behind, to those
that first received it.

Flanders, O^ Flanders.
once the true correlative of the Indies, but being now divided and alienated,
yields no profit to this Prince, yet Charles the fifth, by his good
government drew from thence by extraordinary grievances and Imposts (occasioned
by his manifold wars) more than twenty four millions of gold.

This Country, though by Nature it be not very fruitful, yet by Art, it
proves to the Inhabitants very profitable and commodious, exercising with all
travel and industry the Trade of Merchandise; by which in former times
infinite riches arose to their Princes, who always held it dear, and sought
by all means to conserve the Dominion thereof. And so Philip the second would
feign have done, supposing that those wars would the rather have drawn to an
end, when he gave his daughter Isabella for wife to the Archduke (with the
assignment thereof) for her Dower; and that the people would the sooner have
quieted themselves under the obedience of that Prince, if they might be
suffered to enjoy the liberty of their consciences; but time has revealed
what effects those projects have produced.

It now remains to speak of the Council, Council.
and quality of his Council, and the conditions of his Counselors, a matter
both of great importance, and worthy of understanding, being the very Seat of
the soul of his government.

The government is absolute and royal: Government.
matters of several qualities are handled in several Councels, and they are
seven in number, besides the Privy Council: That the King may be the better
informed of all affairs, they keep always near about his person in several
Chambers under one roof. Their names are these: The Council of Spain, of the
Indies, of Italy, of the Low Countries, of War, of the Order of Saint John,
and of the Inquisition: In these the slow and considerate advisoes of Fabius,
rather than the rash and heady resolutions of Marcellus are received. As much
as may be, innovations and change of ancient customers are avoided. In regard
whereof, Innocent the eighth was wont to affirm, the Spanish Nation to be so
wary in their actions, that they seldom committed any oversight therein. By
this course the King rangeth under his obedience, Castilians, Arragons,
Bisca^nes, Portugals, Italians, the New-world, Christians, and Gentiles, people
utterly different in Laws, Customs, and Natures, as if they were all of one
Nation, and his natural subjects.

And whereas some object, that this Empire cannot long endure in so flourishing
an estate, because the members thereof are so far disjoined: to such
objections, let this Maxim be opposed; That spacious Dominions are best
preserved against foreign attempts, as those of mean capacity have the like
advantage, against intestine divisions. But in this Empire thus divided,
spaciousness and mediocrity are well united. The spaciousness is apparent in
the whole body compounded of several members: the mediocrity in the greatest
part of the several members: For seeing that the portions thereof (as Spain,
Peru, Mexico) are so great and goodly States of themselves, they cannot but be
stored with all those good things, which are requisite either for greatness or
mediocritie; that is to say, with a puissant union to resist foreign attempts,
and sufficient inward force to provide against domestical discontents. For who
knows not, that by means of Sea-forces, all these members may strengthen one
another, and stand as it were united, even as Caesar Augustus by maintaining
one Fleet at Ravenna, and another at Messina, awed the whole Roman Empire, and
kept it in assured tranquillity: As also we have seen, the Por^^gals, by
reason of their Sea-forces, which they maintained in Persia, Cambera, Decan,
and other places of the Indies, in those parts to have given the Law to many
famous Princes.

This State lays claim also to the Duchy of Burgundy, a part of that
Country whereof the House of Austria re^ain^th Heir. He does the like to the
City of Tunis in A^^^^a, to the Island of Corsica, possessed by the Genoese,
to the base and higher Britain, as also to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, whose
Title he takes upon him; and finally (as it is above mentioned) pretends
himself the Monarch of the World. But this mightiness of his, has many
disturbances in it self, which hinder motion, and cruelly curb designements,
by reason whereof he sets forward with such dullness of speed, that for the most
part the provision which is prepared for effecting of future enterprises,
comes always too late. For if he be to provide Soldiers in Italy, after
they be pressed, enrolled, and set on wards, they lie waiting three or four
months at the River of Spain, before they be embarked for their voyage, their
pay still running on, to the great damage and prejudice of that Crown; so
that we may very well avouch, that what another Prince performs with two
hundred thousand Crowns expense, his Catholic Majesty can scarce execute so
much with the cost of five hundred thousand.

Of no less danger is the damage which that Crown may very easily receive by
a sudden and unexpected loss of their Fleet, because on it are grounded all
the hopes and designs of the said State, that are of any importance. But more
pernicious and fuller of trouble would be the loss of the Indies, which with
ease, either by Foreign Fleets may be taken from them, or much molested and
hindered: Or if neither of these, yet that the Spaniards themselves, sent
thither in Colonies, combining themselves in one bond of unity, having all the
Fortresses in their own hands, together with the Ports and Ships that are
there, may one day resolve to be governed by themselves, denying all obedience
to their Kings commandments. Another contrariety also does this great State
incur; That the Prince thereof has far better means to get Money than
Men. For howbeit upon every occasion, and when need serves, he is served by
the Swizzers, the Wallons, and Italians, yet these of themselves are little or
nothing worth, being upon every slight occasion of slack pay, ready to make
commotions, and in their fury to forsake his service. Of other Nations
(besides that his Majesty dares less trust them) he cannot (although he
would) have such a sufficient number as should supply his need and occasion.
So, howbeit that this Prince be sole Lord and Master of so many mighty States,
and of so great and potent an Empire, yet lives he full of continual travels
and discontents.

Now having taken a full view and mature consideration both of the States,
Correspondencie.
as also of the ends and intents of this mighty Monarch, together with those
contrarieties which these States do suffer; it rests, that in this last
place we should entreat of the correspondencie which he holds with other
Princes: which as it is of all other knowledges the most necessary, so is it
the hardest to be discovered, bringing with it for the most part greater
difficulty, to be able fully and judiciously to pierce into the purposes and
inward thoughts of Princes, but especially into the secret Councels of the
State of Spain, being full of cunning dissimulation.

To begin therefore with this point: With the Pope.
I say, that generally (to instance first of all the Pope) his Catholic
Majesty will have him to be such a one, as may wholly depend upon him, and be
confident of his fastness. And therefore in their Elections, his endeavor is,
that not any ascend to that dignity, that does any way savor of the French
faction, (and therefore alienated from his devotion) nor any that are of
singular Nobility, left their spirits might be too generous to be basely
abused by him: nor any of the Kingdom of Naples, for fear (taught by former
examples) of some new disturbance in that State: But his principal desire is,
to create one of base lineage, and of mean respect, and such a one, as shall
(if it be possible) acknowledge his Cardinalship, and all other dignities, to
proceed from him: and such a one, whose parents and kinsfolks are poor, that
by the bounty which he shall bestow upon them, and the pensions which he shall
confer on their friends, he may bind them unto him, and confidently assure
himself of their favor and partaking, when occasion serves.

And for this cause (in all that he can) he seeks to weaken the Popes, and to
detract from their dignities, to make them inclinable to his will, and wholly
to depend upon him, procuring them to continue in this office of their love, by
furnishing their State with Corn out of Puglia and Sicilie, and by upholding
the authority of the holy See; in defending their Coasts from the incursions
of the Turkish Fleets, and from the depredations and inrodes of Pirates: and
lastly, by giving them to understand, that it is in his power to call a
Council, and in it to take an account of their actions, and to call their
prerogatives into question. And howbeit the absolution and re-benediction of
the late King of Navarre did much move, nay beyond measure trouble the mind of
Philip the second, who in those times did hope for great things at the Popes
hands, yet did he dissemble this offense; As on the contrary, did his Holiness
the prejudice that was and is done him in Spain, in regard of holy Church,
whereby not only his orders and decrees are broken and moderated by the
Council, but also sometimes rejected and contemned; whereof his Holiness has
made often complaint to the Spanish Ambassador, but to small purpose.

In the College of Cardinals, With the College of Cardinals.
the King at this present has not much authority, by reason of his imperious
proceeding, and less will have hereafter, the French Nation being now rise to
some greatness, which will now every day more and more be able strongly to
oppose themselves against the Spanish, by whose jealousies, greatness, and
dissimulation one with another, that See has gained such greatness and
reputation in the world.

In requital whereof, his Holiness in favor of Philip the second (wasted
forsooth in war against the Lutherans) cut off by his authority I know not
how many millions of debt, due to the Genoese. He has given him also all
Pardons sent to the Indies, worth by year half a million, with the collations
of Benefices and Bishoprics, and the enjoyment of the two rich Orders of Saint
James and Calatrava.

With the Emperor (howbeit all be of his blou^) his Catholic Majesty has
not had (till of late) any great intelligence, With the Emperor.
because in many occurrences that have been offered, he has given him but
slender satisfaction, neither would ever seek any counsel of his Majesty,
which principally is by him desired, to the intent that he might seem to rely
upon him. But true it is, that these gusts are now over-blowne, and the
distastes are at length somewhat lessened, in consideration of entermariages.

But since these late wars about Bohemia and the Palatinate, he has made
great use of the Emperor. The Spaniard knows well, that to attain his
designed Monarchy, he must first conquer Germany, and make himself Master of
those Ports and Han^e-Townes, from thence to annoy England and Holland. To
prepare the way to this, necessary it was that some quarrel should be picked
with some of the Protestant Princes for matter of State, and with all of them
for matter of Religion. The plot has taken, and by this means has the
Spaniard brought foreign forces into the Empire, (though this was objected by
the Princes in their Dy^ts, to be against the Constitutions of the Empire.) By
these forces of his (having first gotten himself to be made Executioner of the
Imperial Ban against the proscribed Palatine, Baden, Hessen, Iegerensdorff,
and others) has he in the Emperors name gotten possession of div^^ Towns,
which he holds as his own. Known it is, that there was a Mint set up at
Vienna, the Coin whereof though it bare the Emperors stamp, yet the Bullion
came from Spain. To make himself nearer unto the Emperor, he has made
himself Master of the Valtoline, that by that passage he might unite his own
forces of Millane, with those of the Emperors hereditary States next to the
Alps in Germany. By the Emperors means has he also made himself a party
in the present quarrel of the Dukedom of Mantua in Italy: and it shall go
hard but he will get all or some good part of it, to join to Millane and
Naples. And this is the use that the Spaniard since the year 1620. has made
of the Emperor. The Emperor grows great by the Arms of Spain; but this is
but personal, and to die with Ferdinand of Gratz: in the mean time all the
world knows that the Spaniard has the reputation, and will at last r^ape the
whole benefit of it.

For the Arch-duchesse, With the Archduchesse.
we know she bears but the name of Governesse of his Provinces, being her
self otherwise wholly governed by Spanish Counsel: and were the Kings younger
brother but old enough to be Governor, we know that she must be thrust into a
Monastery.

However France seems now to rejoice in a new alliance, With France.
yet let the world not doubt but that out of ancient emulation, which has ever
been between these two Kingdoms, being exasperated done against another, by
so many injuries, so many wrongs, and so many jarres and brawles, new occasions
of discontents will evermore arise: For can the French (think we) ever forget
their expulsions out of Italy, their deprivation of Navarre, or the intrusion
of the late King upon the maine body of the Kingdom? But fresh in memory, and
yet unrevenged (as one this present year 1629.) is the defeat of the French
troops sent into Italy in favor of the Duke of Mantoa: nor does the Spaniard
look that the cross marriages with the French (the Kings marying one another
sisters) can make any atonement; but looks either that the French should
invade Flanders, or the Wallon Countries, unto which he has so good and
ancient pretencion; or watch him some other good turn at his best opportunity.

Between him and the Savoyard (notwithstanding their near alliance) have
there been late wars; With Savoy.
the Spaniard depriving him of some Towns in Montferat; and the Duke of Savoy
in revenge on the other side distressing Genoa with an Army, which is under
the Spaniards protection, and the place from whence he borrowes his great
sums of money. But these differences are so far reconciled, that contrary to
all expectation, the Savoyard in consideration of the restoring to him of those
Towns in Montferat, is now at this present turned on the Spaniards side, has
levied an Army in favor of him, and blockt up the passages of his own
Country, by which the French Arms should enter Italy, to the aid of Mantoa.
But to be known it is, that this Duke of Savoy is an old, a subtle, and an
inconstant Prince, jealous enough (as all the States of Italy are) of the
Spaniards greatness; and for his own advantage will as readily turn to the
French, as he did now to the Spaniard.

With the King of (...) he has not any negotiation, Polonia.
save good correspondencie. And because betwixt these two Crowns there is not
any pretencion of State, or interest of Consines, which are wont to be causes
from whence discords arise, and also for the most part evil intelligence among
Princes.

As the Turk is Lord of a larger Seacoast than the King, With (...) Tu^ks.
so can he hardly compare with his Majesty either in furniture or mariners.
Along all the coast of Afric, he has not an harbor, where he can build or
keep a couple of Galleys, except Algier, and Tripolie. In the Euxine sea, what
place of name is there, besides Capha and Trapezond? What better report can we
give to the coast of Asia? More implements than a spacious Seacoast are
incident on either part to this business: he must have plenty of Timber and
Cordage; he must be furnished with a people practiced in Sea-affaires, able to
endure the labor and working of the waters; delighting in traffike and
navigation; cheerful in tempests and rough weather, which dare dwell as it
were amongst perils, and expose their lives to a thousand dangers, and here in
true judgment, I take the King to exceed the Turk: For the Turkish subjects,
as to the better part never saw Sea, and those that have used it are not to be
compared to the Biskaines, Catalonians, Portugals, and Geno^ais; (I add this
people for their good services and affections at all times to this Crown.) To
conclude, in two things the King excels the Turk; the first is, that
although the Turk can command more men, yet the best and greater part of them
being Christians, he dare hardly trust; the second, that the Seacoasts of the
King are nearer conjoined than those of the Turk, and in that regard has his
forces sooner incorporated. By this facility, experience has proved, that the
Eastern Navies have been often overthrown by the Western, the Southern by
the Northern, the Carthaginian by the Roman, the Asian by the Grecian.
Octavius Caesar with the Navy of Italy, defeated the Fleet of Egypt, and in
our times the Armada of the Christians, the Fleet of the Turk. The Turks
themselves confess, that in Sea Fights the Christians excel, and are
unwilling to deal with those forces. As often as Charles the fifth rigged
forth his Navy, it was so puissant, that the Turk never durst leave the
harbor. In his journey of Algier, he rigged five hundred vessels; in his Tunis
voyage 600. Andrew Dorie conducted 10 gallant an Armada into Greece, that the
Turk not daring to move out of his station, the Christians took Patras and
Coronna in Morea.

At this day they are at peace: The Spaniard is doubtful of the Turkish
forces, especially by Sea, if he be not assisted by the league of Italy: And
again, the Turk is fearful of him alone, and of his associates. For he
knows he is to deal with a Potentate of much estimation, and well practiced
in the world; and although of late there have fallen out between them certain
jarres and differences upon damages done by the one and the other Prince
reciprocally in each others dominions, yet it is to be thought, that these two
so powerful Princes will not easily be brought to take Arms, seeing they
emulate each others greatness, and contented with equal strife, to bring all
Christendom to their subjection; pretending both one and the selfsame end,
viz. Religion. Besides, it is sufficient for the Catholic King to have
revenged his wrongs, and for the Turk, that he is no more molested by the
Spanish Armadaes. As the one has a warlike and well armed Empire, so has the
other an united and most rich Kingdom. But herein the Turk has the greater
advantage, that he spends but little in the wars, in regard of that, that
not only the King of Spain disburseth, but even all the Princes of the world.
For his soldiers receive for their pay, those lands which he has given them
to hold for life, with condition annexed, always to be in readiness to serve
at an instant. Certain it is, that the Turk being dreadful to Christendom,
the Spaniard is the ablest to oppose him. For which reason Andreas Hoia would
needs persuade us, that it were best for Christendom to choose the Spaniard for
their universal Monarch: but Boccalini argues better; that it had been more
convenient for Europe, if the Moors had still been Lords of Spain. Most sure
it is, that the Protestants, yea, all Christians in Hungaria, live better under
the Turk, than under the house of Austria. The Spaniards be intolerable
masters, witness the poor Indians. Hoia therefore vented this in an Oration
at Doway, to inflame our English fugitives to treason.

His Landforces consist in Cavalrie and Infanterie: Forces at land.
the best footmen of all the German Nations is the Wallon, and it is well
known that in all ages the Spanish have been accounted one of the most
valourous Nations of the world. The French in nine years were subdued to the
Roman yoke, the Spaniards held out two hundred. The power and person of
Augustus Caesar were requisite to the subduing of the Cantabrians, whereas they
not only delivered their own Country from subjection of the Moors, but
invaded Afric, and therein took many strong places. So the Portugals invaded
Barbary, tamed the coast of Guinea, Aethiopia, and Cafraria; they conquered
India, Malaca, and the Moluccas. The Castilians sailing through the Atlanticke
sea, subdued the New-world, with all the Kingdoms, Provinces, and people
therein: and finally, drove the French from Naples, Sicil, and Millaine.

This people is much inclined to melancholy, Humors of the Spaniards.
which makes them solemn in their conversation, slow and advised in action:
they love complement, and stand much upon appearance, presuming greatly of
themselves, and exceedingly boasting of their own doings: and to maintain
their reputation, they will employ all they have in furniture and apparel^: in
suffering of hunger, thirst, heat, cold, labor, and extremities, they will lay
up any Nation in Europe. By these virtues they have achieved the glory of so
many victories, and although sometime they have been overcome, notwithstanding
they vanquished their vanquishers, as it fell out at Ravenna. They never
suffered any famous defeature, but in the journeys of Algier, and England; the
one by the casualty of Tempest; the other by the skillful prowess, and
Seafaring dexterity of the English. Three or four thousand of them turned
topsie-turvie the better part of Germany, and made way with their Swords
through the thickest of their enemies. In the journey of Carven in Barbary,
being four thousand foot soldiers of great valor, they made a brave retreit
the space of four or five miles, beset and charged with twenty thousand horse
by the King of the Moors, at least five or six times, with the loss only of
eighty men, and the slaughter of eight hundred of the enemy. They serve better
on foot than on horseback, (although they have horses of excellent courage)
and better with the Harquebuze, than with any other kind of weapon. With great
care they will cover their losses and weakness.

As concerning their Cavalrie, it cannot be gainsaid, Their Cavalrie.
but that the Spanish Genet is the noblest horse of Christendom, far
excelling the Courser of Naples, or the horse of Burgundy, so much esteemed of
the French, of the Freeslander, and in so great request with the Germans. It
should seem that nature herself has armed this people, in giving them the
Iron Mines of Biskay, Guipuscoa, and Medina, with the temperature of Baion,
Bilbo, Toledo, and Calataiut; the Armories of Millan, Naples, and Boscoducis;
the corn and provision of the inexhaustible Garners of Apulia, Sicil,
Sardinia, Artesia, Castile, and Andaluzia; with the plentiful vintages of
Soma, Calabria, San Martin, Aymont, and sundry other places. To conclude, this
Prince is so mighty in gold and silver, that there with (to spare his own
people, engaged in the defense of so many Territories, Provinces, and
Frontiers, from undoubted destruction) he is able to wage what numbers of
horsemen and footmen of the German and Italian Nations it pleases him.

The Princes whose dominions are bordering, Borderers.
and in regard of their forces are any way able to endanger his dominions, are
the Venetians, the Kings of France and England, and the Turk.

The Venetians.
The Venetians (long since the Duchy of Millan came to the possession of this
Crown) have set them down with great quietness, rather looking to the
strengthening and keeping of their own Towns and pieces, than-to the winning
of others from their neighbors. And good reason it is, sithence peace is the
surest anchor-hold of their Commonwealth.

Concerning France, The French.
sithence the French Nation has put an end to their civil discontents, what
Trophee or Triumph can the Spaniard boast to have carried from them? Indeed it
cannot be denied, but in elder days, the wariness of the one, has turned the
furious attempts of the other to matter of too late repentance. For the great
Captain surprising Barletta, and then encamping upon the banks of Gariglano,
first took from them the possession of the Kingdom of Naples, and afterward
all hope of regaining it again. By the same temporizing, Anthony Leva wearied
King Francis at Ticinum, and Prosper Collonna cleared the Duchy of Millan.

In assaulting of Towns and Fortresses, I confess fury to be of great moment;
I confess likewise, that by this virtue the French prevailed at Ioious,
Momedium, and Caleis; but in set battles, as at Graveling, Saint Quintins, and
Siena, most commonly they have had the foil: for in the field good order and
skillful conduct does more prevail, than valor and furious resolution: In all
assaults, fury and resolution, more than counsel or temporizing.

In the East Indies he confineth with the King of Persia, The Persian.
betwixt whom there is not any evil intelligence, but contrariwise, rather
great tokens of much love and amity, as by whose help that King hops to
find means to overthrow the Turk. Howbeit he has very oftentimes denied
him assistance and aid in those wars, which he made against the house and
family of Ottoman, being very much urged and sought unto by the Persian, to
send unto him some of his people, men expert and skillful in casting of great
Ordnance, as also in building of Forts, and other the like matters of defense
and assistance. Excusing himself with the peril of his Religion, which does
not permit Christian Princes to lend aid unto Infidels: though indeed the true
cause was, because he would not thereby give an occasion of future trouble and
molestation to himself (by communicating these two advantages, so important in
war) in his navigation to the Indies, which are adjoining to the Persian Sea.
But the Persians taking Ormuz from the Portugal, shows that they do not at this
day much regard the Spaniard.

With the King of Fesse and Morocco his Catholic Majesty is in league, In
Barbary.
upon interest of those States which he possesses in Africa.

His Catholic Majesty would very willingly that the great Duke of Tuscanie
should wholly depend upon him; In Tuscanie.
but he is so far from that, that he does not only depend, but in many
occasions has still showed himself opposite unto this Crown, and has lately
discovered himself to be a welwiller to the Crown of France, by joining
alliance with the most Christian King: and therefore it is not likely that any
good intelligence can be betwixt them. In like manner, the Ambassador of
Tuscanie is but of indifferent regard in that Court, but since the Emperor and
the Duke are allied by marriage, there is greater respect.

The Duke of Parma is not only a devout servant, Parma.
and a near kinsman, but also a subject to this Crown, by the City of
Placentia, and therefore wholly depends thereupon, having taken a secret oath
to obey him in all commands. Proceeding with all possible respect, not to give
the least occasion of offense, by reason that the investiture of Placentia was
not granted absolutely to the house of Farnesi, but only to the fourth
descendencie after which it returns again to the King of Spain, as Duke of
Millan. And therefore his Excellency (that he may not separate himself from
his Majesty's good liking) did lately refuse to link himself in alliance with
the great Duke, lest he should displease the King, whose mind he saw was bent
against (...)

The Duke of Vrbine being a Prince of small power, Vrbine.
wholly relies upon his Majesty, as receiving his greatest benefit from him,
to whom he has committed the charge of all his Italian Cavalrie.

The Commonwealth of Genoa is like a ship beaten at Sea, Genoa.
and tossed with contrary winds, and tempestuous storms, placed as it were
betwixt two anchors; which are, Prince Doria, a true borne Citizen, and the
Ambassador of the Catholic King, who has the protection thereof in his
Masters name, to his great benefit. If ever he chance to become Sole-Lord
thereof it will add a greater Dominion to his greatness, for the nature and
quality of the situation of that City, whereof the Spaniards were wont to say;
That if the King their Master were but once Lord of Marsettes in Provence, and
of Genoa in Italy, by the benefit of these two famous ports, he might easily
arrive to the Monarchy of the whole World. But howbeit the King of Spain be
not Lord thereof, nor yet has so great a part therein, that he can assuredly
say, that it wholly rests at his command, yet by favoring and upholding the
greatness of the Prince Doria, he makes him the Instrument to serve his
turn, and by his means obtains what he will, or can in reason desire of
that people deeply interessed, in regard that his Majesty has taken up great
sums of money upon interest of them, and therefore will take heed how they
break with him; lest they be hindered of their gains, peradventure of their
principal: It has been thought, that some Kings have been behind hand with
them, for more than a million and a half of gold. How much Genoa depends upon
him, was seen in these late wars, in which they were wholly protected by him.

Of the Religion of Malta, Malta.
the said King takes a particular protection, as that in like sort depends
wholly upon his pleasure, and does readily execute his royal commandments,
serving his turn oftentimes, in keeping the Coasts of Spain, and the
Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, from the incursions of Pirates; and that
without any one penie cost or charges to the said King; whereof in proper place.

The Seigniory of Lucca has placed both it self and all Lucca.
that it has (fearing the potencie of the great Duke) under the protection of
his Majesty.

In general, Venice.
the Spanish Nation bears little love to the Venetian Commonwealth, as
suspecting it to favor the French, and for the strict friendship which it
holds with the most Christian King, and the most renowned State of England, of
late his apparent and professed Enemies.

Again, From him.
there is also little inclination of love toward this State, because they
think, that it makes profession to balance the States and Forces of the
Princes of Italy; and though they esteem well enough of it, yet they love it
not a jot. Notwithstanding, the Spaniards know, that in those wars which may
happen betwixt the Turks and this people, they cannot (out of their particular
interests) but aid and assist them, and that on the contrary from them, they
have no hope of retribution, unless in like occasion. But withal they
assuredly believe, that the aids which they shall afford it, shall be but
feeble; and slowly subministred, in such sort, that they shall not give it any
great re-enforcement, but only such as may be sufficient to save it from ruin,
yea scarce that.

Finally, for a perfect review of this tedious discourse, I will recite unto
you, these weighty, secret, and last instructions given by Philip the second,
King of Spain, to his son Philip the third, father of this present King:
teaching him how to govern himself and his Kingdoms after the decease of his
said father; brought to light by a servant of Don Christophero di Mora, called
Roderigo, and translated out of Spanish and Dutch into English, that the world
may see how judiciously this manuscript of the Kings own hand agrees with the
purport of these Relations.

Son, I have often troubled my mind, and entered into most deep and serious
considerations, how to leave a quiet and settled estate unto you after my
decease: Howb^^^, neither the long time of my life, nor the opportunity of
Princes affected to my service, would afford me sufficient assistance in this
behalf. I confess; that I have spent more than 594. millions of Ducats; in
lieu whereof, I have enjoyed nothing the space of three and thirty years, but
heart-sorrow, and vexation of spirit. True it is, that I recovered Portugal;
but as lightly as France is escaped from me, so likewise may Portugal slide
back. Would to God I had followed the counsel of Charles the Emperor, my
Lord Father of famous memory: for then could I much more quietly brook those
my sorrows, and die with a more willing mind, leaving to you the succession
of this mortal life.

This then, besides so many stately Kingdoms and Seigniories, as a perpetual
testament I leave behind unto you, as a mirror and Looking-glass, wherein
you may see how to frame your actions, and to carry your self in your
government after my death.

Always look well to the charges and alterations of other States and
Countries, to the end you make use, and reap good profit thereby, as occasion
shall serve; and withal, have a cautelous and circumspect eye over them that
be in Counsel with you.

Two means you have whereby to maintain your Spanish Kingdoms; the one is
Government; the other, the Trade of the Indies.

Touching your Government, you must draw unto you, and rely either upon the
Nobility, or the Spirituality of your Dominions.

If you lean unto the Spirituality, you must seek to bri^ile and curb the
other, as I have done: but if you mean to strengthen your self with the
Nobility, cut short the Livings and Revenues of the Spirituality, as much as is
possible. For holding them both in equal favor, they will consume you; and
besides, you shall set your Realms out of quiet, and never come to resolution,
the balance being over-weighed, sometimes by the one, and sometimes by the
other.

My Counsel is, that you hold in league with the Provinces of the Netherlands,
especially if you mean to help your self with the Nobility: for they be
friends to France, England, the German Princes. And neither Italy, Poland,
Sweden, nor Denmark, can stand you much in stead: As for the King of Denmark,
he gets his Revenues by foreign Nations.

Sweden is always at division, and unfit in regard of situation.

The Polacks be as Masters over their Kings. Italy, though it be rich, yet it
is far distant from these before named; besides that, all the Princes therein
are of diverse humors and dispositions.

But on the other side, the Netherlands are exceeding populous, and abound
mightily in shipping: the Inhabitants being a people most constant in labors,
diligent in searching out things profitable, courageous in their attempts,
patient in adversity.

True it is, that I have bestowed those Provinces upon your Sister Isabella
Clara Eugenia, howbeit in the transport thereof are comprised an hundred
means, whereby you may help your self: The principal whereof be, that you
are Tutor and over-seer of all her children; and that she may alter nothing in
the Catholic Religion: These two maine points being taken away, you are
absolutely dispossessed and quit of the Netherlands; and other Kings would be
so forward to draw them unto their allegiance, that it may happily redound to
your overthrow.

Contrariwise, if you mean to rely and cleave to the Clergy and State
Spiritual, you shall purchase your self many enemies: I have had the
experience thereof: but hold all correspondencie with the Popes: Give them
much; be friendly always to them: Entertain such Cardinals as be most in
credit with them: Make your self Master of the Conclave: Make much of the
German-Princes Bishops, and use to bestow no more pension on them by the hand
of the Emperor, but deal so; as they may acknowledge your self for the
giver; surely they will serve you the more willingly, and receive your gifts
with greater gladness.

As for them that be of baser degree and quality, let them not come near you,
and so shall you seem to give your Nobility and Commons the better
countenance. For certainly I must needs say, their pride is great, they are
mighty in substance, whatsoever they desire must be done, they will be
chargeable unto you, and in the end will seek to rule your Scepter. Wherefore
make your party good, by the means of such as are descended of Noble
parentage, and great Families, and promote them now and then to some Spiritual
livings. The common sort is not so serviceable; for they will procure you such
unspeakable hatred, as that thereby you might be forced to consume your
treasure, and therefore repose your trust in none of them, unless they be of
great quality.

Abandon and shake off your English Spies.

Clear your self of the French charges.

Use the service of some part of the Netherlandish Nobility, so that you may
join and knit them unto your best and, most trusty subjects. Now as concerning
the travel and Navigation to the East and West Indies, therein does consist
all the power and might of the Kingdom of Spain, as likewise the straining
and bridling of the Italians.

France and England cannot be debar^ed from meddling with the aforesaid Trade
and Navigation, their powers be great, their Seamen be many, their Seas be too
large, their Merchants too rich, their Captains and soldiers too greedy of
money, and their subjects too trusty.

I have for your sake, in the transport of the Low Countries, put down a
proviso, altogether to restrain the Netherlanders from dealing in the aforesaid
Trade: but I fear that time and men will prove changeable: wherefore you must
do two things. First, alter often your Governors. Secondly, those which you
draw from thence, you shall put in Office here at home, and make them of the
Council of India in Spain. So shall you never (in my opinion) be deceived,
but both parties will discover your profit, and seek their own honor.

If you perceive the Englishmen prepare to bereave you of these commodities, as
being strong both in shipping and Mariners, (for the French I make small
account) see that you strengthen your self with the Netherlands,
notwithstanding that a great part of them be Heretics, and would so continue,
with condition, that they shall have full liberty to utter all their
commodities in Spain and Italy, paying their royal Incomes and Customs, and
all duties belonging unto you: and then also you may grant unto them passage to
travel and trade unto your East and West Indies, provided that they put in
good security in Spain, and take upon them a corporal oath, that upon their
return from the Indies, they shall arrive in some part of Spain, and there to
unload upon pain of death, if they shall be found to do otherwise. Mine
opinion is, that they will never refuse to accept of this easy condition, and
to accomplish the same: and by these means shall the Indian and Spanish be
linked and knit to the Netherlandish trade: and England and France must then
live upon their own purses.

My Son, I could relate unto you more secrets for the conquests of other
Kingdoms and Countries, but all such advertisements, with the discourses
thereupon delivered unto me, and by me amended, you shall find in my Cabinet.
Cause Christopher de Moro immediately to deliver the key unto you, lest these
so weighty secrets come into the hands of some other.

Upon the seventeenth of September, I caused the transcript or last scribled
copy of these remembrances, being in diverse places int^rlined, amended, and
altered, to be cast into the fire: but I fear somewhat thereof might underhand
be kept and reserved: wherefore set your ears to hearken thereafter.

I have this present day added thus much. If you can; deal with Antonio Peers,
to draw him into Italy, or at least to procure him to do you service in some
other Countries, but into Spain or the Netherlands (...) come.

Touching your marriage, the particular writings thereof remain under the
custody of the Secretary.

Moreover, remember that you often read over this signed Bill, and these
Writings, here-about was never any body in counsel with me, but mine own hand.

Have always an especial care over your Counselors, and over those that are
near unto you.

The deciphering of Letters you must your self take upon you.

Do not offend nor anger your Secretaries; deliver them always work of small
or great importance, make proof of them rather by your enemies, than by your
friends. And although you be enforced to discover your secrets to your dearest
favorites, yet lock the chiefest always within your own breast.

Thus much gentle Reader, as it is thought has been saved out of those notes
and writings which were seen to be burned, and this I thought good to publish
for the common understanding.

Portugal.
THis Kingdom (which is not above 320. miles long, and sixty broad; not very
populous, and but meanly rich in essential revenues:) by navigation and
Acquisition of late days, it held equal rank with the most famous Provinces
of the world: yea, this humor of industry so possessed their minds, that they
solely undertook the famous expeditions of Barbary, Aethiopia, India, and
Brasile. Wherein within these hundred years, they have taken and fortified the
principal places and harbors of those Provinces, challenging unto themselves
the peculiar traffike of the Atlanticke and East Ocean. They seized upon the
Ter^craz, knowing that without touching at those Islands; no ship could safely
pass into Aethiopia, India, Brasil, or the New-world. Returning from the
Countries toward Spain or Lisbon, they put into releeve their wants and sick
passengers, and outward they touch to take in fresh water, and fetch the wind.
In Afric they are Lords of those places, which we spoke of before in the
description of Spain: In Cambaia, they have Diu, Damain, and Bazain, the
hither India, Chaul, Goa, and the fortresses of Cochin, Colan, the Island
Mavar, and the haven Columbo in Zeilan.

Amongst these Goa is the chiefest, as the place where the Viceroy keeps his
Court. Cochin and Colan for their plenty of Pepper: Mavar for the
Pearle-fishing: Columbo for the abundance of Cinnamon: Damain and Bazain, for
fertile provision. In these quarters they have some Princes their Confederates,
others their Feodaries. The chief and wealthiest of Allies is the King of
Cochin, sometime tributarie to the Calecute, but now by the intercourse and
traffike with the Portugals, he is grown so rich and mighty, that the other
Princes do envy his prosperity. The King of Colan is likewise their
confederate.

Their chief Force consists in situation and strength of places, and in
number and goodness of their shipping. Forces.
As concerning situation, this people wisely foreseeing, that in regard of
their contemptible numbers, they were not of power to make any famous journey
into the Inland Regions, neither able to match the Persians, the Guizarites,
the Princes of Decan, the King of Narsinga, and other barbarous Potentates in
Cambaia, turned all their cogitations to immure themselves in such defensive
places, that therein with small forces they might ever have hope to divert
great attempts, and make themselves Lords and Commanders of the Sea and
Navigation: which when they had done, they entertained and maintained so strong
a Navy, that no Prince in those parts was able to wrong them; yea, they
furnished those vessels so thoroughly, that one single ship would not refuse to
cope with three or four of the Barbarians. With this Armada (of one and twenty
ships) Francis Almeida defeated the Ma^^lucks, near the town of Diu. Alfonse
Alburquerick with thirty great ships won (...) cute: with one and twenty he
took Goa, and regained it (being lost) with four and thirty. With three and
twenty he took Malaca; with six and twenty he entered the Red Sea; These
Galleons I suppose were but poor ^^gats.
and with two and twenty recovered Ormus. In process of time, as their
mightiness increased, Lopes Zu^^ezius made a journey into the Red Sea with
seven and thirty Galleons. Lopes Sequeira with twenty four ships, but with
greater number of soldiers than ever before, laid siege to Guidda in the
Red Sea: Henry Menesius wasted Patan with fifty ships. Lopes Vazius Sampaius
left in the Arsenall 136. vessels of war, whereof the greatest part were
excellent well furnished. Nonius Acunia undertook a journey to Diu with three
hundred ships, wherein were three thousand Portugals, and five thousand
Indians, besides a great number of his Guard and Servants, which ordinarily
follow the Viceroyes in those Countries.

Thus have they much talked of their victories and purchases, and so should
still for me, if truth and time proclaimed not, that indeed they are but poor
possessors of some Harbors and Towns by the Sea shore; standing on their
Guard now more than ever, as fearing to lose them with more terror, than ever
they entertained comfort in the facile acquisition of them.

Besides his confederates and feodaries, Borderers.
he is confined with most mighty Princes, his enemies: as the Persian, the
King of Cambaia, who makes title to Diu, and other places, which were once
under his jurisdiction: Nizzamaluc and Idalcam (for so the Portugals call the
two Princes of Decan) and the Kings of Calecute and Narsinga.

As for the Kings of Persia and Narsinga, they never waged war against them,
because they have always had to do with more dangerous enemies: other Princes
though they have enterprized to their uttermost, to regaine Diu, Chial, Goa,
and other places, and have left no means unattempted to bring their designs
to effect, yet their abilities could not work any prosperous success to their
laborious endeavors, by reason of situation, so commodious for the
transportation and receipt of continual succors from the Sea. And though they
have undertaken the like actions in the deep of Winter, hoping by tempests and
other casualties, to bar the Portugals from their Sea-succours, yet they
never prevailed; because the ships and courages of the Portugals, the one
resolute to endure the siege, and by patience to overcome ^ the other
determining (hap what may) never to forsake their distressed Contrymen, have
set all upon hazard, and exposed their fortunes to the mercy of wind and waves
in those tempestuous seasons. Their worst, greatest, and fiercest enemy is the
Turk, who (being backed with the like advantage of situation, which the City
of Aden affords him, and sometime pricked on by his own proper envy,
emulation, and ambition, sometime egged on by the persuasion of the King of
Cambaia,) has often endeavored to dispoile them of the Sovereignty of the
Red Sea, and finally to drive them out of the East India. The greatest Navy
that ever he sent against them, was to recover Diu, consisting of sixty four
ships, but by them defeated. Afterward he sent a Navy of greater vessels to
the conquest of Ormuz, and that likewise was almost wholly beaten, bruised, and
drowned.

In the further Indies they hold nothing but Malaca, and the Moluccas. In times
past Malaca was far greater than now it is: for it lay scattered three miles
alongs the Seacoast; but the Portugals, that they might the better defend it,
have brought it into a round form, containing not above a mile in compass.
Here the King has two puissant enemies, Ior, and Achem, tho one mighty at
Land, and the other far mightier at Sea, by whom the Town, not without great
danger, has more than once been besieged, but by the aid sent from India,
always releeved, with great slaughter of the Enemy. At length Paul Lima
defeated King Ior, and raced the Castle built by him near Malaca, wherein
besides other spoils, he found nine hundred brazen cast-peeces. This
territory is subject to great danger, by reason of the puissance of this King
of Achem, bending all his cogitations to the rooting and final destruction of
the Portugals out of this Province, and therefore the King of Spain of late
years sent Matthias Alburquerk with a great power into India, with authority
either to secure the territory of Malaca, or to fight with the King of Achem.

To secure their trade of Spice and Nutmegs in the Moluccas and Banda, they
have built many Castles, yet for many years past they have been mightily
molested by the Dutch and English Nations, who by no means will be excluded
from the free traffic of the Sea. The English by reason of their great
puissance, have of late builded the fairest ships of the World for that only
trade, and therein (as now) seated a hopeful and peaceable Factorie.

The Roman Empire, or Germany.
THis Empire in its greatest glory ( viz.) in the days of Trajan, stretched
from the Irish Ocean; and beyond, from the Atlantik, to the Persian Gulf, and
from Catnes in Scotland, to the River Albis, and beyond, to the Danubie. It
began first to decline by the civil wars of Galba, Otho, and Vttellius: for
in those times the Legions of Britanie were transported into the Continent;
Holland and the bordering Countries revolted, and immediately after, the
Sarazens finding the Frontiers of the Empire without Garrisons, passed over
Danubius. The Alani won the Streights of the Caspian Hills: the Persians
endeavored to get them a name and reputation; the Goths wandered thorowout
Moesia and Macedonia; the Frenchmen entered Gallia. But Constantine the
Emperor restored it to the former glory, made an end of civil War, and
tamed the barbarous and cruel Nations; and had he not committed two great
faults, this Empire might long have flourished. The first was, the translating
of the Imperial Seat, from Rome to Constantinople; which action weakened the
West, and overthrew the Empire: as Plants removed out of their natural soil,
and transported into Regions contrary in temperature and air, retain small
vigor of their radical virtue: as also because the manly and martial people
of Europe if they should rebel, could not be reduced to obedience by the power
of the effeminate Asians; whom, or none, the Emperors of Constantinople must
of necessity make use of, by reason of their situation. In which regard, the
Roman Senate would never consent, that the people should leave Rome and dwell
at Veij, a City far more pleasant and more commodious than Rome, especially
after the sacking thereof by the Frenchmen.

The second fault of Constantine, was, the division of the Empire to his
children, Anno Dom. 341. By this division, of one Empire he made three, and
withal, a memorable diminution of his authority and forces. For when his
sons fell to civil dissension, they consumed one another so cruelly, that
the Empire resembled a bloudlesse, yea, a livelesse body. And though sometime,
under some one Prince, it stood on foot again, yet it remained always subject
to division, and parted into two Empires, the East and the West, until the
coming of Odoacer, King of the Herules and Turingi, into Italy, with a mighty
Host: by which invasion, Augustulus suffered such irrecoverable losses, that
in extreme despair he was forced to cast himself into the protection of the
East Empire. This happened in the year of our Lord 476. And about this time
the Hunnes passed Danubius; Alaricus King of the Goths took Rome: the Vandals
first spoiled Andaluzia, afterward, Afric: the Alans won Portugal: the
Goths conquered the greater part of Spain: the Saxons, Britanie: the
Burgundians, Provence. Anno 556. Justinian restored it somewhat to a better
State, driving the Vandals out of Afric, and the Goths out of Italy, by his
Captains. But this fair weather lasted not long: for in the year 713. the
Arms and Heresies of the Mahumetans began to vex the East Empire, and shortly
after, the Sa^^^ zons wasted Syria, Egypt, the Archipelago, Afric, Sie^, and
Spain. In the year 735. they vanquished Narbon, Avignon, Tolouse, Bordeaux,
and the bordering Regions. Thus by little and little began the Western Empire
to droope, and as it were, to draw toward his last age. As for the Eastern,
it stood so weak and tottering, that with all the force it had it was scarce
able to defend Constantinople against the Arms of the Sarazens, much less to
minister aid to the Western Provinces. But in the year of our Lord 800.
Charles the Great, King of France, obtained the Title of the Western Empire,
and in some sort mitigated the fury of these barbarous Nations.

And thus the Western Empire stood then divided: That Naples and Sipont
Eastward, with Sicil, should belong to the Greek Empire; Bononia should
remain to the Lumbards; the Venetians were Neuters: the Popedom free; the
rest Charles should possess. Blondus says, that the Empress Irene gave the
first counsel to this division which afterward was confirmed by Nicephorus.
For before Charles his time, there was one form of Government; and the Laws,
Magistracies, and ordinances which were enacted for the welfare of one
Empire, tended to the good and honor of both, as to the members of one body;
and if one Emperor died without issue, the whole Empire remained to the
survivour. But when Charles the great was chosen Emperor of the West, there
was no more regard taken of the East Empire, neither the Emperor of the East
had to do with the West, nor the West with the East. The Empire of the West
continued in this line above one hundred years, and failed in Arnolph, the
last of that house. In the year 1453. Mahumet Prince of the Turks took
Constantinople, and utterly extinguished the succession of the Eastern Empire.

And as for the West ( viz. Italy) the Emperor has no more to do therein,
than has a pilgrim, who is admitted to visit the wonders of our Lady of
Loretto.

For, in the year of Christ. 1002. all claim of inheritance rejected, the
Creation of the Emperor was granted to the free election of seven Princes,
termed Electors. The reason why the Empire became elective, which had so long
continued hereditary in the House of Charles, was because Otho the third left
no issue male: After whom the Western Empire was marvellously curtailed and
diminished: nothing being left but Germany, and a part of Italy. The Pope held
Romagnia; the Venetians lived free, possessing great Dominions joined to their
State: the Normans (taking Naples and Sicil from the Greeks) held them in Fee
of the Church, first under Clement the Antipope, then under Nicholas the
second, and his successors, who for their private gain ratified the former
grant of Clement Antipope.

In Tuscane and Lumbardie, partly by the quarrels between Henry the fourth,
Henry the fifth, Frederick the first, and Frederick the second, with the
Roman Bishops: partly by reason of the valor of the Inhabitants, the Emperor
reaped more labor than honor, more loss than profit. And therefore Rodulphus
terrified with the misfortunes and crosses of his predecessors, had no great
mind to travel into Italy, but sold them their liberties for a small matter.
They of Luques paid ten thousand crowns; the Florentines, but six thousand.
And so every State by little and little forsaking the Emperor, no part of
Italy remained, but the bare Title. The Dukes of Millaine (and so every other
state) usurped what they could catch, without leave asking, only they desired
their investiture of the Empire. But Francis, after the conquest thereof, did
little regard this investiture, saying. That he was able to keep it by the
same means that he had got it. The Princes beyond the Mountains also
withdrew their obedience, so that at this day the Empire is enclosed in
Germany.

Whereupon, Situation.
sithence the glory thereof at this day consists only in Germany; It is good
reason to say somewhat of this most ample and flourishing Province. It lies
between Odera and Mosa; between Vistula and Aa; and between the German Sea;
the Baltic Ocean, and the Alps. The form thereof is foure-square, equal in
length and breadth, stretching six hundred and fifty miles every way^ That it
abounds with Corn, Plenty.
Cattle, and Fish, let experience show. For Charles the fifth had under his
Ensigns at Vienna ninety thousand footmen, and thirty five thousand horse.
Maximilian the second at Iavorin, had almost one hundred thousand footmen, and
thirty four thousand horse, and yet no man complained of dearness or
scarcity. In the war between Charles the fifth and the Protestants, for
certain months, one hundred and fifty thousand men sustained themselves
abundantly in the field.

And surely, of all Europe it is the greatest Country, and beautified with the
best and richest store of Cities, Towns, Castles, and Religious places. And in
that decorum and order (for in a manner see one, and see all) as if there had
been an universal consent to have squared them, like Courts, to one another
proportion: whereto may be added a secret of morality; That the inhabitants
for honesty of conversation, probity of manners, assurance of loyalty, and
confidence of disposition (setting apart their imperfect customs of drinking)
exceed our belief. For notwithstanding these their intemperate meetings, and
phantasticalnesse in apparel; yet are they unoffensive, conversible and
maintainers of their Honors and Families: wherein they step so far, as if
true Gentry were incorporate with them, and there had his principal mansion.
And wanted they not an united and heeditary succession of government, having
sometime an Emperor by partiality of election, and sometime by the absolute
command of the Pope; I should stand as forward as the best, to say with Charles
the Emperor, That they were indeed a valiant, a happy, and an honorable
Nation. But in respect of these apparent and material defects, in some
abatement of their ostentation, concerning their own glory, and the honor of
Majesty (in my judgment) they should not do amiss, to reform the custom
of intituling the younger sons of Dukes, Earls, and Barons, by the
honorable Titles of their Ancestors: especially sithence the Italians in
facetiousnesse do jest; That these Earls of Germany, the Dukes of Russia,
the Dons of Spain, the Monsiers of France, the Bishops of Italy, the Knights
of Naples, the Lairds of Scotland, the Hidalgos of Portugal, the Nobles of
Hungary, and the younger Brethren in England, make a very poor company.
Otherwise, if noveltie transport you to view their Palaces of Honor, you shall
eft-soones be brought into their well fortified Cities, wherein you shall
find Armorie, Munition, etc. with a presence of the very Burgers excellently
well trained in Military discipline: you shall see brave musters of Horse,
with their exercises of Hunting, Hawking, and Riding; yea, how every man lives
of his own, the Citizen in quiet, and the women blessed with plentiful issue.

The Nature of this Climate is temperate enough, Climate.
somewhat of the coldest, yet tolerable and healthie. Soil.
No place thereof, unless by nature it be utterly barren, lies unmanured;
insomuch, that few remainders of that huge wood of Hercynia are to be seen at
this day, unless in place where humane necessity requires their growing, or
Nature has made the Earth fit for no other employment; as are the Blacke-Wood,
the Ottonique Wood, and the Woods of Bohemia. And yet do they neither carry
that horrid face of thickness, as in old times, neither are they so
untravelled, or unhabitable, but exceeding full of Habitations, Hamlets,
Villages, and Monasteries.

It is rich in Mines of Gold, Silver, Corn, Vines, Bathes, Commodities.
and all sorts of Metal, and therein surpasses the residue of the Provinces
of Europe. Nature has also bestowed upon the Vp-land Countries, many Springs
and pits of Salt Water; of which hard Salt is boiled. Neither is it less
stored with Merchandise; for the Inhabitants more than any other Nation, do
excel in curious workmanship, and mechanical invention: and it is so watered
with Navigable Rivers, that all sorts of merchandise and wares are with ease
conveied from one place to another. The greatest of them is Danow, Rivers.
next the Rhene, which runs clean through the Country, from the South to
the North, as the Danow from East to West. Albis rises in Bohemia, passes by
Misnia, Saxony, Marchia, and the ancient Marquisat. Odera springs in
Moravia, waters S^^^sia, the two Marquisats, and Pomeran. Then follows
Wesar, Neccar, Mosa, Moselia, Isara, C^nus, Varia, the Mase. This divides
Germany into two parts, the higher and the lower: The high stretches from the
Mase to the Alps: the low from the Mase to the Ocean. It is divided into many
Provinces, the chief whereof (I mean the true members of the Empire) are
Alsatia, Swevia, Bavaria, Austria, Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, Lusatia, the two
Marquisates, Saxony, Masaia, Thuringia, Franconia, Hassia, Westphalia,
Cleveland, Magunce, Pomeran. In these Provinces (besides Belgia and Helvetia)
are esteemed to be ten Millions of men, and eighty great Cities; Villages
innumerable, and those plentifully stored with all sorts of Mechanical
Occupations. Cities.
Those which are seated near Rivers, for the most part are builded of Stone;
the Vp-land, part of Stone, and part of Timber. The Houses thereof are very
fair and high, the Streets strait, large, and paved with stone; yea, more neat
and handsome than those of Italy. Strabo writes, that the Romans excelled the
Grecians, in cleanliness of their cities, by reason of their Channels to
conu^y away the soil; but at this day, the Dutchmen do far exceed the
Romans herein.

These Cities are of three sorts, viz. free Cities, (yet those styled
imperial) Hanse-townes, and Cities by inheritance immediately holden of
Princes and Prelates. The free Cities are those which are by time and
prescription immediately subject to the Emperor, and have no other protector
but him only. In times past they have been accounted 96. now 60.

Of Hanse cities there were 72. mutually bound by ancient leagues to enjoy
common privileges and freedoms, both at home and in foreign Countries. In
ancient times they were of high estimation in England and other Provinces, in
regard of their numbers of shipping and Sea-trade, whereby they stored all
Countries with their Eastern commodities, and served Princes turns in time of
war with use of shipping: But at this day we shall find neither themselves,
nor their means so great, that the English should either fear them, or favor
them, especially in cases of prejudice. I write this because of their
continual grudges and complaints against our Nation. For if the State upon
occasion (as of late years) after the example of other Princes, should forbid
them all offensive trade into Spain, (which is their chiefest support) they
would in short time be quit of that indifferent proportion which as yet
remains. As for that true estimation which is so much spoken of beyond Sea,
and vaunted of in History, almost nothing remains at this present but bare
report. For of those which in some good measure seem to hold up their heads,
and appear by their Deputies in their assemblies, they are seldom of one
mind, as being in truth unable (unless with much ado) to bring up the
charges and contributions necessary and incident for the defense and
maintenance of their leagues, privileges, and trade, in foreign parts and at
home.

Maidenburg is one of these Hanse-towns, and the County wherein it stands is
also Maidenburg. It is one of the most ancient towns of Germany, and
contains in circuit about three miles, The streets are very large, but
durtie; and the houses built partly of stone, and partly of timber, many of
them being ancient and fair: The walls are strong and upon them are mounted
many good pieces of brass Ordnance. It has ten Churches, the Inhabitants for
the most part being Lutherans. It stands upon the river Elve, over which it
has a fair and large bridge of timber. The Emperor this summer laid siege to
it, which upon composition he afterward raised.

Hamburg stands in the land of Holst upon the River of E^^^ also. It is four
miles in compass, and of great strength, and much resorted unto by foreign
Nations for traffic of Merchandise. In it are nine Churches, and many large
streets, which are very durtie in foul weather. The greatest part of the
Inhabitants are Brewers: for here are said to be 777. Brewers, forty Bakers,
two Lawyers, and one Physician: for most of their quarrels and contentions, as
they begin in drink, so they end in drink. And being sick and ill at ease,
their physic is to fill their guts with Hamborow Beer: if that help not,
their case is desperate. It is one of the Hanse-townes also, and the people are
Lutherans.

Stoad, being neither fair nor great, stands within the jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Br^me, but not subject unto him, by reason it is one of the
Hanse-townes. It stands about two English miles from the river of Elve, and
has a small creek called the Swing, which runs through the city into the
river, and bears small barques for transportation of Merchandise. In it are
four Churches, and a Monastery of Lutheran Friars. It was this last year
taken by the Emperor.

Of other goodly Cities there are a far greater number, some by inheritance
belonging to the Temporal Princes, and some to the Spiritual.

In criminal causes they inflict most sharp torments, and unusual kinds of
death; a sign of the cruelty of their Natu^^^. They were the inventors of
Printing, of Guns, and of ^lockes, things of notable use for mankind.

The people is divided into four sorts, Husbandmen (they bear ^o office)
Citizens, Noblemen, and Prelates: The la^^ th^ee sort, make the Assembly and
States of the Empire.

O^ Prelates, (...).
the Archbishops Electors have the chiefest place. The Archbishop of Ments is
Chancellor for the Empire, the Bishop of Colen is Chancellor of Italy, and
the Bishop of Treuers is Chancellor of France. The Archbishop of Saltzburg is
of greatest jurisdiction and revenue. The Bishop of Maidenburg writes himself
Primate of Germany, Breme and Hamburg had jurisdictions: next follow above
forty other Bishops, the Great Master of the Dutch Order, and the Prior of the
Knights of Jerusalem: then seven Abbots, and they likewise are States of the
Empire.

Of secular Princes, the King of Bohemia is principal, Temporal Princes.
who is chief Tasier: the Duke of Saxony, Marshall: the Marquess of
Brandburg, high Chamberlain: the Earl Palatine, Sewer. Besides these places,
there are thirty other Dukes, amongst whom, the Archduke of Austria holds
the highest place: and of these Dukes, the King of De^marke by his tenure of
the Dukedom of Holsatia, is reckoned to be one. The Marquesses, Lantgraves,
Earls, and Barons are innumerable.

It is thought that the Empire receives every way above seven millions, which
is a great matter: Revenue.
yet besides ordinary, the people, not over pressed as in Italy, do pay other
great subsidies to their Princes in times of danger. The Empire was bound (at
least wise accustomed) to furnish the Emperor, when he went to Rome to be
crowned, with twenty thousand footmen, and four thousand Horse, and to
maintain them for eight months, and therefore it was, called Romanum
subsidium. The revenues of the Cities and Lay-Princes, have been greatly
augmented since the suppressing of Popery, and bringing in of new impositions,
which taking their beginning from Italy, (evil examples spread far) quickly
passed over to France and Germany. In times of necessity great taxes are laid
upon the whole Empire, and levied extraordinarily; And that they may be
gathered with the greater ease, Germany is parted into ten divisions (or
circuits) which have their particular assemblies for the execution of the
Edicts made in the general Diets of the Empire.

As concerning their multitudes, Forces.
it is thought that the Empire is able to afford two hundred thousand Horse
and Foot, which the war (before spoken of) may prove to be true: As likewise
the forepassed wars of France and Belgia, which were ever continued in those
two Provinces, for the most part with German soldiers. Their forces may the
better be transported from place to place, by reason of the commodiousnesse of
many fair and navigable rivers. At one time, Wolfang Duke of Bipont led into
France an Army of twelve thousand footmen, and eight thousand horsemen in
behalf of the Protestants; and at the same time, the Count Mansfield was
leader of five thousand horsemen of the same Nation, in behalf of the
Catholics. William of Nassaw had in his Army eight thousand German horsemen,
and ten thousand footmen: the Duke of Alva had at the same instant three
thousand. What should I speak of the numbers that entered Flanders with Duke
Casimere? Or those that entered France under the same Leader, in the year of
our Lord 1578. Or to what end should I make mention of that Army, whereof part
served Henry the fourth, part the league? But to prove that this Nation must
be very populous, seeing that wars are continually open in some one or other
part of Christendom; and no action undertaken therein, wherein great numbers
of Germans are not waged and entertained. To speak nothing of the Netherlands,
who in times past have resisted the whole power of France, with an Army of
fourscore thousand men; or of the Swissers, who in their own defense, are
thought able to raise an Army of one hundred and twenty thousand soldiers; I
will only put you in mind of that expedition, which they made out of their
own Territories into Lumbardie, in defense of that State, against Francis the
French King, with an Army of fifty thousand footmen.

The best footmen of Germany are those of Tirol, Swevia, and Westphalia: the
best horsemen, those of Brunswicke, Cleveland, and Franconia. But plainly the
best horsemen of Germany will play the Pultrones, and the best foot, the
cowards. They are both the meanest soldiers of Christendom.

Of Weapons, they handle the Sword and the Pike, better than the Harquebuze. In
the field they are very strong, as well to charge, as to bear the Shocke: for
Order is of great effect, which is as it were natural unto them, with a
stately pace and firm standing. They are not accounted of for the defense of
fortresses; and for their corpulent bodies, I hold them not fit for the assault
of a breach. And therefore they are to be accounted rather resolute and
constant, than fierce and courageous; for they will never come to the service
wherein courage and magnanimity is to be showed. After the victory, they do
kill all whom they meet, without difference of age, sex, or calling. If the
war be drawn out at length, or if they be besieged, they faint with
cowardice. In Camp they can endure no delays, neither know they how to
temporize. If their first attempts fall not out to their minds, they are at
their wits end, and lose courage: if they once begin to run, they will never
turn again. He that retains them, must be at extraordinary charges and great
trouble, by reason of their wives, who consume so much provision, that it is a
very hard thing to provide it, almost unpossible to preserve it; and without
this provision they stand in no stead. Their horses are rather strong than
courageous; and because of ten which go to the war, eight are pressed from the
plough, they are of small service; and when they see their blood, their heart
quaileth. The Spanish Genets in this case wax more fierce.

In Sea-forces they are not much inferior to their Landforces, Forces by Sea.
although they use no Sea Fights: the Cities of Hamburg, Lubeck, Rostoch, and
some other places, are able to make an hundred ships; some say an hundred and
fifty, equal to the forces of the Kings of Denmark and Swethland. When these
strong and invincible forces are united, they fear no enemy; and in imminent
peril they are sure of the aid of the Princes of Italy, Savoy, and Lorraine;
for these Princes never forsook the Empire in necessity. To the Zegethan
war Emanuel Duke of Savoy sent six hundred Argolitrees. Cosmo, Duke of
Florence, three thousand footmen, paid by that State. Alphonsus the second,
Duke of Ferrara, was there in person with fifteen hundred horsemen; better
horsemen there were not in the whole Camp. William Duke of Mantua was there
also with a gallant troop of footmen; and Henry of Lorraine, Duke of Guis^^
had there three hundred Gentlemen. The Commonweals of Genoa and Lucca
assisted them with money. With the aid of these Princes, and with those whom
Pius the fifth sent to his succors, Maximilian the second had in the field and
hundred thousand footmen, and five and thirty thousand horse. Anno 1566. the
States of the Empire at the Diet of Ausburg granted him an assistance of forty
thousand footmen and eight thousand horsemen for eight months, and twenty
thousand footmen and four thousand horsemen for three years next following.

Austrich.
And now because the Western Empire has continued in the most noble Family
of the House of Austrich, and eight Emperors have successively succeeded one
another of that line; for the delight of the Reader, we will speak somewhat
thereof.

This House grew famous almost about the same time that the Ottoman Prince
began his Empire, and (as it may seem) was raised up of God, to stand as a
Wall or Bulwark against these Turks and Infidels.

Philip the first, King of Spain, Archduke of Austrich, etc. had two sons,
Charles the fifth, afterward Emperor, and Ferdinand the first, King of Romans.
To Charles (as to the eldest) fell Belgia and Spain, with their dependances;
Ferdinand succeeded him in his Lordships of Germany, as Austrich, Boheme,
Tirol, and other Provinces, whereunto by the marriage of his wife Anne, Hungary
was adjoined. This Ferdinand left three sons behind him, who although they
divided their inheritance into three parts, yet their successors even to this
day did and do govern them as one entire government: their counsels are one,
their minds one, their designements one, most lively representing the ancient
Gerion, where for the common safety, if any part be afflicted, every member
runs to the succor of the other, as if it were to their peculiar
tranquillity. Their dominion stretches so large, and is of such force, that
if (by reason of the great tract of Land lying between the Carpathie
Mountains and Segonia) they did not border upon the great Turk, (who always
constrains them to stand upon their guard, and to be at excessive charges) no
Potentate thorowout the Christian World could go beyond them for numbers of
people, for Wealth and Treasure, or for magnificent Cities. Any man may
perceive this to be true, that considers the distance from Tergiste to the
Borders of Lusatia, from Tissa to Nobu^, from Canisia to Constantia upon the
Lake Podame.

Austria was sometimes a kingdom of it self, and called Ostenrick; made so
Anno 1225. It held this honor but eleven years. Duke Albert son to the
Emperor Rodolphus, by marriage united Tirole, Stiria, Carinthia, and Carniola;
whose descendant Frederike 3. Emperor, raised it to an Arch-dukedome. This
House is divided into four illustrious Families: The first is Spain; The
second Gratz of Stiria, of which House this present Emperor Ferdinand is; The
third Inspruck; And the fourth Burgundy. It is a goodly and a rich Country,
yea the best of all Germany, both for Corn, Cattle, Wine, and Fish. Diverse
good Cities it has, whereof Vienna is small, but for strength the very
Bulwark of Europe, at the siege of which the Turk lost 60000. Soldiers. The
first walls were built with the ransom of our King Richara the first. The
Protestants were much gotten into these parts before these late wars, and the
Emperor had much ado to suppress the Boores, who in the year 1627. under
Student Potts (a Scholar) stood stoutly for their conscience. His revenue must
needs be good, as having some silver mines: the transportation of Wine and
Beeves yields much to him. His Forces are still in Garrison in Hungary against
the Turk. The Sea comes not near him.

Under the Emperor at this day are Lusatia, Silesia, Bohemia, Moravia,
Austria, and a great part of Hung^rie, Territories large and ample) abounding
with people, corn, and riches. Then follow Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola, the
Countries of Canisia, Tirol, Slesia, the Princedomes of Swevia, Alsaria,
Brisgovia, and Constantia.

The Kingdom of Bohemia, Bohemia.
being in a manner round, is encompassed with great Mountains and the
Hercynian woods: it contains in the whole circuit five hundred and fifty
English miles; the length is three days journie. Those Mountains (as I have
said elsewhere) as also the whole soil, are pleasant and fruitful, abounding
with corn, wood, wine, and grass; and afford gold, silver, copper, tin,
lead and iron, in great quantities: only here is no salt, but such as is
brought out of Germany. The County is so populous, and so replenished with
buildings in all places, that here are credibly affirmed 29237. Cities, Towns,
and Villages to be numbered. Others say, 780. Castles and walled Towns, and 32.
thousand Villages. Here is also plenty of Foul, and great store of
Fresh Water Fish, by reason of the great Lakes which are found in many places
of this Kingdom. The people are for the most part Lutherans, and their
language is more than half Polish. They are a free people; and after the death
of their King, they may make choice of whom they will to be their Governor. So
did they lately choose Matthias. And for their more strength and better
security against the Romanists, they linked themselves with the Silesians
their next neighbors in a perpetual and firm bond of amity, offensive and
defensive, against all men whatsoever.

The people of Bohemia live in great plenty and delicacie; they much resemble
the English: the women be very beautiful, white-handed, but luxurious, and
that with liberty of their husbands also. They are divided in opinion of
Religion; the Protestants of the Augustane Confession being so potent, that
they were able to choose a King, and to put out the Emperor. Their Kingdom is
merely elective, although by force and faction now almost made hereditary to
the House of Austria; which it seems it was not, when as within these two Ages
that State made choice of one M. Tyndall and English Gentleman, father to M.
Doctor Tyndall, Master of Queens College in Cambridge, sending over their
Ambassadors to him, and by them their presents: which story is famously known
in Cambridge. Their chief City Prague is one of the greatest of Christendom,
as being three towns in one, each divided from other by the River Multaw, and
all three conjoined by a goodly wooden bridge of four and twenty arches: by
it runs the famous Elve, which receives two others into him in that Country,
Eger and Wattz. The Kingdom has many mighty men of estate; into whose
Lordships the Country is altogether divided, and not as others into Shires and
Counties. The King has three silver Mines, and one of gold, some pearls are
there found also. The tin Mines there were first found by an English Tinner,
who fled thither for debt, and is the best of Europe next our English. All the
Nobility and Gentry are by their tenures obliged when their King is in the
field, to wait upon him on horseback completely armed; which are enough to make
an Army of twenty or thirty thousand. This service the Protestants promised to
King Frederick of late, but the tenth man appeared not. They serve willinger
on horseback than on foot; and are rather for a Summer service, than to lie in
the field all Winter; and yet are every way better soldiers than the Germans.
The Protestants were suffered to plant and increase there by the craft and plot
of Cardinal Glessel, (who was governor to the Emperor Matthias) his pretense
was, that they would be a sure bulwark against the Turk, and should spare
the service and lives of the Catholics; this was his pretense: but his plot
was an expectation of some stirs to be raised by them; which some lay he did
in hatred of the house of Austria, whom he desired to see set besides the
cushion: others imagine it was but a trick to make the great men of the
Protestants to forfeit their Estates. Howsoever the plot took, and the
Cardinal after the taking of Prague, being invited to a banquet by the Elector
of Mentz, was by him sent prisoner to Rome, where he remained two years, but
was afterward both enlarged and rewarded. And this was one of the secrets of
the Mystery of iniquity.

Moravia lying on the East of Bohemia, Moravia.
so named of the River Mora, for the bigness thereof affords more corn than
any Country of Europe. It abounds also with good and pleasant wine, like unto
Rhenish: and is wonderfully replenished in all parts with fair Cities, Towns,
and Villages, all built of stone or brick. It is very mountainous and woody,
but the South part is more champian. It contains two Earledomes, one
Bishopric, diverse Baronies, two good Cities, and four or six fair Towns.
The people be very martial and fierce, especially the mountainers, who stood
so stoutly to King Frederick at the battle of Prague, that had all the rest of
the Army done so, the Kingdom had not been lost. It is a free State like
Poland, and may make choice of whom they will to be the Lord, whose style is to
be called Margrave of Moravia. And for that informer times the Emperor and
Matthias his brother offered them some wrongs concerning religion, they have
sithence contracted a league offensive and defensive with the Nobility of
Hungary and Austria, as well against the invasions of the Turk, as the
oppressions of the Romanists. Amongst these Provinces, Silesia, and Lusatia,
are as large as Bohemia, but in strength and numbers of people far inferior.
These two Provinces with Moravia, are incorporate to the Crown of Bohemia.
Silesia lies on the East of Bohemia, Poland on the South of it, to which it
sometimes belonged; Hungaria and Moravia on the East. It is two hundred miles
long and fourscore broad. It is a most delicate and a plentiful Country,
finely divided in the middle by the fair River Oder: on which stand four or
five handsome Cities; the chief of which is Breslaw, the Bishop whereof is for
his revenue called the golden Bishop: here is also an University. Niesse is
also another Bishopric, who now is a Cardinal. The people (especially of the
Cities) be civil and generous; nor is there any where a more gallant or
warlike Gentry, which the Turk well tried in the wars of Hungary: for very
sufficient serviters they be both on horse and foot, and they are able to levy
great numbers. The government is Aristocraticall, that is, by the States; yet
in most things a dependant upon the will of the King of Bohemia. It was
sometimes divided amongst fifteen Dukes, but all their families being extinct,
nine of those Lordships are escheated to the King of Bohemia, the other six
still remain, amongst three of the heirs of the ancient owners. The two
Dukedomes of Oppelen and Ratibor, in this Country, were by this present
Emperor given to Bethlem Gabor, in consideration of his relinquishment of the
Crown of Hungaria. For which two Dukedomes, and for the lands of the old
Marquess of Iegerensdorff in Lusatia, who being prescribed by the Emperor,
and beaten out by the Duke of Saxony, fled to Bethlem Gabor, who had newly
married his niece; that is, the sister to the present Elector of Brandenburgh,
whose fathers brother this Iegerensdorff was: For these lands (I say) came part
of the discontents still depending between Bethlem Gabor and the Emperor. It Is
reported, that if King Frederick would have laid down his right to Bohemia,
the Emperor would have been content to have made him King of Silesia.

Lusatia is on the South bounded with Silesia: it is near upon two hundred miles
long, and fifty broad: it lies between the Rivers Elve and Viadrus, and is
divided into the Upper and Lower; both given to Vratislaus (as Silesia also
was) King of Bohemia, by the Emperor Henry the fourth, Anno 1087. It still
retains the honor of a Marquisate. Gorlitz is the chief City, and a fair
one. Bandzen, Sutaw, Spremberg, and Tribel, be neat and well peopled Towns.
The people as in Northerly situation they are nearer to the Germans, so are
they like them more rough mannerd than the Silesians and Bohemians. Their
Country is fruitful enough; and there may upon necessity be levied twenty
thousand foot, as good as any in that Kingdom. All these incorporate Provinces
use the Sclavonian tongue. S^ria is rich in Mines of Silver and Iron,
threescore miles broad, and an hundred and ten long: Carinthia a hilly and
woody Country, is seventy five miles long, and fifty five broad: Carniola,
with the bordering Countries up to Tergis^e, is an hundred and fifty miles
long, and forty five broad. They are plentiful of Corn, Wine, Flesh, and Wood.

The Country of Tirol is full of Mines of Silver, (...)
and Saltpits, and is eighteen German miles long and broad. The territories
Swevia, Swevia.
Alsatia, and Rhetia, do pay little less than two millions and a half of
ordinary revenue, and so much extraordinary, besides the eighteen Cantons of
Rhetia, are under the same jurisdiction. They are so well peopled, that upon
occasion they are able to levy an hundred thousand footmen, and thirty
thousand Horse. I know no other Province in Europe able to say the like. And
therefore the Emperor is not so weak a Prince, as those, ignorant of the
State of Kingdoms, do suppose him to be, reporting his Territories to be
small, unprovided of necessaries, poor in money, and barren of people. But
this is certain, that as he is Lord of a large dominion, fertile, rich, and
infinite of people; so let every man think, that by the neighborhood of the
Turk, bordering upon him from the Carpathian Mountains to the Adriatike Sea,
the forces of a mightier Prince may seem small and be overlaid. For what
Prince is there bordering upon so puissant an enemy, but either by building of
fortresses, or by entertaining of Garrisons, is not almost beggered; I will not
say in time of war, but even during the securest peace; especially
considering that the forces of the Turk are always ready, strong, and
cheerful; yea, better furnished in the time of peace, than any other Nation
in the hottest fury of war? Wherefore it stands him upon, who is a borderer
upon so powerful an enemy, either for fear or jealousy, to be ever
watchful, and to spare no charges, as does the Emperor; retaining in wages
continually twenty thousand soldiers, keeping Watch and Ward upon the borders
of Hungary. These ask great expenses, and yet less than these are not to be
defraied for the strengthening of other places; besides other expenses not meet
here to be spoken of.

To conclude with the State of the Empire, though it cannot be said to be
hereditary, nor to have (which is strange) any chief City appropriate to the
residence or standing Court of the Emperor, (as Rome sometimes was:) yet for
neighborhood and conveniences sake, the Emperors have in this last age been
chosen out of the house of Austria; yea, when there have been several
brothers of them, they have all looked for the Empire one after another, and
have had it too. And for the same reasons have the Bohemians made choice of the
same person, yea, and sometimes the Hungarians also; the Austrian being the
ablest Prince to defend them against the Turks. So that Bohemia, though in
possession of the Emperor, yet is no more part of the Empire than Hungaria is,
but a Kingdom absolute of it self, free to choose a King where it pleases. So
that the Emperor in Germany is to be considered two ways: first, as a German
Prince; secondly, as the German Emperor. First, as a Prince he has by
inheritance the lands and honors of his family; such be Austria, Alsatia,
Tirol, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, with some parts of Rhetia and Swevia: and
these dominions are like other principalities, subjects of the Empire; and for
them, the Emperor is his own subject. Secondly, as a German Prince (though
not by inheritance, but by election) may the Emperor be considered when he is
King of Bohemia: Which though it be an independent kingdom, yet being included
within Germany, and the King of Bohemia by office chief Taster to the
Emperor, and one of the seven Electors of the German Empire, (as having the
casting voice, if the other six be equally divided, nay, and with power to name
himself if he be one of the two in election,) in consideration hereof may he
thus also be brought within the Empire. But yet neither of these ways can the
Emperor or Empire so properly be considered. Thirdly, therefore to speak of
him as the German Emperor, is to consider of him as Lord of those portions and
States of the Empire properly so called. And those be either the States, or
Imperial Cities of Germany. The States and Princes of Germany are naturally
subjects to the Emperor, yea, and officers to his person too, (which is a part
of their honor,) so the Palsgrave is chief Shewer, and Brandenburgh
Sword Bearer, etc. They are also as subjects, to be summoned to the Imperial
Diets, their lands are to be charged toward the Emperors wars, made in
defense of the Empire. But yet on the other side, the German Princes be not
such subjects as the Lords of England and France, but much freer. Lorraine is a
member of the Empire, and yet will not that Duke suffer the Emperor to have
any thing to do in his dominions; and if any other Prince should take up Arms
against the Emperor, (as Saxony did in the case of Luther:) yet cannot the
Emperor escheat their lands (as other Princes may serve their Rebels) by his
own private power, without the consent of the other Electors and Princes in a
Diet. So that the German Princes be subjects, and no subjects; The Emperor is
as it were the Grand Landlord, who has made away his right by lease or grant,
but has little to do till the expiration or forfeiture.

The second member of the Empire be the Imperial and Hanse-townes, in which,
because they have less power, the Emperor has more than in the Princes
Estates. The^e acknowledge the Emperor for their Lord, but yet with diverse
acceptions. For first, they will stand upon their own privileges, and for them
will deny any request of the Emperor. Secondly, they depend and trust unto
their own private confederacies amongst themselves, as much as to the
Emperor; as the Switzers, and Grisons leaguers amongst themselves; and the
Princes of the lower Creitz, or circle of Saxony, amongst themselves; in
defense of which the King of Denmark, as Duke of Holstein being one of them,
took up just Arms of late even against the Emperor. Subjects these Cities
and States are, but yet were they no freer than the subjects of other Princes,
they durst not make leagues amongst themselves to the prejudice of their
Emperor. Thirdly, even these Imperial Cities have some other Lords besides
the Emperor, or the Mayor, or Officers of their own Towns. Thus the
Marquess of Onspach being of the House of Brandenburgh, still challenges the
ancient Office and Title of his Family, which is to be Burgrave of Nurembergh,
which is a principal Imperial City. We see also what power and favor the
King of Poland had in these wars with Sweden, in the Imperial City of
Dantzik, which put it self under his protection. Wormbs also in the Palatinate
under protection of the Palsgrave, received an Army of the Princes of the
Union in favor of him, even against the present Emperor.

Finally, the House of Austria holds the Empire in that fashion, that Adonias
laid claim to the Kingdom, wherein another sat confirmed, and perished for
want of supportation. For besides that it is not hereditary, neither can he
after Coronation command like an absolute Sovereign, nor expect or enforce the
reciprocal duties between Prince and Subject; nor is he powerful enough to
countermand the Privileges of the Empire; no nor to call the Diet without the
consent of the major part of the Electors. For some Provinces are as it were
members of the Empire, yet disunited: for neither do they, nor will they
acknowledge that they belong at all to the Empire; as the Kings of Denmark and
Sweden, the Duke of Prussia, the Elector of Brandenburg that now is (who
requires Investiture of the Polander, not of the Emperor) the Switzers and the
Netherlands. Others confess the Emperor for their Sovereign Prince; but they
come not to the Diets of the Empire, nor will bear the Tax and Tallages of the
Empire: as the Dukes of Savoy, Lorraine, and the Princes of Italy. Others come
to the Diets and pay all impositions: and these are properly the Princes' and
Cities of Germany. But the King of Bohemia, by the grant of Charles the
fourth, is exempted from all contributions. As for the other Princes, they be
so many, and by leaguing together so mighty, that they attend in Court at
pleasure, contest with the Emperor at pleasure, raise forces at pleasure, and
supply his wants of Exchequer at pleasure. Some of them have to do both in the
Diets, and at the Election of a new Emperor: those be the Electors; three
Bishops, and three Princes. But as at first Wenceslaus the Emperor was feign to
bribe them with many Privileges and Lordships for their voices in his Election:
so still they must be courted, if the Emperor desires to have his son or
brother chosen after him, or any great favor done unto him. If they be
displeased, they are strong enough to ruffle with him. The other Princes live
of themselves, and the Emperor is oftener beholding to them, than they to him:
so that these be but Lordly Subjects of the Empire. To speak now in a word,:
These are truly termed the States, the Princes and Cities of the Empire; who
have to do in the Diets or Parliaments, and as members of one b^die
participate of good and evil, of advantage or disadvantage, thorowout the
whole Empire. These, living after the manner of a Commonwealth well united,
make use (in manner aforesaid) of the Emperor for their head and common
safety.

And such be diverse of the lesser Princes, together with the Hanse-townes, and
Imperial Cities. Free or Imperial Cities, are they, which are not directly
within the Inheritance of any Prince, though they stand within his Territory.
For example: Heidleberg, Wormbs, and Spiers, are all in the Palatinate; whereof
the first is the Princes own, and not Imperial; the other be Imperial, and
not the Princes. Such Cities have obtained their freedom either for money, or
for service done to the Emperor: whereupon, some of them are so strong, so
privileged, and so populous, that out of obstinate repining at Taxes and
Impositions, they have many times opposed against their natural Lords; yea,
and in hostile manner excluded them from the superiority of commanding:
witness the contentions heretofore between the City of Brunswicke, and their
own Duke; the exclamations of the Cities and Princes, when the Landigrave of
Hessen was imprisoned; and the general cause of the Protestants, protesting in
every place against the Ecclesiastical proceedings, and Imperial threatenings.
These Cities govern themselves by their own Laws, being bound no further,
than to pay two fifth parts of whatsoever general contribution is assessed in
the Imperial Diets. They pay tribute to the Emperor (some say) fifteen
thousand Florens: but they have for the most part sufficient revenue of their
own to defray the charges. The nature of other Cities you have before read of.

The Diets now be the things by which the Emperor rules all, if he be able to
make a party. The ordinances of these Diets cannot be frustrated but by
another Diet: but of putting the Decrees in execution, the Emperor has the
full power and the sole authority. And therefore as touching pre-eminence and
dignity, he is to be accounted the first and chief of the Christian Princes,
as the person upon whom the Majesty of the Roman Empire rests, and who ought
to defend the Nation of the Germans, the Church of God, the Catholic Faith;
and to procure the peace and welfare of the whole Christian world. And this is
something toward the understanding of the State of the Empire in Germany. Go
we now to relate of the other chief Princes there. And first of those which
worthily challenge the next place, the Electors: of which the Palsgrave is
chief.

The State of the Prince Elector Palatine.
HIs Dominion contains the Upper and the Lower Palatinate. The Lower is the
chief of the two, as being both the richest, the largest, and the Seat of the
Elector. A goodly and a delicate Country it is, almost two hundred miles in
length, and about half so much in breadth, lying on both sides of the famous
Rhine; and watered besides with the Neccar, whose banks are enriched with the
most generous Wines. It touches upon Lorraine at the Southwest, and has the
Duchy of Wirtenberg upon the East. Of this Country, because of the army of
the Destroyer, may we speak in the Scripture phrase, The Land is as Eden
before them, and as a desolate wilderness behind them; her goodly and strong
Cities, her pleasant fields, and delicate vineyards, are fallen into the
possession of those that reaped where they did not sow. To this Principality,
was the Title of the first Elector incorporate. It and Bavaria were made a
Kingdom, Anno 456. which Charles the Great conquered; in whose Line it
continued from the year 789. till Otho's time, Anno 955. whose heirs
continued in them (but not as a Kingdom) till the year 1043. at which time
Henry the third deprived Prince Conrade of them: to whose heir, Frederick
Barbarossa restored the Palatinate in the year 1183. since which time (as
Munster says) it ever continued in that male Line; until these unfortunate
wars. The Lower Palatinate has been twice augmented; once by the Emperor
Wenceslaus, who bestowed Oppenheim and two other Imperial Towns upon the
Elector for his voice in the Election. The second augmentation was by the
ransom of the Duke of Wirtenberg, and the Archbishop of Mentz, both taken in
one battle by Prince Frederike, Anno 1452. out of both whose Countries lying
next unto the Palatinate, the victorious Palatine took some what to lay to his
own: For which, and other quarrels, there has still continued a grudging in
the Archbishops toward the Palsgraves; Mentz (whose Archiepiscopall City is
also in the Palatinate) laying a claim to a Monastery, and the lands upon the
Bergstraes, or mountain, within two English miles even of Heidleberg. The
Palsgrave has many prerogatives above the Electors of ^ther sort. He takes
place of the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brandenburgh, because Henry
the first Palatine was descended of Charles the Great; for which cause in the
vacancie of the Empire, he is also Governor of the West parts of Germany,
with power to alienate or give Offices to take fealty and homage of the
Subjects; and which is most, to sit in the Imperial Courts, and give judgment
of the Emperor himself.

The Land naturally is very rich, the Mountains are full of Vines, Woods, and
such excessive store of red Dear, that Spinola's soldiers in the late wars
had them brought to them like Beef or Bacon. How famous the Rhenish Wines are,
I need not say. Of Corn they have no want: Silver also is here dug up.
Goodly Towns and strong it had such store, as if they had had nothing but
Cities. All which are now divided betwixt the Emperor, the Bavarian, and the
Spaniard. The Prince also was said to have two and twenty Palaces. But the
chiefest ornament was the incomparable, Library of Heidleberg; not for the
beauty of the room, (for it was but in the roof of the chief Church, and
that by a long wall divided into two parts) but for the numbers of excellent
Manuscripts and printed books; with which it was then better stored, than
Oxford yet is. The Princes Revenue arose first out of his own Lands and
Customs of his Manours. Secondly, out of the tenths and wealth of the
Monasteries and estate of the Church confiscated: which perchance made up one
quarter (if not more) of his whole estate. Thirdly, from the Toll of one Bridge
over the Rhine, he yearly had about twenty thousand crowns. Fourthly, some
say that one silver mine yielded him threescore thousand crowns. All together
the revenues of this and the Upper Palatinate (lying next to Bavaria, and some
thirty English miles distant from this Lower) were valued to amount unto one
hundred sixty thousand pounds sterling of yearly Revenues. Finally, of the
three Temporal Electors goes this common proverb in Germany, That the
Palsgrave has the honor, Saxony the money, and Brandenburgh the land: for
Saxony indeed is richer, and Brandenburghs Dominions larger, than those of the
Prince Elector Palatine.

The State of the Elector of Saxony.
THe Dominion of the Dukes of Saxony, Saxony.
contains the Marquisat of M^sen, the Lantgravedome of Turinge, Voitland,
part of Nether Saxony, (almost within two Dutch miles of Maigdburg) part of
the Lands of the Earls of Mansfielt, pawned to Augustus for some sums of
money, and a parcel of Frankhenland. The whole Country is seated almost in the
midst of Germany, on all sides very far from the Sea, except Voitland, very
plain and Champion, sprinkled here and there with some few of them navigable.
The chiefest of them all is the Elve, ^o which all the rest pay the tribute of
their waters. All of it together is imagined to be in bigness about a third
part of England, or somewhat more.

The climate in temperature is not much differing from ours of England.
Situation.
It confineth on the South-East with the Kingdom of Bohem, and is parted with
many high hills and great woods: on the South with the Bishop of Bambergs
Country, and on the South-west with the Lantgrave of Hesse: on the North and
North-west with the Counts of Mansfielt, the Princes of An^^^^^, and the City
of Maidburgh (of which this Duke writes himself Burgrave, and the Marquess
of Brandeburghs eldest son Archbishop) yet is it not under either
Jurisdiction, but freely governed within it self: On the North-east lies the
Marquesdome of ^randeburgh and the Lansknites, who partly belong to the
Marquess, and partly to the Emperor.

It is in peace at this time (as all Germany beside) with all the
Neighbour-Princes. Borderers.
Between the Bohemians and them there is a great league, but betwixt the
Emperor and their Dukes, great jealousies under hand. The Duke of Saxony, the
Marquesses of Brandeburgh, and the Lantgraves of Hesse, have many years (they
and their ancestry) been linked together, and both Lutherans, howbeit the
Lantgrave is thought to f^vour of Calvinisme. The Bishop of Bamberge, both
himself and his Country are all Catholics, but of no power to hurt, though
they were Enemies. The Counts of Mansfielt have a grudge to the house of
Saxony, because most of their land being pawned to Augustus, is, as they
pretend, wrongfully detained, the debt being long, since satisfied: but they
are so many, and so poor, as they may well have the will, but not the power to
annoy Saxony; in Religion, Catholics.

Anhault. Mansfield.
The Princes of Anhault (as also the Counts of Mansfield) are homagers to this
Duke, but of small power or riches. In Religion, Calvinists.

For home defense and strength, Force.
this Dukedom is so strong by nature, on Boheme side, and upon the frontiers,
and within Land so well fortified by Art, with reasonable strong Cities,
Towns, and Castles; so well peopled, and all places of strength so well looked
unto, and kept in so good order, that it seems provided to withstand the
Enemy, not only of any one, but of all the Neighbor-provinces. The greatest
and chiefest City within this Dukedom is Erdford seated in Turing, not
subject to the Duke, Erdford.
but a free and Hanse-towne; the next unto it is Leipsique, the Metropolis of
Mis^n; a Town very well seated both for profit and pleasure, yet of no great
strength, though it held out John Frederick, a siege of two or three months
with small disadvantage: of building very fair and stately, most of the houses
of seven, eight, or nine Stories high, but all of Brick and no Stone. It is
greater than Dresden, and has many fair and large streets, and yet inferior
in beauty and strength: for the Duke will not suffer the Inhabitants neither
to fortify nor to repair the walls, left they should again rebel, as in
former times: within the walls are nine hundred Houses; it has three Churches,
five Colleges, and about four hundred Students; as also a fair Castle with a
small garrison to keep the Town in obedience. To it resort diverse Merchants
for traffic, and many Gentlemen to lea^^^ the ^^^^uage.

There are besides, diverse other pretty and reasonable st^o^g Towns, but above
all, Dresden
Dresden the ancient seat of the Dukes of Saxony: It stands in the County
of Mis^^a, round, and containing in compass about the walls the circuit of two
English miles. These Walls are of fair and large squared stones, well
countermined with earth on the inside, and wonderfully fortified with seven
strong Bulwarks, and as many great Mounts on the outside. On the which (as also
on the walls) are one hundred and fifty goodly pieces of Brass artillery,
with a garrison of five hundred well appointed Soldiers in continual pay.
This City within the walls has eight hundred houses, four Churches, three
Gates, two fair Market places, and a great Bridge of stone over the Elve.

The Mote which incompasseth the wall is deep and clear without any filth or
weeds, and is on all sides walled with fair stones to the bottom. The streets
are not many, but very fair, the houses not very great, but of one
uniformitie, and pleasing to behold. In most of the streets runs from the
River a small stream of water, and in many of these streets are tubs placed
upon sleds full of water, always ready to be drawn by horses or men, whither
occasion of fire should crave employment. For prevention whereof, they
maintain men of purpose to walk every night in the streets, and some to watch
carefully on the highest Towers. The Palace of the Duke is of great beauty and
majesty: the Chambers are flowerd with colored Marbles, and garnished round
with Stags heads of extraordinary greatness; many bed-steds and tables also
are of diverse colored Marbles, most curiously carved and polished. Within the
Palace is an Armory for horsemen of unspeakable magnificence, with a great
number of horses curiously framed in wood, and painted to the life, with as
many wooden men on their backs, furnished most richly with all furniture fit
for a horseman to use in the wars. Amongst these are the lively portraictures
of many of the Dukes of Saxony carved and painted to life, covered with such
robes, armor, and furniture for their horses made of gold and silver, and set
with precious stones, as they used to wear when they were living.

There are also thirty six sleds for pleasure of great beauty, and rare
invention, with two carved and painted horses to every of them, richly
furnished with silver bits, and the bridles and capar sons imbrodered with
silver and gold, hanging full of silver bells according to the German custom.
Here are also many Chambers full of Masking garments, and other abiliments for
triumphs and pastimes both for Land and Water. In this Armory also are many
costly weapons, both offensive and defensive; such, so good, and so rich, as
money can procure, or the wit of man invent.

Under this Armory stands a most princely Stable arched with stone, and
supported with goodly pillars of Marble. Out of every of which pillars runs
sweet and fresh water for the daily use of the Stable: The rackes are of iron,
the mangers plated over with copper, the stalles for the Horses of strong
carved timber; every Stall having a fair glazed window, and every window a
green curtain. The ground between the stalles is paved with fair broad
stones. In this Stable are an hundred eight and twenty horses, and yet no wet
nor filth to be perceived, nor dung to be seen or smelt.

Near unto the Palace stands the Arsenall, wherein is seen such plenty of
great Artillery, yellow as gold, such strange Engines, and such wonderful
qualities of all kind of Armor and Munition whatsoever, necessary for the
Wars, or a long siege, that for Land-service it far excels the Arsnall of
Venice, or any other Storehouse in Europe, able to arm 300000. Horse and Foot
at a days warning. And as the Armory and Arsenall excel all others, so the
City for its quantity (in my judgment) is to be accounted the fairest and
strongest of Europe, and that far surpassing Noremberg, Anwerp, or Lubech, at
this day reckoned to be the prime Cities of Christendom. Besides this Armory,
all the Cities and Towns have their Armories very well kept and provided:
neither are the Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Country people unfurnished.

There are in Saxony three Universities, Wittenberg, Universities. Wittenberg.
Liep^que, and Iene. The first is supposed to be the prime-Vniversity of all
Germany. It is about two miles compass within the walls, being neither strong
nor fair. In it are only two Churches, and four Colleges, being neither rich
nor beautiful, and in them about a thousand Students of all sorts. It has a
strong Bridge of Timber over the Elve, and a fair Castle or Palace
appertaining to the Duke. In the Church of this Castle are interred the bodies
of M. Luther, and, P. Melancthon, under two fair Marble stones, with
superscriptions of copper upon them, and their pictures from head to foot in
great tables set up by them.

The other two have some six or seven hundred Scholars a piece; (...).
but in Colleges, Lectures, Order, Proceeding, and all things else, infinitely
inferior either to Cambridge or Oxford: There are all professions in each of
them, but Wittenberg is esteemed the chief Seminary of Divines; Iene of
Civilians; and Liepsiege of Philosophy.

All the Dukedom, Fertility.
but especially Misen, is one of the pleasantest and fruitfullest parts of all
Germany, and in truth much exceeding any that I saw, but only the Dukedom of
Wittenberg. It has great store of very good Corn of all sorts, reasonable
good and convenient store of most sort of Cattle: of Horses they have plenty,
and those strong and tall of stature, but fitter to draw than to serve, yet
very well fitting their manner of service, being heavily armed ( viz.) with a
Petronell, a case of Pistols, a Courtle-axe, and diverse times with a
Battle-axe; over and above all which, his Horse must be able to carry two or
four bottles of Wine or Beer in his great heavy Saddle, left in any case his
Master should faint for want of liquor in his journey: But their best races
they have out of the nether Saxony, where there be exceeding store. The
Bullocks are but small and nothing good. Of sheep they have in some places
indifferent store, especially within these few years; of body little, and but
reasonable good, yet so, as bearing indifferent good wool; either the sheep
themselves, or their fleeces, are bought up by the Netherlands, and employed in
the making of cloth, to some prejudice of ours in England.

They have great store of Mines of most sorts, Riches.
as Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron, and (as they say) some Gold. The chief
places of the Silver Mines are Tiberg, Aviberg, Mariaberg, and other Towns at
the foot of the Bohemian Mountains. In Voitland there are also some Hills very
rich in Minerals, especially one called which being much celebrated for having
some Rivers running out of it, East, West, North, and South, is exceedingly
spoken of for Silver and Gold Mines, insomuch as in a Story written of the
Mines of Saxony, called Berg-Cronicon, it is affirmed, that this Hill yielded
to the Dukes of Saxony in eight years, twenty two Millions of Florens, only
for the Tenths. Besides these Mines, the Duke has the Mine of Mansfielt,
pawned to diverse Merchants of Norimberg and Augusta, and are thought to be
worth yearly thirty thousand pounds sterling. It is held, that all his Mines
of Saxony (besides those of Mansfielt) yield the Duke one year with another
seven hundred thousand Florens, which is about an hundred and thirty thousand
pounds sterling.

Other commodities of worth they have none, but flax, Commodities.
and a kind of thick course cloth, which by reason of the exceeding
falsifying and dearness of ours, grows every day into more and more request
with them.

The whole Dukedom, but especially Misen, People.
is very populous, full of Cities, walled Towns, and Country Villages, and all
of them very well peopled. It is certainly affirmed, that the Duke at twenty
days warning is able to make an Army of fourscore thousand men very well
armed and furnished.

The people generally are reasonable fair of complexion and flaxen haired, but
not well favored, Manners of the people.
either men or women: in behavior as civil as any part of Germany
whatsoever; especially the women, who taking themselves (as they are indeed)
for the fairest and best spoken of all Dutchland, are in their apparel and
entertainment indifferently graceful. For their disposition, (as indeed almost
all the rest of the Germans) it is very honest, true, and not ordinarily given
to any notorious vice, but drinking; nor willingly offering any injury, either
to their own countrymen, or to strangers, but when they are drunk; and then
very quarrelsome, and (as it is said) more valiant than when they are sober.
Wise in mediocritie, but not of any great sharpness or subtlety of wit: Of
body strong, and big boned, especially the Country people, but of a kind of
lumpish, heavy, and unactive strength, fitter for husbandry, and other
toilesome labor, than fighting.

In their chief Cities, some few give themselves at their great and principal
Feasts, to a little use of their Piece, in shooting at a mark; but otherwise,
by reason of their long peace, altogether untrained to the wars, or any
warlike exercises. But the use of the pot serves for all other pastimes and
delights; in which notwithstanding they have very small store of wine, yet they
are nothing inferior to any other part of Dutchland.

They have great store of Artizans and Handy-crafts men of all sorts, Artizans
but in their several trades nothing so neat and artificial as the
Netherlanders and English, or those of Norimberg and Augusta. Merchants.
Of Merchants they have great store, especially in Liepsiege, and other chief
Cities, and those for the most part very rich; whereof this reason is yielded,
that though they have no commodities, save those before mentioned, nor are
near the Sea, or any great Rivers, (by which they may have cheap and
commodious importation or exportation of wares) yet Germany is so seated in
the midst and heart of all Christendom, and Saxony in the bowels of it, as by
continual trafficking with England, France, the Low Countries, Italy, Poland,
and all the Eastern Countries, and by daily conveying all the commodities of
each Country over-land to others that want them, they grow very wealthy.

For such as give themselves to the wars, and have no other profession of
living, though generally all the Germans are mercenary soldiers, (and so their
service accordingly) yet I heard of as few in this Province, as in any part of
Germany; whether it were that the wars of Hungary employed them all, or that
other Princes growing weary of their service, their occupation began to decay.

Touching the Nobility, Nobles.
I can say nothing in particular of their numbers, names, titles, dispositions,
etc. only in general, there be Earls and Barons. Some are merely subject to
the Duke; others are borderers, which are only but homagers; as the Princes of
Anhalt; the Counts of Mansfielt, the Counts of Swarzenberge, etc. Of Gentiles
there are good store, to the number (as it is supposed) of three or four
thousand at the least, by which means the Duke is always in his wars well
furnished with Horsemen, every one (one with another) bringing three or four
good horses with him to the field.

The Nobility and Gentilitie generally through all Germany, and particularly
in this Dukedom, have great royalties and revenues. The lands, goods, and
chief houses are usually equally divided amongst all the children, reserving
but little prerogative to the eldest brother. The Honors likewise descend
equally to the whole Family; all the sons of Dukes, being Dukes; and all the
daughters, Duchesses: all the sons of Counts, Counts; and the daughters,
Countesses, etc.

They are exceedingly had (both Noblemen and Gentlemen) in extraordinary
reverence and estimation amongst the vulgar people, which both in their Gate
and Seats in public places, they very religiously maintain. In time of Peace
they are but little used in counsel or matters of State, being almost all
utterly unqualified, either with wisdom, learning, or experience; only
contenting themselves with shadow of honor which their ancestors have left
them. And if they have been famous (as by the raising of their Houses to that
greatness it should seem they have ^eene) they imitate them in nothing, but
in only continuing their so long and so holily observed order of carowsing.

In time of war (which has been for many years till the late wars of
Hungary very small, or rather no^^) because of their greatness both in
Revenues and number of Tenants, their service has been usually employed: but
now by reason of their long disuse of Martial matters, (which therefore seemed
to make some amends, or at least some excuse of their other defects) they are
become, if I guess not amiss, not to fit for their greatness, as unfit for
their want of knowledge every way, either in experience or contemplation. And
truly I cannot so much as hear almost of any of them, either Noble or
Gentlemen, that give themselves to any Noble studies, exercises, or delights,
except now and then to the hunting of the wild Boar; by which, and by
accustoming their heads to the wearing of their heavy thrummed Caps in stead
of a head-peece, they take themselves to be greatly enabled for service.

For the valor and warlike disposition of the people of this Dukedom, Valor.
I cannot commend them above the rest of their Countrymen; neither shall I (as
I think) need to stand much upon that point, sithence their actions shall
plead their sufficiency in general. The great matters which they have
undertaken, and the little that they have performed, will produce sufficient
testimony. What they did one against another in the time of Charles the fifth,
is not much material to prove their courage; since without question, Bulrushes
against Bulrushes are very good Weapons. But in the same time, and under the
same Duke and Captain, they performed very little against the Spaniards,
though with far over-ballanced numbers, as in diverse places of Sleyden
manifestly appears. Touching their actions in the Low Countries, in the
Prince of Orange his time, and in France during the civil wars, and sithence
for the King, (if I mistake it not) it has always been praise enough for
them, if they have helped to keep their enemies from doing any great matters,
though they have performed nothing themselves. Of latter time they have rather
increased than diminished this opinion, in the wars ten years since in
Hungary, besides many other times of notable disorders amongst them by false
Alarmes. They fled most shamefully out of the Island of Komora, being charged
by a few Tartars, who with infinite hazard and inconvenience swam over a part
of the Danubie to come at them. The Summer after, Count Charles of Mansfielt,
their General, had them in such jelousie, as when the Turks only with some
twelve or fourteen thousand men came to victual Gran, and past almost close
by their Tents, and they being at least fifty thousand strong, he durst not set
upon them till they retired, having performed the project of their journey,
left the Germans (who were by far the greater part of his Army) being
lustily charged, might give back, and so endanger the whole Camp. To omit
many other particularities about this point, too long to dwell upon in this
discourse, they are no more to be commended for their discipline, than for
their valor: for though they be commonly very well armed, and keep
indifferent good order in their march, yet are they for the most part no more
watchful and provident in their Camp, than if they were safely entrenched in
an Alehouse. Quarrelsome exceedingly, and in a manner given to drinking
continually, and almost every common soldier carrying with him his
she-baggage, besides his bag and other furniture. Of their unreasonable
spoiling and free-booting, the French Stories make sufficient relation; and it
has always been hard to discern, whether those Nations that have called
them to their succor, have received more detriment by them, or by their
professed enemies. For instance of their spoiling humor, the Marquess of
Turloch taking in the Marquesdome of Baden, and being constrained to keep some
four or five thousand men in sundry places in garrison, they all offered
(though he gave them very extraordinary pay) to serve without any wages, so
they might have free liberty of pillage. Therefore let it not seem strange,
that I produce these general examples of this Nation; for though in diverse
Provinces they are much differing in complexion, in stature, and many other
circumstances, yet for war, especially for their vices in war, they are in
a manner all of the same air.

They have greatly affected the English Nation, Conceit of the English.
but of late were they not a little distasted, upon pretense of injuries done
them about prizes, Sea matters, and suppressing their privileges of the
Stillyard; wherein though they themselves (as being Inland people, and trading
little by Sea) are nothing interessed; yet their neighbors of Hamborough,
Lubech, and diverse other Hanse-townes, making all these matters far greater
and worse than indeed they are, have spread even into their minds the contagion
of their own grudge.

The Council of Saxony are at this time few: Council.
Amongst them there are some that are of the Nobility, Counselors rather in
name than effect. For in that they live in their Countries, they are seldom
present at any consultations, and meddle little in the ordinary government of
the State. The rest, after the manner of Germany, are most Civilians. The whole
government of the affairs (as also the Court) is very private. Other
particulars I cannot specify, neither in truth if a man consider their outward
portlinesse, though otherwise I doubt not, but wise enough, do they merit the
setting down of any. For being (as all Germans are) plain and homely in their
behavior and entertainment, they are both in their retinue, apparel, and all
things else very suitable; so that not only in this Court, but in the Courts of
diverse great Princes of Germany, they go usually apparelled in black Leather,
or Linen died black, the chiefest having only an addition for ornament sake,
of the Princes picture in gold, or a chain of one or two boughts, whereby they
seem such leatherne and linen Gentlemen, as, if they were in England, all men
would take them for honest factors unto Merchants, or else some under-Clerke of
an Office, rather than such great and chief Counselors, to so great Princes
and Estates. But as it should be great folly for a man to judge the
preciousnesse of a Jewel by the case wherein it is kept, and much greater to
esteem it by the cover of the case sed even so by the same reason, it were an
equal indiscretion, to estimate a man's worth either by their body or apparel,
the one being but an earthen case of the heavenly mind, the other but the
outward cover of that worthless box. So on the other side, it is an undeniable
certainty, that not only the common people and strangers, but even wise men are
moved and stirred up with outward shows, and their minds according to those
exterior matters, prepared to receive a deep impression, either of like or
dislike, favor or disfavour, of reverence, or careless retchlesnesse, and
debased dispositions.

The Revenues of this Dukedom are, Revenues.
as most men affirm, very great, and without comparison the greatest of any
German Prince whatsoever. The means whereby it arises to that greatness, are
diverse; first the great quantity of Silver Mines, and such like, whose profit
notwithstanding is very uncertain, according to the goodness or badnesse of
the veins: the great impositions upon all sorts of Merchandise, and the assize
upon Beer, which only in the City. Liepsiege, being a little Town of two
Parishes, amounts yearly to above twenty thousand pounds sterling. The
tenths of all sorts of increase, as Corn, Wine, etc. The Salt-houses at Hall,
and some other places, which being all to the Duke; besides the Lands of the
Dukedom being very great, and the Taxes and Subsidies assessed at their
Parliaments or Diets, with diverse other casualties, which fall not within my
knowledge. But above all, the greatest is an imposition which has long time
been laid upon the people, toward the maintenance of the wars against the
Turk; which notwithstanding they have been suspended for a long space lately,
yet under color of being sufficiently provided and furnished against future
necessities, they have been continued, and the treasure converted to the
Princes private use, arising in all this time to that quantity, that if it had
been reserved to the pretended use, the wars might be continually very
royally maintained, (I speak as much as is required on the behalf of that
Dukedom) and the people freed these many years from the imposition; which
notwithstanding is not only still continued, but since the last wars
increased. What the general sum of all the revenues arise unto I have
nothing certain, neither indeed is it certain in it self, a great part
thereof (as aforesaid) consisting upon casualties, as the Mines and Tenths,
etc. But for mine own particular conceit, being not altogether unconfirmed by
other men's opinions, I cannot imagine how that it can arise to less than four
hundred thousand pound sterling yearly at the least.

Thus have I briefly run over some few particulars of the great and noble
Dukedom of Saxony, worthy a much more ample discourse, and a far more
worthier and better informed discourser; being (all things considered) not
only the greatest and mightiest Princedome under the Empire, but even greater
and mightier (I mean as it stood united in the time of Christianus) than the
Empire it self. For though the Emperor by his sacred Imperial Seat be his
Liege-Lord, and in greatness of dominion far superior, yet is he in
revenue, in great love of his people, in warlike provision, and in German
leagues and confederacies far inferior.

The State of the Marquess Elector of Brandenburg.
THis Prince possesses a larger tract of land than does the other Electors,
and has more Noblesse, Gentry, and people, yet is a great deal of his land
very wild and barren, much of his people poor, and himself though of great
revenue, yet far short of that of Saxony. Brandenburg lies on the East
limited with Poland, on the West with Saxony, touching upon Lusatia on the
South. The compass is about five hundred miles, wherein are reckoned fifty
Cities great and small, and threescore and four walled Towns. The whole
Marquisate is divided into the Old, the chief Town whereof is Brandenburg;
and the Nen, the greatest City therein being Franckford upon Oder; famous for
the Mart and University. The Princes Seat is at Berlin. This twofold division
is again subdivided into eight Provinces, from which the Nobility take their
titles; one of these ( Crossen by name) being a Dukedom. For in Germany (you
are to understand) a Dukedom may be contained within a Marquisate, yea, and a
Duke come behind a Count: for that in the Empire precedencie goes not (as with
us) by title, but by blood and antiquity. The name of the present Elector is
Johannes Georgius, in whose line the title has continued these two hundred and
eleven years. Besides now the bare Country of Brandenburg, this Prince has
other dominions: many towns and lands both in Lusatia and Silesia; which with
that of Onspach by Nurenberg, go commonly away to the younger of the family;
all which write themselves Marquesses of Brandenburg. The three Dukedomes of
Cleve, Iuliers, and Berg, have also been united to this family; though now
almost twenty years since the Duke of Cleve dying without issue, these three
States are yet in controversy betwixt this Marquess, and the Duke of
Newenburg. Besides these, is he Duke of Prussia, which is a great Country;
into which the King of Poland is to give him investiture. So that he and the
Archbishop Elector of Cullen, be Lords of the greatest tracts of lands of all
the Princes of Germany. The revenues out of Brandenburg are thought to amount
to forty thousand pounds sterling; and certainly his profits out of all his
other Estates cannot but double that sum: A sufficient rent for such a
Prince, if you consider the cheapnesse of all things in his Country. He is Lord
of much people, and therefore of many soldiers.

The Duke of Brunswicke has a large dominion, The Duke of Brunswicke.
well peopled, well furnished, and himself of a great revenue; but both in
place much inferior (being no Elector) being as of body the strongest, so also
of mind the vilest natured people of all Germany. In other things likewise he
is inferior to the Duke of Saxony, a great part of his Country being barren,
and his subjects poor.

The Duke of Bavaria has a large, rich, Bavaria.
and goodly Country, lying in great length on both sides the Danubie, a great
revenue, and his subjects in good estate: but (as being almost the only
Catholic great Prince of the temporalty) of no great party, and unfurnished of
warlike provision, but much more of treasure, being exceedingly behind hand,
principally through the abuse of his Jesuits, by whom being wholly governed,
he has spent, and daily does infinitely in building them Churches, Altars, and
Colleges, and endowing them with large revenues.

What is above written of the Duke of Bavaria's estate, was something to the
truth at the time of the former edition of this book; for certainly the house
of Bavaria is wholly Iesuited, insomuch as the father of this present Duke
giving over the government, retired himself into a house of Jesuits: and this
present Duke, besides other his large bounties and buildings, has already
estated eighteen hundred pound sterling a year upon the English Jesuits,
with condition, that it shall go to the University of Oxford, so soon as that
shall be converted to Popery. So that the case is now altered with the Duke of
Bavaria, he has gotten part both of the Upper and Lower Palatinate into his
hands; yea, and the Electorship it self is estated upon him. Thus (for the
time) are the Palatinate and Bavaria fallen both upon one person again, as
they were before the year 1294. when as Lewis the Emperor, Prince of both of
them, gave the Palatinate to his elder son, and Bavaria to the younger: after
which the Palatine marrying the heir of Bavaria, again united them. But about
125. years since the Emperor Maximilian again parted them, giving Bavaria to
the Ancestor of this present Maximilian. He is Uncle to King Frederike:
himself has no issue; his second brother is the Elector of Cullen, and a
third brother he has who is not childlesse. Bavaria touches both Austria,
Bohemia, and the Upper Palatinate; too aptly situated for the late wars, both
to distress his nephew, and to aid the Emperor. What forces he is able to
make, did then appear; and his revenue must be answerable.

The Duke of Wirtemberg, Wirtemberg.
as in dignity he is inferior to all these, so does he (if I be not
deceived) approach nearest in most particulars of greatness to the Duke of
Saxony: having a Country in circuit but small, being not much bigger by guess
than Yorkshire, but very full of neat Towns and rich Villages, very well
peopled, and they generally very rich: The land is not so fruitful as in other
places, but far excelling the best in England, that ever came under my view;
abounding exceedingly (especially about Stutgard) with wine, and the Country
so pleasantly diversified, as that the hills (whereof it is full) and River
sides being only employed to Vines, the plains are every where full of corn
of all sorts, of excellent meadow and pasture, with sufficient store of wood.
The Duke himself is well loved of his people, very rich in treasure and
yearly revenue, so that setting the mines aside, he is thought to be equal,
if not superior to the Duke of Saxony. But for provision of war (excepting
powder, whereof there is some store) very meanly furnished, and for many
respects not loved of his neighbor Princes. This Prince (as the Palatine) is
also of the Order of England.

The rest of the Princes of Germany, as the Duke of Michelburg, Michelburg.
the Lantgrave of Hesse, the Marquess of Baden, Hesse.
the Marquess of Ansbach, or any other whatsoever, Baden.
being in all respects much inferior to these already named, Ansbach.
need not to be brought into competition with the Dukedom of Saxony, which
makes the case more lamentable, that so mighty a Princedome having been many
years wholly united in Maurice, Augustus, and Christianus, should now by the
ill ordered custom of Germany, be distracted and divided into parts, and
likely in time to be more disunited by subdividing it again to future Issues.

Endless it were to write of all the Princes of Germany, which be about forty
in all, besides seven Archbishops, and seven and forty Bishops; all men of
great power and possessions. The Imperial Cities be also Seigniories by
themselves, each able to make Levies of men by Sea and Land. Thus much
therefore for Germany.

Geneva.
GEneva is also an Imperial City in Savoy, Situation.
situated at the South end of the Lake Lemanus, Circuit.
hard by the Lake. It is in circuit about two English miles, reasonable strong
by Nature and Art, as well for that it is seated on a hill, which on the West
is not easily accessible, as also for that it is indifferently well fortified
with ravelings, Strength.
Bulwarks, and Platformes, besides a deep ditch. The East and West parts
thereof, standing continually full of water: The South part remaining dry
continually, and is well defended with Casemats, the better to scour the
Curtain: it is so much the stronger, for that it stands almost in an Island,
having the Lake aforesaid on the North, the River of Rhosne upon the West, and
the River of Arba upon the South, being from the Town half a mile, and by
reason of the swiftness of the current, and great moveable stones in the
bottom, which are violently carried down the River, it is not passable but
with great danger.

The River Rhosne divides the Town into two parts, the one is called the high
Town, and the other Saint Gervais. Between the River (in passing) it divides
it self into two branches, making a little Island, wherein are some few
houses, and seven or eight mills to grind corn. The weakest part of the Town
is upon the East Side, and out of the West by Saint Gervais Church; and for
that it might have been surprised from the Lake, Mounsier la Nove caused a new
Fort to be made in the mouth of the Lake, by reason whereof, that part is most
secure. The Town is well peopled, especially with women; insomuch as they
commonly say, that there are three women for one man: yielding this reason,
that the wars have consumed their men. They reckon some sixteen thousand of
all sorts. The Territories.
The Territories are small, being no way above two leagues and a half; yet by
reason the soil is fruitful, being well manured, it brings grain of all
sorts, and great store of Wine. There is likewise plenty of pasture and feeding
grounds; by means whereof, the Inhabitants are very well provided of all sorts
of good flesh at a reasonable rate: no want of good Butter and Cheese, and for
most part of wild-fowle; as Partridge, Quail, Phesant, and Mallard, in great
abundance.

There are all manner of good fruits, Fertility.
and especially excellent Pearmaines: besides, the River and the Lake afford
diverse sorts of fresh Fish; as Pike, Roch, Carpe, Tench, etc. and above all,
the best and biggest Carpes of Europe. The commodities of the Dukes Country,
and of the Bernesi, with ten or twelve miles next adjoining, are brought to
this Tower, by reason the Peasant can get no money in any other place, which
makes the market to be well served. The Town stands very well for trade of
Merchandise, and if it might have peace, it would grow rich in short time; for,
the ordinary passage to transport commodities out of Germany to France,
especially to Lions, and so back again into Swizerland and Germany, is by
this Town: beside, all Savoy, in a manner, and a good part of the Country of
the Bernesi resort hither to buy their armor, apparel, and other necessaries,
the Inhabitants being for the most part mechanical persons, making excellent
good Pecces; as Muskets, Caleevers, etc. They likewise work Satin, Velvet,
Taffata, Handicrafts.
and some quantity of Cloth, though not very fine nor durable. There are many
good Merchants, especially Italians, who have great dealings some others are
thought to be worth twenty thousand crowns, and in general, the Town is
reasonable rich notwithstanding their wars.

The ordinary Revenue of the Town, Revenue.
is some threescore thousand crowns, which arises of the Gables of
Merchandise, flesh, demaine, and tithes: and if there might be peace, it would
amount to twice or thrice so much.

There is reasonable provision against a siege, the Town being able to make
some two thousand men, and one hundred horse, and furnish them with all
necessaries; and having the Lake open, they want no provision of corn, or any
victuals. In the Arsenall there is Armor for some two thousand men, with
Muskets, Pikes, Caleevers, etc. Some twelve or fourteen Pieces of Ordnance,
whereof there are about eight or nine Canons and Culverings: plenty of small
shot, bullets and fireworks, besides some sixty Pieces in the Bulwarks. There
was in former times provision of corn for six months, but of late years they
have not been so provident. The people generally are mavelous resolute to
defend their Town, especially against the Duke of Savoy, whom they hate
exceedingly, and he them, not only in respect of the difference of Religion,
but in matter of State: for the Duke counts them Rebels, and pretends a
Title to their Town, alleging, that till the year 1535. they were under the
rule of their Bishop, who was Lord both in Temporal and Spiritual matters,
and the Bishop acknowledged him for his chief Lord, and d^d him homage, till
the year thirty, at which time, and before, the money which was coined in
Geneva, was stamped with the Dukes name and figure upon it. Besides, till the
time aforesaid, the Duke of Savoy might pardon offenders that were condemned:
and further, there was no sentence of Law executed, but the Dukes Officer was
made acquainted therewith, in whose power it was to disanull, as he liked
best. Likewise in the year 1529. when as those of Geneva had leagued
themselves with Friburge, the Duke disliking thereof, because it was done
without his privitie, caused the league to be broken, alleging, that the Town
of Geneva could not conclude a matter of such importance, without his allowance
and approbation. Besides, all these reasons before remembered, this also is
alleged as most material, that Duke Charles coming to Geneva with the
Duchess Beatrice his wife, those of the Town presented him the Keys thereof,
thereby acknowledging him their chief Lord and Master. During the civil wars
in France, the Town was marvellously peopled, insomuch as there were to the
number of twelve or fourteen thousand strangers, the greatest part whereof
were Gentlemen: but since those troubles began to diminish, the number likewise
has decayed, and at this instant there are not many besides the Inhabitants,
by reason whereof, the Town is very much impoverished.

The Town is governed by a Council of two hundred, Government.
called the great Council, out of which is chosen another Council, composed
of five and twenty, and of these, four especial men, called Sindiques, who
have the managing of the whole Commonwealth, unless it be in some great
matters, wherein the whole State is deeply interessed, as in making of peace or
war, in leagues offensive and defensive, appeals, etc.

The people are governed by the Civil Law: the Judge whereof is called a
Lieutenant Criminal, before whom all causes are tried, and from whom there is
no appeal, unless it be to the general Council of two hundred. When the
Town was besieged in eighty nine, the Venetians did not only send them
intelligence of sundry practices against them, but also sent them twenty four
thousand crowns to maintain their wars; and out of England they had
thirteen thousand crowns. The Great Duke of Thuscan did likewise send them
many intelligences at the same time: and heretofore when as the Pope, the King
of Spain, the French King, and the Duke of Savoy, have joined their powers
together, with purpose to besiege them, the Emperor has not only revealed all
their practices, but offered to aid them with men and money: yea, and sometime
the Dukes of Savoy have lent them money to maintain them against the others.
For he had rather the Town should remain as it does, than fall into any
other man's hands than his own.

Queen Elizabeth highly favored it, and releeved it: so did all the
Protestant German Princes, together with the French King. Who though ^ee be of
a contrary Religion, yet has he had it always in especial protection.

The people are very civil in their behavior, speech, Behavior.
and apparel, all licentiousness being severely corrected, and especially
dancing: Adultery is punished with death, and the Women drowned in the Rosne;
simple Fornication with nine days fasting, bread and water in prison; for the
second offense whipping out of the Town, and the third time with banishment.
The Town lent unto Henry the third, King of France, a little before his death,
450000. crowns, and twelve Canons, which are not yet restored: the Bernesi
seem to be their friends, but those of Geneva are very jealous of them, and
dare not trust them.

The Ministers have a consistory, unto which they may call public offenders,
and such as give scandal unto others, and there reprove them: and if the crime
be great, and the party obstinate, they forbid him the Communion; if
notwithstanding he persist, they may excommunicate him. But the Ministers
cannot call any before them into the Consistory, but by the authority of a
Sindique, who must assist them; otherwise the Ministers have power to summon
any Man. They have their maintenance out of the common Treasury, and meddle
with no Tithes. Master Beza in eighty seven had some 1500. Florens for his
stipend, which amounts to some seven or eight and fifty pounds sterling,
besides twenty coupes of corn, and his house; All which will hardly amount to
fourscore pounds: the rest of the Ministers had some six or seven hundred
Florens, twenty coupes of corn, and their houses. The Ministers in the
country have three hundred forty and five Florens, and twenty coupes of corn.
The Professor in Divinity has per annum 1125. Florens, and twenty coupes of
Corn; The Professor in Law 580. Florens; The Professor in Greek 510. Florens;
The Professor of Philosophy 600. Florens, and twenty coupes; The Professor in
Hebrew 510. Florens.

All honest exercises, as shooting in Pieces, Crosse-Bowes, Long-Bowes, etc.
are used on the Sabbath day, and that in the morning, both before and after the
Sermon, neither do the Ministers find any fault therewith, so that they
hinder not from hearing the word at the time appointed.

Swizerland.
IN the days of Caesar, this Province contained two hundred and forty miles in
length, and one hundred and fourscore in breadth; which circuit or territory
seeming too narrow a room to contain so valiant and a warlike people, that
not long before had overthrown L. Cassius a Roman Consul, slain the Consul
himself, and sold the soldiers for bondslaves; upon these apprehensions, and
the conceit of their own valors, they began to entertain a resolution, by
conquest to gain a larger territory, correspondent to the ambitious greatness
of their minds, and to forsake their own country, which first gave them breath
and being. In heat whereof they prepare for their departure, they provide
victuals, study tillage two years, buy carts and carriage beasts, and left any
man's courage should decline with the time, they make a law, that every one
should be in readiness to set forward in the beginning of the third year.
Being upon their way, and hearing that Caesar (then Proconsull of France) had
caused the bridge of Geneva to be hewne down; and to debar them of passage,
had raised that famous fortification between the Lake and Mount Iura, they
sent some of their greatest Commanders to Caesar, to entreat a quiet passage
through the Roman Province. At their appointed day of Audience hearing Caesar's
denial, they resolve to open the way with the power of their forces. In trial
of which project, after they had received diverse defeatures, they again sent
their Ambassadors to Caesar, to entreat an acceptance of submission, throwing
themselves at his feet, and with many supplications, craving such favo^rable
conditions of peace, as might best comfort so distressed a people, and beseem
the glory of so mighty a conquests which requests Caesar upon delivery of
pledges mercifully granted, enjoined them to return to the Country from whence
they came, and to build the cities and villages, which before their coming
forth they had destroyed. Ever since which time they retained the reputation of
their ancient glory, but never enterprized to forsake their limited
habitations. The number of Men, Women, and Children, that were in that journey,
was 3680000. whereof 920000. were fighting men: of them that returned, and saw
the fortune of both their States, was 110000. Some hold opinion, that this
Nation is utterly extinguished, and that the present Inhabitants (whereof we
now entreat) both for their resemblance in manners and phrase of speech, are
descended from the Germans.

It is almost all situated amongst the Alps, Situation.
and therefore supposed to be the highest Region in Europe, and the rather for
that the most famous Rivers of this part of the World, (viz.) Rhone, Rodan, and
Po, falling from these high places, do disperse their channels through diverse
Provinces of Christendom. It is called in History, Confoederatorum Regio, a
State popular, and subject to no one Prince. And although it seem to be
environed with steep and barren Mountains always covered with Snow, yet in
truth it is fertile enough, and intermixed with fruitful places full of
excellent Pastures, wherein they bring up infinite numbers of Sheep and Cattle
to their inestimable profit, by venting of Butter, Cheese, and other white
meats to foreign Nations. Of Wheat and Wine they have no such plenty, but are
glad to crave in aid of their neighbors to releeve their wants.

From the times before spoken of, until the coming of the Sarazens into
Italy, at what time the Pope sent an honorable Embassage of Cardinals to
entreat their favor and assistance, they seemed to live contented within
theior own limits; and only in reward of their many good services (employed
for the defense of the Church and Christendom) they desired of his Holiness,
that they might live in liberty in these places which they then inhabited, with
the use of their own Laws and ancient Customs. Which the Pope not only
granted, but in token of their worthiness and valor he gave them a red
banner, with the Image of the Crucifix painted therein. After this service,
they again gave themselves to a quiet and peaceable life, to follow tillage,
and to husband their granges, until such time as certain Noblemen their
neighbors began to incroach upon them, and to exercise tyrannical
jurisdiction over them. Which kind of servitude (as people bearing in fresh
remembrance their ancient and generous ^^^utation) being unable to endure, and
inured to give and not to take the law of their neighbors, opposed their
forces against the insolency of this Nobility.

The coffeehouse first burst out in the year of our Lord The Causes of
their first Revolts.
1300. about which time the Counts of Aspurgh (afterward Dukes) had placed in
one of their Castles of Urania in Valstreet, a Gentleman proud above measure,
unsociable, and in lust insatiable. At first he was secret, but by custom
imboldned, in Feasts and public Banquets he would boast, how he had now
abused one Woman, then another: at last, amongst the rest, having ravished a
very young and beautiful Damsel, he was slain by her two Brethren. The Count
agrieved hereat, offered to do justice upon the offenders, but the Inhabitants
of that Vallie valiantly resisted, overthrew two or three of his Castles in one
day, and slew diverse of his Officers. Which president the Vndervaldenses
imitating, committed the like outrage upon the Gentlemen of their Territory,
exclaiming that the tyranny of the Nobility had enforced them to this action.
The first of the Confederates were, the Suavi, those of Vro, Zurich, and
Vndervald; who so well as they might in so sudden an innovation gave themselves
to peace, and to respect the good of the league and the confederate Cities.

The residue of the Noblemen and Gentlemen, fearing if this example were left
unpunished, the sore would grow incurable, as an evil which could bring forth
no less a mischief than the utter loss of their jurisdiction, mustred all
their friends and followers, determining either to tame or to raze these
confederated Cantons. But the Swizers well acquainted with the difficult
passages of the Country, easily frustrated the attempts of their enemies:
thereby rather increasing than diminishing their liberty.

Lupold Duke of Austria, enterprizing upon them with a mighty Army for the same
quarrel, had the like fortune. So in succeeding ages had Charles Duke of
Burgundy, by their service undertaken and performed for the defense of Rhene
Duke of Lorrain^. They are men of large stature, and very seldom go armed,
but serve only with the Pike or two-hand-sword, because they fear no other
forces save the fury of the great Artillery, from which (say they) a
breast plate or curace is not able to defend them. And because of their order,
they think it a matter impossible for any forces to break them, or to enter
upon them nearer than a Pikes length. In a pitched field, without doubt, they
are excellent good Footmen, but to invade a Province they have little courage,
and less to defend it; and commonly, where they are not able to maintain
their accustomed order of fight, they avail nothing; as in the war of Italy
was plainly manifested, especially when they were put to assaults (as at Padoa,
and other places) wherein they gave but weak testimonies of valor: whereas
when they fought it out in open field at the Pikes length, they carried
themselves valiantly; insomuch that at the battle of Ravenna, if the French
had been without their assistance, they had questionless lost the glory of
that days victory. For before both Armies came to handy-strokes, the Spanish
had already overthrown the French and Gascoine Footmen, and if the Swizers
had not seconded them, they had been all slain or taken. So in the war of
Guien it plainly appeared, that the Spanish were more afraid of one band of
Swizers, whereof the King had waged ten thousand, than of any of the rest of
the French Regiments. Thus by the reputation of these and their former
exploits, they won unto their Nation so glorious a perpetuity of their Arms
and valor, that ever since they have been called unto the aid of diverse
Princes, and in continual action under some one State or other bordering upon
them; but especially under the Kings of France, of whom they entertain
sometimes more, and sometimes less. Sithence the reign of Lewis the 11. they
have been in perpetual league, and in their pension; to whom they give yearly
forty thousand Florens, twenty thousand to the Cities, and twenty thousand
to particular persons. They again are divided into thirteen Cantons, eight
whereof are Catholic, the residue of the Religion. But those of the Religion
are much greater; and out of these it is that the Kings of France are supplied:
the residue are in pension, with the King of Spain.

When the French King demands any forces out of their Cantons, they call a
Diet, the charge whereof, Levying of soldiers.
as likewise the soldiers wages, the King defrayeth. These foreign bands, more
or less, to whom he always commits the battle, and the guard of his
Cannon, (as for entering of breaches, and giving assaults, they do expressly
capitulate to be exempt) with the five Regiments before spoken of in the
discourse of France, are his maine modern forces on foot: but when he would
have greater numbers, he gives his Captains Commissions to take up soldiers
through the whole Realm, not by press, as with us, but by striking up the
Drum, when if any come voluntarily, and take pay, they are enrolled, and
enjoined to serve, otherwise not.

The government of these thirteen Cities, Government.
with their dependances, (which they term Cantons) is merely popular: for
though the members seem to be separated, yet live they as one body firmly knit
and united, having a chief Magistrate over every Territory chosen by the
commonalty of every particular City, and every City has his particular
Council and place of assembly, save only when they are to sit upon matters of
importance, and such as concern the general estate, then they appoint a
general Diet, and that to be held in some one of the Cities which they think
most convenient; whereunto four or five of the most principal of every City
are bound to resort. In their consultations, for the most part, they are
comfortable one to another; and because one City is as free as another, having
no one chief Governor superior to any other, in case the cause (be it peace
or war) concern the universal State of all the Cantons, look how the major
part of voices shall sway in the Senate, so it prevails, and that which the
greater number resolve upon, is without more ado put in execution. The benefit
which they gain by a common war, Is divided in common: but if sometimes two
or three united Cantons purchase any booty by their peculiar Arms, of that
purchase the residue can claim no share. Yet has it happened, that the
residue thinking themselves injured in not participating generally, have raised
diverse controversies; and because (as aforesaid) they are equally free, and as
great is the sovereign authority of one City as of another, both parties
have appealed unto the French King, who upon hearing of the cause in question,
gave judgment, That a particular gain appertained to particular persons. And
so the rest.

Therefore when they are either occasioned or determined to make any particular
war, the united Cantons erect lights and make bone-fires: but when they are
to raise forces in general, (as suppose they should for the French King) first
they strike up their Drum, then all the Cities do presents as many persons
as they think good, which may be to the number of five and thirty or forty
thousand, of whom after the Captains have culd out their limited portions, the
residue are licensed to depart to their own homes. Every City has his
principal Standard, with their peculiar arms and devices therein, to
distinguish one people from another. And because no politic body can stand
without a head, Their Sovereign Magistrate.
although in no case they will tolerate one absolute Governor over the whole,
yet are they contented to submit themselves to the government of one particular
Magistrate in every particular City: him they term Vnama. The elect on of
which Officer is on this manner: On the first Sunday in May, the principal of
all the houses and families tho^ow every Canton, of all sorts and qualities,
assemble themselves either in some meadow, or else in the chiefest streets of
their City, where all of them taking their places in order, the Vnama, whose
time of office is now expired, seating himself in a place somewhat above the
rest, after some stay, rises up and makes a speech to the people, excusing
himself in good terms of his insufficiency to discharge the weight of the
office committed unto his charge, and craveth pardon of that which he has
through ignorance or negligence committed, to the prejudice of the common good,
and therewithal offers to resign his determined office into the hands of
the people. Immediately upon this resignation, with a loud voice he nominateth
the party, whom in his judgment he thinks worthy to succeed in his place.
He that is nominated, comes forth before the multitude, and presenting
himself before them, after some speeches, nominateth a second, and the second
(with like ceremony) a third. The nomination being ended, the chief of the
companies demand of the people, which of these three thus nominated, they are
willing to elect: So naming them anew, one by one, the multitude lift up their
hands at the naming of him whom they desire to be their Governor. And
oft-times it falls out, that he that has been once Vnama, in desert of his
justice and good carriage toward them, has been chosen again the second
time. This election finished, they proceed to the choice of other Officers.

This Officer continues in his place three years, and although he be the
chiefest amongst them, yet goes he but little better attired than the
meanest, only attended with five or six persons. He dwells in his own house,
because they employ the public places for the holding of the Diets, the
keeping of their Munition and Artillery, and other furniture belonging to the
wars. In criminal causes he can do nothing without the counsel of the
fifteen, but in civil matters he has larger limitation.

Next the Vnama, is that Officer of Justice, who is as it were the Chancellor,
and the second person in that State. After him are certain Counselors, men
well experienced in affairs of Princes, and occurrence of Provinces. Then the
Chamberlain, and his is the charge of the Munition and public Treasure. Next
to him are the four Deputies, in authority greater than the Counselors, and
may do many things in absence of the Vnama, so as the Chancellor be present.
These with the Vnama make the fifteen, which govern the State as well in
peace as in war, and are ever present at the hearing and deciding of all
occurrences arising within the Territory of their own Canton.

These are from year to year confirmed by the people, although (as does the
Vnama) they continue their office for three years. These send Governors to
the Castles on the Frontiers, and (to decide inferior matters) they allow ten
persons chosen out of the meaner sort; but the parties in controversy may
appeal to the fifteen: other Judges, or further appeals (as in the Civil
Law) they have not to fly unto. For their chiefest care is their tillage and
warfare, coveting to live simply and plainly, and not to entrap one another in
quarrels and suits of Law. The party evicted is severely punished. Neither
will they suffer any of their people to appeal out of their own Countries;
and if any offend therein, he is grievously chastened.

Through the whole world Laws are not observed with less partiality; for they
are never-altered according to the humors of the inconstant multitude, nor
violated without due penalty inflicted: for as of those five sorts of popul^r
governments which Aristotle discourses of, there is none more dangerous than
that wherein the will of the people bears sway above reason, and stands for
Law, as Zenophon writes of the Athenians; so no form of government can be
compared to that wherein the Commonaltie without d^tinction live subject to the
censure of the Law: in regard of which policy, we ought not to marvel, if
this Commonweal have flourished now these two hundred and fifty years, in
great reputation of valor.

For ^^y two means has this estate been preserved, viz. by unpartiall
administration of justice, and frequencie of neighbourly feastings; whereas the
scornful ambition of great men has heretofore ruinated the popular estates of
the Megarians, the Romans, the Florentines, the Syennois, and the Genoese. Of
which sort, the Swizzers have none at all, or if there be any (as there are but
few which escaped the general massacre) yet are they contented (without laying
any claim to their ancient gentility) to range themselves with the residue of
the basest commonalties, and can but seldom be admitted to the chiefest
magistracies, being commonly bestowed upon Butchers, and such like Mechanical
Artizans.

Italy.
ITaly, (according to Pliny) the most beautiful and goodliest Region under
the Sun, the Darling of Nature, and the Mother of hardy Men, brave Captains,
and valiant Soldiers, flourishing in all Arts, and abounding with Noble wits,
and men of singular spirits, Situation.
is situate under a Climate most wholesome and temperate, commodious for
Traffike, and most fertile for Corn and Herbage: contains in length from
Augusta Pretoria unto Otranto, one thousand and twenty miles, and in breadth,
from the River Vara in Provence, Length and Breadth.
to the River Arsia in Friuli, (where it is broadest) four hundred and ten
miles; and in the narrow places, as from the mouth of Pescara, to the mouth of
Tiber, an hundred twenty six miles. So that to compass it by Sea from Vara to
Arsia, are three thousand thirty eight miles, which with the four hundred and
ten by land, makes the whole circuit three thousand four hundred forty eight
miles.

Thus it appears to be almost an Island in shape of a leg; bounded on the
East with the Adriatike Sea, on the South and West with the Tirrhene Seas, and
on the North with the Alps: the which, for that it is described by others, we
will but point to, and so much the rather, because there is no Country in the
world better known; and more frequented by strangers.

Inheritance there descend to the children, Natures and manners of the people.
as Lands holden by Ga^^^^nd with us in some parts of England, so that one
brother has as good a share as another, and if the older be borne to the title
of a Co^^e, so is the younger, and so called; yea, if there be twenty brethren;
(except it be in the Estates of Princedomes, as Mantua, Ferrara, Vrbin, and
such like, which evermore descend to the eldest entirely.) By this means it
comes to pass, that often times you shall see Earls and Marquesses without
Lands or goods, yet most strictly standing upon descents, and the glory of
their names, for themselves and their issues for ever. But the Gentlemen which
have whereof to live, are reported to surpass the Gentry of any other Nation
in good carriage and behavior, and for the most part profess Arms, and
follow service. And to be discerned from the vulgar, they all in general
speak the Courtisan, which is an excellent commendation, considering the
diversity of Dialects amongst them. For leaving the difference between the
Florentine and the Venetian, the Milanois and the Roman, the Neapolitan and the
Genois, (which may well be likened to the difference between a Londoner and a
Northern man) yet by the tongue you shall not lightly discern of what part of
the Country any Gentleman is. No more different are they in manners and
behavior; honorable, courteous, prudent, and grave withal, that it should
seem each one to have had a Prince-like education; to their superiors
obedient; to equals respective; to inferiors courteous, to strangers affable,
and desirous by kind offices to win their love. Of expense and lone of his
money, very wary, and will be assured to be at no more cost than he is sure
either to save by, or to have thank for. In apparel modest, in furniture of
household sumptuous, at their table neat, sober of speech, enemies of ill
report, and so jealous of their reputations, that whosoever speaks ill of one
of them, if the party slandered may know it, and find opportunity to perform
it, the party offending shall surely die for it.

The Merchants likewise for the most part are Gentlemen: Merchants.
For when of one house there be three or four brethren, lightly one or two of
them give themselves to traffike. And sometimes, if they chance not to divide
their Fathers substance and patrimony, (as many times they do not) then do
they which profess themselves Merchants, travel for the welfare of their
brethren, jointly participating of loss and profit. But in outward show, these
carry not like reputation to the Gentlemen before spoken of: for they profess
not Arms, but desire to live in peace, and how to vent their wares, and have
new traffike into strange Countries; yet have no less reputation of Nobility
for their trade of Merchandise, but by reason they stay at home, and use the
richest Farms, and follow Husbandry by their Bailises and Factors, they
become the best and wealthiest Merchants in all Christendom.

Their Artificers are thought the best workmen of the world, and are so well
paid, Artificers.
that many live by their labors as well as many do by Revenues; yea, and grow
very rich, and within two or three descents to the reputation of Gentry.

The poorer sort are the husbandmen, Husbandmen.
for they are oppressed on all hands, and in the Country lives no man of
wealth. The Gentry and wealthier sort dwell in Towns and walled Cities,
leaving the Villages, fields, and pastures to their Tenants, not at a rent
certain, as we do in England, but to halfes, or to the thirds of all grain,
fruit, and profit arising of the ground, according as it shall be, either
barren or fertile. And this the poor Tenant must till and manure at his own
charge, so that the Lords part comes clear without disbursing one penny; yet
shall you see many fair houses in the villages, but they are only for the
owners pastime in Summer: For then they leave the Cities for a month or two,
where under the fragrant hedges and bowers, they solace themselves in as much
pleasure as may be imagined. And for the most part, every man has his
Mistress with instruments of music, and such like pleasures as may serve for
recreation and delight. Thus much of the manners and nature of the inhabitants:
now will we speak of the estates of the Country.

The King of Spain has the greatest part for his share, Sharers.
as Naples and the Duchy of Millaine. The King of Spain.


The Pope has the City of Rome, The Pope.
Campagnia, part of Maremma, part of Tuscan, the Duchy of Spo^et, Marca d'
Ancona, Romagnia, and the City of Bononia.

The Venetians have for their part the City of Venice, The Venetians.
with the towns in and about that Marish, called La contrada di Venetia, La
marka Trivigrina, a great part of Lombardie, and part of Istria. They likewise
are, and have been Lords of certain Islands, some whereof the Turk has
won from them.

The Commonweal of Genoa has the territory about them, Genoa.
called at this day Il Genovosaio, and anciently Liguria.

Tuscan, Florence.
once He^ruria, is divided into diverse Seigniories, whereof the Bishop of Rome
holds a small part, but the greatest is under the jurisdiction of Florence.

Then are Commonwealths of Sienna and Lucca, Sienna.
whose Territories are not great. Lucca.
13. The Duke of Ferrara has part of Romagnia, Ferrara.
and part of Lombardie. 14. The Duchy of Mantua lies wholly in Lombardie,
Mantua.
and the Duchy of Vrbin between Marca d' Ancona and Tuscane. Vrbine.
15. The Duchies of Parma and Placentia are in Lombardie, Parma.
and holden of the Church.

Of these Princes and Commonwealths every one holds himself in his own
Territory absolute Prince and Governor, and maintains his estate upon the
custom, taxes, and impositions of the people. For lightly they have little or
no Lands of their own.

THe Estate of the Pope is twofold; The Bishop of Rome.
the one consists in Temporal Dominion, the other in Spiritual
Jurisdiction. His Temporal Dominion is likewise divided into two kinds; the
one profitable, and as a man may term it, an hereditarie: the other immediate,
and holden in fee of he Church. As touching his Temporal Dominion, he is Lord
of a great part of Italy; as of all that lies between the River Fiore and
Cajetta, between Pre^est and the Truentian streights (except the Duchy of
Vrbin.)

In that compass are incircled the Provinces of Bonnonia and Romandiola,
Marchia, Vmbria, the Duchy of Spoleto, S. Peter's patrimony, Tuscan, and
lately Ferrara. It is seated in the heart of Italy, stretching from the
Adriatike to the Tirrhene Sea; and in regard of situation, as also in plenty of
provision, as corn, wine, and oil, it is comparable to any State of Italy:
For Romandiola imparteth great store unto their neighbors, the Venetians and
Sclavonians; And yet have the Inhabitants sufficient for their own provision.

Marchia reaches from Tronto to Foglia, Marchia.
between the Apenine and the Sea; it is divided into little hills and plains.
It is rich of Wine, Oil, and Corn, having diverse great Towns and Castles
therein. The City of greatest trading is Ancona, by reason of the Haven to
which many Lasterne Merchants do repair. The fairest is Ascoli, the most
powerful Fermo, because of many Fortresses subject unto it. Macerata is a new
City, and because it lies in the midst of the Province, it is the
Governors seat. In some years it has supplied the Venetians wants, with many
thousand measures of Corn and Oil. And although Vmbria is not so plentiful
of grain, as to spare for their neighbors, yet is it able to maintain it
self without buying of others, and in stead thereof it is abundantly stored
with Wines, Cattle, and some Saffron. S. Peter's Patrimony, and Tuscan, often
releeved Genoa, and at some seasons Naples: This territory brings forth
fierce and warlike soldiers; and herein it is reported to excel all the
residue of the Italian Provinces. Bonnonia, Romania, and Marchia, are able to
levy twenty thousand footmen, and the other Provinces as many. In the time of
Pope Clement, Marchia alone aided him with a thousand soldiers. The chief
Seat is Rome, once the Lady of the World, and at this day inhabited with two
hundred thousand souls, but two parts thereof consisting of Churchmen and
Curtizans. The second Bononia, wherein are eighty thousand of both sexes. Next
to these are Perugia, Ancona, Ravenna, and some fifty others. The defensible
places are the Castle and Borough of Rome, Ovietta, Teracine, etc. It is a
great credit and commendation to this State, to have many Noblemen therein to
excellent in Negotiation of Peace and War, that the residue of the States and
Princes do most commonly choose their Leaders and Lieutenants out of these
Provinces. If the Prince hereof were secular, both for people and power, he
might very well be compared with any State of Italy.

Besides these Dominions, the Pope has the Territory of Avignon in France,
wherein are four Cities, and fourscore walled Towns. In Naples he has
Benevent.

Romagna extends from Foglia, Romagna.
Panora, and from the Apenine to the River Po. For temperature and fertility,
it is like to Marchia, but has generally more famous Cities, as Rimini,
Cesana, Faensa, Ravenna, Turly, Imola, Sarsina, Cervia, Bertinoto, once a
Bishops Seat, but now translated to Forlimpoli. The Noblest of all these is
Ravenna, where some Emperor have kept their Courts, and after them their
Exarches or Lieutenants. When Pipin having expulsed Astolpho, put the Church in
possession thereof, this Territory comprehended Bolognia, Regio, Modena,
Parma, Piacenza, Ravenna, Sarsina, Claesse, Forli, Forlimpoli, and made one
estate called Pentapoli, which endured an hundred eighty three years, even to
the year of our Lord 741. in which year, it ended by the taking of Ravenna,
by Astolph King of Lombards. So that first the Roman Emperors, especially
Honorius, and after him the Kings of the Goths, and then Exarches, amongst all
the Cities of Italy, chose this for the Seat of their Courts, which from
amongst other respects, I suppose to proceed by reason of the plentiful
Territory, (now covered with water) and the conveniencie of the Haven, which at
this day is likewise choked. This Province was first called Flaminia, but
Charles the Great, to raze out the remembrance of these Exarches, and to make
the people willing to obey the Roman Prelates, called it Romagnia.

As touching his immediate Soveraigntie, he is Lord Paramount of the Kingdoms
of Naples and Sicil, and the Duchies of Vrbin, Ferrara, Parma, Placentia, and
many others.

Where his authority is maintained, he has supreme government of all
religious Orders, and bestows the Ecclesiastical Benefices at his dispose.
Having many strings to his Bow, he has many means to raise money, Riches.
so that Xistus the fourth was wont to say, That the Popes should never want
Coin, as long as their hands were able to hold a pen. Paul the third, in the
league between him, the Emperor and the Venetians, against the Turk, bare the
sixth part of the charges of that war. Against the Protestants, and in aid of
Charles the fifth, he sent twelve thousand footmen, and five hundred
horsemen, bearing their charges during the war: this was he that advanced
his house to that honor, wherein it continues to this day in Florence. Pius
the fifth, aided Charles the ninth, King of France, with four thousand
footmen, and a thousand horse. Xistus the fifth, in five years and a half of
his Pontificacie, raked together five millions of crowns, and spent bountifully
notwithstanding, in bringing Conduits and Water-pipes into the City, and in
building Pyramides, Palaces, and Churches.

So that it should seem, that the Entrado could not but amount to much above
the value of ten hundred thousand crowns per annum; for Newman, a late Writer,
would have this surplusage to be raised upon use money, yearly la^d up in the
Castle of Saint Angelo. And this to arise of his ordinary Revenues within his
Territories of Italy. Since those times it cannot but be much more augmented by
the addition of the Dukedom of Ferrara; as also for that in those days, the
monthly expense of the Court (being thirty thousand crowns) is in these
times defalked unto five thousand.

A State, The State of Rome.
wherein you shall see Religion metamorphosed into policy, and policy
meditating nothing but private greatness: the Man-seeming-God affecting
Honor, Majesty and Temporal riches, with no less ambition and effusion of
blood, than any the merciless Tyrants of the former Monarchies.

As for the College of Cardinals; The College of Cardinals.
It stretches out the Western Churches on the Tenter-hookes of Vainglory and
Authority; suffering no man, no not so much as in thought (if it were possible)
to depresse, or question, the privileges of religious persons: who (according
to their means) live in great State, keep Curtizans, travel in Carosses
(though but for a quarter of a mile) to the Consistory, solemnize feasts and
banquets, make show of ceremonies, and are, in truth, of no Religion. So that,
if a man were an Atheist, and had no conscience to believe that God must one
day call us to account for our transgressions, I had rather live a religious
man in Rome, than be a Nobleman in Naples; who of all men living wash their
hands most in carelessness, being never disturbed with worldly cares or
encumbrances.

The great Duke of Tuscanie.
IT lies between the Apenine and the Sea: Tuscan.
and contains (from Magra to Tenere) above two hundred threescore and ten
miles. It has larger Champians than Liguria, because the Apenine stretches
not so near the Sea, and so inlargeth the plain. In it are many large
valleys, populous, and rich in commodities. But to speak of particulars: when
we are past Magra, Sarazana offers it self to our view, a City holden by
the Genoise with great jealousy, by reason of the neighborhood of the great
Duke, and a little higher lies Pentrimoli, a Castle belonging to the King of
Spain, of great account, and situated not far from the Sea; then Massa and
Carrara, places famous for their quarries of white Marble. Lucca stands on
the River Serichio, Pisa on Arno, and beyond the City of Florence. To the
State whereof belongs Pistoia, Volterra, Montepulcino, Arezzo, Cortona. Those
of Lucca do stand upon their guard for maintenance of their liberties. The
City is three miles in compass, strong in situation and walls, and well stored
with Artillery and Munition. On the North it confineth Carfagnana, a fruitful
Valley, and well inhabited with serviceable people, on the other parts it is
encompassed with the Territories appertaining to the Great Duke. Pisa was once
of such wealth, Pisa.
that at one instant, the Citizens thereof held war against the Venetians and
the Genois. They grew great by the overthrow which the Sarazens gave to the
Genois, in the year 1533. the remainder of which defeature, was received into
the protection of their City; and declined by the slaughter of their people,
and also of their Navy given them by the Genois near to the Isle Giglio. For
thereby they became so weak, that not able to sustain their wonted
reputation, they were forced to submit themselves under the protection of
Florentines, against whom (when Charles the eighth invaded Italy) they
rebelled. But being again reduced to their former obedience, the City
notwithstanding was in a manner left desolate, because the Citizens (impatient
of the Florentines government) passed into Sardinia, Sicil, and other places to
inhabit. So that the place wanting Inhabitants, and the Country people to
manure it, the situation thereof being low and moorish, by reason of Fens and
Marshes, it became infectious. Cosmo the great Duke, undertook to re-people
it again, and to further his intention, he builded there a stately house for
the receipt of the Knights of Saint Stephen, gracing it with many privileges,
which yet to this day remain unaltered. As also by founding an University, by
easing the people of many taxes, and by dwelling himself amongst them two or
three months in the year. Florence.
Florence is the fairest City in Italy, it is in compass six miles. It is
divided into four and forty Parishes; and into one and twenty Companies. It
has in it threescore and six Monasteries, and seven and thirty Hospitals. The
Citizens bought their freedom of the Emperor Rodolfe for six thousand
Crowns, as they of Lucca theirs for 10000. In whose time and ever since it
has flourished in great prosperity. For upon occasion, the City is able to
arm 30000: men, and the Country 60000. It is strongly walled, the situation
thereof being low, especially on the North side: but on the other parts is
somewhat subject to the command of certain hills which overlooke it, the
inconvenience whereof they have prevented by fortifications. It has a Citadell
built by Duke Alexander, and after enlarged by Cosmo. The streets thereof are
straight, large, and very clean kept. There are to be seen the most
artificial buildings of all Europe, both public and private. Charles
Archduke of Austrich was wont to say, that it was a City not to be shown but
on Holidaies. No soil is tilled with more art, diligence, and curiosity: for
you shall see one little piece of ground to bring forth Wine, Oil, Corn,
Pulse, and Fruits. Notwithstanding it will not afford sufficient victuals for a
third part of the year: to remedy which scarcity, it was not without good
reason that they spent two millions of Crowns for the recovery of Pisa. The
last Duke became an earnest Petitioner to the Pope, that he might be created
King of Tuscanie; but the Pope not brooking so lordly a Title in so near a
neighbor, answered, that he was content that he should be King in Tuscanie,
but not King of Tuscanie; which scholler-like distinctions great Princes cannot
well digest.

The qualities of the Tuscans appear by the excellency of the Florentines,
Manners of the Florentines.
whom Nature above all the Provinces of Italy has adorned with sharpness of
wit, frugality, providence, industry, and special insight into the
Negotiations of Peace and War; yea, their continual dissentions and
hazzards, wherein they have almost lived from the first foundation of their
city, I do, to nothing so much attribute as to the sharpness of their wits.
So the civil discords of the Pistolians did not only ruinate their own
estate, but therein likewise engaged Florence; yea, and as a man may say, drew
all Tuscanie after it by the factions of the Neri and Bianchi: for thus it
happened; Two young men descended of Noble Families falling out, the one of
them chanced to be lightly hurt: the Father of the other to extinguish all
sparks of malice, and that no further inconveniencie should arise upon that
quarrel, sent his son to ask forgiveness of him that was hurt, but the
effect insued contrary to his expectation: for the Father of the wounded
Gentleman caused his servants to lay hold on him; and cut off his hands, and so
sending him back again, willed him to tell his Father; that wounds were not
cured with Words, but with Weapons. Hereupon grew between those two Families a
mortal and cruel war, which drew the rest of the Cities into the quarrel,
and was the cause of great effusion of blood: yea, the Florentines in stead of
executing due punishment upon the principal authors of the faction, received
the banished on both sides into their City; where the Donati undertaking the
protection of the Neri, and the Chersi of the Bianchi, all the City became to
be divided into Neri and Bianchi, this sedition was not of long time after
pacified.

Arezzo, Arezzo.
being by long dissension amongst themselves almost brought to wrack (as the
other cities of Tuscane likewise were) was sold to the Florentines by Lewis of
Anjou for forty thousand Florens of gold, and not many years after Cortona, by
King Ladislaus.

With the State of Florence, does confine that of Sienna, Sienna.
a City builded by the Senoni, and of late time become subject to the house of
Medici. It is five miles in compass, strong by situation, and whereunto Cosmo
the great Duke adjoined a Citadell. From Florence it is not above thirty three
miles distant; but the people thereof are much differing in Manners, as also
disposition; they sparing, slow, and unsociable toward Strangers; these
bountiful, and of kind entertainment: they loath to part with money, and
provident; these liberal, and only caring for the present: they grave,
melancholy, and always expecting their profit; these plain and of cheerful
countenance: the one inclined to traffic and gain; the other content with
their Revenues, and the fruits of their Farms. Sienna has a large and
fruitful Territory, wherein are contained in the Cities of Pienza, Montalcino,
Chiusi, Soana: and in Maremma, Massa, and Crosse^o, the ports of Orbetelio,
Portercole, with twenty six other walled Towns. The coast begins at
Capiglia, and extends to the little River of Fiore, being all good soil for
Corn, but the air is so infectious, that none live long therein. The ports
do all belong to the King of Spain, together with the Hill Argentino, a place
famous by the discourse which Claudius Ptolomeus made thereof, for the
excellency of the situation fit for the building of a royal City. Next this
Province begins the patrimony of Saint Peter, bequeathed to the Church by
the Countess Matilda.

These may be partly ghessed at by the numbers of people: His forces at land.
which (not to overreach with the Italians) are valued 800000. souls, or
perchance a million in all his dominions. So then out of every 16000. people to
allow three hundred soldiers (which is the proportion of the Muster-books in
Prato) then will 800000. people allow 15000. soldiers: and though the Duke (as
some writers affirm) has sometimes confessed that he has thirty or 36000.
soldiers: yet I suppose you shall do him no wrong not to allow him above
20000. in ordinary; seeing a Captain of their own at once confessed but
15000. These are trained once a month, except in Florence, where they are not
suffered to wear Arms; the liberty to wear which causes diverse to sue to be
soldiers; those in ordinary pay are bestowed in his Garrisons. Thirty Castles
and Forts he has, and in some of them fifty, in others but fifteen soldiers.
Sixteen Cities with Garrison also he has, in some of which he keeps not much
above the said number, though in others two or three hundred. He has in
ordinary for his Guard one hundred horse, at six and thirty shillings nine
pence apeece a month; and four hundred light horse more, at fifteen
shillings nine pence; one other troop of horse he has, for what service, and
in what pay I know not. The Garrison Soldier has one and twenty shillings a
month, the train Soldier nothing.

His Force at Sea he never recovered since the defeat given by the Turks,
where he lost two of his best Galleys, At Sea.
and one Galleon. His whole Fleet is about twelve Galleys, and five Galleasses;
for honor and increase of his power by Sea, has he instituted the Knights of
the Order of Saint Stephen, who are his Commanders. His chief Port and
Arsenall is Porto Ferraro, in the I Will of Elba. Of great Ordnance were told in
the Castle of Livorno threescore and four, and in that of Florence one hundred
and fifty, by which may be ghessed that he has no want of munition. The
charge of his Galleys for these six months, in which they be commonly at Sea,
is about 18000. gold Crowns, each Crown worth six shillings sterling.

There is not so much as a root, His Revenues.
nor the dunging of an Ass, for which something is not paid to the great Duke:
Victuals, Lodging, Weddings, Bargains, Lawsuits, setting up of young
Tradesmen, all must be paid for. So that his ordinary and known revenue is
valued at 1100000. Ducats, which comes to 279000. pound sterling a year,
besides his extraordinaries. A wonderful sum for a petty Prince, especially
in such a thrifty place, where all expenses defrayed, he may in times of peace
put up one half, if not two thirds of his entire Revenue; Ordinaries and
Extraordinaries arising to one thousand pound a day. His neighbor Princes are
all jealous of him, he of them, and all watchful one over another. But the
greatest eyesore his greatness is to the State of Lucca which lies in
Tuscany, and all the whole length (being fifty miles) surrounded by this Dukes
dominions. This makes them at great and continual charge of Garrisons, and to
put themselves under the protection of the Spaniard, the fear of whose power
slaves off the Duke from attempting upon that State; which might he once
obtain, he might truly then write himself Great Duke of Tuscany. Whereas now
having but part of it, he may be answered as the Pope did his Predecessor. So
he may write himself the Greatest Duke of all Tuscany, rather than The Great
Duke of all Tuscany.

The State of the Kingdom of Naples.
THe chief place hereof in ancient time was Capua, the pleasant situation
whereof was the overthrow of Han^^bal and his army. Cicero writes, that the
Romans were Lords of three imperial Cities, Carthage, Corinth, and Capua. The
two first being far off, they utterly ruinated: of Capua they long consulted;
in the end they concluded that it were extreme tyranny to spoil so noble a
city of Italy. But for their better security, they confiscated the Territories
thereof, and deprived it of all form and Majesty of Commonwealth. They let
the buildings stand to serve for receipt of those which should till the ground.
Naples.
Naples is now the chief seat not only of Campagnia, but of the whole
Kingdom, and is indeed a princely City: it is in compass seven miles, but
narrow: of late times it is much augmented, and would increase continually, if
the King of Spain had not forbidden a further increase by building; whereunto
he was moved, partly by the complaints of the Barons (whose Tenants to enjoy
the liberties granted to the Neapolitans, did forsake their own dwelling to
seat themselves there:) partly by the danger of rebellion, which in so mighty a
City cannot easily be repressed. It is strongly walled, and has in it three
Castles, the chief whereof is Castle- Novo, builded by Charles of Angcow. The
haven is not large nor safe, but that inconvenience is somewhat eased by an
artificial key. It has likewise an Arsenall, wherein all Instruments of war
are forged.

Amongst other religious places (of which sort there are many, and those well
maintained) there is the house of Piety, called Il monte della pieta, House of
Piety
which by ordinary Revenues and gifts, may dispend yearly 60000. Crowns,
wherewith (amongst other charitable works) it maintains through the Kingdom
two thousand Infants.

It is one of the regions belonging to the Kingdom of Naples; It is bounded
with the River Iano, Calabria.
and the Terrhene and Ionian Seas; Compass and conteinue*
it is in compass above five hundred miles, and is divided into two Provinces;
the one lies on the Terrhene Sea, where in ancient times the Brutians did
inhabit, and that part is properly called Calabria; the other lies on the
Ionian, and called Magna Graecia. It is divided into the higher and lower. Of
the higher, the chief seat is Cosenza, of the lower Catanzara. Cosenza is a
large City, Catanzara a strong. Between the Cape of the Pillars, and the Cape
Alice is Corone, a place of very wholesome air. Upon this territory, Anno
1551. the Navy of the Great Turk landed and made some stay: which was the
cause that moved Charles the fifth to fortify this City. It is a thing worthy
to be noted, how much the Inhabitants of this country in former ages, exceeded
the numbers of this present: for in those days this City sent more men
against the Locrians, than the whole Kingdom of Naples is now able to afford,
being numbered to an hundred and thirty thousand. A little above that do
inhabit the Sabarits, who were always able to arm thirty thousand.

At Tarent begins the Country of Otranto, Calabria superior.
in ancient times called Iapigia. It contains all that corner of land almost
environed with the Sea, which lies between Tarent and Brundusium. In it (as
Strabo writes) were once thirteen great Cities, but in his time only two,
Tarent and Brunduse. The air is very healthful, and though the superficies of
the soil seem rough and barren, being broken with the plough, it is found to
be excellent good mold. It is scarce of water, nevertheless it yields good
Pasture, and is apt for Wheat, Barley, Oats, Olives, Cedars, excellent Melons,
Oxen, Asses, and Mules of great estimation. The people are in their manners
dangerous, superstitious, and for the most part beastly. The Gentlemen lovers
of liberty and pleasure, scoffers at Religion, especially at that which we
term the reformed: and yet themselves of their own great blasphemers. For
outward show they live in great pomp, and make the City more stately, because
they are not permitted to live in the Country: yet (as they dare) they
bitterly groan under the Viceroyes control; who exercises the Spanish pride
amongst them, so that in these days they come nothing near their native
glory, nor customary wantonness. In this Country is bred the Tarantola, whose
venom is expelled with Fire and Music, as Gellius reports out of
Theophrash his History of living creatures. There are likewise bred the
Chersidi, serpents living both on the land, and in the Sea: yea, there is no
part of Italy more cumbred with Grasshoppers which leave nothing where they
come, but would utterly consume in one night whole fields full of ripe corn,
if Nature by sending the birds called the Gaive into those quarters, had not
provided a remedy against this misery. The place at all times of the year
endures much damage by Hail: Thunder is as usual in Winter as in Summer.

This Province is situated between two Seas: Situation.
The City is seated in an Island like unto a ship, and joined to the Continent
with bridges, where the tide sets violently; on the other side, the two Seas
join together by means of a trench cut out by man's hand, and is of largeness
sufficient to receive a Gally. Where the City now stands was before a rock,
and is holden to be the strongest fortress of the Kingdom. Caesaria.
From thence along the shore lies Caesaria, now ruined by them of Gallipoli.
Gallipolis.
Gallipolis is seated on a ridge of land, running into the Sea like a tongue;
On the furthest point whereof stands the City, and is of great strength by
reason of the situation, being fenced with unaccessible rocks, well walled and
secured by a Castle; with which motives of encouragement in the wars,
between the French and the Arragons, the citizens thereof to their great
honor, continued ever faithful to the fortunes of the Arragons. It has been
counted one of the chiefest Cities of Italy; it is now by their civil
dissentions almost desolated, the cause, as I take it, wherefore the air
thereabouts is become so unhealthfull: an influence incident to all great
Cities. For as nothing does better temper the air than the frequencie of
Inhabitants, because (by husbandry and industry) they dry up Fennie and
unwholesome places, prune such woods as grow too thick and obscure; with their
fires purge noisome exhalations, and with their high buildings extenuate gross
vapors: So on the contrary, there is nothing apter to breed infection than
desolation: for so the places are not only deprived of the aforesaid helps,
but even the houses and their ruins are receptacles of infection, and matter
of corruption. Which appears to be true by the ruins of Aquilea, Rome,
Ravenna, and Alexandria in Egypt. For which inconvenience, the Grecians never
built huge Cities; Plato would not that his should exceed 500. families, and
Aristotle wished that all his people might at once hear the voice of one Crier.

This Province extends from the confines of Brunduse, Apulia.
to the River Fortore. It is divided into two territories; The extent.
the one at this day called Bari, and by the Latins Peucetia; the other
Puglia, and by them Dawnia, divided each from other by the River Lofanto.

In the second part it comprehends Capitanato, Capitanato.
containing in it many great Cities, places of trade, and Fortresses of good
account. Amongst the number whereof is Mansredonia, Mansredonia.
built by K. Manfredi in a high place, and healthful, with a convenient and
safe harbor. It lies under the hill Gargano, at this day called S. Angelo,
because of the appearing of S. Michael, who is honored there with great
devotion. It should seem that in this hill all the riches of Puglia are heaped
together: it has plenty of water, an element rare in this Province. The
Sarazens finding the opportunity of the situation thereof did there fortify,
and therein maintained themselves a long time: for in truth there is no place
better to molest the Kingdom, and to command the Adriatike Sea. Puglia is
another Province of this Kingdom; Puglia and Abruzze.
it is bounded with the River Fortorie, and the River Tronto: in which circuit
are contained many people. Toward the Sea it is a fruitful Country, in the
midst rough and mountainous, and the coldest Region in the Kingdom. The
wealth thereof consists in Cattle and Saffron.

The Country of Malsi is divided with the River Pescara, Malsi.
the Governor thereof resideth in San-Severino. This Province has no famous
place upon the Seacoast, but in the Inland. Benevento.
Benevento was given to the Church by Henry the fourth in recompense of a
tribute which Leo the ninth did release to the Church of Bamburgh, which in
those days, being by diverse casualties often usurped, was at last restored
again to the Church by the Arms of the Normans.

It was the habitation of the Lucans, extending from the River Sarvo, to Lavo:
it is a territory rough and mountainous. Toward the Seacoast are Nico,
Sorento, Massa, Almasi, and Salerne, the air whereof is very temperate; in the
upland are Cava, Nocera, San-Severino; and more near the Sea, Peste, where
Roses blow twice a year; Agropoli, Possidoniat, now Licosa, Policaster, Capace
Nov^ Venosa, Accella, and Melsi, holden second to Naples.

Naples.
NAples was first the receptacle of Philosophy; secondly, of the Muses; and
now of Soldiery; the modern inhabitants having their ears daily inured to
the sound of the drum and fife, and their eyes to the management of Horses, and
glittering of Armours. For the ambitious Spaniard now governs this Kingdom
by a Viceroy, directed (upon occasions) by the Council appointed for Italy,
which innovation has principally befallen them, by their dependancie upon the
Popes; who knowing (by reason of the brevitie of their lives) not otherwise to
govern than by spleen, passion, and private respect, have continually
disquieted the estate, until a third man has bereaved both parties of their
imaginary greatness. And this is the Spaniard, who making right use of former
defaults, has secured the piece: first, by taking all power and greatness
from the Nobility, (more than titular;) and secondly, in suppressing the
popular throughout the whole Kingdom by foreign soldiery.

A regiment consisting of four thousand Spaniards, besides sixteen hundred
quartered in the maritime Towns and fortresses. To these one thousand great
horse, and four hundred and fifty light horse are enrolled.

They say, through the whole Kingdom, Forces at Land.
two hundred thousand, five hundred and threescore persons (able to bear
arms) may be levied and trained; but are not in pay, nor raised but in time
of service; and then but in part, according to occasion.

To make good this proportion, every Hundred, fires (or families) are charged
with five footmen, and there are four millions, eleven thousand four hundred
fifty and four fires in this Kingdom. Over whom Captains are appointed, who
have their entertaiments as well in times of peace as of war.

Their strength at Sea consists of thirty seven Galleys; At Sea.
yet more than trouble and title the King of Spain reapeth not from this
Kingdom. The revenue, and donatives, Revenue.
(now made revenue) with impositions, amount yearly to two millions and fifty
thousand ducats, one million and thirty thousand thereof are ordinarily given
away in pension and other largesses; the remainder cannot suffice (by much) to
discharge the Garrisons, Galleys, Horsemen, and the residue of the Souldierie.

The body of their Nobility consists of fourteen Princes, Nobility.
five and twenty Dukes, thirty Marquesses, fifty four Earls, and four
thousand Barons: too too many to thrive one by another; for as they increase in
number, so great Princes will be sure they shall decrease in authority. No
office is allotted them, neither any command assigned them, whereby they might
ascend to estimation. Every Officer is countenanced against them, all their
misdemeanors looked into, severely examined, and justice rigorously inflicted.
Their ancient vassals (their ancient honor and confidencie) are now alienated
from them, and being backed against them in their pretensions, are grown
neglectfull of them. They have lost their stings; and being either desperate of
their liberty, or far degenerated from their ancient glory, dare not
express, much less put in hazard, any action tending to redemption. Indeed
they have no likelihood of foreign assistance, all the Princes of Italy in
these days either fearing, or flying into the protection of the Spaniard. A
pregnant president of the many calamities incident to all Kingdoms governed by
Deputies.

The riches of the Kingdom are especially silks, Riches.
wrought and unwrought, and wines. The taxes now imposed upon these wares have
so inhaunced the prices, that the foreign Merchant neglects to trade, to the
no small impoverishment of the Tradesman and Merchant, whose especial
livelihoods consist in workmanship, and the quick return thereof. What rates
may be imposed hereon, as also upon victuals and wines, let reason judge, when
upon herbs only spent in Naples, four thousand pounds sterling are annually
levied by way of imposition. As for Wines, twelve thousand Buts are reported to
be transported from thence at every season.

Among all men that profess Christ, Calabria.
there is not a more uncivil creature than the Calabriar. Over land there is
no traveling, without assured pillage, and hardly to be avoided murder,
although you have not about you (and that to their knowledge) the worth of a
dolar. More silk is made from the silke-worme in this Province, than in all
Italy besides.

The State of the Duchy of Millaine.
NOt to do the Spaniard wrong, we will add his Duchy of Millaine to his
Kingdom of Naples. The circuit of this State is three hundred miles of good,
fruitful, and well watered land; under which are nine good Cities, and in them
two Universities, Pavia and Millan. This latter a goodly City and a rich,
almost seven miles in compass, and inhabited by two hundred thousand souls,
industrious and of the best Artizans of Italy. It claims to be the first
Duchy of Europe. In the weakness of the Empire, Millane withdrew its
obedience, An. 1161. Fifty six years after that, the Visonti usurped upon the
common liberty. For want of heirs the French claimed and conquered it. But
King Francis being taken prisoner by Charles the fifth, was feign to release
Millane to gain his own liberty: And thus came it to the Spaniard. His
certain Revenue out of it (besides Escheats and gratuities) are eight hundred
thousand Ducats: but the maintenance of it costs him much more than that sum:
and the French for that reason were glad they were rid of it: For the Spaniard
is at continual charges of three thousand foot, one thousand light horse, and
six hundred men at Arms, besides the expenses upon the Forts; whereof the
Castle of Millane is held to be one of the surest pieces in the world. The
natives are proud, and the Spaniards are proud too; and it was never yet known
that two proud persons loved one another: and this makes the Spaniard to curb
them with Forts and Garrisons. But since he is Master of the Valtoline, he can
quickly bring German forces into Millane, if he perceived any inclination to
insurrection. The Governor is General of the Forces; and he always a
Spaniard. Law-matters are decided by sixteen Doctors of Law, and other chief
men of the Clergy and Nobility.

The State of Genoa.
THe places of most note therein are Nizza, Genoa.
having a Castle of great account; Villa franca, a Haven of great receipt, but
dangerous; Monaco, a notable fort; Ventimilia, a good City. The Champion of
Arbenga is fertile, but the air infectious. Finale is a famous Lordship; Noly
has a convenient Harbor for shipping, but Savona had a better, if the jealous
Genoise had not choked it.

The people are witty, M^ine^s of the (...).
active, high minded, tall of stature, and of comely personage. They build
stately: At home they live sparingly, abroad magnificently.

Genoa is now the Metropolitan City of the Province, and by reason of
situation was holden to be one of the Keys of Italy. The people thereof were
once very famous for their manifold victories, and great command by sea,
insomuch that wrestling with the Venetians, they had almost bereaved them of
their estate, and taken their City: But (Fortune favoring the Venetians, and
crossing the Genoise, even to their utter undoing) ever since this City has
declined, and that not only in regard of their former defeature, and their
continual and civil discords, but also, for that they have given over their
traffic and care of their public good; and have betaken themselves to live
by usury, retaile, and mechanical Trades, altogether regarding their private
benefit; whereupon, not being of puissance, as in former ages, to make good
their actions, they were forced to put themselves under the protection,
sometimes of the Kings of France, and sometimes of the Duke of Millaine, and
now under the Spanish.

This has sometimes been much more potent; and Mistres not only of diverse
lands in Tuscany, as also of the Islands of Corsica and Sardinia, upon the Coast
of Italy; but of Lesvos, Chios, and other Ilets in the Greekish Seas: of Pera
likewise hard by Constantinople, and of Capha and other places in the Taurica
Chersonesus. These last places they have lost to the Turks, Sardinia to the
Arragonians; their possessions in Tuscanie, to the great Duke; nothing is now
left them but Liguria and Corsica. Liguria is on the East, divided from
Tuscanie by the River Macra, touching the Apenine hills on the North; and on the
South open to its own Sea. The length is about fourscore miles, the breadth
threescore and five. It has some half dozen of eight good Towns besides
Genoa, which City being six miles in compass, is for the wealth and buildings
called Genoa the proud. The people are many: whereof eight and twenty Families
of Gentlemen, out of whom the Council of four hundred is chosen. The men
noted for hasty chopping in of their meat, are therefore of bad complexions;
the women better; and in this freer than the rest of Italy, that they may be
made Court, unto; whence the proverb, Genoa has a Sea without fish,
Mountains without grass, and Women without honesty. They are governed by a
Duke; but he is no other but a Mayor, chosen every year, and directed by a
Council of 16. Their several factions have brought them to this pass. They are
great Bankers and money Masters: and seldom is their Protector, the King of
Spain, out of their debt. Their Merchants hold up one another by Families.
Their Revenues are about 430000. crowns. Their force is nothing so great as
when they conquered Sardinia, Corsica, and the Baleares; or as when they were
able to maintain seven Armies in the wars of the Holy Land; or set forth an
hundred threescore and five Galleys in one Fleet. They must by law have always
five and twenty Galleys in their Arsenall: four of which are still to scour
the Coasts. In Genoa, they have a Garrison of the Ilanders of Corsica, and
there, of Genoise. Some troops of horse they keep to guard their shore. But
their best strength was five years since seen to be the King of Spain.

The State of Venice.
IN the very bottom of the Adriaticke, called at this day, Venice.
the Gulf of Venice, is a ridge of Land, reaching from the Lime-kils, called
by them Fornaci, to the mouth of the River Piane, in form of a Bow; and
contains in length thirty five miles, and in breadth two where it is broadest,
and in some places no more than what an Harquebuze can shoot over. This ridge
is parted and cut (what by the falling of Rivers, and the working of the Sea)
into seven principal Islands: the Ports of Brondolo, of Chiozzo, of Malamoco,
of the three castles, of Saint Erasmus, the Lito Maggiore, or great shore, and
the Treports. Between that part of this ridge, which is called Lito, and the
Continent, stands the Lake of Venice, in compass ninety miles. In this Lake
is seated the City of Venice, upon threescore and twelve Islands, distant from
the shore two miles, and from the firm land five; divided with many Channels,
some greater, some lesser. It was begun to be built in the year 421. the
five and twentieth of March about noone.

It increased in people with the report of the Hunnes coming into Italy, The
increase thereof.
and more afterward by the desolation of Aquily, and the bordering Cities; as
Padoa and Monselice destroyed by Agilulfus King of Lombardy. Some are of
opinion, that anciently the Lake reached up as high as Oriago, which stands
upon the Brent: which being true, then was Venice ten miles distant from the
Continent. The description.
The City, amongst many other Channels which do incircle it, is divided by one
maine Channel (for his largeness called the Grand Canale) into two parts,
whereof the one part looks South-west, the other North-east. This Channel in
his winding makes the form of the letter S. backward: And it is the more
famous for the admirable prospect of so many most curious and goodly Palaces,
as are built all the length of it on either side, to the astonishment of the
beholders. Some report, that the Channel was the bed of the old River Brenta,
which it made before the course thereof was turned, by making the bank of
Leccia fusina, and so broke out and emptied it self by the mouth, which is
called the three Castles. On the middle of this Channel stands the bridge of
Rialto, built first of wood, but in our time re-edified and built of stone, and
that with such excellency of workmanship, that it may justly be numbered
amongst the best contrived Edifices of Europe. This Bridge joyneth together the
two most and best frequented parts of the City, the Rialto and Saint Marks.
Many less Channels fall into this, which are passed over either by Bridges or
Boats appointed for that purpose. The City has in circuit seven miles, and
yields an inestimable Revenue. About the City, especially Northward, lie
scattered here and there in the Lake seventy five other Islands, the chief
whereof are Murano and Burano, both for circuit, building, and number of
Inhabitants: Especially Murano, Murano.
abounding all over with goodly Houses, Gardens, and a thousand other objects
of delight and pleasure. The Glasse-houses.
Here are these so famous Glasse-houses, where so many admirable inventions in
that kind are made in Galleys, Tents, Organs, and such like; whereof the
quantity yearly vented, amounts to 60000. Crowns.

Now the City of Venice, Venice.
which from her Infancy has maintained her self free, and as a Virgin, for
one thousand and three hundred years, and that hitherto has been untouched
with any injury of War or Rapine, amongst other advantages required in the
situation of a City, has those two which are required in a well seated City,
whereof having already discoursed in the site of England, we will here
surcease further to dilate of. The safety then of this City grows from the
Waters, and the situation thereof in the Water, where neither it can be well
approached or assaulted by Land, for the interposition of the Water between it
and the Land: nor yet by Sea, The site thereof, and hardness to approach.
for that the streams are not navigable, but by Vessels of the lesser size
only: for greater ships riding out of the Channels (where the Water is
somewhat deep) would drive; and riding within the Channels, with every turning
water should be on ground. So that a Navy of lesser shipping would do no
good, and greater shipping cannot well there be managed. In conclusion, these
Waters are rather made for the places and entertainment of peace, than for
motions of war. We may add to these difficulties (which nature and the
situation do present) another as great, which arises from the power and
provisions of the City, which are ever such as will better enable the
Inhabitants to offend another in those Waters, than any man can invent to
offend them. All which young Pepin tasted to his loss:

Who with his ships and men filled all the Coast,
From the Fornaci to the greater shore,
And Laid a bridge to pass his ventrous boast
From M^lamocco all the Channellore,
Even to Rialto: yet for all this boast
He Is feign to fly with shame: the Seas do drown
His men: His bridge the waves have beaten down.
And lastly we may add the continual Art and care which the Seigniorie does
use, ever to augment something to the fortification of this their City and
State.

The whole Dominion of the Venetian Seigniorie is divided into firm land and
Sea. Division of the State of Venice.
By the firm land we understand all that which they possess in Lombardie, in
Marca Tr^vis^^, and in Friuli; for that all those parcels do make one
continued country, passable from one to the other, without help of Sea. We
will term that Sea, which confineth with the Lake Sea-ward, or that which
cannot be approached without passing by Water. This State is again divided
into Continent and Island. On the Continent they have Istria, Dalmatia,
Sclavonia, Albania, or at least some parts thereof: The Islands stand partly
within the Gulf, not far distant from the Continent; and part of them are
without the Gulf, which are Corfu, Cephalonia, Zante, Candia, Cenigo, Tine,
and other in the Adriatique.

The State of the firm Land contains one of the Marquisats of Italy, to
wit, Trevisa, which besides the head City, whereof it takes its name, has
also in it the Cities of Feitre, Belluno, and C^n^da. It has moreover two of
those Cities which are of the first rank of the Cities in Italy, namely
Venice and ^res^la. Nor let it seem strange to any man, that Treckon ^r^scia
amongst the said Cities, considering that for largeness of Territory it
gives place to no City through Ital^^, containing in length one hundred miles,
and in breadth fifty; considering also the number of Inhabitants, and the
entrade it yields to the Seigniorie; besides the private revenue of the City
it self: In all which, few other Cities come near it.

There is also in the firm Land the City of Verona, called so for its
superemment conditions, as Ver^ una: and is the first of the second rank of
Cities of Italy.

The City of Padoa, which for goodness of soil exceeds Bolognia it self.
There are also the Cities of Bergamo, Vicenza, and Crema. There is again the
State of Friuli, with two honorable Cities, Vdine, where the Lieutenant of the
State resideth, and Cividal; besides a number other populous Towns, little
inferior to Cities. Lastly, there is the fruitful Polesine, with the noble
City of Rovigo therein, with other places of good respect.

If we consider the water, there are few States of Italy that have more
abundance in that kind, either for standing Waters, or Rivers. In the
Territory of Bergamo is the Lake of Iseo; in the Country of Brescia, the Lake
of Idro. In the Veronesse and Brescian, is the Lake of Guardo. It is also
watered with many great Rivers, that not only serve to make the fields
fruitful, but also to fortify the place. And those Rivers are Oglio, Chiese,
Navilio, Mincio, Seri, Mela, and Garza, which indeed is rather a Mountain
Bourne, than a River, etc. The Country of Polesine and Padoa are so stored
with Lakes and Rivers, that therein is no Burg or place which stands not
within five miles of some fresh Water. And all this Country of the firm Land
(whereof I have spoken) is also for air exceeding wholesome and temperate, as
the complexions and cheerful countenances of the Inhabitants can well
witness, together with the quickness of their apprehension and wit, as well
for matter of Arms as Learning.

Touching the Land, this State has in it many parts that are very diverse in
quality; some-where exceeding happy and fruitful, but less industry in the
people; other-where the people are exceeding industrious, but the ground
defective. Again, some parts there are, where both the people are exceeding
careful and industrious, and the soil also good.

Of the first sort is the Territory of Crema, of Padoa, of Vicenza, of
Trevisa, and the Polesine.

Of the second sort is the Country of the Bergomasche, the Veronise, and
Friuli.

Of the third sort is the Country of Brescia.

And touching the first, it is almost incredible what the riches and increase
is of those grounds; what fresh Meadows, what fruitful arable, what abundance
of Cattle, of Flesh, of all things that come of Milk; what plenty of Corn,
of Pulse, of Fruit, Wood, Flax, Linen, and Fish. Amongst all which
particularities, the Padoan does notwithstanding excel; which for goodness of
soil, does carry the praise from all the rest of Lombardie. The wealth of
this Territory may hence be conjectured, that it has the richest Bishopric
and Prebendaries of Italy. It has one of the richest Abbeies of Saint Benet in
Italy, which is Saint Iustina. It has one of the most beautiful Convents of
the same order, (viz.) that of Praxa. It has the richest Monastery belonging
to the Austen-Friers, which is that of Caudiana. It has two of the greatest
Churches that may be found in Italy, which are Saint Iustina, and Saint
Anthony, with one of the greatest Customs of salt in Europe.

In the time of the Roman Commonwealth, no City of the Empire had more Knights
of Rome, than had Padoa. For that (as Strabo testifies) there were sometimes
counted five hundred of them at once. Which must needs proceed from the
extraordinary goodness of the soil, and the greatness of private
livelihoods. But at this day, the greatness of the Venetian Nobility, has in
great part diminished the Nobility of other Cities. Amongst which Aquileia in
old time took in compass twelve miles, and made an hundred and twenty
thousand Citizens. And Ravenna, which was situated in a Lake (as Venice is) was
once of such respect, that it was thought fit, and chosen first by Honorius,
and afterward by the Goths and Exarchs for the seat of the Empire. In our
days by the conjuration of Cambraie, it was besieged by Maximilian with seven
hundred French Lances, a thousand two hundred men at Arms, Italians: 18000.
Dutch foot: six thousand Spaniards: two thousand Italians in pay: and six
hundred Adventurers of diverse Nations, with a huge quantity of Artillery, and
all other Munition. Against this force the Seigniory opposed as great a force
for defense, and put into the City six hundred men at Arms, fifteen hundred
Light Horse, as many Carabines, under very expert Commanders: And for foot they
had above twelve thousand Italians, ten thousand drawn out of the Galleys, a
great number of Gentlemen of Venice, and Peasants of the Country without
number; together with an Army of inestimable quantity of Munition and victual:
with which quantity of men and provisions, the greatness of their works and
fortifications well answered. Now there being about and in Padoa two so great
and populous Armies, one to assault it, another to defend it, and that this
infinite number of Horse on both sides did never cease from boot-haling and
forraging the Country about, setting fire on all that they could not carry
away, and that the Peasants had also conveyed away as much as they could into
the City, and the adjoining holds, yet did neither of these Armies ever want
victuals during all that siege.

And yet as fruitful as is Padoa, the Country of Crema is no whit behind it
for all things; for store and finenesse of flax beyond it. Of Polesine it shall
only suffice to say, that it holds the like proportion with Padoa. The
Country of Vicenza has the Champian exceeding fat, and for that part thereof
which is hilly, few Countries come near it for pleasantness. It leans its
shoulders upon the Alps: it has on the right hand the new River, on the left
Bronta, in the midst of it runs Bacchilion, Remon, etc. it is the Garden of
Venice.

The Territory of Trevisa, as it cannot be reckoned amongst the fertillest,
ye^ it is numbered amongst the pleasantest.

Now the Countries, where the industry of the people is more than the
goodness of the soil, are those of Verona, Bergamo, and Friuli. For in the
Bergamash there is more than forty miles of mountain: the Veronese has many
miles of champian, altogether barren and sandy. The like has Friuli, whence it
comes that these parts are much subject to dearths, and scarcity of corn;
but what they want in Bread, is re ompenced in Wine abundantly; so that as I
understand, the Island alone of Scala, which is one great Village in the
Veronesse, does rent in this commodity to the number of five thousand crowns
yearly. Nor are they destitute of very good Wool, whereof they of Verona do
weave Cloths and Felts: The Burgamash an infinite quantity of Dornix, besides
Broad-clothes and Kersies, which they vent partly into Lombardie, and partly
into Almaigne.

The fruitfulness of the soil, and industry of the people together, is
notably discovered in the territory of Brescia; insomuch that I believe that no
part of Italy in these two points can be compared thereto for opulencie and
plenty, in those two parts which for goodness of soil we count to be
fertile. There is no private man's Garden for art and gracefulness of
compartment or order, more exquisitely cast, or more diligently planted, or
more neatly kept and dressed than this whole territory.

Now touching that part of the ^rescian territory that is unfruitful,
impossible it were to declare the diligence and art that is there used, for
ploughing of mountains, and for planting of Vines throughout the said
mountains. But a sufficient testimony thereof will be, that the barrenest
part of this territory is no less well inhabited than is the best. In the
town of Cordove alone it is known, that if need require, they are able in one
day to make two hundred Harquibushes at all points out of the Mass, although
there be no Harquebush that goes through less than ten hands at the least. No
Iron is brought in more than grows in the Country, and yet little goes out
imwrought: Some is sold made into bars, but most into wares. In the City of
Brescia are accounted more than two hundred Smiths shops, of which fifty at
least are Cutlers.

There are also some Iron Mines in V^^l Co^^^^^^, which yield water for six
furnaces, and six mills, in which they make plate for Armor. In the City of
Cordove are made in great quantity, Swords, Daggers, Halberds, Knives, and
other like weapons: In the Marquisate of Trevisae great quantity of excellent
steel, and so in Alphaga Soldo, and in Cador; exceeding good Swords are
wrought in Belluno, Felire, and Seravalle.

The dominion which the Venetian has by Sea, Of the Continent.
is of two kinds, as has formerly bin said; partly Continent, and partly
Islands. The greatest territory of the Continent is Istria, and the best;
unless it were for that the air thereof is naturally unwholesome, or rather
to speak freely, contagious and pestilent, especially about Nola. For which
cause that it grow not to be disinhabited, the Seigniory allows to all men
that will dwell there, a certain quantity of land, with diverse immunities and
privileges besides. It yields great abundance of Oil, Fish, and Salt.

Dalmatia, Sclavonia, and Albania afford excellent wines; and in these
quarters, partly by the commodiousnesse of the Sea, and partly by reason of the
entertainment and pay that runs there amongst the garrisons, with the careful
industry of the Inhabitants, the people live indifferently well there.

The Islands belonging to this State, Of the Islands of the Gulf.
and lying within the Gulf, are not many. The names of them are Veggia, Arbe,
Brazza, Pago, Liesina, Curzola, Lissa, with the Islands of Zara and Sesa. They
all yield in general Wines of reasonable goodness. Cherso with some other do
exceed for plenty of Cattle, Milk, Meats and Wool. Pago has Salt Pits, and
yields great profit. Veggia has store of Pulse, light Wines, Wood, and
Horse, though small. They are all beautified with Havens, excepting Arbe, which
defect is there recompensed with the natural pleasantness of the Country.
They have very rich Fishings, especially Lesina, whose Sea yields Pilchers in
great abundance. The greatest of these Islands is Lesina, containing in
compass fifty miles. The best peopled is Curzola: The most delicious Arbe: and
both, with the parts of the Continent over against them (whereof we spoke
before) do yield great number of serviceable men for the field and the Galleys.

It remains to speak of the Islands out of the Gulf. Of the Islands out of
the Gulf.
Of which the first inorder is Corfu, for commodiousnesse of situation of great
account: For it lies in a manner in the very center of all the Sea-dominious
belonging to this State, between the Adriatike and the Ionike Seas, equally
distant from Venice and Candie. In which respect it stands fitly both to
hinder an enemy that would assault the Islands and Continent within the Gulf,
and to releeve Candie, if it were distressed. It also ^eth fitly to defend all
the Western parts, and to molest the East. It stands in so excellent a Seat
for the defense of Italy, that it may properly be termed the Bastion thereof.
It stands well also for the conquest of Greece, bordering upon it, as it
were^ strong mount or Cavallier. I: stands opportunely for the receipt,
releeving and uniting of the Forces and Navies of Christendom against the
Infidelt. And albeit the Island be not very plentiful in grain, yet through
the vicinitie thereof to Puglia, and Epyre, and the facile transportation it
has to Venice and Sicill, it cannot want any necessaries. The experience
whereof has been manifested both in the time of the Romans, and in our days
also. The Roman fleet made head always at Corsu. There also in the civil
wars betwixt Caesar and Pompey, did ride M. Bibulu^, Pompey's General. And
in our memory the forces of the league concluded by Paul the third, and Pius
the fifth, did there assemble, and from thence set forward.

The Island was of so powerful an estate, that it armed 6^ Vessels to Sea. It
abounds with excellent Oil, Wine, Wax, Honey, and fruits of all sorts. All
which commodities it has in that goodness and proportion, that better in the
same kind, are not to be found through the whole earth. It has in length 60
miles, 20 miles over, and in circuit an hundred and twenty. It has three
places of great importance; to wit, the old City near the old Seat of
Pagiopili; the new Fort, and thereto adjoining the Castle Saint Angelo, besides
sixty eight Towns.

Next in order is Cephalonia, containing in compass an hundred threescore and
six miles. It has two hundred Towns, with Havens belonging unto them: Two
whereof, Argostoli and Guiscardo are most famous; the third is Nallo. It
yields store of Grain, Oil, Sheep, Cheese, Wool, Honey, and Currants, and
these in such plenty, that thereby it receives great and yearly Revenues.
Candia is likewise one of the most renowned Islands of the Mediterranean. It
contains in length two hundred sixty miles, in breadth fifty, and in
compass, in regard of the many promontories, it makes almost six hundred. It
yields great plenty of Wine, with us called Malvesies, Cheese, and Honey. It
is seated so conveniently, and with such advantage for marine occurrances, that
Aristotle censured it to be Lady of the Sea. His reason, because it lies very
near the middle, between Europe and Asia, and between Greece and the Islands
of the Archipelago, which in a manner Court her as their Mistress and
Sovereign. It lies from Constantinople three hundred and fifty miles, from
Alexandria and Soria five hundred, from Caramania, Epire, and Cyprus, three
hundred, from Afrike two hundred.

There remain behind two other Islands, Cerigo and Tine. Of which Cerigo
contains in compass sixty miles. In situatian it is mountainous, having one
good City seated on the top of a Hill. It has two Havens, the one called
Delphino, the other Tine: That looks North, this South. It has besides
diverse creeks, but narrow, and unsafe: with the ancients it was of good
esteem; for Leon of Sparta considering well the seat and quality of the place,
wished that either it had never been, or being it had been drowned as soon
as it had been made. Which wish, as things afterward fell out, wrought him a
great opinion of wisdom and foresight. For Romaratus, who banished from
Sparta, and sojourned with Zerxes, counseled him to bring up all his Navy
unto this Island, if he meant to impatronize himself of Greece; as he might
easily have done, if he had followed that counsel, as in few years after did
Nicius, General of the Athenians, in the war of Peloponnesus. In our time it
is called the Lantern of the Archipelago.

Tine is in the midst of Archipelago, six miles from Delos (round about which
Delos lie the Cyclades, in number fifty three:) It has in circuit forty miles,
with one great and populous City; and by reason of the Site which is on a Hill
very strong, very many Towns it has besides. And herewith ends the
Sea-Dominion of the Venetian: In all which, there are little less than three
hundred and fifty thousand souls. Which number perhaps is greater, than a man
at first would believe, especially if he consider withal, how some of these
parts, as Sclavonia, are not very fruitful, and many of the Islands are
barren; besides the terror of the Turkish incursions: Insomuch, that if their
Countries were under any other Lord than the Venetian, they would surely be
defarted. But the Seigniory, with entertaining peace with all their Neighbors,
with building of Forts, maintaining of Garrisons in places of necessity, and
with exceeding expense of money, keep and maintain their people in this sort,
as at this day we see them inhabited.

Fame reports the Venetians to be exceeding rich: Riches.
But besides opinion, there is great reason, why they should be so indeed.
First, they are Lords of a large Territory, both by Land and Sea; but chiefly
on Land: where they have Cities of the best rank of Italy, with large and
opulent Territories adjoining unto them, and full of people, industrious and
thriftie. They have also rich Bishoprics, wealthy Abbeyes, with the fattest
and most commodious benefices of Italy: Families both for Nobility and Revenue
worshipful; and Buildings, for State and Magnificence singular: Besides which,
they have also very wealthy commonalties. Amongst which, to omit many, Brescia
alone has eighteen thousand crowns of yearly Revenue: and Asola which is
but a Town, subject to Brescia, ten thousand.

Another reason, is the great advantage which the Venetian has for Traffic,
both in drawing unto himself other men's commodities, and in venting his own.
I call his own commodities whatsoever is growing, or made within the State: or
whatsoever Trade besides he has engrossed; or by prescription of time
appropriated to himself. This advantage is mavelous great throughout the
whole State of Venice, for that the firm Land on every side, is full of
navigable Rivers and Lakes. Besides, it is for the greater part a plain
Country, so that the conveyance of all sorts of Merchandise by Cart or by
Horse, is very easy. They are also in possession of the Valleys and passages
of the Rhetian, Giulian, and Carmian Alps, by which lies all the Traffic
between Italy and Germany.

The State of the Sea is full of excellent, Of the Sea.
large and safe Harbors, especially Dalmatia and Sclavonia. The Islands have
the like, especially the greater ones, as Corsu and Candia. But the flower of
gain and emolument to this State, is the Traffic of the great Sea of Soria
and Egypt, which the Venetian had altogether in his hand; especially so much
of the ancient Traffic for spice, which has been, and yet is of reasonable
good consequence unto them. In sum, all the Overland trade of Cloves,
Nutmegs, Ginger, Cinnamon, Pepper, Wax, Sugars, Tapestries, Cloths, Silks, and
Leather, with all the commodities of the East do pass this way, and are
uttered from hence into the greatest part of Italy, and a good part of
Germany. The greatness of this Trade, may the better be perceived by the
greatness and multitude of private shipping, belonging to Citizens and other
Strangers, Merchants of Venice, and other Haven Towns belonging to the State:
As also by the multitude and wealth of the said Merchants, and of the great
stirring and bartering, that is there every day. In which kind the Merchants
only of the Dutch Nation in Venice do dispatch as much, as were thought
sufficient to furnish a whole world. To which purpose I may not omit to note,
that Cities of Traffic have three degrees of difference; For either the Trade
lies by the Warehouse, that dispatcheth by gross; or by open shops that do
retaile, or by both. Of this first sort, are Lisbon, Civil, Antwerpe,
Amsterdam, Hamburgh, Danske, Noremberg; and in Italy, Naples, Florence, and
Genoa. Of the second sort, are all the other Cities of France and Germany. And
amongst the Cities of Italy, Millan is herein the chiefest; where there are to
be seen shops of all wares so rich, and well furnished, that they may well
serve for Magazins to many Cities. In both sorts, Venice goes beyond all the
Cities of Italy: For there are open shops of infinite number, and the
Warehouses there do far pass all other in Italy. So that this City does
Traffic by way of shop, as much as any other City, and by Warehouses, more.
And to conclude, putting both together, it is the City of greatest Traffic
in Europe, and perhaps of the World. And over this, whereas wealth does arise
to every City, by three ways; first, by profits of Dominion; secondly, by
recourse from places, to Justice: and thirdly, by Merchandise; Venice is by all
these ways continually enriched. First, the Revenue of the whole is brought to
Venice, both of the firm Land, and of the Sea: Secondly, all Appeals and
suits of importance through the whole State do come thither; and thirdly,
Venice is as it were the center of the East and West, the Storehouse of all
that is produced by Sea or Land, and in sum, the receipt of the whole wealth
of Asia and Europe.

To set down precisely the Revenue of the State is no easy matter: but a man
may be bold to say, that it is held to be the greatest of any Prince
Christian, except those of Spain and France. But whatsoever it be, certain it
is, they do lay up every year a great Mass, over and above their expenses;
notwithstanding their incredible charge they are at in the Arsenall, in the
building of Galleys, in Fortifications, in Garrisons, and Stipends. To this,
the Venetian has been for these many years in continual peace with all
Princes^ during which intermission, they have set all their study to the
augmenting of their Revenues, whereby it is now credible, that having some
years since discharged their debts, and disburthened themselves of the
interests of the said moneys, they have saved together great quantity of
treasure. Besides which treasure in ready coin, they have another treasure of
no small consideration, and that is the wealth of the City and the private
substance of particulars, with the Revenues of the greater Schools, or as they
term them, Halls; which the Commonwealth in her need may use as her own. For
that in occasions, some do give voluntarily, others do lend frankly, or upon
light use: And in the war of Cambray they gathered five hundred thousand
Crowns, upon the sale only of certain offices amongst them.

Now the Venetian Territory, for the extent of it, The strength of the State.
has in length somewhat above one thousand miles; and the breadth thereof
answers not to the length. But whenever they are drawn unto service, they
wage foreign forces. And hereupon they have always amongst them ten bands of
Albanesses and Croatians: They keep moreover in entertainment certain
Colonels of the Swisses and Grisons, with diverse Captains besides out of the
State of the Church. In former times they have been able to draw unto their
service such a Potentate as a Duke of Vrbine, unto whom they committed the
Lieutenancie and leading of their Armies, making as secure an use of his forces
as of their own. But above all things, they have always made right excellent
use of their leagues and confederacies with other States. In the league which
they made with Amadis de ^a^nte, called commonly the Green Count, and with
Theobald Earl of Champaine, with Lewis Earl of Blois; Baldwine Earl of
Flanders, and Boniface Marquess of Montferrat, they first recovered Zara, and
then entered upon the protection of Constantinople: wherein they got for
themselves three eights of the whole Conquest; and in particular, the Cities of
Gallipoli, Modoni, Conone, and Durazzo, with all the Islands in those Seas,
saving a few which lie before Morea. Amongst which Islands, Candy and Cor^^ fell
to their shares, the greatest part whereof they inseffed to their private
Gentlemen. The City of Constantinople it self remained to the Emperor, but
not without a proportionable consideration made to the Seigniorie.

In the league made with Azzo Visconti and the Florentines, against Martin
Scala, they possessed themselves of Trevegi, Bassane, and Castilbaldo. Being
confederated with Mathias Corvinus King of Hungary, and G. Scanderbeg Prince of
Albania, they made head against the Ottoman power. In another league contracted
with the Florentines against the Visconti, they enlarged their Dominions within
Lombardy. Lastly, in the confederation which they had with Francis the first,
King of France, they re-entred upon Brescia and Verona.

With their Money they have also not a little advanced their affairs. Of
Emanuel Paleologus they bought Lepanto, Napoli, and Malvalia. Of George
Belsichius they had the Town of Scutary in pawn of money lent him.

Neither have they been wanting to help themselves with honorable pretenses.
In the wars which Charles the eighth, King of France, made upon Italy, the
Venetians undertook to stand Head and Protectors of the common liberty; and in
that pretense made all Italy arm against him.

And because indeed this State may, and is rightly held for one maine Fort of
Italy, and Christendom beside, against the Turkish invasions, therefore have
they had also in their assistance from time to time the forces of the Church,
and of the King of Spain; of whom the danger has always been accounted
common, and as near unto themselves.

Now, Forces at land.
on the firm land they have a continual Ordinance of twenty and eight
thousand Foot, with Captains, Ensigns, and all other Officers enrolled and
paid. They have besides to the number of four thousand Musketeers, men well
trained to that kind of Weapon. For which occasions they have also their times
of Musters yearly; partly to approve their experience, and partly to render
such rewards as are due to the best deservers. Of this multitude and their
valor, the battle fought at Lepanto, to the utter rowting of the Turkish
Navy is a sufficient Testimony. Besides these, they maintain six thousand men
at Arms, well managed and appointed, the like whereof is not to be found in
all Italy besides.

Touching their sea-forces, they have on the firm Land ten thousand men
enrolled to serve at the Ore: And of these kind of Men, all Dalmatia and
Sclavonia does yield them what numbers they will besides; and that at a
reasonable hand.

The City of Venice alone, At Sea.
armeth upon occasion fifty Galleys, and Candy forty.

What their whole power and forces every way may amount unto, they showed in
the War of Ferrara: wherein they had on foot two several Armies, one about
Ferrara; the other on the Confines of Millan. They had at the same time besides
two several Navies; the one upon the Po, the other upon the sea, to observe
the proceedings of Naples; and all this without associats. In the war against
Lewis the twelfth, King of France, their Army was composed of two thousand men
at arms, three thousand light horse, and thirty thousand foot. In the year
1570. they armed forth one hundred and fifty lesser Galleys, eleven great
Galleys, one Gallion, and twenty five tall ships: al^eit, that number by
occasion of Pestilence happening in the Navy, was reduced to one hundred and
twenty, and seven lesser Galleys, and fourteen ships, the other Vessels
remaining untoucht; like as had befalne them before in the year 36. when as
they had the name only to make one part of three: but indeed they made a full
half of all the Christian forces besides.

But because there is nothing that can give more certain conjecture of the
power of any State, than to have sustained and gone through with great and
perilous wars: it will not be unpleasant to set down some of their most
important actions, which in that kind they have supported.

Anciently they had war with the Kings of France, and in that war they
discomfited Pepin son to Charlemagne. They warred afterward with the King of
Hungary, and took from them the Towns which they now hold in Dalmatia and
Sclavonie. They fell at debate with the Emperors of Constantinople, and gat
from them the Cities of Salonich and of Moria. One the most dangerous war
that they ever had, was that which they managed with the Genois: and yet at
length, such was the issue thereof, that howsoever having lost to the Enemy
Chiozza, and were near driven to their utter desolation, yet was the Enemy so
far off from gaining an entire victory upon them, that in the pursuit thereof,
he most of all destroyed himself: insomuch that having for maintenance of that
war engaged the Revenues of the State of Saint Georgo, so by little and
little through feebleness growing upon them, they were compelled to throw the
City within the arms and protection sometimes of France, and sometimes of
Millan; so that to this day they could never recover their pristinat fortunes.

Then had they to do with the Visconti, Princes of Millan, who were at that
time dreadful through Italy: yet by that war the Venetian not only gained
profit, but honor also.

They opposed themselves against all the Princes of Italy in the prosecution
of Ferrara, and that with such success, that in fine they annexed to their
own Dominion all the Polesine of Raviso. And after they had irritated the
Princes of Italy, these let not to draw upon themselves a war, undertaken
by all the Potentates of Christendom, combined against them in the
confederation concluded at Cambray: which war, as it was the most hapless
and despairefull that ever they managed, through the miscarriages of their
Armies at Carravaggio, at Brescia, and at Vicenza; yet in the end they remained
Lords still of their own, and of being conquered, at last remained with
Conquest.

They have for many ages together waged war with the Turk, especially with
Amurath the second; Mahomet the second; with Bajazeth; and with Selim the
second. They maintained a sixteen years wars with Mahomet the second, even
him which had the fortune to have subdued two Empires, Constantinople and
Trapisond; to have destroyed twelve Kingdoms, and to have sacked two hundred
Cities: Which war they finished, although not altogether to their profit.

They held wars for seven years (without intermission) with all the Princes
of Christendom, and went away winners: neither in all these occasions were
they destitute either of men or money.

In our memory they warred with Selim the second, and in that war they
disbursed above twelve millions of money. The like excessive sums they spent
in their wars with Michael, Emperor of Constantinople, in the enterprise of
Ferrara, and in the war undertaken of the confederacy at Cambray. All which
so inestimable sums notwithstanding at this day, whether they were parcels of
their own treasure, or lones of money from others, they have re-imbursed or
extinguished.

The Princes that border and confine upon the Venetian are these, the Turk,
the King of Spain, the Pope, Of Neighbors.
and the house of Austria.

As touching the Turk, whose State and power has been so regarded in the
worlds opinion, The Turk.
he seems at this time rather to be impaired than otherwise. Whereof one
great sign is, his protraction of the war in Hungary these many years,
with Armies of much better quality than any his Predecessors were wont to lead
or send thither. Whereupon it has happened, that not only his forces have
oftentimes been broken and discomfited, but also the Prince himself has
hardly escaped from being taken or slaughtered; if on our parts there had been
either better Chiefes to temporize with him, or more agreement in those Heads
to assail him. Notwithstanding he has there lost the Towns of ^il^ch,
Lippa, Rab, and Strigonium, places of great consideration: He has also the
second time lost Invarine. These losses do more than countervaile the winning
of Agria from us, being a fortress of many known imperfections for site and
building; besides the withdrawing of ^ran^lvania and Valachia from his
subjection, with the alienation of many rich Provinces in Asia.

The State of these presents considered, the Venetian for that part of dominion
that confineth upon the Turk, had never more cause to think himself better
secured from violence, especially having all Maritime Towns both by Sea and
Land gallantly fortified: which strength is also the greater, by the facility
the Sea affords to succor his own, and to distress his enemy.

Touching the King of Spain, The Spaniard.
upon whom they do border as well in the Adriatique as in Lombardie, it is now
more than threescore years that there has been any variance at all befallen
them. Neither in truth can it turn the Venetian to any great gain, to have
war with so powerful a King; nor the King of Spain to make war in Italy,
where by putting things in uprore and tumult, he might perhaps hazard some
part of his own. For that War (as Emanuel Duke of Savoy was wont to say)
has something of the nature of Dice, which no man knows how they will run.

I may say as much of the house of Austria, The Emperor.
Princes that do exceedingly cherish and affect quietness, wherewith they are
become great, and with the same means do maintain their greatness.

Of the Church it were alike superfluous to speak, for that neither Saint
Peter can make any excuse to make war upon Saint Mark, The Pope.
nor will Saint Mark seek to trouble Saint Peter unprovoked.

In sum, the Venetian has two maine advantages above all other Princes: The
one is, that they have a council that is immortal, the other, that the heart
of the State cannot be pierced unto by any enemy. And so conclude, that the
Pope and the Venetian at this time are more potent, and of greater antiquity in
Italy, than ever heretofore they have been; not only for that the Pope has a
more ample Territory, and that but little encumbered with petty Lordships; and
that the Venetian has his Dominion better fortified, and his Coffers fuller
than in times past: but also in regard that the States of Naples and Millan are
in the hands of a Prince, absent and far off, and therefore circumspect to
raise innovations.

Lombardie, anciently called Cisalpina, Lombardie.
extends from Panaco, unto Sesia, lying between the Apeniae and the Alps.
Marca Trivigiana, sometime called Venetia, lies between the Menzo and the Po.
Most commonly both Provinces pass under the name of Lombardy, because there
the Kings of the Longobards seated their dwellings, longer than in any other
place of Italy. Besides, the soil, the air, and the Inhabitants hold such
correspondencie, that they ought not to be distinguished. This is the richest
and civillest Province of Italy; For such another piece of ground, for
beautiful Cities, goodly Rivers, Fields, and Pastures, for plenty of Foul,
Fish, Grain, Wine, and Fruits, is not to be found again in all our Western
world; arising partly by the ease of Navigable Rivers, as Tesino, Adda, Oglio,
Menzo, Adige, and Po: partly by channe's cut out of those Rivers, and partly by
the great Lakes of Verbano, Lario, and Benaco. No less commod^ty arises by
the plains passable for Carts, Mules, and other carriage.

The greatness likewise of the Lords of Lombardie has bin a great furtherance
thereto. For while the Visconti reigned, this State maintained wars of great
importance against most puissant Princes. And for the Empirie hereof happened
those notable wars of our days, between the Emperor and the French King. And
no marvel, that two such puissant Potentates contended with so great effusion
of blood for this Dukedom: for though to many it should not seem great, yet
in very truth, for the wealth of the Country, and the quantity, it has been of
as great reputation as some Realms of Europe: some Dukes whereof have
possessed greater Territories enjoyed wealthier Revenues, and have been more
puissant in Wars, and more honorable in Peace, than diverse Princes, graced
with Kingly titles.

Milan.
Amongst the Cities of these Provinces (accounting Venice amongst the Islands)
Millan without controversy holds the precedencie. It is able to reckon upon
two hundred thousand persons, and has a large and populous Territory. A City
(says Guicciardine) most populous and rich in Citizens, plentiful in
Merchants and Artificers, proud in pompes, and sumptuous in ornaments for men
and women; naturally addicted to feastings and pleasure, and not only full of
rejoicing and solace, but also most happy in all other nature of contentment
for the life of man.

And however now the Spaniard one in the City, and another in the Castle,
overlooketh both City and Country, yet is the bravery of the place very little
abated: nor does the Nobleman shrink under the burden, but carries his load
lightly; however his inward groans are breathed, yet lifts he up a face of
cheerfulness, as if he drank wine, and fed on oil, according to the
properties of either: so good and bountiful is the Country.

The second City of Lombardie is Brescia, Brescia.
not for compass or multitude of people, for it is not able to make fifty
thousand men, but by reason of the large jurisdiction thereof, comprehending
therein many large Towns and populous Champians, therefore censured to be able
in all to levy 350000.men. Among the Towns subject thereto, Asalo and Salo
have the pre-eminence: amongst the Valleys, Valcamonia, being fifty miles in
length, and therewith populous, and full of Iron Mines. Bologna (if it please
you to account it in Lombardie) and Verona are alike populous: Bologna.
Verona is larger and of more beauty: Bologna more rich and commodious: as
well for that it has a larger Territory, ^ also for that there is no City that
does more absolutely enjoy her own commodities; and does more freely partake
of others, by the great resort of Courtiers, Clergymen, and Officers
dispersed through all the Ecclesiastike State. To which three things are much
availeable: the University, where all professions are practiced; their wealth,
which is equally divided; and lastly, their inclination and patience to take
pains, and do service.

Between Verona and Padoa there is no great difference in respect of circuit,
Verona.
but Verona has double the people. Whereof the Venetians to supply that
defect, do as much as they may grace their University, and the Scholars. As
in this Province the Cities are great and beautiful, so are the fortresses
many and impregnable. And whereas other Provinces have their places of strength
on their Frontiers, in this, the nearer you approach the center, the stronger
shall you see the Country planted and fortified.

The Dukedom of Vrbine.
THis State, touching the Apenine mountains on the South, and the Adriatike
Sea upon the North, is on the two other sides high hemb'd in with the dominions
of the Pope, whose Liege-man, or Feudatary the Duke hereof is, for several
bounties received from the Church. This State is threescore miles long, and
five and thirty broad, containing seven Cities, and two hundred Castles and
Villages. The land very good. His Revenue comes in two ways: First, from his
subjects, which (he being a gracious Lord) is not above an hundred thousand
ducats a year. But secondly, he much helps himself by the Sea, and especially
by his customs upon Wine and Corn exported; of which last there is a great
trade in his ports. Of this Revenue he issues but 2200. ducats a year by way
of tribute or acknowledgement to the Pope and the great Duke of Tuscanie, which
last, sometimes writes himself Duke of Vrbine also. Both these gape for the
Duchy, if the succession should fail: A pretty case lately happened thereupon.
It chanced that Guido Baldus Duke of Vrbine in his own life time resigning his
Estate to the son, and that son dying without issue before his father in
the year 1624. that both these pretenders being ready to seize upon it, and
yet (...) afraid of another; the old Duke was re-estated with both their
consents. The great Duke of Tuscanio has as it seems since released his
claim to the Pope, who now solely after the death of this old man looks for
it: but many think his nose will be wiped of it, for that the Archduke Leopold
(brother to this Emperor) has in the year 1626. married the daughter and
heir of this old Duke Guido: And this may happen to be the occasion of a
breach between the Pope and the house of Austria; especially of the Duchy
falls void in the life and height of this present Emperor, and that the
Spaniard and he get the better of it in the wars of Mantua.

Modena is an hereditary Dukedom, Modena.
full of riches and fashionable Gentry, after the best Italian manner, newly
allied to Mantua, and reasonably well fortified against his dangerous neighbor
in Millan, and inviteth you to the view of a very delicate Country.

The Duke dome of Mantua.
MAntua is a late Dukedom erected of an ancient Marquifate in the name of
Gonzaga. Mantua.
He lives in better fashion of Courtship, than the other Princes, with a Guard
of Switzers. The City is large, boasts of Virgils birth, and the delicate
streams of Po, over which for all the swiftness and largeness, a
gallerie-bridge transporteth both Coach, Cart, and Horse; under which are
preserved many Courtly Barges, both for magnificent shows and pleasure of the
water in Summer time, as also for the necessities of the Inhabitants thorowout
the year.

This State, abutting upon the East of Millane, has the Marquifate of
Moutferrat annexed unto it, and is now the field of war in Italy. Rich men
never want heirs; weak titles, rather than no titles, are made use of. Thus
comes the quarrel. The Town of Mantua was (as the rest of Italy) sometimes
belonging to the Empire: from which all going away, the famous Matilda laid
hold on this, which with the rest of her estate she bequeathed to the Church of
Rome. Under the Popes, the name of Poledroni bearing great sway, grew at last
too strong, and usurped from their Lord about four hundred years since; from
whom Gonzaga at last snatched it, who so well enlarged both the territory and
honor, that it grew to be a Marquifate, and some hundred and five years since
was it made a Dukedom by the Emperor Charles the fifth, about which time Duke
Frederike obtained the Marquifate of Montferrat also, and that by marriage of
Margarita. It so happened, that a younger son of this Family plants himself
in France; whole descendant, upon the late death of his cousin Ferdinand
Gonzaga, (who having been first a Cardinal before he came to be Duke of
Mantua, was unmaried, and thereupon died without issue) now puts in for the
Duchy as next of the blood. So that the Cardinall-Duke being dead without
issue, the Pope claims his share, and has it: The Emperor puts in for his
title, pretending the Estate escheated to him for want of issue. The heir in
the mean time hastens out of France, gets possession of Mantua, and of the
good will of the people also. The Emperor he calls in the King of Spain to
try his title by the sword, and if not to hinder or regaine possession, yet to
enforce him to demand investiture of the Emperor. The Duke craves aid of
France: the King himself leads an Army thither, which this present year
having passed the Alps, by the Duke of Savoyes stopping up the passage against
him, miscarries in Pledmont. The Savoyard is proved the Duke of Mantuaes enemy
for the Marquifate of Montferrat, which he pretends a triple title unto; all
which were adjudged weak and insufficient pleas by Charles the fifth, being
made Vmpire by both parties. But what he could not obtain by Law, he hopes in
the weakness of the new Duke, to do by power, striking in especially with the
Spaniard, with whom he is now made friends upon it; the Spaniard restoring some
Towns in Montferrat, which the Savoyard had seized upon in the last vacancie,
An. 161^. but had been taken from him again in the late wars with Spain.
So that the poor Dukedom of Mantua is like to be undone by four Pretenders;
The Heir, the Pope, the Emperor, and the Savoyard. The Spanish forces of
Millane are too near unto Mantua, and the Savoyards to Montferrat: These be
his neighbors, and enemies.

The Dukedom of Mantua is indifferent rich, and able to live of its own.
Seven good Cities it has, whereof Mantua is one of the strongest in Italy,
three sides being fortified with a wide River. Montferrat is larger than the
Duchy of Mantua, containing about threescore good walled Towns, three of
which be fair Cities. Both territories together contain as much land as the
great Duke of Tuscanie is master of: yet his yearly Revenues come not to much
above 500000 Ducats, for that he uses his subjects well, and wants the
commodity of the Seas. For his Forces, Italy has not better Horsemen, nor any
willinger to serve their Prince Diverse strong Towns he has, and all little
enough at this time.

The State of the Duke of Savoy.
THe State of this Duke lies in two Countries, in France where Savoy is seated,
and in Italy, where he possesses part of Piedmont. But what Nature and the
Alps have disjoined, Marriage and Wars have united. His Dominions in France
reach as far as Geneva, the County of Burgunde, Bresse, Provence and
Daulphine: on Germany side they touch upon the Switzers: and in Italy are they
bounded with Millane, Montferrat, and the State of Genoa. The length is three
hundred miles; the breadth an hundred and threescore; the compass nine
hundred. To begin with Savoy from whence the Prince has his Title: The fable
(I see) passes current, that these mountaine-passages being infested with
thieves, the Country was thereupon named Malvoy, which disorders being
reformed by a Nobleman, the Emperor rewarded him with the title of Duke, and
named the Country Saulvoy, that is, the Safe-way. But he that shall remember
that the Noticia of the Empire mentions the very name of Sabaudia, will know it
to be ancienter than the modern French tongue, from whence this fable derives
it. Savoy contains the Earldome of Geneva, the Marquifate of Susa the County
of Morienne: the Lordships of Tharentaise, Brengeois Faucignie, Chablais, and
Pays de Vaul; with three Bishoprics, whereof the Duke has the nomination It
contains four or five good Cities, whereof Chamberie is a Parliamentary
Town, and the Seat of the Duke on that side: Situate it is in a rich and
delicate Valley, full of Gentlemen's houses, and every way enclosed with high
mountains. The Valleys be fruitful enough, but the Mountains very
inhospitable, which is the occasion that there be but five hundred thousand
souls in all Savoy. Many and large Lakes it has, and those very well fisht.
Piedmont is much the pleasanter and the richer Country; though the common
people be poor enough, as scorning to work, and caring but to have from hand
to mouth. The chief Honor or Title that the Duke here has, is the Marquifate
of Saluzzes. The other part of Piedmont is taken up with Montferrat; but that
belongs to Mantua. Though in all Piedmont there be reckoned one Duchy (of
Aosta,) Marquisates fifteen, Earldomes fifty, besides Baronies many: but these
(alas) be but petty ones; such as have but Fiefs, being but Gentlemen holding
Fees or Manors of the Dukes favor: of which one writes, that singly they are
not very rich; though all together they make a great noise. Three Counties are
reckoned in it; and in them seven good Cities, besides an hundred and fifty
walled Towns. Whereupon a Gentleman of that Nation boasted, that his Country
was an entire City of three hundred miles compass. Piedmont is said no
nourish seven hundred thousand souls; whereof the lesser half may be reckoned
within this Dukes Dominions: so that he may have some eight or nine hundred
thousand subjects in the whole number. The Dukes chief City here is Turin,
honored now with an University: A strong place, but made less than it was,
when the French were Masters of it, that it might be the more defensible.
Saluzzes is a Bishops See also.

The first Founder of this Noble Family, was Beroaldus of Saxony, brother to
Otho the third, Emperor; who flying hither for killing that brothers wife,
taken in the act of Adultery, was first made General to the Duke of Burgundy;
for whom he conquered Maurienne on Italy side; which Lands the Duke giving to
him, he became Lord of Maurienne: His son was first made Count or Earl of
Maurienne; who marrying the daughter and heir of the Marquess of Susa, joined
both those Titles together. His grandchild enlarged his Dominion by the
conquest of some of the neighbor Valleys: and his son Amadeus was for
service done to the Emperor, Henry the fifth, made Earl of Savoy. His
grandchild Humbert, marrying the Count of Geneva's daughter, made his father
in Law to submit, and acknowledge obedience unto him. This Prince also upon the
sailing of the heirs of the Princes of Piedmont; ^^ts in for himself,
conquers diverse places, and takes Piedmont into his title also. His son gains
further upon his neighbors. His grandchild Peter winnes the City of Turine,
and gets confirmations of Richard Duke of Cornwall (his kirsman, and then
Emperor) in those Valleys conquered by himself and his grandfather. His
son Philip marrying the heir of Burgundy, was in her right made Earl of
Burgundy and Savoy. His brothers son, Amadeus the fourth, gained the
Country of Bresse by marriage also. His son Edward was made a Prince of the
Empire, and his son Amadeus wanne something from the Count of Geneva: To whose
son Amadeus the sixth, part of Piedmont veelded itself. He instituted the
Order of Knighthood of the Annanciada. To his son Amadeus the seventh, did
the Country called Nizza en Provenza freely yield. To honor his son Amadeus
the eighth, did the Emperor Sigismund advance Savoy to the title of a
Dukedom: Him did the Council of Basile choose to be Pope; which he afterward
quit, to compound the schism. His son Lewis was in his fathers lifetime
first called Prince of Piedmont; which is ever since the title of the heir
apparrant: he also obtained to be called Earl of Geneva Charles the first made
the Marquess of Saluzzes to perform homage.

Finally, this present Duke of Savoy, Charles Emmanuel, first got that
Marquisate of Saluzzes entirely into his hands which Henry the fourth of France
wrung from him, and made him release the County of Bresse to have Saluzzes
again. And thus by degrees and years came this Family to these possessions.
Besides all which, he makes title and claim to the Marquisate of Montferrat,
the Earldome of Geneva, the Principality of Achaia in Greece, and the kingdom
of Cyprus.

His ordinary Revenues are thus collected: His customs upon Salt fifty
thousand crowns; from Susa four and twenty thousand; foreign Merchandise
eighteen thousand; from Villa Franca, etc. five and twenty thousand; Ancient
Rents, etc. threescore and ten thousand: The ordinary tax of Piedmont two
hundred threescore and three thousand; from confiscations, condemned persons,
commutations of punishments, and of the Jews, etc. fifty thousand. The total
is five hundred thousand French crowns. What his extraordinaries may amount
unto, cannot be known; but certain it is, that in a few years he raised
eleven millions of crowns out of Piedmont alone: So that we may well allow him
one million of yearly commings in, one with another: out of which these sums
are yearly issued upon certain expenses: Diet, wages, etc. of the Dukes own
Court, threescore thousand crowns: Allowed to the Duchess, twenty thousand:
The Duke of Nemeurs (his kinsman) pension, fourteen thousand: Standing wages
to Judges, Counselors, etc. on both sides the Alps, fourscore and ten
thousand: Upon Ambassadors, Intelligences, etc. sixteen thousand: Upon his
Guard, Pages, Messengers, etc. ten thousand: Given away in Pensions and
favors, twelve thousand: Expenses of pleasure, ten thousand: Charges of his
soldiery, ten thousand, and of his Galleys, two and twenty thousand. The
total is three hundred and eighty thousand French crowns. The rest goes into
the Treasury. But in this former account, the expenses upon building and
repairing of Forts is not reckoned, which must needs amount to a mass of
money; seeing that no Prince of Europe in so little ground (unless those of
the Low Countries perchance) has so many fortified places, and few stronger in
the world, either by Nature of Ar^: eight hundred Castles being reckoned in
Piedmont alone. Of Land-souldiers his muster-bookes shows him about twenty
thousand, often exercised by their Captains and Colonels; and three Galleys
for scowring of the Coast.

And now for the State and terms he stands in with other Princes his
neighbors; they be these. To the Papacy is his Family much beholding: the
Pope having made his second son Victor, a Cardinal: and his third son
Philibert, Admiral of the Galleys of the Church. A great dependancie has he
on the Pope besides: for whereas Cardinal Aldabrandino, Nephew to Clement the
eighth, has purchased Raiensa in Piedmont to the Duke: after whose decease
that rich Territory must fall to the Church, unless the Pope be pleased to
confirm it upon the Duke. With Spain both the Duke and his elde^^ son Philip
Emanuel, have very near alliance; A^ time there was, that the Spaniard
withheld his Pension from the Duke, and he again discharged his garrison of
Spaniards in Tur^ne, etc. but all being now piec't up between them, it
concerns Spain not to displease him; because he may stop up the passages by
which the Spanish forces might march out of Italy into Germany. Venice and he
are in a common league and correspondencie. Diverse States and persons of the
Switzers take pension of him: and the City of Geneva is in bodily fear of
him; so was Genoa in these late wars, and may be again. With other Princes
of Italy he is in good terms (except with Mantua:) it equally concerns them
all, to see that one another grow not too great, and especially to look to the
Spaniard. The only fear is from the French, who will be revenged for the
defeat of his Army. How able the French is to hurt him, was lately seen, when
Henry the fourth quickly overran all Savoy, and the second time enforced him to
release Bresse, for Saluzzes. Nor wants he pretenses, seeing King Francis the
first made nine years war in Piedmont; and (notwithstanding the Law Salicke)
claimed Savoy in the right of his mother; who was sister to Philibert, who died
without Issue. Upon which pretense, Charles Duke of Savoy was beaten of
Piedmont: unto which his son was not restored, but upon marriage of the said
King Francis daughter; of which marriage this present Duke Charles Emanuel
comes.

And here by the way let me add an observation, concerning the French playing
fast and loose with their Salick law, It is true indeed that Margaret, sole
daughter and child of Edward Duke of Savoy, was in the year 1329. put by the
Succession, being excluded by the Laws of the Empire, as mine Author notes.
Constantia, daughter of Duke Peter, was also put by it; the next heir male
both times succeeding: and yet notwithstanding these Examples, and that Law,
the French King claims the Dukedom. Will not they give the English leave to
do as much?

Sicilie.
THis is the chief Island of the Mediterranean Sea, and for the bigness the
most delicate of the whole world. For the abundance of Corn, it was called the
Granary of Italy; their store of Si^ke may be seen upon the back of every
Tradesmans wife; Wines and Honey most plentiful and delicious; add to these,
Sugar, Oil, Salt, and Saffron; yea, Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, (the
Emerald and Aggats) and what would ye desire more? if Fish and Foul, the Sea
and Rivers yield it them. Admirable were the (...) that the Ilanders might
attain unto, could they but make the best of their own, and work their
Silks, Sugars, and other commodities. This made it so populous of old, that
Pliny reckoned up threescore and twelve Cities, of which Syracusa alone was two
and twenty miles about; The Map and History shows it divided into three parts
or Governments: Mona, Noto, and Mazzaro; in all which be eight or nine Cities
and walled towns. It was of old times called Trima^ria; of the shape which is
like a long Triangle; and believed sometimes to have been firm land with
Italy, from whence it is not at this day above one mile and a^ half distant;
and from Greece and hundred forty and four. In process of time and variety of
fortunes, this little Island has successively been mastered by fifteen
several Nations. The thirteenth in order were the French: These being insolent
and hated, the Sicilians willingly received, and as quickly crowned Peter of
Arragon laying claim to it: whereupon the French Lord of it, Charles of
Province, for avoiding the effusion of Christian blood, challenges King Peter
to try their titles by a single combat; the place to be Bordeaux, and the Judge
our Edward the black Prince, the flower of Chivalry. Peter accepts the combat;
but in the mean time one John de Prochita shows him a safer way to his quiet.
The plot was this, a secret and sure-bound agreement with the Sicilians to
serve all the French upon the Island, as the English sometimes did the Danes, to
kill them all man hour: the common watchword was the tolling of the Bells to
Even-song; the feat was achieved Anno 1281. whence like our Hocking da^es for
the death of the Danes, they begun their proverb of The Sicilian Vespers.
Thus Arragon got it: in the right of which Crown the Spaniard holds it.

It is at this day governed by a Viceroy under the Spanish Council for Italy,
consisting of three Spaniards and three Italians, having for their President
the Constable of Castile; who by authority from the King, do create
Governors, Judges, and Commanders, etc. It yields to the Coffers of Spain
yearly six hundred thousand Ducats, but that drawn back again in rewards
and paiments.

It feeds and maintains about a million of souls; Number of Inhabitants.
and what force out of that proportion it is able to raise, may be conjectured
by that levy which Don Garzia of Toledo made, only out of the south angle of
the Island, at what time the Turk passed by it, to the invasion of Malia;
consisting of three thousand Horse, and ten thousand Foot.

For remonstrance of the populousnes of the ancient world, Modern Forces.
wonder you may, how this then-goodly Island, in the days of Dionysius the
elder (being but Lord of Syracusa and the adjoining territories) continually
maintained ten thousand footmen and as many horsemen for his guard, with
four hundred Galleys at Sea: of which, now in these times the whole Kingdom
affords but eight.

A people they are standing much upon their Honor, Nature of the people.
yet excessively given to idleness; talkative, busie-headed, quarrelsome,
jealous, and revengefull. Their commodities are exported by strangers; and
withal, the profit: themselves little traffiking abroad, and therefore
unexpert in the art of Navigation; selling their Sugars unextracted from the
Cane to the Venetians, and buy^ng it again from them after it is refined: The
Vpland sort so unhospitable to strangers, that without a sufficient guard there
is no traveling without assured destruction by robbery and murder.

The better sort (especially about Messana) live in all abundance and
delicacie, having more than enough of food, Sicil.
of fruits, and of excellent wines. They are Spanish in attire, and the meanest
Artificers wife is clothed in Silk; whereof infinite quantities proceed from
the wo^ne, a part whereof is wrought into rude stuffes for their own uses.
Eight thousand Bails are yearly made in the Island, and five thousand fetched
from thence at the Mart-time by the Galleys of Naples, Ostia, Ligorne, and
Genoa: their language is Italian, but corrupted with the Greek, French, and
Spanish.

The Garrison appointed for the security of the South part of the Island,
consists of two hundred Spaniards, Garrisons.
and three hundred horsemen of the Country adjoining, who ^^ive by turns and
nightly scour and guard that Coast. So on the North toward Calabria, Philip
the second erected a very strong Castle, and thrust into it a guard of natural
Spaniards.

The whole island nominateth seven Princes, four Dukes, thirteen Marquesses,
fourteen Earls, one Vicount, and eight and forty Barons: The chief and
ancientest of whom, rather of policy than free will, for the most part of their
lives attend in the Court of Spain: it has also three Archbishops, and nine
Bishops under them.

The Isles of Malta, or the Estate of the Knights of the Rhodes.
THis Island, being the same Melita where Saint Paul shook off the Viper, lies
in the Lybian Sea, just betwixt Tripolis in Barbary, and the South-East angle
of Sicilie; being distant from the former threescore leagues of Sea measure,
and separated from the latter threescore miles of Italy: the compass also
being threescore miles, and but threescore villages in the whole Island: So that
this Island goes much upon the number of threescore. Many masters has this also
had; first, the Phenicians, and then the Greeks; thirdly, the Moors of
Barbary: from them the Spaniard took it after their expulsion out of Spain.
Charles the fifth lastly gave it to the Knights of Saint John's of Jerusalem,
when the Turk had beaten them out of the Rhodes, Anno 1522. the length of it
is twenty miles, and the breadth twelve. The country people both in language
and attire much resemble their old Masters and Sires of Africa; their Arabic
Dialect being much corrupted with words crept in out of the several Countries
from whence their Knights do come: The women are handsome, and the men
jealous: The Citizens be altogether Frenchified: The whole number of
Inhabitants is about 20000. The weather is hot and the soil barren; as being
only a flat Rock with a pan of earth a foot or two thick. Trees has it few,
and Rivers none, watered only with fountains and rain water. All their Corn
is Barley; which and Olives, makes the best part of a Malteses dinner. Plenty
of Anice seed, Comine seed, and Honey they vent to Merchants: Here also grows
the perfectest Cotton Wool. The people are healthy, dying rather of age than
of diseases. The Religion Popish. Four Cities be upon the I Will, quartered under
the command of ten Captains; whereof Valetta is both the fairest and the
strongest, built 1565. and so named of Valetta the Grand Master, famous for his
valor against the Turks. Founded upon a rock it is, high mounted, wonderfully
fortified close to the Sea, and by land assaultable only at the South end.
Victualled continually it is for three years; new provision still supplying
the expense of the old, sent in from Sicily, and by reason of the heat of the
Country preserved under ground. This small City is neighbor to two others, La
Isula, and Saint Hermes, each distant but a musket shot from other; near to
the Haven, and on the East end, and North side of the Island: from which Malta
(the fourth City) is eight small miles separated. Two Forts more it has, Saint
Michael, and Saint Angelo: So that all together, this Island is thought the most
impregnable place of the world.

The Knights of Jerusalem (since called of the Rhodes) command all in all here,
no man daring to contradict. Of these there be five hundred continually
resident in the Island, and five hundred m^re (a thousand being their whole
number) dispersed in other Alberges or Hospitals in Europe. Of them at this day
there be seven seminaries; one of France in general, one of Auvergne, one of
Provence, one of Casrile, one of Germany, one of Arragon, and one of Italy;
the eighth of England was suppressed by Henry the eighth. These knights be all
Friars by profession; their Vow was to defend the Sepulcher of Christ; (...)
now it is to defend the Romish Religion and Countries against the Infidels. Of
every one of these there is a Grand Prior, having goodly houses and Seminaries
in diverse Countries, living in great plenty and reputation. Such an house of
theirs was that of Saint John's (commonly called Saint Ioanes) without
Smithfield. The builder of which house was Thomas Docwra, Prior then; whose
name lives in Esquires estate at Offley in Hartford shire, etc. A Knight of
this order was to prove himself a Gentleman for six descents: over the gate
therefore may you see that testified by so many Eschutcheons. There also is to
be seen their Vow and Title expressed in the Motto, Sarie Boro. The word Sarie
being accented with harsh aspirations, to brand the Saracens with a note of
wickedness. Both words with the figure of the cross between, signify thus
much, Defender of the Cross of Christ against the wicked Saracens. This is
written in the Saracen tongue, the language of Malta: which words expressing
their Vow and Title, is not much unlike to that of Raimund, the first Master of
their order; whose Motto was, The poor servant of Christ, and defender of the
Hospital of Jerusalem. And thus much by the way out of Docwra's pedigree, for
preserving of this antiquity.

Of these thousand Knights of the Rhodes, there be sixteen more eminent than
the rest, called Great-Crosses, for that the white cross upon their black
cloak (which is the cognizance of their order) they are privileged to wear
larger than the rest. Over all these there is one grand Master; for whose
election two are appointed out of each of the eight Nations (two supplying the
place of the English also) these sixteen make choice of a Knight, a Priest,
and a Frier-servant, and those three nominate one of the sixteen Great Crosses
to be Grand Master: for which place the foresaid Docwra was once in
competition. The style of this Master is, The illustrious and most reverent
Prince, my Lord Friar, great Master of the Hospital of Saint John's of
Jerusalem; Prince of Malta and Goza.

The Estate of the Grand Master arising out of the profits of the Island of
Malta ^tselfe, Revenues.
is valued at ten thousand ducats, besides what he has out of the I Will of Goza,
(which the ancients called Glacon, and Strabo, Gaudon;) lying but one mile to
the South-west of Malta, and twenty miles in compass. The rest of his Entrada
is made up out of fat Commendams of Ecclesiastical dignities in several
Countries, and of pensions from other Princes. He has an allowance out of the
public treasury, the tenth of all prizes by Sea; as also the whole (or the
chief part) of whatsoever estate any of the officers, belonging to his own
person, shall chance to leave behind them. The several Knights are very rich,
besides their temporal lands in several Countries, enjoying diverse Commendams
and pensions also; of which they are capable after five years of their
admission, and when they have made four martial expeditions. Their common
treasury is maintained by the gifts of Princes, by the admissions of novices
into their order, (each Knight paying an hundred and fifty crowns, and every
Frier-servant an hundred at his first entrance;) and lastly, by the deaths of
their brethren; for when any of the Fraternity dies, the whole order is heir,
excepting only of one fifth part.

These consist not so much in the number of the Knights, Forces by land.
(for they are but five hundred upon the Island at once, though the other five
hundred are to come in upon summons) as in their valor and resolution: the
whole Island may perchance make six or eight thousand men able to bear arms,
and Goza the third part of that number. The Ilanders are always well trained
for land-service: and how much they are able to do, was seen by their
repulsing the Turkish invasion. By Sea the religion maintains but only five
Galleys, and one ship, (by report, so stinted: By Sea.
) each galley carrying seventeene pieces of Ordnance, and four or five hundred
men. More than these wise men peradventure will imagine, that a barren and
small Island living for the most part upon the neighborhood of Sicily, can
hardly maintain. If more there are, they pertain to private men. Besides
which, certain Phaluccoes they have, (vessels they be twice so big as a
wherry, and rowed by five men) which they send out for scouts, and to discover
the booty. The expeditions which they make are little better than for booty,
either in the night time landing on the maine of Africa, and surprising some
villages, or scowring along the coast, and taking small and weak barks, out
of which they take the men and goods, and turn the hulke adrift with wind and
weather.

Lorraine.
THis was once a Kingdom of it self, containing all those Countries lying
betwixt the Rivers Rhine and Scheld, and the mountain Vogesus, wherein are
Brabant and Gelderland, Lutzenburg, Limburg, and the Bishopric of Liege.
These were at several times taken away from it; some given by the Emperors to
the younger families, and some to the Church. That which is now left to the
Duke was of his ancestor Lotharius, called by the Latins Lotharij regnum;
Bounded.
or as the Germans speak, Lotars-ricke: is bounded upon the East with Alsatia;
upon the South with Burgundy; toward the West with Champaigne, and toward
the North with the Forest of Arden. The length is four days journey, and the
breadth three. In it are many goodly Rivers, as the Meuse, Mosel, etc. And fine
Towns, as Nancie, where the Duke commonly resideth; Saint Nicholas, and five
others of good esteem upon the Frontier and Inland, whereof Pont Musson is an
University.

It yields Wine and Wheat sufficient for the provision of its own
Inhabitants, Fertility.
and affords Cattle, Horse, and River-fish in some good measure to the
defects of their neighbors.

In manners and fashion they resemble their neighbors, Manners.
the French and the Germans, both whose languages the most can speak. In
courtesy and civility they strive to imitate the French; in drinking, the
Germans. Yet not here the one so punctually as the French, nor the other so
inordinately as the Dutch. They are good soldiers, free of disposition, and
rather subtle than politic. The Duke of Lorraine is of the best and
ancientest blood of Europe; as descended from Charles the Great. He also
claims to be King of Jerusalem. And for such Courts as these petty Princes
maintain, you shall find therein many fine Gentlemen. His counsels are mostly
directed by the Jesuits, and his favorite Count de Boulla.

Surely his Riches cannot be great: Riches.
for of commodities nothing of value can be said to arise therein, save
certain works (or cups) of Cassidony-stone; some horses, linen cloth and
manufactures, and those vented into France and Germany. What to think of the
silver mines therein, I cannot show: Those that have estimated with the most,
have not related of above seven hundred and eight thousand crowns of yearly
Revenue ordinary; (viz.) five hundred thousand of rent and royalty, two
hundred thousand from the Salt-pans, and from the fishing of the Rivers and
Lakes two thousand pounds sterling. But others more probably, allow him twelve
hundred thousand crowns, which might be more, would he put his people to it.

Nancie is exceedingly well fortified after the modern fashion, and enlarged
of late by addition of a new Town, Forces.
and that also fortified. And in former ages, as it resisted the whole forces
of Charles the Great, Duke of Burgundy; so this people also (but united with
the Switzers) gave him three fatal overthrowes in the field. Of any great
Expeditions which they should particularly make of themselves, I never read;
Neighbors
neither that any of their Neighbors have much affrighted them. With the
Switzers and the House of France, they have always held good correspondencie
and Alliance: So that if the Archduke should quarrel with them on one side,
they have the Low-Countrimen their friends on the other. And as for the King of
Spaines neighborhood, (by reason of the proximity of the French Country of
Burgundy;) it may always be supposed, that in regard of the Alliances (before
spoken of) the one will be loath to prejudice the other, to neithers boast of
advantage. As for other petty Princes, they stand in as much need to take care
for their own preservations, as to invade another; for that in truth this
Prince exceeds most of them in means, forces, friends and circuit of
Territory.

This Principality gives titles of honor, first to the Duke of Bar; (which
is now united to the Dukes own Family:) to six Counts or Earls, and to seven
Lords or Barons.

Hungary.
HVngarie is a Noble Kingdom. I call it Noble, because whole volumes might be
writ; and yet extenuate the worth, but not relate the troubles thereof;
External, with the enemy of Christendom; Internal, by reason of confused
dissension. For sometime the glory of the Kingdom elateth them, sometime
private revenges divide them: sometime the Nobility does tyrannize over them,
and sometime the general cause exciteth compassion.

For the plenty wherewith it abounds of all things, both for use and
pleasure, it may be numbered amongst the most fertile Kingdoms of Europe. In it
are found fruits of as much variety and goodness, as in Italy: Corn
sufficient to sustain the Inhabitants; Wine to furnish their neighbors
(Poland, Silesia, Moravia, Bohemia:) Fish in such plenty, that strangers
borrow of their abundance from them, and out of Valachia, (before the loss of
Agria in 96.) were Beeves driven into Italy, and all parts of Germany, which
now find a present want in their former provision through the Turks stopping
of that passage.

The Hungarian Horse by nature are not improper for war, being courageous,
strong, hardy, and swift, but for want of management they fit no service but
travel, to which the Italian Hackney-men, and Almain Coach-men findethem
excellent.

Hungarland is divided by the River Danubius, (...) of Hungary.
into two parts: the one mountainous; and therefore called the upper
Hungarland, abounding in Gold, Silver and Copper-Ore; the other nether
Hungarland, plain, without hills, and called for the fertility thereof, the
Storehouse of Italy, and Germany. The Metropolitan City of that part of
Hungarland that obeys the Emperor, is Possonium or Presb^rgh, which the
Hungarians call Posonie; little, and not very beautiful, no more than are
Sirigonium, Cassovia, Ni^ria, Tervanio, or any other Cities of Hungarland: a
reason whereof may be, that the Gentlemen have their Houses in the Country,
and the Citizens are more studious to build for use, than for pomp.

In confineth toward the North with Poland and Moravia: Bounded.
on the East lies Transylvania and Valachia; on the South, Bulgaria, Servia,
Bosnia, Sclavonia, and Croatia: and toward the West it is joined to Stiria and
Austria; two thirds of it possessed by the Turk. The Inhabitants be of stature
and complexion not unlike the English, but in habit resembling the poor Irish;
in War strong, valiant, and patient; covetous above measure, yet having
rather desire than art to enrich themselves, permitting (of negligence) the
Germans to inherit in their Cities, and to Traffic their Merchandise; a cause
why none of them rise by their own industry to any great wealth. They never
combat amongst themselves, but revenge injuries with words, except upon
objection of cowardice, whereof the charged is never disburthened, until he
have proved himself in singular combat with a Turk. It has been an ancient
custom amongst them, that none should wear a feather but he who has killed
a Turk, to whom it was lawful to show the number of his slain Enemies, by
the number of feathers in his Cap. They punish Adultery and Fornication with
death: the Husband forcing his Wife, the Father his Daughter, and the Brother
his Sister to the place of Execution, The Sons inhabit equally after the
death of their fathers, occupying for the most part the possessions left them
in common. The Daughters have the value of the part of the Lands in money. They
are desirous of wars above measure, they admit no unprofitable man into their
Camp, but such as hold servants are served with men. They march in troops
both Horse and Foot, lodging apart, but not in that good order which is used by
the Germans, who distinguish both their Companies and Regiments into streets,
placing their baggage at their backs or flanks, according to necessity. They
go no round, neither in their Camps nor Towns, but in stead thereof one
Sentinel whoopeth to another, as in like case do the Turks. The Horsemen in
battle range themselves in files after the German order, as do also their
foot, placing all their shot on front. They give a furious charge, and the
Enemy broken fall presently to spoil, leaving to follow the execution for any
small booty: but being broken, they fly every man home without ever turning
head, lying in wait by the way for their enemies, whom they rob in their flight
counterfeiting for the more terror the clamor of the Tartars, from whom they
differ in the fashion of their Caps.

Government.
The Government in the times of the Kings of Hungary (which in these latter
ages were still elective) was administered partly by the great Officers of the
Spirituality, and of the Secular powers. The chief of the Spirituality was the
Archbishop of Strigonium, who was ever to be the Lord Keeper or Chancellor,
principal Secretary of Estate, and Primate of Hungaria. The other Archbishop
was he of Colozza: these two had fourteen Suffragan Bishops under them; all
now swallowed up by the Turk, except Sirigonium, Nitria, ^aver^ne, and ^^cia.
The chief Officer of the Secularitie is the Palatine of Hungaria, chosen by
the States and Lords of the Kingdom: his authority is mavelous large, both
in the Court of the King, the Courts of Justice in the ordinary Diets, and
especially in the vacancie of the Throne. The Kingdom of Hungaria is now
divided between three; First the Turk, who has the greater part, and is
Master of Buda it self, the chief City of the Kingdom. Secondly, Bethien
Gabor, who possesses most of the upper Hungary, lying betwixt Transylvania and
the River Tibiscus: and the third part is in possession of the Emperor, whose
son was lately chosen King of Hungaria.

For the due administration of Justice under the Secular, the ancient Lords
divided their Land into twenty Counties, appointing to every County a Baron for
Governor, with one and twenty Doctors of Law to be his Assistants, reserving
ever to themselves an Appeal for the redress of Injustice, and preventing of
extortion. Now since the Princes of Austria got the Crown, their tyranny so
yoketh the Peasants, that nothing may be done without the Lords leave.
Insomuch that these people living in the true condition of slavery, want
nothing but the name thereof. In the time of the ancient government, when the
Kings would alter any thing in the administration of the Commonweal,
undertake a foreign war, or conclude a peace, there assembled together at one
place three degrees of Subjects, Barons, Bishops, and Gentlemen: with consent
of the greater part whereof, the Kings had authority to confirm, abrogate, or
institute laws, to denounce war, to conclude peace, and to charge their Land
with impositions fit for their necessities.

This assembly is still in use, but the freedom thereof is altered, nothing
being at this day propounded to the assembled by the new Governors but a
contribution of money; to which demand at a day given, the Nobility give their
resolutions, which in the year 96. and 97. (when the Turkish Emperor
threatened to descend himself in person) was; That the Nobility would put
themselves in Campania with their Forces, and promised for their subjects (for
so they term their Peasants) that every Householder should send a man, and give
two Dollars of money for entertainment of Soldiers: but the Turkish Emperor
not coming in person, the Gentiles did not further bind themselves, than that
their subjects should pay every house one Dollar; with which money were to be
waged 20000. horse and foot, the half of which never appeared in field, there
being not at any time in arms under the three Generals of Teufeubach in upper
Hungarland, Forces at land.
of Palfeis upon the border of Danubius, and of Zerius in nether Hungarland
above nine thousand men: And at the battle of Keresture in 96. where were
assembled the greatest forces that could be made by the three Confederates,
Germany, Hungary, and Transylvania: the Combatants amounted not to above 51000.
(viz.) out of Hungarland arrived six thousand horse, and 10000. foot: out of
Transylvania six thousand horse, and 12000. foot: out of Germany nine thousand
five hundred horse and seven thousand foot. The Germans were so well appointed
(horse and foot) as for quantity of Arms and goodness of horse nothing could
be better devised; Of the foot, the third part were Pikes armed complete, the
rest were shot, whereof three parts were Muskets: the Horsemen were allarmed,
many of whose Curases were Musket-proofe: some of them carried five Pistols,
most four, all two. That which was indeed a want amongst them was, that three
parts were Servants, according to the German custom, many of whom took pay
for eight Horses. The Hungarish and Transilvanian foot were all naked, part of
whom carried Fire-lockes of two foot, and the residue Pikes of nine foot long,
either Arms of small or no use, either in offense or defense, whether in
Forts, Streights, or Campania. The Horsemen carried hollow Lances of twelve
foot long, which they brake by the help of a leather thong fastened to their
saddles: for the rest, they were armed according to their means, the rich with
Cura^es, the mean with Shirts, the poor with Sleeves of Male, and all with
Caskes, which kind of arming, as it makes them much defective in proof, so
are they of less worth for their horses, which (for their manner of riding,
bridles and sadd^^s) are more forceable to do execution upon victory, to make
excursions, and to discover, than they be either to give or to sustain a
charge.

forces by water.
Their forces by Water (or to speak more properly the Emperors) were much
impaired by the loss of Iaverin in 94. where of thirteen Galleys the Turks
took ten; that loss is not yet repaired, the Emperor not having at this time
above five Galleys: which at the siege of Strigonium, durst not make head
against three of the Turks which came to releeve the Town. There be moreover
ordinarily upon the Danubie sixteen small Barks, twelve foot broad, and fifty
foot long; these carry in the prow two pieces, a crogue three foot long, and
one pound bullet; they are rowed by soldiers with twenty Oars on a side,
having their half pikes standing by them, and their pieces hanging at their
backs.

The Captain governs the rudder, and the Lieutenant attends on the pieces.
These barks (for that which I have seen) are fitter for the skout and guard
of the Camp, when it marches or lodges by the waterside, than commodious for
fight.

The Hungarians presuming (more than reason) on their valor in Campania,
Fortification.
have ever neglected to fortify their frontiers: the last and best invented
means whereby small States preserve themselves from being overrun by the
great; which error being better looked unto by the Princes of Austria (who about
fifty years since obtained that Kingdom) have used some diligence in this
kind, yet with so small judgment, as that no Fortress in the Land can justly
be said to be strong, (except Rab) the rest being either only strong by
fight, as Tockay, Villak, Strigonium, Comora, Altemburgh, Papae, Canisia: or by
art, as Castlenovo and Novigrade; or neither by art nor sight, as Guents and
Edinburgh, (passages of importance in nether Hungarland) with almost infinite
others. Tockay, Altemburgh, Papa, and Canisia are governed by the Germans:
Novigrade, Castlenovo, Strigonium, and Komara, have Hungarish Governors, but
the greatest part of their Garrisons be Dutch, a device peradventure as well to
secure the Emperor of Hungarland, as to defend those places against the
Turkish inrodes, to which service the Hungarians are more proper, if they were
provided oflike Arms.

These Fortresses were well provided of all sorts of Munition, Artillery,
Powder, Bullets, Fire-workes, and Victuals, but not so well foreseen with
defendants, as is convenient against so mighty an Enemy as the Turk; there
being in the last recited fortress not above fifteen hundred men, and in some
not two hundred.

How abundant this Province is in victuals, Plenty.
I say no more than has been mentioned in the beginning of this Discourse;
that it is one of the most plentifulest Countries in Europe, furnishing the
Inhabitants with abundance, without borrowing of any neighbor Province. For as
for the Bread, Wine, and Oats which Austria ministers, that is only when the
Camp is lodged by the River Danubius; which Merchants transport thither,
rather for their gain, than that their Arms suffer any scarcity in want
thereof. Artillery is sent them from the Emperors Arsenall in Vienna,
themselves neither finding great pieces nor making small; which likewise they
have out of Germany, as also Powder and Shot; A note of their exceeding
negligence, having excellent Metals for this purpose, which they transport
unwrought into Germany.

The greatest fruit which the Emperor reapeth by the Crown of Hungarland,
Mines.
arises by the benefit of Mines which yield him yearly one million and a
half of Gilders, which comes clearly into his Treasury; the presidiarie
soldiers being all paid with the contribution money, as i^ also his Lieutenant
General 30000. Dollars yearly for his provision. The Emperor Maximilian the
second took into his hands the living of the Cathedral and Collegiat
Churches, giving to the Bishops and Canons small stipends; by which device he
gained yearly half a million of Gilders. The religious houses are almost all
abandoned for the fear the Monks and Friars have of the Turk, except those
of the Gray-Friers, to which order he is very favorable. The Villages likewise
are many, but some wholly desolate, the Peasants retiring themselves under the
Turk, where they live with less agrievance than under the Emperor. Their
livings are confiscate, which has much increased the yearly Revenue of that
Kingdom.

Now Hungarland being not in better terms to support it self against the
irresistible power of the Turk, Reasons why the Turk stands at a stay in
Hungary.
than appears in the premises; it may reasonably be demanded, what has been
the cause that the Turk in an hundred and fifty years space (about which time
he invaded that Country) has not made an absolute conquest thereof: For
having in this time not conquered above two third parts thereof, it is manifest
that he must be defective in the means before spoken of, wherewith Princes
augment their Greatness, (viz.) either in Treasure, Munition, Men, Arms, or
(that which is principal) in judgment to embrace or prosecute occasions. For
answer unto which, I say; first, that the Turkish Emperor has not only above
these four hundred years been superior to the Kings of Hungarland in
Treasure and Munition, but also to any other Prince in the world: so is he
likewise in number of his Captains and private Soldiers; but borrowing a
conjecture from the managing of his actions, it is manifest that his council
of war (schooled above in the barbarous service of Persia) has ever been
inferior to that of Christendom, as it is at this present. Secondly, the
Emperor has of late served himself in all his occasions of worthy
Chieftaines, as Count Charles Maunsfielt, the Marquess Sanseverino, Alexander
Malospina, Francisco de Monte, the Baron Swarzenburg, George Basta, Ferrant di
Rossi, etc. All which, either by their experience in their Netherlandish
wars, or diligence in History, or else pains in both, have long since
obtained the names of great Soldiers; which providence of late times used by
the Emperors, and heretofore by other Princes, has in part prevented the
Turks designs in the entireness of this Conquest. Another hindrance has
been the evil arming of the Turkish Soldiers, the greatest numbers whereof
are naked: And which is as great a defect, none of them carry Weapons of much
offense, except the Ianizars. who serve with Muskets of longer and bigger bore
than the Christians: To which number of Ianizars, being 2000. tripled, if
20000. Pikes complete were added, they would make an Army of greater
consequence for the Conquest of this Kingdom (which is secured by passages)
than does the multitude of Horses in which the Turk puts so great
confidence.

I must also confess, that the Turk in all his attempts against Hungary has
used irreproveable judgment, in making no inrode into that Country, but when
he had peace with his Neighbors, and the Christians at division amongst
themselves, atchieving by such providence infinite victory; So, if he had
prosecuted the least advantage with constancy and celerity, befitting the
occasions; the Conquest of Hungarland had been finished many years since. Of
all negligences in this kind, none has been of greater note than that of
Mahomet the third, superior in the battle of Kerestur in 96. by which
victory, not Hungary alone, but all Austria stood in great danger. For the
Christian Army being irrecoverably overthrown, and all the Towns
disfurnished both of defendants and Munition, there wanted nothing (in man's
judgment) to the gaining of that Kingdom, but the speedy prosecution of that
absolute victory.

But whether with the learned we may believe, that great Kingdoms have their
periods, or that Greatness in it self produces carelessness, whose true
symptoms are pride, effeminacy, and corruption in Military Discipline: most
certain it is, that those Empires which formerly have fallen from their prime
felicity, have generally declined through the Alteration of their ancient
Orders and pristinate virtues.

Nor can it otherwise be, but that as those Ordinances and Laws which reason
at first introduced, and experience afterward approved, do settle and fortify
States: so the manifest neglect of the same should make them weak again and
crazie.

Which being duly considered, a Prince ought not in any thing to be more
watchful and vigorous, than to keep in life those Laws by which his State at
first became to be exalted to that height, wherein he found it at the decease
of his Predecessor: for let him be assured, that the same are still, and shall
be the foundations and Basis of future prosperity.

Causes of greatness of Empires.
Herein the Ottomans have by two means especially advanced their power, and
have raised it to the height wherein we see it at this day. The one was their
personal presence and traveling to the wars; the other, theirmaking of great
wars, and fierce to effect, but short. Their perpetual expeditions produced
many profitable effects; as first, that it kept in awe and attendance the great
Servitors of the State: Secondly, that the Ianizars were thereby the better
inured to obedience, patience, and practice of their Arms with the discipline
of the field: Thirdly, it caused their whole forces entirely to attend them.

For better understanding whereof, it behooves to know how that the Port (or
Court) of the Great Turk, was anciently wont to make twelve thousand Ianizars
monthly paid, and that without fail. Now that number by occasion of the wars
of Hungary is much increased, and their pay raised to five Aspers a day; to
some, more in regard of desert.

Out of the number of these Ianizars are chosen two hundred, whose Office is to
run by the stirrup of the Prince, and three hundred Porters that receive
twenty Aspers a day above their ordinary stipend: The Cavalry arises to a
far greater number. The Spahi are six thousand, marshalled in two troops;
whereof the one guardeth the right hand of the Prince, the other the left in
all marches. Every one of these Spahi is bound to maintain three or four
servants on Horseback for the war: and these servants, either in valor or
costlinesse of furniture, do in little or nothing give place to their Lords.
Their place of march is in rear of their Masters, but in distinct troops.

Besides these troops do march two other squadrons, consisting of a thousand
horse apeece: The one is made of certain select and stalled persons, known
for some one or other famous exploit. Into which troop do also entersome
Ianizars, and many servants, as well belonging to the Prince himself, as to
other of his principal Ministers, that have approved themselves by some
notable endeavor, to be worthy and capable of that degree.

The other squadron is all of natural Turks, recommended to that honor, for
some superordinary skill at their weapon; for horsemanship, or some such like
quality.

The soldiers of these two troops are not tied to keep above two servants
mounted at the most. So that these four squadrons (whereof we have spoken) do
make in all as good as forty thousand horse, all excellently furnished.

Besides these, there are also near 20 thousand men that are servants and
attendants upon the supreme Officers of the State; as Judges, Treasurers,
Counselors, and Commanders. Amongst which, some there are that bring into the
field two or three thousand apeece; all well armed, and in like livery, being
indeed tied for every five Aspers, that they have of provision, to find one
horseman. So that what for pomp, and what for their own safety, in this
occasion they do set all their slaves being Renegadoes on horseback. What
shall I say of the infinite number of cariages of Mules and Camels accompanying
this Equipage? Of which sort Bajazet led into the field forty thousand, and
Selim in the enterprise of Egypt, one hundred and thirty thousand: This was
the ancient proportion. Now all these forces (whereof I have spoken) from the
Court do accompany the Prince, setting forward to the wars. But if his
Person move not, then do these also stay idle at home, where the Ianizars (for
their too much ease) do often fall into mutinies, and the great Bashaes busy
themselves about nothing, but to disgrace or overthrow one another through
envy and ambition. Which is well witnessed on the one side by the extreme
rancors and partialities that boil amongst them, and sometime breaks forth;
and on the other, by their immoderate affection and swelling into titular
dignities, which of necessity cannot be avoided; for that as trees which are
less fruitful do thrust forth most leaves and branches, to cover therewith
the defects of nature: So do men (in whose minds desert and virtue is wanting)
seek nothing so much as with outward vanity of apparel, and show of great
descent to shadow their inward imperfections. Through which abuse, it is not
possible to imagine unto what number the titularie Officers of that State are
augmented. The Bashawes which in the flourishing days of this Empire were only
two, one in Asia, the other in Europe, are now seven in Asia alone, (viz.) of
Natolia, Caramania, Amasia, Anadule, Damascus, and Cairo; who do suck from
the Prin^es Coffers no less than an hundred and thirty thousand ducats
yearly. And this is sprung from nothing else, but that upon opportunity of the
Princes keeping at home, the Ministers of the State, especially such as lie
farthest off, have by little and little presumed to usurp and arrogate to
themselves more power and authority than was anciently belonging unto them.
Besides which, the Prince by his personal intervention in all expeditions,
became by his experience better acquainted with the condition of his Armies,
made himself cunning in the causes that did envigour or corrupt his soldiers;
so that by cherishing of the one, and redressing of the other, the discipline
of the field was made more firm every day than other.

And in truth it can seem to no man less than a very miracle that in this
house of the Ottomans should follow a continual succession of twelve Princes
together, that have been all men of great action, and extreme Warriers. Causes
of declination.
But since the successors of Soliman have disused themselves from the field,
and to be personally absent from the Wars, it is wonderful again to see,
how much the power of that Empire is impaired.

The first that gave passage to this disorder was Soliman himself, who howbeit
he were a Prince of excellent courage and great sufficiency for State; and not
only did put his own person into many and hazardous attempts, but also did
leave his life in one of them (which was at the siege of Sigeth) yet did he
suffer his Son Selim, to lie shamefully rioting and consuming himself at
Court. By which custom once taken, he never after his fathers time would
abandon the City, but managed all his affairs abroad by his Captains and
Ministers.

The selfsame course held Amurath also, Selims son; Mahomet indeed his son
has not wanted to show both spirit and valor enough by his personal going
into Hungary, and forcing of Agria. But for all that, whether through the
indisposition of their own persons, or through the overdeepe rooting of
disorders grown in the Empire, he was neither able to recover the old
reputation of his predecessors, nor to reform the lost discipline of his
soldiers.

Besides, since those times men are now weighed by the abundance of their
fortunes, not of their virtues; who buying their greatness of the Prince, like
Merchants, must make their profit of the people: which violent humor in the
great Ones, has bred disobedience in the inferiors. So that the Princes
commandment is no more esteemed in any remote part, than it fitteth with the
profit of him to whom it comes. From hence have budded all these so great
inconveniences.

For the Ianizars lying idle, and having nothing to do, are swollen unto such
insolence, that they make every thing lawful for them (as it were) by
prescription, nor forbearing to sack and pillage the natural Towns of the
State, in stead of the enemies: yea, falling into further fury and
insurrection, they were (these few years passed) the causes that Amurath was
forced at their instance, to behead his best beloved Bassa, Hebraim. In which
mutiny they also fired above five thousand houses in Constantinople. And even
the last day almost, at the importunate request of the Spahi, he was saine to
behead his Capi Aga, who was the greatest personage for counsel, and the most
dear Servitor he had in Court. Albeit indeed his death was afterward
reasonably well revenged, with the heads of three of the principal of the said
seditious Spahi. And of late years they proceeded to such an height of
insolency, as to murder their Emperor himself, because he had a purpose to
change their Militia, to correct the laziness and cowardice of those Ianizars,
and to prove a Prince of activity.

And forasmuch as through the want of exercise of Arms, and employment of the
Ianizars, their valor also is much abated. For (contrary to their first
institution) the Ianizars are now married, have families and trades in
Constantinople, from which profit and pleasure the Emperors will scarce ever
again be able to draw then to any hazardous, long, or foreign expedition; they
will mutiny, and fire the Town rather: for recompense of such defaults, they
have been saine to increase their number from twelve, to twenty and nine
thousand. Which number also being not able to be made up of Christian
children, and the Azamoglam of Europe, they have been fame to supply it with
Asians and Mahumetans, contrary to the first and ancient ordinance of the
Ianizars.

Neither are less the inconveniences and mischiefs that do arise from
prolonging of wars; whereas by contrary usages, the Ottomans were wont to
reap two notable benefits. One was, that by leading a full force into the
field, whether they wanne any Town, or had the better of a field: they
evermore in the same instant oppressed their adversaries; and again on the
other side, by making speedy and short wars, they gave respit and leisure
unto the subjects of those parts where their Armies lay, to repair themselves
again: unto which subjects otherwise the neerenesse of the Ottoman Camp does
bring unrecoverable damage: for it is observed, that the Ottoman Prince never
does conquer so much of the enemies Country, but that he destroys more of his
own. Nor can they otherwise choose, having no peaceable or orderly way of
provision, but for want of necessaries they must make prey of all they can come
by.

And the reason is, that because the vast extent of that Empire, and the
distance of the frontier parts from the head, they are feign to march more upon
their own ground, than upon other men's. And they pass it not once, but twice:
first, in setting forth, and again in the retreit. Whereby the people, and
especially the husbandmen, being pilled and spoiled of their substance, are
consequently constrained to forsake their tenures, and to leave their land
unmanured.

Another benefit which they received by making great, but short wars, was,
that thereby they kept their own soldiers in continual practice and exercise
of war, without giving their enemy so much breath as to do the like. For as
soon as any one exploit was ended, their order was suddenly to bring the
adversary asleep by negotiating of some truce or peace; that done, as suddenly
they transferred the war upon another part and enemy, never giving time to
their own to lay down, or to their neighbors to take up their weapons. With
these practices they took from the Venetian Cyprus, and making peace with
them, they presently transferred the war into Afric, where they surprised
Goletta and Tunis: and that war being finished, Amurath himself without
intermission put himself into the expedition of Persia. And this course is
indeed in it self of so great consideration, that Lycurgus amongst the three
Laws only, which he left to the Spartan Commonwealth, left this for one:
first, that they should use no written Laws; secondly, that they should admit
of no other architecture, but of such as might be performed with an Axe and a
Saw; and lastly, that they should never fight twice together with one enemy.

In this point Philip the second amongst many other errors committed the
greatest oversight, in protracting the wars so many years in the
Low Countries. For by means thereof the people of Holland and Zeland (who in
former times had little or no experience in the wars) became one of the most
warlike and souldier-like Nations of Europe. So Amurath, contrary to the
custom of all his predecessors, made war in Persia that lasted twenty two
years or more. And albeit he took from the Persian at that time a good piece
of his State, yet do I not think, but that the loss thereby received did
more than counterpoise the gain, not so much by fight and fortune of the
field, as by length and tediousness of the journies; wherein, partly through
want and distress of victual, with other sinister accidents arising from the
quality of those Countries, he lost the flower and vigor of all his forces;
namely, above two hundred thousand horse, and five hundred thousand men:
leaving the Country besides so naked of Inhabitants, so poor and ruinous, that
in one Province alone (Armenia) Osman Basha was forced to destroy and set fire
on above two hundred thousand houses. Moreover, by occasion of so long a war,
not only the Persians, but the Georgians, and Arabians also, betook
themselves to the exercise of Arms, and therein attained to such ability, that
to this day they are ever and anon in tumult, and begin to recover some of
their losses. This was the true reason (as aforesaid) that induced Amurath and
his Counselors, distrusting the obedience of that people, (against the
Turkish custom) there to erect many Citadels, as at Chars, Nassivan, Lori,
Teflis, and at Tauris; whereinto they thrust great Garrisons: as namely, into
that of Tauris eight thousand. The predecessors of Amurath, who reposed the
maine reputation of their forces to consist in being Masters of the field, made
no account of these holds; maintaining this rule; That who is strong in the
field needs not the assistance of Holds, and who will maintain many
fortresses garrisoned, can never be very strong in Campania.

From these and such like oversights, have arisen all the corruptions whereof I
have spoken in this relation of the Turkish greatness. Whereby those Armies,
which were wont to amount to two hundred thousand fighting men and upward; and
their Navies accustomed to be of two hundred sail and more, are now brought
to a far less reckoning: They are now come to fifty thousand, the proportion
that Hebraim brought with him not many years since into Hungary: And to some
thirty six Galleys, or thereabouts, with which Cicola, Admiral of that Empire,
came of late into the Levant Seas.

By which diminutions it has fallen out, that a poor Prince of Transylvania
durst meet Sinan Bassa, and fight with him; and that the Vayvod of Valachia
durst also make him the like opposition.

So likewise I say, that this one Kingdom and one Commonwealth has done more
in abatement of the ambition, and checking the fortune of the Ottoman, than all
Christian States have done all together: For where all the rest of the Princes
bordering anciently upon them, were in short time devoured and spoiled of their
Estates; the Hungarian and the Venetian alone, have for the space of one
hundred and fifty years and more, maintained themselves. And though both the
one and the other have quitted unto the Ottoman some parts of their
Territories, yet have they well warded and retained the residue; So that to
speak truth, Christianity has at this day no other frontier upon the Turk
but what is theirs: which, how much it imports; no man can rightly judge, who
has not by experience made trial, how dreadful the Ottoman power is to all
those that dwell near it. And howbeit in these later years, the Hungarian
has had in his favor the continual supplies of Germany, and the Venetian
has been assisted by the association of the Pope and the Spaniard, yet it is
to be understood, that unless both those and these had had of their own a
sufficient body of war, the cold assistance of others would finally have
helped their sudden necessities.

The State of Bethlen Gabor in Transylvania, etc.
THis Country has Nature it self at one time both fortified and honored: for
the woods and Hercynian mountains do round about inviron it, gathering it
into the shape of a Crown. The length is two hundred twenty five miles
English, and the breadth two hundred. The Ancients made it a part of Dacia; but
the latter Writers from the lying of it beyond the woods, have called it
Transylvania. (...) name Sienburgen, or the new Latin name Sept^m ^a^^ra, it
has not from the seven Castles set to defend the Frontiers (as some mistake
it;) but from those seven Quarters or Camps, into which the old Hunnes at their
invasion divided their Army. Through these woods and mountains there be but
eleven Avenues or entrances out of other Countries into Transylvania. It Is
inhabited by three several Nations; the Siculi which be the ancientest, the
Hungarians, and the Saxons. The Religions publicly professed are three also:
The Arrian, the Romish, and the Reformed: and this last divided into the
Lutheran and Calvinisticall. The Popish has continued there of old. The Arrian
heresy was first brought in by Blandrata, Anno 1556. It chiefly infected the
Town of Clausenburg, where even at this day the Arrians have a populous
College and a free Church, though by the religious diligence of Bethlen Gabor
scarce one fourth part of the City be now infected with this poison. Both
Papists and Arrians profess in great freedom; for that the Prince at his
Inauguration is always sworn to defend them, As members politic of the
Kingdom. The Saxons use their own mother tongue, the rest speak the Hungarian.
The number of Seven is much observed in Transylvania: for by this number is the
whole Country variously divided. For first, both the Siculi and Saxons, and
each severally have divided their portions into seven Countries or Seats, the
Shire-towne (as it were) being head of the Villages about it; to which Towns
those of that division repair for matter of Justice. Secondly, there be seven
capital Towns, unto which the Villagers round about are to bring their Taxes
and Tributes; where being received by Auditors and under-Treasurers, it is
afterward returned into the grand Exchequer. Thirdly, over and above all these
is the whole land of Transylvania divided into seven larger Counties. First,
Coloszien, whose Metropolis or chief City is Clausenburg. Secondly, Szolnok,
whose chief Town is Dees. Thirdly, Dobocen-Landt. The fourth County has
Alba Iulia or Weisenburg for its chief, and that famous for the Residence and
Palace of the Prince. The fifth is named Thorden, from Thorda, its Metropolis.
The sixth is Keokeollea, which takes name from the River Keokeolleo, and gives
name to its chief Town Keokeolleovar. The seventh and last Town and County
is Hungad, which gave birth and name to the famous Family of Hungades. Seven
principal Cities it also has: First, Hermanstadt, the ancient Metropolis of
Transylvania. Secondly, Cronstat. Thirdly, Szas. Fourthly, Clausenburg.
Fifthly, Bestereze. Sixthly, Sespurg. And seventhly, Medroish, in the middle of
all the Country.

The whole Country is very fruitful in one commodity or other; Riches.
Corn, Beeves, Muttons and Fish, Gods plenty; all cheap beyond imagination:
a fat one being not worth above ten or twelve shillings English. So much Wine
they have in some places, that at Vintage time it may be bought for an English
farthing or halfe-peny a pint. Very rich it is also underground; as in
Salt Pits, Stone-quarries (whereof some be precious) and mines both of Gold and
Silver, Iron, Quicksilver, and other metals: So that nothing is wanting for
the life of man, either for nutriment or ornament; and (that which is part of a
wonder also) though there be no where more store of money, yet be there no
where meaner prizes for their commodities.

For proof of this, at the election of Bethlen Gabor, there were an hundred
measures of Wheat sold in Clausenburg Market, for one Rix Dollar: and few
Gentlemen there be, who yearly reap not ten, twenty or thirty stacks of Wheat
as big as houses, says mine Author: Their droves and flocks be answerable
also. This did Trajan express in his-Coine or Medaglia, which had the Image of
Ceres on the Reverse, with this Motto, Abundantia Daciae.

From the Riches of the Country comes in the Revenue of the Prince. Revenues.
This is raised first out of his own Crown Lands: the Tenants (it seems)
paying as in Scotland, so many Chaldron of victuals. So that one where or other
in the Country, the Princes yearly parts come to a thousand mowes or stacks of
wheat, four thousand Beeves, and as many Horses he has still running, and of
sheep about thirty thousand. His second way of Revenues is by his Tenths out
of the mines, etc. whereof Transylvania has three of Gold, two of Silver, with
Quicksilver among; three of Iron, some of Copper, Steel, and Antimony:
Lastly, out of eight Salt Pits something comes to him also. The third way
arises out of the yearly Tribute and ordinary impositions; besides his
extraordinary Subsidies in times of war. So that though we by reason of
distance and information cannot certainly value his Entrada, yet verily has it
never been read, that the Princes of Transylvania ever wanted either money or
victuals for their Armies, either in wars offensive or defensive.

The neighbors unto Transylvania be the Moldavians and Walachians, Neighbors.
all three Confederates: who in a leaguer war have not only resisted the Turks,
but freed their Countries of them; The Turk at this day being glad of a small
Tribute for an acknowledgement from them; knowing, that if he should oppress
them, the Emperor would be glad to take them into his protection. His other
neighbors be the Tartars and Russes; who being Boot-halers rather than
Soldiers, he keeps them out of his Country by fortifying upon the eleven
Gates or Passages. But the two neighbors most to be accounted of, are the
Turk and the Emperor; able friends, but too mighty enemies for the
Transilvanian: But this help he has against them both; that if one proves his
enemy, he puts himself under the protection of the other. Thus John Zepusio,
beaten by Ferdinand, was restored by the Arms of Solomon: and Sigismund of
Transylvania falling out with the Turks, committed himself to the Emperor
Rodulphus. Again, for these last thirty years, have three several Princes
of Transylvania thought it more ease and safety to incline themselves unto the
Turkish favor, than unto the Emperors.

The Forces that this Prince is able to raise, Forces.
^^y be some five and twenty or thirty thousand horse and foot; and so many he
may well lead out of the Country to a foreign Expedition; but the whole
strength of the Land for the resisting of a common Enemy, have been numbered
to amount unto ninety thousand fighting men; resolute soldiers, able bodies,
and still inured, at least to hear of the wars. But the maine strength of
Transylvania consists in the multitude of Forts and Castles, built not only
upon the eleven passages aforesaid, for the keeping out of the Invaders; but
aptly disposed in several places within Land also; as two namely at Alba
Iulia, lately erected by Bethlen Gabor, as very many other likewise have been
since the year 1614. that he came to the government: so that if he continues
but a few years, he will leave his Transylvania as well fortified as the
Low Countries. 18. or 20. principal pieces of strength are in the Princes
hand, all well garrisoned; the Country being bound to find the soldiers their
provisions. The Fort of Fogaras is one of the most impregnable places in the
whole world: and not much inferior unto that is the Ca^^le of Radnet where
sometimes Bethlen Gabor keeps his Court. I omit here the usual Guards of the
Prince: which though they be soldiers in time of war, yet are they but like
our Gentlemen pensioners, and my fellows of the Guard in time of peace.

Government.
The Government and Religion both are wonderfully much amended since the time
of the noble Bethlen Gabor. The people are grown more civil, and the Country
less Infested with Robbers. As for the Religion, Bethlen himself is a zealous
Calvinist, seldom going without a Latin Testament in his pocket. Churches are
so well repaired and served, that none wants an Universitie man for its
Minister: Bethlen still maintaining an hundred poor Scholars upon his own
charges in the Universities of Germany. Colleges he has built and endowed;
whereof that one of Clausenburg has thirty Fellowships: yearly Synodes and
disputations he appoints; himself setting on, encouraging and feasting the
Divines and Disputers. Thus reclaimes he the Heretics, for he usually calls it
a mark of Antichrist, By the sword to enforce the conscience.

The Estate of Gabriel Bethlen or Bethlen Gabor in Hungaria: which came to him
either by Election, or by Conquest achieved from the Emperor: With a brief
Relation or Chronicle of his Birth and fortunes.
Transylvania is (as the maps show) on the East confined by Hungaria: in the
description whereof we told you of 11. famous gates or Avenues, through which
the Passages lead out of one Country into another: Four of which lie betwixt
the possessions of this Prince in both kingdoms: and next to the first of them
on Hungaria side, are his Counties of Szolnok and Maramaros; this latter being
governed by Stephan Bethlen, brother unto Gabriel Bethlen: The chief Town is
Szighet. A rich Country it is, and watered with the famous Tibiscus, which in
this County has its fountain. Abutting upon the next Passage, is the most
plentiful Country called Szilagy; and is divided into two Counties, Crastno,
and the other Szolnok. Upon the ninth Passage, along the River Keoreo, lies the
most delicate Country Keoreos Videke, the chief Town whereof is Varad; whose
Castle endured a siege of three hundred thousand Turks, in the year 1598. who
yet rose without it. Which Fort has the famous Bethlen now re-edified from the
very foundation, fortified it alla moderna, and built most stately Palaces
about it. Adorned also it is with a College of five and thirty Fellows, an
hundred Scholars, a Master and a public Reader. It has two hot Baths like
wise. In this Country lies the County of Bihar, so named of Bihar its
Metropolis; and another County called Erm^lly^ke, whose head is Diosz^gh; and
the chief Forts, Somlgo and Sz^k^lhid. Upon the fourth Passage (which is the
eighth in order of those of Transylvania) lies the Country of Belenyes, the
head-Towne being of the same name also. This is the native soil of our famous
Gabriel Bethlen; who was here borne in a Manor house of his own, called
Iktar: hereabouts also is the Seat of Kornis, the Family of his mother. A
Country it is plentiful in Woods, Cattoll, Corn, Iron and Copper mines; and
on the South part it reaches unto the Castle of Illyem, the Inheritance of his
brother Stephan Bethlen: on another side touching upon the County of Torontali,
which is under the Turk; who has also incroached into a part of this
Country. Here be the two strong Castles, Ieneo, and Baiom; this latter is
built in the midst of a Lake, and is in the Maps falsely called Echyed. And
those be the Countries of Hungaria, which lying near to the Turk, and further
from the Emperor, did for their own safeguard, voluntarily at first put
themselves under the protection of Bethlen Gabor, whom with the Transilvanians
they also elected for their Prince.

And now follow those seven Counties which the same Prince has by the sword
and conquest taken from the German Emperor, which lie next in situation unto
those before mentioned. The first of these is that of Sz^atmar, lying nearer to
Transylvania, and touching both upon Maramaros and Szolnok aforesaid. The
chief Town gives name to the Shire; being a very strong one, and served by a
most plentiful Country about it. The next Country so conquered is Zabolczi:
whose Borough Town is Debrecen, situate in a large and most fertile level of
an hundred English miles long and broad, and adorned with a goodly College of
Students. This County from the Southern parts of Hungaria subject to the
Turks, reaches over the goodly River Tibiscus, fifty English miles right out,
ascending from the East to the South and West; in which parts be the towns and
villages of the warlike Hayduks, so famous in the Turkish History; a free
people they held themselves; all Gentlemen, in service of no Lord, but of their
Leaders in time of wars; and those are still of their own Nation, yet all
bound to serve in the Armies of the Prince of Transylvania. They live by their
own private Laws, and are most stiff for the Calvinist Religion.

Next come those Counties which lie in the midst of these aforenamed. The first
of which is Bereghez, whose Metropolis is Berekszas: and this is the driest and
barrennest Country of Hungaria. Here is the Fort of Echyed, so built in the
midst of Lakes and Bogs, that there is no approach to be made within four
miles of it, either by horse or foot but by one bridge only: This makes it
have the name of the strongest piece of all Bethlen Gabors Dominions (perhaps
of the whole world) and therefore chosen by him to keep the Crown of Hungaria
in, when he had it in his custody, Anno 1622.

All these three Countries aforesaid, conquered from the Emperor, together
with these former which belong unto him by Election, lie situated in the form
of a ragged Triangle, betwixt Transylvania and the River Tibiscus: the first
line whereof is made up by the County Maramaros, out of which Tibiscus flows
originally. The second line is either made by the River of Maros (Marusius)
which falls unto the Tibiscus near Iappa, a town of the Turks dominions:
although the better and evener line be made by the County Belenges. The third
line of this Triangle (toward the West) ends at the Castle of Tokai, under
whose walls the River Brodogh falls into the Tibiscus. From this Castle we
begin to account the other four conquered Counties, which lie on Hungaria
side, and in respect of Transylvania are beyond the Tibiscus. The first of
which lying beyond. Tibiscus and Brodogh is called Vgocz or Vngh (of a River of
that name) whose chief town is Vnghar: the second is Hommona, where the
Jesuits have a College.

This Country touches upon Poland. The second of these conquered Counties (a
member also of this latter) is called Zemlen, as its chief City also is. Its
second City is Saros Patak, where the Palatine or Earle-marcher of that part of
Hungaria, subject to Bethlen Gabor, usually keeps his residence. Ennoblished
it is besides with the greatest College belonging to the reformed Religion in
all those parts: wherein (namely) are fourscore Fellows, three hundred
Scholars, a Master and four Readers, all maintained by their own settled
Revenues like ours in England, and all planted in a dainty air, a rich and
most delicate Country. The third conquered County is Porsod, whose Metropolis
is Tokay aforesaid; which with its Fort and Castle was in consideration of
60000. pounds rendered by the Emperor unto Bethlen Gabor in the year 1628.
August the 10. which its new Lord has since re-edified. This town is
overlookt by that which they call The golden Mountain, three English miles in
height, and seven in compass, which bears a wine of a more delicate and rich
race than the Canaries, and inestimable plenty too, here and all abouts the
Country. This Country confronts upon the Turkish Territories; and beyond
Rudabaneya in the west parts begins the dominion of the Emperor. The fourth of
these Counties of his beyond Tibiscus, and the utmost bounds of his conquests,
is called Abavyvar; whose Metropolis is Cassovia, the fairest and richest of
all those parts, and newly walled and fortified by the Conqueror. Inhabited it
is by the Hungarian and German Nations, both of which here have their several
Churches. Here likewise is a College, as there also be at Geonez and Sepsi,
two neighbor Cities. Here also is the Bishopric of Lelesz, which being
popish, was upon request delivered up unto the Emperors disposing in that late
treaty of Pacification.

And these be the goodly dominions of Bethlen Gabor in Hungaria; which on the
East are bounded with Transylvania, on the West with the Turkish parts of
Hungaria, on the North with Poland, and on the South with the Counties of
Heves, Torn, and Genevar, etc. all subject to the Emperor. As for his two
Dukedomes of Oppelen and Ratibor in Silesia, they being far distant and
chargeable to hold, he made a fair surrender of them into the Emperors hands
in that treaty of Peace concluded betwixt them, Anno 1624.

What Revenues and Certainties may be raised from hence, is not to be ghessed
at in these troublesome times; in which seasons quiet possession is to be
accounted the chief part of the Revenues, seeing the subject is then rather to
be releeved than oppressed. The Forces which he is able to raise from hence
with his own pay and money must needs be very great, seeing that with them he
has not only defended himself, and gained upon the Emperor, but so far
pressed upon him as to set so many towns on fire in Austria it self; that by
the light of those Bonefires the Emperor might read a Letter in his own
Bedchamber in Vienna. Bethlen Gabor finally, both for his valor and fortune
is more dreaded by the Emperor than any other Christian King or Potentate of
Europe. And now for that this Prince has so arrested the incroching greatness
of the Emperor Ferdinand in those parts, that he may well be called, The
scourge of the house of Austria: he is therefore most mortally hated by all the
Papists of Christendom, who are sottishly addicted unto that Family. Hence
those scorns and slanders of him, that he was basely borne, that he was a
Turk in Religion, yea Circumcised, and an hundred other Jesuitical knaveries.
And for that he has not still been ready to do as we would have him in
England, since these unfortunate wars of Bohemia, even we good Protestants
have thought that he has hitherto done nothing. To rehearse therefore what
he is, and how his time and Arms have been employed, may against these
calumnies serve for a real Apology.

This Gabriel Bethlen (whom we call Bethlen Gabor) now writing himself Prince
of the Sacred Roman Empire, Lord of some part of Hungaria, Duke of Oppelen and
Ratibor, etc. was about the year 1580. borne of an ancient Nobility; in his
own inheritance of Iktar aforesaid. His Fathers name was the Lord Wolfgang
Bethlen; his Mother was descended also of the house of Kornis, a Noble and an
Ancient Sept or Tribe of the Sicali, which be the eldest Inhabitants of
Transylvania. His childhood was rather addicted to Arms than to Letters; and
his Tutor had much ado in keeping him from his delight of riding the great
horses, etc. But coming to more maturity and discretion, he so well redeemed
his time lost at school, that he attained to so much perfection in the Latin
tongue, as he was able extempore to answer the Emperors Ambassadors Oration
in that language, Anno 1622. Being afterward brought up in the Court of
Stephan Bathori, Prince of Transylvania, (whose house in those days was a very
school of military knowledge and exercises) he so approved himself to that
judicious Prince, as he first of all made him a Captain; and to be brief, he
was by the next Prince Stephan Boczkai made General of his Armies. This
honor, and his fortunate management of it, obtained him a wife of the noble
Family of the Caroli, by whom he had diverse children, though now all deceased.
Prince Boczkai dying, the next Prince Gabriel Bathori continued him likewise in
his military honor aforesaid, swearing him also of his Privy Council. But
this double greatness made him envied of the Nobility; and this following
occasion rendered him hateful to the Prince. It fortuned that in the year
1611. this Gabriel Bathori most unjustly bereaved the Saxon Nation of their
chief City of Hermansradt: whereupon complaint is made to the great Turk
abroad, and at home that Nation makes choice of the favor and greatness of
Bethlen Gabor to be their mediator to the Prince: Youthful Bathori hereupon
suspects him to be too popular, offers him both ill language and blows to
boot. Bethlen avoiding the Court escapes to Buda, and from thence to
Constantinople, where he was feign to stay two whole years. Means being made
in the mean time for the Saxons, they obtain an Army of the Turk, and
request him to appoint Bethlen Gabor for his and their General. Thus in
October 1613. is he called back to redress the wrongs offered by a hated
Prince, and to releeve the miseries of his own Country. So welcome he proves
and so successful, that the States and Chiefes, both of the Saxons and the
Siculi, run amain to Clausenburgh; in the chief Temple whereof they for three
days together hold a great Council about the deposing of their Prince.
Whereupon Bathori making show freely to relinquish that which he could not
hold, did with a loud voice (in the hearing of our Author then 15. years old,
and a studient in the Town) grant a free election; for himself professing in
these very words; That whatsoever Prince this Kingdom of Transylvania shall
make choice of, I (says he) am ready also to acknowledge for my Prince, upon
condition, that he exercises no tyranny upon the three Nations of the Siculi,
Saxons, and Hungarians. Upon this resignation is Gabriel Be^hlen elected and
sworn Prince of Transylvania. Gabriel Bathori (a Prince neither lawfully
elected, nor lawfully governing) retires himself to his Castle of Varadmum:
where he is shortly and treacherously murdered by his own servants; for which
they are executed by Bethlen Gabor the year following.

He being thus settled, first of all sets upon the reparations of the Castles
and Forts of his Country; re-edifies and inlarges Varadinum, lately dismantled
by the Turks. Thus spends he his two first years, 1614. and 1615. The next
year the Turk comes down against Poland with 410000. men, and the Polander
meets him with 250000. Gabriel foreknowing, that whosoever gained the victory
might afterward turn his Arms upon him; goes with 25000. men into the
neighbor Moldavia, where the other two Armies lay encamped: with this handful
of men he passes the River Nester, puts himself betwixt both Armies, mediates
a peace, effects it, is stormed at by the Turks, and much thanked by the
Polander; but ill requited afterward, when in the year 1620. Bethlen was
engaged in his wars with the Emperor. Returning home, he the same year
1616. (being his third) founds a College at Alba Iulia takes order for solemn
and frequent disputations against the Arrian; and Papists, converts many of the
first sort. The next two (...) ^e revi^es and betters the execution of good
laws; reduces Justice and Civility; and though the wars were (...) and the
Reformed Religion much afflicted in German^, (...), etc. yet he intends his
own Government, and intermeddles (...): but intercepting at length some
intelligence of the public design^ of the Princes leaguers of the Romis^
Religion, (which was utterly to root out the Reformed) and perceiving the
Jesuits and others more busy and pragmaticall at home; and that the Emperors
Army pretended to be sent against the Turks, was now upon its march, and very
suspiciously advanced as far as the frontiers of his Transylvania; he thinks
it time to take the alarm; he arms, and with a small company draws near to
observe the motions of the Imperialists; stands still upon the defensive, and
does no more. Not long after is his aid solicited by the Ambassadors of
Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia, his confederates, miserably troubled by the
Emperor for Religion: For them he first peaceably mediates to Caesar, and being
neglected he in the year 1620. leads out his Army, if not to releeve them,
yet to countenance their cause, and to draw the Emperor to more moderate
conditions. In their quarrel and Religions, he takes Presburg from the
Imperialists, October 13. 1620. Next year he passes the Danubie, and to be
short, is fairly elected King of Hungary; and though he had the Imperial
Crown of Hungary in his own hands, yet refused he to be crowned with it.
This temper of his preserved him; for besides the treachery of his own Popish
subjects, he had heard a suspicious word let fall by the Emperor of the Turks
to this purpose; Now (says he) that Bethlen Gabor is King of Hungary, he must
needs in the next place affect our Buda (the ancient royal City) to reign
in. This word made him fear the Turks, and fo^beare his own Coronation, only
carrying the Crown away with him. Thus ended the year 1621. The next year
the Emperor remanding the Crown, Bethlen assembles a Parliament at Cassaw,
where the Popish patty prevails; the Crown is sent back; the title of King
is laid down; in lie^ of which he receives these conditions from the Emperor:
First, he is acknowledged a sovereign and independent Prince: Secondly, he is
made a Prince of the Empire; and thirdly, are the two Dukedomes of Oppelen and
Ratibor in Silesia estated upon him. This year his wife Susanna Katherina
leaves him a widower; and the rest is spent in Embasi^es and Treaties with the
Emperor. The next year 1623. was passed over in peace; the Emperor sends him
a diamond ring; which some conjectured was meant for a wedding ring, and that
the Emperor was desirous to allie him to his house of Austria. Ann. 1624. was
quiet and peaceable. Anno 1625. he by his Ambassadors wooes the Lady
Katherine, sister to the Elector of Brandenburgh; whom in February 1626. he
solemnly espouses in Cassovia: and is so potent and happy, that July 16.
following, he procures her to be elected Princess of Transylvania after him,
(in case she survived him) and his own brother Stephan Bethlen to be Regent
under her. This year there happened some more bust^ng against the Emperor; but
a peace quickly concludes it. The next year 1627. the Turkish Sultan honors
of Bethlens Princess with a solemn Embassy, to her principally directed;
sends her a Scepter; requires her name also (as an absolute Princess which one
day might be) to be put into the treaty of a perpetual league. The year 162^.
he had peace on every side, which continued the next year also. When October
21. he solemnly buries his Predecessor Gabriel Bathori aforesaid. Finally, this
year 1629. for thinkfulnesse to God, and the good of his Church and Country,
he erects an University at Alba Iulia, which crowns and blesses all the fame
of his former actions. He has this Summer been dangerously sick; but we have
heard news of his safe recovery.

And thus ends the Chronicle of Bethlen Gabor the famous; a man much talk^ of,
but little known. Let this at last be answered to his Traducers: that he must
needs be a brave fellow, who was favored and preferred by so many Princes;
that from a private fortune should upon his own deserts be advanced by his
Nation to he chair of sovereignty: that was able to gain so much upon the
Emperor; to succor his friends, and compose a quarrel between two such
potent enemies: that is in his own person so dexterous both at Arts and Arms:
that desires so much the good of his Country, as to fortify all the passages;
to adorn it with Palaces, Churches, Colleges, and Universities: that takes the
right course to advance Religion; to encourage, countenance, and promote
learning, and to do that in beating down heresy by the Word, which the laws
of his Nation forbid him to do by the Sword: that has quickened Justice and
good manners; is beloved of his loyal subjects, and feared by the disloyal:
that being so dangerously situated has the spirit and skill to defend his
little Country from the power of the house of Ottoman, the ambition of the
house of Austria, the might of the Pole, and the barbarous inroads of the
Russes and Tartarians: that finally maintains his subjects in abundance of
safety, and abundance of plenty: and though perchance hated, yet feared, and
highly honored by his greatest enemy, the Emperor.

The most of this description of Bethlen Gabor and his dominions, we owe unto
Master Petrus. Eusenius Maxai, a Transilvanian borne, and servant to the
illustrious Prince aforesaid.

Poland.
THis Kingdom (inhabited of old by the Sarmatians) was never so spacious as at
this day, the great Dukedomes of Lituania and Livonia being joined thereto. It
stretched from the floods, Notes and Orba (which divide it from Marchia) and
Odera) which separateth it from Silisia) to Beresay and Boristhenes, which two
parts it from Moscovia. It reaches from the Baltike Sea, to the River
Niester, which divides it from Moldavia, and to the Mountains Carpathie, which
separate it from Hungary. By this limitation from the borders of Silesia, to
the Frontiers of Moscovia, (between the West part and the East) it contains
an hundred and twenty German miles, and from the uttermost bounds of Livonia,
to the borders of Hungary, not much less. So allowing the form thereof to be
round, it is far larger than a man would take it to be, as taking up six and
twenty hundred miles in compass. It contains many and goodly large
Provinces, as Polonia the great, and the less, Mazovia, Podolia, Podlassia,
Samogithia, Prussia, Russia, Volinia, Livonia, and Lituania. Among these
Provinces, Poland was the proper inhabitation of the Polonians: but Pruse, part
of Pomeran, Podolia, Volonia, Mazovia, and Livonia have been obtained and
gained by Arms, as were the Dukedomes of Oswitz and Zator in Silesia also.
Lituania and Samogithia, (Provinces of Russia) were the inheritance of the
House of Iagello. For in the year 1380. Iagello then Duke of Lituania, took
unto wife the Princess Hedwiga, the last of the blood Royal of Polonia, and
was then installed King on three conditions: the first, that he should become a
Christian; secondly, that he should cause his people to do the like; and
thirdly, that he should for ever unite his principalities to Poland. The two
former conditions were presently performed; but the latter not till within
these few years: For the Kings of Poland standing upon election, Iagello was
loath to trust his own patrimony upon the uncertain voices of the people; who
if they should choose a stranger, then should his posterity not only lose the
Kingdom of Polonia, but their paternall Dukedom of Lituania also. And this
deferred the union all the time of Iagello and his descendants; but the race
failing in Sigismund Augustus; and the Lituanians on the other side, fearing
the force of the Moscovite, they agreed to union and election. In times past
Livonia was the fear of the Dutch Knights, and they had therein their chief
Governor, whom they termed the Great Master: But in the year 1558. being
spoiled of the greatest part of their territory by the great Duke of Moscovie,
they fled to Sigismund King of Poland, who took them into his protection, and
until the reign of K. Stephen 1582. the Province was never regained.

For the most part Poland is a plain Country, and but for certain mountains
(rather hills than mountains) situated in the lesser Poland, dividing it from
Prusland, all the residue of the Country stretches it self into most ample
plains, wherein are very many woods, especially in Lituania. The greater and
lesser Poland are better inhabited than any other Province of the Kingdom. The
like may be almost spoken of Russia, for the neerenesse of the Sea, concourse
to the Havens, and commodiousnesse of the Rivers. Prussia and Livonia have
fairer Cities, good lier buildings, and by traffike and concourse of Merchants
greater plenty of riches. For when the Dutch Knights were Lords of the Country,
they builded Cities like those of Germany, and all along the Seacoast (for
the space of fourscore miles) many Castles and pieces of good esteem. They
have many fair Havens of good worth, and are Lords of all the traffike
between Poland and the Baltike Sea; which is a thing of great value and
consequence. For the River Vistula arising in the extremest bounds of Silesia,
waters all Poland the less, and part of the Greater, Mazovia and Prussia,
and then it falls into the Baltike Sea below Danske, whither it transporteth
the greatest quantity of Rye, Corn, Honey, and Wax of the whole Kingdom, a
journey of four hundred miles. From another coast the most famous River Duina,
arising out of the Lake Ruthenigo, and parting Livonia into equal portions,
falls into the Sea about Riga, a City of great concourse. There are in
Prussia and Livonia many Lakes, amongst which one is called the New-Sea, 100
miles long: in Livonia is a Lake called Beybas, more than 400. miles long: from
thence spring the Rivers, which, running by Pernovia and Nar^e. make two
notable Havens for traffike. Between these two Cities stands Rivalia, giving
place to neither in beauty: Samogithia is more rude and barbarous than the
other Provinces, and Podalia more barren: which is not to be attributed to the
nature of the soil (for it is plentiful of those Commodities which the
climate, under which it lies, can afford) but to the cruelty of the Tartars,
which so vex it with continual inrodes, that the Inhabitants are driven either
to fly for fear, or to be led away captives by these barbarous people.

The riches of Poland are the abundance of Corn, and all sorts of grain,
which grow there in such plentiful sort, Riches.
that in it self it never suffered want, but evermore, as in the year 1590.
and 1591, it releeved not only the bordering Nations, oppressed with famine
and scarcity, but also yielded some portion of releese to the wants of Genoa,
Tuscanie, and Rome. It flows with Honey and Wax: And whereas in all these
Northerly Nations of Poland, Lituania, Russia, Muscovia there are no Wines
growing, in stead thereof Nature has bestowed upon them incredible quantities
of Honey, whereof these people do brew an excellent kind of Beverage. The
Bees make Honey either in Woods, where they find the trees made hollow by
rottenness or man's industry, or in Hives set in open field by the Country
people, or in holes of the earth, or in any place where they can find never so
small a liking.

It abounds with Flax, Hemp, with Sheep, with Cattle tell and with Horses.
Amongst the beasts of the wood are sound wild Oxen, wild Horses, and the
Buste, which cannot live out of the Wood of Nazovia: The riches of the land
consist in the Salt Pits of Bozena and Velisca, in the territory of Cracovia.

The Revenues of the Kingdom (for the most part) are equally divided between
the Noblemen and he Gentlemen: Revenues.
for no man is left so rich by inheritance, that he may exceed others above
measure; and the greatest Revenue of all exceeds not five and twenty thousand
Ducats: Only the Dukes of Curland and Regimount exceed this mean. For
although they are feodaries of the Kingdom, and acknowledge the King as their
superior, yet are they not as lively members of the State: they come not to
the Diets of the Kingdom, they have not their voices in the election of the
Prince, neither are they accounted as natural Lords of the Kingdom, but for
strangers (as in truth they are:) the Duke of Curland being of the house of
Ketlert, and the Duke of Regimount, of the family of Brandenburge.

All Prussia did belong to the Dutch Knights, who had their Great Master
resident there, but he not being able to withstand the force of the Polonians,
yielded himself feodarie to King Casimere. Afterward, when Albert of
Brandenburge their Great Master became a Protestant, he was created Duke of
Prussia, and the Country was divided into two parts; the one regal, mediately
holden of the Crown; the other Ducall, allotted to Albert and his successors
to hold by fealty. In the Kings par^ition stand Marieburge, Torovia, Culma,
Varnia, and Da^^ke^ in the Duchy (which yielded an hundred and twenty thousand
Ducats yearly) the chief Town is Regimount: the Germans call it
Conningsburgh, and there the Duke keeps his Court.

The Government of Polonia is altogether elective, Government.
and represents rather an Aristocracie, than a Kingdom; the Nobility (who
have great authority in the Diets) choosing the King, and at their pleasure
limiting him his authority, and making his sovereignty but a slavish royalty.

These diminutions of Regality began first by default of King Lewis, and
Iagello, who to gain the succession in the Kingdom (contrary to the Laws)
one for his daughter, and the other for his son; departed with many of his
Royalties and Prerogatives, to buy the voices of the Nobility. Whereupon by
degrees the King of Poland (as Stanislaus Orichovius confesses) is little more
than the Mouth of the Kingdom, which speaks not but what his Council prompts
him. The great Officer (whom they call the President of their liberty, and
Guardian of it) is still joined with the King, as it were to Tutor him, and to
moderate his desires. The power royal there, is no more but what King
Sigismund assumed in full Parliament at Petricovia, Anno 1548. which was to
conclude nothing but by advice of his Council. To give instances of the power
of these great Counselors; they made void the testament of King Casimire:
forbade King Iagello to war upon the Knights Hospitalers: unto whom in his
expedition into Lituania they adjoined the Bishop of Cracovia, limiting their
King to do nothing but with his approbation. Casimire the third had four
Commissioners joined with him. Without their leaves the King cannot choose his
own wife: for which reason King Iagello was by them perpetually perplexed.
Appeals (the supreme mark of Sovereignty) are not made to the King, but to
the States. King Alexander, Anno 1504. was feign to remit the disposing of the
public treasure unto the Lord Treasurer: to which Officer Iagello, Anno 1422.
could not but grant the royalty of coining moneys also. Well therefore (as
Cromerus reports) might Queen Christina complain, That her Husband was but
the shadow of a Sovereign. They have neither law nor statute, nor form of
government written, but (by custom from the death of one Prince to the
election of another) the supreme authority rests in the Archbishop of Gesna,
who is President of the Council, appoints the Diets, rules the Senate, and
proclaims the new elected King. Before King Stephen erected new Bishops,
Palatines, and Castellanes in Livonia, few other besides the Archbishop of
Leopolis, and his thirteen Suffragans, eight and twenty Palatines, and thirty
of the chiefest Castellanes were present at the election of the new King. They
hold an assembly of the States every year, for two causes; the one, to
administer Justice in Sovereign causes; unto which are brought appeals from
all the Judges of the Country: the other, to provide for the safety of the
Commonweal against their next Enemies the Tartars, who make often incursions
upon them.

In the time of their Diets these men assemble in a place near unto the
Senate House, where they choose two Marshals, by whom (but with a tribune-like
authority) they signify unto the Council what their requests are. Not long
since their authority and reputation grew so mighty, that they now carry
themselves as heads and Governors, rather than Officers and Ministers of the
public decrees of the estates. One of the Council, after the manner of
Clodius, refused his Senators place to become one of these Officers. When a
King is to be chosen, these men do more and more limit his authority, not
suffering it to stretch one jot farther than accustomed. But although the
Crown of Poland be at the disposition of the Nobility, yet was it never heard
that they rejected or overslipped the Kings successor, or transferred the
Kingdom into any other line, more than once, when deposing Ladislaus, (whom
notwithstanding they afterward restored) they elected Wenceslaus the Bohemian.
Likewise, they have always a regard to the Kings daughters, as of Hedwiga,
married by them to Iagello, and in our times of Anne, given in marriage to King
Stephen. It was no small cause of the advancement of Sigismund the third, to
the Crown of Polonia, that he was the son of Katherine, sister to Sigismund
the Emperor, and of the foresaid Anne. And although the Kingly authority be
elective, yet after he is chosen, his power is absolute in many things: As to
call the Diets, to appoint the times and place at his pleasure; to choose Lay
Counselors, and nominate the Bishops, and whom he will have to be of the
Privy Council; he is absolute disposer of the Revenue of the Crown, and Lord
of those which hold of him immediate, but over the Tenants of the Nobility he
has no jurisdiction; he is absolute establisher of the decrees of the Diets,
and Sovereign Judge of the Nobles in criminal causes; it is in his power to
reward and advance whom pleases him; to speak in a word, such as is his
valor, dexterity, and wisdom, such is his power, authority, and government.
As the Polanders say, the decrees of their King endure but three days, and
they converse not with him as Cosins, as in France, but as Brethren. And as the
King has absolute authority over them which immediately hold of him, so the
Nobility dispose absolutely of their vassals, on every of whom they exercise
more than Kingly authority, in manner as upon slaves. In establishing their
Kingdom they have done one thing worthy the noting, which is, that as the
Romans increast their Name and Dominion, by communicating the Laws and Honors
of Italy, and the City of Rome to other Cities, yea, whole Provinces: so the
Kings of Polonia have enlarged, united, and strengthened their estate, by
participating the privileges of the Polish Nobility to those Provinces, which
either they have conquered by Arms, or otherwise purchased, gracing the Nobles
thereof with favors equal to any bestowed on the Polish Nation. By this
equallizing, King Ladislaus strongly united Russia and Podalia; Sigismund
Augustus, Lituania: Stephen, Livonia: for respect in offices and promotions
knitteth affections in peace and war.

The force of this Kingdom (as of others) consists in grain, Coin,
Footmen, Horsemen, Armor, Forces.
and Munition. Of grain we have spoken already. In coin it is not very rich:
for excepting Danske, they have never a Mart-Towne worthy estimation; and the
wars that are brought from Prussia and Livonia, do not enrich the Kingdom
with ready money; yea, they do hardly suffice to barter with the English and
Flemish for Cloth, Silks, or Woolls; or with the Spanish, Portuguize and other
Merchants, for Sugars, Spices, Fruits, and Malueseies. For when the Country is
not given to traffike, nor the Cities to buy and sell, nor the people to
labor; and the Nobility is very gallant, prodigal in expenses, spending more
than their Revenues in diet and apparel, and the seasoning of their Viands,
(for the Polanders use more Spices than any other Nation:) and their Wine,
their Silk, and the greatest part of their Woollen Cloth is brought from
foreign Nations, how can the Kingdom be rich in Silver? For in transporting of
much ware, and returning of little, consists the wealth of every dominion;
gathering together (by venting homebred commodities) the come of foreign
Nations, and keeping it once brought in, from passing abroad. In this practice
consists the wealth of Naples and Millan: for Naples sends to Sea great
store of Corn, Wine, Oil, Silk, Woad, Horses, Fruits, and such like
commodities, which bring in huge masses of foreign coin: Millan supplieth the
want of other Provinces, with Corn, Rice, Cloths, Iron-workes, wares of all
sorts; and returns little again. If the Kingdom of Sicil were as well
stored with manual workmanship, as it is provided with Corn, Sugarcanes, and
Silk, no other Kingdom could compare with it.

To return to Poland: Riches.
notwithstanding, their riches are not so small as some say they are; for the
Revenues of the Crown raised of the Mines of Salt and Silver, amount yearly
to 600000. Ducats. True it is, that Sigismund Augustus pawned part of these
Revenues: and King Henry a month before his flight (to bind some part of the
Nobility unto him) sold unto them more than three hundred thousand Ducats of
yearly rent. It is lawful for the King by sales of escheats (falling to the
Crown) to purchase livings for himself, and of the said Revenues to retain
great portions to his proper use, and to spare his own expenses: for when the
King with his Court ^bideth in Lituania, the Lituanians defray the charge: the
like is done in most places of Poland. He that weighs with himself, that the
ordinary Revenues of Scotland, Naples, or Sardinia, exceed not yearly one
hundred thousand Ducats, nor the Kingdom of Arragon to yield above one hundred
thousand crowns every three years; cannot lightly esteem of the Revenues of
this Kingdom; yet the King might raise his Revenues to a higher reckoning, if
he were less bountiful to his Palatines and Castellanes. For most commonly he
bestows on them two parts, and three parts; yea, now and then the whole
profits arising in their governments. But in the time of war (yet by the
decree of the assemblies of the Kingdom) the King does lay grievous
impositions and taxes on the people, which are either levied of the Provinces,
or of the excise of victual: and these tallages have amounted to such a
reckoning, that therewith King Stephen sustained the burden of a most heavy
three years war against the great Duke of Moscovie: yea, the Gentlemen for
defense of the Kingdom are bound to serve at their own charges. These serve
on Horse, some armed as our men at arms, some more light, some like the
Tartars; And those they term Cossaches, or Adventurers, trained up to steal,
to depopulate, waste, and to turn all things up-side down. These Gentlemen
serve in the field gallantly furnished, attired in Cassocks and Hose shining
with Gold and Silver, and a thousand other colors: they adorn themselves with
plumes and feathers of Eagles, with the skins of Leopards and Bears, and
with many Banners and party-colored Ensigns. These and such like furnitures
do cause them to be discerned of their fellows, make them seem terrible to
their Enemies, and do encourage their minds to fierceness and prowess: Their
Horse are but small, yet very nimble, and far more courageous than the Dutch.

It is thought that upon necessity Poland is able to raise an hundred thousand
horse, Forces.
and Lituania seventy thousand, but far inferior in goodness to the Polish.
They have so great trust in the great number of their horse, that nothing
fearing the power of any Enemies, they regard not the building of Fortresses,
but resolve that they are able to defend their Country, their Wives and
Children, their liberty and goods, in the open field against any Prince
whatsoever; boasting, that in either chance of war, they never turned their
backs. Sigismund Augustus labored, that in the Diets of the Kingdom, order
might be taken for the fortifying of Cracovia, because of neighborhood of the
Emperor: but he could never effect it, partly because it should not give their
Kings opportunity of absolute authority and tyrannical Emperie, partly because
they think themselves by noble courage sufficiently able to defend the
Kingdom. They have no infanterie; for all the people of the Kingdom are
divided either into Merchants and Artificers (which inhabit the Cities,) or
laborers which live in the country, in such subjection as we spoke of before:
and this is the reason that the Gentlemen only go to the war, and will not in
any case serve on foot; but always when occasion serves, they do give wages
unto the German and Hungarish footmen; Infantery.
and of these King Stephen, in his journey into Livonia, entertained under his
colors little less than 16000. to convey his great Ordnance: 1609. Sigismund
being called into Moscovie by the treason of Sulskey, who had slain Demetrius
his Lord and Master in Mosco, departed from Cracovia with 30000. horse and
10000. foot, exceedingly well furnished and resolute: Wherein in truth
consists the sole commendation of the Polish Gentlemen. As for manners, for
the most part they are discourteous and uncivil, a very murderous and wicked
people, especially in their drunkenness, and that toward strangers.

For Pioners they use the Tartars, Pioners.
and their own unplandish people. The Kingdom is sufficiently furnished;
stored with great Ordnance, and all furniture belonging thereto, of which it
can suffer no manner of scarcity: first, because the Gentlemen and Noblemen
keep many in their castles; next for the neighborhood of Germany, which is
exceeding rich in Metal to that use, and plentiful of Antificers to forge
anything belonging thereunto. And though it is not usual to see many castles
in Polonia, yet the Fortresses of Leopolis and Camentzie in Russia, the Castle
of Cracovia in the less Poland, Polocensis on the Frontiers of Moscovia,
Mariembourge, and some other Towns in Livonia, are pieces in truth of great
strength.

These forces of Polonia (which we have spoken of) are such in quantity and
quality, that few Nations in Europe can equal them, none surpass them: one
thing they want, and that is Celeritie: For to the sure strengthening of every
Kingdom four things are required; that is to say, That their forces be of
their own subjects; That it be Populous, Valiant, and Quick: their own,
because it is dangerous trusting to a stranger; Populous, because of
re-enforcements after checkes or overthrowes; Valiant, because number without
courage little avails; yea, it brings forth confusion; And Quick, that
they may lightly move, and speedily be drawn whither necessity enforces. The
last of these four are Polacks especially want; that is, Celerity; occasioned
two ways: First, for defect of absolute authority in the Prince, which is much
checked by prolonging and adjourning of Parliaments, procured many times by the
frowardness of the Nobility: And secondly, for want of ready money, and
quick levies thereof.

For the King has no power to determine any thing; to denounce war, to
impose taxes, or to gather treasure without the consent of these Parliaments,
and these Parliaments (where it is necessary that many be present) are like an
Engine made of many pieces, which (without loss of time) can neither easily be
joined, nor readily moved. For in warlike affairs, those Princes make best
speed which are best able to command, and have most money in readiness:
otherwise, in appointing and ordering the Diets, and devising that the Actions
may answer the Counsels; than in executing and in providing of money, there
happens such loss of time, that little is left for the beginning of the
journey, much less to accomplish. Besides, the Barons and Nobles are at such
charges, and tarry so long when they are there, that at their departure they
have little left to maintain after-charges. It may be, that for the defense of
the State, quicker and readier resolution would be taken, because of the
imminent danger fatal in general. But for the conquest of any foreign place, I
believe they will always proceed with like flownesse and irresolution; for the
hope of good does not so much move us, as the fear of evil: Yet has our age
seen (in the reign of Sigismund Augustus) the Moscovite to have conquered the
Provinces of Moloch and Smolock, and that without resistance or revenge; a
cowardice ill beseeming so great a King, and so mighty a State: as likewise he
invaded Livonia without impeachment, which had shadowed it self under the
protection of the said Sigismund. In the days of Henry of Anjow, John Prince
of Moldavia (even he that with an undaunted spirit and famous victory held
war against the Turk) was shamefully forsaken of them, contrary to the
covenants of confederacy between him and this Sigismund concluded. So that we
must needs confess, that such as is the courage, valor, and reputation of the
Prince; such is the resolution alacrity, and forces of the Polackes; of
themselves populous, valiant, and courageous. Stephen Bathori had good
testimony hereof, in whose time Polonia not only maintained the honor of a
King, sufficient to defend it self from foreign Arms, but also to make
conquests of great matters from most potent Enemies. And seeing we have spoken
of Celerity, a virtue most necessary for every State, it shall not be amiss
to speak of the causes thereof, which (as is aforesaid) are two: ( viz.) The
reputation of the Prince, which gives it life; and store of Coin, which
preserves it in action: for we have seen in mightiest Armies, the body by the
slownesse of the head, to have spent the time most idly, and very famous
victories for want of money (to give continual motion to action) to have
brought forth small or no effects. Besides the disposition of a Soldier is a
great help hereunto: for no man can truly praise the German and Bohemian
Footmen for Celerity; but this commendation without doubt is proper to the
Italian, Spaniard, and Frenchmen, not only for that they are of better
constitution of body, but for that (which in war is all in all) they are
better contented to live with a little: Though they want Coin they are not
discouraged, neither wax sick with fruits, if flesh be wanting; and happen
what may, they longer and better can endure hardness and scarcity. Their
riding light armed, is of more execution than armed at all pieces, and their
Argolitires more serviceable than Lanciers: for which cause the French also in
their late broiles have quitted their Lances, wherein of old did consist the
glory of their Arms, and now taken themselves to the Pistol. But to what
purpose they have thus done, let another dispute; for I say not, that a light
armed man is absolutely to be preferred before a man at arms in chances of
war, but only affirm, that he is more active and more ready: yea, the
goodness of the Horse is of great consequence. For the Flanders Horse ^ar^e
excels the Frislander and German. The Hungari^ Horse, the Polonian; the
Turkey Horse, the Genet; the Bar^^ry Horse is more speedy than the rest:
between both is the Courser of Naples, who though he be not so swift as the
Spanish Genet, yet is he better able to endure travel, and to ^eare the weight
of Armor, not becoming overflow therewith. To speak truth, experience
manifests the German Horse, by reason of their slow pace, to work small
effect, either to pursue the flying Enemy, or swiftly to fly from their
executing adversary: for if the Wallachian, Hungarian, Polish, Turkish,
Moorish, or Barbary Horsemen should break the Germans, they cannot speedily
fall, and if it happen the Germans to overthrow them, they are as unable to
pursue them; for they charge slowly, and retire heavily. So in fights at Sea,
ships of burden are of small service; because i^ wind want they cannot be
moved; the Galleasses are some what better, yet perform little more; but the
best of all is the Galley for his ^wife st^rage. And for proof hereof, we
have seen the Navy of the Christians consisting of great Ships, to have spent
the better part of Summer and warlike season in preparations only; And on the
contrary, the Turkish Fleet soon furnished, and speedily put to Sea: Of such
advantage is spare diet, and needful provision of the Turkish affairs; and so
discommodious is gluttony to the proceedings of the Christians: For, the
provision of Wine and other delicates is as troublesome to the Christians, as
the whole provision for a Camp to the Turkish Armies. Therefore let no man
marvel, if they march in all their journies, excellent well furnished with
Ordnance, Shot, Gunpowder, and all necessaries; for at land they have their
Carriages laden only with provision; at Sea, their Ships without Wine,
Pullets, and such needless vanities. At a word, they go to the war to
fight, and not to fill their bellies.

THE THIRD BOOK.
Of Afric.
THat tract of the habitable World tending toward the South, The description
of Afric.
which at this day we call Africa, and the Grecians Ly^ia, contains one of
those three divisions which were known to the Ancients, and yet not fully
discovered; partly in regard of vast Deserts impossible to be traveled by
Land, and wholly covered with wind-driving sands in manner of a tempestuous
Sea; and partly in regard of the long, tedious, and uncertain Navigation,
undertaken by few, discovered but little, and fully known to none. The
undertakers whereof were Hanno the Carthaginian, and Eudoxius a banished man
under Ptolomie King of Alexandria. But in this latter age it has been wholly
navigated by the Portugals, and sufficiently by them discovered, especially
from the Pillars of Hercules, almost to the very bottom of the Arabian Gulf.
The first of them that passed the Cape of Good Hope, was Vaseo de Gama, in the
year of our Lord 1497. from whence continuing his course to Calecut, and so to
the residue of the East Indies, to the unspeakable honor and achievement of
that Nation.

I will not spend time in discourse upon the Original of the name, Quia paucae
civitates norint originem; but it is situated in manner of a Peninsula,
conjoined with a small neck of Land lying between the Mediterranean Sea and
the Arabian Gulf. In quantity it exceeds Europe at least by twice, but it is
not half so well inhabited, for that is not so temperate for inhabitation.
Many places lying waste, somewhere for want of water, somewhere for want of
manurance, somewhere for abundance of light sand and sterile Dust, and all
subject to the immoderate heat of the scorching Sun. And the nature of these
Sands are such, that sometimes they lie as Mountains in one part of the
Deserts, and presently upon the rising of any gale of wind, they are carried
most furiously to another, in manner of a violent and terrible tempest. And
last of all, the increase of venomous Serpents and devouring Creature^ is so
general, that in some places no man will, in some places no man dare to manure
or inhabit the adjoining Country, although most fruitful. By reason whereof
(as aforesaid) the Region seems rather waste than inhabited; but where it is
manured it is exceeding fruitful, and full of inhabitation, especially toward
the North side, which looks toward Europe, and along the Sea Coasts,
between the promontory of Good Hope, and Cape Niger, where the ^aines,
Mountains, and Valleys are singular fruitful and pleasant, as places enjoying
the benefit of a perpetual Springtide.

Our modern Cosmographers upon the North side bound it with the Mediterranean
and Herculian Sea, upon the East with the Arabian Gulf, and that Istmus of
Asia that lies between the said Mediterranean and the Arabian Seas: Upon the
South beat the waves of the great Ocean, especially toward the Cape of Good
Hope; which deriving its denomination from the Country adjoining (viz.)
Aethiopia, is termed the Ethiopian Sea: Upon the West, on this side the
Equinoctial heth the Atiantike Ocean, and beyond that it is termed the
Ethiopian.

The Celestial situation, with the description of the renouned Mountains,
famous Rivers, and remarkable Capes, all worthy to be registered (if brevity,
requisite for so small a volume, did not persuade the contrary) I would not
omit, for the delight of those who desire to make deepest progressions to this
kind of study.

The living Creatures, Creatures proper to Afric.
both tame and wild, which this and no other climate affords, by the
testimony of Leo Afer, are many. As first, the Elephant, a docible and wild
beast, found in many parts of the Continent. The Giraffa, most admirable,
fierce, and seldom seen. The Camel is a gentle beast and tame, wherein the
wealth of the Arabians does chiefly consist. The Barbary Horse, and the wild
Horse, whereof many of the Arabians, inhabiting the deserts, do feed. The Dant
or Iant resembles the Ox, and of his bide are wrought ^mpenetrable B^cklers.
Here likewise live the wild Oxen, and the wild Ass. The Adimain is like the
Ram, but in stature resembling the Ass, with cares long and slagging. The
tame Oxen that live on the mountains are small bodied, but laboursome and
strong. Their Rams differ only in their tails from ours, being most broad
and containing twenty pound in weight. There are a kind of Lions, which in
many places dare to adventure upon two hundred Horsemen. The Leopards are
strong and cruel yet seldom hurt they men. The beast which the Arabians term
Dabul, and the Africans Ieses, is a base and simple beast, in fashion and
bigness resembling the Wolf, but in feet and thighs like a man. This beast
will dig men's Carcases out of their graves and devour them; toward all other
Creatures he is harmless. The sorts of Apes are very diverse. Here lives the
Mus-cat and the wild Conie. The strange Fishes, and other watery Creatures
found in Nilus, Niger, and other principal Rivers are innumerable. The Ambara
for his shape and hugeness is prodigious, as a Creature containing twenty five
foot in length. The Hippotame, a beast like an Horse, and as big as an Ass,
lives as well in Waters as on the Land, and by his often striking of Boats
laden with Merchandise with his sharp prickles, sinketh them under water. The
Sea Ox differs nothing from the Land Ox, save in smalnesse of stature. The
Tortoise lives in Deserts, and are found oftentimes as big as a barrel. The
Crocodile resembles the Lacerta, and is twelve cubits long in body, and as
many in tail. Most huge Dragons and poisonsome are often seen.

What people inhabit Afric.
FIve several Nations inhabit this part of the World, (viz.) the Caseres, that
is, people without Law: the Moors, the Abussines, the Egyptians, the
Arabians, and the Africans; whereof some are white and some black. In Religion
some are likewise Gentiles, and worship Idols, some Mahumetans, some
Christians, and some Jews. All which Nations some Writers will have derived
from Cham the Son of Noe, excepting some certain Arabians of the feed of
Sem, which entered Afric after the residue. And these Arabians are
distinguished into many Families or Regiments, use diverse and many
habitations, and possess as many Regions; some dwelling by the Seaside
(properly termed Arabians;) some in the Up-land, and they are called Badium:
Others in innumerable swarms lead a roguish life with their Wives and
Children in the Wilderness, dwelling in Tents instead of Houses, altogether
given rospoile, and alike infestuous to neighbor and traveller; which is the
cause that the Inhabitants dare not travel alone, but stay the time of the
Caravan; that is, the whole assembly of the Merchants, traveling upon Camels
and Asses all in one company at a set time of the year, for fear of the
theevish and roguish Arabians.

As the Nations are diverse, so are their languages: the chief they call
Aqu^lamarig, that is, the rob^e Language; and of the Arabians inhabiting
Africa, the Barbarian Language. And this is the true and proper Idiome of the
Af^, utterly differing from the residue, save that it favors of many
Arabicke words. The Gnabets, Zombati, Ghinians, the Mellidi and Gagonti use the
Sungai Language. The Gubarits, Canontes, Chesenes, and the other blacke-Moores
use the G^ber tongue. The Abassines have their proper speech. Moreover, the
Chaldean, Egyptian, and Arabian tongues, with another compounded of all three,
are in use in some places: and by the intercourse of Merchants, many are
accustomed to speak the Moorish, Turkish, Spanish, and Italian Languages. All
the Sea-Townes, from the Mediterran to Mount Atlas, speak the Arabian
corruptly, except the Kingdom and City of Marocco, which wholly speak the
Barbarian.

The noblest part at this day is called Barbary, and contains all that
Sea-tract which reaches from Egypt to the Gaditan Sea, inhabited by the
Arabians, and including diverse Provinces. At first, it was under the Empire of
the Greeks; secondly, under the Vandals; and lastly, under the Saracens and
Arabians, who left them their language. Some part thereof at this day is
subject to the Turk, some to Xeriffe, and some to the King of Spain.

Their manners are not so much differing from those of the Arabians, but that
they are somewhat more civil, ambitious, light, subtle, treacherous,
wrathful, boasters, suspicious, and exceeding jealous. They are very active
and ready Horsemen, but not able to endure labor.

Barbary.
BARBARY is divided into four Kingdoms, Marocco, Fez, Telesine, and Tunes.
Sanutus adds a fifth (viz.) Barca. Into what, and how many Shires or
Provinces these portions are divided, let him read Leo Afer that desires the
particulars.

Numidia is the second part of Afric, Numidia.
and is termed by Leo Afer Biledulgerid, that is, the Almond-Countrey. But it
is of less estimation than the residue, and therefore injoyeth not the Title
of a Kingdom. It was once disinhabited, as was Barbary, and at this day the
Towns are but small, base, scattering, and very far distant one from
another. Those places that they manure, lie beyond Atlas, and are hot and dry;
but being watered with certain streams descending from the Mount, they yield
Almonds in abundance, but scarcity of Corn, nor any fruitful tree except the
Palm. Those grounds that border upon Lybia, are environed with craggie
Mountains, destitute of water, and all manner of trees, except some fruitless
shrubs at the foot of the Hills. As for infinite store of Scorpions and
Serpents, it is so over-laid, that many are daily found dead by their venomous
bitings. In old time they were idolatrous, and at this day little better,
irreligious, ignorant, base, treacherous, man-killers and Thieves, utterly
destitute of any civil knowledge, save that some few of them addict themselves
to the study of the Laws. The Arabians that live amongst them love Poesy,
and are more civil, but very poor. They live long, but their teeth soon
perish with eating of Almonds, and their sight fails by the annoyance of the
Sands. They know not the French disease; yea, if an infected person should but
come into the Country, it were Physic enough to clear him. Their chief
food is Barley, Almonds, and other most course food; as for Bread, they never
taste it but on Festivals. And that Corn which they have, they exchange for
Almonds.

Lybia.
LYbia, the third part of Afric, was once called Sarra; that is, desert; and
so it is, a Desert, dry and sandy country, utterly bereaved of Springs and
Rivers, unfruitful, and those which they have, they keep in standing pooles,
and those also but rare and salt. So that the Merchants, which are to travel
over those Countries, must provide carriage for water; otherwise man and beast
might perish, as not possible to find one drop in six or seven days journey.
By this Region lies the way from Fez to Tombut, and from Telesine to Agadas, a
country of the Moors. Not past one hundred years since, they that were to
travel from Fez to Cairo, were accustomed to travel by these Deserts; but
upon the rising of the South Wind, the Wells (although entrenched with skins
and bones of Camels) were so overwhelmed with sands, that the Merchants not
able to find either sign or token of way or water, have perished in the
journey through extreme thirst.

Some Rivelets they have descending out of Atlas, and standing in manner of
Lakes, as the Lakes of Gir, and Ighid^^ikengan, to the great comfort of
Travelers, and preservation of the Inhabitants.

They live without any form of Law, in manner of bru^e, beasts, leading a
miserable life. What learning means they know not, and virtue they absolutely
defy. They are altogether addicted to hunting, notorious thieves, and most
dangerous to Merchants: Yet there live amongst them many Africans and Arabians,
civil and courteous entertainers of strangers, and true of their words. In
comparison of the other Africans, they live but a short time, the strongest
bodies not exceeding the years of sixty.

Yet for the time they are very healthful, slender, and lean of body, riding
upon Camels, and feed very sparingly, as also very patient of thirst and
hunger. Bread they know not, but live upon Milk, Camels flesh and butter.
Their clothing is a short raiment and rude, scarce covering their middle. Some
of them cover their heads with black cloth, in fashion of a Turbant. Their
Nobility goes attired in a kind of long garment like a shirt, made of blew
Cotton-wooll, with large sleeves. In stead of beds they use the green banks,
or Mats wrought of Bulrushes. Their Tents are either wrought of Chamblet, or of
a course kind of Wool, which they find amongst the Date-trees.

The Land of Negroes or Aethiopia.
THis Region takes his name either from the color of the Inhabitants, or from
the River Niger. Some Writers affirm that (excepting Egypt) this Country was
first inhabited, and yet at this day is scarcely known, although in latitude
it contains very near four hundred miles. By reason of its situation near
the Torrid Zone it is extreme hot, yet not altogether uninhabited: Yea, it is
most full of Inhabitants, and in some places always Springtime. On this side
the River Cananga, which is ^he bounder of th^se black people, the Country is
most dry, s^ndie and desert, but beyond for the most part fruitful, by reason
of their continual letting of water from the River Niger, running through the
midst of the Country: Whereby all the grounds which lie near thereunto, or
such as participate of this water, are exceeding fruitful; both in Grain,
Cattle, Scarletdie, Cucumbers, Onions, and such like sawces. But they have no
trees, save one which brings forth fruit not much unlike a Chest-nut, but
somewhat bitterer. About the banks of Niger there are no Mountains nor
Valleys, but many Woods stored with Elephants, and other strange creatures,
watered with many Lakes and Mists, compacted with the over-flowings of Niger.
Here rain neither profits nor damnifieth, but in the overflowing of Niger
consists welfare, even as it does in Egypt by the mundation of Nilus. For
even as Nilus, so this forty days (from the five and twentieth of June)
increases, and in so many again falls, so that during those fourscore
days, they fail over the whole Land in Boats and Barges.

The Inhabitants derived their original from Chu^, the son of Cham, the son of
Noe, whom at the first they worshipped as Lord of Heaven. Afterward they
received the Jewish Laws, and persevered therei^ many years, until they
received the Christian faith. But sithence the Al^^m^^an inperst it on
impoisoned the whole confines of Lybia, they likewise turned, excepting some
few Provinces, which to this day observe the Christian Rites. Toward the Ocean
Sea they are all Idolaters and Gentiles. Generally they all lead a brutish
life, far different from the instinct of reason, from employment of wit, and
manuary Sciences. They are exceeding luxurious, by reason whereof the Country
swarmeth with Whores. But they that inhabit the good Towns are a great deal
more neat and civil than these other Africans; They live not long, yet retain
they their wonted vigor, and the soundness of their teeth to their last gasp.

The Country was once divided into five and twenty Kingdoms, now reduced to
three; that is to say, the Kingdom of Tombut, the Kingdom of Borneo, and the
Kingdom of G^oga. Besides Gualata has its proper King.

Gualata is distant from the Ocean an hundred miles, Gualata.
it is very small, and contains but three Boroughs, with some Territory of
ground, Hamlets, and Date-bearing fields thereunto adjacent. The Inhabitants
are most black, lovers of Strangers, exceeding poor, without any government,
Gentry or Judges.

Tombut takes his name of a City so called, Tombut.
and lies beyond the River Canaga. It is exceeding plentiful of Corn,
Cattle, Milk, and Butter. Salt they have none, but buy it at a dear rate at
the hands of Merchants. Of Horse they have infinite store. The King thereof is
very rich, as a Prince reigning over many other kingdoms, and is Lord of some
Ingots which weigh thirteen hundred pound weight.

He keeps a royal Court, guarded with three thousand Horsemen, and many
more foot, armed with Bows and impoysoned Arrows. He is an utter enemy to
the Jews, and does not only forbid them his Kingdom, but likewise
confiscateth those his subjects goods, of whom he understands that they use
any Traffic with any of that Nation. He maintains a great number of learned
men. The buildings of his imperial City, are built of mud and thatch, except
one fair Temple, and the Kings Palace, which are wrought of stone and Lime.
Sweet Springs are every where to be found in this Country: and the people are
courteous, and merry, spending the third part of their time in songs and
dancing. They are very rich, and especially the Stranger. Infinite sorts of
Manuscripts are brought hither from Barbary, which are here sold at very high
rates.

Gago is the name of the chief City where the King resideth. Gago.
It is very large, without Walls, and distant four hundred miles from Tombut.
The buildings are very base, except those which pertain to the King and the
Nobility. Fresh water is here very frequent, with plenty of Corn, Rice, and
Flesh; but of fruits, except the Melon and the Citron, great scarcity. The
Merchants are very rich, and their wares sumptuous and precious, but excessive
dear.

Borneo is a large Country, Borneo.
has upon the West Guangara, and toward the East it reaches almost five
hundred miles. In some places it is plain, in some mountainous. The plain
Country is replenished with many Market Towns, from whence comes great
store of Corn. The Mountains are inhabited with Neat-herds, and Sheep-herds,
and bring forth Mill, and other fruits to us unknown. The Inhabitants are
Infidels, living like beasts, neither knowing their proper wives, nor their
own Children. They have no names at all, but are distinguished by bodily
accidents. The King is a mighty Prince, as maintaining three thousand Horse,
and infinite troops of foot, but has no other Revenue than what he takes by
force from his Enemies.

Gaoga lies between the Kingdom of Borneo, Gaoga.
and the deserts of Nubia, stretched out five hundred miles in length and
breadth. The Inhabitants are uncivil, ignorant, and most rude, especially the
Mountainers. They go naked all save their privities. Their houses are built of
boughs and leaves, having great flocks of Cattle, which they preserve with
much care.

These are the chief, the residue are not worth the reading; for nothing can
be spoken unto, but their barrenness or fertility; their poverty or riches;
blessings and curses, peculiar more or less to every of these Nations.

The Xeriffe.
AMongst all the Potentates of Africk^, I do not think that there can any one
be found to excel this Prince either in wealth or power. His Dominion
contains all that tract of Mauritania, which the Romans called Tingitana, and
stretches from the promontorie Bayadir or Tanger, and from the Atlantike Ocean
to the River Mulvia. In which progress is contained the best portion of all
Afric, the best inhabited, the pleasantest, the fruitfullest, and most
civil. Herein amongst others are the famous Kingdoms of Fez and Marocho, the
one divided into seven Provinces, the other into eight. The Country is divided
into Plains and Mountains: the Mountains are inhabited with a fierce people,
rich in pastures and Cattle, and possessing a great part of the less and
bigger Atlas. Between the greater Atlas and the Ocean lies the Plain
Country, and therein the Royal City of Marocho, distant fourteen miles
from Atlas, watered with many Springs, Brooks, and Rivers. In times past this
City contained one hundred thousand households, and was the chiefest of Afric;
but by little and little it is decayed, and now lies more waste than
inhabited. In the Kingdom of Marocho, besides others, is Tedsi, a Town of
five thousand ho^sholds, and Tagoast of eight thousand. Taradent gives place
to none for Nobleness and traffike, though for largeness and circuit. It is
situated between Atlas and the Ocean, in a plain sixteen miles long, and
little less broad, abounding with Sugar and all kind of provision. The good
regard and continual abode which Mahumet Xeriffe made in this place, did
greatly augment and ennoblish this Town. Being past Atlas, you enter into most
batle plains, wherein how fruitful the soil is of Sugar, Olives, Cattle,
and all good things, can hardly be spoken.

Fez.
THe Kingdom of Fez likewise contains diverse Provinces excellent well
peopled. Amongst them is Alga, a territory of eighty miles long, and sixty
broad: Elabut is an hundred miles long, and sixty broad. Eriffe is a Province
wholly mountainous: therein are said to be three and twenty branches of the
Mount Atlas, inhabited for the most part with savage and barbarous people.
Caret is dry and rockie, more like Lybia than Barbary.

Now because the glory and Majesty of this Kingdom consists especially in
the City of Fez; I think it not amiss to describe the situation thereof. It
is divided in two parts, a little distant one from another, the one is called
the old Town, the other the new. A little River likewise divides the old Town
into two parts: the East part is called Beleyda, containing four thousand
households: the West part is commonly called old Fez, and has fourscore
thousand and upward, standing not far from the new Fez, which likewise has
eight thousand. Old Fez stands partly upon hills, partly on plains, and has
in it fifty Mahumetan Temples of admirable largeness. All of them have their
fountains and pillars of Alablaster and Jasper: Besides these, there are six
hundred of a less sort: amongst which that which is commonly called Carucen is
most beautiful, built in the heart of the City, and containing half a mile in
compass: In breadth it contains seventeene Arches, in length an hundred and
twenty, borne up by two thousand five hundred white marble pillars: under the
chiefest Arch (where the Tribunal is kept) hangs a most huge Lamp,
encompassed with an hundred and ten lesser. Under the other Arches hang very
great Lamps, in each of which burn an hundred and fifty lights. They say in
Fez that all these Lamps were made of the Bells which the Arabians brought out
of Spain, who not only made prey of Bells, but of Columns, Pillars, Brass,
Marble, and whatsoever was rich, first erected by the Romans, and afterward by
the Goths. There are in Fez above two hundred Schools, two hundred Innes, and
four hundred Water-mils, every one driven with four or five wheels. There
are also diverse Colleges, among which that which is called Madarac, is
accounted for one of the most finest pieces of workmanship throughout all
Barbary. There is likewise 600. Conduits, from whence almost every house is
served with water. It were a long labor to describe their Burse, (they call it
Alcacer) it is a place walled about, having twelve gates, and divided into
fifteen walks, where Merchants meet to dispatch their business under Tents.
Their delightsome Gardens and pleasant Parkes, with the Rillets and waters
running through them, I can hardly describe.

For the most part the King keeps his Court at Fez, Kings Court.
wherein he has a Castle, Palaces and Houses adorned with rare workmanship,
rich and beautiful even to his hearts desire. He has a way under ground from
the old Town to the new.

For greatness and stateliness thereof (by the grant of former Kings) it
injoyeth this strange privilege; Its privileges.
not to endure any siege, unless the Citizens shall think their Prince for
strength and force able and equal to cope with his Enemy: if not, without
reproach of treason they may yield their City before the enemy approach within
half a mile of it. This have they done, that so goodly and so flourishing a
City should not suffer spoil under pretext of unprofitable temporizing.

It is of no less moment for situation, store of Corn, Plenty.
Oil, Flax, and Cattle, than for pleasantness of territory, and plenty of
Water. The Walls are very strong, and defended with many Bulwarks. The
Inhabitants are very thriftie, given to traffike, and especially to the making
of Cloths of Wool, Silk, and Cotton. The Kings eldest son is called the
Prince of Mequivez. Though the Kingdom have no good Havens upon the
Mediterranean Sea, yet great store of Englishmen and Frenchmen resort to
Alarach, Aguer, and other Ports in the Ocean, whereof some belong to the
Kingdom of Fez, and other to the Kingdom of Marocho. They carry thither
armor, and other wares of Europe, which they barter for Sugar and other
commodities. But how the Kingdoms of Fez and Marocho (two several
principalities) with their dependances, became subject to one Crown, I think
it worthy relation, because a more strange and memorable accident has not
happened in our age. About the year 1508. a certain Alfaique borne in
Tigumedet in the Province of Dura, began to grow in reputation, a man of a
reaching wit, and no less ambitious than learned in the Mathematickes: his
name was Ma^umet Ben-Amet, otherwise called Xeriffe, by his own commandment.
This man deriving his pedigree from Mahumet, and emboldned by the civil war
of Afric, and the differences of the States and Commonweals thereof
(wherein in those days the Portugals were of no small puissance) began to
dream on the conquest of Mauritania Tingitana. Which the better to effect, he
first sent his three sons Abdel, Abnet, and Mahumet on pilgrimage to Meca and
Medina, to visit and worship the Sepulcher of their great Prophet Mahumet. The
young men returned from their pilgrimage, with such opinion and estimation of
holiness and Religion, (if it be lawful to use these terms to so great
impiety and fopperie) that the Inhabitants as they traveled could hardly be
kept from kissing their garments, and adoring them as Saints.

They again, as men wrapped in deep contemplation, journied through the
Provinces sighing and sobbing, and crying with a high voice, Ala, Ala. They had
no other sustenance but the alms of the people. Their father received them
with great joy and contentment, and perceiving the favor and opinion of the
people not to be like a nine days wonder, but to continue fresh and the same
as at the first, resolved to make use thereof, and thereupon sent two of them.
Abnet and Mahumet to the Court at Fez. The King received them kindly, and made
one of them President of the famous College of Amadorac, and the younger Tutor
of his Children. In process of time when they perceived the King to grace
them, and the people to favor them, by the Counsel of their father, (taking
occasion of the grievances which the Arabians and Moors, serving under the
Portugal Ensigns, had done to the professors of their superstition) they
desired leave of the King to display a Banner against the Christians, making
him believe that they would easily draw the Portugal Moors to their party,
and so secure the Provinces of Sus, Hea, Deucala, and Maroch. Muly mazer the
Kings brother resisted this petition, alleging that if once under the show of
holiness they grew to head, it would not afterward lie in his power to
suppress them under his obedience: For war makes men awlesse; victories
insolent; popularity ambitious and studious of innovation. But the King, in
whose heart their hypocritical sanctimony had taken a deep impression, little
regarding his brothers counsel, gave them a Banner, a Drum, and twenty
horsemen to accompany them, with Letters of credence to the Princes of Arabie,
and Cities of Barbary. In these beginnings many things falling out to their
honor and good liking, they began to make incursions into Deucala, and the
Country of Safi, ranging as far as the promontory Aguer, then under the
government of the Portugals: and perceiving themselves to be favored, strong,
and well followed, urged the people (who for the most part in those days lived
in liberty) to aid those, which fought for their Law and Religion against the
Christians, as likewise with willing minds to give God his tithes, which they
obtained of the people of Dara. Then by little and little they incroached upon
the territory of Taradant, (of which they made their Father Governor) and
invaded Sus, Hia, Deucala, and the neighboring places. They first seated
themselves in Ted^^st, and after in Tesarot. In their next journey (but with
the loss of their Brother) they defeated Lopes Barriga, a great Warrior, and
Captain general of the Portugal Army. By flattering speeches they entered
Marocho, poisoned the King, and proclaimed Amet-Xeriffe King of the Country.
After this happened the war of the Arabians, of Deucala, and Xarquia, with the
Arabians of Garbi, where while each party weakened other, and either promised to
himself the favor and assistance of the Xeriffes: they turned their arms
upon both factions, and carried rich preyes from both Nations. Before this
war they sent unto the King the fifth part of all their spoils, but after
this victory, little regarding their Sovereign, they sent him only six
Horses, and six Camels, and those very lean and ill shapen. Which the King
disdaining, sent to demand his fifths, and also the Tribute which the Kings of
Marocho were accustomed to pay to him; which if they denied, he vowed revenge
with fire and sword. In the mean time the King died, and Amet his Son, once
the pupil of the younger Xeriffe, not only allowed, but also confirmed Amet
in the Kingdom of Marocho; upon condition that in some things he should
acknowledge the King of Fez to be his Lord paramount. To this the Xeriffes
(whose power and estimation daily increased) when the day of payment of the
tribute came, willed the messenger to say unto his Master, that they were the
lawful successors of Mahumet, and therefore that they were bound to pay
tribute to no Man; yea, that they had more right to Afric than he had: but if
he would reckon them in the number of his friends, no doubt but it would turn
to his good and honor, for if he diverted them from the war of the
Christians, they would not leave him so much as a heart to defend himself.

The King taking this in ill part proclaimed war against them, and besieged
Marocho, but for that time was constrained to dislodge. Afterward returning
with eighteen thousand Horsemen, and two thousand Harquebusiers to renew the
siege; as soon as he had past the River, he was overcome of the Xeriffs, who
led an Army of seven thousand Horse, and one thousand two hundred shot. In the
pride of this victory they exacted Tribute of this Province, and passing Atlas
they took the famous City Tafilet, and partly by love, and partly by force
compelled diverse people of Numidia and the Mountains to bear the yoke of
their subjection. In the year 1536. the younger Xeriffe, which called himself
King of Sus, gathering together a mighty Army, with great store of Artillery,
part whereof he took from the King of Fez, and part whereof were cast by
certain Renegada Frenchmen, made a journey to Cape Aguer.

This place is of great consequence, and possessed by the Portugals, who built
it and fortified it, first at the expenses of Lopes Sequiera, and then at the
charges of King Emanuel, after he understood of the commodious situation
thereof. It was fiercely assaulted, and as valiantly defended, until the fire
began to take hold upon the Bulwark, where their Gunpowder was stowed; with
which misfortune the companies appointed for the defense of that quarter,
growing fearful and faint-hearted, gave way for the Xeriffe to enter, who
made slaves of the greatest part of the defendants. After which victory, they
subdued almost all Atlas, the Kingdom of Marocho, and the Arabians which were
vassals to the Crown of Portugal; the residue, as Safi, Azamon, Arzil, and
Aleazar (places situated upon the Seacoast of Mauritania) King John the third
perceiving the prose not to equalize the charge; voluntarily resigned.

These prosperous beginnings brought forth sour ends; for the Brethren falling
at discord, twice put their fortunes upon the hazard of a battle, twice the
younger overcame the elder, took him, and cast him into prison in the City
Tafilet. Then turned he his Arms against the King of Fez, took him prisoner,
and restored him to his liberty: but taking him again, for breach of
Covenants, deprived him and his Son of life and Kingdom. By the valor of his
Sons, he took, the City Tremissen. But Sal Aries, Viceroy of Algier, being
jealous of these good fortunes, gathered a puissant host, recovered Tremissen,
put the Xeriffe to flight, took Fez, and bestowed it with the Territory upon
the Lord of Velez, who afterward in a battle against the Xeriffe, lost both
life and Kingdom. At last, in his journey to Taradant, by the subordination of
the Viceroy of Algier, he was murdered in his Tent by certain Turks, who
with their Captain Assen coming to Taradant, rifled the Kings Treasures, but
were all slain (except five) by the Inhabitants in their journey homewards.
This came to pass 1557. when Muley Abdala the Xeriffes son, was proclaimed
King.

Let this suffice for the original of the Xeriffe: now let us see how these
risings were like the fortunes of Ismael King of Persia. Both of them in small
time conquered many Provinces: both grew great by the ruin of their
Neighbors: both suffered crosses by the arms of the Turks, and to them lost
part of their Dominions. Selim took from Ismael Caramit, and diverse other
Cities of Mesopotamia. The Viceroy of Algier drove the Xeriffe from Tremissen
and the adjacent Territory. Selim won Tauris, the chief seat of Persia, and
then gave it over; Sal Aries took Fez, the head City of Mauritania, and left
it.

This Potentate is absolute Lord of the bodies and goods of his Subjects; His
manner of government.
whatsoever imposition he lays on them, they repine not thereat. For Tribute
he takes the tenth, and the first fruits of their fruits and cattle: yet is
it most true, that for first fruits he takes not above one in twenty: and
though it exceed that number, even to one hundred, yet he nevertaketh above
two. Of every Acre of Land he takes a ducat and the fifth part, and so much of
every household, and so of every pole male and female above fifteen years of
age yearly. If he want, he takes a greater sum. To make the people more
willing to pay what is imposed, he always demands more than is paid, that so
by paying their due, they may think they are well dealt withal, in seeming to
be forgiven somewhat of his full demand. The Inhabitants of the Mountains, a
savage people, for the difficult access unto them, he cannot enforce to pay
tribute, but those that manure the plains, he constrains to give the tenth
of their harvest.

Besides these Revenues, he takes Toll and Custom of all kinds of
Merchandise in Cities: inward, Revenues.
of a citizen two in the hundred, of a stranger ten. His rent of Mils is a
great matter: for upon every Ass load of Grain grinded in Fez, he takes
half a real: in this Town there are above four hundred Mils. The Church of
Carruven was endowed with 80000. Ducats of yearly Revenue, the Colleges and
Monasteries of Fez with much more, which now are escheated into the Kings
Coffers. Moreover he is heir to all the Judges (whom they call Alcaids) and
has the bestowing of all their Offices. When they die he seizes upon all
their Horses, Armor, Apparel, and all their other Chattels. If the intestate
leave Children behind him fit for the war, he bestows his Fathers annuitie
upon them: if they be Sons and young, he nurseth them till they come to full
years; if Daughters, he maintains them till they find husbands. To be fi^
gring the wealth of the richer sort, he has some Office of Lieutenantship with
an annuitie to sell them: but commonly to prevent those sales, they will not be
known of their abilities, removing their aboads far from the Court and Kings
sight, which is the cause that the City of Fez is much fallen from the ancient
splendor.

He has no Castles or pieces well fortified, Forces.
but only Aguer, Larach, (lately taken) and Tituan upon the Sea side. His
chiefest confidence is in the valor of his Soldiers, especially his
Horsemen, like the Turk and Persian. In this regard he takes no great care
to furnish himself with Ordnance, yet has he great store thereof in Fez,
Marocho, Taradant, and in the aforesaid haven Towns taken from the Portugals
and others. As he sees occasion he causes new to be cast, for which service
he can want no workmen out of Europe. In Marocho he has an Arsenall, wherein
he lays up monthly at least forty six Quintals of Gunpowder: Here he
causes his Harquebushes and Bows likewise to be made. In the year 1569. by
fire which happened among the Gunpowder houses, the greatest part of the City
was very much defaced.

His soldiery is of diverse sorts: the first consists of 2700. Horsemen, and
2000. Harquebushers, part lying in Garrison in Fez, and part in Maroc^o, where
also lies the Court. The second consists (as a man may say) of a royal
troop of 6000. horse, all Gentlemen Pensioners, and of great reputation. These
ride upon brave Horses, with rich Caparisons, their Arms and Furniture shining
with Gold, Silver, Stones, and all things else, which for variety of colors,
or rich devices, may delight the eye with a gallant show, or feed the humor of
the curious beholder. To these servitors, besides their allowance of Corn,
Provender, Butter, and Flesh for themselves, their Wives, Children, and
Servants, they receive yearly from seventy, to one hundred ounces of Silver.
The third sort are a kind of Timariots: for the Xeriffe does allot a certain
portion of Land and Tenants to his Sons, Brethren, and Men of quality amongst
the people of Afric and Arabia, for the maintenance of their degrees. Those
whom they term Alcaids, look to the manuring of the fields, gather the rents
of Corn, Rice, Oats, Oil, Butter, Flesh, Poultry, and Money, and distribute it
monthly amongst the Soldiers, to every man according to his place. They
likewise give them Linen, Woollen, and Silk for their Garments: Armor and
Horses for service. If their horses chance to be slain, they give them new: so
did the Romans to those which served on the horses of the State. The Commanders
of these troops are very careful to see their soldiers in heart and full of
life, excellent well armed and competently attired. They receive between four
and twenty and thirty ounces of Silver yearly. The fourth sort make the
Arabians, who commonly live in Tents, divided by 120. under their several
Leaders, to be always ready upon all occasions. They serve on Horseback,
but more like Thieves and Out-lawes than Soldiers. The fifth sort is like the
press of the Christian Commonweals. These companies consist of Citizens,
Villagers, and Mountaine-people. Of these men the King makes no reckoning,
neither does he willingly arm them, for fear of sedition and innovation,
unless it be to war upon the Christians, wherein he cannot forbid them to
serve. For upon remembrance of the slaughter of the Moors by the Christians,
spoken of in their Mahumeticall Legend, the more Christians they slay, the
easier they think shall be their passage to Heaven: Hereupon you shall see
herds of people running to this war, desiring there to die upon hope of
meriting salvation by the slaughter of our people. The same fury (be it spoken
to our shame) inrageth the Turks: especially for the propagation of their
heresies, you shall see them more liker people running to the celebration of a
mariage-feast, than to a war-journey; hardly enduring to stay the limited time
of the Randevou. They account them Saints which die with their weapons in their
hands, and those most unhappie which depart this world amongst the tears of
their children, and the mournings of their wives.

By this, it may sufficiently appear what forces the Xeriffe is able to bring
to the field, but examples will make it more clear. Muley Abdala beleagred
Magazan with two hundred thousand men: He filled the ditch with a mount made of
earth, and with his Ordnance beat the wall level with the ground; but by the
prowess of the Portugal, and fury of their Miners, he was forced to raise his
siege and depart. It is certain, he is not able to hold any war above three
months, because the soldier lives upon his daily allowance of Diet and
Apparel: and when such like provisions cannot be conveyed to the place of
necessity, without great labor and hazard, it comes oftentimes to pass,
that for want of provision the army is constrained to break and retire.
Molucco King of Fez, who defeated Sebastian, had under his standard forty
thousand Horsemen, and eight thousand hired footmen; and with the Arabians
and other common soldiers, it is thought that he is able to levy seventie
thousand horse, and a far greater number of foot.

The Higher Aethiopia, or the Empire of Presbyter John.
LInscho^en is of opinion, that Pres^er John is but a supposed name. The Moors
term him Asiclabassi; his own Subjects, Acegune, prime Emperor, and Negus,
chiefest King. He says, his true denomination is Bel-gian. Bell (as before)
signifies highest; and Gian Lord: which is also proper to many Commanders and
Governors under him: but Bel-gian to none, ^ave the Emperor himself;
whereunto he adds the Surname of David, in the same sense as the Christian
Emperors assume the Titles of Caesar, or Augustus; and worthily: For he is the
greatest and powerfullest Prince in all Afric. His Dominions begin at the
entrance of the Red Sea, and stretch to the entrance of the Island of Siene
(lying under the tropicke of Cancer) excepting some part of the Coast upon the
same Sea, which the Turk within these fourscore years has taken from him.
So that his government toward the North-west and East, lies most part by the
Red Sea, and North-east upon Egypt, and the deserts of Nubia: and upon the
South Side upon Monemugi; So that to set down the greatness of all the
Countries which this Christian King has under his command, were to say, that
in compass they contain four thousand Italian miles.

Ios^phus. affirms, that in ancient times they were called Chusaet, of Chus
the son of Cham; And at this day some hold that the Portugals term them
C^ssios. But in the Egyptian tongue they are styled Abessini, by reason of
their scattering habitation. The Country, by report of late Travelers, is
most fertile: For admit it yield Wheat in scarcity, yet abounds it in
Barley, Millet, Pease, Beans, and such like Pulse, as we neither know nor can
name. And although the Soveraigntie of this Prince be very magnificent,
powerful, and spacious; yet in truth does it nothing answer, the fame and
report of the vulgar. Horatius Malaguccius in his discourse De amplitudine
dominiorum hujus temporis, maintains it to be larger than the Empire of any
other Potentate, except that of the King of Spain. Truly I must needs say,
that in elder age, by the number of his Titles, it may be conjectured, that his
Dominions did stretch far: for he did entitle himself King of Goiam, (which
is beyond Nilus) Va^gue and Damur; places situated beyond the River Zair,
whereas at this day, he hardly comes near the banks of either River: yea,
John Baroz writes, that the Abessines, by reason of the Mountains between
them and Nilus* have little or no knowledge of that River.

It is divided into vast Plains, fertile Hillocks and Mountains, Fertility.
though wondrous high yet fit for tillage, and full of habitation. It is not
very well stored with Wheat, but it brings forth Barley, Millet, a certain
other Grain wholesome and indurable, Indian Wheat, and all other kind of
Pulse (as well known as unknown to us) in very plentiful manner. They have
Vines, but make no Wines, unless it be in the Kings Court, or the Patriarchs
Palace, instead whereof they brew a kind of sharp Beverage,-made of the fruit
of Tamerind. The Orange, Limon and Cedar tree grow wild. They make Oil of a
certain fruit which they call Zava, it is of a good color, but unsavory. The
Bees build their Hives even in their houses, whereupon arises a great
quantity of Wax and Honey. Their garments are woven of a Cotton-wooll. The
richer sort are clothed in sheepskins; the Gentlemen in cases of Lions, Tigers
and Linces. Their riches consist in herds of Oxen, Goats, Sheep, Mules, Asses
and Camels. Of horses their breed is small, but they have great store of goodly
Coursers brought them from Arabia and Egypt. They have Hens, Geese,
wilde-swine, Hearts, Goats and Hares, but no Conies; yea, and such Beasts, of
which we have not the like; as Panthers, Lions, Elephants and Linces. To speak
in a word: there is no Country under heaven fitter for increase of Plants, and
all living creatures; but none less helped by art or industry, for the
Inhabitants are idle and unthriftie. They have Flax, but make no cloth, they
have Sugarcanes and Iron-mines, but know not the use of either, and as for
Smiths they fear them as fiends. They have Rivers and streams, yet will not
they take pains in droughts to cut the banks to water their Tillage,-or
hearten their grounds. Few give themselves to hunting or fishing, which causes
their fields to swarm with foul and venison, and their Rivers with fish. But
it seems, that the true ground of their idleness arises from their evil
usage; for their poor people perceiving their Landlords to pole and pill
them, never sow more than they needs must. They keep no method in their
speeches, and to write a letter, many men (and that many days) must lay their
wits together. At meals they neither use cloth, napkin nor tables. They are
utterly ignorant in Physic. The Gentlemen, Burgers, and Plebeians dwell
apart, yet may any man rise to honor by virtue and prowess. The first borne
is heir to all, even to the uttermost farthing. Through the whole Land, there
is not a Town containing above sixteen hundred households, and but few of that
quantity: For, for the most part they dwell dispersed in small Villages. They
have no Castle or fortification, in imitation of the Spartans, maintaining that
a Country ought to be defended by the Sword, and not by strength of earth or
stone. They barter one thing for another, and to make reckonings even, they
supply the want with Corn and Salt. For Pepper, Frankincense, Myrrh and Salt,
they give Gold, and that by weight, as for Silver it is in little request. The
greatest concourse of people is about the Kings Court, which never stays long
in one place, but is ever in progress, sometime in one place, sometime in
another, and ever in the open fields, under Tents and Pavillions. It is said to
contain ten miles in circuit. His government is tyrannical; for he entreats
his Vassals, rich and poor, more liker slaves than subjects: which to do with
the greater safety, he carries himself amongst them with a holy and
Saint-like adoration: for at his bare name they bow their bodies, and touch the
earth with their hands. They reverence his Pavillion, yea though he be absent.

In old times they were accustomed to show themselves to the people but once in
three years, State.
but since they are grown less Majesticall, showing themselves thrice in one
year; to wit, on Christmas Day, on Easter Day, and on Holy-Rood-day; yea and
in these times, the Kings, which now reign, are become more gracious. When any
matter is committed in the Princes name to any man, he is to attend his
Commission stark naked to the middle. Being called to witness a matter in
controversy, they hardly speak truth, unless they swear by the life of the
King. He gives and takes, to whom, and from whom he pleases, neither dare
he, from whom he takes, for his life make show of a discontented countenance.
He presents to holy Orders, and disposes at his good pleasure of the goods
of the Spirituality, as well as of the Laity. In traveling, he rides
shadowed with red Curtains, high and deep, incompassing him round about.

He wears on his head a Crown, the one half wrought with Gold: and the
other of Silver, in his hand he bears a Silver Crucifix. He covers his face
with a piece of watchet Taftata, which more or less he lifts up and puts
down according as he is minded to grace him with whom he talks. Sometimes
he shows his whole leg, lifting it without the hangings, then may no man
approach but by degrees, and after many courtesies, and diverse messages passing
to and fro. No man has vassals but the King, to whom once a year they do
homage, and protest obedience as subjects to their Liege Sovereign. He
derived his pedigree from Milech the son of Solomon and Saba. In the reign
of Candaces, they received the Christian Faith: and about that time, one
Gasparis became famous in Aethiopia; from whom after thirteen generations,
descended that John, who first took upon him the Surname of Sanctus, and left
it an hereditary Title to his house and successors.

This man having no issue of his body, about the time of Constantine, gave the
Kingdom to the eldest son of his brother Caius, and invested the younger (
Balthazar and Melchior) the one with the Kingdom of Fatigar, the other with
the Kingdom of Goiam; and so divided the blood royal into three Families, the
Gaspars, Balthasars, and Melchiors. To avoid sedition and innovation, he made
a Law, that the sons, brethren, and nearest kindred of the Emperor should be
kept and shut up in the Castle of Amara, and that they should neither succeed
in the Empire, nor enjoy any honorable estate, for which cause the Emperors
ever since have seldom married. He manureth his Domaines with his own slaves
and Cattle; who by reason they are suffered to marry, and their issues
remain in the same estate of villenage, as do their Fathers; they increase to
infinite multitudes. Every man that has any inheritance does likewise pay
tribute, some Horses, some Oxen, others Gold, Cotton-wooll, or such like. It is
thought that he is Lord of infinite Treasures, and to have store of houses full
of Cloth, Jewels, and Gold. In his Letters to the King of Portugal, upon
condition that he would wage war against the Infidels, he offered him a Million
of Gold, and a Million of men, with provision according. He is reported to lay
up yearly in the Castle of Amara three Millions of Gold. And true it is, that
before the days of King Alexander, he did hoord up great store of Gold in rude
and unwrought Masses; but no such quantity as is spoken, because they know not
how to refine it. Revenue.
His Revenues are of three sorts: the first arises of his Crowne-land; the
second of the Taxes of his people, who pay every man by house somewhat, besides
the tenth of all that is dug out of their Mines: the third he levieth of the
great Lords, and they give him the Revenue of any one of their Towns (which he
will choose,) so he choose not that wherein themselves inhabit. And albeit the
Prince be very rich, yet the people are idle and beggarly: partly because they
are entreated as slaves, which usage takes from any people that courage and
alacrity of spirit which should be in men professing arms, and undergoing
dangers; and partly because in respect of that base bond of servile fidelity,
wherewith they are overawed to his Majesty, they perceive their hands are fast
bound, through fear whereof, they have no other weapon fit for service, than a
rusty head-peece, a Scull or Curasse, which the Portugals have brought thither.
So that having neither fortress to sly unto, nor weapons to repulse wrongs;
their Villages and substance lie always open to the prey and spoil of
whosoever will invade them. Their offensive weapons are certain darts, and
arrows without feathers. They observe a Lent of fifty days, which by reason
of their true (or rather superstitious) abstinence, does bring their bodies so
weak and low, that for many days after they are not able to gather strength
to move themselves from one place to another. At which time the Moors watching
opportunity, invading their Dominions, carry away men, women, and wealth.
Francis Alvarez writes, that he is able to bring into the field an hundred
thousand men: but experience has manifested, that even in his extremities, his
numbers were far inferior to that reckoning. He has Knights of an order
dedicated to the protecton of S. Anthony. Every Gentleman Father of three sons
(except the eldest) is bound to give one to the service of the King; out of
these are chosen twelve thousand Horsemen for the guard of his person. Their
vow and oath is to defend the bounds of the Empire, and to fight against the
enemies of the Christian Faith.

He is fronted with three puissant neighbors: Borderers.
the King of Borno, the great Turk, and the King of Adel. King of Borno.
The King of Borno is Lord of that Country, which from Guangula Eastward
stretches about five hundred miles between the deserts of Seth and Barca. In
situation it is very uneven, sometime mountainous, and sometime plain; the
people indifferent civil, the Country reasonably well inhabited, and in
regard of plenty of victual somewhat resorted unto by Merchants. On the
Mountains dwell Neat-herds, and Sheep-herds, living for the most part upon
Millet, leading a bestiall life, without Religion, and accompanying with one
another Wives. They know no other names than such as are given them for some
note or mark of their body, as Blind, Lame, Tall, Bold, etc. This King is
very puissant in people, of whom he exacteth no other tribute than the tenths
of the increase of their liveli-hoods. For exercise, and in stead of
occupations, they give themselves to steal, to slay their neighbors, and to
take them prisoners, and then to barter them for Horses with the Merchants of
Barbary. He has under him many Kingdoms and Nations, some white, some
black. He is an heavy enemy to the Abessines, taking away their Cattle,
rifling their Mines, and leading away the people in captivity. His Horsemen
ride after the Spanish manner, armed with Lances, (steeled at both ends) Darts
and Arrows: but their inrodes resemble rather robberies and garboiles, than
wars managed by valiant soldiers.

The Turk likewise on the East, Turk.
and the King of Adel on the South-East, do cruelly vex him; for they have
curtal'd his large dominion, and brought his Provinces into great misery. In
the year 1558. the Turk harried the whole Territory of Bernagasso, and took
from Prester John whatsoever he was Lord of upon the Seacoast, especially the
Haven and City of Suaquen and Erococo; in which place the mountains between
Abex and the Red Sea, make a gate as it were for the traffike and carriages of
the Abessines and Arabians. And since that Bernagasso was forced to submit
himself to the Turkish commands, to buy his peace, and in name of a tribute to
pay 1000 ounces of Gold yearly.

The King of Adel is his no less infestious enemy: he bordereth upon the
Kingdom of Fatigar; King of Adel.
and his Seigniory stretches along the Red Sea as far as Assum, Salir, Mith,
Barbora, Pidar, and Zeila. Many ships come from Aden and Cambaia to Barbora
with Merchandise, which they trucke for Flesh, Honey, Wax, and Victual; these
commodities are carried to Aden; Gold, Ivory, and such wares are sent to
Cambaia; the greatest part of Victual, Honey, Wax, Corn and Fruits brought
from Zeila, are carried into Aden and Arabia, also much Cattle, especially
Sheep, having tails of twenty five pound weight, with heads and necks all
black, the rest of their bodies all white. Of these Cattle there are some
altogether white, with turning crooked tails as long as a man's arm, and
dew-laps like Oxen. Some of their Kine have horns with many branches like our
Dear: othersome have one horn in their forehead growing backward, a span and
a half long. The chief City of this Kingdom is Arar, thirty eight leagues
distant from Zeila toward the South-East. He professes Mahumetisme, and since
his conversion he has entitled himself with the surname of Holy; avowing
continual war against the Abessine Christians; and therefore he watches the
time of the foresaid Fast of fifty days, when he enters their Territories,
burns their Villages, takes prisoners, and then commits a thousand other
mischiefs.

The Abessine slaves do often leave their Country, The Slaves.
and take upon them great journies, putting themselves in the service of great
Lords, where many times by their industry and good carriage they become high
Commanders in Arabia, Cambaia, Bengala, and Sumatra. For the Mahumetan Princes
being all Tyrants and Lords of those Countries, which they have forced from the
Gentiles, to secure their estates, do never trust to their homebred subjects,
but wage strangers and slaves, unto whose fidelity they commit their persons,
and the managing of all the affairs of their Kingdoms. And amongst all sorts
of slaves, the Abessine is in greatest esteem for his faithfulness and
towardly disposition. The King of Adel overlayeth Egypt and Arabia with their
slaves, which he changes with the Turks and Princes of Arabte, for armor,
provision of war, and soldiers. In the year of our Lord 1500. Claud King of
Abex perceiving himself inferior unto Grand Ameda King of Adel, (for he had
vexed his Land fourteen years with incursions) forsaking the frontiers,
retired himself into the inward parts of his Kingdom, entreating for aid of
Stephen Gama, Viceroy of India, under John the third King of Portugal, who was
then in the Red Sea with a warlike Navy. In compassion of his miseries and
Religion, he sent him four hundred Portugal shot, very well furnished, under
the conduct of Christopher his Brother. By the aid and use of their Artillery,
he overthrew his Enemies in two battles: but the King of Adel obtaining of the
Governor of the City of Zebit one thousand Harquibushers, and ten pieces of
Ordnance; in the third fight put the Portugals to flight, and slew their
Captain. Afterward, when Adel had sent away these Turks, King Claudius set
upon him at unawares by the River Zeila, at the Mountain Sana, with eight
thousand footmen, five hundred Abessine horsemen, and the remainder of the
living Portugals, one of whom gave Grada-Amada his deaths wound. But in March
1560. Claudius fighting with the Moors of Malaca, gaining the victory, was
slain in the battle. Adam his brother succeeded, against whom, being a
Demi-Mahumetan, the greatest part of the Abessine Nobility rebelled, and was
overthrown in the year 1562. by Bernagasso. By this casualty did the
Aethi^pian affairs ebb and slow; But in the reign of Alexander, things
began in some sort to return to their ancient State, by the aid of the
Portugals, who furnished them with weapons both offensive and defensive, and by
their example encouraged them to be stout and courageous against their enemies.

All that were living after the defeature of Christopher Gama, and all that
ever went thither since that day to this, do remain there, marrying Wives,
and begetting Children. King Alexander gave them leave to elect a Justicer, and
to end all matters of controversy amongst themselves, which makes them so
willing to stay and teach them the use of Weapons, the manners of warfare, and
how to fortify places of importance. Sithence those times (Francis Medicis
contracting friendship with the Abessine) diverse Florentines, some for
pleasure, and some for profit have traveled into those Provinces; wherein when
they are once entered, the King entreats them so fair, and gives them so
liberally whereon to live; that they can hardly obtain license to return
again into their own Countries.

Besides these he has other enemies, as the King of Da^ca^, whose City and
Haven is Vela upon the Red Sea, and the Moors of Doba, a Province divided into
fourteen Lieutenantships. These people, though they are accounted within the
limits of the Abessine Empire, yet do they often rebel, having a Law amongst
themselves, that no young man may contract Matrimony, unless he can bring
good proof that he has slain twelve Christians.

Monomotapa.
Upon this Continent are contained many other Kingdoms. As Gualata, small and
poor; Tombuto, great and populous; Melli, rich in Corn, Flesh, and
Cottonwooll. Guinea is next, greater and richer than any other within the
Moors Country, except Egypt and Abessine, Angola, Manicongo, Co^go,
Mombassa, Quiolasafola, Melinde, Mosambique, Mon^^^^gi, with the rest within
land, are all inhabited with Moors, Mahumetans, Heathen and barbarous people,
who live plentifully upon those good nutriments, which God and nature has
provided for those places; traffiking and bartering one with another; some for
Ambergrice, Wax, Silver, Copper, and Rice; some for Gold, Pearl, Linen, and
Silks, and others for Ivory, Cotton, and such inbred commodities, as each
Province peculiarly can spare to the necessities of the other. Monomotapa
seems to be civiller and better governed than any of the residue, and is
almost an Island lying between the Rivers of Cuama, and Spirito Sancto, from
whence it stretches along the Seacoast to the Cape of good Hope; and on the
North to the Kingdom of Mo^emugi. It is an hundred and fifty leagues in
compass, Greatness.
and all the Vice-Royes (or Lieutenants) throughout that whole territory do
acknowledge the King thereof for their Sovereign. Of Towns and Villages they
have few, but Cottages many, and those compacted of timber and thatcht. Cities
there are also many, whereof Zimbas and Benemetaxa are between twenty, and
five and twenty miles distant from Sofola, toward the West. The soil
abounds with Corn, and Cattle great and small, wandering by herds through
the fields and woods. Elephants teeth.
By the store of teeth from thence yearly transported, we can but conjecture,
that less than five Elephants cannot but die in this Country: these beasts are
herevery huge. Mines.
There is no climate like it for plenty of Gold; for there are said to be three
thousand Mines, whereout Gold is usually dug. Which commodity is also found
as well in the Plains, as in Rocks and in Rivers. Whereof the Mine of Manica,
Boro, Quiticui, and Tero^, (which some men all Butna) are the chiefest. So that
some men are of opinion, Salomons O^hir.
that out of this Country Solomon procured his Gold and Ivory to be brought
unto Jerusalem: Which seems not unlikely, for that in this Kingdom were
found many old and Prince-like buildings, and those very costly in Timber,
Stone, Chalk, and Wood; which in the Countries thereabouts are not to be found.

The Government is great, and extends over many warlike people; Government.
all Pagans; mean of stature, black, well set, and very swift. Their weapons
are Darts, and light Targets, and the men much given to rebellion: the cause,
wherefore the Prince retains the heirs of his vassal Princes, to be secured
of their parents; as also, that he entertaineth strong Regiments in several
Provinces, divided into legions after the Roman manner. Amongst the which, that
he accounts his battalion of Amazons, comparable (for trust of person) to the
Turkish Pretorian Ianizars, with their manner of warfare, copulation, and
educating of their males, according to the ancient custom of those masculine
Viragoes; you may, by my leave, confidently believe, because some late
travelers have as lately reported it. But truth it is, that according to their
uncivil civility they converse with the King kneeling on their knees, and to
sit in his presence is the use with them, as with us to stand; and that is
granted but to great Lords only. The assay of meat and drink is not made
before, but after the Prince has eat and drunk. Here are no prisons, because
Law passes upon the offender in the very moment wherein the offense was
committed: The offenses most severely punished, are Witchcraft, Theft, and
Adultery. They pay no other tribute but certain days work and presents,
without which no man may appear in the Princes presence. The King bears in
his Coat Armor a little spade, with an Ivory handle, and two small Darts.

One of them not long since was converted and baptized by Gonsalva Silva a
Jesuit, with the greater part of his Courtiers; but afterward (by the
persuasion of certain Moors in great credit about him) he caused him to be
slain. Sebastian King of Portugal offended hereat, proclaimed war against
him under the leading of Francisco Berotio. This Army consisted of sixteen
hundred, the greatest part Gentlemen, to whom the Monomotapa fearing their
Arms and valor, offered honorable conditions, but the Captain (whom no
offer or indifferency could satisfy) was overcome, and his Army utterly
consumed, yet not by the enemy, but by sickness and in the infectious air of
the Country.

Egypt.
IN this description, I will rather follow the, opinion of Ptolomy, and some
others, who make it a part of Africa, than those who either refer some
portion thereof to Asia, and the residue to Afric. It is a most noble and
ancient Region, much celebrated both in Scripture, and other profane Writers,
for the excellency and antiquity thereof. In holy Writ (as witnesses Josephus)
it is called Misraim, and so the Inhabitants. For Misraim was the Son of
Chus, the Son of Cham, the Son of Noe. The Arabians call the country Mesre,
but the Inhabitants Chibeth, for such was his Name that first brought his
Colonie into these parts. It is plain, sandy, and low Land without Mountains,
which is the reason that it cannot be seen afar off: the air is hot and
infectious; and therefore either to avoid or mollify the intolerable heat of
Summer Sun, the Inhabitants are accustomed in all their Cities upon the tops
of their Houses to build open Tarases, to let the wind drive in through all
their rooms. Yet is not this Country as the rest of Afric, infested with the
Southern winds engendered of heat; but is especially refreshed with the
Northern, which here is moist, and in other places dry. It has no
Earthquakes nor showers, but of very able fertility; and if it rain (as it
seldom does) it brings many diseases, as Murres, Catars, Agues, and such
like.

The inundation of Nilus is mother of all fertility, Fertility.
the want thereof an assured prediction of famine and scarcity. The Country is
full of cuts and inlets from this River, which long ago Sesostris caused to
be entrenched, left those Towns which were situated from the maine bank in
the heart of the Kingdom should want water upon the ebbing of the River. This
inundation causes such plentiful harvests, that through the whole earth,
better increase, and speedier ripeness is not to be found.

The wealth hereof is rather to be admired than estimated; Riches.
in reviewing the spendor and magnificence of their regal Antiquities, their
Labyrinths, their Pyramides, and waterworks, all built and perfected at
inestimable charges. The ruins whereof are to be seen at this day, whereunto
the bravest Monuments of the Roman Empire are nothing comparable. The revenue
of this Kingdom in times past, both in regard of the fertility of Nilus, and
the infinite quantity of Merchandise transported from Aethiopia, Arabia, and
India, has been very great. Some report (says Ptolomie) that Auletes
received from hence twelve millions and fifty talents, which according to the
computation of Budaeus, arises to seven millions and a half of Crowns: the
Romans received a far greater mass, but now by the Portugal Navigations it
yields the Turk no such reckoning.

Howbeit it cannot be but at this day very great, for that in fear of the
Florentine Fleet, the grand Seigniour dare not commit the treasure thereof to
the passage by Sea; but is at charges every year to transport it over land by
a convoy of Ianizars.

About the beginning of April they go to harvest; by the twentieth of May no
one ear of Corn is left growing. About the banks of Nilus it brings forth
the fruits of the earth with great ease; but farther off, they are feign with
the labor of Oxen and Men, to let in Water from the Rivers by trenches to
moisten their grounds.

Besides wild Beasts and harmefull in abundance, it affords infinite store
of tame cattle, as the Buffall, the Ox, Camel, the Horse, the Ass, the
Ram, and the Goat. All which (as Bellonius affirms) by reason of their
deep pastures and excellent temperature of the Country, do exceed common
proportion: As the Ram, who grows very fat and extraordinary big, having a
large and gross tail trailing after him upon the earth, and a dewlap in
manner of an Ox.

And for that the Winter is very pleasant, and the soil moorish, it is no
less stored with Foul, especially with Storkes, who for their infinite
abundance (especially toward the Nile) a man would imagine the fields to be
covered with white: But as these flocks of Birds are admirable, no less
noisome are their swarms of Frogs. So that if God had not ordained these Birds
to devour this Vermin, all places would prove loathsome, barren, and
infectious. The Country is now divided into three Provinces; Sahid exceeding in
Flax, all sorts of Pulse, Poultrie and Cattle: Errisia in Fruits and Rice:
Maremma in Cottons and Sugar. The Pharaohs resided in Sahid; the Ptolomies in
Errisia; and the Romans and Greeks along the Sea-shores. But the Mahumetans
have made the midst of the land the seat of their Empire. The people of the
middle times were prone to innovations, luxurious, and cowardly cruel: Those
that now inhabit the Country, are for the most part Moors. Of Turks and Jews
there are many, but they reside in Cities. Of Arabians and Negroes not a few.
Of Christians the Natives are most, and those termed Copties; some Greeks there
be, and a few Armenians of all the poorest and honestest, laboring painfully
and living soberly. These Copties be the true Egyptians, and hold the Roman
Church for heretical, rejecting all general Councels after that of Ephesus.
In this Country was Thebes destroyed by Cambises; Memphis, Babylon, and
Alexandria, if not destroyed, yet were defaced by time and divine punishment.
Cair.
Cair is seated on the East side of Nilus, winding therewith in the form of a
Crescent, stretching South and North with the suburbs adjoining, containing in
length five Italian miles, in breadth scarce one and a half at broadest. The
walls carry small show of strength, yet is it strong, as appeared by that three
days battle which Selimus was constrained to carry through it, being opposed
by a poor remainder of the surviving Mamalucks. For the streets are narrow,
and the houses high built, all of stone well high to the top: At the end almost
of all, a Gate; which being shut (as every night they are) make every street a
defensible Castle. The Inhabitants consist most of Merchants and Artificers,
not frequenting foreign Marts.

The Country was no sooner known, but it was inhabited. And although it were,
and is of hard access, by reason of the huge Deserts, steep Mountains,
moorish places, and violent Seas, where with it is wholly encompassed; yet has
it suffered diverse and lamentable alterations under the yoke of strangers. For
first it was subject to their native Kings, and they were the Pharaohs; then to
the Aethiopians, whom Cambises King of Persia expulsed and subjected. After
that, they revolted from Darius (sir-named Nothus) and elected Kings again of
their own Nation, until the days of Alexander the Macedonian. After whose
death, the third time they had their own Kings called Ptolomies, of Ptolomie
the son of Lagus; In whose race it continued till the times of Ptolomeus
Aulet^s, Father of Cleopatra, whom Augustus Caesar utterly defeated, and
annexed the Province to the Roman Empire. Under the Romans the Egyptians
became Christians, and in the division of the Empire it accrued to the share of
the Constantinopolitan Emperors. But in the declination thereof the people
being weary of their oppressions, called in the Saracens to assist them in the
expulsion of these Greeks. And expulsed they were by Hamro, General to Homar
the second Mahumetan high Priest; who only imposing a tribute, afforded unto
all liberty of Religion. Long time his successors held the sovereignty thereof
until the reign of Melec-sala, who being often foiled by those Christians,
which after the days of Godfrey reigned in Soria and Jerusalem, Anciently
called G^^es.
and hereupon distrusting the courages and effeminacy of the Inhabitants,
procured a multitude of Circassian slaves in his assistance from the Tartars,
who first in those days began to amaze the Provinces with their multitudes:
These he armed, and by these he gave the Franks a direful overthrow. And they
again insulting in their victories and mutual valors, slew their patron
Melec-sala, elected a Sultan of their own, tyrannized over the natural
Inhabitants, and by yearly purchases of Circassian children, erected and
maintained that strong body of war, which until the days of our Ancestors,
in this Kingdom bare the name of Mamalucks, and so continued dreadful in
power, and abounding in riches for the space of two hundred and seventy years,
even until the times of Selimus, who utterly extinguished both the name and
discipline of the said souldierie, together with their Sultans, Empery and
Fortunes. In whose posterity it remains to this day, and is now governed by a
Bassa, who as absolute Sovereign resideth and commands in Caire. Under him
are 16. Sanziacks, and 100000. Spahies, by estimation., Riches.
The revenues amount to three millions of Shariffs: The grand Seignior has
one, part whereof is conveyed over land with a guard of 600. soldiers, for
fear of the Florentine Fleet, as before. Another is spent in pays, and in
setting forth the Carvan to Mecha; The third the Governor has for support of
his charge and estate, and entertainment of dependants.

Aethiopia Inferior.
THe lower Aethiope, siteth most Southerly of any part of Afric, unknown to
Ptolomie, and but lately discovered by the Portugals.

It contains many Kingdoms, whereof some are famous and unwritten of; some
obscure, and not worth the recording: Amongst them is Adel, a large Kingdom,
adorned with two famous Mart-Townes, Zeila and Barbora. Adea, Magadazzum, a
Kingdom and City, Zanzibar, Melina, Mombassa, Quiola, Mozambique, Cafala,
Angola, and Loangi, all Kingdom. Amongst the Islands, Insula Spiritus sancti,
Madera, the Canaries, Capo verde, Saint Thomas, Magadascar, and Zocotarie are
the most famous.

THE FOVRTH BOOK.
Of Asia.
ASia is the greatest, and vastest part of the World, and in ancient times
acknowledged for the third part thereof. Now it is accounted the fourth, or if
you please, one of the seven, exceeding the ancient two, viz. Europe and
Afric, in largeness and circuit: especially in these our days, being wholly
discovered to the East and North, the habitations of the Chinois and Tartars;
without accounting the Islands thereunto belonging, which if they were
adjoined, would make a Continent far fairer than Europe.

Upon three parts it is bounded with the vast Ocean, surnamed the Orient; on
the South, with the Indian; upon the North with the Scythian; upon the West it
is somewhere dis^oyned from Europe and Africa with the Red Sea, somewhere with
the Mediterranean, somewhere with the Euxine, and somewhere with the River
Tanais. The Regions which of old it contained, were Pon^us, Bithynia, Phrygia
the Great, Lycia, Galatia, Paphlagonia, Pamphylia, Cappadocia, Armenia the
Less; Cilicia, Sarmatia Asiatica, Colchis, Iberia, Albania, Armenia the Great,
Cyprus, Syria cava, Phoenicia, Palestina, Arabia petrea, Mosopotamia, Arabia
deserta, Babylonia, Assyria, Susiana, Media, Persis, Parthia, Carmania deserta,
Carmania altera, Arabia Felix, Hyrcania, Margiana, Bractriana, Sogdiana,
Sacarum Regio, Scythia within Imaus, Scythia without Imaus, Serica, Aria,
Paramisus, Drang^^no, Arachosia, G^drosia, India on this side Ganges, India
beyond Ganges, Sinatum Regio, and Taproban.

Generally it enjoys a most excellent temperature of air, and is so rich,
fertile, and barefull for variety of fruits and feeding; and so abounding
therewith, that in all these good gifts, it excels all Countries whatsoever.
For here are to be found diverse sorts of living Creatures and Plants, the like
whereof the whole world again affords not: As Balm, Sugar canes,
Frankincense, Myrrh, Cassia, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Pepper, Saffron, sweet Woods,
Musk, and diverse other sorts of Drugs and Odors; excellent Gold, all sorts of
Minerals, and precious stones.

Of beasts, it affords the Elephant and Camel, with diverse strange sorts,
both wild and tame.

The people are of excellent wits, exceeding rich, and happy in all good
things: This Region has been the Parent of many rare spirits, and the Seat of
most mighty and flourishing Empires: As wherein reigned the Monarchs of the
Assyrians, Persians, Babylonians, Parthians, and Medes. No less regardfull at
this day are the Empires of the Turks, Tartars, Persians, Mogors, Indians and
Chinois; but indeed most celebrated in Holy Writ for our Creation, Fall, and
Redemption, as the Region wherein, in a manner, all the Histories and Acts
mentioned in the Old Testament, and a great part of those of the New, were
wrought and accomplished. The Ancients divided it into diverse parts, but at
this present it is best divided into five, according to the chief and
principal Empires therein: the first whereof confining with Europe, is
governed by the Great Duke of Moscovie; the second belongs to the Great Cham;
the third is commanded by the Turk; the fourth is the Kingdom of Persia; the
fifth comprehends that which has always been called India, and governed by
diverse Princes, for the most part vassals, feodaries, or tributaries to other
Potentates. The principal Islands, are Iapan, Luconia, Mindanao, Burneo,
Sumatra, Zeiland and Cyprus.

Russia, alias Sarmatia, now Moscovia.
THe Great Duke of Moscovia is Lord of a most large Dominion, and within the
limits of his jurisdiction are contained many Regions.

It is bou^ded on the North with Lappia and the North Ocean: Bounded.
On the South by the Chrim Tartars: On the East by the Nagarans, possessing all
the Country on the East side of Volga, toward the Caspian sea: On the West
and Southwest lie Lituania, Livonia, and Polonia.

The natural Shires pertaining to Russia, Shires.
and whereof perticularly the Great Duke will not (without offense) but be
styled King, are sixteen, but far greater and larger than the Shires of
England, though not so well peopled. The other Provinces (being nine, with a
great part of Siberia,) being not natural Russes, the Emperors of late years
have purchased by their swords, and subjected them to their Laws, Customs and
Taxes. Casan and Astrachan, by them termed Kingdoms, have devolved unto them
by like providence. As for all his interest in Lituania (to the number of
thirty great Towns and more) with Narve and Dorp in Livonia, they are quite
gone, surprised of late times by the Kings of Poland and Sweden.

From North to South, measuring from Cola to Astrachan, it contains in length
four thousand two hundred and sixty Versts (a verst is three quarters of a
mile English.) Beyond Cola he has more Territory Northward, viz. to
Tromschna, running four thousand versts welnie beyond Pechinga, near
Wardhuis; but not clearly possessed, by reason that the Kings of Sweden and
Denmark have diverse Towns therein, as well as the Russe, every one of them
claiming the lawful possession of these Northern Provinces, as in his own
right. The breadth taken farthest Westward on the Narve side, to the bounds of
Siberia Eastward, where the Emperor has some garrisons, is four and forty
hundred ve^sts, or thereabouts. If these Dominions were all habitable and
peopled, the Russe Emperor were either very unlikely to hold them, or holding
them with good government, would prove too mighty for his bordering Neighbors.

And although by the spaciousness of these Territories, it should seem that
he has engrossed many Countries, and for brevities sake, has also assumed the
titles into the credit and majesty of one Monarchy: yet it may well be
compared to the fortune of the five Kings that took Lot prisoner; whom Abraham
with his three hundred and eighteen menial-servants released, and set at
liberty: witness the proof, which a few resolute and well ordered English
soldiers made of late amongst them, even in the fields of Novograd, where they
contracted their own conditions in despite of that whole Army, which both
Poles and Moscovites rallied against them.

It is situated partly in Europe, Situation.
and partly in Asia, which separation is caused by the River of Tanais, bounder
of Asia, and running through the middle of the Country. By which (as the Rasse
reports) a man may pass from Mosco to Constantinople, and so into all those
parts of the world by water; only drawing his Boat (as their custom is) over a
little Isthmus of land. This passage was proved not long since by a Russe
Ambassador sent to Constantinople; who passing the Moscua, entered into Ock^,
and from thence (as aforesaid) drawing his Boat over land, fell into Tanais,
then into Meotis, and so to his journeyes end. The Pole at Moscua is 55.
degrees and ten minutes: At Saint Nicholas 63. and 50. minutes.

The people were once subject to the Tartars, whose Prince Roydo in the year
1140. conquered Moscovie; but John the first (encouraged by their civil
dissentions) denied them tribute. In process of time, when Ametes the last
successor of Roydo (who died at Vilua) had overcome the Tartars, Precopenses
the great Duke adjoined to his Empire Permia, Vestia and Iugria, Provinces
subject to Ametes. From this time, the forces of the great Duke increasing.
Basilius Casan, and John the second, conquered the Provinces of Citrahan, which
at this day are called Kingdoms. To confess the truth, the great Dukes have
mightily enlarged their bounds; and have taken the great Duchies of Severin and
Smoloneke, Bulchese, Prescovia, Novogrod, Iaroslave, and Roscovia (some of
them) from the Polaques, and some from other Potentates: they possessed thirty
great Towns in Lituania, with Narve and Dorp in Livonia, but they are all
quite gone, being of late years surprised by the Kings of Poland and Sweveland.

The chief City of the Kingdom is Mosco, where the Patriarch resideth;
Roscovia and Novogrod are the Seats of Archbishops: Cortisa, Resania, Columna,
Susdelia, Casan; Vologda, Tuera, Smoloncke, Plescovia, Staritia, Sloboda,
Ieroslave, Volodomir, (from whence the Kings Seat was translated to Mosco by
John the second) Mosayco, Saint Nicholas, Su^ana, Vstium, and Gargapolia are
Bishoprics. The Emperor abides in the City of Mosco, which takes his name
from the River, arising fourscore and ten miles higher into the Country.
Mosco.
The City has been greater than now it is, and was nine miles compass: the
form thereof is in a manner round, environed with three walls, the one within
the other, and streets lying between; whereof the inmost wall and the
buildings closed within it, (lying safest, as the heart within the body, fenced
and watered with the River Mosco, that runs close by it) is all accounted
the Emperors Castle. The number of houses through the whole City, (being
reckoned by the Emperor a little before it was fired by the Enemy) was
accounted to be 41500. in all. But since it was sacked 1571. and burnt by the
Tartars, it contains not above five miles. According to Possevinus, a Writer
of good judgment and industry, there are housed in this City thirty thousand
people, besides Oxen and other Cattle. Doctor Fletcher writes, that it is not
much bigger than the City of London.

Novograde has the name of Great, and yet the same Author allows it not
above twenty thousand Inhabitants; as likewise Smoloncke and Plescovia. As the
Russe says, here was committed that memorable war (so much spoken of in
histories) of the Scythian servants, that took arms against their Masters:
who in memory of their great victory, have ever since in their coin stamped
the figure of a horseman shaking a whip aloft in his hand.

This seems most incredible to me, (if it be true as some write) that
Plescovia, when King Stephen of Poland besieged it, had within it fifty
thousand footmen, and seven thousand Horse. Truly this is a great number, and
though they were not all Moscovites, yet this reckoning asks a great
proportion of Inhabitants; For if the King thrust in fifty seven thousand
fighting men, it must needs be that the Inhabitants were very many more. Some
will have it, that in times past the Country was better replenished with
people, and that afterward it became desolate for three causes: the first was
the Plague (a new disease in Moscovie) which gleaned away many thousand souls:
the second, the Tyranny of their Emperors, who have put infinite numbers to
death, especially of the Nobility: the third the Incursions and robberies of
the Tartars, Precopians, and the Nagayans, which never cease vexing their
bordering neighbors. For the nature of these roguish Tartars is, to make
spoil of all men, and to captivate their bodies, selling them to the Turks
and other Nations. By reason whereof, many far removed Provinces (partly upon
fear, and partly upon policy) are suffered to lie waste and unmanured. And
this is all the good which ambitious Princes gain by their undiscreet
invasions of their neighbors, to the destruction of their people, and their
own vexation.

No Prince made longer journeyes and greater expenses than the great Duke John:
he vanquished the Kingdoms of Casan to Volga, and Astrachan on the Caspian
Sea; he subdued a great part of Livonia. But what honor, what profit, or what
continuance of security gained he by these victories? What was the end of this
war? In those expeditions perished infinite numbers of men, in journeying, in
assaults, with the Sword, with sickness, with hunger, and other extremities.
When he had overcome them, he was enforced to keep great Garrisons; yea, to
bring thither whole Colonies. Besides, when men were so far from home, either
busied in getting other men's goods, or in keeping what they had got, their
wives stayed at home like widows, and the inward part of the Realm remained
empty, as a heart void of blood, wanting his necessary nutriment, whilst the
Inhabitants were wasted on the skirts of the Kingdom. And therefore when it
was invaded by King Stephen of Poland, these remote forces were wanting to make
resistance; and through this oversight he lost again Pozovia, and other pieces
of good reckoning; yea, and was enforced to leave the whole possession of
Livonia to the Polander

To proceed, The soil and climate.
the soil of the Country for the most part is of a slight sandy mould, yet
very much different one place from another; for the yield of such things as
grow out of the earth. Northwards toward the parts of Saint Nicholas and Chola,
and North-East toward Siberia, it is barren and full of desert Woods, by reason
of the climate, and extremity of cold. So likewise along the River Volga,
betwixt the Countries of Casan Astrachan, notwithstanding the soil be
fruitful, it is all inhabited, saving that upon the West Side, the Emperor
has some few Castles and Garrisons in them. This happened by means of the
Chrim Tartars, that will neither plant Towns to dwell in, (living a wild and
vagrant life) nor suffer the Russe, being far off, with Colonies to people
those parts. From Vologda, which lies almost a thousand seven hundred versts
from the Port of Saint Nicholas down toward Mosco, and to toward the South
parts that border upon the Chrim (containing the like space of a thousand seven
hundred Verstz, or thereabouts) it is a very pleasant and fruitful Country,
yielding Pasture and Corn, with Wood and Water in great store and plenty. The
like is between Rezan (lying South-East from Mosco) to Novogrode and Vobsco,
that reaches farthest toward the North-West: So betwixt Mosco and Smolensko
(that lies South-West toward Lituania) is a very fruitful and pleasant
soil, and also very fertile and commodious for those Inhabitants that dwell
therein.

The Country differs very much from it self, by reason of the year; so
that a man would marvel to see the great alteration and difference betwixt
Winter (...). In Winter it lies under snow (which falle^^ (...) unually)
sometime a yard or two of thickness, but deeper toward the North. The Rivers
and other waters are frozen up a yard or more thick, how swift or broad soever
they be. And this continues commonly five months, ( viz.) from the beginning
of November, till toward the end of March, about which time the snow begins
to melt. The sharpness whereof you may judge by this: for that water dropped
down (or cast up into the air) congealeth into Ice before it come to the
ground. In extremity of weather, if you hold a pewter dish or a pot in your
hand, or any other metal (except in some chamber where their warm Stoves be)
your fingers will freeze fast to it, and draw off the skin at parting: when you
pass out of a warm room into a cold, you shall sensibly feel your breath to
wax thick and stifling with the cold as you draw it in and out: Diverse, not
only that travel abroad, but in the very markets and streets of their Towns,
are monstrously pinched, yea, killed withal; so that you shall see many drop
down in the streets, many travelers brought into the Towns, sitting dead and
stiff in their sleds. And yet in Summertime you shall see such a new hue and
face of a Country, the Woods so fresh and so sweet, the Pastures and Meddowes
so green and well grown, (and that upon the sudden) with such variety of
flowers, and such melody of Birds (especially of Nightingales) that a man shall
not lightly travel in a more pleasanter Country. Which fresh and speedy
growth of the Spring, seems to proceed from the benefit of the Snow; which
all the Winter time being spread over the whole Country, as a white robe,
keeps it warm from the rigor of the frost; and in the Springtime, when the
weather waxes warm, and the Sun dissolveth it into water, it does so
thoroughly drench and soke the ground (being of a slight and sandy mould) and
then shines so hotly upon it again, that it even forces the Herbs and Plants
to shoot forth in great plenty and variety, and that in short time. As the
Winter season in these Regions exceeds in cold; so likewise I may say, that
the Summer inclines to overmuch heat, especially in the months of June, July,
and August, being accounted the three chiefest months of burning heat in those
places, much warmer than the Summer in England.

To return to our relation of the soil and climate; for the most part it is
covered with Woods and Lakes: these Woods are the branches of Hircinia,
spreading it self through all the North, and perhaps more in this Province
than in any other. Here grow the goodliest and tallest trees of the world,
through which for their thickness, the brightness of the Sunbeams can hardly
pierce. An unspeakable quantity of Rozin and Pitch distilleth out of these
trees, and here is the never-wasting Fountain of Wax and Honey. For without any
industry of man, the Bees themselves build their Hives in the Barks and
hollownesse of trees. Here is all plenty of Cattle and wild Beasts: Bears,
Martins, Beasts called Zibellini, Wolves and black Foxes, whose skins do
bear highprices. Of the timber of these trees a^re squared all necessaries,
as well for buildings, as all other uses; the Walls of the Cities are framed of
beams cut foure-square, fastened together, filling all the chinks and vacant
places with earth. And of these beams likewise they build platformes of such
height and thickness, that they bear the weight of great Ordnance how massy
soever. They are subject to fire, but not easily shaken with the fury of
battery.

For Waters, Of Waters.
Moscovie may well be called the mother of Rivers and Lakes: witness Duyna,
Boristhenes, Volga, Duyna, Onega, Moscua, Volisca, and the famous Tanais; the
Lakes of Ina, upon which stands the great Novograde, Voluppo, and many
others. The abundance of these Waters do make the air colder than is
requisite for the increase of Cattle, or growth of Plants, and although cold
is thought more wholesome than heat, yet are their Cattle of small growth
thereby, and many times their fruits come not to ripening; and the earth being
drowned with the waters, for the most part becomes light and sandy, and then
either with too great drought, or too much moisture, it destroys the fruit.
Winter in some sort lasts nine months, little more or less, and in
seasonable times the soil brings forth plenty of grain, and feeding for
Cattle. It also brings forth Apples, Nuts, and Filberds: other kinds of
fruits they scarcely know. Of Fish they raise their greatest gain, as having
greatest abundance of that commodity; they dry them in the frost and wind, as
in Norway and other Northerly Nations, and they lay it up for store, as well in
their Towns of War, as for their private Families. The Kingdom is not full
of Merchants, because by nature the Inhabitants are idle: And that Province
cannot abound with Merchants, where Arts and Artificers are not favored. And
again, the government is absolute, mixed with a kind of tyranny, enforcing
slavish prostitution. So that in the chiefest and best ordered Towns of
Novograde and Mosco, many strange and fearful concussions have been
practiced. Concerning which you have whole Commentaries, from whence you may
take notice, how he once nailed an Ambassadors Hat to his head, because he
abated him of that reverence appropriate to so great a Majesty; How Sir Tho.
Smith was entertained with a contrary satisfaction and welcome. How Mosco is
compared to the grand Caire for spaciousness of ground, multitude of houses,
and uncomlinesse of streets, so that, as the one is patible of stink,
corruption and infectious air, so this other is not free from beastliness,
smoke and unwholesome smells. They have not the use of the Sea, because it is
not lawful for a Moscovite to travel out of his Princes Dominions: such, and
such store of wares as they have (as Skins, Rosin, and Wax) they barter for
Cloth, and diverse other commodities, which the Armenians bring to Astrachan by
the Caspian Sea, and the English to Saint Nicholas by the Bay of Graduicum.

This Government is more tyrannical than of any other Prince in the World:
Form of government.
for he is absolute Lord and disposer of the bodies and goods of his subjects.
Therefore Mahumet the Vizier was wont to say, That the Moscovite and the great
Turk, amongst all the Princes of the earth were only Lords of their own
Dominions, and in that regard thought the journey of King Stephen of Poland
would prove full of danger and difficulty. The Kingdom is divided into four
parts (by them termed Chetferds) and those governed by four Lieutenants, not
resident upon their charges, but attending on the Emperors person wheresoever
he goes; and there holding their Courts, but especially at Mosco, the prime
seat of the Empire; where from their under-Deputies they receive the complaints
of the Provinces, and inform the Kings Council of the business, and from
them again receive instructions for amendment or reformation. For you must
note, that the great Duke does not trust any particular Nobleman with any
eminent place of honor or dignity; but places therein a certain Duke of
meanest rank, and no great capacity, adjoining with him in commission a
Secretary to assist him, or to speak more properly, to direct him; for in
execution the Secretary does all. And being thus united, they have authority
over all persons in criminal and civil causes, in levying of Taxes and
Subsidies, in mustring of Soldiers, and commanding them to all services
imposed by the Emperor or his Council. And to prevent all popular
Innovations, he will be sure that they shall neither be borne within the
territories of their Government, neither that they possess one foot of
inheritance within their jurisdictions: And being every year subject to change
(of which he will not fail) for their new avarice, they stand assured first
to be extremely hated of the people, and worse used of the Emperor: For few
of them have the favor to avoid the Pudkey (or whip) when their time is
expired: and therefore do make full account, as they cannot otherwise choose,
being to bribe the Emperor, the Lieutenant of the Chetfird, and to provide for
themselves, having in allowance, the best, not above a hundred marks; the
worst, but thirty per annum.

Fuan Vasilowie shall be an example of this severity: who having before him a
Diak (or Secretary) accused for taking a Goose ready dressed, stuffed full of
silver by way of a bribe, caused the offender to be brought into the Market
place of Mosco, and there himself, making an honest Oration unto the people,
asked his Polachies or Executioner, Who could cut up a Goose? And then
commanded he one of them first to cut off the parties legs, about the midst of
the shins, then his arms above his elbowes; (still asking the miserable
offender, If Goose-flesh were good meat) in the end to chop off his head, in
similitude of a Goose ready dressed.

But in the four Towns, whereof three border upon the Polonian and Sweden,
and the other upon the Chrim Tartar, (viz.) Smolonsko, Vobsko, Novograd and
Cazan, he is somewhat more advised and honorable. For being pieces of great
import, in them he appoints men of more sufficient and better rank, two in
each Town, whereof one is ever of his Council of Estate. These have larger
commission, and without adjournment or appeal may proceed to execution in all
criminal causes; yet are they changed every year, and have for their
allowance, some seven hundred rubbles, and some four hundred.

To preserve his Majesty and reputation, he uses as incredible policy, as he
does unusual severitie: First, it is not lawful for any of his subjects to
depart the Realm upon pain of death; and therefore no man there dare go to
Sea, no, not speak to an Ambassador, or use the counsel of a foreign
Physician, without license. He wears apparel of inestimable value, joining
the Ornaments of a Bishop to the Majesty of a King; by wearing a Miter on his
head, shining with Diamonds and rich stones: When he wears it not on his
head, he places it before his Chair of Estate, and oftentimes changes it, in
boast of his riches. In his left hand he bears a most rich Crosier,
apparelled in a long Garment, not much unlike to that which the Pope wears
when he goes to Mass: his fingers are full of Gold Rings, and the Image of
Christ, and his blessed mother the Virgin are over the Chair wherein he
sits. The Privy Chamber and great Chamber are full of men, clothed in
Cloth of Gold down to the foot, but never used unless upon occasion of
Festivals, or entertainment of Ambassadors. In matter of Ceremony, for the
most part they follow the Greek Church; the Priests marry, maintain
adoration of Images, Fast, and compel to confession; which the common people
suppose most necessary, (...)*
especially for the Nobles and Gentrle, retayning a sensuality of life, and
liberty of voluptuousness. The Princes themselves are very devout at the
Table, as often a dish is changed, or they have a desire to drink, they make
many signs of the Cross.

That no man should prove a better Scholar than himself, he suffers no
school, but of writing and reading to be kept. In their Liturgies, they read
nothing but the Evangelists, some History, the lives of Saints, a Homily of
John Chrysostom, or some such like; yea, they would hold him for an Heretic,
that should go about to profess himself better learned; and assure himself,
he shall not escape punishment. Which is the reason that their Notaries, nay
the Secretaries themselves, commonly can neither write, nor answer Ambassadors
of foreign Princes, no farther than they are taught by the great Duke. When they
negociate, they no sooner name the great Duke, but all of them rise up with
great reverence: the like is done at his Table, when he drinks, or carveth to
any man, and so in a thousand like casualties: they are taught, even from their
cradles, to believe and talk of their great Duke, as of God: using these
phrases in their ordinary talking, God only and our Great Semapor knows
this; Our Great Lord knows all things. All we enjoy, health and riches, all
proceeds from our Great Duke. For the subjects, seeing such State and
Magnificence in the Prince, and knowing no more than he is taught at home,
reverence and obey him as slaves, not as subjects, accounting him rather a God
than a King. Those Lords which he has under him are only graced with Titles,
not as we have Dukes, Barons, etc. Bestowing upon one a Hamlet, upon another a
Farm; and these not hereditarie, unless he confirm it: and when he has
confirmed it, the Farmers not withstanding pay him a portion of their fruits,
and owe him villaine-service: which is the cause, that every man depends on
the will of the Prince, and look by how much the richer, by so much the
deeper, is he indebted unto him.

^ The Native commodities are Furs, Riches, and commodities.
Wax, Honey, Tallow, Hides, Traine-Oyle, Caveare, Hemp, Flax, Salt, Tar, Slud,
Saltpeter, Brimston and Tron. Besides the great quantity of Furs spent in the
Country (the only defense of the Country People in the winter season) there
are transported some years by the Merchants of Turkey, Persia, Bougharia,
Georgia, Armenia, and the Christians, to the value of four or five hundred
thousand rubbles yearly: Of Wax fifty thousand poad; every poad containing
forty pounds. Their Honey is almost all spent within the Country in their
ordinary drinks, and other uses. Of Tallow in times past, they have shipped
out 100000. poad yearly: Of Hides, 100000. Of Flax and Hemp one hundred ships:
and so semblably of other Merchandises. But you must understand, that by reason
of the idle carelessness of the people, occasioned through the extreme tyranny
of their Emperors, (whereof you shall hear hereafter) at this day three parts
of that reckoning in every commodity, are abated.

For the receiving of which riches and Revenues, Of his Entrada or Revenue.
he has as it were three principal Treasures; The Steward of his House; Every
Chetsird within his own Province; And the Office called the great Income.

The Stewards Office receives yearly, above the expense of his house twenty
three thousand rubbles.

The fourth Chetfirds for Soak and Pol-mony four hundred thousand rubbles. And
the office of the great Income for custom and rents eight hundred thousand
rubbles.

And all this in ready coin: For besides this revenue ordinary, he receives
extraordinarily in furs and other commodities, out of Siberia, Pechora, Permia
and other remote places, a great mass of wealth. As may be ghessed by that,
That 1589. out of Siberia only, by way of custom, were collected four
hundred threescore and six timber of Sables, five timber of Martrons, one
hundred eighty cases of black Foxes, besides other commodities.

To these may be added Seisures, Confiscations, and Incomes of like nature,
whereof I will show you some cases.

As by coining his Plate into money, in show of want, thereby to color some
new taxations; so did Theodor Iuanowich. And as by suffering every man to give
unto Monasteries, what pleases him; that the wealth being stowed in gross,
the Prince may come by it the readier to satisfy his pleasure: So did Iuan
Vasilowich, wringing from some Bishops and Monasteries one hundred thousand
rubbles; from some forty, and from others fifty, etc. For the subtle Friars
are content without noise to part from somewhat, rather than by clamor to
endanger the loss of the whole.

By forestalling homebred commodities, and engrossing the foreign; as Silks,
Cloth, Lead, Pearl; To give out monopolies for staying of Sables, till the
Emperors be vented.

By rent corn and provision of victual, he has some years raised two
hundred thousand rubbles. Of rent wood, hay, etc. thirty thousand rubbles.

But the most Unchristian abuse is, that in every great town he has a Caback
(or Tap-house) to sell Aqua-vite, Mead, Bear, etc. wherein, besides the vice
of drunkenness, many foul faults (as it cannot otherwise fall out) are
committed. The poor laboring man, and artificer many times spends all from
his wife and children. Some will lay 20, thirty or forty rubbles into the
Caback, vowing themselves to the pot, till the stock be spent; and all this (as
the drunkard will vaunt,) for the honor of Hospodare, viz. the Prince. For,
for hindering this base and ungodly profit, none may dare to call, or entreat
him out of the Caback. Of these some yield eight hundred, some nine hundred,
some a thousand, some three thousand rubbles by year.

Sometime he will cause his Botarens (or Nobles) to feign themselves robbed,
and then will he send for the Aldermen of the City, to find out the fellon,
and upon an Ignoramus, he will sesse the City (upon color of misgovernment)
eight thousand, nine thousand or ten thousand rubbles.

Iuan Vasilowich sent into Permia for certain loads of Cedar wood, whereof he
knew none to grow in the Country. The Inhabitants returned word, that they
could find none: whereupon he sessed the Country at 12060 rubbles. So sent he
to the City of Mosco, to provide a Colpack (or measure full) of live fleas for
a medicine: They returned answer that the thing was impossible: whereupon he
praved (or beat out of their shins) seven hundred rubbles for a mulct. So at
another time, he praved thirty thousand rubbles from his Nobility, because he
missed of his game when he went on hunting: Which they again praved out of the
Monsicks, or common people of the Country, as the manner is.

Besides, in their Diets (or Parliaments) they are reputed of no degree or
order. For therein the Nobility and Clergy only have voices.

In all their supplications and petitions to any of the Nobles, or chief
Officers, they subscribe Kelophey, slaves; and so do they of the Nobility, to
the Emperor: So that if a poor Mousal meets any of them upon the way, he
must turn himself about, and not dare to look this Magnifico in the face,
but conge to the ground with his head, as Priests do to their Wafer-cakes.

As for the quiet enjoyment of their lands, besides the taxes, customs,
feasings and other public exactions, practiced by the Emperor himself, and
permitted unto his Nobles, Messengers and Officers; you shall see Yammes
(thorowfare towns) of half a mile and a mile long, stand uninhabited, by
reason of these ungodly pressures. So that in the way toward Mosco, between
Vologda and Yerasl^ve, which is some what more than an hundred English miles,
there have been in sight fifty Villages, at least of the foresaid length,
quite disinhabited. And this is the reason that the people do not give
themselves to thrive, nor to trades, as in former times: whereby honest labor
is much decayed, and the present quantities of Merchandise nothing answerable
to the former reckoning. As well you may perceive in this one History, wherein
I will show you two rare accidents, how three Brethren Merchants did rise up to
great wealth, and in what manner they were fleeced.

They traded together in one stock, and were found to be worth three hundred
thousand rubbies, besides lands, stock and other commodities. They that knew
them report, That they set ten thousand men on work all the year long, in
making of salt, carriages by cart and water, hewing of wood, and such like
labors; besides five thousand bondslaves at least, to inhabit and till their
land. They had all manner of Artificers; Physicians, Surgeons, Apothecaries (
Dutchmen) belonging unto them; And for custom paid unto the Emperor came (the
true cause wherefore they were the longer permitted to enjoy their thrift)
twenty three thousand rubbles per annum, besides the maintayning of certain
garrisons on the borders of Siberia, which were near unto them. Now if any man
object, how these men could come to such an estate of wealth, under such an
exactious Prince: First, he must understand, that their dwelling was in
Wichida, a thousand miles from Mosco, and the eye of the Court: Secondly, that
forbearance is no quittance: For the Emperor was well content to use their
purses, until such time as they had perfected their designs in Siberia; and
that, by burning and cutting down woods, from Wichida to Permia, a progress
of a thousand Versts, they had made the land habitable. But at last, He,
envying and disdayning that a Monsick should grow to be so great a man, against
the rules of their policy; first began to pull from them sometimes twenty
thousand rubbles, and sometimes more; and then, the greatest part of their
Inheritance: So that at this day their Sons are well eased of their stock,
and have but small part of their Fathers substance.

Neither is this State content to tyrannize over their bodies, goods and lands,
but he does the like over their wits and capacities. For, for any
extraordinary perfection in any common Art, much less in learning, you shall
never see them excellent, from which they are kept of purpose, as they are also
(being no Boiardi, Gentlemen) from all military practice.

And because they should prove utterly unapt for any profession, save
servilitie, they are forbidden to travel; so that you shall never meet with a
Russe in foreign Countries, except it be some Ambassador, or perhaps some
straggling companion, who has narrowly escaped the watch on the borders.

The penalty upon taking, is no less than confiscation of all his goods.
Neither will they suffer any stranger willingly to enter their Country,
further than the necessity of venting their commodities, and taking in of
foreign does enforce them.

Their capital punishments are hanging, Their cruelty in punishing offenders
rodding, knocking on the heads, drowning, putting under the ice, impaling a
stake, and such like.

By this a man may guess of his riches: for he is not only absolute Lord of
all, but also he uses the service of their bodies at his pleasure, and what
portion of their goods him lists. Of the skins of wild beasts he challenges
what portion he likes; and of every sort of Fish, even what he will (as
hereafter.) The skins are sold or given, as pleases him: the Fish (dried in
the wind) is kept for victualling the garrisons. In the market no man may sell
his wares, before the King has sold. He has not many Mines of Gold or Silver.
The best Mart-Townes, from whence he gathers the greatest part of his
Revenues, are Astrachan at the Caspian sea, whither the wares of the Persians
and Armenians are brought; and S. Nicholas, whither the ships of the English
and Hollanders do arrive, laden with Cloth and other Merchandise, which from
thence are transported to Vologda. When his Ambassadors return, he takes from
them the presents given them by foreign Princes, and in stead thereof bestows
upon them some other reward, and many times nothing at all. To speak in a
word: he gleaneth whatsoever is good or ought worth, through his whole
Kingdom; it is thought that he has great store of Treasure in his Castles of
Mosco, Ieraslave, and the Marshes of Albi; which may be true: for the great
Duke John wasted in a manner all Livonia, sparing neither Relic, Chalice,
Crucifix, nor any ornament of silver: and of that which is once brought in, he
suffers no part thereof to be transported, unless it be for the ransom of
soldiers taken in the war, or of the poor people carried into captivity.
This is most true, that when he lost Livonia, which King Stephen of Poland
reconquered, in the year of our Lord 1582. he lost the richest Province of all
his Dominions, for the Traffike of the Baltike sea; and the best, for the
strength of 34. castles standing therein.

The strength of the Kingdom consists in the manifold Of his strength
numbers of Rivers and Marshes, and in the thickness of woods. Besides, they
use to lay wast the parts nearest their enemies, that there the Woods may grow
thicker, which for the moisture of the soil quickly comes to pass, and are
as available, as a wall or trench to the defense of the next towns. This
policy brought great travel to the Polanders, for they were constrained to
lose much time in cutting down the woods, before they could come to the
inhabited places of their enemies. They have a few fortresses, some built of
stone, some of brick after the Italian fashion, but without strength of
modern devices or cunning workmanship. Such are the Castles of Mosco,
Novograd, Plescovia, Porcovia, Slobadie: some are wrought with twigs and earth,
well trodden down, as Smoloncke. But commonly the walls of strong places are
built of great beams stuffed with Turffe or Moss leaving loop-holes for shot.
This fortifying is very available against great Ordnance, but exceeding subject
to firing. They serve in the field (as we told you before, treating of his
government) rather bearing themselves valiantly for fear of punishment, than
of their own natures showing any alacrity or willingness to the service. He
has his Captains at a beck, his Soldiers suffer all extremities patiently;
they care not for frost or rain: they endure hunger and scarcity with
incredible contentment; they live with a little: better able to defend a
fortress, than to fight in field; for here courage and agilitie, there
constancy and resolution are most serviceable: whereas the Polanders are
better to fight in the field, than to keep a Castle: as well appeared in
either Nation at the siege of Vobsco, where the Russe repulsed the Polonian
King Stephen Battore, with his whole Army of one hundred thousand men, and
forced him in the end to give over his siege, with the loss of many of his
best Captains and Soldiers: but in a set field the Russia has been ever
noted to have had the worse of the Polonian and Sweden. And therefore the Great
Duke John, finding by experience the unaptnesse of his Soldiers, and the
readiness of the Polonians in skirmishes, was wont to say; That his men had
need of a spur to drive them forward, and the Polonians wanted a bridle to hold
them back. His chiefest force is in horse; but what number he can raise, who
can show? For I do not believe that he is able (as some say) to arm three
hundred thousand, because though his Empire be large, yet for the greatest part
it lies unmanured; as the many days journey between Cazan and Astrachan, and
scarce meeting one Village in the way, may well witness. In the war which King
Stephen waged against him (being not above sixty thousand Foot and Horse
strong) he was not able to raise so great a force, I will not say, as to meet
him in the open field, but not to hinder him from forcing of Pocovia,
V^locoluo, and other pieces, no, nor to divert him from the siege of Plescovia.

In the year 1571. the Prince of the Tartars with 80000. Soldiers, pierced
even into the bowels of his Kingdom, and set fire on his Imperial seat Mosco.
Therefore I think, that they who report, that the Great Duke can levy three
hundred thousand men, and the King of Polonia 200000. do rather mean heads of
Horses than Riders; for there may be so many thousand Horse, and yet every one
is not to be counted a Horse of service, no more than every Horseman a Rider,
or able to find himself Armor. One has his heart in his horse; another
wants ability; a third wants strength of body; a fourth, both courage and
strength: yea, admit he could raise so many men (as these Writers speak of)
yet would it be a hard matter, perchance impossible, for him to assemble them
in one place; or if he could, where would wages or victuals be found sufficient
to sustain them For two hundred Horsemen in Moscovie, require three hundred
Packe-horses, and so many tenders, who must all be fed; as likewise the
victualers, the Merchant, the Artificers, and such Servants as can hardly be
spared in warlike enterprises. To perform this, whole Moscovie must of
necessity be gathered into one place; and then it were to be feared, lest in so
great a journey from one part of the Kingdom, the other part opposite would
run to ruin and decay. Likewise, although such a proportion of Horse, as
has been spoken of, might be raised, it were not wisdom for the State to
strip the Borders of their Garrisons, the Provinces of their finewes, the
Cities of their Magistrates, and the Country of Husbandmen.

In which point Basilius, in the conquest of Lituania and Livonia. committed a
great oversight; for that, taking away with him the upland and Country people;
who should have tilled the ground, and might easily have been kept in order
without any danger, by other good policies; by this course was afterward
driven many years together, to victual the Country (especially the great
Towns) out of his own Country of Russia. And again, when he first conquered
the Countries, he committed no less an error in suffering the Natives to keep
their possessions, and to inhabit all their Towns, only paying him a tribute,
under the government of his Russe Captains, whose conspiracies and attempts
were the loss of these places. The like fell out at the Port-Towne of Narve in
Liesland, where his Son Iuan Vasiliwich, built a Town and a Castle on the
other side of the River (called Ivangorod) to keep the Country in subjection,
which so fortified, was thought to be invincible: When it was furnished, for
reward to the Architect (being a Polonian) he put out both his eyes, to disable
him to build the like again. But having left all the Natives within their own
Country, without abating their number and strength in due order, the Town and
Castle not long after was betrayed to the King of Sweden. Therefore I conclude,
that that Prince whose Kingdom is able to afford him an hundred and fifty
thousand Horse, to be bravely furnished, if he can bring into the field but the
third part (I speak of war, and not of incursions.)

Some more modest in writing affirm, that the Moscovite could levy an hundred
and fifty thousand Horse, if necessity to defend himself forced him
thereunto: And that John the third, in the voyage of Astrachan, entertained an
hundred and twenty thousand Horse, and twenty thousand foot. The same King
invading Livonia in the time of King Alexander, levied a mighty Army, and
notwithstanding, maintained another upon the borders of the Kingdom. The great
Duke John adjoining to his troops of Horse certain thousands of shot, most
Strangers, which yielded him notable service in the defense of his Cities.

And to make good the aforesaid proportion of Cavalrie, the Englishmen, who by
reason of their intercourse in those Countries, are best acquainted with these
Relations, do write, that the ordinary number of soldiers entertained in
continual pay is this: first, he has his Dowrancie (viz.) Pensioners, or
guard of his person, to the number of 15000. horsemen, with their Captains and
other Officers, that are always in a readiness. These 15000. are divided into
three sorts: the first are chief Pensioners, and they receive some an hundred,
some fourscore rubbles a year, none under seventie. The second sort receive
betwixt sixty and fifty, none under forty. The third and lowest sort receive
thirty a year, some 25, some 20, none under 12. the whole sum arises to
fifty five thousand rubbles by year.

Besides these 15000 Horsemen, (being the guard of the Emperors own person,
when himself goes to the wars, resembling the Roman praetorian soldiers)
there are 110. men of special account for their Nobility and trust, chosen by
the Emperor, who are bound to find 65000. Horsemen, with all necessaries meet
for the wars, after the Russian manner. For the which service, they are yearly
allowed for themselves, and their companies, the sum of 40000. rubbles. These
65000. are bound to repair to the field every year, toward the borders of
the Chrim Tartars (except they be otherwise appointed) whether there be wars
with the Tartar, or no. And because it should not prove dangerous unto the
State, to entrust so great a power to Noblemen, first as they are many, viz.
110. so are they changed by the Emperor at his pleasure. Secondly, they have
their maintenance of the Emperor, being men otherwise borne but to small
Revenue. Thirdly, for the most part, they are about the Emperors person, being
of his Council, either special, or at large. Fourthly, they are rather
pay-masters than Captains to their Companies; themselves not going forth
ordinarily to the wars, save when they are directed by special command. So the
whole number of horsemen always in readiness and continual pay, are
fourscore thousand, few more or less. If he need a greater number (which
seldom happens) then he entertaineth those Gentlemen which are out of pay: If
yet he want, he gives charge unto his Noblemen that hold Lands of him, to
bring into the field every man proportionable number of his Servants (called
Rolophey, viz. such as till his Lands) with their furniture: the which service
being done, presently they lay down their Weapons, and return again to their
servile labors.

Of Footmen in continual pay, he has twelve thousand all Harquebushers,
whereof five thousand attend about the city of Mosco, or where the Emperor
shall abide; and two thousand (called Stremaney strelsey, or Gunners at the
stirrup,) about his own person at the Court or House where himself lodges.
The residue are placed in Garrisons, till times of service, and receive for
their salarie every man seven rubbles a year, besides twelve measures apeece
of Rice and Oats. Of mercenary soldiers being strangers, (1588) he had three
thousand Polonians: Of Chyrchasses (who are under the Polonians) about four
thousand: Of Dutch and Scots 150. Of Greeks, Turks, and Swedens, all in one
band, a hundred or thereabouts. These they employ only upon the Tartarian side,
and against the Siberians, as they do the Tartar soldiers (whom they sometime
hire, and but only for the present) on the other side, against the Polonian and
Sweden. Concerning their arming, they are but slightly appointed: The Common
Horseman has nothing but his Bow in his case under his right arm, and his
Quiver and Sword hanging on the left side, except some few that bear a case of
Dags, or a Iavelin, or short Staff along their Horse side. The Noblemen ride
better and richer appointed; their Swords, Bows and Arrows, are of the
Turkish fashion, and practice as the Tartars, to shoot forwards and backwards,
as they fly, or retire.

The Footman has nothing but his piece in his hand, his casting-hatchet at his
back, and his sword by his side; provision of victual the Emperor allows
none, either for Captain or Soldier, neither provideth any, except
peradventure some corn for their money. Every man is to bring sufficient for
himself for four months, and if need require, to give order for more to be
brought after him to the Camp from his Tenant that tilleth his Land, or some
other place: for diet and lodging, every Russie is prepared a Soldier
beforehand; for though the Chief Captains carry tents with them after the
fashion of ours, with some better provision of victual than the rest: yet the
common sort bring nothing with them, save a kind of dried bread, with some
store of meal; which they temper with water, and so make it into a ball, or
small lump of dough, and this they eat raw in stead of bread: their meat is
Bacon, or some flesh, or fish, dried after the Dutch manner. If this Soldier
were as hardy to execute, as he is able to bear out toil and travel, or as
apt and well trained, as he is indifferent for his lodging and diet; he would
far exceed the servitors of other Provinces. For every Soldier in Russia is
a Gentleman, and none Gentlemen but Soldiers, so that the son of a Gentleman
is ever a Gentleman, and a Soldier withal, bound unto no other profession,
but mere Souldierie.

It is thought, that no Prince in Christendom has better store of munition,
which may partly appear by the Artillery-house at Mosco, where are diverse
sorts of great Ordnance, all of Brass, very fair, and to an exceeding great
number.

Upon his frontiers lie the Tartars, Precopenses, Borderers.
those of the Taurica Chersonesus, the Circassi, and the Nagayans. These people
inhabit a Country seven days journey distant, and are governed by Dukes,
after the manner of the Helvetians. He has received great injury of the
Precopenses, without hope of amends; because they are confederate with the
great Turk, and by him furnished with Harquebusiers, and Ordnance, and have in
their Kingdom many strong places fortified with Turkish Garrisons: and
therefore he thinks it hard and dangerous to invade them being backed by the
Turk, whose power he should likewise stir up against him: It is the custom
of the Precopi (often used) to make inrodes into the Provinces of the Great
Duke, as likewise of the Polonian, and to carry away whatsoever comes to
hand. If the Great Duke have vanquished the Tartars of C^ssan and Astrachan,
let him attribute that Conquest to his great Ordnance, which they wanted. But
the Precopi have the use of Guns, and (worth all the rest,) the favor and
protection of the Turkish Emperor; who thirsting to open a way into Moscouy, or
the Caspian sea, assayed not many years (...) to dig a trench from Tanais to
Volga: but his forces were put to flight by the Moscovites in fear of their
utter destruction, if the Turk had brought that designment to effect. This was
a device of greater courage than wisdom: for the Moscovites not only defeated
his Navy, taking part thereof; but also put all his Landforces to the Sword,
consisting of fourscore thousand Tartars, five and twenty thousand Turks, and
three thousand Ianizars.

As we have said before, The Circassi.
the Circassi live much after the manner of the Swissers; they endeavor not to
enlarge their own bounds, but serve for wages, sometime under the Turk
sometime under the Persian, sometimes under the Moscovite: from whose Dominions
they are so far disjoined, that they stand in no fear of their several
greatnesses. The Nagayans.
The Nagayans are more to be dreaded, for their sudden inrodes and furious
incursions, than for jealousy of their forces, or that they are able to raise,
or undertake any royal voyage. Of late times they threatened the Moscovite, but
their fury was soon appeased by sending them presents. It is the best course to
hazard our money, rather than our forces, against the thefts and spoils of
these barbarous Nations: for when they have neither City nor strong place to
subdue; thereby to keep them in subjection, what can you term the War made
against them, but labor with loss, and charge without profit? But to prevent
all mischiefs, the Duke is forced to keep great troops of Horse in Curachan,
Casan, and Viatca, against these Nagaij: as also a great Garrison in Culagan
upon Tanais against the Precopi.

But the mightiest of them all is the Chrim Tartar, The Chrim Tartars.
(whom some call the Great Cham) who lies South and Southeastward from Russia,
and does most annoy the Country by often invasions, commonly once every year,
sometimes entering very far within the Inland parts. In the year 1571. he
pierced as far as the City Mosco, with an Army of 200000. men, without
battle or resistance; for that the Russe Emperor (then Iu^n Vasiliwich)
leading forth his Army to encounter him, mistook the way. The City he took
not, but fired the suburbs, which by reason of the buildings consisting for the
most part of wood, kindled so quickly, and went on with such fury, as that it
consumed the greatest part thereof, almost within the space of four hours:
where, by fire, and prease 800000. people or more were reported to have
perished at that season. Their principal quarrel arises about certain
Territories claimed by the Tartar, but possessed by the Russe. The Tartar
alleges, that besides Astrachan and Cazan (the ancient possession of the
East- Tartar) the whole bounds, North and Westward, so far as the City of
Mosco, and Mosco it self, pertains to his right; which seems to be true by
the report of the Russes themselves, that tell of a certain homage done by the
Russe Emperor every year to the great Chrim, the Russe Emperor standing on
foot, and feeding the Chrims horse sitting on horseback, with Oats out of his
own Cap, in stead of a Boule or Manger, and that within the Castle of Mosco.

And this homage they say was done till the time of Basilius, who surprising
the Chrim Tartar by a Stratagem undertook by one of his Nobility, was content
to change this homage into a tribute of Furs: which afterward also was denied;
whereupon they continue their quarrels, the Russe defending his Country and
Conquests, and the Chrim invading him once or twice a year, sometime about
Whitsontide, but oftener in Harvest. What time if the great Chrim come in
person, he brings with him an Army of one hundred thousand, or two hundred
thousand men; otherwise they make short and sudden rodes, with lesser numbers,
running about the list of the borders like wilde-Geese, invading, and retyring,
as they see advantage. Tartaria
And now being entered thus far, not without occasion, into the manners of
these Tartars, I think it not amiss somewhat to discourse of their rights,
their Arming, their Religion, and Customs.

Their common practice (being very populous) is to make diverse armies, and so
drawing the Russe into one or two places of the frontiers, to invade at some
place unsuspected, and without defense. Their order of fight is much after the
Russe manner; that is, to thrust on all together without discipline in a hurry,
as they are directed by their General; save that they are all Horsemen, and
carry nothing else but a Bow, a sheafe of Arrows, and a Cemiter, after the
Turkish fashion. They are very expert Horsemen, and use to shoot as readily
backward, as forward. Some will have a Horse-mans staff like a Boare-speare;
besides their other weapons. The common Soldier has no other armor than his
ordinary apparel, viz. a black Sheepe-skin, with the wooll-side outward in the
day time, and inwards in the night time, with a Cap of the same. But their
Morseis or Noblemen imitate the Turk both in Apparel and Armor. When they
are to pass over a River with their Army, they tie three or four Horses
together, and taking pieces of wood, they bind them to the tails of their
Horses, and so sitting on the poles, they drive their Horses over. At handy
strokes they are counted far better men than the Russes, fierce by nature,
but more hardy and bloody by continual practice of war, as men never inured to
the delights of peace, nor any civil practice.

Yet their subtlety is more than may seem to agree with their barbarous
conditions. By their continual invasions and robberies, they are very pregnant
and witty, to devise stratagems on the sudden for their advantage. As in their
Wars against Beala, the fourth Kings of Hungary, whom they invaded with
500000. men, and obtained against him a great victory. Wherein having slain
his Chancellor, they found about him the Kings privy Seal, and there with
presently counterfeited Letters in the Kings name to the next Cities, with
charge, That in no case they should convey themselves or their goods out of
their dwelling places; encouraging the people to abide therein without fear of
danger, and withal recounting how base a resolution it were, to abandon their
country and possessions to so barbarous a Nation as the Tartar; dispraising
themselves in all despightfull manner, letting them to understand, that though
he had lost his carriages with some few straglers; who had marched disorderly,
yet he doubted not but to recover that loss with the fortune of a noble
victory, if the savage Tartar durst abide him in the field. To this purpose
having written their Letters in the Polish Character (by the help of certain
young men taken prisoners in the field) signed with the Kings seal, they
dispatched them forth to all the adjacent quarters of the Country; whereupon
the Hungarians that were now posting away with their goods, wives, and
children, on the rumor of the Kings overthrow, by the comfort of these
counterfeit letters, stopped their journey, and so being surprised, were hemmed
in, and made a prey to the huge numbers of these barbarous Tartarians.

When they besiege a Town or Fort, they offer much parle, and pretend many
flattering courtesies to persuade a surrender, and being once possessed of the
place, they leave no cruelty unpractised, affirming, that faith and justice is
to be kept toward no people but their own. In their encounters (where they
always practice by ambushments) they retire as repulsed for fear, so to draw
their enemies within danger: but the Russe being well acquainted with this
subtlety, is very wary of them. When they war in small numbers, like Rovers,
to make their Army seem greater, they set counterfeit shapes of men on
horseback.

When they give the onset, they make a great and barbarous shout, crying all
together Olla Billa, Olla Billa, God help us, God help us; They contemn
death in that desperate manner, that they choose rather to die than yield: and
when they are wounded to death, and past recovery, they have been seen to
bite their weapons in rage; wherein appears the great difference of courage
between the Tartar, the Russe, and the Turk: For if the Russe soldier be once
put to retire, all his safety is set on speedy and resolved flight, and being
once taken, he neither defends himself, nor entreats for mercy, as
reckoning straight to die: and the Turk commonly, when he is past hope of
escaping, falls to entreat, and casting away his weapon, offers both his
hands as it were to be manacled, choosing rather to live a slave, than to die
constantly.

The chiefest booty they desire is to get store of captives, especially young
Boys and Girls, whom they sell to the Turks, or other their neighbors. And
the Russe borderers (being used to their invasions, lightly every Summer) keep
few other Cattle on the borders save Swine, which the Tartars will not touch
nor drive away, because they are of the Turkish Religion, and will eat no
Swines flesh. Of Christ, they confess as much as the Turk does in his
Alcoran, viz. That he came of the Angel Gabriel and Mary; that he was a great
Prophet, and shall be Judge of the world at the last day. In other matters
likewise they are much ordered after the manner and direction of the Turk, as
having felt his force at the winnings of Azon and Caffa, with some other
territories about the Euxine Sea, which before were Tributaries to this Chrim
Tartar. So that at this day, most usually the Emperor of the Chrim is chosen
out of the Tartar Nobility by the Turks appointment, and to him they give the
tenths of their spoils gotten by war from the Christians. Under the Emperor
they have certain Dukes, whom they call Morses or Divoy morses, that rule over
a certain number of 1000. 20000. or 40000. apeece, which they term Hords.
When the Emperor has use of them in his wars, they are bound to come and to
bring with them their proportion of Soldiers, every man with two horse at
least, the one to ride on, the other to kill, when it comes to his turn to
have him eaten. For their chief victual is horseflesh, which they eat
without bread, or any thing else with it. And yet (with marvel) though they
serve all on horseback, and eat all of horseflesh, there are brought yearly
to the Mosco to be sold 30 or 40000 Horse. So they have great droves of Kine,
and flocks of black Sheep, which they keep rather for their skins, than
for their flesh, though sometime they eat of it. Towns they plant none, nor
other standing buildings; but have moving houses built on wheels, like a
Shepherds cottage: these they draw with them wheresoever they go, driving
their Cattle with them, and when they come to their journies end, they plant
these Cart-houses in a rank, in form of a Town with large streets: neither
has the Emperor himself other place ormanner of dwelling; saying, That the
fixed and standing buildings of other Countries are unwholesome and unsavory.

In the Spring they begin to move their houses from the South parts toward
the North, and so driving on till they have grazed up all to the farthest part
of the North; they return back again toward the South (where they continue
all the Winter) by ten miles a stage. Of Money they have no use at all,
preferring Brass and Steel before other Metals, which they use for swords,
knives and other necessaries; gold and silver they neglect of purpose, as also
tillage, to be more free for their wandering kind of life, and to keep their
Country less subject to invasions. Which course indeed cannot but prove
disadvantagious to the Invaders, as it happened in old time to Cyrus, and Darius
Histaspis. For their manner is, when they are invaded, by flying, reculing, and
fained fear, to draw their enemies some good way into the bowels of their
Country; and then when victuals begin to grow scarce, and other extremities
to oppress their enemies, (as needs they must, where nothing is to be had)
they stop up the passages, and enclose them with multitudes. By which policy
(as some write) they had well-nigh surprised the Army of Tamerlane, had he not
with all expedition retired toward the River Tanais.

For Person and Complexion; they have broad and flat visages, of a tawny
color, firce and cruel in looks, thinne-haired on the upper lip and a pit of
the chinne, light and nimble bodied, and short legged, as if they were naturally
created for horsemen. Their speech is very sudden and loud, speaking as it were
out of a deep hollow throat. Their chiefest exercise is shooting, wherein they
train their children from their infancy: and to conclude, are the very same
people whom the Greeks and Latins called Scytha-Nomades, or the Scythian
Shepherds.

There are diverse other Tartars (as I have before said) bordering upon Russia,
as the Nagaij, the Cheremissens, the Mordwits, the Chircasses, and the
Shalcans: all differing in name, more than in custom or condition, from the
Chrim Tartar, (except the Chircasses that border SouthEast toward Lituania,)
who are far more civil than the rest of the Tartars, of a comely personage
and stately behavior, as imitating the fashion of the Polonian: whereof some
of them have subjected themselves to this Crown, and profess Christianity.
The Nagaij lies Eastward, and is reckoned the best man of war among the
Tartars, but very savage above all the rest. The Cheremissen Tartar lies
between the Russie and the Nagaij, and are of two sorts, the Luganoy, that is,
of the valley; and the Nagornay, viz. of the hilly Country. These have so
troubled the Russe Emperor, that under color of a yearly pension of Russie
commodities, he is content to buy his peace, yet with condition to serve him in
his wars.

The most rude and barbarous is the Mordwit Tartar, a people having many
selfe-fashions, and strange kinds of behavior differing from the rest.

Next to the Kingdom of Astraehan, the farthest part South-East of the Russie
dominion lies the Shalcan, and the Country of Media, whither the Russie
Merchants travel for raw Silks, Syndon, Saftron, Skins, and other commodities.

The next bordering neighbor by Finland side, is the King of Sweveland. Of
late times this King holding a long war against him, took from him by force
the Castles of Sorenesco, and Pernavia the great, and the less in Livonia, on
the one side, while King Stephen vexed him with a cruel war on the other. In
the utmost bound of the Finland Bay, the Swevian to his great charge possesses
the fortress of Viburge, maintaining therein a great Garrison to resist the
attempts of the Russe. Likewise in that Sea, and on the coast adjoining, he
keeps the ships of war, as well to be ready at all assayes against the
approaches of this great Duke, as also to forbid the Easterlings the bringing
in of munition, and warlike furniture into any part of the Russies Dominions:
neither does he suffer other Ships to sail in those Seas, without a special
Placard signed with his own hand: By the benefit of this Navy, the King
(wheresoever he finds means to use it) becomes master of the Sea, and by
virtue thereof seizes upon many places on the coast of Livonia, and the
bordering territories. But where the Dukes horse, or his great numbers of
footmen may stand him in stead, (as in the open field removed from the Sea)
there he makes his part good enough, and most commonly puts the Swevian to the
worst. The best is, Nature has placed between them such rough Mountains,
such cold, such Ice, and such snowes, that they cannot greatly endamage one
another.

The last neighbor is the King of Poland The Pole.
between whom and the great Duke, this is the difference. The Moscovite has
more territories, the Polonians better inhabited, and more civil: the
Moscovite more subjects, and more subject; the Polonian better soldiers, and
more courageous: the Moscovites are apter to bear the shocke, than to give a
charge; the Polonians, to charge: the Moscovite is fitter to keep a fortress;
the Polonian, to fight in the field: the Moscovite forces are better united;
the Polonian more considerate, and better armed: the Moscovite less cares for
want and extremities; the Polonian, death and the sword: yea, either Nation is
of greater worth, when either of their Princes is of greater magnanimity: As it
happened, when Basilius conquered the great Duchy of Smoloncke, and Poloncke,
and the large circuit of Livonia: And again, when Stephen, King of Poland, in
his last wars against John Basilius his son, reconquered Poloncke, with
diverse other places of good reckoning; besieged the City of Plesko, and forced
the Moscovite to leave all Livonia; whereby I conclude, such as is the valor
and wisdom of either Prince, such is the force and courage of their people.

Tartaria.
THe Empire of Tartaria laid prostrate under the Throne of the Great Cham.
called Dominus dominantium, The large extent of all Tartaria.
and Rex regum, spreads if self with to large imbracement, that it extends
from the Northern Olba, or if you will Tamais, even to the Eastern Sea,
sometime surnamed the Atlanticke, whose vast Lap is almost filled with a fry of
Islands, and begirteth all the Countries called Scythia, Ievomongal, Sumongal,
Market, Metrit, the vast Desert of Lop, Tangut, Kataia, and Mungia: so that
shouldering all the Northern shore of the Caspian, it runs along without
control by the high looking walls of China, and is over-shadowed by those
formidable Mountains Riphei, Hyperborei, Iman, and Caucasus.

And although the Chrim Tartar would feign challenge affinity with the Turk,
expecting that if the Ottoman line should fail, the greatest share of the
worlds magnificence would devolve to him: yet dare he not but acknowledge the
Emperor Cham for his Lord paramount, and is affrighted when he hears of any
complaints to his prejudice.

From Scythia to the Province of Tangus, they live in troops or hoords, and
remove from place to place according to the temperature of the season, and
plenty of feeding: Nor before the year of Redemption 1^12. did we in Europe
hear of the name of a Tartar, but of Scythians, Sarmatians, Albanians, and
such, who were all Idolaters.

They are men of square Stature, Their features.
broad Faces, hollow Eyes, thin Beards, and ugly Countenances, swartish of
Complexion, not for that the Sun kisseth them with extraordinary kindness,
but for that the air, and their sluttish customs corrupts their blood and
bodies: To which inconveniences Nature notwithstanding has prevailed in the
distribution of valor, swift foot-manship, vigilance, and patience to endure
the many encumbrances of travel, hunger, and want of sleep.

They love horses, Their fashions.
and from that love accustom themselves to a savage drinking of their blood,
practicing a cunning theft therem; which being inpunishable, occasioneth many
pretty changes, both in keeping their own, and purloyning from others; as if
some civil Artist had instructed them in the Lacedemonian Laws, which
tolerated theft for the better animating one another in the spoiling of their
enemies.

In their travels and removement they are governed by their Stars, and
observing the North pole, they settle according to its motion. They live free
from covetousness, and are thus far happy, that the strange corruption of
wealth breeds no disorders amongst them; yet have they a kind of traffic,
and by way of exchange continue mutual commerces, loving presents, and can be
contented to be flattered even in their Barbarism, as all the Eastern people
of the world (I think) are affected either by nature or tradition.

If you will hear of their riches, Their Riches.
then must you raise your eyes Eastward, and take notice of Tangut, a wealthy
Province, affording many things befitting Europe, especially Rhubarb; a simple
of that prerogative, as if the whole world of necessity should be beholding
unto them for this distribution.

In Kataia (amongst many others) the great City of Cambalu will excite
admiration, if you may be induced to measure a quadrant of thirty miles
compass, and over-looke at every corner a square Tower very near forty
furlongs in circuit; in which the Emperors Munition, Armor, and provision for
war are secured.

In Mangia, as Queen of the rest, is the City of Quinzay, having a
circumference of an hundred miles, by reason that a great Lake divides the
streets into Channels; over which are numbered twelve hundred and threescore
bridges, some opening the Arches so high and wide, that a good Ship under sail
has a passage of ease. For belief, I will neither force the travels of Sir
John Mandevil, nor the writings of Munster, nor the constant asseveration of
modern Travelers; but for mine own part I would modesty persuade you, That
the world is a stage of variety, and that within our own Kingdom we are
acquainted with such novelties of wonder, that if they were but delivered by
report, we would soon prove as incredulous of the one, as we are of the
other. But to proceed.

As I told you, The ancient division.
the ancient Provinces were divided into three particulars; and in those days
known by the names of Sarmatia Asiatica, both Scythiaes, and the Regions of
Serica, now Kataia. Most fierce and barbarous Nations did always inhabit this
Country, as first the Amazons, a warlike kind of women, which in their days
casting away the properties of their sex, vexed the whole world, usurped Asia,
and built Ephesus. Upon their small extirpation arose the Scythians, no less
dreadful than the former. Then succeeded the Goths or Getes, termed by their
neighbors Polouci, that is, ravenous or theevish. These the Tartars tamed, and
then erected their Monarchy about the year of our Lord, 1187. or as others
say, 1162. electing for their King one Cingis, a man of base birth and calling.
This man's followers at that time lived without Manners, Law, or Religion in the
plains of Caracoram, tended their Cattle, and paid their duties to K.
Vn-cham, otherwise Presbyter John, who without doubt in those days kept his
Court in Tenduch, in the Kingdom of Argon. But this King Cingis first subdued
the Kingdom of Vn-cham, and afterward imposed the yoke of subjection on the
bordering Provinces. And certainly that famous Comet seen in the month of
May, 1211. lasting eighteen days, and glimmering on the Goths, Tanais, and
Russia, with its tail extended toward the West, did foreshew the succeeding
inundation of these Tartars. For in the year following, this Nation, whose
name (as I said) was not so much as dreamed of before in Europe, wholly subdued
Sarmatia Asiatica, or Scythia, invaded Russia, Hungaria, and Polonia. And
lastly, erected other famous Monarchies in China, Mein, and Bengala.

So that at this day it is divided into five great Provinces: Their modern
division.
Tartaria minor, lying in Europe between Tanais and Boristhenes: Tartaria
deserta, (of old Sarmatia Asiatica) containing most of the Hords, but not all:
Zagatai: Kataia: And lastly, that great Promontory which lies outstretched in
the furthest part thereof toward the North and East, and may be called
Tartaria antiqua, as the motherplace of the true Tartar Nation, utterly
unknown to Ptolomie.

Those that live in the open field, about the Euxine Sea, Tartaria minor.
the Lake of Meoris, and the Tauricke Chersonesse, which adjoyneth upon
Boristhenes and Tanais in Europe are the Precopenses. The Precopenses.
In this straight or Peninsula stands Theodosia, now Caffa, once a Colonie of
the Genois, now a Sangiacie of the Turks. Their whole Territories are very
fruitful for Corn and Cattle, and tho people more civil and courteous than
many of the residue, yet retaining a smatch of their ancient Barbarism. For
they are sworn enemies to the Christians, yearly invading Russia, Lituania,
Valachia, Polonia, and many times Moscovie, yielding to the Turk in the name
of Tribute yearly three hundred Christian souls. To one of these Princes
Selimus gave his daughter in marriage.

This in old time was called Sarmatia Asiatica, and better inhabited before the
coming of the Tartars. Tartaria deserta.
It lies between Tanais, the Caspian Sea, and the Lake of Kitay. It is a
plain Country, by nature fertile, if it were manured by these Tartars, nothing
given to husbandry, but addicted to lead a roguish and wandering life, after the
manner of the Arabians. Their chief delight is in hunting and warfare; Mill
and Panicke they cast carelessly into the ground, which notwithstanding yields
sufficient increase. Their store of Horse and Cattle is so plentiful, that
they have to spare for their Neighbors. For the most part they dwell upon
Cartrages covered with skins and woollen cloth. Some defensible Towns they
have, whereunto they fly in times of necessity.

Astrachan is situated upon the Caspian Sea; Astrachan.
it is rich, affords excellent good Salt, and very well frequented by
Moscovish, Turkish, Armenian, and Persian Merchants. In the year 1494. it was
taken by John Basilides, great Duke of Moscovie, and by him with the Title
thereof annexed to the Moscovian Empire.

The Zagatayan Tartars, The Zagata^e.
were so named of their Prince, the Brother of the great Cham, or Can, which
once reigned amongst them. They are now called Ieselbas, that is to say,
Greene-heads, of the color of their Turbants. They inhabit the ancient
Countries of Bactria, Sogdiana, and Margiana, in times past the habitation of
the Massagetes, so famous in Arms. These are the most honorable people of the
Tartars, indifferent civil, given to Arts, and Lords of many fair Cities
built with stone; as Shamercand, once a Town of great fame, and renowned for
the birth of the great Tamerlan, or Temar-lang, but now decayed.

Kataia.
AS our Ancestors were ignorant of the Regions situated upon the East side of
the Caspian, which they imagined to be a branch of the Ocean; even so, as yet
little or nothing knows this Age, what Regions lie, or what people inhabit
beyond that Sea, and the Mountains, commonly called Dalanguer and Vssont. M.
Paul. Venetus was the first that brake the ice in describing of those
Countries, and of him we received what we know of the Tartars. The great
distance of Countries, the difficulty of the journey, and the inaccessible
situation of places, has hindered the discovery of those Provinces: and the
great Duke of Moscovie (by whose Dominions we may easiest travel thither) will
suffer no strangers to pass through his Kingdom. The Caspian Sea, a passage no
less fitting for the journey, is not frequented; and by the way of Persia
infinite Mountains and vast Deserts, dividing both Provinces, oppose
themselves against us: And to the further hindrance of this discovery, neither
the great Cham, neither the King of China, nor the Duke of Moscovie, will
suffer any of their subjects to travel out of their Dominions; nor any
stranger to enter in; unless he come as an Ambassador: neither (in this case)
is it lawful for him to converse freely, or to range at pleasure.

They live under diverse Princes, the principal whereof are those that wear
green on their Turbants. These (as aforesaid) inhabit Shamercand, and are at
continual enmity with the Persians. Next are those of Bochan, Mahumetans: then
those of Mogor, of whom you shall hear hereafter; and lastly, those of Kataia,
whereof we now entreat.

Never was there any Nation upon the face of the earth, that enjoyed a larger
Empery than they do, or have undertaken haughtier exploits; and I would that
they had had some, who might have recommended (by writing) their doings to the
World.

M. Paul. Venetus writes, that this people once inhabited Ciurga and Barge,
Provinces situated upon the Scythicke Ocean, without City, Castle or House,
wandering like the Arabians from place to place, according to the season of the
year. They (as before) acknowledged Un-cham (whom some interpret Prester John)
for their Sovereign Lord, to whom they gave the tenth of their cartell. In
process of time they multiplied to such numbers, and Un-cham being jealous of
their neighborhood, began to lessen their numbers and forces, by sending them
now hither, now thither, upon most long and desperate voyages, as occasion
offered. Which when they perceived, they assembled themselves, resolving to
leave their natural soil, and to remove so far from the borders of Vn-cham,
that never after he should have cause to suspect them: this they performed.
After certain years, they elected amongst them a King, called Changis, to
whom for the greatness of his glory and victories, they added the Surname and
Great. This Changis, departing from his own Territories in the year of our
Lord 1162. with a most fearful Army, subdued partly by force, and partly by
the terror of his name, nine Provinces. At last, being denied the daughter of
Un-cham in marriage, he made war upon him, and overcomming him in battle,
cast him out of his Kingdom. After the death of Changis his successors
afflicted Europe. In the year 1212. they drove the Polesochi from the banks
of the Euxine Sea. In the year 1228. they spoiled Russia. In the year 1241.
they razed Kiovia the chief City of the Rutheni; and Batu their Captain
wasted Polonia, Silesia, Moravia, and Hungary. Innocent the fourth, amazed
with the tempest of these invasions, in the year 1242. sent certain Friars of
the orders of Dominicke and Francis, to the Court of this Great Cham, to
entreat a peace for Christendom.

The circuit of this Empire, Bounded.
in the times above spoken of, stretched from the uttermost bounds of Asia to
Armenia, and from Bengala to Volga, yea, their incursions pierced to Nilus and
Danubius. The Macedonian and Roman Empires were never so large. But because
they were rather Runnagates than men of war, wanting politic government and
military discipline, sometime ruling one Province, sometime another; they
rather wrought spoil and terror to the conquered Nations, than fear of
bondage or subjection, and at last seated themselves beyond the Mountain
Caucasus. After, it became divided into many Principalities, yet so, that the
Title and Majesty of the Empire, remained always to the Cham, who (as we
said before) took the original of this name from the Great Changis.

The Region for the most part is very populous, Fertility.
full of Towns, rich and civil, which you may the rather believe; first, for
that the Tartars choosing this for their Country, beautified it with the
spoils of Asia, China, and that part of Europe which they harried, and were
never won or taken from thence again to this day: next, for that the
Provinces are most commodiously situated for Traffic and Negotiation; partly
by reason of their admirable Plains, and huge Lakes; (Amongst which are
Cazaia, whose waters are salt, Guian, Dangu, Xandu, and Catacora:) and partly
by reason of their large Rivers, which with a long course do run by the
Provinces of Curato, Polisango, Zaiton, and Mecon. Paulus Venetus calls it
Quion. A great help hereunto likewise is the variety of fruits, and the
abundance of Grain. Rice, Wool, Silk, Hemp, Rhubarbe, Musk, and excellent
fine Chamlets. Paul. writes, that it affords Ginger, Cinnamon and Cloves,
which I can hardly believe. In many Rivers are found grains of gold. Their
coin is not all of one value. In Kataia a coin is current, made of the black
rind of a certain tree, growing between the body and the bark: this rind
being smoothed, rounded, and tempered with a gummie substance, is stamped with
the Image of the Great Cham. In the Kingdoms of Ca^acan and Carazan, certain
seafish shells are current, which some men term Porcelline. This kind of
money is frequent in many places of India and Aethiope. By this means, the
Princes get to themselves all the Gold and Silver of the Provinces, which they
cause to be molten and laid up in most safe places, without ever taking any
thing from thence again. In like sort, Prest^r John is thought to be Lord of
inestimable Treasure, while he makes grains of Salt and Pepper, to pass for
current Coin amongst his subjects. They brew an excellent beverage of Rice and
Spice, which sooner procures drunkenness than Wine. As the Arabians, so they
delight in sour milk, or Cosmus, a kind of churned sour Mares-milke, very
forcible to turn the brain.

His force consists first (as we told you) in situation, Forces.
in spacious Territory, in goodly Cities, in plenty of provision, and in rich
Revenues: for amongst other things, he takes the tenths of Wool, Silk,
Hemp, Grain, Cattle, and is absolute Lord of all: but the chief sinews of
his State consists in his armed troops. These live always in the field, 4. or
5. miles remote from the Cities. Over and above their Salarie, they are allowed
to make profit of their Cattle, Milk and Wool. When he goes to war,
according to the custom of the Romans, he mustreth part of the Soldiery,
which lies dispersed through the Provinces. For the most part, all the Nations
of the Tartars, (except the Varcheni, who are not subject to the Great Cham)
fight on horseback. Their Weapons are the Bow and Arrow, with which they fight
very desperately. They are very swift, their Tents are made of woven Wool,
under which they keep in foul weather. Their chiefest meat is milk dried in
the Sun, after the Butter is squeezed out; yea, the blood of their horses, if
famine enforce them. They fight not pell-mell with their enemies, but sometime
on the front, sometime on the flank, after the Parthian manner, overwhelming
them, as it were with a shower of arrows. Whosoever carries himself
valiantly, stands assured of reward, and is graced with honor, immunities
and gifts. Twelve thousand horsemen are appointed for the guard of this Prince,
and it is said, that of this kind of force, he is able to levy a greater
power than any other Potentate.

Howsoever it be, two things in his Kingdom are worthy consideration: the one
is Numbers, which may be imagined by the spaciousness of his Dominions: the
other, their Discipline, because he keeps them in continual pay. For as
discipline rather than rash valor, is to be wished in a soldier; so in
armies, a few trained and experienced soldiers are more worth than many strong
and raw bodies: the one may well be compared to Eagles, Lions, and Tigers,
which obtain principality amongst other beasts, not because they exceed them
in hugeness of bodies (for then should they be a prey to the Elephant, Horse
and Bufall) but because they excel them as well in agility of body, as
encourage.

This Potentate the Moscovite terms the Caesar of Kataia, and the Turk
Vlu-chan, that is, the Great Prince. And not without reason, for in
magnificence of Court, amplenesse of Dominion, abundance of Treasure, and
number of Soldiers, he goes far beyond all the Kings and Potentates of
Asia, and reigns in such Majesty, that his subjects foolishly call him, The
shadow of Spirits, and the Son of the immortal God. His word only is a Law,
wherein consists life and death. He maintains Justice with admirable
severitie, except for the first fault; for which the offender is grievously
whipped: for every other fault he is cut in pieces by the middle: herein it
should seem, they imitate the opinion of the Stoics, concerning the equality
of offenses. A thief is likewise slain, if he be not able to repay nine fold,
as well for a farthing, as a pound. The first Son is heir to the Crown, and
installed with these ceremonies. His Coronation.
The chief of their seven Tribes clothed in white (which is their mourning
color) cause the Prince to sit upon a black woollen cloth spread upon the
ground, willing him to behold the Sun, and to fear the immortal God; which
if he do perform, he shall find a more plentiful reward in heaven, than in
earth; if not, that piece of black cloth shall scarcely be left him, whereupon
to rest his wearied body in the field; besides a thousand other miseries that
shall continually attend him. Then they set the Crown upon his head, and the
Great Lords kiss his feet, swear fealty, and honor him with most rich
presents. Then is his name written in golden letters, and laid up in the
Temples of the Metropolitan City. He has two Councels, the one for War,
wherein are twelve wisemen: the other for Civil affairs, consisting likewise
of as many Counselors. These manage all things belonging to the government,
rewarding the good, and punishing the evil, taking special care to see those
preferred, who have done best service, either in War or Peace, to his Country
or Emperor; and others severely punished, who bear themselves carelessly and
cowardly in the charges unto them committed. In these two points (that is, in
rewarding and punishing) consists so high a policy of good government, that
it may well be said, That the greatest part of these barbarous Princes by these
two virtues only, have imprinted so majesticall a reverence in the hearts of
their barbarous subjects.

For, Government.
what other face of good Government see you in the Turk, Persian, Mogor, or
Xeriffe? Whom reward they, but Captains and Soldiers? Where use they
liberality, but in the field amongst weapons? Surely they built the foundation
of their States upon no other ground-works, neither expect they for peace and
quietness, but by victory and strong hand: yea, they keep no mean, in
disgracing base minds and cowards, and in honoring high spirits and valiant
soldiers. Never was there any Commonweal or Kingdom, that more devised to
honor and enrich the soldier, than these Barbarians, and the Turk more than
all the rest. The Tartars, Arabians, and Persians honor Nobility in some good
measure; but the Turk rooteth out all the Families of Noblemen, and esteems
of no man, unless he be a soldier; committing the fortunes of the whole
Empire to the direction of slaves, and men base borne, but with a special care
of their good parts, and sufficiency.

Let us return to the Tartar, and his form of government. Astrologians are in
great request in those Provinces; for M. Paul. writes, that in the City of
Cambula are fifty thousand. When Cublay-Cham understood by them, that that
City would rebel against him, he caused another to be built near unto it,
called Taindu, containing four and twenty miles besides the Suburbs. There
are also great store of Fortune Tellers and Necromancers in the Kings Palace of
Xandu: As also in China, they are in high esteem. Ismael King of Persia
enterprised few matters without their counsel: and it is no wonder, that it is
of such repute in those places; for between the Chaldeans and the Assyrians it
took the first original in those Countries. The Turks cannot abide it. The
Roman Emperors did more than once banish it, and the professors thereof, out
of their governments. I would to God the like might be done amongst us
Christians, for it is nothing else but a branch of Paganism.

As part of these Tartarians inhabit Cities, and are called Moors; part live
in the Fields and Mountains, and are termed Baduin; so some of these people
dwell in Cities, as the Kataians, Bochars, and those of Shamercand: others
wander through the plains, and are divided into Hords, being five in number, as
aforesaid.

Those Tartars, who are far situated from the residue, and inhabit that
remote Scythian promontory, which Pliny calls Tabin, lying upon the fret of
Anian, are also dispersed into diverse Hords, wandering up and down the
Country, and are in a manner all subject to the Great Cham of Kataia.

Certain Writers affirm, that these Hords issued from those ten Tribes of
Israel, which were sent into captivity of Salmanasser King of Assyria, beyond
the Caspian mountains. In remembrance whereof until this day, they retain the
names of their Tribes, the title of Hebrews, and Circumcision. In all other
rites they follow the fashions of the Tartarians.

Some men likewise say, that King Tabor came out of these parts, to turn unto
Judaisme Francis King of France, Charles the fifth, and other Christian
Princes; and for his pains, in the year 1540. by the commandment of the said
Charles was burnt to ashes at Mantua.

Turkey.
SVch shares of the Worlds vastness has it pleased the Almighty, to cast
into the lap of this great Potentate, commonly called the Gran Seignior; that
for wealth, Territories and command of soldiery, he would have you to
understand, that all other Princes come short of him; and are terrified, when
his Armies are united, to particular destructions. Compound the ambiguitie by
your own discretions.

For Countries, His Countries.
he possesses Asia minor, now Natolia, with all the Regions within the
Propontis and the Hellespont. Which places in times past made the Crowns of
Kings to shine with Gold and Pearl. As Phrygia, Galatia, ^ithynia, Pontus,
Lidia, Caria, Paphlago^ia, Lycia, Magnesi^, Cappadocia, and Comogena. Nearer
the Caspian; Georgia, Mengrelia, Armenia; All Christians of the Greek Church.
To which, if you add the Empire of Trebisond, you shall then find him great
Controller of the Black-sea. For although Russia, Bogdonia, Moldavia, and some
Polanders, keep the North and West shores; yet is it, as a man, who always
for fear the thieves approach, dare not slacken his guards, for doubt of
surprisall.

Next does the pride of his Greatness send you into Assyria, Syria, Palestine,
Mesopotamia, Judea, the three Arabies, the Red Sea, Egypt, and the shores of
Afrike, as far as the confederation of the Kings of Barbary, F^z, and
Marocco. Neither rests he there, but he can bring you to the Towers of
Alexandria, and bid you look Northward (as far as is possible) at all the
Islands in the Archipelago, except Ca^die, and some few other under the Venetian.

But is this sufficient? Stay, and answer your selves. The fields of Greece lie
waste, and are ashamed to show forth that disparitie of countenance, which in
times past Thracia, Macedonia, Thessalia, Epyrus, and Peloponnesus smiled with
in ancient times. Nay more, his Bashawes will bring you to Buda and Belgrade,
and affright you with Hungaries conquest, telling you, that now it knows no
other Proprietor but the Turk as Conqueror. And concerning the Princes of
Transylvania, Slavonia, Poland, and others, with whom he has contracted a
Treaty of pacification, they notwithstanding observe such correspondencie as
Wolves and Dogs do, watching advantages to prey upon the harmless.

His principal Cities are Trebisond, Cities.
Amasia, Babylon, (or rather the ruins of confusion,) Tauris, gotten (if not
regotten) from the Persians: Mecha, famous for the history and death of
Mahomet: Cairo, once Memphis, of late new Babylon, now the mirror of heat,
dust, sluttishnesse, and the mortality of an hundred thousand in a year, when
the Pestilence rages amongst them. Aleppo, the chief Seat of Syria, and
Constantinople, a City exceeding all the Cities in Europe, for populous
numbers; For it is thought that seven hundred thousand souls reside therein,
which if it be true, it is well-neere twice as much, as may be said of Paris.

Shall I come back again, and tell you of Jerusalem, Tyrus and Sidon? Alas,
they are but names; and all the miseries denounced by the Prophets, have broken
their bones asunder, and bruised them like a rod of iron. The few Cities of
Europe, the poor harbors of Asia, the port Towns of the Islands, and the two
Castles of the Hellespont, stand upon no better terms. Only Algier lifts up
the head of a strong Castle, protesting a general entertainment to Pirates, and
bragging of the defeature of Charles and Emperor.

Now if you demand, how from so small a molehill such mountains have been
raised? know, That in the year of grace 1300. did Ottoman, the son of
Zichis, step before other Families, and (as if he were adopted the darling of
success) in his fathers behalf, obtain jurisdiction over Bithynia,
Cappadocia, and most part of Pontus. His successor Orchanes conquered the
great City of Prusia, and made it the Seat of his Kingdom, but in the two and
twentieth year of his Progress he was slain by the Tartars, and left his
son Amurath to succeed both in his honor and family; who perceiving the
dissension of the Greeks, and division of the Empire, spent not his labors
without a great satisfaction: for with the water that drove the Mill, he
drowned the same, and invited (as a guest) to this banquet of Combats, became
Master of the feast. So he made a conquest of Gallipolis, Cherfonesus,
Peloponnesus, Hadrianopole, Servia, Bulgaria, and Mysia, but after three and
twenty years convulsion of the Grecian glory, he was stabbed with a dagger,
and so gave way to his son Bajacet to fill the chair of imperiousness. He
began well, attaining Phocis, Macedonia, and had endangered the most part of
Thracia, had not fortune kept him from insulting, and tript up his heels even
in the race of his Triumph. For with the loss of two hundred thousand Turks
against the valiant Tamberlane, he also lost his freedom; and how he died, our
Stages have instructed Mechanical men: yet in the mean while did Calephin his
son take up the Colors of defiance, and (forbearing the revenges of Asia) he
wrecked his anger on Sigismond, and determined to have overrun the other
Kingdoms of Europe. But prosperity was not so attendant, for ere six years
had enlarged the branches of his strange spreading tree the axe was put to the
root; and, as in Daniels vision, Nebuchadnezzar-like, he fell to the earth.
But this stumpe sprung again, and Mahomet his son in imitation of his
fathers progress, set forward his journey, and wan Valachia, Slavonia, and
infested all the borders of the Ionian sea, making Hadrianople the storehouse
of his projects; wherein for fourteen years he raised up such ornaments of
Mars and Bellona, that he terrified the Emperor of Germany, and all the
Confederates of Hungary. Presently followed Amurath the second, who filled up
his Inventorie with Epyre, Aetolia, Achaia, Beotia, Attica, and Thessalonica,
now Salenica, subject to the Venetians, with the gulf of Napoli adjacent to
Nigropont. Next him Mahomet the second overthrew the School of Athens, and on
a fatal day, the nine and twentieth of May, 1452. forced Constantinople:
whereof when Corinth, Lemnes, Mitylen, Caplea, (a Town belonging to the
Genois) and many other Islands understood, they took the course of
prostitution, and had some mercy extended. The like part played Trebisond,
after that, God gave him leave to continue two and thirty years in pomp and
jollitie.

After him, Bajacet the second obtained Naupast, Methon, and Dirachium from the
Venetians. Then made he a contract with Fortune for the most part of Dalmatia,
and thought to have bargained for Austria, but the conditions were somewhat too
unreasonable, and an envious hand poisoned his body, as ambition had
inthralled this mind; which was imputed to his son Selimus, in detestation
of his long life, after whose departure this Selimus set forward for the
conquest of Africa, uniting Egypt and Damascus, to the Empire.

Now behold Fortunes wanton, Soliman the magnificent, who stepped back again
into Europe, and overreached Belgrad, Buda, and Strigonium, leaving Hungary
as a sorrowful mother mourning for the loss of her dearest infants. Yet
herewith not satisfied, he besieged Rhodes, loading his Camels with the broken
Colossus therein sometime erected, to which he added the devastation of the
five Churches, and Iula. At Zigoth he was arrested, with an imperious
interdiction from his supreme Commander, and so died. His son, Selim the
second, lived and reigned until Cyprus fell from the Venetians, 1570. This
loss resembled a stone pulled from a ruinous wall, which being loose before,
did not much endanger the foundation, which the following battle of Lepanto
did somewhat repair; by the reputation whereof, the enemy ever since has
been more considerate to try Masteries at Sea. After him, time wrought Amurath
the third great Lord of Lords, over-looking the most part of Europe, and the
West of Asia, more proud of Sinan Bassa and Cicala, (the one his Admiral at
Sea, the other Vizier of his Army) than of the conquest of a Kingdom; because
by their industry the honor of the Empire flourished, and he being a
corpulent man, presumed to follow his pleasures, fatting himself with all the
delights that luxury and incontinencie could invent: At last, this lump was
extinguished, and Achmat, the first of that name, is left at this present to
manage the Horses of this Phaetonticall Chariot.

Let no man therefore wonder at this excess of Dominion, considering how
thirteen of their Princes successively have delighted in Arms, and prosecuted
wars in person; a president from the worlds creation, not to be matched by
any the Commanders of the first four and bravest Monarchies. Thus much for
satisfaction of admiration: Their Government.
Now to the form of Government, which is merely tyrannical, and different
from all other, as guided by the heads, and strengthened by the hands of
slaves, who think it as great an honor so to be styled and so to live, as
they do with us, who serve in the highest places of Princes Courts. No man is
master of himself, much less of his house wherein he dwells, or of the
field which he tilleth, except certain families in Constantinople, to whom for
some good service immunitie was granted by Mahumet the second. No more surety
has he of his life (be he never so great) longer than Durante beneplacito of
the grand Seignior, who disposes thereof and of his fortunes, by no other Rule
than that of his will. For although these great slaves attain to immensive
riches, yet are they but the Collectors thereof for his Treasury, whither at
their decease it returns all, except what it pleases him to bestow upon
posterity, who never are preferred to eminent place, except (and that of late)
years and desert plead rising fortunes. Insomuch, that when a Sister or a
Daughter of a Sultan is given to wife to a Beglerbeg, the children begotten on
them do seldom rise above the degree of private Captain, so careless are
they of Nobility, known parentage, kindred, or hereditary possessions.

These slaves are either the sons of Christians, tithed in their childhoods,
Captives taken in the wars, or Renegadoes, such as have willingly quitted
their Religion and Countries, to fight against both, and are to the Christians
the most spightfull and terrible adversaries.

These children they call Iemoglans, The Iemoglans, or tribute-children.
and are brought up under severe Tutors in diverse Seraglioes, distinguished by
Wards, like those in Hospitals, according to their seniorities, where all are
brought up liberally, and taught to write, to read, to handle their weapons,
yea, many of them to converse in secrets of State.

All of them, thrice every week within the courts of their houses, learn and
exercise some military discipline, rise every morning before day, wash their
bodies in cold water, and then repair to Church. After they have performed
these duties, they are allowed a small breakfast, and then are they again to
follow their Books, or several dispositions. At midday, at four of the
clock in the afternoon, and two hours within night, before they go to bed,
they must again to pray, and he that is missing at any of the prefixions, is
sure to have many bastinadoes on the soles of his feet. They never have liberty
to walk abroad, no, not so much as to approach the gates of their College, no,
nor suffered to speak with any Christian or stranger.

It should seem that they remove from Chamber to Chamber, according to their
Antiquities and Proficiencies. Their preferments.
For those of the first Chamber (or Ward) are first preferred, yet not
according to Senioritie, but according to the worth of his calling, and the
worthiness of the person. The meanest place that at first these young
Gentlemen (for such is their resemblance) attain unto, is to attend the grand
Seignior in his Seraglio, as a Page or Groom of his Chamber, and those are
they that are of extraordinary capacities and dexterity of wit, and therefore
called to great places of honor and dignity.

The residue (being alike brought up in their youths) are either preferred to
be Chauses, Ianizars, Spaheioglans, and Silistarspaheis, or taken into the
Port, or Gardens, to servile drudgeries an inferior offices, as to fetch Hey,
Wood, and such like provision, for the Stables, the Court, and the Kitchins.

Out of the first ranks come the Beglerbegs. A Beglerbeg.
The word signifies Lord of Lords. They were but two, the one of Greece, the
other of Natolia, but now by reason of their many conquests, they are also
accounted to be many. Next under the Bassa, their office is to command all the
Horsemen in those Countries wherein they are appointed to serve. The Sanziaks
are Governors of Cities, A Sanziake.
and Colonels of the foot, and command all officers of war and peace within
their territories.

The Chauses go on Embassies, A Chause.
and execute commandments: They are as Pur^evants, or under-Sheriffes: Attend
on the Emperor on Horseback, and on the Courts of Justice, carrying a weapon
on their shoulders, resembling a Mace, and can also solicit the causes of
Clients.

These are, as it were, the heads of this imperious government. The hands are
the Spachi and Ianizars, the maine nerves and supporters of this admired body.
The Spachi are Horsemen, The Spachi, and then distinctions.
weaponed for the most part at once with Bow, Mace, Lance, Harquebush and
Cemiter, whereof they have the several uses, agreeing with their fight,
flights, or pursuments. Of these there are reckoned to be two and thirty
thousand, the one halte of them are called Spachioglans, and ride on the right
hand of the Sultan, when they are in the field; and the other are termed
Silistarspachies, and march on the left hand. The Ianizars, and their
distinguishments.
Of the Timariots in place convenient. But out the Ottoman Empire, both in the
Field, the Court, and the City, insomuch that the Sultans themselves have been
afraid of their insolences, yet term they the Emperor Father, (for no known
friend besides have they to rely on) and he again in time of war commits
his person to their trust, valor, and fidelity. In the City sixteen thousand
are said to be continually abiding, who are there employed Constables, for
keeping of the peace, and observation of good orders: for Clerks of the Market,
to look to the prices, and wholesomnesse of victuals: for arresting of
offenders, and warding of the gates. Some are appointed to guard the houses of
Ambassadors, or of such particular Christians, who will be at the charge,
either about the City, or in their travels, toward whom they show themselves
both civil and faithful. Notwithstanding amongst themselves (as I said
before) they are very insolent and mutinous, in regard of their great
multitudes, and many privileges, so dangerous is an armed Soldier in a rich
and peaceable City. For whereas their first privileges were given them for
safety of the Provinces, as rewards of their abstinence and virtues, as also to
re-answer their benefactors confidence. In these days their insolences are
become so exorbitant, that they will seldom obey any Authority; but by
combining themselves together in mutiny, will tyrannize the Countries committed
to their charges, in such rude manner, that they seem not only to play the
Princes over the people, but do also terrify their greatest Officers.

In them, two properties are to be noted; their birthplace, Their birthplace.
and training. As concerning their birthplace, they are not chosen out of
Asia, but out of Europe; for they ever accounted the Asians esseminate and
cowardly, always more ready to fly than willing to fight^ but the Europians,
hardy, courageous, and good men of war. The Asians they term after their own
name, Turks; but the Europians, Rumi, that is, Romans.

As concerning their Training, Their training
they are taught when they are young: and therefore no marvel, if as they grow
in age, so they increase in strength, activity, and courage: for these three
virtues make a perfect Soldier. The tithing of Springals is made every third
year, unless occasion constrain a quicker election; as it happened in the
Persian war, wherein they were forced not only to make more haste than
ordinary, but also compelled to take up Turkish Az^m^^^n^, which was never
seen to be put in practice before. When these young lads are brought to
Constantinople, they are surviewed by the Captain of the Ianizars, who
registieth their names, their Parents, and their Country, in tables. From
thence, some are sent into Natolia, and other Provinces, to learn their Law
and Language; where being nuzled in the superstitions customs of them, with
whom they converse, they turn Mahumetans before they have discretion to
discern good from evil. Another sort is distributed into the offices of the
Seraglio: The third sort (of the fairest complexions, and comliest proportion)
are appointed to services in the Port of the Grand Seignior. During the time
that they are counted Azamoglani, they have no certain Governor, nor trained
up in prescript orders, but some are set to keep Gardens, some to manure
Fields, other to manual occupations, and to dispatch household business, as
aforesaid. At riper and abler years, they are called into the Schools of the
Azamoglani, (for so they are still termed till they are enrolled in the seroule
of Ianizars) and then delivered over to prescribed Schoolmasters, who train
them up in exercises of labor and travel, allowing them spare diet and thin
clothing. When they are well profited in that profession, whereunto they have
most addicted their minds, then are they enrolled either in the roll of the
Ianizars, or of Spachie. For their maintenance, the one sort are allowed no
less than five Aspers, Their allowance.
nor more than eight a day, the other ten.

Being enrolled for Ianizars, immediately they enter into action, to Garrisons,
or to wait in the Port.

In their journeys and expeditions, they count it religious service to spoil
the cottages and houses of Christians, Their licentious liberty.
who must not find fault with any outrage: whatsoever they bargain for, they
must carry it at their own prices. They are subject to no Judge but their Aga;
and he neither can give judgment of life and death upon any of them, but in
cases of sedition and mutinies, and that seldom and very secretly. They enjoy
many immunities and privileges; by reason whereof they are crouched to, and
feared of all men.

The election of the Emperor is in their power; for unless they approve and
proclaim the Election, the instalment and investiture is of doubtful force.
Every Emperor coming to the Crown gives them some donative, and augmenteth
their pay, so that the more the Emperors, the greater will be their
entertainment. In any dangerous war, part of them go forth with their Aga, or
his Lieutenant, but these are the last men that come to blows. There is not
amongst the Turkish Honors an Office more subject to envy and jealousy than
this Captainship; for he and the Beglerbeg of Greece may not choose their
Lieutenants, but the grand Seignior only: The general favor of the Ianizars
is his assured destruction.

The number commonly is four and twenty thousand, Some say forty thousand.
but in our times they carry not their wonted reputations, because both Turks
and Asians are enrolled for Ianizars; whereas in former ages none were admitted
but the Europian Christians. Besides, contrary to their custom, they marry
wives without limitation. By their long residence about Constantinople (than
the which there is not a more effeminate City in the world) they are grown
vile, base, and men of small service; yea lazy, insolent, and proud above
measure. It is the received opinion, that in their prowess and discipline,
consists the flourishing estate of this Empire; but the degenerate carriage
of these men at this present (as I have before related) may afford us good
hopes, by the favor of the Almighty, shortly to see an end of their licentious
tyranny, as heretofore it has befallen to the preceding Monarchies.

Besides these Ianizars he has the Azapi, a base Besonio, The Azapi, properly
belonging to the Galleys.
sitter for the spade than the sword, entertained rather with numbers to tire,
than by prowess to defeat Armies, opposing them to all dangerous services;
yea, to fill trenches with their slain carcasses, and then to make bridges
with their slaughtered bodies, for the Ianizars to pass over to the breaches.
And as the Romans had their Legions and Auxiliaries, the one the slowre of
their Chivalrie, the other as an aid or augmentation; even so the Turk
accounts his stipendarie horsemen or Timariots; the s^news of his arms; the
Alcanza (such as he presses out of Towns and Villages) Scar-crowes, and for
ostentation; the Ianizars as the Pratorian Legions and the Azapi as ^ rabble of
Pesants; being indeed mere hindes, and tied to serve on horseback for
certain privileges which they hold, in number about thirty or forty thousand,
without allowance of any pay, save what they get by spoil and rapine.

Besides these, he has at command the Tartars, The Tartars.
as Auxiliaries, whereof there are likely threescore thousand, who live by
spoil, and serve also without pay. In their Marches they scour the Country
two days journey before: next them follow the Achangi, then the Timariots,
then those few Azamoglani that be, and lastly the Ianizars. The Chauses ride
on horseback (and carry Bows and Arrows, besides their Maces and Cemiters)
after whom follows the Sultan with the Officers of the Court, and Archers of
his guard; the Spahies, as aforesaid, incircling the slankes of this brave
battle. The Pages, Eunuchs, and carriages, followed by an other sort of
Auxiliars, called Voluntaries, make the Rear; And these follow only upon hope
to be entertained in their rooms of the slain Spahies and Ianizars; their
Commanders being nothing curious (in these times) to receive those that be not
the sons of Christians into Orders. Thus have we lively described his forces
at land.

At Sea; there is no Prince furnished with better means for building of Ships,
Forces at Sea.
than he; for not only the woods of Epyre and Sicilia, but also of Nicomedia
and Trapezond are so huge, so thick, and full of tall Trees, fit for all sorts
of buildings, that a man would take the Trunkes, falling sometimes by violence
of storm from the banks of their Woods into the Luxine Sea, to be Triremes
already built and framed. They can want no workmen to fit and square this
Timber; for vile Covetousness has drawn whole flocks of Christian
Shipwrights into their Arsenals. The year after his defeature at Lepanto, he
showed his Navy whole and entire, yea, itching to cope with the Christian
Armada. Neither can he want a competent number of Mariners: for out of the
Galleys which he maintains in Lesbo Rhodes, Cyprus, and Alexandria, and from
the Havens of Tunis, Bugia, and Algier, he is able to draw a sufficient
proportion of Seamen and Gally-slaves, as often as occasion requires, to
furnish his Royal Army. The experience hereof we have seen at Mal^^^ at
Lepanto, and Goletta. Of warlike furniture his store is infinite, his Ordnance
innumerable; out of Hungary he carried five thousand; in Cyprus he won five
hundred; at Goletta few less. The siege of Malta, wherein they discharged
threescore thousand Bullets, may well declare their abundance of powder and
shot: at Famagusta they discharged an hundred and eighteen thousand: at
Goletta in nine and thirty days, they rased with their uncessant vollies a
Fortification which was forty years in building: in the last Persian war,
Osman Bassa drew after him five hundred field pieces. Where ever they come,
they never cease playing with their Ordnance, till they have laid all level
with the ground; if that prevail not, they go to work with Spade and
Pickaxe: if that fail too, they will never give over till they have filled the
Ditches with the bodies of their slaughtered soldiers.

They are Lords of three things, wherewith they terrify the whole world:
multitudes of men unconquerable; military Discipline (if so at this day)
uncorrupted; of Corn and provisions, store infinite. Multitudes in times past
have bred confusion, and commonly we have seen great armies overthrown by
small numbers; but the Turkish multitudes are managed with so good order, that
although it be far more easy to range a small Army than a great, yet even
in order have their great Armies so excelled our small ones, that I must needs
conclude, that they go far beyond us both in discipline and numbers; herein
giving place, no not to the ancient Romans, much less to any modern Nation,
how warlike soever. And this their due commendation consists not only in
Arms, but in thirst, patience, and hard diet; as for Wine, by their Law they
are utterly forbidden it. In the field every ten soldiers have their
Corporal, to whom without grudging they dutifully obey. You shall never see
Women in their Armies; their silence is admirable, for with the beck of the
hand, and sign of the countenance, they understand without words what they are
to do: rather than they will make any noise in the night, they will suffer
their slaves and prisoners to escape. They punish theft and quarrelling
extremely. They dare not (for their lives) step out of their ranks to spoil
Vineyard or Orchard. They fear not death, believing their destinies to be
written in their foreheads, inevitable: The valiant are assured of preferment,
the cowards of punishment. They are never bilited in Towns, nor suffered to
lodge one night within them. To keep them in breath and exercise, their
Princes are always in action with some neighbor or other, being very jealous
of the corruption of their Discipline.

The which notwithstanding, either time, pride, or the covetousness of the
great ones has much impaired. For in comparison of what they have been, they
are now nothing equivalent to those of other Christian Princes. The Florentine
(in despite of him) with six ships only has so kept the bottom of the
Streits for these six years past, that they have not dared to hazard the
Revenue of Egypt by Sea; but have sent it over land with a guard of Soldiers.
And because the Galleys dare not look upon such Instruments; and yet the
Admiral, supposing it no policy to let them lie unaffronted, has done what he
may to employ and encourage the Pirates of Algier and Tunis to undertake the
service. And in truth, they have many tall Ships (the spoil of Christian
Merchants) warlike appointed, yea grown expert in Navigation and all kind of
Sea Fights, by the wicked instruction of our fugitive Seamen, and other
Renegadoes. But false men will always deal falsely; having no minds to
attempt any enterprise, where the victory is like to prove bloody, and the
booty worthless.

The Royal Navy is set forth in the beginning of Mar, to annoy the enemy, to
suppress Pirates, to collect tribute, and to reform disorders in the maritime
Towns. It consists not of above threescore Galleys, which are all that can be
spared from employment in other places. In October the Admiral returns from
his circuit; and during Winter the Armada is dispersed, and the Galleys drawn
into their dry Stations. Mean time the Pirates, both Christian and Mahumetan
fly out, and rob on the Aegean and Mediterran Seas uncontrolled, more than by
the defensive strength of the assailed. Thus is he served, and thus enabled to
maintain his Servitors.

For the civil and politic government of these Estates, Administration of
Justice.
he causes a Council to be holden four days in the week by the Bass^es,
wheresoever the Prince sojourneth; if it be in the time of peace, then at
Constantinople, or in some other Town, according to occasions, within his
Dominions: if in war, then it is kept within his Pavilion. In this Council
called Dyvan, where audience is open to every suter, first they consult of
Embassies, and of answers to be made unto them; of matters of State and of
Sovereignty, of the means to provide for decayed or ruinated Provinces, of
Murders and Condemnations. And secondly, add the Suppliants, Complainants, or
Suitors, speak without Advocate or Attorney, and is forced to answer presently
to the information of their Adversary, if they be present, or otherwise to
prove their accusation by witnesses. Upon hearing of both parties, judgment
definitive is given, and may not be repealed.

Now as touching his Treasure, It is generally received, Revenues ordinary,
besides Timariots.
that he enjoys little less than fifteen millions of ordinary Revenue. And
where some men think, that out of so large a Dominion a greater Revenue may be
raised, therein they deceive themselves; in not calling to remembrance, that
the Nation give their minds to nothing but war, nor take care of any thing
but provision of Armor and Weapons; courses sitter to destroy and to waste,
than to preserve and enrich Provinces. Whereupon, to give courage to their
Armies, and to continue them in the love of warfare, they suffer them to spoil
the people, hardly leaving them wherewith to hold life and soul together. And
therefore the poor men, not ^ire of so much as their household provisions, much
less of their wealth, (which by time and industry they may gather) take no
more pains about their Husbandry and Traffick^^ (...) they needs must; yea, no
more than their own necessity, as near as they can, shall enforce them, to
make ^eere at the years end. For say they, Why should we sow, and another
reap? Or why should we reap, and another devour the reward of our labors?
This is the cause; that in the Ottoman Dominions you shall see admirable ^uge
Woods, all things laid waste; few Cities well peopled, and especially the
better part of the fields lying unmanured. An assertion easily and probably to
be proved by Constantinople it self. No object in the world promises so much
afar off to the beholders; and entered, so deceives expectation; the best of
their private buildings being inferior to the more contemptible of ours, and
is said to contain but seven hundred thousand souls, half of them Turks,
and the other half Jews and Christians, and those for the general Grecians.
An estimate near which (as I have heard) our London may afford. And no
wonder: for in our Countries, by the abundance of people arises the dearness
of victuals; but in Turkey, through the scarcity of Inhabitants, the greatest
number of the Husbandmen perish with carrying provision, and other necessaries
to the remote places, through which their Armies are to travel. In their
Galleys likewise falls most commonly so great a mortality, that of ten
thousand Rowers haled from their houses, scant the fourth part returns
again. This the rather happens, because the Turks in Winter time (as
aforesaid) mooring their Galleys, do not inure their Seamen and Gally-slaves
to change of air, and the discommodities of tempestuous Seas in all seasons.

The whole trade of Merchandise for the most part is in the hands of Jews or
Christians of Europe; Epidaurians, Venetians, Frenchmen, and Englishmen. In so
large a Territory as the Turk has in Europe, there is never a famous
Mart-towne, but Constantinople, Capha, and Thessalonica; In Asia, but Aleppo,
Damasco, Tripoli, and Adena: In Afric, Cair, Alexandria, and Algier.

Although the ordinary Revenues are no greater than aforesaid, Extraordinary.
yet the extraordinary arise to a richer reckoning, and that by confiscations
and presents. For the Bassaes and great Officers (as Harpies) suck the very
blood of the people, and after they have heaped up inestimable riches, for the
most part they escheat to the coffers of the Grand Seignior. It is reported
that Ibraim Bassa carried from Cair six millions, and Mahumet Vizier, a far
greater mass. Ochiali, besides other riches, had three thousand slaves. The
Suliana, Sister to Selim the second, received daily five and twenty hundred
Chechini, and for the ease of pilgrims and travelers, (journeying between
Cair Meca) she began to trench a watercourse along the way; an enterprise
great, chargeable, and majesticall.

Yea, to give you an estimate of his Revenues, I have seen a particular of his
daily expenses, amounting by the year to one million, nine hundred threescore
and eight thousand, seven hundred thirty five pounds, nineteen shillings eight
pence sterling, answered quarterly, without default; with the allowance of
four hundred ninety two thousand, an hundred threescore and four pounds,
four shillings, and eleven pence; which is for every day, five thousand three
hundred ninety and three pounds, fifteen shillings and ten pence; upon which
account runs for his own diet, but one thousand and one Asper a day,
according to the frugall custom of his Ancestors, amounting in sterling money
by the year, to two thousand one hundred ninety two pounds, three shillings
eight pence. Amongst five and forty thousand Ianizars, dispersed through his
whole Dominions, every one at six Aspers a day, is expended five hundred ninety
one thousand, and three hundred pounds. The tribute-children far surmount
that number, and are allowed one with another three Aspers a day. The five
Bassaes, besides their ordinary revenue, receive one thousand Aspers a day: and
of ordinary revenue, the chiefest receives for his Timar or annuitie,
threescore thousand Ducats; the second, fifty thousand Ducats; the third, forty
thousand; the fourth, thirty thousand; and the fifth, twenty thousand. In
Europe he maintains three Beglerbegs, viz. in Greece one, another in Hungary,
and a third in Sclavonie, at a thousand Aspers a day; the fourth in Natolia;
the fifth in Carmania of Asia, at like allowance. The Admiral receives two
thousand one hundred and ninety pounds: the Captain of the Ianizars one
thousand nine hundred and fifty pounds, besides his annuitie of twenty
thousand Ducats by the year. The Imbrabur Bassa (Master of the Horse)
receives three hundred and eight and twenty pounds, his annuitie is fifteen
thousand Ducats. The Captain of the Spahi, or Horsemen, receives one
thousand nine hundred threescore and one pounds; the Capigi Bassa (head Porter)
one thousand four hundred and fourteen pounds. The Sisingar Bassa Controller
of the Household, two hundred threescore and three pound. The Chaus Bassa
(Captain of the Pensioners) two hundred threescore and two pounds sixteen
shillings, besides his annuitie of ten thousand Ducats. The residue of the
foresaid account is expended upon inferior officers and attendants upon the
Court, City, and Armies, every man receiving according to his place and
calling (viz.) the Masters of the Armory, Masters of the Artillery, Physicians,
Porters of the Court and City, Archers of his Guard, Servitors of his Stable,
Sadlers, Bitmakers, Captains of Galleys, Masters, Boat-swaines, Pursers,
Shipwrights, and such like.

Where, note by the way; That a Sultany is equal to the Chechini of Venice,
and sixscore Aspers amount to a Sultanie.

To raise his Donatives to a high reckoning, it is a custom, that no
Ambassador appear before him empty-handed; no man may look for any office or
honorable preferment, if money be wanting: no General may return from his
province (or journey) without presents: and you must think, that so
magnificent a Prince will swallow no trisles.

The Va^vods of Valachia and Moldavia, hold their estates by virtue of their
bribery, and yet are often changed: For the Estates are given to the best
Chapmen; who make good their days of payment, oppress the people, and bring
the Commons to extreme poverty. Notwithstanding all this, we have seen the
Persian war to have drawn dri^ his Coffers, and emptied his Treasures. Not
long sithence, both at Constantinople, and through the whole Empire, the value
of Gold was raised above belief; insomuch that a Chechin of Gold went for
double his value, and the alay of Gold and Silver was so much abased, that the
Ianizars finding themselves aggrieved thereat, brought great fear, not only
upon the Inhabitants, but also to the Grand Seignior, in threatening, That they
would set fire on Constantinople. In Aleppo threescore thousand Ducats were
taken up of the Merchants, in the name of the Grand Seignior.

But although his Revenues are not so great, as the spacious apprehension of so
mighty an Empire, may seem to produce; yet has he an assistance of greater
value than his surest revenues, and that is, his Timariots, or stipendaries.
The Timariots.
For it is the custom of the Ottoman Princes, to seize on all the land which
they take from their enemies; and assigning a small parcel (peradventure none
at all) to the ancient Lords, they divide the residue into Timars, to every
Servitor a portion, viz. to every one about four and twenty or thirty Acres
of our measure, with seed to sow it; Upon condition to pay half the fruits the
seventh year, and half of the twelfth. Herein consists the chiefest
preservation of the Ottoman Empire; for unless, upon this consideration, the
care of manuring the Land were committed to these Masters; and they again set
it over unto others for their profit and lucre, all would lie waste through the
whole Empire: themselves affirming, That whatsoever the Grand Seignior once
treads with his horse-hoofe, (were it not for this course) there never after
would grow grass again. With these Timars, he also maintains an hundred and
fifty thousand horsemen, excellent well armed, and always ready at their
own charges to march whither their Leaders will command them. So great a
Cavalry can no other Prince maintain, with the yearly expense of fourteen
Millions of Gold. Which makes me to wonder, that some Writers comparing the
Turkish receipts with the Entrado of the Christians, Report says, that this is
again reconquered by the Persian.
never spoke word of so huge a member of the Turkish Puissance. It is reported,
that in the war of Persia, the Turk conquered so much land, that thereof he
erected forty thousand Timars, and a new Exchequer at Tauris, from whence he
receives yearly a Million of gold.

By these troops, the Grand Seignior so aweth his subjects, that they no
sooner can stir, but (as so many Falcons) these Timariots are presently on
their necks; And this is the drift of this dispersing them through the
Provinces. So that one part of them is always ready at the sound of the
Trumpet upon all occasions to march, while the other stay at home to keep the
Inhabitants in their due obedience.

With his Treasure his Bassaes intermeddle not. But two general Treasures (or
over-feers) are chief dealers therein; the one residing in Romania, the other
in Natolia. The Cadalisquers have the administration of Justice, who assist the
Bassaes in the Divan; Neither do any sit there but the twelve Beglarbegs, the
Princes children (being Presidents in their fathers absence) and some certain
of the Cadies, to assist in matters of Law and difficulty, as is used with us
in the Court of Star Chamber.

This Court is holden four days in the week by the Bassaes, Administration
of Justice.
wheresoever the Prince sojourneth: if it be in the time of peace, then at
Constantinople, or in some other Town, according to occasions within his
Dominions: if in War, then it is kept within his Pavillion. In this Council
called Divan, (where audience is open to every futer) they consult of
Embassies, and of answers to be made unto them, of matters of State and of
Soveraigntie, of the means to provide for decayed or ruinated Provinces, of
murders and condemnation. The Suppliant, Complainant, or Suter, speaks
without Advocate or Attorney, and is forced to answer presently to the
information of his Adversary, if he be present, or to prove or disprove his
accusation by witnesses. Upon hearing of both parties, judgment definitive is
given, and may not be repealed. When the Council has sitten seven or eight
hours, the Bassa vizier makes true relation to the Prince of all that has
been handled; if he lie, it is present death: For the Prince often listeneth
at a window, termed Dangerous, right against the Divan, being made in such sort
that he may hear and see, and not be perceived: Though he be seldom there,
yet are they always suspicious: After he has heard the discourse and advice
of his Council, he seldom gain-sayeth, but confirms or moderateth the same.
These things thus ordered, they are written and registered by Officers appointed.

To the management also of the Civil Government, they, as the Christians, have
many several degrees of Civilians: or rather Churchmen; which is a kind of
Ecclesiastical Law, the professors whereof are all of the Clergy, if I may
so term them. And to the training up of these professors, there are certain
Houses (or Colleges) called Medressae in Constantinople, Andrianople, Burssia,
and other places, in which they live, and study their Sciences: wherein they
have nine several degrees.

The first, are called Saffi, and are the puisne Students, or Novices.

The second, are Calsi, Readers (or Tutors) unto the first.

The third, are Hogi, Writers of Books; for they have no Printing.

The fourth, are Naipi, or young Doctors, who are not yet so well studied in
their Laws, as to be profound, or absolute Judges, but yet are of sufficiency
to supply a Judges place, in case of absence.

The fifth, are Cadi, who are both Judges and Justices, to punish offenses. Of
this sort, there is one atleast in every City thorowout all the Grand
Seigniors Dominions, they are distinguished from other men by their high
Turbants, being at least two yards in compass.

The sixth, are called Mudressi, who are as Suffragans unto their Flamins, or
Bishops. Their authority stretches to over-looke Cadies, and to see that they
do their duties in their several charges.

The seventh, are Mulli (Bishops) and are the principal Church Governors next
unto the Mustee. Their office is to place and displace Churchmen at discretion.

The eight are Cadeliscari: they are two great and principal Judges (or
Cardinals) the one of Grecia, the other of Natolia. Selimiu the third added
another over the Provinces of Egypt, Syria, Arabia, and part of Armaria,
equal in authority to the former. These sit every Session in the foresaid
Divano amongst the Bassaes to determine temporal suits, being (as it were)
chief Justices in dignity and authority.

The ninth and principallest is the Muftee: He commands and governs all
Churchmen (or Judges) whatsoever; and his sentence in matters of Law and
Religion is uncontrollable: yea, the greatest Bashaws in matters of Law or
difficulty refer all to his decision without appeal. Such is his
greatness, that he may not abase himself to sit in the Divano; neither when
he comes into the presence of the great Seignior will he vouchsafe to kiss
his hand, or to use greater reverence toward his Highness, than his Highness
will afford unto him. And therefore when he enters the Grand Seigniors
Chamber he will presently rise, and then both sit down face to face, and so
confer. And these be the degree; and no other, by which the poorest scholar
may ascend unto the highest place of Honor in this Turkish government.

Toward the East, Borderers.
from Ta^ris to Balsara lie the Persians; Toward the South, and the Persian
Gulf, the Portugals. Toward the Red Sea, ^hesterh^^^. Upon the West, the
Xeriffe and the Kingdom of Naples; On the North, border the Polonians and the
Germans.

The Persian.
Without all question the Turk far excels the Persian in military
discipline: for Mahumet the second took (...) the first, (and after him his
son Soliman) defeated Ismael and Ta^ias. Amurath the third, by his
Lieutenants took from them all Media, the greater Armenia, and their chief
City Tauris. Their battalions of footmen, and the use of great ordnance, which
the Persians wanted, (and knew not how to manage,) were the chieft decasions of
these their good fortunes. And although the Persians have sometime prevailed in
horse-fights, yet has it been always with loss of ground, not to themselves
only, but to their Confederates also. For Selim the first took from the
Momeluks, Syria, and Egypt: and Amurath the third almost extinguished the
Nation of the Georgians, their surest allies.

To the Portugals he is far inferior; for in Sea Fights and Sea-forces
there is as great inequality between them, The Portugals.
as between the Ocean, and the Persian Gulf. The Portugals have in India
Havens and Castles, Territories and Dominions, plentiful in timber, provision,
and all sorts of warlike furniture for the Sea, nor without many great Princes,
their Allies and Confederates: whereas the Turk has no one place of strength
in the Persian Gulf, except Balsara. That tract of the Seacoast of Arabia,
which stands him in stead, has but four Towns, and those weak, and of
small esteem, which is sufficient to endure: So that in this Gulf, as
likewise in the Red Sea, he has small means to rigge out any strong, Armada.
Besides the soil is utterly barren of timber fit for building of Galleys: for
which scarcity whenever he had occasion to set forth a Navy, he was
constrained to send down his stuff from the Havens of Bithynia and Cilicia,
by Nilus to Cair, and from thence to convey it over land upon Camels backs, to
his Arsenall at Suez. What success his fleets have had in those parts, may be
read in the discourse of Portugal: for the Portugals take great care to prevent
him of setting foot in those Seas, yea, when they but hear that he provideth
Sea-forces, they presently make out, and spoil whatsoever they light upon.

For Captains, Soldiers, Arms, and Munition, Prester John.
he is better provided than Prester John; for this Prince has a large
territory without munition, and infinite Soldiers without weapons; Baruangasso
his Lieutenant lost all the aforesaid Seacoast of the Red Sea, and brought the
Abessine into such extremity, that to obtain peace he promised payment of a
yearly tribute.

In Afric he has a greater jurisdiction than the Xeriffe: The Xeriffe.
For he is Lord of all those Provinces which lie between the Red Sea, and
Velez de Gomera: but the Xeriffe has the richer, the stronger, and the better
united. Neither of them for the neighborhood of the King of Spain, dare
molest one another.

The residue of his neighbors are the Christians, The Polander.
and first the King of Poland: what either of these Princes can effect the one
against the other, has been manifest by their forepassed actions. In some
sort it seems that the Turk fears the Polaques: For, upon sundry occasions
being provoked (as in the reign of Henry the third, in that war which Ivonia
Vaivod of Walachia made with the said Turks, wherein great numbers of Polaques
served) and (in the reign of Sigismund the third,) notwithstanding the
incursions of the Kosacks, and the inrodes of John Zamoschus, General of
Polonia; he stirred not, neither with wont-like disdain; once offered to
revenge so great an indignity. Again, They, since the unfortunate journey of
Ladislaus, never enterprized journey against the Turks. no, nor at any time
aided the Walachians their neighbors, their friends and Confederates, but
suffered whatsoever they held upon the Euxine Sea to be taken from them. But
the smothering of this, wrong I rather attribute to the base mind of their
King, than to want of good will or courage, either in the Gentry or Nobility.
Sigismund the first, being by Leo the tenth moved to war upon the Turk,
answered; Few words shall serve; first make firm peace between the Christian
Princes, then will I be nothing behind the forwardest. Sigismund the second
bare a mind so far abhorring from war, that he also never made attempt
against this enemy, but being injured by the Moscovite, he let him likewise
do that what he would, unrevenged. King Stephen, a great politician, thought
the war of Turki full of danger, notwithstanding discoursing with his
familiars, he would often say, that if he had but thirty thousand good footmen
joined to his Polonian Horsemen, he could willingly have found in his heart to
have tried his fortune with this enemy.

The Princes of Austrich are borderers by a far larger circuit of land than
any other Potentate, The Austrian.
and being constrained to spend the greatest part of their revenues in the
continual maintenance of twenty thousand footmen and horsemen in garrisons;
they seem rather to stand content to defend their own, than any way minded to
recover their losses, or to enlarge their bounds. Ferdinands journey to Buda
and Possovia, was rather to be counted courageous, than prosperous: the reason
was; not because his soldiers wanted strength and courage, but skill and
discipline. For numbers he was equal to the enemy, and reasonably well
furnished with necessaries, but his troops consisted of Germans and Bohemians,
Nations by influence heavy, slow, and nothing fit to match the Turks,
skillful and ready in all warlike exercises.

The Venetians likewise are borderers for many hundred miles space by Sea and
land: The Venetians.
but they maintain their estate by treaties of peace, by traffike and
presents, rather than by open hostility; providing very strongly for their
places exposed to danger, and avoiding all charges and hazard of war, yea,
refusing no conditions; (if not dishonorable) rather than willing to try
their fortune in battle. And the reason is, not because they want money and
sufficiency of warlike furniture, but soldiers and proportionable provisions
for one sole State to provide against so extraordinary an enemy.

For, if time has proved, that neither the Emperors of Trapizond and
Constantinople, nor the Sultans of Egypt, nor the puissant Kings of Persia and
Hungary, have been able to maintain themselves against this enemy; who can
but commend this honorable State, for their wariness, and moderate carriage?

For howsoever of custom, for affectation, or admiration we carry to
Antiquity, we use to extenuate things present, and (like old men) we fashion
our selves to extol the ages past, and complain of times: yet if we will
speak without partiality, we must needs confess, that never since the worlds
first creation in any age was there found a body of war so politickly
devised, so strongly cemented, and so severely disciplined as is this, for
greatness and powerfulness.

Which the effects thereof may well witness, with the fortunate success of
continual victory. I may not stand hereto recount the extreme diligence and
circumspection of Ottoman, the first raiser and founder of this Empire; nor the
wily wit and cunning of his son and successor Orchanes, who first passed his
Turkish forces into Europe, after he had taken Prusia from the Greeks, and
subdued Carmania: nor yet the wisdom and dexterity of Amurath, in espying of
advantages, and prosecuting of them: Nor will I make any long discourse to
entreat of Bajacet, who conquered Bulgaria, and destroyed Bosnia: neither of
Amurath the second, who in person fought six and thirty battles, and in all
departed Conqueror: And yet his son Mahumet the second exceeded him, and all
before him. Equal to him was Selim the first, who in eight years razed and
extirpated the whole Empire of the Mamelukes, defeated two Sultans, and
adjoined to the purchases of his predecessors Egypt, Cerenaica, and Syria, a
good part of Arabia, and all that which lies between the Syrtes of Egypt and
Euphrates. And more than this, did in a pitched field overthrow the Sophy of
Persia. The memory of Soliman is yet fresh, who for Arms was no whit inferior
to his ancestors, but for gravity, constancy, civil carriage, and fidelity of
his word, went beyond them all. He wan the Island of the Rhodes from the
Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, took Belgrade from the Hungarians, with a
great part of that Kingdom; and from the Persians Babylon, and Dyerbecha, the
two maine fortresses of the Turkish Empire in those quarters. All which
notwithstanding this honorable State, having both before them, and on both
their skirts this so-powerfull an enemy, covering both Sea and Land with his
forces, have to this day by their provident wisdom, so governed their
affairs, that in despite of him they have hitherto maintained themselves not
only in liberty, but also in prosperity and reputation of greatness.

His last neighbor is the King of Spain, The Spaniard.
between whom there is no great difference, you shall hear the Spaniard say,
that the Kings revenues (they mean those of Europe only) exceed the Turkish:
for he receives more than four millions out of his Provinces of Italy and
Sicilie, two and upward out of Portugal, and three from the Indies, one year
with another. In these only he equallizeth the Turk, yea, and in the ordinary
revenues of Castile, Arragon, and Belgia he far exceeds him. But what can you
find (say some men) to compare to his Timars? First I answer, that as the
Kings revenues are far greater than the Turks; so also his Subsidies which he
levieth extraordinarily (of late times for the most part turned into ordinary,
as his Croisados) do amount to as much as the entire profits of some whole
Kingdom. His tenths of the spiritual livings, are able to maintain one
hundred strong Galleys: his eicheats in Spain and Naples, bring more into his
Coffers than a man would think. His benevolences and presents sent him from
Naples, Sicily, Sardinia, Millan, and the New-world, are infinite and
magnificent. Not long since Castile granted a contribution of eight millions of
gold to be paid in four years, which sum amounts to the Turks whole
Revenue of one year. What should I speak of his Commendams of the orders of
Montegia, Calatravia, Alcantara, and S. James, which were enough, if he had
naught else to suffice him: he is great Master of the said orders, and thereby
has means to advance and enrich his servants, whomsoever he pleases, as
freely as if he were King of France and Poland. Also in Spain he keeps three
thousand good horsemen, and as many in Flanders; in Millan four hundred men at
Arms, and a thousand light horse: in Naples fifteen hundred men at Arms, and
a great company of light-armed Italians. The number of his souldierie in Sicily
is one thousand five hundred. Neither are his feodaries lightly to be
esteemed, who upon necessity are bound by their tenures, at their own charges
to serve personally in the field, especially if you consider their numbers,
wherein are reckoned three and twenty Dukes, two and thirty Marquesses, nine
and forty Viscounts, seven Archbishops, (for they likewise in this case are
bound to contribute, as the great Lay-Lords) three and thirty Bishops. And in
Naples fourteen Princes, five and twenty Dukes, seven and thirty Marquesses,
four and fifty Earls, four hundred forty eight Barons, to speak nothing of
Portugal, Sicily, Sardinia, and Millan. Lastly, you must note, that these
troops to whom the Turk grants these Timars, are not so renowned for their
valor, as for their number: For the Timars and profits of their Villages and
possessions, together with the greedy desire of enriching themselves with the
demaines of their Farms, has bred such love of ease and peace in their
minds, that they are grown cowardly and base minded; by their good wills
hating the travels of war and journeyes, and marching with a greater desire
of returning home to enjoy the pleasures of their Gardens, and the plenty of
their Granges, than with stomachs to cope with their adversaries, or to enrich
themselves by hazard. For if by a little pillage, fierce and valiant Soldiers
have become cowards, and men of small service; what will fair possessions, a
pleasant seat, a rich dairy, and wife and children left behind, bring to pass?
I may well say, and say truly, that these Timariots are fitter to bridle and
keep under the subdued Provinces, than to fight in field against armed
Nations: and to this use it is good policy to maintain them. For who knows
not that the Turkish subjects do hate his Government, his Religion and
Tyranny? For Religion only, the Moors and Arabians, who differ in opinion:
and for Religion and Tyranny, the Christians, who make more than two third
parts of his Subjects. For jealousy hereof, he is forced to keep the greater
part of these troops at home, unless he should lay naked his estates to
infinite casualties. To speak in a word, his Cavalrie is so far and wide
dispersed thorowout the Provinces, that they cannot easily be drawn to any
famous journey in great numbers, without loss of long time; neither are they
able to stay long from their houses, but they will fall into diseases and
extremities: so that if the Grand Seignior had no other aids nearer hand but
these Timariots, he might happen to make very many unfortunate journeyes.

The experience offore-passed exploits, does well show the difference of their
several forces. The loss of the Spanish Fleet at Zerby, may be put in the
balance against the Turkish flight from Malta. The loss of Goletta, against
the taking of the Rock of Velez. Tunis is always to be taken at his pleasure,
who has a liking thereto. The Spanish King never enterprized any sole journey
against the Turk; but he has valiantly defended his own at Malta and Oran. I
will speak nothing of the defeature at Lepanto, for other Princes had their
shares therein.

A treaty of truce was mentioned between both Princes not many years since,
and equally accepted of both parties. For the one was invested in the War of
Persia, the other in the commotions of the Low Countries. These Wars, by
reason of their remote distances, were extreme chargeable to both Princes, but
worser to the King than to the Turk: for although Persia be far from
Constantinople (from whence the principal smewes of the war were to be
drawn) yet it bordereth upon Mesopotamia and other subdued Provinces, from
whence his Armies were supplied with provisions and treasures, but Belgia is
far distant from any part of the Spanish Dominions. The Turk has to do
with the Persian (a State without any mighty confederate worth speaking of) but
the King was engaged in a war (of greatest difficulty) favored by the
English, the French, and the Germans, Nations severally equal in all points to
the Persian.

Of those Countries which the Turks term Romania.
ANd now that we have run over the spacious Provinces of this mighty, rich,
and dreadful Potentate; we will also in some sort, to the pleasure of the
Reader, relate many the particulars of those good and ancient Regions, which at
this day this Saracenicall Nation terms by the names of Romania and Natolia.
Romania at this day is taken for that part of Christendom which was anciently
called Grecia, and contains the Provinces of Thrace, with his Chersonesus
vulgarly, the straight of Gallipoli, Macedon, Epyre, now Albania; Achaia, now
Livadia; Peloponnesus, now Morea; and the Island of the Archipelago.

Until the coming of Cyrus King of Persia, these Provinces remained in
freedom, but of all others he first gave them the yoke of subjection. After
him Xerxes the son of Darius, with the succeeding Princes of Persia, did no
less afflict them. When their turn was past, Philip King of Macedon acted his
part, and united them under his own Dominion, until the days of Perseus,
whom the Romans subdued and subjected. But the Roman Empire being divided into
the East and West, the Grecians began their Empire under Constantine the
Great, and ruled honorably many ages, until the descent, first of the Goths,
secondly of the Bulgars, thirdly of the Sarazens, and lastly of the Turks, who
slew their Emperor, and seized on the Empire. Who at this day (except some
Relikes, remaining under the Venetian Dominion) possess the greatest part
thereof, as well upon the Continent as in the Islands. Those that are under the
Venetian jurisdiction (says Bellonius) little differ, especially in Religion,
from those that are tributary to the Turk: for both sorts being mingled, those
that are subject to the Turks, live like the Turks; and those that live under
the Venetians, do as do the Venetians. So unspeakable is the rudeness of
either, that through all their Cities you shall not find a School to instruct
their youth. Promiscuously all speak the Greek tongue corrupted from the
ancient, but some better than others. The Burghers subject to the Italians,
speak Italian as well as Greek, but the Villagois altogether Greek. And so
the Grecians which are subject to the Turk, in Cities speak Turkish and
Greek; the Villagois only Greek; and in places of Traffic they borrow one
from another, according as their business is with those with whom they
negociate. And as they differ in language, so do they in attire. Those that
serve the Venetians, go apparelled like Venetians; those that live under the
Turk, like Turks. Both the Ilanders and those that live on the Continent, as
well in Europe as in Asia, although subject to Turkey, keep their ancient
Christian faith. Long ago they rejected the primacy of the Latin Church, and
elected to themselves Patriarchs, whom they acknowledge for their chief
Pastors, and have appointed them their several Sees. Whom not only the
Grecians thus obey, but likewise all those Provinces which follow the Greek
Church, as Circassia, Walachia, Bulgaria, Moscovia, Russia, the better part of
Polonia, Mongrelia, Bosnia, Albania, Sclavonia, some part of Tartarie, Syria,
Croatia, and generally all the Provinces about the Euxine Sea. In number they
are four, viz. the Patriarks of Constantinople, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and
Antioch.

Of these, the Patriarch of Constantinople is Primate; Patriarchs of
Constantinople.
sits in Constantinople, and chiefly moderateth over the Caloieri, (so are
the Greek Priests termed) which reside in Mount Athos, and generally over all
Christians, professing the rites of the Greek Church thorowout Europe; and for
the Monasteries of Mount Athos, and all other dispersed over Europe, he paieth
the Turk yearly 12000. ducats.

The Patriarch of Alexandria moderateth in Egypt and Arabia, and his dwelling
places in Memphis and Cair, Of Alexandria.
are not much inferior to his of Constantinople.

The Patriarch of Jerusalem absolutely moderateth in Judea, Of Jerusalem.
and overall Professors of the Greek Religion thorowout Syria. And must of
necessity every year, on the fifteenth day of August, efficiate at the solemn
Service in the Monastery situated upon Mount Libanus.

The Patriarch of Antioch precedeth in those Monasteries and Greek Churches,
Of Antioch.
which are in Beritus, Tripolis, Aleppo, and other places of Asia. And in these
places, as in all other, the Turk permits the Grecians to use their
consciences freely, so they perform their due and accustomed tributes.

A Nation no less scattered than the Jew, but infinitely more populous; three
parts of the Inhabitants of all Greece and Romania being Grecians, besides
those who dwell in the Islands of the Mid-land Sea, Propontis and Aegeum.
Infinite numbers there are of them also in the less and greater. Asia, and in
Africa not a few. A people once so excellent, that their precepts and examples
do still remain as approved Canons to direct the mind that affects virtue:
Admirable in Arts, and glorious in Arms, famous for Government, and passionate
affectors of freedom; but now drowned in ignorance and contented slavery,
having (as it should seem) utterly lost their minds with their Empire. So
base, as to be imagined, that they had rather remain as they be, than endure a
temporary trouble to redeem their pristinate estates, delighting in nothing
but in ease, in shades, in dancing and drinking.

Thrace has on the East the Euxine Sea, Thrace.
the Thracian Bosphorus, Propontis, and Hellespont: on the North, the Mount
Hemus; upon the West, the higher Mysia, and part of Macedon; on the South, the
Archipelago. It is a most Noble Province, cold, plain, and admirable populous,
stored with Grain, Pulse, and excellent Wine toward the Seaside: but toward
the up-land (lying more subject to cold) it is not so fertile nor woody.

In it stands many goodly Cities: Philipopolis, Nicopolis, Hadrianopolis, and
amongst many other Constantinopolis, by Heaven erected to be the head of an
Empire; as the only seat which the Romans, Greeks, and now the Turks, have
chosen and reputed to be most commodiously seated, not for the government only
of the Empire, but as they conceit of the whole world.

Gallipolis is another famous portion thereof: Gallipolis.
I will not stand to describe these trivials, yet is it a place of great
moment, and therein resideth a Governor, or Lord Admiral, without whose
license no ship of what Country soever may pass the straight, but he must
there cast Anchor at least for three days, until the Turks have made full
search, whether they transport any slaves or prohibited wares by stealth, or no.

Next follows Macedon, a fertile region enclosed with hills, and near the
Ionian sea, plain and woodie. Macedon.
That it was once the Empress of the East, it is well known, but at this day
it is Turkish, and without any famous Cities, save in a piece of Albania. In it
is nothing memorable but the Mount Athos, or the holy Mount. It is 75. miles in
compass, three days journey long, and half a days journey broad, resembling
the shape of a man lying with his face upward, whose highest Cone, always
covered with snow, is seen thirty miles off at Sea. It is exceeding fertile
in Grass, Fruit, Oil, and Wine. Long ago it was dedicated in honor of Saint
Basile to the Greek Caloieri, and endowed with privileges, which at this day
it enjoys by the Turks good favor; that is to say, that no man neither
Grecian nor Turk may inhabit in this place, except he be a Priest. So that
their number in these days are about six thousand, dispersed into twenty and
four Monasteries, ancient and warlike, so built for fear of thieves and
pirates, although there be no such great cause. In these Monasteries are many
relickes, which cause great concourse of people, and they are stately built,
and richly adorned.

This hill is in as great request with the Grecians for their sanctimonious
strictness of life, as is Rome with the Latins; yea, the Turks themselves do
send hither many bountiful alms. None of them live idly, but must do
somewhat, and so do daily for the oeconomike of the house; as to dress Vines,
fell Timber; yea to build ships, and such like mechanical labors. They are
poorly clad, like Hermits, neither wear they shirts of Linen, but Woollen;
and them they spin, and sow themselves, never giving themselves to study: and
that more is, many of them can neither write nor read. And yet notwithstanding,
if any man have occasion to journey by their houses, he shall, if he please,
find viands scot-free, according to his calling.

Epyre, Epyrus.
now Albania, was once a very famous Province, as witnesses P. Aemilius. It
had in it seventie Cities, now destroyed, and turned into ruins, or Villages,
meanly inhabited. For the most part it is woodie, and barren, but near the
sea, fertile and adorned with very beautiful havens.

Achaia is a very goodly Region, Achaia.
as may be gathered by the goodly Cities, which therein once flourished ( viz.)
Delphos, Thebes, Athens, Megara, and many more now destroyed.

So is Peloponnesus, Peloponnesus.
termed by Pliny the bulwark of Greece. It yields all things that man can
desire, either for life or pleasure. And although the ancient Cities be now
defaced, yet is it for quantity, the best peopled part of Greece. It is now
under the Turk, and counted the best Sangiakship in Turkey, as bound to bring
at the commandment of the Beglerbeg of Greece, one thousand horsemen under his
own pay. It is worth yearly fourteen Ducats. The Islands adjoining unto these
large continents, I will not discourse of: for as they are diverse in worth and
estimation, so are they many in number, and (for the most part) not worthy
relation.

Dalmatia, Dalmatia.
is at this day divided into Sclavonia, Dalmatia and Albania. Sclavonia lies
upon the West, Albania upon the East, and in the middle, Dalmatia. In all
fertility it is as good as Italy. Of a Country first wasted by Caesar
Augustus; secondly by the Goths; thirdly by the Turks, and at this day shared
amongst three such Lords, as are the Venetians, the Turk, and the Emperor; it
may be said to be reasonable well inhabited. And so it is having many fine
Cities in it, as Iadera, Ragusa, etc. Howbeit, that part which is subject to
the Turk, lies almost desert, by reason of their continual inrodes.

Bossina, or Maesia superior, is also a parcel of Illyria, Maesia superior.
and erected into a Turkish Beglerbeg-ship, having under it nine Sangiaks.
Servia, now Rascia, lies between Bosnia and Bulgaria; Servia.
it was taken by the Turk 1438. and reduced into a Sangiak-ship under the
Beglerbeg of Buda. Bulgaria, Bulgaria.
which some take for the lower Maesia, is so famous a Province, that the
Turkish Emperor has erected it for the chief Seat of the Beglerbeg of
Europe; under whose command are twenty and one Sangiaks.

Valachia contains the two Provinces of Moldavia and Transalpina. Valachia.
Valachia is a plain and fertile Country smally inhabited, and destitute of
firewood; but stored with excellent Horse, Cattle, and Mines of Gold and
Silver, if the people durst dig them for fear of the Turks. It is 500. miles
long, and 120. broad. It has one Archbishop, and two Bishops, and is more
populous than Moldavia. They speak both one language, being almost half
Italian. This Country and Moldavia are plagued with three bad neighbors, The
reason of the desolation of these Countries.
viz. the Turks, the Tartars, and the Cassoks. They follow the Greek Church,
and in matters of Religion obey the Patriarch of Constantinople. They are the
same which in ancient times were called Daci. The Turks have often attempted
with their mightiest powers to have made a small conquest of these Provinces,
but they have hitherto bin valiantly resisted, and repulsed, partly by the
Natives, and partly by the Polonians, Transylvanians, and the Cassoks, in
dislike of each others bad neighborhood. Yet is it tributarie to the Grand
Seignior, and pays him yearly twenty four thousand Chechini.

Moldavia, being in a manner round is almost 300. Moldavia.
English miles over every way. It has two Archbishopricks, and two
Bishoprics, and is exceeding fertile in Corn, Wine, Grass, and Wood. It
affords great plenty of Beef and Mutton, and therewith feeds Polonia, a
great part of Germany, and the populous city of Constantinople. A great and
fat Ox in this Country is valued but at thirty shillings, a Sheep at three
shillings. The tenth whereof (which of duty is yearly paid to the Prince)
amounts to 150000. The Clergy and Gentry (for they always can make best
shift for themselves) contribute no parcel hereof. It has a small River
passing through the Country, and falls into Danubius, near unto Gallatz,
called Pruta, the water whereof (as also of Danubius) is unwholesome to drink,
for it causes the body to swell. In 1609. certain English Gentlemen
traveling 240. miles in this Country, could meet but with nine Towns and
Villages in all the way, and yet for above a hundred miles space together, the
Grass grows at least one yard high, and rotteth every year upon the ground
for want of Cattle and manurance. On the East, it has the black Sea, on the
West Podalia: on the North the Tartars; and on the South the Danubie, and the
Country of Bulgaria. It pays yearly unto the Great Turk by way of Tribute
3200. Chechini, besides one thousand horses, sent yearly unto Constantinople
for a present, from both these Princes, of Moldavia, and Valachia. It also
pays tribute to the Polander, but how much I cannot show you.

Therein dwell many Armenians, Jews, Hungarians, Saxons, and Ragusians, who
forestall the whole traffic in those parts bartering their Corn and Wine into
Russia and Polonia, and their Skins, Wax, Honey, powdered Beef, Butter and
Pulse, into Constantinople. The Malmesey likewise which is transported out of
Creet into Poland and Germany, is carried through this Country, whereof the
Vaivod receives a massy impost.

Of those Countries which at this day the Turks term Natolia.
THat which the Turks at this day term Natolia, or Turcia major, once Asia
minor, comprehends the Provinces of Pontus, Bithynia, Asia it self, Lycia,
Galacia, Pamphylia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, and Armenia the less; and in these
Provinces of ancient times flourished the States and Kingdoms of the Trojans,
of Mithridates, of Craesus, of Antigonus, of the Paphlagonians, of the
Galathians, of the Cappadocians, and Phrygians: All which at this day are not
sufficient to satisfy the only ambition of the Turkish tyranny. The
Inhabitants for the most part are Mahumetans, and natural Turks, of simpler
natures than the Turks of Europe, and nothing so cruel as the Renegado
Christians. Yet are there many Christians among them in many of these Regions,
following the Rites of the Greek Church. Among these Turks, there is no
acknowledgement of Superiority, Blood or Nobility, but all are equal slaves
to the Grand Seignior, over whom he appoints Beglerbegs and Sanziaks. They
are either a kind of idle or lofty people, for they are smally industrious,
and were it not for their slaves, their grounds would generally lie unmanured.

Pontus and Bithynia are now united under one name, Pontus, Bithynia, Bursia.
and called Bursia. Here once reigned the great King Mithridates; and here
stood the famous Cities of Chalcedon, Nicomedia, Apamaea, Prusia, Nice, and
Heraclea Ponti.

Asia propria, now Sabrun, Asia minor.
is the peculiar Province of Asia minor, and contains in it many famous
Provinces; as Phrygia major and minor, Caria, Mysia, etc. In Phrygia minor
stood that Noble city of Troie, famous at this day (says Bellonius, an
eie-witnesse) for its very ruins of walls, gates, circuit, and marble
sepulchers, found upon the ways without the walls.

Pamphilia, now Caramania, Caramania.
is one of the old seven Sangiakships of Turkey, and yields 8000. ducats of
yearly revenue. In this Country, as also in Cilicia, are woven those fine
cloths which we call Chamblets, watered and unwatered, they are made of the
hair of Goats so fine and white, as no Silk can surpass them in those two
properties.

Cappadocia, now Amasia, is a goodly Country, Cappadocia or Amasia.
and the seat of the Turks eldest Son. In it are many goodly cities, as
Trapezond, once the seat of the Comneni, Emperors of Trapezond, whose Name and
Progeny ahumet the second utterly extinguished.

Cilicta now part of Caramania, Cilicia.
is a good Country: the Inhabitants are given to pasturing of Goats for lucre
of their fleeces, of which they make their Chamblets; but otherwise, neither
given to Fishing, Navigation, nor Husbandry. At the foot of Mount Taurus
(says Bellonius are diverse small Villages, and excellent pastures about them,
which for the fertility thereof should seem to be one of the Turkish Races:
from thence he culleth out every year six hundred horse of service, which they
highly esteem, and name Caramanni.

Armenia minor is a better soil, Armenia minor.
and more populous than Cappadocia, and round about incircled with tall, huge,
broken, and wooddie mountains.

Arabia triplex.
THe three Arabiaes are likewise a parcel of the Empire, which is a mavelous
great Country, included between two huge bosoms of the sea, in manner of a
Peninsula, viz: upon the West and East with the Arabian and Persian gulfes,
upon the South with the Ocean, and upon the North with Syria, and Euphrates.

The Inhabitants are indifferently called Arabians, Saracens, or Moors: Those
are the true Arabians which live out of Cities in Tents, dispersed over Syria,
Egypt, and Afric: these give themselves to feed cattle, and droves of
Camels. Those which inhabit Cities, are called Moors, and were once of such
puissance, that they not only subdued Syria, Persia, and Troglodytica, but
likewise Egypt, a great part of Afric, and almost all Spain, with the Island
of Sicilie; and the Kingdom of Naples.

Two hundred years they kept possession of these pieces, but of some part of
Spain, 700, even until the days of our fathers. And further, this accursed
generation at this day, is not only spread over all the Southern coast of
Asia (viz:) Persia, East India, and the Islands of the Indian Sea, but are
likewise advanced with great prosperity unto diverse wealthy Kingdoms, famous
Cities, and worthy Marttownes, yea, overall the South-coast of Afric; Under
this people, the Turks were first called into Asia to bear arms.

Of their manners we have spoken elsewhere. In their Religion they are
Mahumetans, for in this Country that false Prophet first opened his
superstitious Wardrobe.

This is a vast Country, full of Deserts, Arabia Deserta
yet well inhabited with populous and warlike multitudes, especially toward
Euphrates, and the Mountains of Arabia felix, whither Merchants resort. The
residue toward the West is sandy, by which if a man be to travel, he must
have the Stars to his guide, company for his safeguard, and provision for his
diet: Otherwise he shall surely lose his way, surrender his goods to the
theevish Arabes, or starve in the Desert for want of food.

To secure the which passages, as well against those who live on the side of
Euphrates toward Egypt, as through all Arabia (Petrea and Deserta) the Grand
Seignior entertaineth the king of those Arabians which inhabit Mesopotamia. And
for this his service, as a Turkish Sanziak he holds Ana and Dir, two towns
situated upon the said river. He is a poor King, but accompanied with 10. or
12. thousand beggarly subjects, living and lying intents of course black
Hair-cloth: which forces notwithstanding, these wilder ones are so infinite in
multitudes, and so unpossible to be brought unto a more civil manner of
living; that for their danger toward strangers, and the continual spoils,
which they commit upon those parts of the Turks Dominions, which every way
border upon them, necessity inforceth him also, to maintain two other
garrisons; the first of twelve thousand in Cairo, the other of one thousand
five hundred in Damasco.

Wherein it is to be noted; That sithence those of Damasco, do not only defend
that piece, but are also distributed, through other cities of Soria (as Aleppo,
Antiochia, and Jerusalem) one thousand five hundred men were not able to
sustain, and answer to such a charge, unless by being both Ianizars and
Timariots also, they have many followers and attendants. Who (as else where I
have showed you) are not only mighty in reputation, and powerful in number,
but also every year accustomed to spare and cull out strong troops, warlikely
and pompously provided to send into Hungary.

For, surely without this order, all the passages of the Caravans, which
yearly come from Balsara, and the Red Sea, would become so infectious, that
neither Bagdet, nor Damasco, could receive the commodities of those parts, to
the annual loss of two millions of Entrado to the grand Seignior.

Amongst these it was, that Sir Anthony Sherly traveled, and found them so
well governed, that without any wrong offered, he passed through them all in
such peace, as he could not have done, being a stranger, amongst civiller bred
people. The King gave him good words, without any kind of barbarous wondering,
or other distasteful fashion. But at his return to the river, he found the
Master of his House, Master of his Boat, accompanied with a great sort of
Arabs, who in conclusion, ^o'ens nolens, forces him to send his Master three
verst of cloth of gold, as a present for beholding his person.

Toward Syria, Arabia Potrea.
this is somewhat fertile, yet smally commended for that property by the
Ancients; for indeed it is exceeding barren, and wants necessary sustenance,
wood, and fresh water. The memorable things herein are, the Mountains of Sinai
and Oreb, upon the former whereof, is at this day builded a Monastery of
Christians, following the Greek Church, and the only receptacle (or Inn) for
wayfaring Christians: other place of releese is there none.

Arabia Felix is a very large Province, Arabia Felix.
better manured and watered than the other. It is adorned with Noble Cities,
and full of villages; especially toward the sea side, where are many excellent
places of trade. The residue, except the sand, is made manurable, either for
feeding of Cattle or Camels, in which places live infinite swarms of diverse
Nations, by grazing and husbandry. It brings forth whatsoeever will grow in
India, and that twice a year, in abundant manner, besides Cassia, Cinnamon,
Myrrh, etc. and soly, as much Frankincense, as will serve all the world. It
yields also metal, and excellent pearl all along the coast by fishing. It
sends abundance of horse and sheep into India, whose tails weigh forty
pounds. In it are many famous Cities, as Medinat Al-naby, Mecca, Zidem, Zibit,
and Aden.

This City of Aden, together with the whole Country, was in the year of our
Lord 1538. fraudulently surprised by the Turk, and their King hanged. It is
now strongly fortified, and erected into a Stately Turkish Beglerbeg-ship.

Turcomania, in times past a part of the greater Armenia.
TVrcomania comprehends no small portion of Armenia major: Situation.
what remains is accounted in Georgia. Upon the North lies Colchis, (now
Mongrelia:) Upon the West Euphrates, and the less Armenia upon the East that
remainder of the greater Armenia, which is counted in Georgia; Upon the South
Mesopotar^^a (now Dierbechia) with the people Curdi. It is environed with
Mountains, and beautified with plains, amongst the which Periander, (now
Chalderan) Antitaurus (now Mons-nigor) are most renowned. It is generally
exceeding fertile, and stored with Cattle, but marvellously subject to deep
snowes.

The people by nature are much given to theft and spoil, Nature of the people.
as descending from the Tartars, and so at this day lead their lives, living in
Tents and Hovels attending and pasturing their cattle; Yet some of them inure
themselves to tillage, and mechanike Trades, in weaving of Chamblets, and
Hangings, watered and unwatered: of the like qualities. are the Curdi, and some
suppose that these Curdi inhabit the ancient seats of the Chaldeans, whereupon
it is called at this day Curdistan by the Turks and Persians, The Curdines.
but by the Arabians Kelaan, that is to say, Chaldea.

Georgia, by the Barbarians termed Gurgistan, comprehends the ancient Iberia,
Gurgist^n, or Georgia, in times past Iberia.
with part of the greater Armenia, and peradventure Atropatia. Upon the West
lies Mengrelia, upon the North Zuiria (once Albania), upon the East the middle
Atropatia (now Siruan,) upon the South that part of the greater Armenia, which
now is called Turcomanta.

For the greater part it is covered with Mountains, Woods, and thickets, and in
that regard inconquerable for the difficulties of the mountainous passages. It
is notwithstanding fertile, and adorned with many large plains and valleys,
from whence arise many famoused Rivers, as Cirus and Araxis, springing from the
Mountain Taurus, and running through the whole Province, until at last it
disgorge it self into the Caspian.

The Inhabitants are termed Georgiani, of S. George, whom they advow their
Patron and Advocate. But this is but a vulgar error, seeing both Pliny and
Mela make mention of the Georgiani, one hundred years before the birth of
Saint George, the famous soldier and martyr. They are Christians, according to
the Greek Church, with some small difference. They are very populous and
warlike, strong of body, and valorous in fight, even until our times,
mantaining their liberty in the midst of the Mahumetans, sometimes following
the fortunes of the Turks, sometimes of the Persians. But at this day, they
have not only lost their wonted liberty, but also many Fortresses and Cities,
as Testis, Lori, Clisca, G^ri, and Tomanis, and withal, some of of them have
embraced the Turkish infidelity.

Palestine, or the Holy Land.
PAlestine is one of the most excellent Provinces of Syria, as well in regard
of habitation, as of many famous acts done therein, and celebrated in holy
Scripture. Under the general name whereof are comprehended Idumea, Iudaea,
Samaria, and Galile. Anciently it was called Canaan, of Chanaan the son of
Cham, whose posterity divided the Land amongst them, and under that name it
continued until the invasion of the Israelites, who called it after their own
denomination, Israel.

It was also called Philistim of the Philistians, once a powerful and mighty
people: after that, the Land of promise; and now lastly, The holy Land.

It is situated between the Arabies and the mid-land Sea; Situation.
Northerly upon part of Phoenicia; Eastward upon Libanus; Southward and
South-East upon Arabia, and Westward upon that part of the Mediterran, which is
termed the Syrian and Phinicean Seas.

From the very beginning (as witnesses the holy Scripture) it has been a
most famous Province, and afterward more renowned for the Birth, Miracles, and
Passion of our Savior Christ. Distant from the line 31. degrees, and extending
unto thirty three, and somewhat upward. So that in length from Now Caesaria
P^ilippi.
Dan, unto Now Gibelin.
Beersheba, it contains no more than one hundred and forty miles; where
broadest, not fifty. A Land that flowed with Milk and Honey; Adorned with
beautiful mountains, and luxurious valleys, the rocks producing excellent
waters, and no part empty of delight and profit. The air very temperate, and
the bodies of men healthful, and patient of labor.

The ancients will have it to be situated in the midst of the world, where it
is neither pinched with extremity of cold, nor vexed with overmuch heat. And
therefore the Israelites say, This to be the land which God promised unto
Abraham.

For site it is very pleasant, for plains and hills no less delightsome, rich
in diverse sorts of Manufactures, and well watered. Where although it rain but
seldom, yet was the soil batefull, and that by testimony of Scripture,
averring it to be a Land excelling all other in goodness and fertility.

So that their grain was most delicate, their increase abundant, and their
Roses most sweet. Rue, fennel, and sage, and such like pot-hearbs it brought
forth of its own accord. Olives, Figs, Pomegranets, and Palm trees are very
frequent, with some store of Vines. For, although the Saracens are forbidden
the drinking of Wine, yet make they abundance thereof, and very good, for the
use of strangers, dwelling in the Country. They make three harvests, yet have
they neither Pears, Apples, Cherries, Nuts, nor any other fruits common with
us: these are brought them from Damascus. Some fruits, as Oranges, and the
Apple of Paradise, they have and preserve upon the trees all the year long. It
did once yield Balm, not now; but is stored with Honey, and Sugar Canes; so is
it with Goats, Swine, Hares, Partridges and Quails, as also Lions, Bears, and
Camels. And in many places so pestred with Rats and Mice, that if it were not
for certain Birds devouring those Creatures, it were impossible to have any
Harvest.

Jordan runs through the midst of the Country, whose water is most
delicious, Jordan.
and therein strangers are accustomed to wash themselves. In its course, it
makes two lakes, the one in Cana of Galilie, the other at Tyberias, which is
called Genazereth, and at last disgorgeth it self into the Mediterran Sea.
Upon the banks thereof grow Withies, Tamarisk, and many other sorts of shrubs
and weeds, of which the Arabians make their darts, weapons, lances, and
writing pens.

The former of these two lakes is especially filled when the Snowes dissolve
and run from Libanus. In the Summer it is dry, and brings forth abundance
of shrubs and flags, wherein Lions, and diverse wild beasts do shroud their
carcasses. The Lake of Genazereth runs most clearly, and yields diverse
sorts of fish, as Carps, Pikes, etc.

It is not so broad, but that a man may see from one side unto the other, as
consisting of sixteen miles in length, and six in breadth. The plains round
about are barren for the abundance of bushes, which hinder the husbandman from
manuring the ground. Yet the Jews industry do much amend it, and dwell about
the banks thereof for the fishing sake.

Mare mortuum, otherwise the Lake Asphaltites, so called of his bituminous
favor, Asphaltites.
was a place once woody and full of salt pits, which for the pleasantness
thereof was resembled to Paradise; and therein stood Sodom, Gomorrah, and the
three other Cities, which for their sin against Nature, were therein drowned
and burnt by the doom of God. At this day it sends forth smokes and fogs as
from an infernal furnace, wherewith the whole valley adjacent for half a
days journey is made barren. It neither yields Fish nor Foul, and
whatsoever creature is cast therein, though bound hand and foot, it swimmeth on
the face of the water.

The land was once most populous, Forces.
as appears by the muster of David, who numbered thirteen hundred thousand
men, able to bear arms, besides the Tribe of Benjamin. As long as they
continued their upright and religious obedience to the service of God, the Land
prospered; but as soon as they forgot God, they suffered many miseries, and
those perpetual, until they were clean destroyed, and forced to fly every
way. For to speak nothing of ancient time, the 73. year after Christ,
Jerusalem was taken and destroyed by Titus, with the slaughter and captivity
of infinite thousands. In the year 136. it was restored by Aelius Adrianus,
new named Aelia, and given in possession to the Jews. In the time of
Constantine and Helena (his mother) it fell into the hands of the Christians,
and so continued until the year 609. at what time it was sacked by the
Persians, but left unto the Christians, and so continued until the days of
Henry the fourth, at what time it was again taken by the Sultan of the
Sarazens, and the Christians clean banished.

In the year 1097. in a general Council for the deliverie of the holy Land,
the Crossed Knights were instituted throughout Christendom, and Godfrey of
Bulloigne chosen General of three hundred thousand footmen, and one hundred
thousand horse. These Knights did many famous acts; recovered the land,
instituted a Monarchy, and sometime with good fortune, and sometime with
loss, continued the defense thereof, until the year 1290. in which year it
was utterly subdued by the Sultan of Egypt. In whose possession it continued,
until the year of our Lord 1517. and then was it overcome by the Turkish
Armies, who at this day retain it in miserable servitude. And so it rests,
peopled with men of diverse Nations and Sects; as Saracens, Arabians, Turks,
Hebrews, and Christians: whereof some follow the Latin Church, some the
Greek: as the Grecians, Syrians, Armenians, Georgians, Nestorians, Iacobites,
Nubians, Maronites, Abassines, Indians, and Egyptians, every one having their
peculiar Bishops, whom they obey.

Galilie upon the North is environed with the steep hills of Libanus and
Antilibanus, Galilie.
upon the with West Phoenicia, upon the East with Celosyria, and upon the South
with Samaria and Arabia the desert. The soil is most fruitful, yielding all
sorts of trees, and divided by Jordan: upon whose banks stand very many towns
and villages, and so well watered either with mountain-torrents, or springs,
that no part thereof lies unmanured.

The Country is more famous, for that in it stands (amongst the rude
Mountains) the small village of Nazareth, Nazareth.
the place of our Lords conception: and at this day, there is a small Chapel
archt and built under ground, whereinto a man must descend by stairs: Here
(some say) the Angel appeared unto Mary, and foretold her, that she should
conceive and bring forth our Lord.

The Inhabitants are Arabians, short and thick men, rudely apparelled, and
weaponed with bows, swords, and daggers. In this region likewise, stands the
Mount Thabor, whose North part is inaccessible, and whereon our Lord was
transfigured.

Samaria lies in a most delicate plot of Palestine, Samaria.
but in bigness not comparable to Judea, or Galilie. The soil is partly
mountainous, partly champian, pleasant, fruitful, and very well watered with
fresh and sweet water. The City is now ruinated: But Naplos for pleasure and
delight is inferior, to none other. It is situated upon the side of a hill,
the eighth part of a mile, from whence a man may behold the ruins of a great
Temple near unto that Well, where (as men say) Christ fate, when he asked
water of the Samaritan woman.

Judea far excels any part of the residue of Palestine, Judea.
and at this day enjoys its ancient fertility. The tribe of Judah so named
it, and in it, as in the rest of Palestine, were very many worthy Cities,
Jerusalem.
whereof Jerusalem was the chief feate of their Princes, the receptacle of the
Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles: the original place of our Faith, and the
glory of the Christian world. By the Barbarians, at this day, it is called Godz
or Chutz. It stands on an eminent place, -- as whereunto a man must every way
ascend.

S. Ieroms opinion was, that it stood not only in the heart of Judea, but in
the very center of the World, as having Asia on the East, Europe on the West,
upon the South Lybia and Africa, and upon the North Scythia, Armenia, Persia,
with the residue of the Pontique Nations.

What the glory hereof has been, may be conjectured out of Tacitus, who
reports, that in the beginning of the siege, it contained two hundred
thousand souls. At this day it numbreth not above five thousand inhabitants,
although many Pilgrims daily resort thither for devotion sake.

It was once strongly and fairly walled, but now weakly, and therein it
shows nothing now so famous, as the Sepulchie of our Lord Christ, whose
Temple encircleth the whole mount of Calvarie, situated upon a plain plot of
ground, high, round, and open at the top, from whence it receives light: but
the Sepulcher itself is covered with an Archt-Chappell, cut out of the maine
Marble, and left unto the custody of the Latin Christians.

Whosoever is desirous to see this Sepulcher, must pay nine crowns to the
Turk; so that this tribute is yearly worth unto him, eight millions of Ducats.

One hundred and eight foot distant from this Tomb is the Mount (called
Calvarie, Mount Calvarie.
) whereon our Savior Christ was crucified by the treacherous Jews. In this
place are many other religious Relics. And the pilgrims which come thither,
are always lodged according to their own professions; that is to say, the
Latins with the Franciscans, without the City by Mount Sion: the Grecians are
lodged with the Caloieran Greeks, dwelling within the City by the Sepulcher:
And so every other Nation, Abassines, Georgians, Armenians, Nestorians, and
Maronits; who all have their proper and peculiar Chapels. Those Franciscans,
which follow the Latin Church, and are for the most part Italians, were wont
to create the Knights of the Sepulcher, and to give testimonial unto pilgrims
of their arrival there.

Without this City is the Valley of Iehosaphat, and therein the tombs of the
blessed Lady, Valley of Ichosaphat.
and S. Anne. The territory adjoining is exceeding fruitful in Vines, Apples,
Almonds, Figs, and Oil: the Mountains are no less stored with all sorts of
Trees, wild Beasts, and Spiceries.

Besides Jerusalem stands Bethlem, Bethlem.
now destroyed, and showing nothing worth looking on, save a great and stately
Monastery of the Franciscans; within which is the place where Christ was
borne. Rama is now likewise ruinated, the Arches and Cesternes yet remaining by
the witness of Bellonius his own eye, are greater than those of Alexandria,
but not so thick.

Gaza is now a Turkish Sangiak-ship: Gaza.
the soil about fertile, and the inhabitants Grecians, Turks, and Arabians.

In holy Writ this Region is called Edom, Jdumea.
and by other Authors Nabathea. Toward the sea and Judea the soil is fertile,
but toward Arabia desert and barren. Some say it is inexpugnable for its
Deserts and want of water: yet is it stored therewith, but hidden, and known
to none but the natives. Of old they were a turbulent, unquiet, and seditious
people; and so at this day, they are like to the villainous and roguish
Neighbors, the Arabians.

Next bordereth Phoenicia, as part of Syria, Phoenicia.
exposed to the sea, and bordering upon Galile. Of old it had many famous
Cities, as Tripolis, Beritus, Sydon, Tyrus, Ptolemais, Capernaum, Emissa, and
others: Amongst the which, Tire and Sydon were most famous. Tire was a goodly
City, a Colonie of the Sydonians, and round about encircled with the Sea,
until Alexander in his siege joined it to the continent.

At this day it has two harbors, that on the North side the fairest and best
thorowout the Levant, which the Cursores enter at their pleasure; the other
choked with the ruins of the City. So is it, and Sydon, now the strong
receptacles of the stiff-necked Drusians; A generation (they say) descended
from the relics of those Noble Christians, who under the conduct of Godfrey
of Bullen, descended into those parts; and being by time driven unto harder
fortunes, betook themselves to the Mountains; from whence, they could never
be expulsed, neither by the Saracens, nor yet by the Turks. Allowed they are
liberty of Religion, and no other tribute imposed upon them, than is upon the
natural Subject, the one being no good Christians, and the other, worse
Mahumetans.

Sydon was once no less famous; Sydon.
now contracted into a narrow compass, showing only in her ruins the
foundations of her greatness. The Inhabitants are of sundry Nations and
Religions (as the Tyrians) yet governed by a succession of Princes, whom they
call Emirs; And whose Seigniorie (augmented by arms and tyranny) stretches
from the River of Canis to the foot of Mount Carmel, containing a large extent
of ground, and therein many Cities, whereof Saffet is the principal. The Grand
Seignior does much envy him for suffering the Florentines to harbor and water
within his Port of Tyrus; which he is glad to excuse by the waste of the place,
and inabilitie of resistance. But the truth is, that he is a strong, rich, and
potent Lord in these parts, partly presuming upon the strength of his
invincible Forts, and partly upon the advantage of the Mountains, yet having
besides in continual pay forty thousand soldiers ^ome Moors, some
Christians; and if the worst should (...) ^hee has the Sea at hand, and the
Florentine to friend; with whom, he knows that a massy Treasure will work
^o small effects, toward the purchase of some rich Seigniorie.

To conclude, he is too strong for his neighbors, and able to make a long
defensive War against the Turk, if his tyranny could assure him of
fidelity in this people.

Acon or Ptolomais, Acon.
is strongly fortified triangular-wise, two parts whereof lie upon the Sea, the
third toward the land. The soil about is very fruitful and delicious. The
City adorned with a beautiful Hospital, strong and well bulwarked, once
belonging to the Teutonicke Knights. It has also a very fair Haven, capacious
of any ships coming from the South: now under the Sanz^ack of Saffet, and
usurped with the rest of that Province, by the foresaid Emir of Sydon. In this
woeful Town dwell not above two or three hundred Inhabitants, and those in
patcht up ruinous houses.

Beritus is an ancient City, Beritus.
once an Episcopal See, now famous for Traffic and Merchandise, as the
Mart-towne whereunto all the ships coming from Europe do arrive. It is
situated most safely, and almost inexpugnable.

NOw following mine Author, and having finished this tedious discourse of this
great Empire, by the patience of my Reader, I will once turn back again and
relate the Original, the manners, the descent, and the Religion of this
warlike and infidelious people, composed partly of Natives, lineally descended
from the Scythians and Tartars, and partly of Apostata and Renegado Christians.

Generally the Natives have broad visages, correspondent to the proportion of
their members, fair and tall, and somewhat inclined to grossness. Their
hair they regard not, save only that of their beards. They are of a gross
and dull capacity,-wayward, slow and lazy, hating husbandry, and yet above
all people in the world covetous and desirous of riches, yea, selling all
places of Justice and Government to their best Chapmen. Amongst one another
exceeding courteous, and as servile toward their superiors; in whose presence
they keep admirable silence, and yield due reverence: but toward strangers
they are all fashioned of pride, insolency, and boasting, thinking no Nation
in the world to equalize them; in their speech, entertainment and gesture,
bewraying their inherent insolence; faithful to none, but where fidelity may
produce advantage. By nature, they are as idle, and given to excessive eating
and drinking, sitting close by it three days together, and secretly not
abstaining from Wine, although by their Law they are forbidden the drinking
thereof. No less are they addicted to lechery and loathsome unnatural venery,
exceeding credulous, superstitious, relying upon dreams, fortunes, divinations
and destiny, believing every man's fortune to be written in his forehead,
impossible to be avoided: the fundamental reason why they adventure like brute
beasts, into so many desperate dangers.

As concerning their Religion, a man might write much, but we studying brevity,
do relate, that generally, as a people too too credulous, they embrace many
absurd and trivial opinions, touching the Creation and end of the world, of
Paradise, Heaven, Hell, the Earth, the creation of Man, and Mahumets journey to
Heaven, even such and so gross, as would make our children to laugh, if they
heard them fabled. They do all acknowledge one God, they reverence Christ, not
as the Son of God, but as a Prophet borne of the Virgin Mary, and not
crucified on the Cross, but some other man foisted in by the subtlety of the
Jews. Idols and Images they will not endure, and observe the Friday, as we
do the Sabbath. They keep a Lent of thirty days, which they call Ramadan,
and fast all day; but in the night they make amends for all, abstaining from
nothing that comes to hand, save Swines flesh, Wine and Women. Next this
Feast follows their Easter, by them termed Baydan, it continues three days,
and during that time, they take no delight in any pastime. This feast falls
not at all times alike, but sometimes in the Winter, sometimes in the Spring,
and sometimes in Autumn; by reason that they account not their year according
to the course of the Sun, but of the Moon: the rising whereof at first quarter
they adore, bearing the Figure thereof, as we the Cross, in their Ensigns.

They are circumcised Iew-like, but not as they on the eighth day, but at the
eighth year. They have no Bells after the manner of Christendom, neither will
they suffer the Christians to have any, but five times in one day and night,
their Priests ascend the Steeples, with their loud roarings and outcries to
call and assemble the people to prayers. By their good will they will not be
called Turks; for in the Hebrew tongue that denomination signifies a Vagabond
or banished man, and is accounted a word of disgrace; and therefore forsooth
they must be styled Musolmans, that is, Right-beleevers.

They have likewise amongst them (as amongst the Papists) four Orders of
professed persons, (viz.) the Torlaci, the Darvisi, the Calenderi, and the
Hughie mali; the most wicked Sect of all the residue, giving themselves to all
imposture and uncleanness.

They are not very dainty to converse with Christians, but with small
entreaty will eat, drink and traffic with them; yea, and sometimes marry
the daughters, permitting them to live peaceably after their consciences: but
to the Jews, they are most insociable, detesting their company, and hating
their tables, accounting them the basest people in the world, neither will they
marry with any of that progeny, no^, nor receive them into the Mahumetan
Religion, unless they be first baptized. By their Laws they may have but
four wives, yet by prescription every man takes as many as he can well
maintain: one of these is accounted the wife; to her the residue are
underlings, and may at any time be divorced. Their women go seldom abroad,
but if they do, they mask their faces, are gallantly attired, and shine in
gold, Stone, and Jewels: Twice a week (as do men) they frequent the Baths.
They never blaspheme the name of God, nor of Mahumet, nor of Christ, nor of our
Lady, nor of any other Saints, but if any be heard so to offend, he is
grievously punished, let him be of what calling or religion soever. At Dice and
Cards they never play, but only at Alveolo. They are very charitable,
disbursing their Alms, not only to Turks, but also to Christians, and men of
all professions, yea to brute beasts, sometimes buying quick Birds, which for
charities sake, they will again let fly at liberty. Their garments are long,
and open before to the foot, except their shirts, which they wear without
their Broges, so that as they go they are openly seen. Their raiment is very
fair and costly, viz. of cloth, silk, imbrodery, and set with pearl. They
cover their head with a Turbant, except those of the descent of Mahumet; these
wear altogether green, but the Christians inhabiting among them, wear no one
color, but as they please (green except.) They are all clothed in long
garments like the Turks, and are not distinguished by any apparel they wear
(of what profession soever they be) but only by the attire of their heads. In
salutations they never uncover their heads, neither does the meaner salute his
better; the left hand with them is the place of honor, and the better sort
ride about their affairs on horseback.

In diet they are very rude; they fare basely, and grossly, and yet they eat
thrice a day, at morning, noone, and evening, always without Table-cloth or
Napkin; not sitting orderly at Table, but on the ground, or some low stool,
with their legs acrosse, Taylor-like. They feed upon all sorts of flesh,
except Porke, which is forbidden them by their Law. Their chiefest food is
Rice; and the Asian Turks care not much for Fish, but the European Turks for
nothing more. By Law they forbear Wine, and therefore drink water, whereunto
the better sort mix either Honey or Sugar, and in cold weather in stead of a
tossed they throw in a burning coal, to take away the offensive operation of
this raw Element. They make great use of Opium, and there is not one of them
but eats it, believing that thereby his courage increases, and thereby less
dreadeth the hazard of war. They make water, cowring down like women, and
their private buildings for the most part consist of timber and mortar, very
narrow and ill contrived; wherein to say truth, they are not intensive,
esteeming it an heinous sin to bestow more cost upon the frame, than is
likely or convenient to last longer than during the life of one man: but in
building of Temples to the honor of God, in providing for public receptacles
of travelers, in erecting Hospitals, public Baths, watering places for men
and cattle, and fountains to wash away their imaginary pollutions, before
they enter into their Mesehits, they are most sumptuous, most prodigal. No
less a pride take they in building of Conduits, in erecting of Bridges, and in
paving of highways, all which in Turkey you shall see very carefully
repaired, and as a man may say, sumptuously and magnificently provided for.

Except upon the frontiers, in Turkey you shall see no fortified Cities, but
rather the walls, that have been fortified, ruinated, and the fields wasted,
according to their proverb, Qua Ottomanicus aliquis transivit, ibi nec folia
nec gram^na proveniunt. And not untruly, for as soon as they have conquered
any Province, they extinguish the great ones, especially those of royal blood,
and as for the wealth^est Burgers, they transport them into remote Provinces,
already inured, and subjected to their Laws and Government; not forcing their
consciences, but only despoyling them of their arms, restraining them of
liberty to travel out of their limits, and forbidding them to serve any other
Potentate, in prevention of rebellion. In invention of engines against their
neighbors they are admirable industrious, not caring to obtain that by craft
and faithless cowardice, which they cannot gain by force, or the effusion of
much blood: but those base projects not prevailing, without respect of honor
or military glory, they are not ashamed to betake themselves to their heels.
Yet to speak truth, they are good soldiers, and to their especial advantage
excellently disciplined, being obedient to their Commanders, most laborious in
the fabrikes, content with a small refreshment of victual, and that most
gross, contrary to gluttonous behavior of all Christian warfare. Their Arms
are a Lance, a Bow, and a quiver of Arrows, an iron Mace, a Battle-axe, and a
Cemiter, and those enchased with Gold and Silver: besides their great Ordnance,
whereof at this day they are Lords of infinite pieces.

This Empire began to take root in the year 1300. under the fortunes of one
Osman or Ottoman, from whom the succeeding Princes of that house have derived
and usurped the surnames of Ottoman, even as the Emperors of Christendom have
continued the title of Caesar's, since the first Roman Julius. From that time,
until the year 1608. and from that Ottoman until this Acmach, wonder it is
to relate how in the space of three hundred years, from so mean a Captain,
so base a people, and in so short a time, (considering the growth of the Roman
Empire) this Sovereignty is now grown to be the terror of the world, and
almost to equallize that of the Romans. How long every particular Prince
reigned, and what exploits they performed, I rue to record, and mean not to
relate: only let me remember you of that devilish policy of theirs, how one
brother at his first coming to the Crown murdereth all the residue of his
fathers children, and male-competitors, thereby presuming to live secure and
fearelesse of innovation: judicet Deus.

They first seated the model and majesty of their Empire in Prusia, a City of
Bithynia; then they transported it to Hadrianople, and lastly to
Constantinople. In which Imperial City is now his Court or Palace, three or
four miles in compass, wholly enclosed with a strong wall, and situated the
pleasantest of any Palace on the face of the earth, termed by them the Port, or
Seraglio. Within the enclosure of this wall are many pleasant Parkes, sweet
Fountains, sumptuous Arbours, and innumerable lodgings richly built,
especially those wherein the great Turk himself resideth. Within this
enclosure likewise, are two other enclosed receptacles or lodgings for women;
in the one are continually kept at least fifteen hundred damsels, out of
which are culled one hundred and fifty for the daily service of the Emperor,
and those sequestered into the other of the lesser lodgings.

For his guard he maintains daily by turns four thousand footmen, by them
styled Ianizars, viz. slaves, by way of tribute haled in their infancies from
the bosoms of their Christian parents. He has always in Court likewise
attendant on his person fifteen hundred horsemen (besides those that serve
under the Beglerbegs) and those are divided into four classes or orders, viz.
Sp^zi, Vlufagi, Steliftari, and Caripici, all paid out of his Casna, or
Exchequer. Besides these Pretorian bands, he likewise maintained, out of his
Exchequer not so few as ten thousand Ianizars garrisoned, through all parts of
his Empire, under several leaders, acknowledging no other Lord, Sovereign, or
maintainer, but the grand Seignior.

Moreover, he has another order of Soldiery, termed Timario^s, what they
are, and how maintained, you have heard before. So many as at this day are
raised in Europe, are thought sufficient to entertain eighty thousand
horsemen: those in Asia or Na^olia fifty thousand; and those wrested from the
Crown of Persia forty thousand; What are raised in Syria, and the adjacent
Regions of Egypt and Africa, have not been estimated, but all these serve
under their Sanziaks, and they at the commands of their Beglerbegs or Colonels.

The Court is commonly styled by them Capi, that is, the Port, wherein are many
great Officers, by us spoken of before: But those whose services are only
destinated to uses within the Seraglio, are for the most part Eunuchs, with
their rabble of under-Eunuches. Without the Seraglio, are also diverse
honorable Offices for the government of the Empire, the chief whereof is
their Mufii or Pope. In the second rank are their Cadeleschers, viz. chief
Justices. After the Cadeleschers follow the Viceroy Bassae^, (Counselors of
estate) whose number is uncertain; in old time three or four, but of late
nine. The President of these the Turks term Viceroy. And in truth, it is a
place of great dignity and authority in managing the affairs of the State, as
the man with whom the grand Seignior does only communicate his weightiest
intentions, and secretest deliberations.

And were it certain, either for years, or life; For profit and honor, this
place would not be much inferior to the estate of many great Princes in
Christendom. But such is the tyranny of this Monarch, that upon every
suggestion and jealousy, he is sometime deprived, and sometime strangled.
Within these sixteen or seventeene years last past, it has been observed,
that fourteen of these Officers have thus been used. Five have died natural
deaths after deprivement, and nine deprived and afterward murdered.

In the next place appear the Beglerbegs, (masters del Campo) the chief
whereof is he that is termed of Romania or Grecia: The second of Anatolia or
Asia. The third is the Denizi Beglerbeg, that is to say, the Lord high
Admiral. And these three Beglerbegs have equal place and authority with the
former Bassaes in the Divano, or place of public audience.

Before the last war of Persia, this Empire was undergoverned by forty
Beglerbegs, who likewise had under them two hundred and seventy Sanziaks: But
since those times this number has been much augmented, viz. in Europe reside
seven: In Afrike four: In Asia twenty nine.

The Turkish Arsenals for shipping are four; the first is at P^ra, and
contains three and thirty docks or stations for so many Galleys: The second
is at Gallipolis, and contains twenty, both under the charge of the high
Admiral and his servitors. The third is at Suez upon the Red Sea, containing
five and twenty stations: and the fourth last, at Balsara in the Persian gulf,
consisting of fifteen Galleys, and these two last under the charges of the
Beglerbegs of Balsara and Cairo.

In the time of Sel^mus we reckoned one million, and three hundred thirty three
thousand Christian souls to live within his Dominions, not accounting those
that enjoyed freedom of conscience by privilege, nor those that then were
subject to the Egyptian Sultan, whom the said Selimus vanquished.

The Jews likewise live dispersed over his whole Dominions, in such infinite
numbers, that scarce no Town nor Village, but is very populously replenished
with their families, speaking diverse languages, and using the trade of
Merchandise in royal and rich fashion.

A people scattered over the face of the earth, hated by all men amongst whom
they live, yet of incredible patience; as subjecting themselves to times, and
to whatsoever may advance their profit: worldly wise, and thriving wheresoever
they set footing. Men of indifferent statures, and best complexions. Those that
live in Christendom are the relikes only of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin;
the other ten (some say) are lost: Others, that they be in India, or driven by
Salmanasser into the extreme parts of the North.

Their own Country, after the expulsion of the Egyptian Sultans by Selimus,
at this day is adjoined unto the Crown of the Ottoman Empire: being governed
by diverse Sanziacks, all under the Bassa of Damasco. It is now inhabited by
Moors and Arabians: Those possessing the valleys; these the mountains. Of
Turks there be some few: of Greeks many; with other Christians of all sects
and Nations; especially of such as impute an adherent holiness to the place.
Those Jews that live here, are not proprietors of any land therein, but live
as strangers and aliens, and pay their duties to their Lords.

The Arabians are said to be descended from Ismael, dwelling in tents, and
removing their aboads, according to opportunity of prey, or benefit of
pasturage; not worth the conquering, nor can they be conquered, retiring to
places inaccessible for Armies. A Nation from the beginning unmixed with
others, boasting of their Nobility, and this day hating all mechanical
Sciences. They hang about the skirts of the inhabited Countries, and having
robbed, retire with wonderful celerity. They are of mean stature, raw-boned,
tawny, having feminine voices, of a swift and noislesse pace being behind you,
and upon you before you be aware. Their Religion (if any) Mahumetisme, their
Language extending as far as their Religion. Yet if any one of them undertake
that conduct, he will perform it faithfully, not any of the Nation offering to
molest you. Then will they lead you by unknown ways, farther in four days
than a man can travel by Caravan in fourteen.

Persia.
PErsia, and the Persian glory has been often obscured: First, by the
Arabians, who (to bury in oblivion the memory of former reputation) enacted by
Law, according to the custom of Conquerours, that the people should no more be
called Persians, but Saracens. Secondly, by the Tartarians, led by Ching^s. And
lastly, by Tamerlan and his followers.

But not long before the days of our Ancestors, by the virtue of Ismael Sophy
(of whose original and fortunes, for the better understanding of this History,
it will not be amiss to discourse) the King some might truly have been said
to have recovered its ancient splendor, if the Turkish depredations upon the
Natives, had not through blood and devastation, enforced this Ismael to
re-people the Country with Tartars, Turcomans, Courdines, and the scumme of all
Nations: who though they live in a better Country, yet do they nothing
resemble the ancient and noble descended Persians; but at this day retain the
inheritance of their bad, treacherous, and vilde dispositions.

When Mahumet, after the decease of his first wife (who adopted him her heir)
by her riches and his new superstition, had gotten him a name amongst the
vulgar, he married for his second wife Aissa, the daughter of one Ahubacer a
great rich man, and of high authority in those quarters. By this man's
continuance, and the friendship of Oman and Ottomar his kinsmen, he gathered
together a great rabble of Arabians, and partly by fair means, and partly by
color of Religion he became Master of many bordering Territories; and also
about the same time gave Fatime his Daughter (by his first Wife) to Halie his
Cousin: and to him after his death, all his earthly substance, making him the
head of his superstition, with the title of Caliph.

Abubacer, by whose countenance Mahumet became gracious, taking in ill part the
preferment of the young man; by the aid of Omar and Ottomar (whose desires,
wholly built upon hope of succession, by reason of the old man's years, and for
kindred sake, were inclined rather to see Abubacer, than Halie to be their
Caliph) began openly to resist Halie and to spoil him, and his wife Fatime,
of all the substance which was left them by the Uncle. Abubacer died: Omar and
Ottomar succeeded. Omar was slain by a slave; Ottomar in a private quarrel;
after whose death Halie succeeded. Against him rose Mavie, who accusing him as
accessory to the death of Ottomar his Lord, caused him to be slain near Caffa,
a City within two days journey of Babylon, where likewise he lies buried: The
place is called to this day Massadel, that is, the house of Halie. After his
decease the Inhabitants of Caffa proclaimed Ossan, the son of Fatime, Caliph;
but him likewise Mavie opposed, and flew by poison. Then was he absolute
Caliph, and after him his son Iazit. Ossan left behind him twelve sons,
one whereof was called Mahumet Mahadin. The Moors say, he never died, but that
he shall return again to convert the world; and therefore they keep always
ready in the Mosque of Massadella, a horse gallantly furnished, where in their
foppery they affirm, that this worlds conversion shall first begin. Upon these
differents of Halie, Abubacer, Omar, Ottomar, and Mavie, have mighty factions
of arms and opinions arisen amongst the sectaries of this new superstition.
The Persians labor to prove Halie true Caliph, by the last Will of Mahumet;
the Arabians stand as stiffly to the three first. When from the year of our
Lord God 1258. to the year 1363. the Moors had no Caliph (Mustapha Mumbala
the last Caliph being slain by Alcu King of the Tartarians) a certain
Nobleman in Persia, named Sophi, Lord of Ardevel, deriving his pedigree from
Halie, by Musa Ceresin his Nephew, and one of the twelve sons of Ossan (in
memory of whom he altered the form of the Turbant) by his virtue and valor,
won great credit and estimation to his new faction.

To him succeeded Adar the son of Guine, to whom Assembeg, a powerful Prince
in Syria and Persia, gave his daughter in marriage. But his son Iacob-beg,
fearing the power and estimation of Adar, caused him to be slain, and
delivered his two sons, Ismael and Soliman, to his Captain Amanzar, willing
him to cast them in prison in Zaliga, a Castle in the mountains: but Amazar
detesting the tyranny of his Lord, conveied the children to his own house, and
brought them up like Gentlemen amongst his own sons; and falling sick of a
deadly disease, forecasting what might happen after his decease, gave them
horses and money, willing them to fly, and to betake themselves to their
mothers house and tuition. Ismael the eldest was no sooner returned to his
mothers place, but he vowed revenge for his fathers death, and after some
fortunate expeditions, took upon him the cause and protection of the followers
of Halie, from whom he derived his pedigree. He made the Turbant higher, and
sent Ambassadors to all the Oriental Mahumetans, to exhort them to unity in
Religion and Cognisances. By these means and fortune of his arms, he became a
terror to the East, and slew Ossan then Usurper of the Persian State, with his
ten brethren, except Marabeg, who saved himself, and sled to Soliman first
Emperor of the Turks, imploring his aid. This Ismael at the Lake Vay,
overthrew with a great slaughter the Prince of the Tartars Zagatai, and in heat
of his victory had passed the River Abbian, if his Astrologian, in whom he
greatly trusted, had not foretold him that his passage should be prosperous,
but his return unfortunate. He left to his sons a most spacious Empire,
bounded with the Caspian Sea, the Persian Gulf, the Lake Sioc, the Rivers
Tygris and Oxus, and the Kingdom of Cambaia, which Provinces contain more
than twenty degrees from East to West, and eighteen from North to South. And
although these Kingdoms lying within these bounds held not immediately of the
Crown of Persia, yet all acknowledge the Persian for their sovereign Prince,
that is to say, the Kings of Matam, Patan, Guadel, and Ormus.

Georgia and Mengrellia, being Christian Countries, according to the
superstition of the Greek Church, submitted to certain conditions, as
toleration of Religion, payment of Tribute, and disclaiming to assist the Turk
against them; and so obtained a kind of peace and protection until again the
Persians declined, by the fortunes of the Ottomans. The like course ran
Media, now called Servan, Dierbechia, once Mesopotamia; Cusistan, the
inhabitation of the Susiani; Farsistan, the Country of the Persians; Strava,
once Hircania; Parthia, at this day called Arac; Caramanie, now Sigestan,
Carassa, Sablestan, and Istigiu, whose ancient names were Drangia, Bactria,
Parapamisus, Margiana. Of these Regions, those which lie nearest to the Persian
Sea are most plentiful, by reason of the Rivers every where dispersed through
the whole Land. Amongst these Rivers, the most famous is Bindimir, to whose
waters the Inhabitants are much beholding, conveying it by trenches, and other
inventions into their grounds, to their great ease and commodity. The Provinces
lying upon the Caspian Sea, for their Rivers and temperature, do likewise
participate of the said fertility, especially all those quarters which are
watered with the River Puly-Malon, falling into the Lake Burgian: the residue
of the Province is dry; by reason whereof, Towns and Villages are seldom
seen in those places, unless it be by some springs or waters side.

The most ample and magnificent Cities of Persia, Cities.
are Istigias the chief seat of Bactria, thought to be one of the pleasantest
Cities of the East. Indion, the chief City of Margiana, situated in so fat and
fertile a territory, that therefore Antiochus Soler caused it to be walled
about. Candahar, the chief seat of Pamaparisus, famous for the traffic of
Indiae and Cathaia, whither the Merchants of those Countries do resort. Ert,
the chief City of Aria, so abounding with Roses, that thereof it should seem
to take the name. Barbarus says, it is of thirteen miles compass. Ispaa the
chief seat of Parthia, so spacious for the circuit thereof, that the Persians
hyperbolically term it, the half World. Chirmaine is the chief seat of
Caramania, renowned for the excellent cloth of gold and silver woven therein.
Eor is a noble City, and so is Custra of Susiana. But all these for beauty and
magnificence may bow and bend to Syras, seated upon the River Bindimire.

It was once the chief seat of Persia, and as some think, called Persepolis.
Alexander the Great burnt it to the ground at the entreaty of his Concubine;
but afterward, being ashamed of so vile an action, caused it to be re-edified.
It is not at this time so great, as in times past, yet it is thought to be one
of the greatest Cities in all the Orient, with its suburbs, which are in
compass twenty miles. It is a Proverb among the Persians; Quando Suars erat
Siras, tunc Cairus (...) Pagus: yet they account it not very ancient, neither
are they of their opinions, who will have it the head of ^^^ia. Tauris and
Casbin are famous Cities, and besides their magnificence they may glory, that
in them the Kings of Persia for the most part keep their residences.

The form of Government of this Nation, Government.
is not like the Government of any other Mahumetan people; neither is ^^

There are also many deserts, Deserts.
and many mountains disjoyning the Provinces far asunder. Herein it
resembles Spain, where for want of navigable Rivers (except toward the
Seacoast) traffike is little used, and mountains and Provinces lie unmanured
for scarcity of moisture. But Nature, unwilling that humane life should want
any easement, has so provided for mutual commerce in these sandy and barren
places, that through the labor of Camels, the want of Navigation is richly
recompensed thorowout Persia, and the bordering Countries. These beasts carry
wondrous burdens, and will longer continue than either Horse or Mule. They will
travel laden with a thousand pound weight, and will so continue forty days
and upward. In sterile and deep sandy Countries (such as are Lybia, Arabia,
and Persia,) they drink but once every fifth day, and if extremity enforce,
they will endure the want of water ten or twelve. When their burdens are off, a
little grass, thorns, or leaves of trees will suffice them. There is no living
thing less chargeable, and more laborious, certainly ordained of nature a fit
creature for those sandy and deep places of Asia and Afric, wherein even man
himself feels the want of food and water. Of these there are three sorts,
upon the lesser men travel; the middle sort have bunches on their backs, fit
for carrying of Merchandise; the greater and stronger are those which carry
burdens of one thousand pound weight, these are their ships, the sands their
Seas.

What numbers of horsemen this King is able to levy, was manifested in the
wars between Selim the first, Forces.
and Ismael; between Ismael and Soliman; and between Codabanda and Amurath.
Not one of them brought above thirty thousand horse into the field, but so
thoroughly furnished, that they had little cause to fear greater numbers. The
richer and abler sort arm themselves after the manner of our men at Arms; the
residue being better than the third part of their Cavalry, content themselves
with a Scull, a Jack and a Cemiter. They use the Lance and the Bow
indifferently. There is scarce a better Musketteer in the whole world than the
Persian generally is at this day, nor a sorer fellow at the Spade, or at a
Mine: Of both these the Portugals had sensible experience at the siege of
Ormuz, lately taken from them by the Persian.

Touching their riches, the common opinion is, Riches.
that in the days of King Tamas, the yearly Revenues amounted to four or
five millions of Gold, who by a sudden doubling of the value of his coin,
raised it to eight, and accordingly made payment to his Soldans and soldiers.
But in these days, by the conquest of the great Turk they are much
diminished, and it is thought that they amount to little more than two; But
indeed the feodary Lands, Towns, and Villages, Tenths, Shops, etc. (which are
very many) supply a great part of the pay due to the companies of those his
horsemen above mentioned.

Toward the East bordereth the Mogor, Borderers.
upon the North the Zagatai. The Mogor.
Toward the West the Turk possesses a large frontier. With the Mogors he is
little troubled; for as Spain and France by reason of the narrow straight, and
difficult passages over the mountains, cannot easily convey necessaries (the
life of an Army) to infest one another: So toward the frontiers of India and
Cambaia (Provinces belonging to the Mogors) high Mountains, and vast Deserts,
keep good peace between these two Princes: yet infest they one another on the
borders of Cahull and Sablestan, of which certain Lords of the Mogors have
gotten the dominion. He comes not near the borders of the great Cham,
between whom certain petty Princes, and impassable Deserts do oppose
themselves. It seems, The Zagatai.
that toward the Zagatai he stands content with those bounds which the River
Oxus has laid out; for he never durst pass it; and when Zaba King of the
Zagatai had passed it, he was overthrown with much slaughter by Ismael. So
was Cyrus by Tomyris, who slew him and all his host. The Turk is a borderer all
along the western coast of this whole Empire, even from the Caspian Sea, to
the gulf Saura, The Turk.
a tract almost of fifteen degrees. He has no enemy so dangerous, nor more to
be feared, nor at whose hands in all conflicts (for the most part) he has
received greater loss. Mahumet the second overthrew Vssanchan, and took from
David, his Vassal and Confederate, the Empire of Trapezond. Selim the first
did overthrow Ismael in Campania, and took from him Caramit, Orfa, Merdis, and
all the territory which they call Alech. Soliman put Tamas to flight, and took
from him Babylon and all Mesopotamia. In our days Amurath won whatsoever
lies between Derbent and Tauris, wherein is comprehended Georgia, and Sirvan,
and by building of fortresses in Teflis, Samachia, and Eres, assured the
passages of Chars, Tomanis, and Lori. He is Lord of all that lies between
Erzirum and Orontes, a River three days journey beyond Tauris. In this City he
caused a Citadell to be built, not minding to leave it, as did Selim and
Soliman, but thereby as with a curb to bridle and keep it. In this war
which lasted from the year 1591. to 1597. the Turks altered their form of
warfare: for whereas they were wont to lay their whole hopes upon their
numbers, the valor of their horsemen and footmen, their store of artillery and
warlike furniture, scorning to be cooped up in Castles and Fortresses, for the
most part spoiling and burning whatsoever they overcame, or became Lords of,
and taking as little care to keep what they had conquered (supposing it no
good policy to fortify Castles; or strengthen Towns, by weakening of their
companies) in these wars to avoid the inconveniences, where into Selim and
Soliman were plunged, they were glad to build strong places upon commodious
passages, and Citadels in the chiefest Towns, furnishing them with good
Garrisons, and great store of Artillery. This war cost them very dear; for
by surprises, by famine, and extremities of weather, infinite thousands
perished, yet always to the loss of the Persian or his Confederates. In the
field the Persian is far inferior to the Turk in numbers and goodness of
footmen, in Ordnance, in all sorts of warlike furniture, and (the chief stay
of a State) in obedience of subjects. Notwithstanding, if Selim, Soliman, or
Amurath, had not been allured thither either by rebellion, or intestine
discords, they durst not have meddled with this war. Selim was called into the
aid of Mara-beg the son of Ossaen, a mighty Prince in Persia. Soliman came in
aid of Elcaso, the brother of Taemas, hateful to his Sovereign, for his
ambition and aspiring humor, and in the end abused the credit and good will of
the people toward Elcaso, to the furtherance of his own designments. Amurath
never took weapon in hand against this people, before he understood by the
letters of Mustapha, Bassa of Van, that all Persia was in uprore about the
election of a new Prince, thereby certifying him that some had chosen Ismael,
some Ainer (both sons of Tamas) and that Periacocona slaying her own brother
Ismael, and betraying Ainer, had procured the Kingdom to Mahumet Codobanda.
After this mischief fell those fatal jarres betwixt Codobanda and his son,
and betwixt the Turcoman Nation (a mighty family in Persia) and the King: A
faction no less disasterous to the State of Persia, than the war of Turkey.

Against the Portugal, for want of Sea-forces he stirs not, and again, for
want of Landforces the Portugals are not able to molest his upland Countries.
Tamaes being counseled to make a voyage against Ormus, asked what commodities
the Island brought forth, whether Corn, Cattle, Fruit, or what other good
thing? When it was answered, that the soil was utterly barren and destitute of
provision, but excellently well seated for traffike and navigation, One Tomana
makes twenty French Crowns.
scoffing at the motion, he replied: That of this kind of Revenue he had
released unto his people above 90000. Tomana.

Truth is, that he wants shipping to put the Portugals out of those Seas:
where these stead not, he is content to reign from India to Arabia, East and
West; and from the Caspian to the South side of the Persian gulf. And as for
these ninety thousand Tomana (being in our account eighty thousand French
crowns of annual Revenue) said to be decreed in the days of this Tamas,
upon the general customs of importation and exportation, thorowout the whole
Realm. I can give my Reader no other satisfaction; why to think the stomachs
of great Princes can at any time be cloyed with such surfets; unless he be
pleased to imagine, that after this Prince (or his Predecessor) had received
one or two dismal overthrowes by the Turkish forces, and that not so much by
their valors, as by his own deficiencie in shot, ordnance and discipline: he
set on foot this Proclamation. First, to induce his own people to manual
thrift, and mutual commerce: And secondly, to allure Gentlemen and foreign
Merchants to frequent his Dominions. Without the which inticements,
peradventure they might be unwilling to hazard their estates from far Nations
amongst such barbarous and unsure customers. For sure he was, that his
Neighbors could not, and the Portugals would not supply those necessities,
which concerned the life and essence of an entire Estate.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
Of India, commonly called Asiatica, or East India.
INdia is a spacious portion of Asia, the most Noble part of the World, and far
exceeding any other apportionment, comprehended under one name, Tartarie only
excepted: As that, which without other addition lifts up her Title alone, to
challenge all the Territories between China and Persia; A conteinue almost
twelve hundred leagues; yet divided into many Kingdoms: Amongst whom he is
principal, that most obtains by force and popularitie. The Region is most
wholesome to inhabit, by the favor of the Western winds; but in regard of its
spaciousness, subject to diverse Temperatures: As in some places to heat, viz.
toward the Equator: In some, to temperatures, or rather to cold; as toward
the North. But generally for goodness of situation, health and fertility, it
is far better than any other Country. And therefore seldom, or never
feels famine, or scarcity: the misery whereof is prevented by the benefit of
Rivers, as in Egypt. For the two great Rivers of Indus and Ganges water it
thoroughly, which being divided into a thousand brooks, insulteth of two
Summers, temperature of Air, with duplicitie of increase. And that, we are
but Adventurers for those delicacies, which she vtlipendeth; and yet not
admitted to the understanding of one half of her worth: yet has it its
Deserts, scorching Sands, places infested with wild Beasts, and unpeopled by
reason of impenetrable woods. And although the Region wants Wheat, yet
abounds it with diverse sorts of fruits, of Pulses, of Barley and Rice. Vines
they have none, but rare; and therefore brew their Beverage of Barley and Rice.
Fruit Trees, and trees fit to make linen cloth of, they have in abundance, and
out of the Palm they produce Wine, Vinegar, and fruit to eat. The particular
of their Silks, Bombasies, Elephant, Serpents, Spices, Stones, and diverse
famous Rivers being well known, I will not stand to recite: The natures and
fashions of the Inhabitants briefly I will, who being diversely dispersed into
diverse Regions and Principalities, do diversely differ in language, visage,
habit, manners, and religion.

Both men and women imitate a noble pomp, as not incountred abroad nisi m^gna
comitante caterva, using many odours in their baths and washings; nor are they
without oiles, and perfumes, jewels, pearls, and other ornaments, befitting the
business they intend.

Of whom, the four principal Nations that inhabit this tract, are the
Indians, viz. the Natives, and they for the most part are Gentiles. The second
are the Jews, and they are dispersed here, as elsewhere, over the whole face
of the earth. The third are the Mahumetans, whereof some are Persians, and some
Scythians, now called Mogors, living in the upland Countries. The fourth are
the Moors or Arabians, who within these two hundred years, usurping upon the
maritime coasts of the Country, have built them places and Cities very fit for
Traffic, and expulsed the Natives into the more Inland Countries. And now of
late, besides those ancient Christians which Saint Thomas converted, there
reside many Portugals natives and M^sticos, who are daily converted by the
industry of the Jesuits, to the Christian belief: who have taught them to
baptize Children, and to fast. Wherein they are now tedious observants, as all
barbarous people are, the best maintainers of customs and ceremonies,
especially where the Roman Church instructs. The Portugals intruded by arms,
prayers and policy; Their purchases I account to be so far from the name of
a Conquest, as was the possession of the English from the Crown of France,
when they held nothing but ^alais in Picardie. Howbeit for state and
ostentation, every third year a Viceroy is sent to Goa, from whom, and from
whence all inferior deputations have their directions and governments. Here he
has his Council, his Nobles, his Chancery and Justices, as is used in
Portugal, from whence in Civil cases the parties may appeal to Portugal, but
in Criminal, no one person, except he be a Gentleman. He is very magnificent
in State, and never goes abroad, unless to Church; and then attended with
music, and accompanied with all the principal Gentlemen and Burgers of Goa,
on horseback, with a guard of soldiers, before, behind, and on each side. It
is a place of great honor and profit: For besides the presents which the
bordering Princes round about Goa, send them at their first entrances, for
contraction of peace and friendship by their Embassies, they have also the
management of the Kings revenues and treasure, with absolute allowance from his
Majesty to give, spend and reward, as best pleases him.

When a new Viceroy arriveth (the time of the former being expired) he
presently dispatcheth his Lieutenants, with sufficient authority in their
Masters name, to receive the possession of the Government of India, and to
prepare the Palace: Whereupon the old Viceroy makes quick and clean
riddance of all Vtensils; neither leaving one stool in the Palace, nor one
penny in the Treasury: So that these great Officers by reason of their short
time of employment, have enough to do; The first year to furnish their house
with necessaries; The second, to gather treasure, and to respect the causes
that moved them to come into India; The third, and last year, to prepare
themselves, and to settle their businesses in order, left they be overtaken and
surprised by the approach of a new successor. The like is to be understood of
all the Captains in the Forts, and of all other Officers thorowout these
Indies.

The Great Mogor.
IT shall always been believed, that the territory lying between Ganges, and
the (...) Indus, has evermore been subject to great and mighty Monarchs. For
(to be silent in matter of more ancient memory about the year of our Lord
1300, there reigned in the Kingdom of Delos and Arabian Prince, of the f^^t of
Mahumet, named Sanofaradin, (as John Barros reports) of so great power and
strength, that he enterprised the conquest of Asia. Upon which resolution
forsaking these Regions, in which Indus and Ganges take heir beginnings, with a
mighty Army by little and little he subdued those Princes, and people which did
oppose against him, until he pierced to the bounds of Canora, where it
begins at the River Bate about Chaul, and stretches between Bate and the
Gulf of Bengala to Cape Comerine. When he had won so large and famous a
territory, resolving to return to Delos, he left Abdessa his Lieutenant in
Canora. This man encouraged by the victories of his Master, and presuming upon
his own good fortune, bereaved the Gentiles of the greater part of Canora; and
having gathered a most mighty and populous Army compacted of Gentiles,
Mahumeta^ and Christians, after he had reigned twenty years, he died in the
height of his prosperity, leaving his son Mamudza behind him: whom the King
graced with his fathers regencie, upon condition to pay him a yearly tribute:
which payment the young man neither regarded, nor she wed himself loyal to
his Sovereign in many things. It happened that Sanosaradin dying in the war
which he made against Persia, left behind him a son of so abject and base a
spirit, that Mamudza hereupon took courage to entitle himself King of Canora,
calling the Country Decan, and the people Decainai, that is, illegitimate.
After this, he erected eighteen Captaineships, and divided his dominion among
them, assigning to everyone his limits, only with this penalty, to find
always in a readiness a certain number of footmen and horsemen. To prevent
future rebellion he chose these Captains, not out of the orders of his
Nobility, but from the number of his slaves. Nay more than this (to be assured
of their loyalty) he commanded that every one of them should build him a house
in his royal City Bider, in which their children should remain: and that once
every year at the least, they should make their appearance in his Court.

But because all authority, which is not as well underpropped, with its proper
virtues, as grounded upon the affections of the people, is of small
continuance; so happened it to this Prince, for his slaves and vassals having
sovereign authority put into their hands, made no more account of him than of
a Cipher, stripping him poor Prince without respect of reverence of all his
dominions, saving his chiefs City Bidor, with the territory adjoining. For
every one of a Lieutenant became an Usurper of those States, which were
committed to his trust, the mightier always oppressing the weaker, so that all
in the end became a prey to a fe^. Two of them are famous at this day; the one
stretching his dominion to the borders of Cambaia; the other to the skir^s of
Narsynga; the first called by the Portugals Nissamalucco, the other Idalcan,
either of them being so puissant, that in the year 1571. Idalcan beleag^ed God
with an Army of five and thirty thousand Horse, threescore thousand Elephants,
and two hundred and fifty pieces of Ordnance. Nissamalucco besieged Chaul with
less forces, but better fortune: For though he did not force it, yet he
brought into a hard-pinch, with the slaughter of twelve thousand Moore^s. In
those Countries in which S^^adorasin began hos Empire, not above threescore and
ten years agone, a great Prince (whom the East people call the great Mogor, in
the same sense as we call the great Turk) laid the foundation of a mighty
Empire: for as the King of Bierma in our time^ greatly hazarded the States of
Pegu and Siam, and the bordering Nations; even so the Mogor turned topsie turvy
the Kingdoms lying on the River Ganges. The received opinion is, that they
took their original from Tartaria, and that they came from the coast where
the ancient Massagecae (a people accounted invincible at arms) did once
inhabit, and living as it were lawless, and under no manner of government, by
invading of their neighbors, procured unto themselves the sovereignty of
spacious Kingdoms. By the River Oxus they border upon the Persians, and are at
continual enmity with them, sometime for Religion, and sometimes for
enlargement of the bounds of their Empire. The chief City is Shamarchand, from
whence came Tamerlan, and of whose blood these Mogor Princes do boast that
they are descended. The predecessor of him (who is now Prince of the Mogors)
was very famous in the East; for in the year 1436. being solicited by King
Mandao of the North (from whom Badurius King of Cambaia had taken his Kingdom)
to aid him against the Cambaian, he is reported to have brought with him an
infinite number of soldiers, which we may conjecture out of that which
Masseus writes of the army of the said King Badurius: to wit, that this King
had under his Standard one hundred and fifty thousand horse, whereof five and
thirty thousand were barbed. The number of footmen was five hundred thousand.
Amongst these were fifteen thousand foreign soldiers, and fourscore
Christians French and Portugals. At which, by what means, or by what way they
should come thither, I do not a little wonder. Their Galleon (which they
called Dobriga) suffered Ship-wracke in the Channel of Cambaia.

I know, that if these preparations and provisions for war be compared with our
forces of Christendom, they will hardly be taken for true: but we have already
declared the causes, why the Princes of the East and South may gather greater
Armies than we can, and consequently that those things which are spoken of
their incredible store, and wonderful provision of furniture, may be
answerable to their levies and proportions. And as they are able to levy
millions of men (for arming and for feeding them, they take no great care;) so
likewise do the Provinces afford great plenty of provision, and an inestimable
multitude of their usual warlike Engines: for they carry nothing with them
save that which is necessary and needful for service: Wines, Cates, and such
like, which cannot but with great expense, labor, and trouble be carried along
with Armies, are by these men wholly omitted and utterly rejected. All their
thoughts tend to warlike provision, as to get Brass, Iron, Steel and Tin,
to forge Pieces, and cast great Ordnance; Iron and Lead to make Bullets; Iron
and Steel to temper Cemiters; Oxen and Elephants to draw their Artillery;
Grain to nourish their bodies; Metals to arm them, and Treasure to conserve
them.

They are all tyrants, and to preserve their estate, and induce submissive
awednesse, they hold hard hands over the commonalty, committing all government
into the hands of slaves and soldiers. And to make these men faithful and
loyal, they ordain them Lords of all things, committing unto their trust,
Towns, Castles, and expeditions of great weight: but the expectation of the
Prince is often deceived by the rebellion of these vassals, for sometimes they
usurp whole Provinces, and impose upon the people all kind of injuries. But
let good Princes think it as necessary to build their safety on the love of
their subjects, as upon the force of their soldiers. Fear admits no
security, much less perpetuity: and therefore these tyrants expecting no
surety at the hands of their subjects, trust wholly upon their men of war,
flattering them with promise of liberty, and bestowing upon them the goods of
their subjects as rewards of their service. So with us, the Turk strengthens
his State with Ianizars, and as he coveteth to be beloved and favored of them
(to that end bestowing upon them the riches and honors of the Empire) so they
acknowledge no other Lord and master, I may very well say, father and
protector. And so many of the Malabor Princes using and accounting the Commons
but as beasts, lay all their hopes and fortunes on the Naiors: the Kings of
Ormus, Cambaia, Decan, and Achan, lay all upon the shoulders of these slaves.
In a word as a lawful and just Prince has a great regard and singular care to
have the liking and love of his people, by which being guarded and environed
(as with a strong rampire) he is able to withstand all attempts; so
contrariwise, tyrants knowing themselves hateful to their subjects, employ
their whole study how to win the favor of their soldiers and slaves, thereby
to repress innovations at home, and invasions from abroad. Seeing therefore
the safety and foundation of their greatness is built on the entertainment of
their Soldiers, as their Naiors, their Ianizars, free or bond, strangers, or
subjects, yea, whatsoever they be, it must needs follow, that only actions of
war may be the end and scope of their cogitations; as likewise that they be
very prodigal to keep their estates very well furnished and appointed with
soldiers and provisions. And these reasons I take to be sufficient inducements
to believe the reports of this King of Cambaia, and these other barbarous
Indian Princes. For (besides that I spoke of before) it is reported that with
this army did march a thousand pieces of Ordnance, among which were four
Basiliskes, every one drawn with an hundred yoke of Oxen; five hundred Wagons
laden with Gunpowder and Bullets, two hundred armed Elephants, five hundred
Chests full of Gold and Silver to pay soldiers wages; besides many Princes and
petty Lords, with their Followers, Merchants, Victualers, Artificers, and their
Servants, numberless. Notwithstanding this his incredible preparation, he was
twice overthrown by Marhumedio: once in the Territory of the City of Doce, and
another time at Mandao, from whence disguising his apparel to save his life,
he fled to Diu. Being out of danger and fear, he sent Ambassadors to Soliman,
with a present esteemed worth, 60000. Crowns, desiring his aid in these
wars. But afterward weighing in his mind, that these affairs required
speedier succors, he contracted a league with those Portugals which were
nearest adjoining, to make them his friends and partners of the War: the
composition was, that he should permit them to build a Castle in the Island of
Diu.

Now to speak of Marhumedius, his fortunes were not much unlike to those of
Tamerlan: for as this Prince brought terror and fear upon the inhabitants of
Persia and Asia; so did that no less innovation and trouble upon India and the
Orient: This defeated in battle Bajazet Emperor of Turks; that overthrew
Badurius King of Cambaia, and his army far greater than his own: both of
them had the surname of Great. When the Mogors understood of the riches of
India and the fertility thereof, they never ceased by a continual course of
victory their arms and invasions, till they had made themselves Lords of the
Provinces, lying between Caucasus and the Sea Ganges, and the River Indus. In
this tract are contained seven and forty Kingdoms. For Adabar the successor of
Marhumedius won Madabar, with the better part of Cambaia. Of what goodly
consequence this Province is, may be imagined by the famous City of Madabar
Campana (so called for situation upon the top of a high hill rising in the
midst of a spacious plain) and Cambaia (a City consisting of an hundred and
thirty thousand houses) as likewise by the populous host of King Badurius, his
warlike provision for such an army, and plenty of grain to sustain such
multitudes. I assure you, the world affords not a soil for all necessaries for
the life of man (as Rice, Corn, Pulse, Sugar, Oxen, Sheep, Pullen of all
sorts, and Silk) more richer or plentiful than this Province, wherein also
there are reported to be sixty thousand Buroughs; which number certainly is
very great and admirable. Guicciardine writes, that in Netherland, within the
Territory of the seventeene Provinces are contained two hundred and eight
walled Towns, and an hundred and fifty Buroughs, enjoying the rights and
privileges of Cities, and six thousand three hundred Villages, having Parish
Churches. In Naples are a thousand eight hundred of these, some are Towns,
some but Castles. In Bohemia are seven hundred and fourscore Towns, and
thirty two thousand Villages. In France (as John Bodine writes) are two
thousand seven hundred Boroughs, having Parish Churches, besides those in
Burgundy, which in those times were not numbered amongst the Towns of France.
I write this, to induce a true and absolute judgment of the power of any
Province, by the number of Parishes (for I know that that ought to be made
according to their greatness) but yet their number makes much to the purpose,
as in both which Cambaia may carry the credit and esteem of a most spacious,
populous, and puissant Kingdom.

Acabar also conquered the rich Kingdom of Bengala; so that a man may truly
say, that in this part of the Orient there are three Emperors; one in Cambaia,
the other in Narsinga, and the third in Bengala: whereof Cambaia and Bengala
far exceed all the other Provinces in fertility of soil, and concourse of
Merchants, both riotously abounding in Sugar, Cotton-wooll, Cattle, Elephants,
and Horses: In Bengala also grows long Pepper and Ginger. The first is
watered and cut as it were into two halfes by the River Indus, the other by
Ganges, having two famous Marttownes, Satagan and Catagan.

The great Mogor does likewise possess the Kingdoms of Citor, Mandao, and
Delly, wherein he keeps his Court. He has infinite store of Horses,
Elephants, and Camels, as also all sorts of Artillery and warlike furniture, by
mean: whereof he is grown fearful to the whole Inhabitants of the East. It
is written of him that he is able to bring into the field three hundred
thousand horse, and that there are within his Dominions fifty thousand
Elephants.

Some man perhaps will ask how it comes to pass that this Prince (being so
mighty, and his neighbors so naked, unarmed, and poor) does not get into his
possession the Dominion of the rest of India and the Orient? In this as in the
former unlikelihoods, the wisest man is soonest answered. There are many
obstacles; one is, that as the spirit and body of man cannot endure in
continual travel and motion (for that is only proper to God and Nature:) so
a continued and open passage is not evermore given to the ambitious
apprehensions of Kings and Princes. Great Empires seldom fear foreign
invasions, yet oftentimes faint they under their own weight. It is not
destinied unto great things to stand always at the highest, much less to
increase: they have their flood, but upon a remediless condition, that there
follow an ebb. They are lifted on high, but by the irrevocable decree of
Nature, that a fall succeed: yea, and that themselves by themselves decline.
The greater they are, the more subject to mutabilitie: the larger, the harder
to hold and manage, they move but slowly, and of what effect celerity is in
war, who knows not? The greatest conquest carries the greatest envy with
it, and greatest care to conserve what is got, and yet not care, but long
continuance perfecteth these actions: and while time passes, the neighboring
Nations provide (if not infest) for their own safety; yea, most commonly by
loss of time proceeds the loss of victories opportunity. He that has
overcome his enemy, stands oftentimes in fear of his friend, yea, of such
as have been fellows and partners with him in all his fortunes: so that to
secure himself of these and such like casualties, he is constrained even in
the course of victory to found the retreit, and surcease his projects. Again,
continual victory makes leaders insolent, soldiers mutinous, refusing to
pass forward at the command of their General, as it happened to Alexander and
Lucullus. Great enterprises even brought to their wished end, enrich the purses
of certain private men, but leave the Princes Coffers empty, who nevertheless
must be at the charge to maintain continual companies, and keep them in
continual pay; without which course the casher'd soldier is ever ready to
follow any faction whenever it shall be offered.

Moreover this numberless Army which Marhumedius led against the King of
Cambaia, did not only waste the Regions where through it passed and encamped,
but likewise by devouring all things that the face of the earth yielded,
bereaved it self of the means, which Nature in measure had afforded to every
creature to maintain li^e by: and so it often happens, that those Armies which
in apprehension seem invincible for their hugeness, are most commonly
overthrown by famine, the forerunner of pestilence. For proof hereof, we
have seen the invadations of Attila, Tamerlane, and those barbarous Nations,
stand on foot but a little space, whereas the Grecians, Macedonians,
Carthaginians, Romans, Spaniards, and English, have done great matters with
mean Armies. For things that are moderate last and dure, as small Rivers,
which what they cannot do in one year, in two or more they finally
accomplish; whereas immoderate and violent are like to torrents, making more
noise and fury, than hurt or hinderance; violently coming, and violently
again carrying themselves away. Therefore against such mighty impressions, the
surest safety is to draw the war out at length, and only to stand upon the
defensive: for, let such Armies rest assured, that they cannot so long hold
out, but they will waver, either for want of provision, scarcity of coin,
infection of the air, or infirmities of their own bodies. The other thing is,
that prosperity blinds the winner, making him careless; adversity ripeneth
the loser, and makes him wary and industrious: so fortune changing her copy,
the affairs of the winner decline, and the good success of the loser grows
every day better than other. Besides, conquests are not perfected but by
process of time, old age creeps upon the person of Princes, and how fit a
crasie body, and a vigorous spirit nummed with old age, is for the consummation
of a conquered estate, the lives of Julius Caesar, and Charles the fifth may
stand for examples.

Lastly, to answer those, who unless they be eyewitnesses, will never be
answered, let them know, that nothing so much hinders the invasive ambition
of this Prince, as the Nature of places. For Caucasus stretches it self into
a thousand branches in those parts, incompasseth whole Kingdoms with some
parcels thereof: by some it runs by the sides: to others, it is more
defensive than any artificial rampire; sometime it wholly shuts up
passages, sometime it makes them inaccessible. These difficulties are more
iujurious to the Mogor than to any other Prince, because the strength and
sinews of his forces consist in horse; which as they are of great consequence
in Campania, so amongst hills and rocks they are of small service. Of this
quality are the frontiers of Persia, and the Kingdom of Sablestan, on every
side hemmed in with that part of Caucasus, which the ^r^cians call Paropamise.
Segestan is likewise so environed, that the River Il-mento (were it not for
searching out infinite windings and turnings through natural valleys) could
hardly find passage to pay his tribute to the famous Ganges. In Cambaia it
self, when the Mogors are of such fearful puissance, live the Resbuti, not
dreading them one whit by reason of the strength of the Mountains. These
Resbuti are the remainder of the Gentiles, that betook themselves to the
mountains between Cambaia and Diu, when the Mahumetans first entered these
Countries; and since that day, by strong hand they have preserved their
liberty, infesting often the plain Country with their incursions. Other
Provinces there are utterly barren, not only wanting water, but all
necessaries else: of this kind is Dolcinda, upon the skirts of Cambaia,
through which it is impossible to lead an Army. To these discommodities you may
add the loss of time, which Princes (being Lords of ample and spacious
dominions) are constrained to make in their voyages. For the better part of
Summer is spent before they can arrive at their Rendevous, with their horses
half dead through travel, and the Army half in half in number and courage
diminished; yea, Winter overtaketh them, commodious for their enemies, and
disadvantagious for them: for they must lie in the field and open air among
mire and frosts, their enemies under a warm roof, and wholesome harbor.

Whereupon wise Princes, which have been to make long Land-journies, through
diverse Provinces of diverse natures, for fear of such like discommodities, have
thought it best to provide shipping, and to use the opportunity of Rivers or
Sea, as did Caesar Germanicus in the war of Germany, after he perceived,
that in the protracting of time (which was requisite for the marching of his
Army) the greater part of his men and horses were idle, consumed by
infirmities, labors, and the length of journeyes. But the Mogor is utterly
destitute to this advantage: upon one side he has no Haven, on another the
Portugals are his jealous. neighbors, who with two Castles of great strength
at Diu and Damain, have shut up the whole gulf of the Cambaian sea.

Finally, the puissance of their neighbors has been as great a controler to
their furious invasions, as any other natural cause, viz. the King of Barma,
who is nothing inferior in power and riches: for he is Lord of so many
Kingdoms, and of so fierce and warlike a people, and can bring such swarms
into the field, that he i^ fearelesse of any of his Tartarian neighbors. And
as the Mogor rules far and wide between Ganges and Indus, so does this King
between Ganges and Siam. As the one devises to offend, so by little and
little the other waxes wife to defend. For by nature man is more prone to
provide for his own safety, than ready by wrong to oppress others, being
always more careful to conserve, than forward to destroy. It cannot be
expressed how full of subtilty, shifts, devices, and industry man is to defend
him and his: for he uses for his own safeguard, not that only which is
properly defensive; but even that also which humane wisdom has invented, or
Nature created any way offensive. Neither ever was there any instrument
invented for offense, but that the same has been turned to defense: Of which
kind are Castles built of later times, and the devices of modern
fortification; whereby few soldiers have resisted great Armies, and a small
place (made tenable) has wasted the forces and treasure of a mighty Emperor;
as well witnessed the fortunes of eight hundred Portugals at Domaine upon the
coast of Cambaia, who by this Art scorned and deluded the whole forces and
attempts of this mighty Mogor.

China.
IN times past the Kingdom of China has been far larger than now it is.
For it appears by their Histories (containing the Annals of 2000. years and
upward) and by other of their manuscript Chronicles written in their own
language (whose fragments are yet to be seen) that their Kings were Lords
almost of all the Seacoast of Asia, from the straight of Anian, to the
Kingdom of Pegu, the Provinces of Meletai, Becam, Calan, Boraga, and other
territories situated upon the North side of Pegu; where their monuments, with
their Epitaphs and devices, are to be seen at this day. For in all the foresaid
Regions, the relics of their ancient ceremonies, whereby the knowledge of the
Mathematics (as the division of the year into months, the Zodiac into 12.
signs, true testimonies of their Empire) are taught by tradition. Neither is
the time long, sithence all those Kingdoms accounted the King of China for
their Sovereign, sending their Ambassadors with presents to his Court every
third year.

These Ambassadors ought to be four at least; for before they could arrive at
their journeyes end, some of them either by remoteness of place, difficult
access of audience, or delay in dispatch, could not but surely die; those
whose chance it was to escape, the Chinois in some set banquet would poison, and
erect unto them stately tombs, with the inscription of their names, the place
from whence they came, and with the style of Ambassadors: thereby (say they) to
commit to eternity the remembrance of the bounds of their Empire. They enlarged
their dominions no less upon the Ocean, than upon the Continent. For they
first of all invaded the Isles of the Orient; next unto them the Giavi: then
the Moluccans and Moors; and lastly, the Portugals and Castilians; who hold
them at this day. But none of these Nations were equal of power and
magnificence to the Chinois: for besides the conquest of the bordering Isles
(which in regard of their numbers, their spaciousness and fertility, were of
great reckoning) they became Lords of the greatest part of all the inhabitable
places in that vast Archipelago, even to Zeilan, where they left their speech
and characters, as also they did the like upon the opposite continent. Wre
read also in the papers of certain Jesuits, that in one quarter of the
Island of Saint Laurence, they found white people, which said, that they
descended of the Chinois. They first discovered the Moluccas, gave names unto
the Spices, and planted Colonies in many of them: which to this present keep
their old name, as batta china a Maur, batta china, Mauri: batta signifies a
Town, batta china, a Town of the Chinois. It is likewise thought that the
Inhabitants of Iava descended from them; and to speak the truth, there is no
great difference between their manner of living, clothing, building, industry,
traffic, and manual occupations. But after the shipwr^cke of fourscore
vessels, and the loss of their people in the Sea of Zeilan, (comparing their
profit with their loss) they resolved to try no more such hazards, but to
contain themselves within their own bounds. And to cause this Edict to be
inviolably observed, they enacted, that none there after upon pain of the
loss of his ^ead, should offer to fail into those parts: the Kings themselves
did ever abstain from future invasions. For sithence they enjoy a very earthly
Paradise, where Nature and Art are at strife to content the Inhabitants, where
no good thing i^ wanting, but much superfluous, and to spare, what mad men
would consume their bodies and treasures, in getting those things, which are
more chargeable to get, than profitable to keep? Polybius writes, that upon
the same reason the old Carthaginians forsook part of those things, which
before they had conquered. The Romans, after they had suffered a grievous loss
of their best vessels in the second Punicke war, in mere despair bade
Navigation adue; but afterward perceiving that they who were Commanders of the
Sea, were likely to prove Lords of the Land, they built a new Navy, and at
length saw the success to answer their latest opinions. Therefore can we not
but ascribe this resolution of the Chinois, rather to good conscience and
advisednesse, than to wisdom, or good polic^e.

When this surrender was resolved in full council, they set the people, whom
they had vanquished, free: yet some of their good wills remained feodaries,
shadowing their estates under the wings of their puissance, as the Kings of
Corea, Lequi, Cauchinchina and Siam. But notwithstanding their retreit within
their own bounds, yet possess they a dominion little less than Europe: for
from the North toward the South, it reaches from seventeene to two and fifty
degrees, from East to the West, are two and twenty degrees.

It is divided into eight several Kingdoms, over whom one principal Monarch
controlleth; by whose high and illustrious titles of Mundi Dominus, and Solis
filius, he would seem to challenge all Natures immunities, and withal, that
their prescriptions before the days of Adam, were true and canonical.

The principal City is called Paquin, neighboring Tartary, out of which the
Emperor never issues, but in time of war, which is as it were an exercise
amongst them, at that time challenging the attendance of every Nation. For, as
you have read in the History of England, That from the Twede (between
Northumberland and Scotland) even to the Irish Seas, there was a wall, called
Picts wall, one hundred miles long, and at certain spaces fortified with
watchtowers, which through hollow trunkes placed within the curtains, received
advertisements of Alarmes, excursions, and such like; so that in a moment the
whole Country was up in arms, and the ordinary proceedings of military
discipline executed: So here, from the Sea to Mount Caucasus, or rather Imaus,
eight thousand furlongs together, is raised a fortification, and at every miles
end a strong rampart, or bulwark, wherein is continual garrison.

Thomas Perez the King of Portugals Ambassador, made four months journey
from Cantan to Nanquij, bearing always Northerly.

Nor does he enter the field under an army of three hundred thousand foot, and
two hundred thousand horse. Of which I am not incredulous, considering the
levies of the East, five hundred thousand men were consumed in the civil
wars of Judah and Jerusalem, and against Judah, her enemies (the Moors and
Aethiopians) brought ten hundred thousand pair of hands to pull down the walls
of Jerusalem.

Their manner of life is most obscene and shameless, their idolatry vile and
vicious, their incantations ridiculous, the prostitution of Virgins to be
deflowred of Idols abominable, their exorcismes damnable, and the variety of
senseless profanations most contemptible.

It is not so spacious, but it is as fertile: for it yields not only what is
fitting for humane life, but whatsoever the delicate and esseminate appetite of
man may lust after. Many Plants yield fruit twice or thrice a year, and that
not only by the temperature of the air, but by the number of the rivers and
plenty of waters, which do both cause traffic through every corner of the
Region, and so water it on all sides, that it resembles a most pleasant and
delectable garden-plot. Of this plenty there are three causes: one, the
prodigal expenses of the King in digging of trenches thorowout the whole Land:
sometime cutting through rockie Mountains, sometime damming up deep valleys
to make them level with high mountains, and to draine the waters of Lakes and
Marshes: the other, for that the whole Region is situated under the temperate
Zone, and in no place, either by nature or man's industry, wants moisture; so
that all creatures, taking nourishment of heat and moisture, must needs here
wonderously prosper. In no place Plants may take larger scope to spread their
branches, nor Cattle larger walks to wander in, than in this Country. The
last reason is, for that the idle are neither severely punished, nor altogether
tolerated, but every one is forced to do somewhat, no foot of land is left
unhusbanded, nor dram of stuff cast away unwrought. Among other things
note-worthy, this one is of great consideration, that in Cantan they maintain
four thousand blind people to grind corn and Rice; every child is set about
somewhat according to his years and strength; those only who are truly
impotent in their limbs, and have no friends living to succor them, are
provided for in Hospitals. That none may excuse themselves, in saying he can
do nothing, every one is bound to learn his fathers occupation, which is the
reason that the children (borne as it were tradesmen) learn their fathers
occupations before they perceive it, by continual practice becoming in time
most artificial mechanickes. He that cannot live at Land, seeks his
maintenance at Sea, (for that is no less inhabited than the Land) yea,
infinite households live on the Rivers in Boats, without coming to Land for a
long season: Some whereof live by ferrying over people, some by transporting
passengers and their merchandise: others keep shops, others vessels of lodging
for their Merchants and Travelers. Whatsoever is needful for clothing, for
food or nourishment, delight or ease of a civil life, is to be found in the
midst of great Rivers. Many likewise nourish all sorts of Poultrie,
especially Duckes in their vessels: To hatch the eggs and to nourish the young
ones, they use not the dams as we do, but an artificial heat, in a manner as
they do in Egypt, especially at Cair: All night he keeps them in his Boat,
and at morning sends them to feed in the fields sowed with Rice, where all
day long having fed on the weeds, to the great good of the husbandman, they
return toward evening to their Cages, at the sound of a little Bell or
Cimball. Many live by carrying Fish, both salt and fresh, into the high
Countries: for in the Spring, when the Rivers rise through thawes, and
landstouds, so incomparable quantities of seafish do abound in the havens and
creekes, that the fishermen depart rather wearied than wanting. This fish the
Skippers buy for a small matter of the fishermen, and keeping them alive in
certain vessels made for the purpose, they transport them into Provinces far
remote from the Sea. There they are sold and preserved in Pooles and Stews
near Cities and great Towns, to serve the Markets and Tables of the richer
Chinois all the year long. Because it is forbidden any inhabitant to pass out
of the Land without leave, and therewith neither, but for a certain time
limited, it must needs be that by the daily increase of people, the Country is
even pestered with inhabitation. It has been observed among themselves, that
for every five that have died, seven have been borne. The Climate is so
temperate, and the air so wholesome, that in man's memory any universal
pestilence has not been known to infest the Country. Notwithstanding left
any man should think this people to enjoy all sweets without some mixture of
sour, you must note that their earthquakes are more dreadful unto them than
any pestilence to us: for whole Cities have been swallowed, and Provinces made
desert by this punishment. These casualties choke up the course of ancient
Channels, and make new where were never any before; they lay Mountains level
with the ground, and make havocke of the people. In the year 1555. a deluge
breaking out of the bowels of the earth, devoured an hundred and fourscore
miles of firm land, with the Towns and Villages standing thereupon: those
which escaped the flood, lightning and fire from Heaven destroyed.

There are said to be in China one hundred and fifty Cities, two hundred thirty
five great Towns, one thousand one hundred fifty four Castles, and four
thousand two hundred Boroughs without walls, wherein soldiers are quartered:
of Villages and Hamlets (some of them containing a thousand households) the
number is infinite; for the Country is so covered with habitation, that all
China seems but as one Town. They have two Metropolitan Cities, Nanquin and
Panquin. In Nanquin toward the North, the King keeps his Court: under the
jurisdiction of the one are seven Provinces, under the other eight. Both of
them are so spacious, that it is a days journey for a horseman to ride from
one end to the other. Of the number of the Inhabitants no certainty can be
produced, but according to manuscript relations, and the report of travelers,
it is said, that the Kingdom contains threescore and ten millions of living
souls. This is an admirable report, and not to be believed, if it be compared
with the Provinces of Christendom; but surely something above conceit is to be
credited to those spacious, populous, and barbarous Nations. Let us set the
largeness of their Provinces, the circuit of their Cities, their plenty and
abundance of all things and in all places, either in prospering by nature or
man's industry, with their number and inhabitation, and we shall find a Country
like enough to afford such a reckoning, with places, cities, and dwellings able
to contain them, and nourishment sufficient to maintain them. Italy exceeds
not nine millions: Germany (excluding the Swizzers and Netherlands) not ten,
and with the foresaid Provinces not above fifteen, which number peradventure
France may reach unto. Spain is far inferior to Italy: Sicilie has but
one million and three hundred thousand: England three millions, and Belgia as
many, if by the continuance of the war in those Countries that number be not
much decayed.

The Italians conceit mavelous highly of themselves, thinking no Province
upon the face of the earth for wealth and people comparable to Italy; but they
forget, that as it is long, so it is narrow, and nothing wide or spacious,
neither that two third parts have not one navigable River (a want of great
consequence) neither that the Apenine, a Mountain rockie and barren, does
spread it self over a fourth part thereof. Let them nor deceive themselves,
nor condemn another plenty by their own wants, nor measure others excess by
their handfuls. For fertility, does France in plenty of Grain or Cattle give
place to Italy? or England for Cattle, for Wool, Fish, or Metal? Or Belgia,
for number or goodlinesse of Cities, excellency of Artificers, wealth or
merchandise? Or Greece, for delectable situation, commodious Havens of the Sea,
or pleasant Provinces? Or Hungary for Cattle, Wine, Corn, Fish, Mines, and
all things else? But I will not stand upon these discourses; only let me tell
you that Lombardy contains the third part of Italy, a Province delightsome
for battle-plaines and pleasant Rivers, without barren mountains or sandy
fields, and to be as full of people as the whole half of Italy besides. Yea,
what may be said of Italy for profit or pleasure, that may not be spoken
particularly of France, England, Netherland and both the Panonies? Wherefore
since the Country is not only large and spacious, but united, populous,
plentiful and rich, at least let it be believed and accounted for one of the
greatest Empires that ever was.

The Government is tyrannical: Government.
for thorowout the Kingdom there is no other Lord but the King, they know not
what an Earl, a Marquess, or a Duke means. No fealty, no tribute, or toll
is paid to any man but the King. He gives all magistracies and honors. He
allows them stipends wherewith to maintain their estates, and they dispatch
no matter of weight without his privity. His vassals obey him, not as a King,
but rather as a God. In every Province stands his portraicture in gold, which
is never to be seen but in the new Moons; then is it showed and visited of
the Magistrates, and reverenced as the Kings own person. In like manner the
Governors and Judges are honored; no man may speak to them but upon their
knees. Strangers are not admitted to enter into the Kingdom, left their
customs and conversation should breed alteration in manners, or innovation in
the State. They are only permitted to traffic upon the Seacoasts, to buy
and sell victual, and to vent their wares. They that do traffic upon the
Land, assemble many together, and elect a Governor amongst them, whom they
term Consul. In this good manner strangers enter the Kingdom, but always
waited on by the Customers, and Kings Officers.

The Inhabitants cannot travel but with a license, and with that neither, but
for a prefixed season: and to be sure of their return they grant no leave,
but for traffickes sake, and that in Ships of an hundred and fifty tun and not
above; for they are jealous, that if they should go to sea in bigger vessels,
they would make longer journies. To conclude, it is a religious Law of the
Kingdom, that every man's endeavors tend wholly to the good and quiet of the
Commonwealth. By which proceedings, Justice, the mother of quietness, Policy,
the mistress of good Laws, and Industry, the daughter of peace, do flourish
in this Kingdom. There is no Country modern or ancient, governed by a better
form of policy than this Empire: by virtue whereof they have ruled their
Empire 2000. years: And so has the State of Venice flourished 1100. years,
the Kingdom of France 1200. It is a thousand two hundred years since they
cast off the yoke of the Tartars, after their ninety years government.

For their Arts, Learning and Policy, Arts.
they conceive so well of themselves, that they are accustomed to say that they
have two eyes; the people of Europe but one; and the residue of the Nations
none. They give this report of the Europeans, because of their acquaintance
with the Portugals, with whom they traffic in Macoa and other places, and the
renown of the Castidians, who are their neighbors in the Philippinae.

Printing, Painting, and Gunpowder, with the materials thereunto belonging,
have been used in China many years past and very common, so that it is with
them out of memory when they first began. Their Chronicles say, that their
first King, being a great Necromancer, who reigned many thousand years past,
did first invent great Ordnance: and for the antiquity of Printing, there has
been Books seen in China, which were printed at least five or six hundred
years before Printing was in use with us in Europe, and to say when it first
began, it is beyond remembrance. But not to make our Readers believe reports
beyond probability or credit, we must needs inform the truth, That the Arts
and Manufactures of China, are not comparable to ours of Europe. Their
buildings are base and low, but one story high (for fear of earthquakes)
which makes them take up more room on the ground than in the air; no marvel
then if their Cities be great. Their Painting is mere, steyning or trowelling
in respect of ours. Their Printing is but stamping, like our great Letters or
Gaies cut in wood; for they cut many words in one piece, and then stamp it off
in paper. This makes their Printing very difficult and chargeable, and
therefore so little used. Of liberal Arts they know none but a little natural
Rhetoric, which he that there excels in, is more beholding to a good wit and
a fine tongue than to the precepts of his Tutor. Their great Ordnance be but
short and naught. Finally, they are a people rather crafty than wise; their
common policy is made up of wariness and wiliness.

By the multitudes of people (before spoken of) you may imagine the state of
his forces, Forces at land.
for herein all other provisions take their perfection. But to speak somewhat
in particular: The power of this Prince (remembering his countenance and nature,
detesting all invasions) is more ready and fit to defend than offend, to
preserve rather than to increase. His Cities for the most part are builded upon
the banks of navigable Rivers, environed with deep and broad ditches, the
walls built of stone and brick, strong above belief, and fortified with
ramparts and artificial bulwarks. Upon the borders toward Tartarie (to make
sure work against such an enemy) they have built a wall beginning at Chioi (a
City situate between two most high mountains) and stretching it self toward
the East, six hundred miles between mountain and mountain, until it touch
the cliffes of the Ocean. Upon the other frontiers you may behold many, but
small holds, so built to stay the course of the enemy, until the Country
forces be able to make head, and the Royal Army have time to come leasurely
forward; for in 400. great Towns he keeps in continual pay forces
sufficient upon the least warning, to march to that quarter whither occasion
calls. Every City has a Garrison and Guard at the gates, which at nights is
not only fast locked, but sealed, and may not be opened before the seal at
morning be thoroughly viewed. To speak truth, their soldiers, horsemen, and
footmen, by land or sea, are more famous for their numbers, their gallant
furniture, and plenty of provision, than for strength and courage. For the
Inhabitants partly by their effeminate and wanton kind of life, partly by
their form of government, whereby they are made vile and base, have little
valor or manhood left them. They use no foreign soldiers, except those whom
they take in war; these they send into the inland Countries, where being
marked (to distinguish them from other) they serve more like slaves than
soldiers; yet have they pay, with rewards for their good service, and
punishment for their cowardice: true motives to make men valorous. The rest
which are not enrolled, are not suffered to keep weapons in their houses.

Their Sea-forces are nothing inferior to their Landforces: Force at sea.
for besides their ordinary Fleets, lying upon the Coasts for the safety of the
Sea-townes, by reason of the abundance of navigable Rivers, and so huge a
Sea-tract full of Havens, Creeks, and Islands, it is thought that with case
they are able to assemble from five hundred to a thousand such great Ships,
which they call Giunchi, we Iunks.

To think that treasure cannot be wanting to levy so Treasure.
great a number of Ships, Soldiers, and Mariners, many men affirm, that the
Kings revenues amount to an hundred and twenty millions of gold, which value,
although it may seem impossible to him that shall make an estimate of the
States of Europe, with the Kingdom of China; yet may it find place of
belief, if he do but call to mind, First, the nature and circuit of the
Empire, being little less than all Europe; Next, the populousness of the
Inhabitants, accompanied with inestimable riches: Then the diversity of Mines,
of Gold, Silver, Iron, and other sorts of Metal, the unspeakable quantity of
Merchandise, passing from hand to hand, by so many navigable Rivers: so many
arms and in-lets of the Sea, their upland Cities, and maritime Towns, their
Tolls, Customs, Subsidies; and lastly, their rich wares brought into Europe.
He takes the tenth of all things which the earth yields; as Barley, Rice,
Olives, Wine, Cotton, Wool, Flax, Silk, all kinds of Metal, Fruits, Cattle,
Sugar, Honey, Rubarbe, Camphire, Ginger, Wood, Musk, and all sorts of Perfumes.
The custom only of Salt in the City Canto (which is not of the greatest, nor
of the best traffic) yields 180000. Crowns yearly: the tenth of Rice of
one small Town, and the adjacent Territory, yields more than 100000.
Crowns. By these you may conjecture of the rest. He leaves his subjects
nothing save food and clothing. He has under him no Earls, Lords, or Nobles
of any degree, no nor private persons endowed with great wealth.

Wherefore since this Empire is so huge, and all the profits thereof are in his
hands, how can the former assertion of so great and yearly a revenue to men of
reason seem any thing admirable at all? There are two things moreover, which
add great credit to this reckoning; one is, that all his impositions are not
paid in Coin, but some in hay, some in Rice, Corn, Provender, Silk, Cotton,
Wool, and such like necessaries; the other is, that the King of 120. millions
which he receives, disburseth again three parts thereof. And so since it
goes round from the King to the people, it ought to seem no wonder, if the
people be able to spare it again for the Princes use at the years end. For as
waters do ebb as deep as they flow, so impositions easily levied suffice for
the expenses of the State, and the people receive again by those expenses as
much as they laid out in the beginning of the year.

This King fears no neighbor, Borderers.
but the great Cham of Tartaria; all the rest acknowledge vassalage. Against
this enemy the ancient Kings built that admirable wall, so much renowned
amongst the wonders of the Ortem. Toward the Sea, he bordereth upon the
Iaponians and Castilians. The distance between Iapan and China is diverse. From
Goto, one of the Islands of Iapan, to the City Liampo, is threescore leagues:
from Canian 297. The Islanders of Iapan do often spoil the Seacoasts of
China by their incursions, descending on land and harrying the Country, more
like Pirates than men of War. For in regard that Iapan is divided into many
Islands, and into diverse Seigniories (ill agreeing amongst themselves,) though
they excel the Chinois in arms and courage, yet are they not of sufficient
power to perform any action of moment against them. Upon another Frontier lie
the Spaniards, of whom the Chinois, not without good cause, are very jealous,
because of the situation of the Philippinae (commodiously seated for the
invasion of China) and the fame of the riches well known to the Spanish. But
the King of Spain wishes rather to plant Christianity peaceably amongst
them, whereof there was once good hope, that God had opened a passage. For
though the Chinois will suffer no stranger to enter within their Dominions, yet
certain Jesuits (zealous in the increasing of Christian Religion) in a
Territory, so spacious as that is, entered with great secrecy and danger, and
procuring the favor of certain Governors, obtained a privilege of
naturalization, specially Friar Michael Rogerius, who in the year 1590.
returned into Europe to advise what course were best to take in this business.
After whose departure, intelligence was brought from two Friars which remained
behind, that after diverse persecutions they were then constrained to forsake
the City wherein they sojourned, and to make haste to sea-ward. Nor plainly
would the Chinois suffer the said Friar Rogerius to come into their Country,
as himself confessed to an English Gentleman of very good worth and curious
understanding, Mr. W.F. who purposely asked that question of him. If any man of
Europe has been in China, it is Matthew Riccius the Jesuit. The Portugals
are likewise eye-sores unto them, but by the report of their justice and the
moderation, which Ferdinand Andrada showed in the government of the Island of
Tamo, and by the Traffic which they exercise in those seas, they can better
digest their neighborhood, than that of the Spanish. This was the first
Portugal that arrived in the City of Cantan, and set on land Thomas Perez,
Legier for Emanuel King of Portugal. But other Captains being there afterward
dis-embarked, behaved themselves so lewdly, that they occasioned the said
Ambassador to be taken for a Spy, and cast into prison, where he died most
miserably, the residue were entreated as enemies. At last it was permitted the
Portugals, for traffic sake, to set a Factory in Macao, where again before
they had strongly fortified their Colonie, they were constrained to submit to
the limitations of the Chinois; to whom in short time for their strength,
wisdom, friendship, and alliance with the Castilians, they became suspicious:
and therefore they do daily more and more bridle their liberty of Traffic,
carrying so heavy a hand toward them, that they would feign give them occasion
to leave Macao of their own w^ls, and retire back into India from whence they
came.

The Kingdom of Siam.
Upon the borders of China (to speak nothing of Cauchinchina, because we know
nothing worth relation of that Territory) joyneth the Country of Siam,
accounted one of the greatest amongst these great Kingdoms of Asia. It took
its name of the City Siam, situated upon the entrance of the River Menon: it
is also called Gorneo. It reaches by Fast and West from the City Campaa, to
the City of Tava^: in which tract by the Seacoast are contained five hundred
leagues, whereof the Arabians once usurped two hundred, with the Cities of
Patan, Paam, Ior, Perca, and Malaco, now in the possession of the Portugals.
From the South toward the North, it reaches from Sincapura, situate in
degrees, to the people called Guconi, in nine and twenty degrees.

The Lake Chimai is distant from the Sea six hundred miles: the upland circuit
stretches from the borders of Cauchinchina beyond the River Avan, where lies
the Kingdom of Chencra. Besides the Lake of Chimai, the Rivers Menon, Menam,
Caipumo and Ana (which cause greater fertility of Grain through the whole
Region, than a man would believe) are all his. The better part of his Kingdom
is environed with the Mountains Ana, Brema, and Iangoma, the residue is plain
like Egypt, abounding with Elephants, Horse, Pepper, Gold and Tin. In the
West part are huge Woods, and therein are many Tigers, Lions, Ounces and
Serpents. It contains these Provinces, Cambaia, Siam, Muantai, Bremo,
Caipumo, and Chencra. The Inhabitants of Lai which border upon the North of the
Provinces of Muantai and Caipumo (and are divided into three Principalities)
are under his obeisance. The first is that of Iangoma; The second of Currai;
The third Lanea, near Cauchinchina. They inhabit a plain and wealthy
Country, into which the Gueoni (Mark Paul calls their Country Gangigu)
descending from the Mountains to hunt for men, make oftentimes cruel
butcheries amongst them: The people of Lai for fear of those Anthropophagi
acknowledge the soveraigntie of Siam, but they often rebel and obey as they
list.

The wealth of the Country may be conjectured by the fertility: Riches.
for being situated in a Plain, and watered with most famous Rivers (like
another Egypt) it cannot but abound with plenty of all good things. It
brings forth Rice, grain of all sorts, Horses, Elephants, infinite store of
Cattle, Gold and Tin: Silver is brought thither by the people of Lai. By
reason of this plenty, the people are drowned in pleasure and wantonness.
They follow husbandry, but take no great delight in manual occupations, which
causes the Kingdom to be poor in merchandise. Amongst many other Cities
three are famous; Cambaia, seated upon the River Menon: which rising in Chinae,
is so hugely augmented by the falling in of many Rivers, that his own Channel
not sufficing for receipt thereof, it rendeth the earth to disgorge it self
into a thousand Islands, making a second Meo^is more than threescore miles
long: Meican signifies the Captain, Menon the mother of waters. The second is
the City of Siam, whose stateliness gives the name to the whole Country. It
is a most goodly City, and of admirable Traffic, which may the better be
imagined, by the writing of a certain Jesuit, who reports, that besides the
natural Inhabitants, there are more than thirty thousand Arabian households.
The third City is called Vdia, greater than Siam, consisting of four hundred
thousand families. It is said, that two hundred thousand Boats belong to this
City, and the River Caipumo, whereon it is seated.

This King to show his majesty and magnificence, Forces.
keeps a Guard of six thousand Soldiers, and two hundred Elephants: of these
beasts he has thirty thousand, whereof he traineth three thousand for the
War. This is a very great matter, if you weigh their worth, and their charges
in keeping.

His Government is rather tyrannical than King-like: Government.
for he is absolute Lord over all the demeanes of the Kingdom, and either
sets them out to husbandmen, or gives them to his Nobles for maintenance,
during life and pleasure, but never passes the right of inheritance. He
bestows on them likewise Towns and Villages, with their Territories, but on
condition to maintain a certain number of horsemen, footmen and Elephants. By
this policy, without any penny pay or burden to the Country, he is able to
levy twenty thousand horsemen, and two hundred and fifty thousand footmen.
Upon occasion he can wage a greater number, by reason of the largeness of his
Kingdoms, and the populousness of his Towns. For Vdia only (the chief seat
of his Kingdom) mustered fifty thousand men. And although he be Lord of nine
Kingdoms, yet uses he no other Nation in the War, but the Siamits, and the
Inhabitants of the two Kingdoms of Vdia and Muantai. All honors and
preferments are bestowed upon men of service in this Kingdom.

In times of peace they have their warlike exercises, and in certain pastimes
which the King once a year exhibiteth at Vdia, are showed all military feats
of arms upon the River Menon, where more than three thousand vessels (which
they term Paraos) divided into two squadrons, skirmish one against another.
Upon the land run the Horses and Elephants, and the footmen try it out at
sword and buckler, with point and edge rebated: the remainder of their days
they spend in not and wantonness.

Their borders toward the East, reach to Cauchinchina, Borderers.
between whom are such huge Woods, Lions, Tigers, Leopards, Serpents and
Elephants, that they cannot infest one another by arms. Toward the Lake China
they border upon the Chinois. Toward the Sea they affront the Arabians and
Portugals. The one took from them Paiam, Paam, Ior and Peam; the other Malaca,
and the Territory adjoining, so between them they bereaved him of two hundred
miles of land; and contenting themselves with the command of the Seacoasts,
and with the customs arising upon the carrying out and bringing in of
merchandise, they abstain from further invasion of the Inland Provinces, and
hold it good policy to keep firm peace with this King and his Countries.
Toward the West lies the Kingdom of Pegu, like a half Moon, between the
Mountains of Brama and Iangoma. Toward the North lie the Gudoni, inhabiting
the barren and sharp Mountains, between whom and Siam dwell the people of
Lay. This people is subject to the crown of Siam, for fear of these Canibals,
of whom (if it had not been for his protection) they had long ago been
utterly devoured. Not forty years since the King made a journey against them
with twenty thousand horse (their horse are small, but excellent good in
travel) five and twenty thousand footmen, and ten thousand Elephants; part
employed for service, and part for carriage. No kingdom has greater store of
these beasts, or does more use them. An innumerable number of Oxen, Buffals,
and beasts of carriage, followed this army, whom they slew when they wanted
other provision.

Hitherto have we devised of Siam and Pegu (as they stood) before the coming
of the Portugals into India, but how in process of time the State was altered,
you shall now hear. In times past, diverse Kingdoms of Brama situated along
the River toward the Lake Chiamai obeyed the Kings of Pegu under the
government of Lieutenants. Sixty years since, one of these Captains, Ruler
of the Kingdom of Tengu, by the aid of his faction, and reputation of his
Virtues, entered into Rebellion, and slaying the Nobles of the Land, usurped
the Kingdom. Afterward he forced the Cities, and conquered the Kingdom of
Prom, Melintati, Calam, Mirandu and Ana, all inhabited by the Bramians, for the
space of one hundred and fifty leagues toward the North. He assayed likewise
the conquest of Siam; but coming before Vdia, the chief City of the
Kingdom, he was forced to raise his siege and depart. He undertook this
journey with three hundred thousand footmen, consuming more than three months
in making way for his army through stony Mountains, huge Woods, and
inaccessible places, in prosecution whereof, he lost two hundred and twenty
thousand of his Soldiers, and re-enforced his losses with captive Siamus. At
this return home, he invaded the Kingdom of Pegu, and won it. Afterward, in
the year 1507. he renewed his journey against Siam, and overcame the King
thereof, who slew himself with poison; but he took his sons, and with them
the better part of the Kingdom. He beleagred Vdia with a million of men and
upward. Our late Writers call this man and his successors (because their fames
arose by the conquest of the Kingdoms of Brama) Kings of Brama or Bramia, but
the Portugals of a more sound judgment grounded upon nearer Neighborhood,
call them Kings of Pegu.

And for that it may not seem that what we write as concerning these infinite
numbers, is either fabulous, or reported altogether upon hearsay; because
that now, here-before, and hereafter we shall have occasion to discourse of
this point, we think it not amiss to spend some time in showing how, and by
what likly-hoods, both in this, and other like barbarous dominions, such huge
and numberless companies are levied and nourished. First therefore it is a
ground infallible, that all Monarchies consist of people, government, and
revenues, and that howsoever in times of peace Princes may live at pleasure,
yet populous Armies near home, or far off, cannot long endure without great
supplies, and a continual Sea of ready money: For as the members of our body
cannot move without sinews, nor motion avail us if joints were wanting; so
without money an Army can never be gathered, nor being gathered, kept
together, if coin be wanting; which preventeth infinite mischances, and
draws after it Armor, Provision, Victuals, and whatsoever else is necessary
for life or arms. And sithence the wealth of Princes, even as of private
persons (from whose purses they supply their occasions) has limits and
measure; Let them not think to begin any long war, much less to continue
it, unless they thoroughly provide aforehand: for when this torrent breaks
forth, no man can make an estimate what will be the expense of reparation
therein: which moved a certain Portugal Captain to tell King Sebastian,
providing for his journey into Barbary, that wars should be accompanied with
three streams: The first, of men; The second, of Victual; The third, of
Silver. For whosoever will rightly judge of a Princes estate, must examine
whether his ordinary receipts be sufficient to answer his ordinary issues,
(leaving always a portion to answer extraordinary accidents) which are so
certain in proof, as all men must provide for, though they know them not
beforehand, especially in the condition of a great Prince.

The great Turk in his Persian journies, felt the smart thereof, who though he
be so potent a Prince, by default of this providence, was constrained to raise
the value of his coin, and abase the allay, so far forth that the Ianizars
finding themselves aggrieved thereat, raised commotions, set fire on the City
of Constantinople, and rifled a great part thereof. Neither could the King of
Spain have sustained the burden of so many wars, and in so remote
Provinces, if he had trusted to no other supplies than those of Spain. But
fortune has given him a Country, prodigal in Mines of Gold and Silver,
assuredly paying the expense of one year, with the income of another. A
providence so far from neglect, in the late reign of Queen Elizabeth, that
before she had any wars with Spain, or had sent her forces of prevention
into the Low Countries, she had ready in deposito two millions of Crowns. And
being engaged, by her politic government, she raised such an annual
assistance from the love of her subjects, against the malicious and injurious
attempts of her enemies, that during her reign she levied three million^, five
hundred and nineteen thousand, five hundred and sixty four pounds. John
Jacques Trivulce being demanded, how many things were necessary hereunto,
answered three; Money, Money, Money.

But these grounds especially hold, when the burden of the war lies upon the
purse of the Prince and his people: for sometime it happens, that the soldier
lives upon the enemies Country, as did the Hunnes, Vandals, Goths, Arabians,
and in our days Tamerlane. They entered the Provinces without control, being
unprovided of forces, and made prey and spoil of whatsoever came in their
reaches. The ransacked the Cities, and fed upon the Villages. The like good
luck had the Portugals in the Fast Indies, and the Castilians in the West, but
the one far better than the other; for never any Nation conquered with less
cost so much as the Spaniards have done in new Spain and Peru. But let not any
people think to do so in these days, no not in Asia or Afric, much less
in Europe, where the use of great Ordnance is in perfection, and the art of
fortification so ingenuous, that one Castle shall be able to sustain, yea,
well provided, to weary the forces of the greatest Potentate. The Turks at
Zigeth (a small fortress in Hungary) approved this; which in the year 1566.
Soliman beleagred with three hundred thousand men of war, and at last forced;
but with so great a slaughter of his people, that scant the third part of this
huge Army returned to their houses. In like manner, the Portugals in the
beginning of their Indian acquisitions, with a few soldiers, and in little
time won adm^rable victories; but when the Barbarians began to grow
acquainted with Artillery, to allure Carpenters and Masons to build them
Castles, and to arm vessels to Sea, their courages became calm, and there set
an end to their Plus ultra. The like did the Spanish in the New world, to their
Non sufficit orbis. For after their first good fortunes, they found in Nova
Hispania the Chichimechi, and in Peru the Pilcosony, the Chiriguani, and the
Luchy, people so desperate to stop the furious course of their former
victories, that sithence, in almost one hundred years space they have not
been able to add one foots breadth to their new Empiry.

In the vale of Aranco, Tecapell and the Kingdom of Chile, when the
Inhabitants saw them to be wounded and slain with the shot of their arrows,
and the strokes of their swords, they never afterward vouchsafed them their
former reverence; nor carried the wonted conceit of their immortality: and now
being beaten by experience, they fear not the carie^e of the horse, nor the
terror of the Harquebush.

If the war be at or within our own doors, then is it easy to levy strong
and populous forces, as we read of the Cro^ons, Sibarites, and Gauntois; who
made head against the power of France, with fourscore thousand fighting men.
When the war was made in these populous Countries, and near at hand, every
man made one in the medlie, gallantly armed, and well provided with furniture
and victual to hold out certain days: but when the war continued longer
than expectation, for want of money and food every man retired; one to the
Plough, another to his Shop, the rest to those employments, whereby they
sustained themselves and their families. The Scots for want of wealth never
made famous journey out of the Island, but at home they have led mighty armies
for a short time, either for revenge of wrongs, or to defend their frontiers:
even as did the Romans for certain ages, warring with their neighbors at
their private charges. They took the field, every man provided with victual
for two or three days, and in one battle, and few hours, finished those
wars. But in the journey against the Veij, the war continuing beyond
opinion, the State was enforced to procure provision for the Army.

That Armies may far easier be gathered in the East and Afric, than in
Europe, the reasons are many. Those Regions for the most part are more
plentiful of all necessaries for humane life: the people of the South are
better contented with little than we: their diet is bare and simple, only to
maintain life, and not excess: but the Europeans must eat and drink, not to
sustain nature, but to comfort the stomach, and to expel colds. Wine, which
with us is dearer than bread, is not to be found amongst them: their waters are
better than our drinks. Cookery is not in such request with them as with us,
nor their tables accustomed to such Cates: their banquets are only furnished
with Rice and Mutton. Neither do the people of the East spend a quarter of
that clothing which we do: they go to the war half naked, hiding nothing
but their privities: they stand not in need of that number of workmen which we
do, among whom the greatest part of our life is spent in weaving, and devising
stuffes and fashions to cloth the carcass, and adorn the body, with cloth,
silk, colors, and embroderies. All their expenses are only upon clothing of
Cottonwooll, and that but from the Navell to the Knee.

These are the reasons which I meant to lay, why they may gather forty thousand
men with more case, than we ten; and to these may be added this as the last;
that, upon Ordnance and their furnitures; upon provisions and their cariages;
upon horses, pioners, and a thousand like necessaries, infinite sums are
spent; of which the people of the East are uttterly ignorant, especially those
which have not to deal with the Portugals or Arabians.

They go to War without Armor, without Curaces, Helmets, Lances, or Targets,
which with us cannot be conveyed from place to place without great expense.
Virgil calls this luggage, Injustam fascem, because it seems to be
needless, therein degenerating much from the ancient Roman discipline; wherein
for ten days journie and more, every soldier carried his proper weapons both
offensive and defensive, yea, and sometimes his victuals. What should we speak
of the Armies of the Assyrians and Aethiopians, of Belus, Ninus, Semiramis,
Cambises, Cyrus, Darius, Sesostris, and Sesacus? were they not as huge and
populous, by the report of all histories, as these whereof we entreat? Or in
times less ancient, have not we and our ancestors seen the Arabians,
Tartarians, and Turks, invading Provinces with Armies of three hundred
thousand people and upward? By modern examples, and memory of later accidents,
to give credit to the ancient, I will set down that happened in Angola, a noble
and rich Province of the West Aethiope, adjoining to Congo, reported by the
letters of certain Jesuits and Portugal Captains. In the year 1584. Paulus
Diasius, by the favor of God and valor of his people, upon the second day of
February put to flight the King of Angola, and defeated his Army, consisting
of one million, and two hundred thousand Moors: which may well prove, that
these populous Armies are of little service, and small continuance, rather like
violent storms, than dripping showers; and though with ease they are gathered,
yet without greater provision than any Province is able to afford them, they
are not easily held together. When their provision is spent they begin to
break, and bid adue to the action; and that most commonly not in the midst of
their course, but even in their first removes, for Merchants, Victualiers,
Tailors, Shoomakers, and such like, follow not their wars; and if they
should, then this inconvenience would follow; that for one million of
soldiers, i^ were very necessary to provide a million of Wagons, Packhorses,
Ca^ters, Carpenters, Victuallers, Merchants, etc. and then neither Rivers would
serve them for drink, nor the fields with bread; nor the earth for lodgings:
so must they needs sink under their own weight; which the Eastern Princes
(leading these unaccustomed numbers upon long journeyes) in some fashion
forecasting, did always provide incredible masses of money, victual, and such
like warlike provisions, long before they entered into action; as was well seen
in Xerxes, who to maintain the great Army, as well at Sea as at Land, which he
led for the conquest of Greece, spent seven years in preparation for the
journey.

To return to the King of Barma: Of late years he took the havens of Martela
and Pernasor; and turning his arms sometime toward the North, sometime toward
the West, he vexed the Princes of Caor and Tipura, took the kingdoms of
Aracan and Macin, leading upon this journey three hundred thousand men, and
forty thousand Elephants.

Aracan.
Aracan is a kingdom environed round with mountains and woods, as with a wall
or trench: the chief city which gives the name to the Country, is situated
on a river fifteen leagues from the Sea, and thirty five from Catagan.

Macin is a kingdom abounding in Aloes: Macin.
this wood, which the Arabians call Calambuco, and others Lignum vitae, for the
sweet favor is valued by the people of the East at the weight in silver. In
India and Cambaia they use it at the burial of great Lords, in baths, and
other wantonness. It grows most frequent in the rough mountains of Campa,
Cambaia, and Macin. That which is brought to us is in no esteem with them: the
right is found (say they) in Congo and Angola, and the bordering Country, and
used by them in all their grievous and dangerous maladies; which if it be true,
I marvel that the Portugals will let slip so precious a commodity.

Narsinga.
IN the row of these potent Princes inhabiting between Indus and Ganges
dwells the King of Narsinga. Whatsoever lies between the mountain Guate
and the gulf of Bengala, between the promontories Guadaverne and Comorin, by
the space of two hundred leagues, abounding as prodigally as any other province
in the Indies with all good things, is under his dominion. The waters sometime
falling from the mountains, sometime from the rivers, and received into
trenches, meeres, and lakes, do wonderfully cool, moisten, and enrich this
land, causing the Grain and Cattle to prosper above imagination. It is no
less plentiful of birds, beasts wild and tame, Buffals, Elephants, and Mines
of precious stones and metals. It breeds no races of horse for the war, but
they buy them of the Arabian and Persian Merchants in great numbers: the like
do all the Princes of Decan. Within the bounds of Narsinga dwell five Nations
different in language: he has many strong places on the Indian Ocean. Canera
is at his command, wherein are the haven Towns of Mangolar, Melin^, Berticala,
and Onor: but the Portugals receive the custom of Berticala, and also in times
past of Onor. In Narsinga are two imperial Cities, Narsinga and Bisnagar, by
reason whereof he is termed sometime King of Narsinga, sometime King of
Bisnagar.

It is undoubtedly believed, that this King receives yearly twelve millions
of ducats, of which he lays up but two or three, the residue he expendeth
upon the troops of his soldiers, that is to say, forty thousand Nairs, and
twenty thousand horsemen kept in continual pay. Upon necessity he is able to
levy a far greater number: for besides these allowances, he sets out
certain lands to two hundred Captains, on condition to keep in readiness a
proportion of Horsemen, Footmen, and Elephants. The wages of these Captains
(to some of whom he gives a million of ducats yearly) may be an argument of
his great revenues; for to these projects, this Prince and all the Potentates
of the Fast, keep in their possession all the profits of the lands, woods,
mines, yea, and the waters of pooles and rivers, through their whole Dominions.
No man may wash himself in Ganges, (which runs by Bengala) nor in Ganga,
(which waters the Land of Orissa) before he has paid toll to the King. The
King himself is now enforced to buy this water, causing it to be brought unto
him by long journies, upon a superstitious custom, either to bathe or to purge
himself therein. He is absolute Lord of the bodies and goods of his subjects,
which he shareth to himself and his Captains, leaving the people nothing but
their hands and labor: of lands the King has three parts, and his Captains
the residue. Whereupon sithence all these barbarous Princes maintain not peace
and justice, as arches whereupon to lay the groundwork of their Estates; but
arms, conquest, and the Nurserie of a continual Souldierie; it must needs
follow, that they are able to levy greatertroopes of horse and foot, than
otherwise we were bound to believe. But to induce some measure of credit, let
us compare the abilities of some Christian Princes with theirs. If the King of
France were absolute Lord of all the lands and domaines of his whole dominion,
(as these men are) it is thought that his yearly revenues would amount to
fifteen millions, and yet therein are neither mines of gold nor silver. The
Clergy receives six millions, the Kings demesnes amount to one and an half,
the residue is theirs who have the inheritance and yet here the peasants live
well in comparison of the Villago^ of India, Polonia, and Lituania. Besides
this, the King has eight millions of ordinary revenue, arising of customs and
escheats. How mighty a Prince would he be, if he were Landlord of the demesnes
and rents of the whole Kingdom, and should employ them upon the maintenance of
Soldiers, as does the King of Narsinga? Surely, whereas now the Kings revenues
do hardly suffice for the maintenance of four thousand men at arms, and six
thousand Crosse-bowes; if this allowance were added to the former, he might as
easily maintain an hundred and fifty thousand.

To return to Narsinga: The King to see that his Captains perform their
duties, once a year proclaims a muster, whereat they dare not but be
present. At the muster day, those who have presented their companies defective,
either in number, or furniture, are sure to be cashiered: but those who bring
their companies complete and well armed, he honors and advances. What
forces may be gathered out of so ample a dominion, (armed after their manner,
as aforesaid) you shall gather by that which John Barros writes, of the Army
which King Chrismarao lead against Idalcan in the journey of Raciel. These are
his words verbatim: Under sundry Captains the Army was divided into many
battalions: In the Vantguard marched Camraque with one thousand horse,
seventeene Elephants, and thirty thousand footmen: Tirabicar, with two thousand
horse, twenty Elephants, and fifty thousand footment: Timapanique, with three
thousand horsemen, and fifty six thousand footmen. After them followed
Hadanaique, with five thousand horsemen, fifty Elephants, and one hundred
thousand footmen: Condomara, with six thousand horse, sixty Elephants, one
hundred and twenty thousand footmen: Comora, with two hundred and fifty horse,
forty Elephants, and fourscore thousand footmen: Gendua, with a thousand horse,
ten Elephants, and thirty thousand footmen. In the rereward were two Eunuchs,
with one thousand horse, fifteen Elephants, and forty thousand footmen. Betel
one of the Kings Pages lead two hundred horse, twenty Elephants, and eight
thousand foot. After all these followed the King with his Guard of six thousand
horsemen, three hundred Elephants, and forty thousand footmen. Upon the
flanks of this battle went the Governor of the City of Bengapor with diverse
Captains, under whose colors were four thousand two hundred horse, twenty
five Elephants, and sixty thousand mercenary footmen. Upon the head of the
battle ranged 200000. horsemen in small troops, like our vant^urrers, in f^^^h
sort and order scowring the Country, before, behind, and on all sides, that
no novelty could so suddenly happen, but notice thereof was given at the
Imperial Tent in a moment. Twelve thousand carriers of water, and twenty
thousand light huswives followed this Army. The number of Lackies, Merchants,
Artificers, and Water-bearers, Ox^n, Buffals, and carriage-beasts was infinite.
When the Army was to pass any River knee-deepe, before the foremost were
passed, there was scant sufficient for the latter whereof to drink. Before
this journey the King sacrificed in nine days twenty thousand three hundred
seventy six head of living creatures, as well of birds as beasts, the flesh
whereof in honor of his Idols, was given to the poor. The soldiers were
clothed in garments of Cotton-wooll so close and, hard quilted, that they would
bear out the thrust of a Lance or a Sword. Every Elephant was trimmed in a
covering of Cotton-wooll, with a frame on his back bearing fouremen.

To their tuskes were fastened long and broad swords, to cut in sund^r
whatsoever stood in their way. The footmen were armed with bows, javelins,
swords and bucklers. In the fight when the King perceived Idalcan by the fury
of his great Ordnance to make havocke of his men, and dismay the residue,
leaping into the head of the battle, he is reported to use this
Prince-beseeming encouragement: Believe me my companions, Idalcan shall rather
boast that he has slain, than overcome a King of Narsinga. With which words
and ensample, his soldiers all inflamed, and ashamed of their cowardice, with
a furious charge broke the enemies array, and put Idalcan to flight. Amongst
other spoils they took four thousand Arabian horses, one hundred Elephants,
four hundred great pieces, besides small. The number of Oxen, Buffals, Tents,
and Prisoners, was inestimable. With Idalcan were forty Portugals, with the
then King of Narsinga twenty. In his reign two of his Captains rebel'd;
Virapanai usurped Negapatan, and Veneapa^^ the territory adjoining to Matipura.

Calecute.
THe most noble part of India is that which lies between the Mountain Ga^e,
and the Indian Ocean. It stretches from Cape Comerin, to the River
Cangiericor, three hundred leagues long. In this Province reigns the Kings of
Calecute, though he may not be compared with the Prince above spoken of for
number and power, yet for pleasant and plentiful situation, he may be said
far to surpass him. For the Region is so cut (as it were) into many parcels,
sometimes by c^^ekes of the Sea, sometime by Rivers, and sometime by Lakes,
that Nature (as it should seem) would have it divided into several Provinces,
as Travancar, Colan, Cochin, Crangonar, Calecute, Tavo, and Canonor. A few
years ago, Per^imal King of all Malabar, ruled these Provinces, who after he
became a Mahumetan, and resolved to travel to Meca, there to spend the remnant
of his days, divided the land into many principalities, but with this proviso;
That all sovereign authority should rest in the King of Calecute, with the
title of Samori, which signifies Emperor, or as some write, God on earth.
Although the reputation of this King be much eclipsed by the Portugals, partly
by diversion of traffic from his Countries, and partly by assisting his
rebels and vassals (the Kings of Tavor and Cochin) and though his title of
Samori be little regarded, yet retains he his wonted Majesty in very good
sort amongst the Barbarians. Calecute is five and twenty leagues long: Malabar
in the broadest place exceeds not ten.

The City of Calecute (from whence the Province takes his name) is three miles
long, situated upon the Sea side. It contains but few houses, and those of
little worth, not above ten, fifteen, or twenty nobles rent by the year,
which is the common rent of all the housing of the East Indies, if the Arabians
or Portugals be not dealers therein. The Inhabitants live upon Rice, Palmito,
Cattle, and Fish. Their riches consist in Ginger and Pepper, which draws
yearly a great mass of treasure into the havens of this Kingdom. The
Arabians were Lords of this traffic for many ages, till the Portugals,
setting light by the incredible dangers of a long navigation, arrived there not
above a hundred years since, and bartered their wares for Pepper, and other
commodities. And as the Portugals enriched the Towns of Cochin, so did the
Arabians Calecute, and that Kingdom. For this commodity is of such
consequence, that it not only enricheth the Prince with presents and customs,
but in such sort augmenteth the state of the merchants, that some of them are
comparable to many Dukes in Europe; and Kings in Afric.

In their wars in Malabar they use not the service of horse, not only for that
the climate breeds none, (for those that they have are brought out of Persia
and Arabia) but for that the nature of the Country is not fit for
horsemanship. For as in ^wevia the footmen use no Pikes, and the horsemen no
Lances, for the thickness of the woods, which make^h them unserviceable, so
in Malabar because of the streights, rivers of the Sea, and Marshes, they
seldom use horses, so that all their forces consist in shipping and footmen.
It is strange to see how ready the Soldier of this Country is at his weapons;
they are all Gentlemen, and termed Nai^^s. At seven ye^res of age they are put
to School to learn the use of their weapons, where to make them nimble and
active, their finewes and joints are stretched by skillful fellows, and
anointed with the oil Sesamus; by this annoynting they become so light and
nimble, that they will wind and turn their bodies, as if they had no bones,
casting them forward, backward, high, and low, even to the astonishment of the
beholders. Their continual delight is in their weapon, persuading themselves
that no Nation goes beyond them in skill and dexterity. Every one inureth
himself to that weapon; whereto he finds his body most agreeable. Their
ancient weapons were the Javelin, the Bow, and the Sword; but after the coming
of the Portugals they learned so exactly the mixture of metals, the casting of
great Ordnance, and the practice thereof, that (some say) their artillery and
powder surpasses ours. They go to war all naked save their privities,
neither use they head-peeces, which is the reason that in fights and skirmishes
they show exceeding agility, charging and retiring more like Falcons than
Soldiers. When a man would take them to be far off, he shall see them
hovering round about him in a trice, so that it is as dangerous to follow them
flying, as to deal with them fighting. They are swift as Leopards, and their
flight as much to be feared as their charge. If they come to hand-strokes
(which they will not do but upon necessity or advantage) they use altogether
to strike with the point. They bind Copper or Silver shingels to the hilts of
their swords, the sound whereof instead of Drums and Trumpets, incourageth them
to the encounter. They will lie so close under their bucklers, that you shall
not see any part of their bodies lie open to the danger. There are one kind of
Naires (called Amochi) which curse themselves, their kindred and posterity with
most bitter execrations, if they leave injuries done to their society
unrevenged. If their King happen to be slain, so much the more furious run,
they through fire, water, and assured destruction to revenge his death. And
therefore the Kings of India suppose their estates weak or strong, as they
perceive the numbers of those Amochi to be few or many. By the Law of the
Country they may not marry, but they are all allowed women in common. They
maintain those women according to their birth and degrees. They must be all
Gentlewomen, for the Nairs may not take any Countrywoman; yea, so great is
their disdain and pride, that without illusage they will not endure any of the
common people to come near them. In their journeyes they send their servants
before to the Innes and Villages, to declare their Masters approach; then must
all travelers depart and give room. If it be ^hought in Turkey, that by
licentious liberty in time of peace the Ianizars become more hardy and
courageous in war: what may we deem of these Nairs, who will not endure a man
of mean calling to look them in the face? They inhabit no Towns, but dwell in
houses made of earth, environed with hedges and woods, and their ways as
intricate as into a labyrinth. Of what force this Kingdom is, may be gathered
by the army of 60000. soldiers, and 200. vessels of war, which he levied
1503. against Edward Pachecho the King of Portugals Captain, taking part that
time with the King of Cochin: this war lasted almost five months. In the year
1529. with an army of 100000. he beleagred the fortress which the Portugals
built in Calecute, under the keeping of John Lima. In this siege he spent a
whole Winter, wherein although the Portugals behaved themselves valiantly, yet
weighing the Kings forces, and their own possibilities, they thought it best
to destroy it with their own hands. In the year 1601. he besieged Caile with
90000. men, and took it by composition. He has more than once given an
instance of his power at Sea. He is Lord of many havens, whereunto great
numbers of shipping do resort, and in that regard cannot choose but be well
furnished with a great Navy. But in goodness of shipping, and martial
discipline, we must needs confess the Sea-forces of all the Indian Princes, to
be far inferior to those of the Portugals, whose dominion (both at Sea and
Land) nothing has so much augmented as their defensive warfare. To speak
truth, it seldom falls out but the naked man fears the sword, and the
armed man is more encouraged thereby, bearing himself bolder upon his skill,
than his strength, and prevails more by temporizing, than by rash fighting;
whereas the Barbarians putting more confidence in their numbers, than their
goodness, have always wanted that virtue which should make armies dreadful
and fortunate, which is good order and Discipline.

Iapan.
Iapan may well be called a politic body, compacted of many and sundry Islands
of diverse different forms and circuits, which as they are divided from the
rest of the continent, so are they inhabited by a people much differing in
manners and customs from the residue of the Orient. They stand round and close
together like the Maldivae in the Indian Sea, and the Hebrides and Orcades in
the North Ocean. They are in number sixty six, divided into three partialities:
The first contains nine; the second four; the third fifty three. Amongst
these, five are renowned, but especially one for the famous City of Macao. And
it is most commonly seen, that they who have the soveraigntie of those five,
are Lords of all the rest. It is distant from New Spain an hundred and fifty
leagues; from China sixty. The soil is to be accounted rather barren than
fertile. The inhabitants are of a very ready wit, and mavelous patient in
adversity. Their newborn children they immediately wash in the rivers, and as
soon as they are weaned, they take them from their mothers, and bring them up
in labors of hunting, and such like exercises. They go bare-headed men very
ambitious and desirous of honor. Poverty is no disgrace to the Gentry of
their blood. They will not suffer the least wrong to pass unrevenged: they
salute one another with many courtesies: they are very stayed, and of a settled
resolution. They are very jealous to show themselves fearful or base-minded
in word or deed: they will make no man privy of their losses or misfortunes;
they have the like beasts both tame and wild as we have, but they will
scarcely eat any thing save Herbs, Fish, Barley, or Rice; and if they do, it
is the flesh of wild beasts taken by hunting. Of these grains they make their
Wines, and water mixed with a certain precious powder, which they use, they
account a dainty beverage: they call it Chia. Their buildings for the most
part are of timber, partly because the upland places are destitute of quarries,
but abounding with Cedars of admirable height and thickness fit for building,
and partly because the Country is subject to Earthquakes. In times past all
Iapan obeyed one Prince, showing him great obedience and subjection, and this
government endured with no less state and majesty, at the least sixteen
hundred years, until about seventie years since, by the rebellion of two of
his chiefest Lieutenants, the whole Kingdom was distracted, each of them
holding by arms whatsoever he achieved by usurpation. By their example others
becoming as ambitious, seized on the rest of the kingdom, some on one part,
some on another, leaving nothing but the bare name of Dairi, which signifies
the Lord of all Iapan, with the title of Iucata, (viz.) King, to their
rightful Sovereign. Yea, those Princes which were Lords of the Territories
about Meaco, would hardly allow him whereof to find him victual and apparel,
so that now he resembles the shadow rather than the King of the ancient and
magnificent Monarchy of Iapan. Since those times whosoever lays fast hold on
the dominion of the Coquinat, (these are the five Kingdoms bordering Me^co) in
stead of Dairi, calls himself Emperor and King of Iapan, and Lord of Tenza.
Nahunanga was one of them in our days, and after him Fassiba in power and
majesty excelling all his predecessors. Nabunanga was Lord of six and thirty
Provinces, Fassiba at the least of fifty.

The form of government is nothing like the policy of Europe. The strength of
the Prince consists not in ordinary revenues and love of the people, but in
rigor and the Princes pleasure. As soon as the Prince has conquered one or
more Kingdoms, he shareth them wholly amongst his friends and followers, who
bind themselves by oath faithfully to serve him with a limited company of men
as well in peace as war. They again to make their followers trust^e and
ready for all services, reserving some small matter for the sustentation of
themselves and families, divide to every man a portion of the former division;
so that all the wealth of Iapan private and public is in the hands of a few
men, and those few depending on the pleasure of one, that is, the Lord of
Tenza. He, as him lists, gives, takes, disgraceth, honors, and
impoverisheth. When he casheereth any Governor of his Province, all the
Leaders and Soldiers of the said Province are changed, and none left there but
Artificers and Husbandmen. This government draws with it continual dislike
and innovations: for Dairi (though he has neither power nor government) yet
being in favor and estimation of the people, cease not to insinuate into
their heads, that this Lord of Tenza and the other Tyrants are usurpers of
other men's right, destroyers of the Monarchy, and enemies to the state and
liberties of Iapan. Which persuasions take so deep root in the hearts of the
people, and so extenuate the reputation of these Usurpers, that under color of
suppression of other, they often take Arms upon hope to raise their own
greatness: so that by this daily change of Governors, the people, not knowing
who are their right and natural Lords, know not whom to love and obey: And
again, their Lords being as uncertain of their continuance, care not for the
people, nor for the welfare of their own vassals, no more than if they were
mere strangers: but always aspiring by the same facility whereby they gained
one, to conquer a better, after the manner of Gamesters, continually hazard
one, upon hope of winning another; in this sort sometime one alone, sometime
many together, vexing the Islands with perpetual warfare. Fassiba to assure
his estate, and disable the greatest ones from enterprising against him, does
often transport them from one Province to another, causing them to forgo their
ancient inheritances, and to lead their lives amongst unknown neighbors:
neither in those places will he suffer them to enjoy livings united, but far
divided in pieces and parcels. For all this, they are never at peace among
themselves, by reason that the frontiers of their petty jurisdictions
neighbor so near one upon another. In these alterations Fassiba constrained
as well the losers as the winners to do him homage and obeisance, and once a
year to pay him a rich tribute, drawing to his own Coffers the greatest part
of the wealth of Iapan by these Tyrannies. He keeps his own people busied in
building of admirable Palaces, sumptuous Temples, Towns and Fortresses, the
like whereof are no where to be seen: In these works he has more than an
hundred thousand workmen, laboring in their several occupations at their own
charges. Amongst the rest, he is now in building a Temple, for whose iron
works, all the stuff in Iapan will hardly suffice, and therefore he has
given commandment to all his people and Merchants to bring all iron and Armor
into one place.

Besides the oath of fealty whereby the residue of the Kings and Princes are
bound to aid and assist him in peace and war, he receives yearly two
millions arising of the profits of Rice, reserved upon his own possessions. He
was determined after the finishing of the fabrikes, to attempt a journey into
China, and for that enterprise caused timber sufficient for the building of two
thousand vessels for transportation to be felled. By these magnificent
fabrikes, this haughty resolution, this large dominion, and conquest for foreign
Kingdoms, he hops to attain the reputation of immortality among his
subjects, as diverse of his predecessors have done before him. For Anida, Xaca,
Canis, and To^oque, were no other than Lords of Iapan, which either for their
glory in war, or invention of some good arts in peace, were accounted as Gods
amongst the Iaponians, as in the old world Hercules and Bacchus were amongst
the Grecians, and Saturn and Ianus amongst the Italians. Of these demigods
they report as many strange and fabulous inventions, as the Grecians and
Italians did of theirs. But Fassib^ understanding by the preaching of the
Jesuits, that there can be no God but one, who created the heaven and earth of
nothing, and all other deities to be foolish and detestable, determined to
banish them all, and to weed up that good Vine which began to take deep root
in those Provinces. Surely this may stand for a memorable example of the pride
and blindness of man's heart.

The Roman Emperors opposed their forces against the Christian Religion, only
to maintain and uphold the worship of their Idols, condemned for vain and
devilish by the Law of Christianity: but this man raises persecution against
Religion, to arrogate to himself the Name of God, an imagination (as I said
before) full of extreme ambition and madness. But in the midst of these
proud and unreasonable cogitations, God raised up against him a new enemy from
the Eastern parts of Iapan, who as we understand, is likely to give him his
hand and head full of business.

THE SIXTH BOOK.
Of America, commonly called West India.
THis spacious part of the World utterly unknown to the Ancients, and extended
upon the vast and raging Atlantique Ocean, lay undiscovered until the year of
our Lord 1492. In which year it was found out by Christopher Columbus, a man
of an excellent judgment and haughty spirit, under the protection and good
fortunes of Ferdinand King of Spain. Him seconded Americus Vesputius, and
other famous Gentlemen, who to their everlasting memories, with infinite labor
and danger, surveied that huge tract with the Island adjoining, even unto the
furthest parts of the West and South. That portion they called the New world,
as well for the incredible spaciousness thereof, being larger than the two old
divisions of Afric and Europe; as for the infinite number of Islands,
diversity of manners, fashions of Inhabitants, variety of Languages, Nations,
and Customs, with the disproportions of living Creatures, Trees, and Plants,
not to be found or seen in these parts, which they there found.

It is bounded upon the East with the Atlanticke or North Sea: upon the South
with the Magellan Streights: upon the West with Mare pacificum, or Mar del Zur:
and on the North with Terra incognita. And as some Writers affirm, the whole
Circum Navigation amounts to thirty thousand miles.

This Continent, according to its diversity of situation, is diversely provided:
In some places it is admirable fruitful, in other places very barren and
needy. Some part thereof lies upon huge plains, some places are very hilly
and mountainous. It is watered with many famous Rivers, whose sands in many
places yield Gold, with many famous Lakes and Springs. It brings forth grain
and pulse sufficient, especially Maiz, the chiefest bread and provision through
the whole Indies. Wine they have none, and where they want this M^^z, they make
their bread of a kind of Root, good and wholesome, if the juice be thoroughly
squeezed out, otherwise not. It yields Sugar, Cotton, Wool, and Flax, as
with us; with a thousand sorts of Trees, Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, some
whereof we know, and other some not.

Horses they have none, neither conceive their use, and at the first sight of
horsemen the Inhabitants stood amazed. In it are found the Spices, Gems, and
precious Stones, with those huge masses of Gold, Silver, and other Minerals,
which we see daily transported into Europe. The Inhabitants are of a swarty
complexion, fairer or fouler, according to their different situations. Not very
well favored, but of savage and brutish behaviors, excellent footmen and
swimmers, clearly in their bodies, naked, libidinous, and meneaters. Some
worship the Devil, some Idols, some the Sun, and some the Stars. Their arms
are the Bow and Arrow, which in stead of Iron they head with the teeth of
Fishes. and the bones of Beasts. Gold, Silver, and Stone they little regard,
their chiefest delight is in Feathers and Plumes. Insomuch, that if these
Countries had been traveled into with unarmed search and peregrination; for
what occasion of war could justly be applied unto those who neither held
wealth in estimation, neither coveted Honor with ambitious emulation? No doubt
but all Authors in discoursing of these Nations, could have informed you of
nothing but Gold-yeelding-Rivers, miraculous temperature of Atre, strange
shapes, in Beasts and Birds; The Sea abounding with Pearl, and Land with Gems;
And above all, Man here living and conversing in his rude and anticke
simplicity, under the shield of genuine innocence, with irksome hatred of our
vile custom and wrangling conditions. But alas! Avarice under the mark of
Religion, and Vain glory had no sooner set foot in these terrestrial places
(as I may say) of Paradise, but depravation turned all things topsi-turvie.
Since when, happiness has taken its flight into some either Climate; and as
now nothing is thereof recorded, save undermining of Mountains, disembowelling
the Earth, exiling the Natives, unpeopling of Villages, and that by tyranny and
slavery. For in one or two petty battles, whole Empires have been subdued by
an handful of men; and a Kingdom conquered, in a manner, before it has been
entered. And no wonder, for this simple and naked people had never seen Horse,
nor ever heard the report of the Harquebush. Without the which, peradventure
the Spanish Nation had not galloped in so short a time to such miraculous
victories: no though every petty Commander, employed in that action, in these
days stand comparatively paraleld with the worthy Scipio, and the Great
Alexander.

To whom in truth the ancient exprobration of the Brittons against the Romans,
mentioned in Tacitus, cannot more feelingly be applied than unto these Indian
Spaniards. They are the Robbers and Ravishers of the World. After the spoil of
all Nations, through defect of strange Lands and new Conquests, they scowre the
wide Ocean. The riches of the enemy breeds covetousness in them; the poverty,
ambition: which neither the East nor West can terminate or contain. They only
alone covet the wealth and penury of all Nations with equal greediness and
affectation. On Robbery, Murder, and Villainy, they colourably impose the
glorious title of Empery. Solitude and desolation they term Peace and
Tranquillity.

So that had not Charles the Emperor cast strict reins upon these licentious
and injurious proceedings, Spain had swarmed with slaves, and India had quite
been bereaved of almost all her Natives. Of four hundred thousand
Inhabitants, living in New Spain at the arrival of these Spaniards, the
Country at this day can scant show you eight thousand. About the like number
you shall find in the Fonduras, remaining of four hundred and ten thousand;
when the Spaniards therein set first footing. If you read their own Histories
you shall meet with no better accounts concerning the present Inhabitation of
Hispaniola, Guatimala, Nicuragua, and the Islands adjacent. The greatest number
whereof were either slain, led captives, or consumed in the Mines. Doubtless
in divulging of the aforesaid Proclamation, the good Emperor could not choose
but remember that God (whose judgments are profound) did once by the cruelties
of the Goths, the Huns, and Saracens, waste Italy, persecute France, and
consume Spain; and the consumers were again consumed in fullness of time. So
may it fall out with those, who following the steps of their Predecessors, take
a glory to amaze the Sea with Ships, and the Land with Armies. Time may come,
that Pride shall burn and be consumed with war; and he that builds his
house wrongfully upon the ruin of another, shall himself become a booty to
Aliens and Strangers. The lineage of the Moors is not quite extinguished. The
race of the Indians is not utterly extirpated. That progeny as yet surviveth in
Italy, which in times past and in one day, at one watchword, slew all the loose
French Usurpers of other men's fortunes. And albeit that the fatal cowardice of
these Nations dare not presume to arm themselves against their Oppressors yet
there reigns a just God in Heaven, who can raise footmen and horsemen from
the utmost bounds of the North to assuage and correct the intemperate insolency
of bloodthirsty Tyrants.

New Spain, or Mexico.
NEw Spain is a very large Province, better manured, pleasanter, and more
populous than any part of this New world. It was possessed by the Spaniard, in
the year 1518. under the leading of Ferdinando Cortez, to the great slaughter
of the Inhabitants, and of his own people. In reward of whose service, Charles
the fifth bestowed on him the Country of Tecoantepec. Although it lie under
the Torrid Zone, yet it is temperate, mountainous, and full of woods. It
abounds with all good things necessary for life, and profitable either for
thrift or pleasure, as fish, flesh, gold and stones. Of all part of the Indies
none is like unto it for habitation. For therein the Spaniards have erected
many Colonies, as Compostella, Colima, Purificatio, Guada^lara, Mechoochan, etc.

Whereof the best and fairest is Mexico through the whole Indies. It should
seem the Shire took its name from the City. In ancient time it was built in
the midst of the Lake, like Venice, but Cortez removed it to the bank
thereof. It is at this day a City excellent well built, containing six miles in
compass, one part whereof the Spaniards inhabit, the residue is left to the
Natives. In this City the Viceroy and Archbishop keep their Seats, having
the privileges of supreme Justice, Printing and Coining. The Lake whereon the
City is built, is salt, and ebbeth and flows, as the Ocean. At ebb it
sends its waters into another Lake adjoining, but fresh; it yields no fish,
but worms, which in Summer putrify and corrupt the air; and yet of the
waters thereof they boil great store of salt. The circuit of both these Lakes
is about fifty leagues, and about the banks, and in the Islands, do lie
above fifty Towns, every one consisting of ten thousand households. Upon these
waters do ferry fifty thousand Boats, which they term Canoas, to serve the
use of the City.

This Country was an Indian Empire, full of order and State; as having seen a
succession of ten Kings, and enjoying a Soveraigntie over the neighbor
Provinces. But all this was about an hundred years since utterly overthrown
by Ferdinando Cortez, who with nine hundred Spaniards, assisted with an hundred
thousand Indians of Tlascalan (neighbors and enemies to the Mexicans) with the
help also of eighty Spanish horse, the terror of seventeene field-peeces,
and a fleet of twelve or thirteen Pinnaces, and six thousand Indian Canoas, to
trouble the Town on the Lake side; performed this great, but easy work; made
an absolute Conquest of the Empire of Mexico; and imposed the name of New
Spain upon it. The City has at this day six thousand houses of Spaniards,
and sixty thousand of the native Indians. The gold and silver of these parts
is neither so much, nor so good as that of Peru; but Merchandise, Mechanics
and Husbandry, infinitely more flourish. Some one private man the Spaniards
report to be master of thirty, yea forty or fifty thousand head of Cattle.
The profits arising from hence to the King of Spain, will not the Spanish
Writers suffer to be entirely known: This they brag of; that the yearly
fishing of the Lake of Mexico, is worth twenty thousand crowns: and that
Mexico City glories in four fair things; Women, Clothes, Streets and Horses.

Guatimala.
IT is both the name of a Town, as also of the Province. The Old-towne, so
called, was destroyed by the fall of an Hill, thereunto adjoining, and an
hundred and twenty Spaniards miraculously overwhelmed with the ruin thereof.
About three miles from thence is the New-towne situated, containing eighty or
ninety fair stone houses therein, all covered with tile. It is much subject
to Earthquakes, but otherwise of a good temperate air, fruitful of corn,
and plentiful of trees brought out of Spain, which do not well prosper
therein.

Fonduras.
IT is a great Country, and was exceeding well inhabited before the arrival
of the Spaniards. And howbeit they boast of the erection of five Towns
therein, yet all of them consist not of above an hundred and twenty, or an
hundred and thirty houses, and those for the most part built of reeds and
straw; yea, and but poorly inhabited, because the gold, which is their sole
desire, begins to fail.

Nicaragua.
NIcaragua stretches toward the South Sea, lying South-east from Mexico, and
is not very great, but rich, fruitful and pleasant, insomuch as the Spaniards
call it Mahomets Paradise; but so extreme hot, that it is not to be traveled
by day, but by night. It should seem that their Winter begins in May, for
from thence it raineth six whole months; the other six are very fair and
dry, and day and night being of equal length. Honey, Wax, Cotton-wooll, and
Balsam grow there in great abundance, with many other kinds of fruits, which
are neither found in other Provinces, nor yet in Hispaniola. There are some few
Kine, but many Hogs, and those brought from Spain. Parrots are there as common
as Crows in England. The Country is well replenished with Indian Villages,
their small houses consisting of reeds and straw. The gold that they have is
brought from other places, and so is all other metal. In manners they resemble
the Mexicans, and so in apparel, and language, save that the Mexican is the
better; with the use whereof a man may travel fifteen hundred miles, and is
easily to be learned. One Lake it has three hundred miles about, which has no
vent into the Ocean: The chief Cities are Nueva, Granado, and Leo, the Seat of
a Bishop.

Cuba.
CVba or Fernandina is a great Island, and by reason it has on the East Side
Saint Domingo, on the West Iucatan, on the North Florida, and on the South
Iamaica, it is very much frequented by Merchants. It is more long than broad,
and contains in length, from East to West three hundred miles, and from North
to South threescore and ten. In breadth it is not above nineteen miles, in
some places but fifteen. The ground is high, rough, and full of Hills, the
Rivers small, yet rich of Gold and Copper. The air is temperate, but of the
coldest. The soil affords great store of Mather; it is full of Woods, and
fresh-fish by reason of the fair Rivers therein. It boasts of six Towns
inhabited by Spaniards; whereof that of Saint James is a Bishops See; and
Havana the chief Staple, where yearly all the ships make their Rendevouz. The
people resemble those of Hispaniola, but differ in speech, and go all naked;
being now almost rooted out, and supplanted by the Spaniards. Here though the
Gold be course, yet the Brass is most pure. It bears plenty of Sugar,
Ginger, Cassia, Aloes, Cinnamon. The common people may not eat Serpents, it
being meat for their masters.

Iamaica, or the I Will of Saint Iago.
IAmaica lies seventeene degrees on this side the Equinoctial, and has on
the East S. Domingo, on the West the Cape of Iucatan, on the North Cuba, and on
the South Lacerena. The breadth surpasses the length, being from East to West
about fifty miles, and from North to South twenty. In it the greater part of
the Inhabitants by far are Spaniards, sixty thousand Natives being by them
destroyed, like their neighbors of Lucaya. It is very fruitful both toward
the Sea, as also to the Inland: and was in times past very populous, and such
as were more witty and subtle both in war and other professions, than were
their neighbors. It yields also Gold, and very fine Cotton-wooll: And at
this present it is full of such beastials as the Spaniards have brought thither
out of Spain. The women here killed their own children, rather than suffer
them to serve the Spaniards.

Hispaniola.
HIspaniola, which the Natives call Haitie, for greatness is the second Island
in those parts. On the Eastside lies Saint John's, on the West Cuba and
Iamaica, on the North the Islands of the Canibals, and on the South the firm
land. The Compass thereof is four hundred French miles, being broader than it
is long. For in length it is from East to West an hundred and fifty miles, and
from North to South forty miles. It is stored with Azure, Basill-wood,
Cotton-wooll, Amber, Gold, Silver, and abundance of Sugar. It is so fruitful,
that within sixteen days, Radishes, Lettuce, and Cole-wort will ripen, and be
ready to be eaten; and within six and thirty, Melons, Cucumbers and Gourds
will be as forward. It has many Towns, whereof that of Saint Domingo is the
principal, as containing above five hundred houses, and those inhabited by
Spaniards, and built after the Spanish fashion. Next their Gold, their greatest
trading is Sugar and Hides: For all sorts of Cattle brought thither out of
Spain, have so prospered therein, that some are owners of six or eight
thousand beasts. Here are the Spaniards said to have wasted three millions of
Indians. The Gold is better here than in Cuba; The Sugar yields twenty or
thirty fold, and Corn an hundred fold. Four goodly Rivers it has, and five
or six handsome Towns of Spaniards.

Boriquen.
BOriquen, or the Island of Saint John, on the East has the Island of Saint
Cruz, on the West other small Islands, Northward Saint Domingo, and on the
South the Cape of Paria. From East to West it is fifty miles long, and
eighteen broad. In form it is almost square, and is populous, well housed,
having many good Havens, and replenished with Woods. The Inhabitants are
valiant, and have War continually against the Canibals. Upon the Northside it
is rich in gold, but toward the South fruitful of bread, grass, fruit and
fish. The two chief Towns are Saint John's, and Puerte Rico.

Should I run over all the Coast of Paria, and there tending Brasilia, never
give over until I had showed you the straight of Magellan, with the
description and relation of the people, and Pentagones inhabiting all those
tracts, I could show you nothing but heathenisme, barbarism, and men of
strange and uncouth behaviors.

No better can be related of Quivira, Florida, Norumbega, Terra Labratoris,
Estotilant, etc. Provinces in themselves good, fertile, and all situated
toward the North.

Virginia.
THe Natives call it Aphalchen: It lies between Florida and Norumbega; the
West part is yet undiscovered, but the East is bounded with the Mar del Noort.
Discovered it was Anno 1584. at the directions of Sir Walter Raleigh, and named
Virginia, by our Virgin Queen Elizabeth.

The soil is said to be mavelous good for Corn and Cattle, wonderful
hopeful for Mines of Copper and Iron: plentiful in materials for shipping, as
Timber, Pitch and Tar; here be Cedars and Vines also, Oil, sweet Gummes and
Simples for Dyars, with many other most useful Commodities. The more to blame
they that bring us nothing from thence but Tobacco; which now begins to be so
base and low prized, that it is scarcely worth the costs and labor. The
Northern parts of Virginia be called New England; better discovered and
inhabited. Both Plantations have several Towns and Forts of the English upon
them.

Nova Francia.
THis lies parted from Virginia by Norumbega; and had the name from the French
Discoverer, Jacques Cartier, some hundred years since. Though the soil be none
of the fruitfullest, and the people none of the civillest, yet have the
Frenchmen here gone forward with their plantation; especially about Canada,
the chief Town of it: a place much spoken of within these two years, for
those two rich prizes of Furs and Bevers (with which it seems the Country
abounds, though of a courser wool than the Russian) lately fetched from
thence by Captain Kirk our Countriman.

THE SEVENTH BOOK.
America Magellanica, Or Peruana.
MAgellanica is the sixth part of the World, which as it is least known, so
without doubt it contains many large Provinces, and those five in number,
viz, Castella del Oro, Popaiana, Brasilia, Chile and Peru: Whereof Peru is so
famous, that sometime under that name, all that huge tract is contained, and
named Peruana. The Islands thereof are Iava major, and Iava minor, Timore, the
Moluccae, Los Romoros, and the Islands of Solomon. It is separated from New
Spain by a narrow piece of ground, not above seventeene miles in breadth,
called the Straight of Darien. It contains threescore and four degrees, and
extends on the South Side the Line to fifty two, and on the North-side to
twelve; That, which by the Spaniards at this day is bounded between Villa de
la Plata, and the Province Quito, (in length from North to South, seven hundred
miles, and in breadth from East to West, about one hundred) is properly Peru; A
fruitful, sound, populous and well inhabited Country; wherein, as well for
those beatitudes, as for the riches thereof (being infinite) the Viceroy of
that Division keeps his residence.

It divides it self into three parts; The Plains, the Sierras (mountains,)
and the Andes.

The Plains lie upon the Seacoast, and are outstretched in length by the
space of one thousand and five hundred miles, in breadth they are not above
threescore, and where they are narrowest thirty. These Plains are gravelly,
full of deserts, and for the most part barren, especially where freshets and
lakes are wanting, being never releeved with rain nor showers. Those grounds
that lie nigh the banks of the Rivers, are very fruitful, by reason of the
descent of water all the Winter, distilling from the mountains and rocks,
which are not past seven or ten miles asunder: the residue further off, the
husbandmen do enforce with great industry by letting in sluices, and digging of
channels to their plentiful harvest of Cotton-wooll and Corn. The Inhabitants
of this tract are a base people, cowardly and poor sleeping and living under
trees and reeds, and feeding upon fish and raw flesh. The Mountain Country is
extended from North to South about one thousand miles, being distant not above
twenty leagues from the Sea, and in some places less. They are very cold, and
subject to continual snow, wanting wood, and encumbered with Lions, Wolves,
black Bears, Goats, and a certain beast like a Camel, of whose wool they
work them garments, and other utensils. These Mountains are full of
inhabitants, fertile and batefull, especially where the air is indurable, and
the Inhabitants more witty, courageous, and civiller than the residue.

The Andes are likewise mountains: but lying in one continual ridge without
valleys, extending from North to South. Between which and the former, lies
Callao, a Province full of Mountains also, subject to cold, yet very populous.
Thus much of the nature (in general) of these half known places, of the soil
and people: of their forces little can be spoken, by reason of their subjection
to the Spaniard, and enforced ignorance in matters of arms and policy.

It is rich in gold and silver, more than any Country in all the World, as may
appear by the yearly quantities thereof brought from thence. Yet say the
Inhabitants, that in respect of the remainder, it is no more than if a man
should take a few grains out of a sack full of Corn. Which surely may carry
some presumption of truth, considering what Authors write of Atabalipa his
ransom, offered and performed in those days, when Avarice was not in half so
much request as now it is.

It wants no good thing that God has created for the use of man, either for
pleasure or necessity. Only in this it is dispraisable, that (for the greater
part) it brings forth Inhabitants of savage, irreligious, and inhumane
behavior, delighting in devouring of man's flesh, with other unclean and
undressed viands.

Summer and Winter begins with them as with us, upon the Hills; but in the
plain land it is clean contrary. For when it is Summer in the Hills, it is
Winter in the plains: So that there the Summer begins in October, and
continues till April. Which for the exceeding strangeness, I have the rather
noted, to see a man upon one day in the morning (in one and the same Country)
traveling from the Hills to be well wet with rain, and before night to arrive
in a pleasant and sun-shining-Country, where from the beginning of October
(that is all their Summer long) it seldom or never raineth so much as to lay
the dust in the high ways. But then it is sultry hot in the Plains, and when
any small due falls, then is it fair weather on the Hills.

Yea, when the South-west winds blow in the plain Country, which in other
places are commonly moist, and causes of rain, there they are of clean
contrary effects.

Castella Aurea.
OR golden Castile, is that part of the firm ^an^ (so called by the Spaniards)
which stretches from the City Theonima and Panama, even to the bay of Vrava
and Saint Michael, and takes up all that straight wherewith these two spacious
parts of the New world, are linked as it were with a defensible chain. It is
badly inhabited, and less manured for the contagiousnesse of the air and
standing waters. Yet are there therein two famous Cities; Theonima or Nombre de
dios situated on the North Sea, and Panama on the Peruvian or Pacificke sea.
And whatsoever Merchandise is brought by the Peruvian Sea toward Spain, is
unloden in the City of Panama, and thence transported by land to Nombre de
dios, where it is finally again shipped for Spain. The like course is
observed from Spain to those places.

Of their forces little can be spoken by reason of their subjection to the
Spaniard, and ignorance in matter of arms and policy. But as for their private
commodities, as Gold, Silver, and Stones, who knows not, but that they are
the chiefest traffic of all these Provinces. The name it has from the
abundance of Gold and Silver, and is divided into four Provinces; first,
Castella del Oro it self: secondly, Nova Andaluzia: thirdly, Nova Granata: and
fourthly, Carthagena, taken by Sir Francis Drake, and this year skated by the
Hollander.

Chile.
Upon the South of Peru toward the Pacificke Sea lies Chile, whose name has
been derived (some say) from incredible cold raging therein. Yet feels it
rain, lightnings, and the alteration of seasons, as we do in Europe. It
partly lies upon the Seacoast, and is partly mountainous, but somewhat warm
toward the Seaside. It bears all sorts of fruit brought out of Spain, and
transporteth many Cattle, and store of Ostriches. The Rivers run their
course in the day time, but in the night by reason of their congelation, if
they move, it is very slowly and weak.

The Inhabitants are tall, well set, and warlike: and their arms are the bow
and arrow: their garments the skins of wild beasts and Sea-wolves. It is
divided into two Provinces; first, Chica; and secondly, Paragones; whose people
are eleven foot high. Here, besides Gold, is Honey and Wine good store, and
other Fruits of Spain; five or six towns of Spaniards it also boasts of.

Guiana.
GViana is situated beyond the Mountains of Peru, and between the two mighty
Rivers, Amazone and Orenoquae, directly under the Aequinoctiall. The Air is
delicate, and the soil fruitful; but (by reason of the Raines and Rivers) so
subject to inundations, that the people are ^aine to dwell in Arbors made like
Birds-nests in the tops of Trees. It is so firmly believed to be rich in gold
Mines, that not only Sir Walter Raleigh went thither once or twice, but there
is a new Colony and plantation of English this last year sent to live there,
at the charges of many wise and valiant Gentlemen of our Nation. The Planters
sustain themselves by what God and Nature affords them for their labor upon
the place. Though Gold be the chief of their errand, yet they purpose to
fortify and secure the place against the Spaniards, before they will discover
or open any Mine. Our Nation has hitherto lived quietly, and beloved of the
Caribes (which be the ancient native people) the way to win and keep in with
whom, being to make much of their little children. This Plantation, if it
pleases God to prosper, we may in time hear more of the commendations of
Guiana.

Brasile.
BRasile lies between the two mighty Rivers of Maragnon upon the North, and
Rio de la plata upon the South. It was discovered by Americus Vespuccius in the
days of King Emanuel. The Country in a manner is all pleasant, fair
weathered, and exceeding healthful, by reason that the gentle winds from Sea
do clear and evaporate all the morning dewes and clouds, making the air
fresh and clear. It is well watered, and divided into Plains and easy
Mountains, fertile, always flourishing, full of Sugarcanes, and all other
blessings of Nature. For hither the Portugals have brought all sorts of Europe
Plants with good success, and have therein erected many Ingenors to try their
Sugars. Hence comes our Brasile-wood, the trees whereof are by the Natives
hollowed as they stand, to make houses and dwelling places.

Terra Australis.
THis Land was lately found out, and by our latest Cosmographers, for the great
and spacious circuit thereof, as comprehending many large Regions (viz.)
Psitacorum regio, Terra del feu go, Beac, Lucach, and Maletur, described for
the sixth part of the world. But what people inhabit them, what fashions they
use, or what profitable commodity fit for the life of man they afford, it has
not yet been by any man discovered.

Borealis Orbis pars.
THis division is situated near unto the North Pole, the least of the residue,
almost all unknown, consisting of Islands, and those situated about the Pole.
For Authors affirm, that under the very Pole lies a black and high Rock and
three and thirty leagues in compass, and there these Islands. Among which the
Ocean disgorging it self by 19. Channels, makes four whirle-pooles or
currents, by which the waters are finally ca^ried toward the North, and there
swallowed into the bowels of earth. That Euripus or whirl-poole, which the
Scythicke Ocean makes, has five inlets; and by reason of his streit passage
and violent course is never frozen. The other Euripus on the backside of
Groneland has three inlets, and remains frozen three months yearly; its
length is thirty seven leagues. Between these two raging Euripi lies an Island
(about Lappia and Biarmia) the habitation (they say) of the Pigmies. A certain
Scholar of Oxford reports, that th^se four Euripi are ingulphed with such
furious violence into some inward receptacle, that no ship is able with never
so strong or opposite a gale to stem the current. And that at no time there
blows so much wind as will move a windmill. This is likewise the report of
Giraldus Cambrensis in his marvels of Ireland. But Blundevile our Countryman is
of a contrary opinion, neither believing that either Pliny, or any other Roman
came ever thither to describe this promontory: or that the Friar of Oxford,
without the assistance of some cold Devil out of the middle region of the
Air, could approach so near as to measure those cold parts with this
Astrolabe. So that (as we said in the beginning) this is but a mere folly and
a fable, which some men's boldness made other men's ignorance to believe. And
thus conclude we our Relations.

THE TABLE.
A
Egypt. 455 Aethiopia Superior. 444 Inferior. 460 Africa. 422 America. 625
Armenia the greater. 545 Asia. 460 Austria. 274
B
Barbary. 427 Bavaria. 301 Bethlen Gabor his Estate in Transylvania, 394. in
Hungaria, 399. a brief Chronicle of his life and fortunes. ibid. Bohemia. 277
Borealis orbis pars. 643 Boriquen. 635 Brandenburg. 300 Brasil. 642 Britain.
74
C
CAlecute. 617 Castella Aurea. 640 Cathay. 498 Chile. 641 China. 589 Cuba. 633
D
Denmark. 207 Deserts, their descriptions and use. 45 Dominion, the means to
enlarge it. 19
E
EVrope. 62
F
FEz. 434 Fonduras. 632 France. 122
G
GElderland. 202 Geneva. 304 G^noa. 337 Groningen. 203 Guatimala. 631 Guiana.
641
H
HEbrides. 121 Hispaniola. 634 Holland. 201 Hungary. 378
I
IAmaica. 633 Iapan. 621 Islands of England. 129 India Asiatica, or East India.
574 Ireland. 68 Italy. 317 Judea. 551
K
KAthaia. 498
L
LOrrayne. 428 Lybia. 376
M
MAlta. 373 Man the I Will. 120 Manly Arts breed martial valor. 29 Mantua. 362
Marshes, their description and use. 44 Mexico. 630 Millaine. 336 The Great
Mogor. 578 Moldavia, 539 Mona. 120 Monomotapa^ 453 Moravia. 278 Moscovia. 463
Mountains, their description and use. 42
N
NApl^s Kingdom. 330 Narsinga. 613 Natolla. 540 Navarre. 194 Negroes Land. 429
Netherlands. 195 New Spain, 630 Nicaragua. 632 Norwey. 212 Nova Francia. 636
Numidia. 427
O
OF Observation. 1 Over-Isel. 203
P
PAlatinate. 285 People of the North, their constitutions, complexions, and
natures. 8. Of the South. 12. Of the middle Region. 15 Persia. 563 Peru. 637
Pol^nd. 409 Popes Estate. 320 Prester John. 444
R
REligion, a great advancer of Monarchy. 30 Rewards military, the benefit of
them. 30 Rivers, their use in preserving of Empire. 41 Roman Empire. 262
Russia. 463
SAvoy. 364 Sarmatia. 463 Saxony. 287 Situation, the aptness of it for
Empire. 35 Of the Situation of Nations. 4 Scotland. 114 Sea, the commodities in
enlarging Empire. 29 Seigniories, diverse petty ones easily overcome one by
one, by a common enemy. 37 Siam. 602 Sicily. 369 Spain. 222 States of the
Low Countries. 200 Swethland. 213 Switzerland. 309
T
TArtaria. 494 Tartars, their manners and arms. 485 Temperature, the division
of it. 2 Terra australis. 643 Transylvania. 394 Travel, instructions for it.
46 Treasure, the use in War. 33 Turks, their original and story. 554
Turkey. 505 Turcomania. 545 Tuscanie. 324
V
Valor, the commendations of it. 23. Military Valor how increased. 27 Venice.
339 Virginia. 635 Vrbine. 361 Usage to the Wars, the effects. 27. Free Usage of
people, a means to make Princes potent. 28 Vtrecht. 203
W
WAlachia. 539 Wales. 117 Weapons, their qualities and advantages. 32
West India. 625 Wildernesses, their descriptions. 45 Wisdom, the use of it in
Wars. 25 World, and the greatest Princes in it, and the means to enlarge
Dominion. 19
X
Great Xeriff. 433
FINIS.

