printer's device of Andro Heart A


DOOMES-DAY, OR, THE GREAT DAY OF THE LORDS IVDGEMENT.

BY Sr. WILLIAM ALEXANDER KNIGHT.

printer's device of Andro Heart AH


Printed by ANDRO HEART, and are to be sold at his shop on the North-side of
the high Street, a little beneath the Cross. ANNO DOM 1614

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT Viscount Rochester, Knight of the most noble
order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most honorable privy Council.
THAT the World may have some public testimony of that private love, which
your Virtues long since had begotten with my thoughts (my Lord) this is a small
spark flowne from a great Flame toward you, whose glory is, that you only
of all the subjects of this Isle have the Altar of your honor adorned with
offerings from both the Nations in this kind, as if your Worth were the Center
where both our affections should meet, making an union in minds, a course both
worthy of the credit of your place, and of your estimation with the world. Who
more great with Augustus then Mecoenas? none so great with the Muses. This
subject may be thought by some of too melancholicke a Nature for your youth,
and state, but yet is unnecessary for neither, it may serve for that
Macedonians Page who used every Morning to call to him, PHILIP thou must die,
though not so importunatly urging, yet when looked on, it is a dumb remembrer
both of death, and judgment, of all what was in the World, and of what is
likely to be when it ends: But long may you live, your Fortune still striving
to equal your Worth, your Worth to exceed your Fortune, and the World to
admire both, both being ripe before your years. This for the present is but
[like unripe fruits] an imperfect piece wrested from a mind many ways
distracted, and involued in doubtful designs, the success of some whereof, I
hope hereafter having purchased me fame from the World (who for that effect
will leave no way of worth within the compass of my power unattempted) may
make me the more able to communicate it with another, for none can give what he
has not himself, always I purpose when my mind is more calm to end this
Work, but never that desire which I have

To serve your Honor. S. WILLIAM ALEXANDER.

To. Sr. W. A.
LIKE Sophocles (the hearers in a trance)
With Crimson Cothurne, on a stately Stage,
If thou march forth (where all with pomp does glance)
To move the Monarchs of the Worlds first Age:
Or if like Phoebus thou thy Self advance,
All bright with sacred Flames, known by Heavens Badge,
To make a Day, of Days which scorns the Rage,
Whilst when they end it what should come does Scance.
Thy Phoenix-Muse still winged with Wonders flies,
Praise of our Brooks, Stain to old Pindus Springs,
And who thee follow would scarce with their Eyes
Can reach the Sphere where thou most sweetly sings.
Though string'd with Stars Heavens Orpheus Harp enrolle,
More worthy Thine to blaze about the Pole.
WILLIAM DRVMMOND. A DOOMES-DAY, OR THE GREAT DAY OF the Lords Judgment.
The first Hour.
THE ARGUMENT
GOD by his works demonstratiuely proved,
His Providence impugning Atheism urged,
The Devils from Heaven, from EDEN Man removed,
Of guilty Guestes the World by water purged,
Who never sinned, to die for Sin behou'd,
Those who him scourged in Gods great wrath are scourged,
Some temporal Plagues and fearful Judgments past,
Are cited bear as Figures of the last.
1
THou of whose Power (not reached by Reasons hight)
The Sea a Drop, we Earth a Mote may call:
And for whose Trophies stately to the sight,
The Azure Arc was reared (although too small)
And from the Lamp of whose most glorious light
The Sun (a spark) weak for weak eyes did fall,
Breath thou a heavenly Fury in my breast:
I sing the SABBATH of eternal rest.
2
Though All in all defined, by naught confined,
O thou whose Feet the Clouds for Dust afford,
Whose Voice the Thunder, and whose Breath the Wind,
Whose Footstool Earth, Seat Heaven, Works of thy Word,
Guards Hosts of Angels moving by thy Mind,
Whose Weapons, Famine, Tempest, Pest and Sword,
My cloudy Knowledge by thy Wisdom clear,
And by my Weakness make thy Power appear.
3
Lo ravished (LORD) with pleasure of thy Love,
I feel my Soul enflamed with sacred Fires,
Thy Judgments, and thy Mercies, whilst I move,
To publish to the World my Spirit aspires,
LORD by thy Help this Enterprise approve,
That the Success may second my Desires,
Make Satan's race to tremble at my lives,
And Thine rejoice while as thy Glory shines.
4
Ye blinded Souls, who even in Frailty trust,
By moments Pleasures earning endless Pain,
Whilst charged with living Chains, vile Slaves to Lust,
Of Earth, and earthly, till en-earthd again,
Hear, hold, and weigh my Words, for once ye must
The strange Effects of what I tell sustain,
I go to Sing [or Thunder] in your Ears,
A Heaven of comfort, or a Hell of fears.
5
All my transported Thoughts at randone fly,
As strayed to search that which they can not find;
Whilst silent Wondering makes a settled Eye,
A huge Amazement clouded has my Mind,
How some dare scorn (as if a fabulous Lie)
That Those should rise whom Death has once declined,
And like to Beasts a beastly Life they lead,
Who naught attend save Death when they are dead.
6
But yet what I admired not strange does seem,
When as I hear (O Heavens that such should breath)
That there be Men (if Men we may esteem
Tronkes which are void of Souls, Souls void of Faith)
Who all this World the Work of Fortune deem,
Not hoping Mercy, nor not fearing Wraith,
There is no GOD Fools in their Hearts do say,
Yet make their Hearts their Gods, and them obey.
7
The glassie Heavens which Glory does array,
Are Mirrours of GODS admirable Might,
There, whence forth spreads the Night, forth springs the Day,
He fixed the Fountains of this temporal light,
Where stately Stars enstall'd, some stand, some stray,
All sparks of his great Power (though small) yet bright,
By what none utter can, no, not conceive,
All of GODS Glory Shadows may perceive.
8
What glorious Lights through crystal Lanternes glance,
(As always burning with their Makers love)
Spheres keep one Music, they one Measure dance,
Like Influence below, like Course above,
And all by Order led, not drawn by Chance,
With Majesty as still in Triumph move,
And (prodigal of light) seem showting thus,
Look up all Souls, and gaze on GOD through us.
9
This pondrous Mass (though often deformed) still fair,
Great in our sight, yet then a Star more small,
Is balanced as a Mote amidst the Air,
None knows how hung, yet to no side does fall,
And yearly springs, grows ripe, fades, falls, rich, bare
Men's Mother first, still Mistress, yet their Thrall,
It centers Heavens, Heavens compass it, both breed
Books where of GOD the gnorant may reed,
10
What ebbes, flows, swells, and sinkes, who constant keeps?
Which from the Earth burstes in abundance out,
(As she her Brood would wash, or for them weeps
Who (having life) what dead things prove, do doubt)
Who first did found the Doungeons of the Deepes?
But one in all, over all, above, about,
The Floodes for our delight first calm were set,
But storm and roar, since men did God forget.
11
Who parts the swelling Spoutes which sifte the Rain?
Who raines the Winds, the Waters does empale,?
Who frowns in Tempests, smiles in Calmes again,
And does dispense the Treasures of the Hail?
Whose Coach of Clouds does driu'd by Winds remain?
Whose Darts (dread Thunderbolts) makes men look pale?
Even this to show those works themselves have won,
As smoke does fire, as shadows do the Sun.
12
God visibly invisible who reigns,
Soul of all souls, whose Light each light reflects,
All from confusion freed, and still retains,
The greatest rules, yet not the least neglects,
Fore-knowes the end of all which he ordaines,
His Will each Cause, each cause breeds fit Effects,
Who did make all, all thus could only lead,
None could make all, but who was never made.
13
Vile Dog of Truth who would the ground overthrow,
Thou thee to mark thy darkened Judgment lead,
For (if thy Self) thou must thy Maker know,
Who all thy members prouidently made,
Thy Feet tread Earth (to be contemned) laid low,
To look on Heaven exalted was thy Head,
That there thou might the stately Mansion see,
From whence thou art, where thou should seek to be.
14
The World in Souls Gods Image clear may see,
(Though Mirrours bruised when fallen, sparks dimmed far flown)
They in strict Bounds, strict Bonds, kept captive be,
Yet walk over all this All, and know, not known,
Yea soar to Heaven (whiles from their Fetters free)
And there see things which can not well be shown.
None can conceive, all must admire his Might,
Of whom each Atome gives so great a light.
15
When troubled Conscience reads accusing Scroules
Which witnessed are even by the breasts own brood,
O what a Terror wounds remording Souls,
Who Poison find what seemed a pleasant Food!
A secret power their wandering thoughts controules,
And damning Evil, an Author proves of Good,
Thus here some Minds a Map of Hell do lend,
To show what Horrors damned Souls attend.
16
To grant a God the Devil may men entyfe,
By Magic when conjured such to upbraid,
Who borrowing bodies Horror does disguyse,
Lest some his ugliness might make afraid,
Whiles in more monstrous Forms does roaring rise,
Till even (as charmed) the Charmer stands dismayde,
He bellowing forth abominable lies,
Blood in his Mouth, and Terror in his Eyes.
17
Who saues the World lest that it ruined be
By him whose thoughts (as Arrows) aim at ill?
Save One who is more great, more good then he,
Who makes His Power repugnant to his Will?
Of this with which often Satan's words agree,
He (forced) affords a Testimony still,
From euerything thus springs to GOD some praise
Men, Angels, Devils, all must his Glory raise.
18
Though trusting more, yet some transgress as much
As those who unto GOD draw never near,
For what the Fitst not see, the Last not touch,
Ones Eyes are blind, the others are not clear,
Their Minds (false Mirrours) figure GOD, but such
As Waters straight things crooked make appear,
Their Faith is never firm, their Love not bright,
As Ankers without holds, Fyres without light.
19
Their Judgments Fond by Frailty being confind.
Whose Soul (as Water) Vanity deuoures,
Do feign in GOD what in themselves they find,
And by their Weakness judge the POWER of POWERS,
Then (the Unbounded bounding by their Mind)
Would stain Heavens Garden with terrestrial Flowers:
Men still imagine Others as They are,
And measure all things by Corruptions Square.
20
They think that GOD soft Pleasure does affect,
And Iocund, Lofty, Lul'd in Ease, as Great
Does scorn, contemn, or at the least neglect
Man's sickle, abject, and laborious State,
That he disdaines to guerdon or correct
Man's good or evil Toys free from Love or Hate,
That when Earth is his prospect from the Skies,
As Men on Beasts, on Men he casts his Eyes.
21
No, high in Heaven from whence he binds, and frees,
He in voluptuous Ease not wallowing lies,
What Was, what Is, what Shall be, all he sees,
Weighs every Work, each Heart in secret tryes,
All Registers then filling first Decrees,
Gives, or abstracts his Grace, Cause, End, both spies,
His Contemplation far transcends our reach,
Yet what fits us to know, his Word does teach,
22
Then to confirm what was affirmed before,
That no GOD is, or GOD does not regard
Who do blaspheme (say fools) or who adore,
This often due Vengeance wants, and that Reward,
Then Godly Men the Wicked prosper more,
Who still presume, where they have often despaired,
Such (as they think) feel Pain, and dream but Joy,
Whilst they what can be wished do all enjoy.
23
The Sun in all like Comfort does infuse,
The Rain to all by equal portions parts,
Heavens Treasures all alyke both have, and use,
Which GOD to all [as one to him] imparts,
Each Minds free State like Passions do abuse,
Each bodies Bondage by like Sickness smarts,
Thus all alive alike all Fortunes try,
And as the Bad, even so the Best do die.
24
O Men most Simple, and yet more then Mad,
Whose Souls your Hearts, whose Hearts Sin has subdued
Whilst good Men now are grieved, though you be glad,
They weak (yet pure) you strong (yet stained and lewd)
Huge are the odds betwixe the Best and Bad,
Which darkely here, hence shall be clearly viewed,
When of GODS Wrath the Wind sifts Souls at last,
They shall abide, you vanish at a blast.
25
GODS Benefits though like to both designed,
On outward Eyes whilst Judgment does depend,
The inward Eyes a mighty difference find,
To balance both whilst spiritual Thoughts ascend,
The Gift is one, but not the Giuers Mind,
The Use is one, but not the Users end,
GOD so would clogge the one, the other raise,
Those take themselves to please, They Him to praise.
26
The Good often evil, the Evil often good may have,
And by the contrary both may be cloyd,
But as they are, all make what they receive,
Not real of it self, but as employed,
Those temporal Treasures Monuments do leave,
As by a Blessing or a Curse convoyed,
But this is sure, what ever GOD does send,
To Good-Mens good, to Euil-Mens evil does tend.
27
GOD to cure Souls does diverse Baulmes apply,
Whilst his intent still the event does crown,
Some are pressed down lest they should swell too hie,
Some are raised high lest that they should sink down,
Some must have Wealth their Charity to try,
Some Poverty their Patience to renown,
He who made all, knows all, and as they need,
Not as they wish, makes things with his succeed.
28
Since Worldly things GOD makes both sorts possess,
Ingratitude, or Gratefulness to move,
Let us seek greater things (though seeming less)
Which to one sort does only proper prove,
That secret Grace whose power none can express,
Whose fruits are Virtue, Zeal, Faith, Hope and Love:
The Wickeds Treasures Godly men may gain,
But theirs the wicked never can attain.
29
Ah why should Souls for senseless Riches care?
They Mercy need, it is a way to Wrath,
The first Man he was made, the rest borne bare,
Those floting Treasures come, and go with Breath,
Not mortal Goods, no, mortal Evils they are,
Which (since being dead) can naught afford but Death,
Their seed base Care, their fruit is burd'nous Pain,
A loss when found, often lost the Loosers gain.
30
The greatest good which by such Wealth is sought
Are flattering pleasures, which (whilst fawning) stain,
A smoke, a shadow, froth, a dream, a thought,
Light, slyding, frail, abusing, fond, all vain,
Which shows (when staying) soon dissolved in naught,
Do to the mind as Clouds to Skies remain,
As of Heavens Beauties Clouds would make us doubt,
Through mists of Minds the Spirit peepes faintlie out.
31
That King (of men admired of GOD beloved)
Whom such none did preceede, nor yet succeed,
Who Wisdoms Minion, Virtues Pattern proved,
He slow'd what hight of Bliss this Earth could breed,
Whose Mind and Fortune equal Meruailes moved,
Whilst Wealth and Wit, strived which should most exceed,
Yet he (when quick) was crossed, and scorned when dead,
By Happiness too much unhappy made.
32
Her store franck Nature prodigally spent,
To make that Prince more then a Prince esteemed,
Whilst Art to emulate her Mistress bent,
Though borrowing strength from her, yet stronger seemed,
He wanted naught which might a Mind content,
What once he wished, or but to wish was deemed,
For thousands Reason rested on his Will,
Great fortunes find obsequious followers still.
33
With GOD the Father, he who did confer,
And of the Son placed for a Pattern stood,
He to Gods Law did his vile Lust prefer,
(His Lust as boundless as a raging flood)
Who would have thought he could so grossly err,
Even to serve Idols, scorn a GOD so good?
The strong in Faith (when GOD abstracts his Grace)
Like Men disarmed fall faintly from their Place.
34
GODS Way cannot be found, his Course not known,
As Thoughts he did enlarge, or else restrain,
Some were made Saints, who Saints had once ou'r-throwne,
Some highly Holy turned to be Profane,
To mock Men's Judgment, magnify his Own,
Whilst GOD by both did glorified remain,
Let None presume, nor yet all Hope despise,
Who stand, fear falls, who fall, exspect to rise.
35
Through Hell to Heaven since our Redeemer past,
Think that all Pleasure purchased is with Pain,
But though first Death, none shall the second taste,
Whom GOD predestinates with him to reign,
Choos'd, Called, made Holy, Just, and Glorious last,
Twixt Heaven and Earth them holds a spiritual Chain,
Whose fastening Faith, whose Linkes are all of Love
Through Clouds by GODS own Hand stretched from above
36
Let not the godly Men Affliction fear,
GOD wrestle may with some, but none ou'r-throwes
Who gives the Burden, gives the Strength to bear,
And greatest Service greatest Guerdon owes,
Those who would reap, they at the first must care,
GODS Love, his Faith, a good Man's Trouble shows,
Those whom GOD tries, he gives them power to stand:
He Jacob tossed, and stayed, both by one Hand.
37
Since first being chus'd ere made, much more ere proved,
A Soul elected cannot lose though stray,
And let none ask what so to do GOD moved,
His Will his Word, his Word our Will should sway,
He hated Esau, and he Jacob loved,
Has not the Potter power to use the Clay?
And though his Vessels could, why should they plead,
If to Dishonor, or to Honor made?
38
Some dare tempt GOD presuming of his Grace,
And proudly sin (as saved assured to be)
Nor care not much what Course they do embrace,
Since naught (they say) can change GODS first Decree,
No, None find Heaven, but heavenly Ways first trace,
(The Badge the Bearer shows, the Fruits the Tree)
Who Safety doubt, do as you might deserve,
Who trust, be thankful, both GOD better serve.
39
With Gifts fit for their State all are endew'd,
Grace Mercy still, Wrath Justice does conuoy,
GOD cleares their Sight of whom he will be viewed,
And blindes Them here, Whom hence he will destroy,
Those whom he did elect, those he renewd,
Those whom he leaves, They sin, and sin with Joy,
Such live like Beasts, but worse (when dead) remain,
Beasts dead lose Sense, Death gives them Sense with Pain.
40
This froward Race that to Confusion rinnes,
Through Selse-presumption, or Distruct of GOD,
Shall once disgorge the Surfeit of their Sins,
Whilst what seems light, then prou's a burdnous Lod,
With Them in Judgment once when GOD begins
To beat, to bruise them with an iron Rod,
Whilst ayrie Pleasures leaden Anguish bring,
Exhausted Honny leaves a bitter Sting,
41
Yet wicked Men whom foul Affections blind,
Dare say (O now that Heaven not Brimstone raines!)
Let us alive have what contents the Mind,
And dread (when dead) brags of imagined Pains,
The Debt we sweet, the Intrest easy find,
At least the Payment long deferred remains
Who Shadows fear whilst they the Substance keep,
But start at Dreams when they securely sleep.
42
Ah filthy Wretch thy Fancies higher lift,
That does encroach which then would thus delay,
Then Eagle, Arrow, Ship, or Wind more swift,
Matched only by it self, Time slides away,
Straight of all Souls GOD shall the secrets sift,
And private thoughts with public Showts display,
Then when Times glass (not to be turned) is run,
Their Grief still grows, whose Joys were scarce begun*
43
Whiles raised in haste when Souls from him rebel,
By Inundations of impetuous Sin,
The Floods of GODS deep Indignation swell,
Till Torments Torrents violently run,
Damnations Mirrours, Models of the Hell,
To show what hence not ends, may here begin,
Then let me sing some of GODS Judgments past,
That who them hear, may tremble at the last.
44
That glorious Angel, bearer of the light,
The Mornings eye, the Messinger of Day,
Of all the Bands above esteemed most bright,
(As is among'st the rest the Month of May)
He whom those Gifts should have engadg'f of right,
Did (swollen with pride) from him who gave them stray,
And sought (a Traitor) to usurp his Seat,
Yea worse (if worse may be) did prove ingrate.
45
His starrie Tail the pompous Peacok streams,
As of all Birds the baseness to disprove,
So Lucifer insulted in his Beams,
(As since Narcissus) with himself in love,
And better Angels scorned (whilst drunk with dreams)
If Envy not, at least Disdain to move,
Those who grow proud, presuming of their State,
They others do contemn, them others hate.
46
To Wickedness the Wicked soon accords,
That strife which one deuys'd, all did conclude,
Their Armor Malice, Blasphemy their Swords,
Their darts of Envy only aimed at Good:
And when they met they used not many Words,
Thoughts utter most when they are understood,
By bodies gross when they no hinderance have
The Spirits (being pure) may others minds perceive.
47
As where Uncleanness is the Ravens repair,
The spotted Band swarmed where he spent his Gall,
Who fondly durst with GOD (foul fool) compare,
And his Apostasy applauded all,
Then to usurp Heavens Throne, did bend their care,
So hasting on the Horror of their fall,
Whose traitrous Head made (like a Whore that strayes)
His burning Beauties prodigal of Rays.
48
Whilst vainlie puffed up with preposterous Aims,
He even from GOD his Treasure stryn'd to steal,
The Angels good (Those not deserving Names)
With sacred Ardour boldly did appeal,
Their Eyes shot Lightning, and their Breath smoked Flames,
As ravished with GODS love, burnt up with Zeal,
All listed up their Flight, their Voice, their Hands,
Then sang GODS Praise, rebuked rebellious Bands.
49
This Mutiny a monstrous Tumult bred,
The place of Peace being plenish'd thus with Arms,
Bright Michael forth, a glorious Squadron led,
Which forced the Fiends to apprehend their harms,
The Lights of Heaven looked pale, Clouds (thundering) shed,
Winds (roaring Trumpets) bellowed loud Alarmes:
Think what was feigned to be at Phloegra bounds,
Of this a shadow, Echoes but of sounds.
50
O damned Dog who in a happy State,
Could not thy Self, would not have Others bide,
Sin, Death and Hell, thou opened first their Gate,
Ambitions Bellows, Fountain of all pride,
Who Force in Heaven, in Paradise Deceat,
On Earth used both, a Traitor always tried,
O first the Ground, still guilty of all Evils,
Since whom GOD Angels made, thou made them Devils.
51
When them He viewed (whose Power naught can express
To whose least Nod the Greatest things are thral)
Although his Word, his Look, his Thought, or less,
Might them have made Dust, Air, or what more small,
Yet he (their pride though purposed to repress)
Graced by a Blow, disdained to let them fall,
But them reserved for more opprobrious strypes,
As first of Sin, still of his Judgments Types.
52
Those scorned Riuals GOD would Judge, not fight,
And then Themselves none else, more fit could find,
Brands for his Rage, whilst flamming at the hight,
To clear their Knowledge it with Terror shined,
Whose guilty Weakness matched with his pure Might
Did freeze with Horror each amazed Mind,
Their Conscience kindled who from GOD rebel,
Hell first is placed in Them, then They in Hell.
53
That damned Crew GOD having spied a space,
First lightning Looks, then thundered forth those Words,
Woods for my Wrath, that have abused my Grace,
As once of Light of Darkness now be LORDS
Where Order is since forfaiting your place,
Pass where Confusion every thing affords,
And use your spite by pyning, and being pyn'd,
Not Angels, no, Do EVIZS as Devils designed
54
If with Great things we Small things may compare,
Or with their Maker things which have been made,
As when the Falcon fierce soars through the Air,
The little feathred Flocks foll down as dead,
As Darkness flies, Heaven [like a Bryde] looks fair,
When Phoebus forth does fyrie Coursers lead
Like some Bryde-grome bent for his wedding place,
Or like a mighty Man to run his race.
55
Even so (as Lightning flashing from the Sky
Does die as it descends, gone with a glance)
More fast then follow could a Thought, or Eye,
Heavens banished Rebels fell down in a trance,
Then abject Runnagats over all did fly,
As seeking out some place to hide their Chance,
O what a deadly Storm did then begin,
When Heaven rained Devils to drown the World with Sin!
56
That Forge of Fraud, Evils Center, Sphere of Pride,
From Bliss above whom GODS own Breath had blown,
He who his Strength in Heaven in vain had try'de,
(As Dogs byte stones for him who has them thrown)
GODS Image did pursue in Adam spy'de,
And did despite his state, despise his own.
It never ended yet which then began,
His Hate toward GOD* his Envy unto Man.
57
Ere tainted first with that twyse fatal Crime,
Then Adam lived more blessed then can be thought,
Babe, Infant, Child, Youth, Man, all at one time,
Formed in perfection, having need of naught,
To Paradise preferred from abject slyme,
A grain of Earth to rule it all was brought,
Him to content whilst all things did contend,
GOD walked and talked with him as with his Friend.
58
Then of his pleasures to heap up the store,
GOD Euah formed adorned with Beauties rare,
Such as none since a Woman did decore,
Think what it is to be perfectly fair,
And then imagine her, even much, then more,
She principal, the rest but Pictures are.
No hight of words can her Perfections hit,
The Work was matchless as the Worke-mans Wit.
59
The Worlds first Father what huge Joys did fill,
Whilst Prince of Paradise from trouble free,
The fairest Creature entertained him still,
No Rival was, he could not Jealous be,
Being only wretch'd in having all his Will,
And yet discharged the tasting of one Tree!
Let one have all things good abstract some Toy,
That Want more grieves, then all he has gives Joy.
60
Through Edens Garden stately Euah strayed,
Where beauteous Flowers her Beauties back reglanc'd,
By Natures self, and not by Art arrayed,
Which pure (not blushing) boldly were advanced,
With dangling Hairs the wanton Zephyrs played,
And in rich Rings their floting Gold enhanc'd,
All things concurred which pleasure could incite,
So that she seemed the Center of Delight.
61
Then could she not well think, who now can tell
What banqueted her sight with objects rare,
Birds strived for her whose Songs should most excel,
The odoriferous Flowers perfumed the Air,
Yet did her Breath of all most sweetly smell,
Not then distempered with intemperate fair,
No mixtures strange composed corrupting food,
All naturally was sweet, all simply good.
62
But ah when she the Apples fair did spy,
Which (since reserved) were thought to be the best,
Their preciousnesse supposed enflamed to try,
By being discharged, she looked where they did rest,
Luxuriously abandoned to the Eye,
Swollen, languishing (like those upon her Breast)
Ah Curiousnes first Cause of all our ill,
And yet the Plague which most torments us still!
63
On them she doubtful earnestly did gaise,
The Hand being often advanced, and often drawn bak,
Her State and Beauty entering thus to praise
Whilst subtle Satan in a Serpent spoke,
Your State is high, you may it higher raise,
And may (as Gods) your Selves Immortal make.
This precious Fruit GOD you forbids to eat,
Lest knowing Good and Evil, you match his State.
64
Those fatal Fruits which poisoned were with Sin,
She having tasted, made her Husband prove,
What could not Words of such a Sirene win?
O Woe to Man that Woman thus can move!
He Him to hide [his Falls first Course] did rinne,
Whom Knowledge now had learned to loath and love,
Death from that Tree did shoot through Shadows dark,
His Rest an Apple, Beauty was his Mark.
65
Thus Good and Evil they learned to know by this,
But Ah the Good was gone, the Evil to be,
When They so monstrously had done amiss
They Clothing sought (poor Shift from Shame to free)
Lo the first Fruits of Mortals Knowledge is,
Their Nakedness, and Misery to see:
Thus Curiousnes to Knowledge is the Guide,
And it to Misery, all Toils when tri'de.
66
Mark Adams answer when his Maker craved
If that his Will had been by him transgressed,
The Woman LORD whom I from thee received,
She made me eat, as who my Soul possessed,
The Woman said the Serpent me deceau'd.
Both burdend Others, None the Fault confessed:
Which Custom still their faulty Race does use,
All first do rinne to hide, next to excuse.
67
But he who tries the Reins, and viewes the Heart,
As through the Clouds does through frail Bodies see,
And is not mocked by Men's ridiculous Art,
By which their Crimes made more, more odious be,
Who proudly sin, they must submissely smart,
Lo GOD crau's count of what he did decree,
And those who joined in Sin, are punished all,
All Adams Partners crushed were with his Fall.
68
GOD thus first damned the Fountain of Deceate,
O most accursed of all the Beasts which breed,
Still wallowing in the Dust (a loathsome state)
Drawn on thy Belly basely shall thou feed,
The Woman Thee, thou shall the Woman hate,
Which Hatred still inherit shall her Seed,
Whose fierce Effects both mutually shall feel,
Whilst he shall break thy Head, thou bruise his Heel.
69
And Woman weak, whose Thoughts each Fancy blows,
I will increase thy Grief, thy Joys restrain,
And since thy Judgment does depend on shows,
Thou to thy Husband subject shall remain,
And bringing forth thy Brood with bitter Throws,
What was with Pleasure sown, shall reap with Pain,
Those Beauties now which mustred are with Pride,
In withred Wrinckles ruinous Age shall hide,
70
Fond Adam thou obeying thus thy Wife,
What I commanded violat who durst,
Cares shall exhaust thy Days, Pains end thy Life,
Whilst for thy Cause the Earth becomes accursed,
With Thorns and Thistles guerdoning thy Strife,
Who sweating for thy Food art like to burst,
And look no more for Rest, for Toil thou must,
Till whence thou came, thou be turned back to Dust,
71
By Angels armed barred from the pleasant Place,
When wretched Adams Pilgrimage was past,
The Tree of Sin ou'rshaddowing all his Race,
They from their minds all Love of GOD did cast,
Them to reclaim who did contemn his Grace,
Who weary was with striving at the last,
Of all the World a Harvest made by Rain*
He did resolve to try new Seed again.
72
Yet since that Noah uprightly had lived,
He and his Race stood safe on Horrors hight,
And when all Creatures Ruin was contrived,
They lived secure the fourtie-day-long Night:
To make the World repent that good Man strived,
His swelling Bulwark battering in their Sight,
But with the Wicked naught can well succeed,
In whom Persuasions Obstinacy breed.
73
As the Worlds sins ou'rflow'd, GODS Wrath ou'rflam'd,
Which when raised high, down Floods of Vengeance pours,
As Noah's Preaching often times had proclaimed,
Heavens threatening straight to drown the highest Tours,
Clouds clustred Darkness, Lightnings Terror streamed,
And rumbling Thunders vshered ugly Shours,
Whilst ravenous Tempests swallowed up the Light,
Day dead for Fear brought forth abortiue Night.
74
From Guests profane that Earth might be redeemed,
The Lights of Heaven quensh'd in their Lanterns lay,
The Azure Vaults all but one Cisterne seemed,
Whilst (safe the Waters) All things did decay,
The Fire drowned out, Heavens all dissolved were deemed,
Air Water grew, the Earth as washed away,
By monstrous Storms whilst All things were ou'rturn'd,
Then (safe GODS Wrath) in all the World naught burned.
75
Men to the Mountains did for Help repair,
Whence them the Waves did violently chase,
In Natures Scorn came scallie Squadrouns their,
The Forests Guests inheriting their place,
By too much Water, no, for lack of Air,
All were confounded in a little Space,
The Elements with Anguish we enjoy,
All must nurse one, One thus may all destroy.
76
That vaulting Vault against the Storm did strive,
Which all the Creatures of the World contained,
And whyls through Depthes, whyls through the Clouds did drive
Not by the Compass, nor the Rudder rained,
No Port, no Land was, where it could ariue,
Whilst Earth with Waters level all remained,
The Waves (the World all else being hushed) at once
Roared forth a Consort with Men's dying Groans.
77
But when over all GODS Breath did Ruin blow,
The Arc with others Sin from Death did save,
Him whom the raging Floods did not ou'rthrow,
Who (of GODS Judgments Judge) did all perceive,
A little Liquor did at last ou'rthrow,
Which to his Son to mock Occasion gave,
Thus Drunkenness disdainful scorn does breed,
A fertile Vice which Others still succeed.
78
As the first World did first by Pride offend.
Whose burning Rage to such a hight did win,
That it to quensh, GOD did the Waters bend,
O Drunkenness the second Worlds first sin,
The course of Vice that Element must end,
Which is opposed to it which did begin,
In every thing GODS Justice we may spy,
As Floods drowned Pride, Flames Drunkenness must dry.
79
When Men again to fill the World did wear,
Straight in their Souls did Satan raise his Throne,
O what a Burden Nature do thou bear!
Since that to Sin and Live, seem both but one!
Men Babels Towers against the Stars did rear,
Since like deserving, fearing what was gone,
As though that GOD could but one Plague command,
(Ah Fools) what Strength against his Strength can stand?
80
Whilst fondly They proud weakness did bewray,
(Who can the Depths of His high Judgments sound)
By making their own Tongues their Hearts betray
Those Titans straight the Thund'rer did confound,
Here diverse Tongues the Work of Men did stay,
Which afterward the Work of GOD did ground*
The Mind (not means) effectual does remain,
What helped Apostles, hindered the Profane.
81
When purposed to dissolve quick Clouds of Dust,
GODS Wrath (as stubble) Sinners does devour,
That Town to sack which had not ten Men just
He Brimstone rained, (O most prodigious Shower!)
Their Bodies burned, whose Souls were burned with Lust,
What fair, was ugly, what was sweet, grew sour:
Yet of that Fire Lot escaped the great Deluge
GODS holy Mountain is a sure Refuge.
82
I reckon not the ruin of those States
Which being but Strangers to the ground of Grace,
Were carried headlong with their own Conceits,
And even (though brightly) blindlie ran their Race,
GODS firm Decrees, which fondly they called Fates,
Did bound their Glory in a little Space,
Whilst Tempests huge tossed their tumultuous Minds,
Like Reeds by Rivers wavering with all Winds.
83
Such raised not for their good but for GODS ends
When bent his own to punish or support
Do (as his Arrows) hit but where he tends,
Else of themselves their power does naught import,
When he his spotted Flock to purge intends,
They are but Tools used in a servile sort.
To fan, or cleanse as Fannes, or Beesomes they
Which when the Work is done, are thrown away.
84
Proud Ashur first did daunt all other Soyles,
Till barbarous Persia did become her Head,
The Greeks did glory in the Persians spoils,
Whose Prince at last Rome did in Triumph lead,
Rome rauishing the Earth bred bloody Broils,
Yet was by whom she scorned a Widow made,
The World a Tenniscourt, the Rackets Fates,
Great Kings are Balls, when GOD will toss their States.
85
To them whom GOD to do Great things does choose,
He generous Minds and noble Thoughts imparts,
And does in them all Qualities infuse,
That are requyr'd to act Heroic parts,
Of Matters base, then making others muse,
He breaks their spirits, and vilifies their Hearts,
As Greatness still a gallant Mind preceeds,
A staggering Courage Fortunes fall succeeds.
86
The glancing Glory dazeled every Eye
Of Greece and Rome, made all the Muses song,
On both the Wings of Worth which forth did fly,
By Valor raised, borne up on learning long,
But now both base in abject Bondage lie,
Whose Brood proves now as Faint, as once thought Strong,
That with their Empyres made their Enemies Spoils,
Their Spirits seem too transferred to foreign Soyles.
87
For Nations once which strangers were to Fame,
On whom (as Monsters) Civil Lands did gaise,
Those who in scorn did them Barbarians name,
Do now surpass in all which Merits praise,
Thus Glories Throne is made the Seat of Shame,
Who were obscure do Honor highest raise,
Naught constant is below, no, not true Worth,
It melted South, and freezes in the North.
88
What Heart not quakes when as it does record
The Vengeance huge inflicted whiles below?
Not only Gentiles thus being then abhorred,
High indignation justly did ou'rthrow
That Heritage long labored by the LORD,
Which as his Portion he would only owe,
As loathed for Sin, or for Repentance loved,
GODS Minion whiles, a Strangers Slave whiles proved.
89
By monstrous Plagues GOD did his power express,
In Nilus Bounds which yet admired remains,
The subtle Sorcerers forcing to consesse
That his own Finger pointed out their pains,
The Seas retired would not his Will transgress,
Till Squadrons marched upon their Virgin Plains,
He gloriously triumphed over Pharaos Host,
What Israel saved, that the Egyptians lost.
90
GOD Wonders made not strange to Jacobs brood,
When their great Journey boldly was begun,
Over them a Cloud by Day, by Night Fire stood,
A guide, a guard, a shadow, and a Sun,
Rocks vomited a Flood, Heavens rained down Food,
Canaan was miraculouslie won,
Their Arms did Armies spoil, huge Giants kill,
Weak blasts breathed walls, the Sun (as charmed) stood still.
91
But who can think and trust, trust not admire,
That those Ingrate to such a GOD could prove,
Who often had seen (above their own Desire)
By Wonders Power, by Benefits his Love?
Yet They prouok'd the Holy One to Ire,
And did the Mighties Indignation move,
Till as abhorred the Land did spue Them forth,
And Jordans Glory graced Euphrates Worth.
92
That Realm the Worlds first Froth, and now the Lees,
Of which for Israel, Angels Hosts had slain,
The Lord transplanting Men (as Men do Trees)
It Israel made a Captive to remain,
The stately Temple naught from ruin frees,
Whose sacred Vessels Ethnickes did profane,
Yet all turned back by a repenting Faith,
Sole Mortals Tears quench the Immortalls Wrath.
93
And yet of all the Works which GOD has wrought,
None more to stray Opinions course permittes,
Then our Salvation offered, urged, not sought,
At which who highest aims the Truth worst hittes,
What was contemned, a pretions Treasure bought,
A Mystery surmounting Vulgar Wits,
The Worker, not the Work, must move our Minds,
Celestial Secrets, Faith (not Reason) finds.
94
O who could look for Glory from the Dust?
Or for a Savior fettred in the Grave?
The Power which wrought it must give Power to trust,
This Iudgetnent else all Judgments will deceive.
O Justice merciful, O Mercy just!
He lost his best Beloved his Foes to save,
And even to suffer, suffer did his Son,
The Victory over Hell is hardly won.
95
The Word was Flesh, the Godhead dwelt with Men,
Invisible, yet subject to the Sight,
He whom no Bounds could bound, was bounded then,
Whilst earthly Darkness clouded heavenly Light,
Birds had their Nests, and every Beast a Den,
Yet had he naught who did owe All of right,
No Kind of Thing the wicked World could move,
Not Wonders done below, Words from above.
96
Those Wonders then which sacred Writes record,
Did Some convert, A Multitude amaze,
What did not GODS own Word do by a Word?
Lame ran. Deaf heard, Dumb spoke, Devils fled, Dead raise,
Of servants Servant whilst of Lords the LORD,
Did seek but his own Pain, Man's Good, GODS Praise,
To marie Heaven with Earth He first began,
GOD without Mother, without Father Man.
97
Who never did begin, He would begin,
That Life's chief Fountain might of Life be reau'd,
The Innocent would bear the Weight of Sin,
That by his Sufferings Sinners might be saved,
Yet that which GOD must give, and none can win,
(Though offered freely) many not received,
Whilst on a Tree CHRIST gained (when tortured most,)
What by a Tree for Pleasure Adam lost.
98
The Worlds great Judge was judged, and Worldlings stood,
Even glorious Glory glorying to disgrace,
They damned as Evil the Author of all Good,
(Though Death of Death) who unto Death gave Place,
Ah for our Ransom offering up his Blood,
Huge was the War he had to make our Peace!
The Heir of Heaven daign'd to descend to Hell,
That in the Heaven Hell-worthy Men might dwell.
99
The Father saw the Son surcharged with Woe,
Yet would to Calm his Grief no Favor show,
For Man could not refound, nor GOD forgo,
That Debt which the first Man did justly ow,
CHRIST as a GOD could not have suffered so,
Nor have as Man preuaild, but both below,
He Men most graced when Men him most disgraced,
Justice and Mercy mutually embraced.
100
When GOD confirmed with many fearful Wonder,
The great Work which was wrought for them he loved,
Heaven clad with Darkness mourned, Earth sob'd asunder,
Thus Creatures wanting Sense, were highly moved,
Who should have had, had none, nor could not ponder
What did import the Anguish which he proved,
But of his Torments strange which did abound,
Ah Man's Ingratitude did deepest wound.
101
O wicked offspring of a Godly Sire,
Who saw the Savior of the World arise,
That which your Fathers did so often desire,
Yet could not get that which you did despise,
Who Mercy mocked, prepare your selves for Ire,
He lives, he lives whose Death you did devise,
His Blood (not spent in vain) must wash or drown,
Those whom it cannot cleanse, it shall sincke down.
102
To rest on them and Theirs Jews who did cry
For CHRIST'S contemned Blood, had what they sought,
Then Blood no Burden with more Weight does lie,
Even as they his, so was their Ou'rthrovv wrought,
They by the Roman Power did make Him die,
And them the Roman Power to Ruin brought,
Whilst for their Cause GOD every Thing had cursed
Romes mildest Emperor proved for them the VVorst.
103
Jerusalem the Fair, IEHOV AHS Love,
Repudiated by disdainful Wrath,
A bastard Race did bear, whom Naught could move,
A vile Adultresse violating Faith,
Then did the Worlds Delight her Terror prove,
And Harms performed foretold by sacred Breath,
Naught rested where the stately City stood,
Save Heaps of Horror raised of Dust and Blood.
104
But murdring Saints in Wickedness grown bold,
That Town which long was drunk, last drowned with Blood,
That Town by which who bought the World was sold,
Sold with Disgrace beheld her scorned Brood,
Them loved by GOD Men did in Honor hold,
And loathed by GOD, with them in Horror stood,
Then Jews whom GOD high raised, and low does bow,
What Name more glorious once, more odious now?
105
When of Salvation joyful News were spread,
With spiritual Grace all Nations to bedew,
Whilst famished Souls that sacred Nectar fed,
The LORD strange Judgments Millions made to view,
And those who first fierce Persecutions bred,
A jealous GOD with Vengeance did persew,
His Wrath against Themselves, against their Foes,
Is quensh'd, is kindled by his Servants Woes.
106
By him who first against CHRIST did Ensigns pitch,
His Brother, Mother, Wife, and Self was slain,
The Great Apostat wounded in a Ditch,
Did grant with Grief the Galileans reign,
Of him whose Errors did whole Realms bewitch,
The Death most vile did viler Doctrine stain,
A monstrous Death does monstrous Lives attend,
And what All is, is judged by the End,
107
He who made Hymen's Torch drop Blood and Tears.
The Nation most Human being Inhumaine,
Did blood [when dead] at Mouth, Nose, Eyes, and Ears,
As vomiting his Surfeit so again,
In Crime and Crown his second fraught with Fears,
The bloody Band by mutual Blows was slain,
The King, the Duke, the Friars devised that Ill,
The King the Dake, the Friars the King did kill.
108
Whose Sight is so eclipsed which now not sees,
In every Kingdom, Province, Town, and Race,
On Princes, Subjectes, Men of all Degrees,
What weighty Judgment Sinners Steps do trace,
Which not the Crown, more then the Cottage frees?
The Wicked Man (says GOD) shall have no peace.
A Countenance calm, may mask a stormy Mind,
But Guiltiness no perfect Ease can find.
109
Those temporal Plagues are but small Smokes of Ire,
To breach a Breast which is not armed with Faith,
And are when GOD due Vengeance does require,
Of Indignation Drops, weak Sparks of Wraith,
As Lightning is to Hels eternal Fire,
Or to a Tempest huge, a little Breath:
So are all those of this which I proclaim,
A Puffed, a Glance, a Shadow, or a Dream,
110
As weighed by GOD still balanced hings this Round,
Which Sin (grown heavy) now quyte down ward bears
Exhausted Courage Horror shall confound,
Till Hopes high Towers rest all ou'rflow'd with Fears,
All shall together fall, as by one Wound,
Not having Time to fly, no, not for Tears,
On Day as Night, as on the Wearied Sleep,
Death steals on Life, and Judgments way does sweep.
111
All clearly see who Lyfes short Race do rinne,
The last Decree though being suspended yet,
That fatal Doom inflicted first for Sin,
Though not attended, does not doubted hit,
And of all Souls the Process does begin,
For straight when Death arrests, the Judge does sit,
For this first Charge all fortify the Mind,
As Death us leaves, so Judgment shall us find.
112
Death each Man daily sees, but none fore-sees,
The Wage of Sin, the Jubilie of Cares,
First Judgment threatened, base Corruptions Lees,
Inheritance which serves all Adams Heirs,
Just only Equaller of all Degrees,
The Charge enjoined for no Respect which spaires,
What Agues, Wounds, Thoghts, Pains, al breathing Breath,
Are Heralds, Sergeants, Vshers, Posts of Death.
113
Death Doors to enter at, and Darts to wound,
Has as the Heaven has Stars, or Sea has Sands,
What though not sick, not stabbed, not choked, burnt, drowned.
Age matchless Enemy all at last commands,
O what Designs this Emperor Pale does bound,
Built of bare Bones, whose Arche Triumphall stands!
Ah for Ones Error all the World has wept,
The Golden Fruit a leaden Dragon kept.
114
Then since Sins Hangman, Natures utter Foe,
By whom true Life is found, Lyfes Shadow lost,
A thousand Fancies interrupting so
When least exspected does importune most,
Haste, haste your recknings all must pay and go,
Guests of the World, poor Passengers who post,
And let us strive (a Change being wyselie made)
To die alive, that we may live when dead.
115
All think whilst sound what Sickness may succeed,
How in the Bed imprisoned ye may be,
When every Object Loathsomeness does breed
Within, without, that Soul, or Eyes can see,
To trembling Nature, which still death does dread,
Grief paints out Horror in a high degree,
The Body in the Bed Thoughts in it roll:
The Conscience casting up a bitter scroule.
116
But when external Powers begin to fail,
That neither Tongue can give, nor Ears receive,
Friends [wretched Comforters] retired to wail,
To agonize the soul alone do leave,
Which Satan straight with Squadrons does assail,
Being bent to force whom first he did deceive,
Who once entys'd, then to accuse begins:
To wakened Souls vpbraiding buried Sins.
117
That fatal Conflict which all Flesh does fear,
By helps from Heaven being foughten, past, and won,
Whilst it to Heaven triumphing Angels bear,
This mortal Race magnanimouslie run,
As being ordained to deck the highest Sphere,
The Soul shall shine more glorious then the Sun,
Whilst clothed with Righteousness, a Priest, a King,
Hell where thy Victory, Death where thy Sting?
118
O when to part GOD does the Soul permit,
Raised from her Shell a Pearl for Sion chus'd,
She recollects [accomplish'd ere she flit]
Her Faculties amidst frail Flesh diffused,
As Judgment, Reason, Memory, and Wit,
Being all refyn'd, no more to be abused,
Then parts in Triumph free from Earthly Toils,
Yet longs perchance to gather up her Spoils.
119
Let all those Plagues [smoakes of our Makers Ire]
Make all in time their inward State reform,
Those Plagues of which, lo, even to sing I tire,
Ah what do those who bear their ugly Form?
Yet they but kindlings are of endless Fire,
And little drops which do fore-goe a Storm,
Look, look with Clouds Heavens Bosom else does swell,
To blow the Wicked to the lowest Hell.
The second Hour.
THE ARGUMENT.
THat threatened Time which must the World appall,
Is (that all may amend) by Signs fore-shown,
Wars rumor'd are, the Gospel preached over All,
Some Jews convert, the Antichrist is known:
Devils rage, Vice reigns, Zeal cooles, Faith fails, Stars fall,
All sorts of Plagues have the last Trumpet blown,
And by prodigious Signs may plain appear,
That of the Son of Man the Sign draws near.
1
THough thundering down those who transgress his Lawer*
And with Disdain his Bounty do abuse:
As Adamants do Irne, Repentance draws
The LORD to love Those whom he first did choose,
A Space retired from the tempestuous Waves,
The Port of Mercy must refresh my Muse,
Whose ventrous Flight all Loftiness must leave,
And plainly sing what all Men should conceive.
2
The LORD delights not in a Sinners death,
But Sheep which stray toils to recover still,
To please a Son who had deserved his Wrath,
His Calfe (long fed) the Father straight did kill,
Not for the best whose thoughts (swayed by his Breath)
Had squair'd his Actions only by his Will,
His Calfe, GODS Lamb, both feasted the Profane,
His Best was grieved GODS only Son was slain.
3
Who can express, consider, or conceive,
Our Makers Mercy, our Redeemers Love,
Or of that Spirit the Power which who receive,
By sacred Ardour ravished are above,
O, to Creat, to Sanctify, to Save,
Ingratitude to Gratefulness may move,
Who weighes those Works (else damned were his State)
Must [if no more] be grieved for being ingrate.
4
First ere by Ends Beginnings could be proved,
Whilst Time nor Place, to limit naught attained,
All wholly Holy, wholly to be loved,
GOD in Himself, and All in him remained,
Whilst both the Sun, and Sphere in which he moved,
That which contained, and that which was contained,
Truth lightened Light, All in Perfection stood,
More high then Thoughts can reach, all GOD, all Good.
5
All this alone the LORD would not possess,
But would have some who taste his Goodness might,
Which by being given in no Degree proves less,
What darker grows the Sun by giving Light?
Not that his Bliss ou'rflow'd, no, not beguesse,
All was of Purpose prouidently right,
His Glories Witnesses GOD Men did raise,
That they might it admire, Him serve, and praise.
6
When GOD in Us no Kind of Good could see,
Save that which first was from Himself to fall,
Great was his Favor making Us to be,
Even ere we were, much less deserved at all,
What? since in us Affection must be free,
Who dare presume to make our Makers Thrall?
He first us freely made, when naught, of Naught,
When sold to Sin, with his own Blood us bought.
7
Though Some sometime inspired by GOD we see
Do grateful, I, not meritorious Deeds,
The Fruit, not Root of Mercies saving Tree,
Which was CHRIST'S Cross whence all our Rest proceeds,
As owing Most, they should most humble be,
To Him whose Grace in them such Motions breeds,
From whom for Good a Mind, and Means, they had,
Where Others were abandoned to be Bad.
8
The LORD to those whose Souls produce his Seal,
Good things does give, as who them justly owes,
Bound by his Promise, pleaded with true Zeal,
Which all the Arguments of Wrath ou'rthrowes,
Whilst they from it to Mercy do appeal,
Which justifies all that Repentance shows:
GOD Sins confessed with Grief, with Joy forgiues,
That which Faith humbly seeks, Power freely gives.
9
He [who] when Pilgrims all their Trouble sees,
The faithful Souls from Danger does secure,
And them from Fetters of Corruption frees,
Grieved for the Grieves which Mortals must endure,
But now for them (fulfilling first Decrees)
He would true Rest perpetually procure,
At that great Court which must determine All,
Even till CHRIST rise as Judge from Adams Fall.
10
Their Blood which Tyrants by evil Angels led,
Like worthless Waters lauish'd on the Dust,
From out the Altar cries, all that was shed
From Abel till (and since) Zachary the Just,
To see the Wicked with Confusion cled,
When judged by Him in whom they would not trust,
The sorrow of his Saints does move GOD much,
No sweeter Incense then the Sighs of such.
11
GOD is not slack as Worldlings do suppose,
But only patient willing all to win,
Times Consummation quickly shall disclose
The Period of Mortality, and Sin,
And for the same his Servants to dispose,
Else charged by Signs the Process does begin,
Signs which each Day vpbraide us with the last,
Few are to come, some present, many past.
12
What fatal Warnings do that Time presage,
A due Attendance in the World to breed,
(Though oftener now) some used in every Age,
And some more monstrous straight the Day preceede:
Ah fly the Flames of that encroaching Rage,
And arm against these Terrors which succeed,
For whom the First not fears, the Last confounds,
As whilst the Lightning shines, the Thunder wounds.
13
Whilst threatening Worldlings with the last Deluge,
Old Noah Scorn acquired, but never Trust,
Though building in their Sight his own Refuge,
So were the People drunk with Pride and Lust,
And ere the coming of the general Judge,
To damn the Bad, and justify the Just,
Even when the Tokens come which CHRIST advised,
As Noah's then, CHRIST'S Words are now despised.
14
Even as the Life's last Day to None was shown,
That still attending Death all might live right,
So that great Judgments Day is kept unknown,
To make us watch as CHRIST were still in Sight,
Like Virgins wise with Oil still of our own,
That when the Bridegroom comes, we want not Light,
Live still as looking Death should us sur-prise,
And go to Beds and Graves as we would rise.
15
O what great Wonder that so few are found,
Whom those strange Signs make grieved, or glad appear!
Though that Day haste which should their Soales confound,
Or from Corruption make them ever clear:
If holy Jerome thought he heard the Sound
Of that dead Trumpet thundering in his Ear,
What jealous Cares should in our Breasts be lodged,
Since greater Sinners, nearer to be judged.
16
When Will to Man, or rather Man to Will
Was freely given, then Discord did begin,
Though Brether erst one did another kill,
Of Those who first were borne Life's Race to rinne,
Thus striving (as it seemed) who did most Ill,
The Father fell, the Son did sincke in Sin,
Love Adam lost, but Cain kindled Wraith,
The Author breeding, Actor bringing Death.
17
Thus at the first Contentious Worldlings jarr'd,
Of all the World when only two were Heirs,
And when that Nations were, then Nations warred,
Often sowing Hopes and reaping but Dispaires,
Base Avarice, Pride, and Ambition marred
All Concord first, and framed Death diverse Snares:
Though as a Wind soon blasted is our Breath,
We furnish Feathers for the Wings of Death.
18
Though as the sacred Register records,
Strife is (still boiling mortal Men's Desires)
The thing most fertile which the World affords,
Of which each little Spark may breed great Fires,
Yet that portentuous War which CHRIST'S own Words
Cites as a Sign when Judgment Earth requires,
It is not that which vain Ambition bends,
By partial Passions raised for private Ends.
19
Such was the War which in each Age was moved,
When by prepostrous Cares from rest restrained,
Bent to be more then Men, Men Monsters proved,
Whilst others Lords, who their own Slaves remained,
For whilst advancement vain they fondly loved,
The Devil their Souls, whilst they but Bodies gained,
So with their own disturbing every State,
They bought Hels Horrors at too high a Rate.
20
CHRIST came below, that Souls might be relieved,
Not to breed Peace, but worse then civil Wars,
Broils among Brethren, scarce to be believed,
Even twixt the Son, and Sire engendring Iarres,
GOD must be pleased who ever else be grieved
The Gospels growth no Tyrants malice marres,
As Egypts Burdens Isreal's Strength did crown,
The Truth mounts most when Men would press it down.
21
Those Wars which come before that fatal Day,
End things begun, and endless things begin,
Are not used Broils which States with Steell array,
Whilst Worldlings would but Worldly Treasures win,
No, even Religion must make Peace decay,
And Godliness appear the Ground of Sin,
Then let the World exspect no Peace again,
When sacred Causes breed Effects profane.
22
Such Wars have been, such some are yet to be,
What must not once plague Adams cursed Brood?
Ah that the World so often those Flammes did see,
Which Zeal had kindled to be quensh'd with Blood,
Whilst disagreeing thoughts in deeds agree,
Some bent for Sprituall, some for Temporal Good,
Hells Firebrarnds rage whilst Zeal does weakly smoke,
When Policy puts on Religions Cloakc.
23
All Nations once the Gospells Light shall see,
That Ignorance no just excuse may breed,
Truth spreads in spite of Persecution free,
The Blood of Martyrs is the Churches Seed,
That it contemned, or they condemned may be,
All on the Word their Souls may sometime feed.
The Word by which All Help, or Harm must have,
Those Knowledge damnes, whom Conscience can not save.
24
When bent to mitigate his Fathers Wrath,
Man's mortal Veil the Godhead did disguyse,
The Worlds Redeemer was engadg'd to Death,
And raised Himself to show how We should rise,
Those twelve whole Doctrine builded on his Breath,
To bear his Yoke all Nations did entyse,
They Terrors first, and then did Comfort sound,
For ere the Gospel heal, the Law must wound.
25
In simple Men who servile Trades had used,
(The Wysest of the World are greatest Fools)
The holy Ghost one Truth, all Tongues infused,
And made them teach who never knevv the Schools,
Yea, with more power the Souls of Men they bruised,
Then Rhetoric could do with golden rules,
The Spirit (when GOD the Souls of Men conuerts)
Does move the Teachers Tongues, the Hearers Hearts.
26
As Temporal Power nere to the hottest Pole,
At first being sprung, then spread in other parts,
One State over all did to the Stars extol,
By moral Virtues, and by Martial Arts,
Till colder Climats did that Heat control,
Both shovving stronger Hands, and stouter Hearts,
That Misery Relief, Plagues follovving Sin,
Slaves Liberty, Lords Bondage did begin.
27
The Light of Heaven first in the East did shine,
Then ran the Course kept by the Earthly Light,
And did [as Zeal in Realmes] rise, and decline,
Still giving Day to some, to others Night,
The Faith of Men yet toiled it first to fine,
And left no Land till loathed, not forced, no flight,
The Gadarens in their Land did CHRIST confyne,
Till to his presence they preferred their Swyne.
28
Where are these Churches seven, those Lanternes seven,
Once Asias glory, graced by sacred Scroules?
With Monsters now, as then with Martyrs even,
The Turk their Bodies, Satan rules their Souls,
Lands then obscure are lifted up to Heaven,
Whose Souls like Linxes look, whilst theirs like Owls,
Those whom the Word renowned, are known no more,
Those know GOD best, who scarce knew Men before.
29
The Worlds chief State old Rome with Glory gained,
Of which the loss her Nephews shame did seal,
The Gospells Truth at Rome once taught remained,
Yet from that purity her Heirs appeal,
Thus temp'rall Power, and Spiritual both Rome stained
Grown cold in Courage first, and last in Zeal,
The Church first stood by Toils, whilst poor still pure,
And straight whilst Rich being rent, fell when secure.
30
From offering Grace no Storm the Word can stay,
Ere Judgment come to those who will receive,
In this last Age Time does new Worlds bewray,
That CHRIST a Church over all the Earth may have,
His Righteousness shall barbarous Realms array,
If their first love more civil Lands will leave,
To Europe may America succeed,
GOD may of Stones raise up to Abram Seed.
31
The Gospel once being preached in every Place,
To Lands of which our Fathers could not tell,
And when the Gentiles all are draw'n to Grace,
Which in the new Jerusalem should dwell:
Then shall the stubborn Jews that Truth embrace,
From which with such Disdain they did rebel,
Who first the Law, last shall the Gospel have,
CHRIST whom he first did call, shall last receive.
32
When GOD would but be served by Jacobs Brood
(By his own Mercy, not their Merits moved,)
The Gentiles did what to their Eyes seemed good,
And Satan's Slaves the works of Darkness loved,
They unto Idols offered up their Blood,
Yea bowed to Beasts, then Beasts more beastly proved,
Those whom GOD did not choose, a God did choose,
And what they made did for their Maker use.
33
But when that only Soil too narrow seemed,
To bound GODS Glory, or to bound his Grace,
The Gentiles Souls from Satan he redeemed,
And unto Shems did join of Japhets Race,
The bastard Bands as lawful were esteemed,
The Strangers entered in the Childrens place,
The Infidels grew glorious by their Faith,
Whilst Mercies Minions Vessels were of Wrath.
34
That chosen Flock whom to Himself he drew,
Who saw not Jacobs fault, nor Isreal's sin,
When we regener'd, they degener'd grew,
To lend us Light their Darkness did begin,
Yea, worse then we when worst, GODS Saints they slew,
And when that his Vineyard they come to win,
They first his Servants killed and then his Son,
Naught grows more fast then Mischief when begun
35
Sons of the second Match whom CHRIST should crown,
Ah brag not you as Heritours of Grace,
The natural Branches they were broken down,
And We wild Olives planted in their Place,
Fear, fear, lest Seas of Sins our Souls do drown,
Shall He spare Us who spared not Abrams Race,
As they for lack of Faith, so may we fall,
What springs in some, is rooted in us all.
36
Till ours be full though Isreal's Light lies spent,
Our Light shall once them to Salvation lead,
Is GOD like Man that he should now repent,
That Promise which to Abrams Seed was made?
For his great Harvest ere that CHRIST be bent,
The Jews shall have a Church, and Him their Head,
Both Jews and Gentiles once, one Church shall prove,
We fear their Law, they shall our Gospel love.
37
This Sign it seems might soon accomplished be,
Were not where now remains that Race of Shems,
The Gentiles Dregs, and Idols which they see,
Makes them loath all, for what their Law condemns,
To be baptized yet some of them agree,
Whilst them their Mates, their Mates the World contemnes,
And why should we not seek to have them saved,
Since first from them Salvation we received.
38
When the Euangell most toiled Souls to win,
Even then there was a Falling from the Faith,
The ANTICHRIST his Kingdom did begin
To poison Souls, yet ere the Day of Wrath
Once shall Perditions Child, that MAN OF SIN
Be to the World revealed, and plagued to Death.
GOD may by Tyrants scourge his Church when grieved,
Yet shall the Scourge be scourged, the Church relieved.
39
The ANTICHRIST did come with Power and Might,
By Signs and Wonders to delude the Eyes,
Thus Satan seems an Angel whiles of Light,
That who the Truth contemned, may trust in Lies:
And this with Justice stands even in GODS Sight,
That he in Darkness fall, the Light who flies,
And O this is the uttermost of ill,
When GOD does give one over to his own Will!
40
This Adversary of CHRIST'S heavenly Word,
He should himself extol by Satan's Wit,
Over All that is called GOD or is adored,
And of Iniquity no Means omit,
Though worthy of the World to be abhorred,
He in the CHVRCH of GOD as GOD shall sit:
This Hypocrite huge Mischief borne to breed,
Should look like GOD, yet prove a Devil indeed.
41
This Mystery of Sin which GOD does hate,
Even in Paul's Time began, and since endured,
Yet could not then be known, till from the Gate,
That which then stopped, was razed, and it assured,
The Roman Empire then it was so Great,
That of less States the Luster it obscured,
The Let which then remained, being once removed,
This ANTICHRIST the next Aspirer proved,
42
That spiritual Plague which poisons many Lands,
Is not the Turk nor Mahomet his Saint,
Nor none who to cross CHRIST directly stands,
He whom the Spirit takes such great Pain to paint,
It must be one who in the Church commands,
No Foe confessed, but a Professor faint,
For if All did him know, None would him know,
Feigned Friends, false Foes may whom they will ou'rthrow.
43
Ere that Day come which should the Just adorn,
And shall discover every secret Thought,
The ANTICHRIST whose Badge whole Lands have borne.
The Prophet false which lying Wonders wrought,
The Beast with the blasphemous Mouth, and Horn,
Shall be revealed, and to Confusion brought,
For Causes hid though GOD a Space spare some,
Their Judgments are the heavier when they come.
44
The shameless Whore which sits upon seven Hills
Whose Sight lascivious riotously roules,
Whose Wine does make Kings drunk, snares thousands will,
The Devils chief Baud adulterating Souls,
The Cup of Wrath that filthy Strumpet filles,
Whose boundless Lust no Law, no Time controules,
That stumbling Block by whom so many fell,
Shall once burn here, and ever in the Hell.
45
The Part where now that Whore her Court does hold,
Vile Habylon, abominable Town,
Where every thing, even Souls of Men are sold.
Low in the Dust to lie shall be brought down,
Her Nakedness all Nations shall behold,
And burn that Body which their Souls did drown,
Whore (as she sowed) so shall she reap huge Evils,
Of the Worlds Mistress made a Den of Devils.
46
Fly faithful Christians from that Sea of Sin,
Who hate the Whore, and the two horned Beast,
Fly, fly in time, before their Grief begin,
Lest as their Pleasures, so their Plagues you taste,
When as the Lamb the Victory does win,
He of fat things will make his Flock a Feast,
This Cloud dispersed, the Sun shall shine more bright,
Whilst Darkness past endeeres the present Light.
47
Now in the dangerous Days of this last Age,
When as he knows that CHRIST to come prepares,
The Devil shall like a roaring Lion rage,
And to catch Souls shall set a thousand Snares,
He against GODS Saints twice deadly Wars shall wage,
Whilst some Presumption tempts, and some Despaires,
If that this Time not shortened were, deceau'd,
GODS chosen Children hardly could be saved.
48
Some for a glorious Use who once did serve,
As Stars to Eyes, clear Lights of Souls esteemed,
Lo, (stumbling Blocks) from their first Course do swerue,
Not what they were, else were not what they seemed,
Such justly damned (Lights Foes) as they deserve,
From Darkness more shall never be redeemed,
Church Angels all, all for Examples use,
So that their Fall does many thousands bruise.
49
Men so the World shall love, Religion hate,
That all true Zeal shall in Contempt be brought,
The spiritual Lights Eclipse shall grow so great,
That Lies the Truth, Truth shall a Lie be thought,
Yet some shall weigh their Works at such a Rate,
As they Themselves, not CHRIST their Souls had bought,
All just to seem, not be, their Thoughts shall bend,
Not bent to edify, but to contend.
50
Some Signs are gone which registered were found,
To rouse the World before that dreadful Blast,
But [Ah] what All now see, and I must founds,
I wish they were to come, or else were past,
Those Signs, those Sins I sing, do warn, shall wound
This Age too aged, and worthy to be last,
It Signs that shadowed were does so design,
I must historifie, and not divine.
51
The Devils last charge to shun CHRIST gave aduyce,
Since all the World would be seduced by Lies,
He now whilst all adore their own Deuyce,
Taints all men's Hearts, or else vpbraides their Eyes,
The Froth of Virtue, and the Dregs of Vice,
Which only last, the Worlds last Period tryes,
So high a point Impiety does win,
Not grieved, no, not ashamed, men brag of Sin.
52
Men with Themselves so much in love remain,
That Rich without, and poor within being worn,
They (if not gorgeous) Garments do disdain,
Though the first badge of Bondage which was borne,
Yet pampred Bodies famished Souls retain,
Which seek the Shadow, and the substance scorn,
Ere high advanced, all once must humble prove,
Those first themselves must loath, whom GOD will love.
53
The Greatest number now profanely swears,
And dare to Brawle, or Jest, name GOD in vain,
Yet that Heaven Thunder, or Earth burst, not fears,
Lest so they crushed, or swallowed should remain:
Some vomit forth (polluting purer Ears)
That what them first, may others after stain,
A filthy Tongue, and a blasphemous Mouth,
Of Satan's Seed do show a mighty Growth,
54
That Avarice which the Apostle told,
When as the World declynes Men's Minds should sway,
Does rage so now, that even their GOD for Gold,
Not only Men, Men in our time betray,
To Satan some for gain their Souls have sold,
Whilst what their Hearts hold Truth, their Words gainsay.
By Ethnickes once those must condemned remain,
Who change Religion Earthly things to gain.
55
What Age ere this so many Children saw
Who with their Parents (O unhappy Strife)
Plead still at Law, though wronging Natures Law,
And help to haste their Death who gave them Life?
Now Virtuous Words to vicious Deeds do draw,
The Love of GOD is rare, of Pleasure ryfe:
This Darkness shows that it draws nere the Night,
Sin it must shortly fall, since at the hight,
56
Then even the most of Misery to make.
The Souls of some which still being evil grow worse,
All Sense quyte lost in Sin such pleasure take,
That frozen Minds can melt in no remorse,
No threatened Terrors can their Conscience wake,
Sin has so much, the Spirit so little force,
No Physic for the Sick which live as sound,
A Sore past sense does show a deadly wound.
57
As such a Burden it did burst to bear,
(Through Horror of our Sins) the Earth does shake,
And shall it self oft-tymes asunder tear,
Ere CHRIST his Judgment manifest does make.
Or else I know not if it quake for fear,
Of that great Fire which should it shortly sack:
The living Earth to move, dead Earth does move,
Yet earthly Men then Earth more earthly prove.
58
Whiles in some parts whose Ruins Fame renownes,
In indignation of her sinful Seed,
(As Men should do their Eyes) the Earth GOD drownes.
Which those to plague who the first cause did breed.
Does vomit Mountains, and does swallow Towns,
The Worlds Foundation brangling like a Reed,
Whilst with pale Hearts the panting People think,
That Hell will rise, or that the Heaven will sink.
59
One Earthquake tossed the Turks imperial Head,
Days sensible, but violent some Hours,
Till in that Town a monstrous Breach was made,
[As charged at once by all the damned Powers]
I know not whether buried first, or dead,
Troops seemed to strive in falling with their Towers,
Whilst those who stood all trembling did attend,
That all the World [at least themselues] should end.
60
Twix Rome and Naples once (in Enuies Eye)
What stately Towns did the Worlds Conquerours found,
Which now we not (no, not their Ruins) spy,
Being laid more low then level with the Ground,
They with all theirs en-earth'd by Earthquakes lie,
Whose Stones (drawn down where Darkness does abound)
Like Sisiphus perchance a number roulles,
Else Dis builds Doungeons for the damned Soulles.
61
Late near those Parts whose Ruins men admire,
Where Wealth superfluous idle Wonders wrought,
An Earthquake strange amazement did acquire,
A Plain conceau'd, and forth a Mountain brought,
Which diverse days disgorged Flammes of Fire,
And Stones whose Substance was consumed to naught:
Hells Fire it seemed which as GODS Wrath still lights,
Grown great flamm'd forth vp-braiding Sinners sights.
62
Last in this Land our Eyes saw one of late,
Whose Terror from some Minds rests not removed,
Then any else as strange, though not so great,
Not violent, but universal proved,
As if of Natures Course the threatened Date,
All at one Hour this Kingdom trembling moved,
The old State loathing, longing for a new,
Earth leapes for joy, as ready to renew.
63
But ah who wakes when rocked is all this Round,
Or stryues to stand though even the Earth thus starts?
Though GOD does toss this Ball till it rebound,
Who least it part, from his Corruption parts?
Ah that the World so senseless should be found,
Both Heaven and Earth do shake, but not Men's Hearts,
Since for his Word the World disdaines to bow,
Dumb Creatures do denounce GODS Judgments now.
64
I think the Earth by such strange Throws would tell
How much she does her present State despise,
Or else all those who in her Bowels dwell
Do rouse themselves as ready now to rise,
Her Belly thus grown Big does seem to swell,
As one whose Travel soon should her sur-prise,
And yet her Brood she Viper-like must free,
Whose Course must end when Theirs begins to be.
65
As GOD that Day of Doom strives to make known,
By Monstrous Signs which may amaze the Mind,
That Judgment Great by Judgments is fore-shown,
Whilst all the Weapons of his Wrath have shined,
That others may (whilst some rest thus ouer-thrown)
Stand in the furnace of Affliction fined,
For still the Wretched most Religious prove,
And often Examples more then Doctrine move.
66
The Sword of GOD shall once be drunk with Blood,
And Surfette on the Flesh of thousands slain
Of those who (following Evil) do flee from Good,
And (scorning CHRIST) profess to be profane,
From GODS Wine Press of Wrath shall flow a Flood,
Which shall with Blood their Horses Bridles stain,
None may abide, nor yet can fly his sight,
When armed with Vengeance GOD does thundering fight.
67
When Father-like GOD chastising his Child.
Plagued alt the Subjectes for their Sovereigns Crime,
What Thousands then were from the World exild?
Even in three Days (so soon turns Flesh to Slyme)
The Earth made waste Men had no more defild,
Had but one Angel warred a little Time,
Since by GODS Word the World did made remain,
Less then his Look may ruin it again.
68
The Pestilence of Wrath chief Weapon thought,
Which of all Plagues the PLAGVE is only called,
As if All else (respecting it) were naught,
It has so much the Minds of Men appald,
That Wound by GODS own Hand seems only wrought,
Whose mediat Means scarce rest to Reason thrald:
That which we not conceive, admire we must,
And in GODS Power above our Knowledge trust.
69
That poisoned Dart whose Power none can gaine-stand,
GOD rarely used in time of greatest Wrath,
And had it once but brangled in his Hand,
All trembling stood, (as twixt the Jaws of Death)
Then now it self, the Fame more feared this Land,
Of this great Frenzy which infects the Breath:
A thing thought strange by Habit homely proves,
What first all Grief, at last all Sense remoues.
70
Once in one Age, few Days, and in few Parts,
The Pest some People to Repentance urged,
And did with Terror strike the strongest Hearts,
Whilst his Vineyard the Heavens great Husband purged,
The Quier of whose Wrath did rain down Darts,
By which of late what Kingdom was not scourged:
So that Men now not fear that Whip of GOD,
Like Boys often beaten which contemn the Rod.
71
Lo in this stately I Will admired so much,
What Province, no, what Town has not been pind,
By that abhorred Disease which strikes who touch,
Whilst Byles the Body, Madness swells the Mind?
Ah of some Towns the Anguish has been such,
That All, all Hope of safety had resigned,
Whilst Friends no Comfort gave, no, no Relief,
The Sickness only (not the Death) bred Grief.
72
This raging Ague bursts so ugly out,
Till Men of those whom they love best, are dread,
Then Danger all in every thing do doubt,
Men by the Plague made Plagues as Plagues are fled,
And are with Horror compassed round about,
When that Contagion through the Air is spread,
The Air which first our Breath abused does stain,
It poisoned so but Poisons us again.
73
What thing more wretched can imagined be,
Then is the Town where once the Botch abounds?
There not one Sense rests from some Burden free,
Three do infect, and Two (though pure) bear Wounds,
Often in one Hole Heaps thrown at once we see,
As where to bury Men feared Want of Bounds,
Yea whilst in Plaintes they spend their plaguie Breath,
Of all things which are feared the least is Death.
74
Death (whilst no Drogue this Fevers Force ou'rthrowes)
Often ere the Patient the Physician claims,
The Air they draw their Heat still higher blows,
Till even what should refresh thus most enflames,
Of damned Souls the State their Torment shows,
Who gnash their Teeth as cold whilst Fire enflames,
And twix their Pains this Difference only winnes,
Death ends the One, the Other but begins.
75
To plague those Parts where CHRIST'S own Troops do dwell,
The Angel which destroys has most been bent,
That whom Words could not move, Wounds may compel,
Ere Ruin come, in Time now to repent,
By Pain on Earth made think of Pain in Hell,
As this they fly, that That they may prevent:
What can discourage those whom CHRIST does love,
To whom Evil Good, Grief Joy, Death Life does prove?
76
Where we should always fight the Heaven to gain,
By Prayers, Plaintes and charitable Deeds,
To raise up Earth on Earth our Strength we strain,
So base a Courage worldly Honor breeds,
This does provoke the Darts of GODS Disdain,
By which of some the wounded Conscience bleedes,
All headlongs run to Hell whose Way is even,
But by a narrow Path are drawn to Heaven.
77
Of Vengeance now the Storehouse opned stands,
O what a Weight of Wrath the World now bears!
Through Terror straight why tremble not all Lands,
When GOD in Rage aThrone of Justice reares?
And pours down Plagues whilst brandishing his Brands,
The Pest being past the World next Famine fears:
Still think that Mischief never comes alone,
Those who fear more what is the less do move.
78
Since that the World does loath celestial Food,
That spiritual MANNA which Souls Nectar proves,
By Grace drawn forth from the Redeemers Blood,
A Gift (no Guerdoun) given to whom he loves,
Those who terrestrial things think only good,
Them Want shall try whom no Abundance moves,
For Ah of some so fat the Bodies be,
That of their Souls they not the Leanness see.
79
GODS Creatures (often condemned) shall once accuse
Those who in Wantonness them vainly spent,
And justly what unjustly they abuse,
Shall unto them more sparingly be lent,
That which they now superfluously use,
Shall (made a Curse) not Natures Need content,
A barren Soul should have a barren Earth,
Often temporal Plenty breeds a spiritual Dearth.
80
Those in the Dust who still profanely roll,
Whose thornie Thoughts do chock that heavenly Seed,
Which by the Word was sown in every Soul,
Shall likewise want what should their Bodies feed,
What Most they trust, shall once their Hopes control,
By earthly Hunger heavenly Thirst to breed,
Thus those (like Babes) whose Judgment is not deep,
Who scorned a Treasure shall for Triffles weep.
81
What Sauces strange (a Fault which Custom clokes)
To urge the Bodies Appetit are made,
Which Natures self sufficiently prouokes,
But of the Soul when carnal Cates it lead,
The Appetite which (Ah even Nature chokes)
What Art is used to quicken it when dead?
When Bodies do too much, Souls naught digest,
But when the Others fast, are fit to feast.
82
Base Belly-gods whose Board is Satan's Bate,
Whose Judgments to your Taste rest only thrall,
The LORD in wrath shall cut away your Meat,
And for your Honny furnish you with Gall,
Like loathsome Beasts since you the Acornes eat,
Yet look not up to see from whence they fall,
Sons prodigal who from your Father swerue,
You keeping worse then Swine, shall justly sterue,
83
To waken some which sleep in Sin as dead,
The LORD ere CHRIST do come all States to try,
Since being abused, shall break the Staff of Bread,
And as we him make Earth us fruits deny,
The Corn shall wither, and the Grass shall fade,
Then to nurce Men being rather bent to die,
As dutiful to him by whom they breed,
GODS Creatures pure, his Rebels scorn to feed.
84
Now in this Time which is the last esteemed,
The Spirits impure do all in one conspyre,
And work that GOD by Men may be blasphemed,
To purchase partners of eternal Fire,
That who should them condemn, has us redeemed,
Makes Envy blow the Bellows of their Ire,
The wicked Angels irritated thus,
Not seek their safety, but to ruin us.
85
More near does draw Salvation to the Just,
The more the Dragons Mind does Fnuie wound,
That Men (the Slaves of Death, the Sons of Dust)
As Heirs of Heaven, with Glory should be crowned,
And that perpetual pains they suffer must,
Though (all Immortal) to no Bodies bound:
Naught true repose to the envious brings,
Whom their own harm, or others good still stings.
86
Man's Foe who first Confusion did devise,
(By long Experience grown profound in skill)
Through strength often tried our Weakness does despise,
And knows what best may serve each Soul to kill,
He to his part our Passions does entise,
And to betray our Wit corrupts out Will:
Whom GOD not guardes those Satan soon may win,
Whilst Force does charge without, and Fraud within.
87
That Heir of Hell whom justly GOD rejects,
Who sought by subtlety all Souls to blind,
Not only Shafts in secret now directs,
By Inspirations poisoning the Mind,
But even a Banner boldly he erects,
As this Worlds Prince by public power designed,
From shape to shape this Proteus thus remoues,
Who first a Fox, and last a Lion proves.
88
He since his Kingdom now should end so soon,
Does many Circes, and Medeas make,
That can obscure the Sun, and charm the Moon,
Raise up the Dead, and make the Living quake,
Whilst they by Pictures persons have undone,
Do give to some, from others substance take:
Three Elements their tyranny does thrall,
But often the fourth takes Vengeance of them all.
89
Whilst in his Hand the Bolts of Death he bears,
Still watching Souls the crafty Hunter lies,
With inward Fancies, and with outward fears,
Whom he may tempt continually he tryes,
Whiles [rumbling Horrour] sounds assault the ears,
Whiles Monstrous Forms paint Terror in the Eyes:
He who with GOD even in the Heaven durst strive,
Thinks soon on Earth Men's Ruin to contriue.
90
As many did possessed by Spirits remain,
When first CHRIST came Salvation to begin,
So likewise now before he come again,
Some Bodies daily which they enter in,
By desp'rat means would be dispatched of pain,
Else (bound in Body) loose their Souls to Sin,
And if that GOD not interposed his Power,
Straight every Soul Hells Tyrant would devour.
91
In some whom GOD permits him to abuse,
The Lord of Darkness does at diverse Hours
His subtle Substance fraudfullie infuse,
Till they his Spirit, his Spirit their Souls deuoures,
He as his own does all their Members use,
And they [as Babes with Kniues] work with his Powers,
O monstrous Union, Miracle of Evils,
Which thus with Men incorporates the Devils!
92
When erst in Delphos after ugly cries,
The Priestresse Pithia seeming to be sage,
Big by the Devil delivered was of Lies,
She to the Terror of that senseless Age,
Still panting, swollen, Hell flamming through her Eyes,
Roared forth Responses by Prophetic Rage:
She to her LORD whilst prostituted thus,
An Image was of whom he filles with us.
93
Of those who are possessed in such a sort,
Some to themselves whom Satan does accuse,
They Mad (or He in them) whiles brag, whiles sport,
And whilst they would the Lookers on abuse,
Do secrets (to themselves not known) report,
And of all Tongues the Eloquence can use,
All what each Age devised observing still,
The Devil knows much, but bends it all to ill.
94
O Heavens be hid, and lose thy Light O Sun!
Since in the World (O what a fearful thing!)
The Devil of some so great a power has won,
That what was theirs he does in bondage bring,
Then from their Body speaks (as from a Tun,)
As sounds from Bells, or Floods through Rocks do ring:
Dear Savior rise, and in a Just disdain,
This Serpent bruise, this Liuiathan rain.
95
The Sun, and Moon, now oftentimes look pale,
(As if ashamed the Shame of Men to see)
Or else grown old, their force begins to fail,
That thus so often eclipsed their Beauties be,
And over their Glory Darkness does prevail,
Whilst faint for Grief their Ruin they foresee,
For (as superfluous) they must shortly fall,
When as the light of Light does lighten all.
96
The Heavenly Bodies [as being grown less strong]
Do seem more slack, [as weary of their Race]
So that Time rests reformed [as being run wrong]
All Climats still new Temperatures embrace,
What strange Effects must follow then ere long?
Some Stars seem new, and others change their place,
So altered is the starrie Courts Estate,
Astrologues want intelligence of late.
97
Each element by diverse Signs has shown,
That shortly evil must be discerned from good,
The Earth (aged Mother) now is Barren grown,
Whose Womb often worn, now torn, does f^ile in Brood,
And may (since staggering else) be soon ou'rthrowne.
What wonder? Weak through Age and drunk with Blood:
With Blood, which still to GOD for Vengeance cries,
And (as o'reburden'd) groaning groueling lies.
98
The liquid Legions by tumultuous Bands,
Whose bellowing Billows to transcend contend,
Do whiles usurp, whiles leave possessed Lands,
In Monsters fertile, fishes rarely lend,
Whilst crowned with Clouds each murmuring Mountain stands
Which acted first, but suffer must in end,
A mighty Change Heavens Monarch now concludes,
Floods first quensh'd flams, flams straight shall kindle floods,
99
The Air whose Power impetuous Naught can bound,
Does cite all Souls to GODS Great Parliament,
Whilst thundering Tempests roar a rumbling Sound.
And the last Trumpets Terror represent,
Those Blasts denounce the Ruin of this Round,
Which Heaven in Showers seems weeping to lament:
Thus Waters wash, Winds wipe, and both conspire,
That Earth so purged may be prepared for Fire.
100
The Water, Earth, the Air would it ou'rthrow,
Whose Rage by Ruin only is represt,
The High things still insulting over the Low,
Till once the Highest have consumed the Rest,
The fourth must end what the first three fore-show,
Whose proof is last reserved as being the Best,
A fiery Trial every thing defines,
And All at last to a Perfection fines.
101
Then Natures Self not strong as of before,
Yeeldes Fruits deformed as from a bastard Seed,
That monstrous Minds may be admired no more,
Whilst monstrous Bodies more Amazement breed,
All the Portentuous Brood of Beasts abhor,
And since prodigious ominously dread,
From their first Form since all things thus decline,
All in another Shape must shortly shine.
102
Few Signs or none remain Men's Minds to move,
Till of the Son of Man the Sign crave Sight,
That Glory which unspeakable does prove,
CHRIST'S Substance, no, his Shadow, yet our Light,
Whose Majesty, and Beauty, from above,
Shall ere he shine, make all about be bright,
The Coming of the LORD that Sign bewrayes,
As Lightning Thunder, as the Sun his Rays.
103
Yet this vile Age (what Rage?) some Mockers breeder,
That big with Scorn disdainfully dare say,
What change mad Minds with such fond Fancies feeds,
From the first Form since naught below does stray,
The Summer Harvest, Winter Spring succedes,
The Moon does shine by Night, the Sun by day,
Males procreat, and Females do conceive,
Some daily Life do lose, some it receive?
104
O Atheists vile, else Christians void of Care,
From GODS Tribunal who in vain appeal,
That CHRIST to judge the World does straight prepare,
You thus [contemning Signes] a Sign reveal,
Whose Hearts obdur'd the Nearenesse does declare,
Of your Damnations, our Saluations Seal,
And whilst your Heart both Heaven, and Hell derides,
Your Judgment Heaven, your Torment Hell prouides.
105
Yet foolish Souls their Pleasures still affect,
And marrying Wives what Mirth may move devise,
But whilst asleep their Safety they neglect,
CHRIST (as a Thief) against them shall arise,
And(in a Rage) when they Him least exspect,
Shall slothful Servants suddenly surprise,
As Such shall wish [their Talents strictly try'd]
That from his Face them Hills, them Hells might hide.
106
O Multitude, O multitude as Sand!
A day of Horror strange shall straight appeared,
Come down and in the threshing Valley stand,
The threshing Valley (lo) the LORD draws near,
And else does take (take heed) his Fan in Hand,
Light Souls as Chafe with Wind euanish here,
The Harvest is ripe, and the Wine Press is full,
Yea Wickedness ou'rflowes: all Hearts are dull.
107
Seal, Vial, Trumpet, Seventh, opens, poures, sounds,
What does not intimate GODS Great Decree,
Which Natures Course, Man's Faith, GODS Mercy bounds,
Even in a time, when Time no more should be,
The Fire is kindling else which All confounds,
GODS Hand (lo) writes, his Balance raised we see:
When Souls are weighed [GODS wondrous Works to crown]
The Weighty must mount up, the Light fall down.
108
But ere the Depthes of Wrath I enter in,
When as Repentance shall no more have place,
As GOD a while deferres some Souls to win,
I will suspend my Fury for a Space,
That ere the Hight of Horror do begin,
My Thoughts may bath amidst the Springs of Grace,
To clear some Souls which Satan seeks to blind,
LORD purge my Spirit, illuminat my Mind.
DOOMES-DAY, OR, THE GREAT DAY OF THE LORDS IVDGEMENT.
The third Hour.
THE ARGUMENT.
WHilst Angels Him conuoy, and Saints attend,
(The Heavens as Smoke all fled before his Face)
CHRIST through the Cloud, With Glory does descend,
With Majesty, and Terror, Power, and Grace:
What fly, walk, grow, swim, All What may end, do end,
Earth, Air, and Sea, All purged in little Space,
Strange Preparations that great Court preceede,
Where All must meet whom any Age did breed.
1
Immortal MONARCH Ruler of the Rounds,
Embaume my Bosom with a secret Grace,
Whilst lifted up above the vulgar Bounds,
A Path not pau'd my Spirit aspires to trace,
That I with brazen Breath may rore forth Sou^ds
To shake the Heart, fix Palenesse in the Face:
LORD make my swelling Voice (a mighty Wind)
Lift up the Low, beat down the lofty Mind.
2
What dreadful Sound does thunder in my Ears?
What pompous Splendour does transport mine Eyes?
I wot not what above my self me bears,
He comes, He comes who all Hearts Secrets tries,
Showt, showt for Joy who long have rained down Tears,
Houle, houle for Grief in Ease who wallowing lies,
Now shall be built and on Eternal Grounds,
The Hight of Horror, Pleasure passing Bounds.
3
Now no more firm the Firmament does fly,
As leapes the Dear fled from the Hunters face,
Lo, like a Drunkard reels the Crystal Sky,
As Garments old degraded from their grace,
All folded up the Azure Pallions spy,
Which with a noise does vanish from the Place,
The Lantern burnt, Light vtters utter Worth,
Drawn are the Hingings, MAJESTY comes forth.
4
Who can abide the Glory of that fight,
Which kills the Living, and the Dead does raise,
With Squadrons compassed, Angels flamming bright,
Whom Thousands serve, ten thousand Thousands praise,
My Soul entranced Rest ravished with that Light,
Whose least-least part may all the World amase,
That of our Spirit which does the Powers condense,
Of muddie Mortals far transcends the sense.
5
A Fire before him no resistance finds,
Fierce sounds of Horror thunder in each ear,
The noyce of Armies, Tempests, and Whirle-windes,
A weight of Wrath, more then ten Worlds can bear,
Think what a Terror stings distracted Minds,
When Mountains melt, and Valleys burst for fear,
What? what must this in guilty Mortals breed,
Whilst all this All stands trembling like a Reed?
6
The GOD of Battles Battle does intend,
To daunt the Nations, and to fetter Kings,
He with all Flesh in Judgment to contend,
At Midnight comes as on the Mornings wings,
O time of Ruin ending without End,
Huge time of Vengeance where all balanced hings!
The LORDS Great Day, a Day of Wrath and Pain,
Whose Night of Darkness never cleares again.
7
That Element still clear in spite of Nights,
Which as most subtle mounted up above,
To kindle there perchance those glorious Lights,
Which died by it, as decked by Beauty move,
Of curious Fancies else to stay the Flights,
As which may not be touched, a bounds did prove,
That they presume no higher things to see,
Then are the Elements of which they be.
8
Mark how Aeolian Bands loosed from the Bounds
Where them in Fetters the Eternal keeps,
As if the angry Spirit of all the Rounds,
Like Tyrants rage, till Heaven to quensh them weeps,
Whose rumbling Fury whilst it all confounds,
Whiles cleaues the Clouds, whiles parts the deepest Deepes
By Noise above, and Violence below,
Earthquake and Thunder both at once to show.
9
Even so Fire which was made (naught to annoy)
To liquid Limits closed with Clouds retire,
Lest what it fosters, it might else destroy,
O when enlarged and kindled by GODS Ire,
It him at Midnight does as Torch conuoy,
All all will seem a PYRAMID of Fire,
To GOD what is this Universal Frame?
Now but a Moate, at last a little Flame?
10
The Axell-trees on which Heavens Round does move,
Shrunk from their Burden both fall broken down,
Those which to Pilots point out from above
Their Ways through Waves to richesse or renown,
And so (though fixed) the Strayers helpers prove,
Nights stately Lamps borne in an Azure Crown,
Those guyding Stars may as not needful fall,
When worldlings wanderings are accomplished all,
11
The Vagabonds above, lascivious Lights,
Which from fond Minds which did their Course admire,
By strange Effects observed from several hights,
[As Deities] Altars Idols did acquire,
Thrown from their Spheres exposed to Mortals sights,
As abject Ashes, excrements of Fire,
They in their Ruins (far from what before)
Shall damn the Nations which did them adore.
12
With Ludgings twelve designed by several Signs,
Now falls that Building more then Crystal clear,
Which the days Eye (though circling all) confynes,
Still tempring Times, and seasoning the Year,
All temporal Light (no more to rise) declynes,
That Glory may eternally appear,
All then being Infinite, no bounds attend,
Times and half times being past, Time takes an end,
13
As slymie Vapors whilst like Stars they fall,
Shot from their Place do hurl along the Sky,
The Pleiades, Arcturus, Orion, all
The glistring Troops [Lights languishin] do die,
Like other Creatures to confusion thrall,
They from the Flammes (as Sparks from Fire) do fly,
The Heavens at last grieved for their falling Spheres,
(All else dried up) weep down their Stars for Tears.
14
As Leafes from Trees, the Stars from Heaven do shake,
Dark Clouds of Smoke exhausting those of Rain,
The Moon all turns to Blood, the Sun grows Black,
Which whilst those Monstrous Forms they do retain,
Of Vengeance Badges, Signs of Ruin make,
And not eclipsed by usual means remain,
Those common Lights obscured, the Just shine bright,
The Wicked enter in Eternal Night.
15
Whilst staggering reels this Universal Frame,
The Heavens bow down with GOD as being his Seat,
His Scepter Iron, his Throne a fyrie Flame,
To bruise the Mighty, and to fine the Great,
Who of his Glory can the Greatness dream
Who once was valued at a little Rate?
GOD by his Word did first make all of naught,
And by his Word shall judge All of each thought.
16
When GOD his people did together draw
On Sions Mount to register his Will,
He [that they might attend with reverent Aw]
Came clad with Clouds stern Trumpets sounding shrill,
And threatened Death, (whilst thundering forth his Law)
To all that durst approach the trembling Hill:
What compassed with Death he thus did give,
Ah, who can keep, or violat, and live?
17
Since this confounding Form did (Minds to tame,
That of their Yoke all might the burden know)
Those dreadful Statutes terriblie proclaim,
All Flesh for fear shall fade away below,
How they were kept when GOD a count does claim,
A time of Terror more then words can show,
He gave in Mercy, shall exact with Ire,
The Mountain smoked, the World shall burn on Fire.
18
In spite of Natures powers which then exspyre,
Through liquid Limits breaking from above,
Lo down-ward tends the Tempest of this Fire,
The Airie Region does a Furnace prove,
To boil her Guests the Vessels of GODS Ire,
Which tortured there can no where else remove,
Flammes which should still for their confusion rage,
Thus kindled first perchance naught can assuage*
19
The growing Creatures which do mount most high,
And as their earthly Bounds they did disdain,
Would (whilst their Tops encroach upon the Sky)
Base Men vpbraide who not their Strength do strain
With heavenly Helps still higher up to fly,
And spurn at Earth where rooted they remain,
Those leauie Bands while as they fan the Air,
As fittest Baits for Fire first kindle their.
20
Who can imagine this and yet not mourn?
What Battle must succeed this huge Alarm?
Of Lebanon the stately Cedars burn,
The Pines of Idus fall without an Arm,
The fertile Forests all to Flames do turn,
And waste the World which they were wont to warm:
To plague proud Sinners every thing accords,
What Comfort once, Confusion now affords,
21
The smoking Mountains melt like Wax away,
Else sincke for Fear (O more then fearful things!)
They which the Fields with Rivers did array,
As if to quensh their Heat, drink up their Springs,
Like faded Flowers their drouping Tops decay,
Which crowned with Clouds stretched through the Air their wings,
As did the Rain, the Fire does sease all bounds,
What Last the First; the Last at First confounds.
22
Then of That Birth Hills shall delivered be,
Which big by Nature they so long have borne,
Though it fond Mortals (Slaves by being free)
To make Abortiues have their Bellies torn,
Gold as when Midas wish (O just Decree!)
Shall flow superfluous Couetice to scorn,
What of All else did measure once the Worth,
Shall then ly loathed by Aguous Earth spued forth.
23
The godly Kings wise Son from Ophir brought
With Ethnickes joined [all welcome are for Gains)
What Spaniards now in other Worlds have sought,
That golden Fleece still win, and worn with Pains,
And yet it last which ail this Trouble wrought,
From molten Mountains shall ou'rflow the Plains:
Ah, ah cursed Gold what make thou not Men do,
Being sought over all the Earth, and in it to?
24
Fond Coveting made our first Parents fall,
And since the same has still held down their Race,
Whose Judgments were to senseless things made thrall,
Which GOD most low, and they most high do place,
Naught in themselves, to us by us made All,
The which we first, and then they all things grace,
But straight dissolved they shall to Hell repair,
To brave a Multitude by them drawn thaire.
25
At Heaven (when hence) if certain to arrive,
These barbarous Souls were well, who free from Noy,
Walk naked, feed on Herbs, and for Naught strive,
But scorn our Toils, whose Treasure is their Toy,
As Adam first (when innocent) they live,
And goldlesse thus the golden Age enjoy,
We barbarous are in Deeds, and they in Show,
Too little they, and ah too much we know.
26
What huge Deluge of Flames enflames my Mind,
Whilst inward Ardour that without endeeres,
A Light ou'rflowing Light does make me blind,
The Sea a Lantern, Earth a Lamp appears,
That crystal Covering burned which it confined,
The Way to Ruin fatal Lightning cleares,
Dust equals all which unto it return,
All Creatures now one funeral Fire does burn.
27
The stately Birds which sacred were to Jove,
Whose Pourtraits did great Emprours Powers adorn,
Whilst generously their Race they strived to prove,
Which Titans Beams with bended Eyes had borne,
Shall fall down headlongs burning from above,
(As Phaeton was faind) Ambitions scorn:
As fit to fall who of themselves presume,
Those raging Wrath does at the first consume.
28
The sixth and last of that unmatched Kind,
(If each of them does live a thousand Years)
Shall Sabbath have in Ashes still confined,
Whose Birth, Death, Nest, and Tomb all one appears,
That only Bird which over all others shined,
[As over all Lights that which Nights Darkness cleares,]
He from renewing of his Age by Fire,
Shall be prevented ere that it exspire.
29
The Salamander which still Vulcan loved,
And those small Worms which in hot Waters dwell,
This lives in Fire, that dies from it removed,
But those last Flames shall both from Breath expel,
Those Creatures thus by burning Heat often proved,
Show tortured Souls may pine, yet breath in Hell,
If those in Fire (and with Delight) remain,
May not the Wicked live in Fire with Pain.
30
That pompous Bird which still in Triumph bears,
Rould in a Circle his ostentiue Tail,
With Stars (as if to brave the starrie Spheres)
Then seems at once to walk, to fly, to sail,
His Flesh which kept naught to Corruption wears,
Against Destruction shall not now prevail,
Those painted Fowls shall then be Baits for Fire,
As painted Fools be now for endless Ire.
31
The Indian Griphon Terror of all Eyes,
That flying Giant, Nimbrod of the Air,
The scaly Dragon which in Ambush lies,
To watch his Enemy with a Martial Care,
Though breathing Flames, touched by a Flame straight dies,
And all winged Monsters made (since hurtful) rare,
Types of strong Tyrants which the Weak oppress,
Those ravenous great Ones Prey upon the Less.
32
Their nimble Feathers then shall naught import,
Which with their Wings both level Sea and Land,
The Faulcon fierce, and all that active Sort,
Which by their Burden grace a Princes Hand,
And [they for Prey, their Bearers bent for Sport]
Do thrall great Monarchs which even Men command,
Ere fallen on Earth their Ashes quenshed be;
Whom soard of late aloft Men scarce could see.
33
Those Birds [but turned to Dust] again shall rain,
Which mutinous Israel with a Curse received,
And those for Sport so prodigally slain,
For which (what shame) some Belly-monsters craved
Long Necks like Crans their Tastes to entertain,
From which the PHOENIX hardly can be saved,
In Bodies base whose Bellies still are full,
The Souls are made (choked with gross Vapors) dull.
34
The feathred Flocks which by a Notion strange,
(I know not how inspired or what they see)
Or if their inward Following outward Change,
As true Astrologues gathering Storms foresee,
In quaking Clouds their murmuring Troops which range,
To wail, or warn the World hiu'd on some Tree,
Naught unto them this General Wrack fore-showes,
Men, Angels, no, not CHRIST [as Man] fore-knowes.
35
The rage of Time those Changelings to appease,
Like fained Friends who Fortune only woo,
Which haunt each soil whilst there they find their Ease,
Though I confess this shows their Greatness too,
Who at their Will use Kingdoms as they please,
Even more then Monarchs with great Hosts can do.
But yet where ere they be they then shall fall,
GODS Army, I, his Arm does stretch over All.
36
Those which themselves in Civil Wars do match,
Whose sound triumphall Lions puts to flight,
The Mornings Vshers, urging Sleeps dispatch
Whose Wings applaud their Voice saluting Light,
The Laborers Horloge, ordinary Watch,
Whose Course by Nature ruled goes always right,
Those Trumpeters dissoluing many Dream,
May then not see the Day which they proclaim.
37
So suddenly all shall with Ruin meet,
That even the Foul which still does streams pursue,
As if to wash, or hyde, her loathed black Feet,
Then swimmes in state proud of her snowie hue,
Who used with Tragic Notes (though sad, yet sweet)
To make Meanders Nymphs her dying rue,
She being surprys'd not dreaming of her death,
Shall not have time to tune her plaintiue Breath.
38
The winged Squadrons which by feeling find
A Body (though Invisible) of Air,
Both solid, waste, closed, open, free, confined,
Whilst weighed by lightness stays by moving there,
As Swimmers Waves, those Fliers beat the Wind,
Borne by their Burdens, Miracles if rare,
The Feathers fyr'd, their stretched Arms do shrink,
And by being lighter, heavier down they sink.
39
That sort which diuing deep, and soaring hie,
Like some too subtle trusting double ways,
Which swim with Fishes, and with Fowls do fly,
Whilst still their course the present Fortune swayes,
At last in vain their liquid Fortress try,
Of Wrath the Weapons naught save Ruin stays,
To fly the Air down in the Depthes they bend,
For want of Air down in the Depthes they end.
40
Winged Alchimists which quintessence the Flowers,
As oft-tymes drowned before, then burned shall be,
Then measuring Artists by their nombrous Powers,
Whose works proportions better do agree,
Which do by Colonies vncharge their Bowres,
Kill Idle one, sting Foes, what needs foresee:
Men talk of Virtue, Bees do practice it,
Even Justice, Temperance, Fortitude, and Wit.
41
What Agony does thus my Soul inuest?
I think I see Heaven burn, Hells Gulfes all gape,
My panting Heart does beat upon my Breast,
As urging Passage that it thence may escape,
Reft from my self yet no where else I rest,
Of what I was reserving but the shape,
My Hairs are bended up swollen are mine Eyes,
My Tongue in silence Minds amazement ties.
42
Who can but dream what Furies plague thy Soul,
Poor sinful Wretch who then art tossed with Breath?
Whilst desp'rat Anguish no way can control,
The raging Torrent of consuming Wrath,
In every Corner where thy Eyes can roll,
Their sweetest shows more bitter are then Death,
Who can express thy Feelings, or thy Fears,
Which even Repentance can not help with Tears?
43
To look aloft if thou dare raise thy Sight,
Weighed down as damned by guilty actions gone,
What Horror, Terror, Error, all affright
Thee, trembling thee, who out of time do groan?
Often shall thou wish that thee fallen Mountains might
Hyde from his Face who sittes upon the Throne,
But ah in vain a lurking Place is sought,
Naught can be covered now, no, not one Thought.
44
The dreadful Noise which that great Day proclaims,
When mixed with Sighs and Shouts from Mortals here,
O how deformed a Form Confusion frames!
None can well think till that it self appear,
Whilst Clouds of Smoke delivered are of Flames,
They darken would their Birth, it them would clear,
But whilst Both strive, None Victory attaines,
This endless Darkness bodes, that endless Pains.
45
If seeking Help from thy first Parent slyme,
Lo Plutoes Palace, Dongeons of Despair,
As fyr'd by Furies, kindled by thy Crime,
Ben to encroach on interdicted Air,
Do gape to swallow thee before the time
Whom they foresee damned for a Dweller there,
Heaven over thy Head, Hell burns beneath thy Feet,
As both in Rage to fight with Flammes would meet.
46
With Owlie Eyes which horride Lightnings blind,
This to admire the Reprobat not need,
Matched with the Horrors of a guilty Mind,
Naught from without but Pleasure can proceed,
Sink in their Bosoms Hells and they shall find
More ugly things a Iuster fear to breed,
Of all most loathed since first the World began,
No greater Monster then a Wicked Man.
47
All sorts of Creatures soon consumed remain,
Crushed by their death whose lives on them depend.
Their treasons partners whom they entertain,
Man's Forfeiture does too toward them extend,
Whom since they can no further serve again,
True Vassalls thus) they with their Lords will end,
Though often they them like Tyrants did abuse,
Whom as Ingrate their Dusts that day accuse.
48
Ere it we can call com'd, that which is past,
Charged with Corruption flowlie I pursue,
Since without Hope to reach, though following fast,
That which (like lightning) quickly scapes the view,
I where I cannot walk, a compass cast,
And must seek ways to common knowledge due,
For Mortals ears my Muse tunes what she sings,
With earthly Colors painting Heavenly things.
49
The last Deluge of Universal Wrath,
To wash the Earth defiled all with Sin,
So to prolong their little pufts of Breath,
High Mountains Tops both Sexes strived to win,
But of access what Fort can frustrat death?
Death did attend them there where they did run,
With Pain and fear, choked, dashed, ere dying dead,
Death doubled so was but more grievous made.
50
So when the flamming waves of wasting Fire,
Over all the World do riotouslie rage,
Some to the Depths for safety shall retire,
As Thetis kiss could Vulcans Wrath assuage,
But that Lieutenant of his Makers Ire,
Makes all the Elements straight bear his Badge,
Scorched Earth being opened swallows Thousands down,
Air thickened choakes with smoke, and Waters drown.
51
The halting Lemnian highly shall revenge
The ancient Scorn of other equal Powers,
Both strong and swift though lame (what Wonder strange)
He in his Madness all the Rest deuoures,
His Fierceness first his Mother toils to change,
But having him embraced, she likewise lours,
And with her Son does furiously conspire,
Straight from pure Air being All transformed in Fire.
52
This Heat with Horror may congeale all Hearts,
Life's Bellows tossed by Breath which still does move,
That Fan which does refresh the inward Parts,
Even it shall make the Breast a Furnace prove,
That Sign of Life which often arriues, and parts,
Boyles all within, else burns it self above,
At that dread Day denouncing endless Night,
All smoke, not breath, whilst Flames give only Light.
53
That stormy Tyrant which usurps the Air,
Whilst Woll rained down from Heaven does him enfold,
A liquid Pillar hinging at each Hair,
Sneez'd fiercely forth when shaking all for Cold,
He clad with Flames a fiery Leader their,
Makes feeble Vulcan by his Aid more bold,
Whose Bellows fostred by the Others Blast,
May soon forge Ruin, Instruments to wast.
54
The Lands Great Creature, Nurceling of the East,
Which Jove's extremely, and with Zeal adores,
In Spirit and Nature both, above a Beast,
Whilst charged with Men he through the Battle roares,
And his armed Match (of Monsters not the least)
Whose Scales defensive, Horn inuasiue gores,
Whilst foming Flames, as other to provoke,
Straight joined in Dust, their Battle ends in Smoke.
55
The crafty Fox which Numbers does deceive,
To get, not be a Prey, shall be a Prey,
The Embrions Enemy, Women's that conceive,
As who might give him Death, their Birth to stay,
That ravenous Wolf which Blood would always have,
All then a Thought more quickly shall decay,
No Strength then stands, such Weakness went before,
Nor yet base Slight, mere Foolishness and more.
56
The Heart whose Horns (as Greatness is to all)
Do seem to grace, are Burdens to his Head,
With swift (though slender Legs) when Wounds appall,
Which cures himself where Nature does him lead,
And with great Eyes, weak Heart, often Dangers Thrall,
The wary Hare whose Fear often Sport has made,
Do seek by Swiftness Death in vain to shun,
As if a Flight of Flames could be outrunne.
57
The painted Panther which not feared does gore,
Like some whose beauteous Face foul Minds defame,
The Tiger Tigrish, past expressing more,
Since cruelty is noted by his Name,
The able Ounce, strong Bear, and fooming Bore,
(Man's Rebels since GOD did Man his proclaim)
Though fierce all faint and know not where to turn,
They see their old Refuge, the Forests burn.
58
The mildest Beasts importing greatest Gain,
Which others Crimes made Altars only touch,
By whom they cloth, and feed, not crying slain,
The Christians Image, only true when such,
Their growing Snowes which Arts frail Colors stain,
Was wronged when faind of Gold, since worth more much,
But precious things the Owners Harms often breed,
The Fleeces Flames the Bodies do succeed.
59
The Flocks for Profit used in every Part,
Though them to serve they make their Masters bow,
And are the Idols of a greedy Heart,
Which (as old Egypt) does adore a Cow,
Like Hannibals which Fabius mocked by Art,
As walking Torches, all run madding now,
By Phoebus tickled they to startle used,
But Vulcan ruder makes them rage confused.
60
Their Martial Cheiftan Mastiues Rage to stay,
Pasiphaes Lover, Venus daily Slave,
With brandished Horns as mustering first does stray,
Then throws them down in Guard a Match to crave,
Straight [like the Colchian Bulls ere Iasons Prey]
He Flames not feigned does breath, but not to brave.
Like that of Phalaris whom one did fill,
He tortured bellowing does ly bullering still.
61
Of all the Beasts by Men domesticke made,
The most obsequious, and obedient still,
The fawning Dog which where we list we lead,
And wants but Words to do all which we will,
Which loves his Lord extremely even when dead,
And on his Tomb for Grief himself does kill,
He then with Tongue stretched forth does panting rin,
Which straight when fired drawn back burns all within.
62
The generous Horse the Gallants greatest Friend,
In Peace for Show, and in effect for War,
Which to his Lord (when weary) Legs does lend,
To fly, or chase, in Sport, or earnest Far,
A Pegasus he through the Air would bend,
Till that his Course (turned Centaure) Man does mar,
His wauing Treasures fired to fly from Death,
He first the wind outrunnes, and then his Breath.
63
This squadrons King that does for Fight prepare,
As if he wracked the World does raging go,
His Foot does beat the Earth, Tail whippes the Air,
Mad to be hurt, and yet not find a Foe,
But soon his Shoulders rough the Fire makes bare,
And melts his Strength which was admired so,
Death does to Rest arrest his rouling Eyes,
Lo in a little Dust the Lion lies.
64
Those Poysnous Troops in Africks Fields which stray,
In Death all fertile, as the first began,
By Look, by Touch, by Wound and every Way,
True Serpents Heirs in Hatred unto Man,
Which GOD (still good) in Deserts maks to stay,
To waste the World still doing what they can,
But whilst they houle, scritch, bark, bray, hurl, hiss, spout,
Their inward Fire soon meets with that without.
65
The Crocodile with running Depthes in Love,
By Land and Water, of Tyrannicke power,
With vpmost Jaws which (and none else) do move,
Whose Cleansing first is sweet, often after sour,
And whyls his Crime his Punishment does prove,
Whilst a devouring Bait trained to devour,
He neither now can fight, nor yet retire,
His scaly Armor is no Proof of Fire.
66
The Beast (though haunting Depthes) not there confined,
Whose Hairs as precious deck each Great Man's Head,
Before like Eagles, Gooses like behind,
Whose Feet (as Oars) to manage Streams are made,
To waste the liquid Ways not needing Wind,
Whose Tail his Course does as a Rudder lead,
A Spark fallen from a Tree may then confound
Him with his Teeth that now strikes Trees to Ground.
67
The Otter black where sinne-wing'd troops repair,
Fresh Rivers Robber which his prey does choose,
And all that kind, nor Fish nor Flesh which are
But do two Elements (Amphibions) use,
Not able to touch Earth, nor to draw Air,
In Waters they their kindled Skins infuse,
But yet refuge can find in neither Soil,
They burn on Earth, and in the Depths do boil.
68
Floods seemed to groan which beasts Incursion maimes,
All altered then which looked of late like Glass,
And murmr at the flamming of their streams,
By Carcasses flot-flotting in a Mass,
A moving Bridge whilst every Channel frames,
When as there are no Passengers to pass,
With Beasts all buried Waters are pressed down,
Whilst both at once their Burdens burn and drown*
69
The Crystalls quick which slowly used to go,
And others Heat by coldness did allay,
(As if being grieved to be polluted so)
Grown red with rage, boyld up, pop-popling stay,
And tread in Triumph on their breathless Fo,
Whoses Ashes with their Sands they level lay,
But Vulcan now a Victor in each place,
By Violence does all their Nymphs embrace.
70
The Dwellers of the Depths not harmed in ought,
When first Vice all, and next the Waters drowned,
So since by some more sacred still are thought,
As whom Sins Scourge did only not confound,
The Elements not pure to purge being brought,
They likewise fall, killed by this general Wound,
The Fishes sodden are in every Flood,
Yet find no Eaters though a callour Food.
71
All which Corruption only serves to feed,
When it does end, does end, so Heaven designs,
Naught save the Soul which does from GOD proceed,
Over death triumphs, and still is pleased, else pynes,
Death nor man's Essence, but his Sin did breed,
And it with it, the end of Time confines,
Then Death and Life shall never meet again,
The State then taken always does remain.
72
Salt Seas, fresh Streams, the Fish which loves to change,
The Rivers Prince esteemed by dainty Tastes,
Which through the Ocean though he yearly range,
The bounds him bred to see yet yearly hastes,
(Ah Man whiles wants, O Monster more then strange,
This kind Affection common unto Beasts)
That Salmon fresh for which so many strive,
May then be had, boyld where it lived alive.
73
The Trout, the Eele, and all that Watrie Brood,
Which without Feet, or Wings can make much Way,
Then leap aloft forced by the raging Flood,
Not as they used before, for sport, or prey,
That which whiles freez'd their Glass to gaze in stood,
Now (turned to Flammes) makes what it bred decay,
Those which to take Men did all Snares allow,
All without Baits* or Nets are taken now.
74
Those Floods which first did Fields with Streams array,
The Rivers four by sacred Write made known,
Which (since far sundry) makes their Wits to stray,
Who Paradise drawn by their Dreams have shown,
As turned from it, or it from them away
In all the Earth their strength shall be ou'r-thrown,
Whom first high Pleasures, Horrors huge last bound,
(As if for Grief) they vanish from the Ground.
75
The fertile Nilus never rashly moved,
Which (aged in travel) many Country knows,
Whose Inundation by the Labourer loved,
As Barrenness or Plenty it fore-showes,
From diverse means (but doubtful all) is proved,
Often Natures work all Reasons Power ouer-throwes:
The Ancients wondered not to find his Head,
But it shall all invisible be made.
76
Heavens Indignation seazing on all things,
The greatest Waters languish in their Way,
The little Brooks exhausted in their Springs,
For Poverty can not their Tribute pay,
Of Moisture spoiled the Earth craves Help, not brings,
The Mighty thus left to themselves decay:
Great powers composed make but of many one,
Whose weakness shows it self when left alone.
77
That Flood whose Fame more great then Waters straide,
Whose Race like it more then their own would ow,
Which from the Appennins often gathering aid,
Would those ouer-throw, who did the world ou'r-throw,
Which though unstable only stable staide,
In that great City where all else fell low,
It which so long familiar was with Pame,
Shall be dried up an unregarded stream.
78
The Sheep-heards Mirrours, all like Silver pure,
Which curious Eyes delighted were to see,
When Flammes from Heaven frail Beauties shall combure,
No Creature then being from Confusion free,
Even they shall grow more ugly and obscure,
Then the infernal Floods are feigned to be,
Of their long course there shall no sign remain,
Worse then that Lake where Brimstone once did rain.
79
Whilst Thetis bent to court those Streams [as vaine]
That on themselves to gaze strive Time to win,
And liquid Serpents wynding through the Plain,
(As if to sting the Earth often gathered in)
Seem to attend the remnant of their train,
Them to out-go that nearer Ways would rin,
Even in that Pomp sur-prys'd dried are their Depths,
Whose Widowed Beds scarce their impression keeps.
80
That Flood which does his Name from Silver take,
The Sea-like Ebb, and others of the Indes,
Over which a Bridge Men by no means can make,
Whilst One borne there [amazing strangers Mindes]
On Straw or Reeds with one behind his Back
Can cross them all both scorning Waves and Winds,
Their empty Channells may be tread on dry,
[Though pau'd with Pearles] then precious in no Eye.
81
The Great which change before they end their Race,
Salt Floods, fresh Seas, by mutual Bands as past,
Which siege the Seas and though repulsed a Space,
Yet make a Breach, and enter at the last,
Which from the Earth (which strives them to embrace)
Whiles haste with speed, whiles do a compass cast,
They then for Help in vain to Neptune rinne,
By Vulcan ravished ere his Waves they win.
82
The raging Rampire which does always move,
Whose sloting Waves entrench the solid Round,
And being by Titans kiss drawn up above,
From Heavens Alembick drop upon the Ground,
Of Fruits and Plants the vital Blood to prove,
And foster all that on the Earth are found,
It likewise yields to the Eternalls Ire,
Lo, all the Sea not serves to quensh this Fire,
83
Yet did the Sea presage this threatened Ill,
With ugly Roarings ere that it arrived,
As if contending all Hels Fires to kill,
By Violence to burst out through them driu'd,
Which must make monstrous Sounds jar-jarring still,
As Heat with Cold, with Moisture Dryness strived,
When like the High, the Low, Jove would thud, thud,
Even as when Fires force Passage through a Cloud,
84
O what strange Sight not to be borne with Eyes!
That Tennis-court where often the Winds too bold,
What still rebounded tossed unto the Skies,
And to the Ground from thence have headlongs rold,
Does now in raging Rounds, not Furrows rise,
Then Hosts of Heat, as used to be of Cold,
All Government the liquid State neglects,
Whilst Neptunes Trident Vulcans Hammer brecks.
85
When this huge Vessel does to boil begin,
What can it fill with Matter fit to purge?
The Earth as else without, if thrown within,
With all her Creatures kept but for a Scourge,
To wash away the foulness of that Sin,
Which on frail Flesh strong Nature often does urge,
But ah my Thoughts are vain, this cannot be,
Seas cleanse not Sin, Sin does defile the Sea.
86
O foul Contagion spreading still to Death,
What Pest most odious can with thee compaire?
Which being by Thoughts conceau'd, and borne with Breath,
Do straight infect the Sea, the Earth the Air,
Which damned in Justice, and chastised in Wrath,
Do show that GOD no Creatures Spots will spaire?
All Scourges must be scourged, and even the Fire,
As being impure must feel Effects of Ire.
87
That restless Element which never sleeps,
But by it self, when by Naught else, is wrought,
Which joins all Lands, yet them asunder keeps,
It ruins Rock for last Refuge is sought.
Huge Troops do throw themselves amidst the Deepes,
As if Death reft, then given, less Grief were thought,
Thus is Despair hot Son of Father cold,
Rash without Hope, and without Courage bold.
88
The loving Alcion trusty to her Mate,
The which (save this) no other Storm could catch,
Whose Arc not erres amidst the going Gate,
Though none in it with Art the Waves does watch,
To many Monsters, as exposed a Bait,
Which moving sittes, and in the Depthes does hatch,
She of her Nest against the Waves presumes,
But never looked for Fire which all consumes.
89
The greatest Monster of the Oceans Brood,
Which lodged grieved Jonas harmless in his Womb,
And did digest (yet to be fed) a Food,
A buried quick Man in a living Tomb,
He like a tumbling Tower at first runs wood,
With Force, by Force disdaining to succumbe,
But straight his Fumes being fired a far do shine,
As if some Pharos, but a deathfull Sign.
90
That little Wonder decking Thetis Bower,
Whose adamantine Touch there strongly binds,
(Though both it sail and swim,) a wooden Tower,
For which Man's Wit no Show of Reason finds,
O matchless Virtue, admirable Power,
Which fights and foyles alone, Sails, Oars, Waves, Winds,
Of all which live it that most Strength has shown,
Pressed down by vulgar Bands does die unknown.
91
That moving Mountain in a fearful Form,
Which compassing a Ship, it down-wards flings,
And even in Calmes does vomit forth a Storm,
Whose Blood (all Poison) where it touches stings,
That monstrous Mass, if Serpent, Eele or Worm,
To hasty Ruin his own Greatness brings:
The Greatest sought for Harm are soonest spy'de,
Where little Ones a little thing will hide.
92
Of all the humid Host the most esteemed,
The gentle Dolphins which the Depthes decore,
Which not ingrate who them redeemed, redeemed,
Him helped alive, and did when dead deplore,
Of which one once with Music ravished seemed,
When carrying safe Arion to the Shore,
Those which delight so much in pleasant Sounds,
The contrary preventing Fire confounds.
93
The fairest Nymphe which haunts the sloting State,
To whose great Beauty Thetis Envy bears,
The Oceans Muse from whose sweet Sounds [Soules bate]
The Lord of Ithaca did stop his Ears,
Of what she was most proud, that hastes her Fate,
The golden Hairs which she disheueld wears,
Then whilst they burn her Head seems crowned with Light,
Thus Shows mask Misery, and mock the Sight.
94
Those which from Slight, by Slight their Lives often win,
The Angler drawing scorned Lives to Land,
Whilst some do cast forth Hooks, some draw them in,
And some benumme the gazing Holders Hand,
They can find Help in neither Force, nor Fin,
In Scale, on Shell, in Rock, in Mud, or Sand,
Whilst Tritons Sounds the broken Air not bears,
A louder Trumpets Charge does breach all Ears.
95
The sloting Lodgings which all Soiles do try,
Which whilst they walk on Waves, and burdened Stray,
Seem swimming Mountains, Castles which do fly,
Which Canons arm and Ensigns do array,
At first for Smoke they Naught about them spy,
Till all their Sails on fire do clear their Way,
Whilst Floods, and Flames, do all their Force employ,
As if they strived which should the Ship destroy.
96
The liquid Labrinth thou who first did prove,
No doubt thy desprat Heart was armed with Steel,
Did not the Waves, and Clouds, which always move,
[Firme Objects wanting] make thy Eyes to reele?
Then he who first did steal Fire from above,
Thou greater Torments do deserve to feel,
He only sought the Fire to quicken Breath,
And thou the Water as a Way to Death.
97
O odious Monster since the World began,
Which with thine own could never yet be pleased,
For Lack of Raiment cold, for Hunger wan,
With what thou have though many might be eased,
Thou poisoned first the quiet Mind of Man,
Whose Fury since can never be appeased,
But seeks both Sea and Land with endless Care,
And wants but VVings to violat the Air,
98
That which enchroac'd on every bordering Shore,
By often renu'd Assaults usurping Miles,
Shall then all ebb, not flowing as before,
Whilst traveling Thetis does bring forth new Isles,
Which Birth soon old, to be embraced no more,
She loath to leave often turns, and kisses whiles,
Till all the World one withered Mass appears,
Spoyld of all Moisture, save Man's fruitless Tears.
99
What hideous object? what a horride Sight?
O Terror strange which even I quake to think!
Where all of late was level at one hight,
Their Mountains mount and Fields far down do sink,
All pau'd with Monsters, which if painting right,
Fear would make paper black and pale my Ink,
The Seas with Horror so arrest my Hand,
I must amazed retire me to the Land.
100
The Land where Pleasure lodged, where Rest did rest,
Which did abound in Fruits, in Fowls and Beasts,
Of which (all good) none can discern the best,
In number more (though many) then Men's Tastes
Made to refresh frail Nature when distressed,
Though them fond Man superfluously wastes,
Till that the Earth does to a CHAOS turn,
Which since his Tears not wash his Sins shall burn.
101
Where are the flowrie Fields, the fishie Streams,
The pasturing Mountains, and the fertile Plains,
With Shadows whiles, whiles clad with Titans Beams,
As of Heavens Pleasures Types, and of Hells pains?
[Thus in our Breast some thoughts each Moment claims,
To curb rash Joy with Contemplations raines]
Where are all those Delights in league with Sense,
Which make a Heaven when here, a Hell when hence?
102
Thou who thy Thoughts from no fond course reclaimes,
But do thy Eyes with pleasant objects cloy,
And let'st thy Heart have all at which it aims,
Bent of the Sons of Men to want no Joy,
Those to thy sleeping Soul are all but dreams,
Which waking finds this Treasure but a toy,
Think, think, when all confounded thus remains,
If temporal Joy be worth eternal pains,
103
Those stately Towns whose Towers did brave Heavens rounds,
Their Kingdoms quintessence for Wealth, and Skill,
A States abridgement drawn in little bounds,
Which are* (whilst them Guests of all Lands do fill)
Mappes of the World, deduced from diverse Grounds,
Where all Lyfes parts are act'd, both good and ill,
Which barbarous customs founded to remove,
Most civil first, most subtle last did prove.
104
Those which great Monarchs strongly stryu'd to ow,
(As which oft-tymes a Kingdoms Keys do prove)
By Minds like Earthquakes shaken from below,
By Sulphurous Thunder battered from above,
Yet (as ou'r-thrown) them hopeless to ou'r-throw,
With scorned Squadrouns did disdained remove,
Those which at Powers of armed Emperors spurned,
Are at an instant then charged, sacked, and burned.
105
Brave Citizens which have resisted long,
Till their dismantled Town all naked stands,
And are by Weakness left unto the Strong,
All taken, killed, or sold like Beasts in Bands,
As bound of Right to suffer all the Wrong,
Of railing Tongues or of outrageous Hands,
They of this last assault no Type can see,
Even Worse then was, or can imagined be.
106
Ah! if one House when only fyr'd by chance,
Does straight confound a City all with fear,
What high Conceit with curious Thoughts can scance
How those Inhabitants themselves shall bear,
Whose Towns (like Lightning) vanish with a glance,
And all to Ashes in a moment wear?
This with amazement may benumme the Mind,
But seem no less, a greater being diuinde.
107
Base Miser thou who by all means have used,
To bruise the Poor and on their Spoils to feed,
In Measure, Weight, and quality abused,
Whilst of all Evils Dearth is the least they dreed,
That Wealth by thee even to thy self refused,
Which might of thousands have relieved the need,
Shall all in Flammes vpbraid thee with Hells Fire,
Whose use then at thy hands GOD will require.
108
Thou who to Richesse wast preferred from naught,
Though once being poor, contemned, of base degree,
For whom at length all Realms by Ships were sought,
So that no Wind could blow but serving thee,
Yet would not comfort those who starved in ought,
Not mindful what thou wast, nor what to be,
As naked borne, thou naked shall return,
Else kept to see thy Wealth thy self next burn.
109
Those stately Statues which Great Towns do grace,
And Monuments whose rareness Minds amaze,
The Worlds seven Wonders wondered at a space,
Whilst Strangers long did on their Relics gaze,
If that ere then Time do them not deface,
A little Flash shall even their Ruins raze,
Which only serve to witness to each Sight,
Their idle Builders, Vanity and Might.
110
Those Palaces amongst rare things enrold,
Which Architectours Nombrous Art bewray,
On enterlaced Roofes embossed with Gold,
On marbted VValls which costly Works array,
Though rich without, yet worthy but to hold
A richer Richesse which within does stay,
Past Emulation Admirations Mark,
All their great Pomp does perish with a Spark.
111
Those secoud EDENS, Gardens of delight,
Where Times bright Patron justly parts the Hours,
Where men to gaze all objects do inuit,
In al-wayes lying walks, and growing Bowres,
In smelling Beds with Pleasure ravished quite,
Whilst wandering in a Laberinth of Flowers,
Where Art with Nature still for Praise contends,
A strife though oft-tymes judged, which never ends.
112
Where Floraes Treasures with Pomonaes stryues,
Low shyning groves with shadowed lights above,
Whilst Art by engines raised the Water dryues
Borne through the Air an uncouth Way to prove,
And by all sounds which Creatures can contryue,
To melt in Mirth Melancholy would move,
Those pleasant parts shall straight abhorred remain,
As where Salt sow'n or Showers of Brimstone rain.
113
Those walking Worms which with Worms Spoils arrayed,
Would purchase Homage from each credulons Eye,
And yet as (Asses) vvorth an Ass not vveigh'd,
Whilst having naught of vvorth but what they buy,
They shall see that which see their Fancies svvay'd,
The Tirian Purple, and Assyrian Dye,
Of Pride the Badges, and the Baits of Lust,
Though kept with Toil from Dust, all turned to Dust.
114
Those glorious Rovvmes of Darkness robbing Night.
Where even the Wales rich Garments do inuest,
Where Yuorie Beds with Gold all glancing bright,
Are made for Shovv, as others are for Rest,
And objects need to entertain the Sight,
Which lodge (since great) a seldom sleeping Guest,
Now at this last alarm to them who live,
They then a Cottage no more Comfort give.
115
Those precious Stones which most in Worth excel,
For Virtue whiles, for Vanity often sought,
Pearls, Rubies, Diamonds, from Rock, from Shell,
From Depthes of Floods, from Mountains Entrails brought,
Made Gods with Men whose Heaven is hatching Hell,
Prys'd by Opinion, but by Substance bought,
The sweet Perfumes, and all which is esteemed,
Wast (by the Owners Wish) not once redeemed,
116
That dreadful Storm as striving to begine,
Mount AEtnaes Flames, which roar whil as suppressed,
And that which swallowing Natures Student in
Did him digest who could it not digest,
And all those Hills whence Streams of Sulphur rin,
Shall with their Fires then fortify the Rest,
Whose general Flood whilst it the World ou'rcomes,
None knows where kindled first, nor whence it comes.
117
The lucrous Coal (though black) a precious Stone,
Whose Force as Vulcan will, makes Mars to bend,
Of Albions Jewels second unto none,
To Art and Nature both a special Friend,
Then when of it the needful Use is gone,
What it maintained it likewise helps to end,
And thus the Earth (though cold) with Fire being stored,
To burn it self Materials does afford.
118
Those bathing Springs which free Physicians prove,
Yet for all Evils One only Cure can show,
The which may seem whilst boiling up above,
A Part of Phlegeton ou'rflow'd below,
But for Man's Health Naught can from thence remove,
Where he does dwell who could the World ou'rthrow,
Whom then to warn their Course to Hell repaires,
Or else a greater Heat does drink up theirs.
119
Great Monarchs whom Ambitious Hopes do drive,
To raise their own by razing Others Thrones,
Who spare no Ways that there they may arrive,
Through Orphans Tears, Man's Blood, and Women's Groans,
And all those earthly Minds which for Earth strive,
By passing Bounds, and altering settled Stones,
All such that Day not Lords of their own Grave,
They then no Earth, nor them no Earth shall have.
120
The Earth as glorying in her changed State,
With Face all bright with Flames seems Lightning smiles,
Whilst free from Wounds, and Toils, endured of late,
All burned with Heat, with Cold all frozen whiles,
Though forced she must conceive (a fertile Mate)
Her Husbands Hopes she oftentimes beguiles,
And as she would revenge all Troubles past,
She yeeldes up Man whom she had hid at last.
121
That Element which only needing Aid,
May be made more, and does on others feed,
Whose piercing Powers can in no Bounds be staide,
Such Bodies small that thickened Rareness breed,
The only Essence which can not be weighed,
And void of Weight, does always upward speed,
That soon may seize on all when once set free,
Which infinitely multiplied may be.
122
But lest my Fury be too far declined,
That with the Flames to fly have strived in vain,
I must a while within my self confind
Fresh Succoures seek to charge of new again,
So great Amazement has ou'rwhelm'd my Mind,
That now I in an Agony remain,
But he who did in fiery Tongues descend,
As through the Fire will lead me to the End.
DOOMES-DAY, OR, THE GREAT DAY OF THE LORDS IVDGEMENT.
The fourth Hour.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Hideous Trumpet horribly does sound,
Who sleep in Graves a mighty Voice does wake,
By Angels (Messengers) charged from each ground,
All Flesh comes forth that ever Soul did take:
Seas give Account of all whom they have drowned,
The Earth her Guests long hid in Haste gives back,
Those who then live are at an Instant changed,
So from Life never, still from Death estranged.
1
SO great a Power my sacred Guide imparts,
That still my Muse does raise her ventrous flight,
Though with Confusion compast on all Parts,
My troubled Thoughts dare on no Object light,
The World by Flames (a Charmer) justly smarts.
Whose Ashes now seem to vpbraide my Sight,
Though Fears would quensh those Fires my Breast which burn*
Yet I must sing, that Thousands else may mourn.
2
To plague proud Man who looked so late aloft,
The Earth still pure till made by him unclean,
By whom whiles fierce for Blood, by Lust whiles soft,
She [forc'd to beare] in both abused had been,
Straight as a Strumpet Prostituted often,
Now by her Lovers naked shall be seen,
An odious Mass [euen in her Owners Eyes]
As bruised by Thunder whilst she withered lies.
3
Now of all States the fatal Period comes,
To stay who stumble on this slipperie Ball,
Fierce Vulcans Fury Neptune so ou'rcomes,
That not one Drop remains to weep his Fall,
Lo all the World one Continent becomes,
Whereas save Man no Creature lives at all,
The Sea to Earth, the Earth all turns to Fire.
A monstrous Comet threatening coming Ire.
4
O what a Vault I see of Angels Wings!
Whose greater Brightness makes the Fires decline,
A glorious Guard fit for the KING of Kings,
Whilst they like Rays about that Sun do shine,
But O his presence (past expressing) brings
A real Glory all in All divine,
All as from Darkness look upon this Light,
Whilst Flammes (as mists) do vanish at his Sight.
5
Those blessed Bands in state of Grace which stood,
As Ministers admitted unto GOD,
Which whiles told Mortals Tidings which were good,
And whiles did stryke with Indignations Rod,
They who till com'd this time not understood,
With CHRIST arise all ready at his Nod,
And free from Envy which did mar their Mates,
Do seek with Joy the Partners of their States.
6
The Dregs of Adams Race shall soon disclose
What GODS Decree inuolu'd in Clouds does keep,
That Time, that Time, which must confound all those,
Whose Thoughts are plunged in Pleasures groundless Deep.
Even then perchance that Nature may repose,
When all the Senses buried are in sleep,
Ah how those Eyes vnclos'd amazed remain,
Which from that Time should never close again*
7
O ten times cursed whom CHRIST that time shall find,
Still hatching Evil, defrauding Natures due,
Whilst Darkness mocks the Eyes (though open) blind,
And makes the Mind what it affects to view,
Which winged with thoughts far swifter then the Wind*
Though still confined does all over All pursue,
What doubtful proiects slot within his Breast,
Who dreams yet sleeps not, lies but does not rest?
8
When that crowned Bird which Peter's Bragges did scorn,
(As still a Friend to Light) seems to cite light,
Some more conceive then ever could be borne,
Whilst big with Monsters of imagined might,
And Airie Names with Shadows to adorn,
Do build high Hopes which fall ere at the hight,
Such Bosoms Serpents nurse whose stings they try,
Pride, Aemulation, Jealousy, Envy.
9
As pricked with Thorns some in their Beds do roll,
Whilst charged with thoughts which but their Cares abuse,
And make that Metal Idol of their Soul,
Which in a Calfe the Jews great Judge did bruise,
Their greedy Course whilst nothing can control,
Though having more then they themselves can use,
Like them who drink more then they can digest,
Who keep the Appetite but not the Taste.
10
The Devil in darkness being most powerful still,
Some when retired imagine mischief strange,
And to shed blood do dedicat their Will,
Whilst tortured with a Fury of revenge,
More guilty he who in his Heart does kill,
Although his Course being disappointed change,
Then he who does by Chance ones Death procure,
No Member guilty is, the Mind being pure,
11
Though Beds should be as private Graves for rest,
While as of Death the Image buries dust,
Yet some run-mad as raging in a Pest,
Voluptuouslie their Fancies surfeit must,
A filthy Fury poisoning the Breast,
With strange Delights of a prodigious Lust,
The which whilst waking so corrupts their Will,
That when they sleep it does delude them still.
12
Not only shall this sudden Charge surpryse,
Such in such Sins which do from GOD rebel,
But even all those who evils by Night devise,
And loving Darkness shall in Darkness dwell,
Who with a Conscience calm all Fears despise,
As (when that Cerberus slept) they might take Hell,
Such to an Owl make GOD inferior be,
As if by Night, Nights Maker naught could see.
13
Winged Messengers may then even some arrest,
Who rioting till quite exhausted all,
[Whilst in their Vomits wallowing they rest]
From Men to Beasts, from Beasts to naught do fall,
Those dead (though living) who can but detest,
As Natures Monsters Mankind to appall?
In them who have their Reason drowned in Wine,
No Spark of GODS, nor Natures Light does shine.
14
Some rating Pleasure at too high a price*
Who with the Light do lay all Shame aside,
Do prostitute their Souls to every Vice,
If not then free (by beastliness) from Pride,
Then their whole States often venture on the Dyce,
As who in naught but Fortune do confide,
By many odious Oath then mock GODS Migh,
True works of Darkness worthy of the Night.
15
Fond Worldlings there inuolu'd in vain Delight,
Who to the Senses frail indulgent are,
And as soft Sounds the Courage do inuit,
With measured Madness march upon the Air,
Whilst from themselves by Pleasure ravished quite
What it prouokes no kind of sport they spare,
Their Ears attending Musickes soul to have,
Of this dread Blast the first assault receive.
16
By Stratagems a Captain boldly wise,
His Enemies Camp (not looked for) whiles confounds,
But when he first does Sentinells surpryse,
That all about the Neighboring Bounds rebounds,
In Breasts unarmed what Terror strange does rise,
Whilst Drums yield deadly, Trumpets lively Sounds,
Whilst Showtes make deaf, Amazement dumb, Dust blind,
Ere Swords the Body, fear does kill the Mind.
17
So shall it be with all those broken Bands,
(As for the Godly they watch still prepared)
Then when Life's LORD does come to judge all Lands,
Like Fishes angled, or like Beasts ensnared,
Those whom Hells Badge for endless Darkness brands,
Not having Power to wish, are straight despar'd,
And soon do see what now they not attend,
Ere thought by them begun, all at an end.
18
What hideous Charge all to compeare compells,
Whose sound may show what Breath the Blast does feed?
No Canons, Thunders, Tempests, Trumpets, Bells,
Nor yet all joined so huge a Noise could breed,
Since heard in Heaven, on Earth, and in the Hells,
Till dreadful Silence does over all succeed,
The harkning World seems all become one Ear,
The Grave gives place, the Dead His Voice do hear,
19
All you who on, or in the dull do lodge,
A Great-great Court I cite you to attend,
Even at CHRIST'S Instance where himself is Judge,
To hear that sentence which none can suspend,
Of boundless Joys, or else of Anguish huge,
Which he designed, and you deserved in end,
What from his servants mouth none would conceive,
Hear from himself, even what doch damn, or save.
20
Pass, pass, swift Angels over all quarters range,
Force all to rise who ever down did ly,
What in their Essence Elements did change,
Bid them restore, that CHRIST all flesh may spy,
You are the gatherers, this that Vintage strange,
Which in all Souls what Stuff has been must try:
Twixt Heaven and Hell this is a Judgment great,
To Judge each one their own Contentions date.
21
The Word them gives by which they thus are sought,
Power to obey, else were the charge but vain,
That Word which first did make them all of naught,
May now of some thing make them soon again,
Past numbering Numbers are together brought,
That some may think what Bounds can them contain*
Who makes the Dead to rise at his Decree,
May make a Room where they may marshald be.
22
The Heavenly Souls which with frail Bodies bound,
Did act together on this earthly Stage,
Though subtill-they often diverse Depths did sound,
In which gross Organs could not then engadge,
Yet in all Actions equal Partners found,
By Reason led, or headlong borne by Rage,
Though once diuorc'd, they marry must again,
To join in Joy, or in eternal Pain.
23
Those heavenly Sparks which are flown up above*
To shine in Glory, and in Zeal to burn,
And shall of Pleasure the Perfection prove,
With mortal Vailes which masked of late did mourn,
They from their Place a Moment must remove,
With CHRIST in Triumph glorious to return,
Their twise-borne Bodies when put on they have,
First from the Belly, last now from the Grave.
24
Those gather up their Garments from the Dust,
Which imprisoned are in Plutoes ugly Celles,
Though loath to part thence, where return they must,
Since by their Conscience being committed else,
They know their Judge as terrible, as just,
Will but confirm their holding of the Helles,
Yet all their Process must deduced be,
That Saints GODS Justice, and their Faults may see.
25
Four Elements with four Complexions make,
This mortal Mass soon raised, and soon overthrown,
And when that it turns to Corruption back,
With what accrest each does crave back the own,
The Waters all the liquid Substance take,
Air Breath, Fire active Heat, Earth Earth well known,
Which all though thus in their first Fountains drowned,
Not take nor leave, but are the same still found,
26
The LORD does not (which some would fondly doubt)
As once in EDEN a Creation use,
As if the first consumed were all worn out,
That he not knows their Substance where to choose,
No, these same Bodies which we bear about,
The LORD will raise, and clear, or else accuse,
When done by GOD then Wonders are not strange,
The Quality, and nothing else does change.
27
Of our frail Spoils each Part where made a Prey,
Who over our Dust does watch will straight require,
That which the Waters washed have away,
What was in Flames exhausted by the Fire,
That which (Winds scorn) tossed through the Air did stray,
And what to Earth all rotten did retire,
All at an Instant shall together rinne,
To recontinue not again begin.
28
The Husbands Hopes which Ceres first renowned,
Must buried rot, made less, to be made more,
Yet wrestle up (though in the Earth still bound)
In Form more pleasant, multiplied in Store:
So shall our Dust though swallowed in the Ground,
Spring from Corruption brighter then before,
In Bodies new, whose State none can surmise,
Laid mortal down, but must immortal rise.
29
Those creeping Creatures which with Silks conceive,
Bred first of Seed their Food with Toils acquit,
Then what they win must all to others leave,
And lie stretched out wrapped up in Funeral white,
Yet straight revived, where buried burst the Grave,
And mount aloft with Wings all altered quite,
In Worms [Mens Types] those who do mark this Change,
How can they think the Resurrection strange?
30
As Man like Milk was at the first poured out,
Then straight like Cheese turned all to Cruds at once,
Till clad with Skin his Sex being free from Doubt,
With Sinews joined, and fortified with Bones,
When as the Moon has changed thrice thrice about:
He bursted forth, neglecting Mothers Groans,
Though from him first as poor, fond, weak, Tears flow,
Does straight of GOD a talking Image grow:
31
So sown by Death where rests frail Mortals Seed,
The Earth conceau'd shall to grow Big begin,
And though at first a moving Mass does breed,
Shall stay from Travel till the Time forth rin,
Whilst vital Moisture Ashes dry does feed,
That marrow Bones, Bones Flesh, Flesh takes on Skin,
Till all at last being to Perfection worn,
Graves are delivered, Mankind is newborn.
32
The spiritual Powers shall soon have repossess'd
Their ancient Rowmes recognized by Grace,
Which were [they thence by Natures Rigor press'd]
To Death by Sin morgag'd but for a Space,
But now redeemed who had been thus distressed,
All Members move, Power poured in every Place,
What could corrupt all worn unto an End,
They spiritual Bodies, bodied Spirits ascend.
33
Then shall not Weakness passing each Degree,
A Progress have Perfection to attain,
But from Infirmity made freely free,
They Shape, Proportion, Strength and Knowledge gain,
All Qualities at once accomplished be,
That to augment there nothing does remain,
The first and second Birth do differ far,
First Men were made, now raised, then grew, now are,
34
Some Gentiles fond who from the Truth did stray,
When by Apostles told did scorn this once,
Yet trusted Grounds which vain Inventions lay,
By fabulous Doctrine Learned, and Fools at once,
That by Prometheus Men were made of Clay,
And by Deucalion quickened out of Stones,
Thus had their Souls to see the Truth no Eyes,
Who loath the Light GOD gives them over to Lies.
35
Great Army often as if one Body move,
Whose Souls it seems the Trumpets Sound does swey,
So when this Charge is thundered from above,
One Moment makes who were, or are, obey,
O strange Alarm! what must this meeting prove?
Where Ruin only has prepared the Way?
All known when mustred (though not numbered) thaire
A dreadful Censor no Man's Spot will spaire.
36
Those which the Depthes disgested did contain,
As bent to drink those who them often did drink,
To Heaven exhald, though stilled through Fruits by Rain,
That dainty Tastes more delicate them think,
Their Tronkes drawn down when once thrown up again,
Though dead, and buried move, not swim, nor sink,
A Death which Drunkards do deserve to have,
To lie with Liquor in a liquid Grave.
37
With Kisses cold of Thetis choked of late,
Who her three Mates fallen in her Bosom leave,
Some Winds, and Waves, against each Rock do beat,
Till them for Food the scaillie Troops receive,
That Fishes Men, Men may those Fishes eat,
Changed Quality, and Form, whose Flesh may have,
Man's Substance it may transsubstantiat often,
But shall the same that first, mount last aloft.
38
Muse do not strive above thy Strength to mount,
As Mortals Brains those Hosts could comprehend.
Which not Seas Sands, nor yet Heavens Stars can count,
Then whilst swarmed forth they Heavens high Court attend,
All Faculties of Memory surmount,
Being raisd from Dust, more thick then Dust in End,
But yet a Part most known by Fame designed,
May leave a more Impression in the Mind.
39
The first great Troup inunding from the Deepes,
Which long have wandered with the watrie Brood,
Which glutted Neptune in his Caves did keep,
When all his Guests were surfaited of Food,
Are those amidst the roaring Waves who sleep,
Since first they fell drowned by the general Flood
Those who of GOD the Threatenings still did scorn
Till Death at once one Fleece over all had shorn,
40
What strange Deluge from that Deluge does flow,
Of Monstrons People terrible to see?
Whose Stature shows what time it had to grow,
The Duarfes with them, with us would Giants be,
Ere bended was the many-colour'd Bow,
All that had fallen rise from corruption free,
Where raging Depths had Justly lodgd their Dust,
Still drowned when dead who burned alive with Lust,
41
Thence comes the Tyrant who did sway the State,
Where fertile Nilus mollifies the Mind,
Whom [to confirm his own with Wonders great]
GOD did obdure, and made by brightness blind,
With gilded Slaves which flattering his conceat,
The LORD to him would needs inferior find,
Those all like him by his example made,
As often to sin he shall to Judgment lead.
42
Mad Man to whom by wondrous Blows abroad,
The Arm of GOD had justly Terror brought,
Fool who had seen the proof of Arons Rod,
What danger was thou might in time have thought,
Whilst vain Magicians emulatiug GOD,
The same in show but not in substance wrought,
Vain Sophists to be mocked, but mock the Eyes,
Truth, naked truth, Lies are though painted Lies.
43
What made thee doubt that he whom thou did spy,
Turn Streams to Blood, might mix them with thy Blood?
That he who made thy Lands first borne to die,
Would save the lives of [his friend] Abrams Brood,
Where his might march he who the Depths did dry,
That he would make them drown who him withstood?
But those whom GOD will lose he makes them blind.
Those headlong run who are for wrack designed,
44
Those who with haste the Hebrew Host pursued,
Whose glancing Arms each Eye, shouts filled each Ear,
Who lacked no stately show* which might when viewed,
In them breed Courage, and in others fear,
[The Troops by them contemned ere seen subdu'd]
Who did themselfes as if in Triumph bear,
And spuing Blasphemy from Prides low hight,
Even challenge durst the LORD of Hosts to fight.
45
Lo, from the Mudde they now creep poorly out,
As from a Prison which vpbraids their Blame,
And spoyld of all which compass them about,
Rise naked up, yet kept by fear from shame,
They hear Heavens Trumpet horribly to shout,
Which straight they think their Sentence will proclaim,
And even great Pharo vile amidst his own,
Can by no sign more then the rest be known.
46
What Fools then rise who never could be pleased,
Though settled Owners of a fertile Ground?
Where under them even Thousands were well eased,
And then their Masters more contentment found,
Whose traitrous Hopes still on new conquests seas'd,
Till death did show how little might them bound,
That as all Lands could but strict limits give,
Last for the Seas [vaste like their Mynds] did strive,
47
Ah for Man's madness who enough can mourn,
From whom still pure that there might rest no place,
Who makes his rage even in the Depths to burn,
And standing runs in walking woods his race,
Makes Neptunes Azure all to purple turn,
And filles with blood the wrinkles of his Face?
What thirst of Mischief thus torments Man still,
That it no Sea can quensh nor Land can fill?
48
The Grecian Seas shall give those Bodies back,
When floting Athens camp'd in Wooden Walls,
Which Mountains, Plains, and Floods dry Fields would make,
Scourged all the Winds, ranked Nature with their thralles,
Which all conspyrd seem to procure their wrack,
Both Sea and Land being famous by their falls,
As if that King who could not count his Host,
Had sought all means by which they might be lost.
49
All Salaminaes Straits disgorge again,
Those whom they swallowed and disgested had,
But broken Squadrons are restored in vain,
Since with no Arms, no, with no Garment clad,
Whilst both the parts then joined in one remain,
Great is the Number, but the Cause is bad,
Who strived for State, both as most abject bow,
Greeks and Barbarians no way differ now.
50
By this last Blast those do assemble all
At diverse times who in the Depths fell dead,
By him almost preventing Persias fall,
Who the Greek Empire had abortiue made,
Who charged with Chains lay for his Father thrall,
An Act more great then all his Hosts to lead:
From Virtues hight this generous course did come,
A Man most vicious Armies might overcome,
51
The last great Act which Athens did intend,
It Thousands did defraud their funeral Right,
Which did presage their Greatness near an end,
Whose State then changed as having past the hight,
Those to pursue that then did Armies send,
From that time forth, did for their confines fight,
A mighty Town whose growing naught could stay,
When com'd to fail, does wither soon away.
52
Their greatest Captain fondly being removed,
The other cold, procured what he diuinde,
Who happy first, last most unhappy proved,
Vain superstition vilified his Mind,
But Siracusa yet to stand behou'd,
Whose ruin was for greater foes designed,
And those by Sea to win more Land who strived,
Drowned in the Sea were of all Land deprived.
53
Fair Sicile long still by great States being sought,
As fertile Fields, weak owners did entyse,
The fatal Lists where Rome and Carthage fought,
When all the World was made the Victors pryse,
Thy bounds (often bathed with Blood) was dearly bought,
Which Strangers still, else Tyrants did surpryse,
Thy Sea the Stage where Death often act'd with Wounds,
Must muster many when the Trumpet sounds.
54
Erst Athens, Pirrhus, Carthage, Rome, in Ire,
(Their hungry Hopes whilst Ceres filled with Dreams)
To daunt that People proudly did aspire,
Not fearing Scilla nor Charibdis Streams,
Nor thundering Aetna vomiting forth Fire,
Nor Vulcans Forge, nor monstrous Giants Names,
No, Plutoes self who wedded in those Fields,
His conquered Hells to greedy men he yields.
55
Those whose great Valor did so honor Wrong,
That each eternal Pen, it yet renownes,
Who Riualls lived in love of Glory long,
And though but Cities did dispose of Crowns,
Those two by Sea did strive who was most strong,
As all the Earth could not contain two Towns,
Each State the World less then it self contriues,
A just Proportion Ruin only gives.
56
That hautie Race which Kings in Triumph led,
(All not being pleased with parting of the Spoils)
That Fishes might as well as Beasts be fed,
(The Land else glutted by their guilty Broils)
They on the Sea a Sea of Blood did shed,
Which (washed by Waves away) might foil their Soyles,
That them to plague no Fury Place could find,
All Objects razed which might vpbraide the Mind.
57
A spacious Field the Waters did afford,
Where floting Armies might their Forces try,
When free Men fighting who should be their Lord,
With too much Valor did their Bondage buy,
Whilst AEolus did rage, and Neptune ror'd,
More cruel Creatures then Themselves to spy:
Men of all else which this large Circuit fill,
Most subtle are, and violent in Ill.
58
From liquid Fields where Carcasses are rife,
Now with his Troop Volteius Passage finds,
Who were more bold, then fortunat in Strife,
And dying did triumph over Foes, Waves, Winds,
Of Fame too greedy, prodigal of Life,
As those whose Souls were Strangers to their Minds,
Who lose their own, to gain from others Breath,
Life by Opinion seek, for certain Death,
59
When Father, Son, and Brother bound in Law,
Did pledge their Lives who only should be free,
Pale Neptune once at Actium wondering saw
His Crystal Walks all as congealed in Tree,
Which from their Kingdoms diverse Kings did draw,
To know whose Slaves they were ordained to be,
As both [till cleared) from what they craved would stand,
Two on the Sea did fight for all the Land.
60
To lose their Own or others Ships to win,
When lofty Legions did a Purpose take,
Of Winds, Waves, Arms, Oars, Sounds, Showts, blows, the din
Gave bold men Courage, made the Cowards quake,
Whilst sloting Forests did together rin,
Which Neptune, Mars, and AEolus made shake,
The Bellies (big with Men) abortiue burst,
By thundering Engines violated first.
61
When this Encounter had made many smart,
A stately meeting, terrible to think,
Ships without Kindness kissed, yet loath to part,
Stood struggling long which should the other sink,
Till some often pierced, and past all Hope of Art,
For Poison last [as desprat] Floods did drink,
And that none might their conquered Ensigns clame,
Slipped under Seas as if to hide their Shame.
62
But hautie Romans stormed to be withstood,
And used to conquer, maruail'd to be matched,
From Floods in vain some drinking back their Blood
Half killed, half drowned, Death by two Darts dispatched,
There where they fought whilst Bodies pau'd the Flood,
Till empty first no wooden Cave was caught:
O how that Life seems foul which blots Fames Books,
In Glories Glass whilst generous Courage looks.
63
Whilst Mars as yet a doubtful Judge did prove,
The barbarous Queen fled with Pelusian Slaves,
Who lived in her, with her did straight remove,
Not feared, no, not as who in Feauers reaues,
He fled not Foes, but followed on his Love,
For whom the Hope of all the World he leaves,
Who vanquished Armies often, a Woman foyld,
Who all of All, him of himself she spoyld.
64
The Seas surrender at that dreadful Blast,
Troops of all Lands which in their Depthes did fall,
Which Foes fell down, rise as in League at last,
The Cause being common which does join them all,
Not only Ancients famous in Times past,
But Turks and Christians thence, a voice does call,
Whom even when raging, raging Floods suppressed,
That Waves might toss them still who would not rest.
65
What Turband Band abandons Thetis Bowres,
By their Misfortune fortunat to Fame,
Who by a ROYAL PENS Eternal Powers
Reft back from Death, Breath whilst Men Breath does clame?
How those still Turks were baptized in few Hours,
Where Azure Fields fom'd forth a hoarie Stream,
This my GREAT PHOEBVS tuned to Trumpets Sounds,
Whose stately Accents each strange Tongue rebounds.
66
Not only thus by barbarous Bands ou'rthrowne,
Some whom CHRIST bought a floting Tomb confines,
But by themselves (like Pagans spoyld) though known,
In liquid Plains a Number Breath resignes,
Whilst those who toil to make the World their own,
Do with Devotion paint most damned Designs,
That they when all things else have faild for Baits,
May Superstition use to angle States.
67
When hautie Philip with this I Will in Love,
Whose Rage to reign no Reason could appease,
As often by Fraud, it last by Force would prove,
To barren Spain whose fertile Fields did please,
He send huge Hulks which did like Mountains move,
As Towns for Traffic, Palaces for Ease,
And of all Sorts did furnish forth a Band,
As if to People, not to win a Land.
68
To brave the Heavens whilst Giants would assay,
The LORD their Power would wonderfully bounds,
One little Bark their Navy did dismay,
The mighty Man a Woman did confound,
All Elements did arm their Course to stay,
That Wicked Men might not pollute our Ground,
For Pride disdained, for Cruelty abhorred,
Spain begged (a Slave) where looking to be Lord,
69
O happy those for whom the Heavens will fight,
Of Angels Armies camp about them still,
Whilst Hail and Thunder from Heavens Storehouse light,
Rush armed VVinters forth, stern Tempests kill,
The stormy Winds conjured in Time charge right,
As traind in War to spend their Power with Skill:
Still to the Author Mischief does return,
And in the Fires they make the Wicked burn.
70
The tumid State a Number does afford,
Who only there could quensh ambitions Fire,
And Avarice with many has it stored,
Who only there could bound their waste Desire,
Though of the Wealth of diverse Lands made Lord,
Who by no Means Contentment could acquire
Till (like themselves) still taking, filled with Naught,
The Sea and Hell them to Abundance brought.
71
What fearful thoughts their quaking Stomachs fling,
When with each Wave a Wound Death seems to give?
That so to charge do for a vantage strive,
Save Lightnings whiles some sudden glances bring,
Clouds masking Heaven over all do darkness drive,
That whilst they nothing see, and too much hear,
Fallen on the Depths Hells Shadow does appear.
72
Some escaped such Storms whilst they secure remain,
Whose cruel Couetice to render vain,
They yield (as faint) till Foes toward them repair,
Then Powder kindled by a lingering train,
They all at once are thundered through the Air,
In Water burned, weak thralls kill Victors strong,
And suffering act, revenge preventing wrong.
73
Thus by the Sea a number is bewrayed.
Whose dying Eyes, a friend did never close,
Not in their Fathers, no, in no tomb laid,
Which had when dead no part where to repose,
But are by Waves to every Rock betrayed,
Till this last Day do of all Flesh dispose,
Which as would seem most ready those may find,
Whom Earth not burdens, Wynding-sheets not bind,
74
The Face of Earth like those a number yields,
Who for last lodgings could not get a Grave,
Yet where they fell, as having won the Fields,
Them dead a time from all who lived did reaue,
Thrown in the Dust drawn from their bloody Shields,
Whilst naked there, they what they clad did save,
Till Beasts with some did run, with some Fowls fly,
As Bodies first, Bones bare at last did lie.
75
The Blood of some did stain that golden age,
To stryke with Iron ere malice did invent,
On Ruins Altar offering up to rage,
Wrath wants not Weapons when for mischief bent.
Then Indignation Mortals did assuage,
With Stones, sharp Stings, and what by force was rent,
From gored Bellies Puddings did gush out,
And Heads with Brains were compassed about.
76
But when Man spud whilst venging wrong by chance,
That Life was lodged in such a fortress frail,
To Court Vainglory which to fools did glance,
Some (as for Sport) their Neighbors did assail,
Then last their State of purpose to advance,
Strayed Valor would by violence prevail,
All Armies first were by Ambition led,
Till Avarice a greater fury bred.
77
Who first from Death by Deeds redeemed their Names,
And eminent magnanimously grew,
(Their fancies frying in ambitions Flames)
They only Praise, not Profit did pursue,
And, as for Glory who contend in games,
Sought others to exceed, not to subdue,
Such Scythia one another Egypt gave,
From conguer'd Lands who did but Honor crave.
78
Those Weapons first were fond which pierced, or brus'd,
Ere dreadful Cyclops made their Hammers reele,
Of Mars chief Minions Sword and Lance were used,
Ere Men did march as Statues all of Steel,
What fury in proud Minds this rage insus'd,
That they would suffer to make others feel,
And strive to further, ere to hinder ill,
Then save themselves, more bent their Mates to kill.
79
What Mountains were of murthred Bodies made,
Which till fallen dust, the dust did not receive,
Of Ashur, Persia, Greeks, and Romans dead,
Who whilst that they more Earth, them Earth would have,
Whilst of the World each striving to be Head,
Those Members main'd which it to rule did crave?
Then though all Lands one only did adore,
As pent in too strict bounds whilst one sought more.
80
Of Bones unburied what huge Heaps were reared,
By Teutons, Cimbers, Gauls, great by doing harms,
By Vandalls, Allam, Hunnes, and Goths long feared,
Danes, Longobards, and Sarazens in swarms?
For which long time those Fields could not be eared,
Where they to death had offered up their Arms,
Whilst where to lieu, to win more Lands being set,
Where they might die, they only Land could get?
81
Then Nature strong as in her perfect Age,
As Bees their Swarms Lands Colonies sent forth,
Which forced by wants, else moved by generous Rage,
In Tempests huge inunded from the North,
Else that high Hopes dreamed Richesse might assuage.
They sought the South as held of greatest worth,
To what it pleased whilst Power a right did clame,
Often with their Dwellers Countries changed the Name.
82
That Heathnish Host by Juda so abhorred,
Whose Captains railing Vengeance to contriue,
A godly King did spread before the Lord,
Whose Wrong his Soul did most of peace deprive,
Till that an Angel with just Wrath being stored,
Did kill of thousands thryse threescore and five,
Those who blaspheming GOD by him were slain,
Must rise with fear to look on GOD again,
83
Thence thousands rise with Strangers, or their own,
Where still to Broils the Grecians were inclind,
Where all the World at Fortunes Dyce was thrown,
Twixt Sir and Son in Law not love combind,
By Virtues Clients fall which Fields were known,
Of all, who only the Scates good designed,
None Virtue should adore, all reverence must,
Men should delight in it, not in it trust.
84
Thence (never buried) many Body springs,
Where of all Lands often Armies did contend,
Slave by the Senate, Emperors, or Kings,
But most by Him who did to Carthage send,
[Reft from Romes Nobles] Bushels full of Rings,
And by Barbarians Lord s of all in end,
Thus Italy all Nations did obey,
And to all Nations was exposed a prey.
85
That Field yields thousands, where VVrong squaring Right,
(For famous Captains twyse a fatal Stage)
Great Pompey did with Mithridates fight,
And Tamberlane the Terror of that age,
On lightning Bajazet did thundering light,
Tamed for a Footstool in an Iron Cage:
Thus that great Monarch was made worse then thrall,
Pride hated stands, and does unpitied fall.
86
All then must march at this last Trumpets sound,
Who Fields entombed, damned Floods, and Ditches filled,
Whilst Ottoman to make his Crescent round,
Blood (as but Water) prodigally spilled,
His Bassaes dashed, rise groaning from the Ground,
Which often by him, or else for him were killed,
And as for Bondage borne (free but from Graves)
Did live to him, and died to Satan Slaves,
87
By Violence Death diverse did surprise,
Still since the World first peopled did remain,
But Men in Mischief fondly grown more wise,
By Bolts unseen some more of late are slain,
Since some new Sulmons, no, Devils did devise,
Those Sulphurous Engines bragging GOD again,
Which Men, yea Towers, and Towns in Pieces tear,
Then Thunder now, Men more the Canon fear.
88
Those soon start up which fell whilst as less strong,
By Vulcan forced succumbing Thetis ror'd,
And thundering forth the Horror of her Wrong,
The Burden urged straight in Disdain restored,
The airie Region raging all a long,
Which Death to them did suddenly afford,
And by a Blow most strange, no Scarre being found,
The Bones all broken, and the Flesh still sound,
89
Those whom of Earth the Superfice as forced,
Did bear, not bury, suffer, not receive,
By men even dead [as often aliue] extorc'd,
To Avarice, else Cruelty still Slave,
Those shall from Dust no sooner be diuorc'd,
Then they who sought the Center for a Grave,
Whose Bodies with their Souls did seem to strive,
Which first at Hell should with most Haste arrive.
90
The mutinous Hebrews who against him repined,
Whose Face (as glorious Rays reflecting still)
Com'd from the Thunderer like clear Lightning shined,
GODS Secretary who first penned his Will,
As soon as they whose Dust no Weight confined,
They rise whom Earth did bury first, then kill.
To offer bent (Pride burning in their Breasts)
As like Himself whom Pluto took for Priests.
91
That scorned Diuiner is with them exposed,
[Fooles who foreknow, not for their Fate prouide]
Who by his Wife when lurking was disclosed,
And whom at last Earth did as strangely hide.
And that the Cave which burned might so be closed,
He as Romes Best who under Ground did ride,
There greedy to do good, or to get Fame,
That where his Body died, might live his Name.
92
Some Fever strange when Surfets seem to move,
Those of the Earth who in the Entraills dwell,
Whilst it [though trembling] raging, seems to prove,
If it may drink the World, and spue forth Hell,
They from the Dust as quickly shall remove
As those by Powder who in Powder fell,
By Tyrants fierce being pined, no, freed from Pain,
Who fallen on Earth, or tossed through Air remain.
93
Now Orpheus shall not need, (as Poets feign,)
To charm the Furies with harmonious Sounds,
Nor Hercules by Violence, in vain
To force the Dungeons of the shadowie Bounds,
The Guests below shall once turn back again,
To see what they have lost, superior Rounds,
The Prince of Darkness will be pleased with this,
Since sure to have them judged for ever his,
94
The Earth her Entraills quickly shall discharge,
That GOD all who had Souls at once may see,
His Prisoners at last Death must enlarge,
At that Great Jubilee all once set free,
Who were so long in passing Charons Barge,
Some from Obliuions Flood brought back shall be,
Ere Cerberus can bark, all shall be gone,
And ere they can be missed turned every one.
95
Those whom soft Egypt always Slave to Lust,
By Spices, Ointment, Baumes, and Odours rare,
To scorn Corruption, and to mock the Dust,
Did keep (when lost) with a ridiculous Care,
And used as Pledges whiles to purchase Trust,
Their Bones, worth Naught when clad, worth less when bare,
Their Vailes renewed no sooner they resume,
Then whom at first Corruption did consume.
96
Those Piramids whose Points seemed (threatening Heaven)
Not solitary Tombs, but courted Thrones,
The huge Mausoleum one of Wonders seven,
That Obeliske which graced Augustus Bones,
Late Monuments those aemulous to Even,
Of Marber, Porphyr, Iasp, and precious Stones,
None hides his Guest from this great Judges Sight,
Nor yet him sends more gorgeous to the Light.
97
Of Place the Distance distant Time not breeds,
Some who one Field empurple by their Fall,
Whose Entraills straight another Mansion needs,
Lest else Corruption might encroach on all,
Their Bodies Friends (as whiles for Pomp succeeds)
Not seem, (far borne) to bury, but enstall,
But though each Part a several Kingdom takes,
A sudden Union now one Moment makes.
98
That Dreame-diuiner by two Tribes called Sire,
Though by them lost who did his Brethren save,
His Dust from Goshen quickly shall retire,
And with the Rest a second Hymen have,
Where he when dead as Faith did first inspire,
Where His might live, Possession did receive,
Or since by Him so benefited once,
That Land ingrate to frustrat of his Bones,
99
The third Time then some live, from Tombs raised twice,
(Their Resurrection represented else)
Whom Death (it seemed) did but a while disguise,
For acting Wonders which Amazement tells,
When waked by Force, as who did drousie rise,
They drawn from Lethe, or Obliuions Cells,
Straight with the Place all Privilege did leave,
Made as who dreamed, or in high Feauers reaue.
100
Till soared from hence where they so long have strived.
Still charged with Flesh all Souls infirm remain,
And with their Burdens those who were revived,
Their former Frailties did resume again,
So that unknowing where a while they lived,
Maimed Memory was bounded by the Brain,
Through earthly Organs Spectacles impure,
Souls reach but Objects such as they procure.
101
Some fondly curious would have then inquired,
What Lodgings last those Both-world-guests did leave,
Which (if remembered) reuerenc'd, and admired,
They would not wrong by Words what none conceive,
Great Paul (whose self could not tell how) retird,
Whom the third Heaven (when ravished) did receive,
He what he saw returned could not relate,
Past Mortals Senses, to Immortalls great.
102
Such Souls when last to their first Tents turned back,
Their Toils thereby, and others Glory grew,
Whilst to the World that Way GOD clear would make,
That Faith [when firme] might Death it self subdue,
But then they Flesh as when first left did take,
Which now at last the LORD will all renew,
Their Resurrection when no Time confines,
Whilst raised, ripe Fruits, of what they first were Signs.
103
Thus the great Tisbit strangely did restore,
[That none might trouble have who gave him rest]
Her Son whose Victuals did when waste, wax more,
Like to the like when in like State distressed,
That Prophet did who craved his Spirit in store,
Not to be pressed by such a second guest,
Whose Grave waked one, that there he might not sleep,
Where he (when dead) a quickening power did keep.
104
The blessed Bethanian highly shall rejoice,
When next he calls who showed such tender love,
As even to weep for him, as a chief choice,
Till he was brought free from white bands above,
The first who in the grave did hear that Voice,
Which from all Graves must make their guests remove,
And greater Power when glorified may show,
Then from frail Flesh when but breathed forth below.
105
Those soon start up who quickly come to Light,
As to applaud what was accomplished known,
CHRIST'S acting sufferings (when most low) at hight,
That the last part on this Worlds Stage was shown,
Else to vpbraid as a prodigious sight,
Them who did haste what bent to have ouer-thrown,
And others all thus raised more glad do rise,
Of Souls birth once, then of their Bodies thryse,
106
There come those two, from whence no Flesh can know,
Yet not more soon then whom frail Eyes saw dead,
Of which as Types one to each World did show,
That Mortals might be straight Immortal made,
Gross Bodies mount, and some Death not overthrow,
A Laberinth whence Nature none can lead,
In most evil times most good, to be marked so,
Those did from hence man's common Way not go.
107
That godly man by GOD judged Just to be,
Translated was that he might not see Death,
Being Death to him his LORD despised to see,
Whilst poysond with vile Men's blasphemous Breath,
Or else at last from Pangs and Horrors free,
He priuiledg'd from all the signs of Wrath,
Did part, not die, from Sin, not Life estranged.
Souls must remove, else have their lodging changed.
108
Whilst him save GOD who ought disdained to fear.
Vile Baals Scourge, of Kings who scorned the Ire,
With flamming Steeds a burning Coach did bear,
The Wind being Wagoner, an Angel Squire,
Twix this gross Globe and the celestial Sphere,
Zeal did triumph even as it fought with Fire,
That Heaven and Earth both might his Glory know,
As erst his Toils when but contemned below.
109
As where he live, or lies, to turn or stay,
To dispute easy is, hard to conclude,
The LORD perchance committed him to Clay,
As one with whom He on Mount Tabor stood,
Else not dissolved* but changd when borne away,
And (some think) kept apart yet to do good,
For without all no Saints perfected be,
The Maide-borne-bodie so Heavens only see,
110
A loud Alarm still doubling from above,
[The Word Eternal may make Breath abound]
All this vaste Circuit does a Trumpet prove,
Whose Concaue wastes not, but maintains the sound,
At the first blast naught else save it did move,
As drearie Silence had prepared the ground,
But till all Ears be filled, it higher swells,
A horrid Echo roaring from the Hells.
111
Those guilty Souls what further comfort shields,
From sleep whose Conscience with the Body stares,
Then when they see (as Grass) over all the fields,
Men grow about them? O what frozen Hearts!
Earth labored long a Monstrous Harvest yields,
Which straight Heavens Husband, lo grindes sifts, and parts,
Who can but think how such endure this sight?
And yet what they attend makes it seem light.
112
He who them hates that he should others grace,
Both Grief and Envy tortures them at once,
Of two who rest companions in one place,
One pleased does joy the other desp'rat moves,
One parts as pointed for Eternal Peace,
The other signed for pain, stays, howles and groans,
Thus of the Godlies good the first degree
Is, from the wicked that they parted be.
113
Those Creatures who still sound did never fall,
That fatal Summons do no sooner hear,
Then those whom it forth from the Dust does call
Where they had slept even many a hundredth year,
Souls lodgings thus which had been ruined all,
Straight builded then first perfect do appear,
The Just they first, the Reprobat last move,
Which bide below whilst others fly above.
114
Those Temples then which not dissolved still stay,
(A Mystery difficult to conceive)
All debt of death not dying shall defray,
The other life being com'de, ere this them leave,
The Bodies then (all frailty burned away)
Being quintessenc'd, new qualities receive,
Which though still quick, yet in their Sins being dead,
Ere mortal proved, shall be Immortal made.
115
If often to gaze a multitude remains,
To hold his Court whilst it some Prince attends,
Who still being met with many stately Trains,
Does make a Musters of imagined friends,
(As by small Brooks a Flood swollen when it raines)
Till that on him it seems the World depends,
That Pomp to all a reverent aw imparts,
And strykes with Terror Malefactors Hearts.
116
Think with what glory CHRIST must wondering won,
Whilst thundering Terror, and yet lightning Grace,
He might come clad with Stars, crowned with the Sun,
But to his brightness such [as base] give place,
His court at first of heavenly Hosts begun,
From hence enlarged is in a little space,
O what strange noyce does all the World rebound,
Whilst Angels sing, Saints shout, and Trumpets sound!
117
My ravished Soul transcending Reasons reach,
So earnest is to surfeit on this sight,
That it disdaines what may high thoughts empeach,
Whilst mounting up to Contemplations hight,
Which flight so far does pass the power of speech,
That only Silence can pursue it right,
And that my Spirit may be refreshed that way,
It must a space amidst dombe Pleasures stray.
FINIS.

