: A COMpendyous Regyment or a Dyetary of health made in Mountpyllyer, by
Andrewe Boorde of physycke Doctor, newly corrected and imprynted with diverse
addycyons Dedycated to the Armypotent Prince and valyent Lord Thomas Duke of
Northfolke.



The preface or the proheme.
To the armypotent Prince and valyent lord Thomas Duke of Northfolke Andrewe
Boorde of physycke doctor r does surrender humyle commendacyon with immortal
thanks.
AFter the time that I had traveled for to have the notycyon and practes of
Physycke in diverse regyons and countres and returned in to England and
required to sary and to remain and to co^tynue with sir Robert Drewry knight,
for many vrge^t causes. Your grace heryng of me did send sir John^ Baruyngham
now being knight to me to come to your grace to have my counsel in physycke
for your infyrmytes. The mesage done, I with festynacyon and dylyge^ce did not
prolonge the time but did come to your grate according to my deuts. The which
was in the time, when lord Thomas Cardynall Archebysshop of York was
commanded to go to his see of York. And after my coming to you and feeling
the pulses of your heart: the pulses of your brain, and the pulses of your
liver, and that I had lene your vryne and your egestyon I durst not to
enterprise or medyll with out the counsel of Master doctor Buttes, the which
did know not only your co^plexcion and infyrmite but also he did know the
usage of your dyete. And the imbe^yllyte and strength of your body, with other
qualytes exuedyent and necessary to be known, but brefely to conclude your
recuperatyng or recovering your health. And for synguler trust and high favor
the which the king had to you was compocated to be in the presence of his
magesty, I than did pass over the sees again and did go to all the
vnyuersytes and great Scloles the which be approbated with in the precynet of
Thrystendome for to have the practes of physycke, I seeing many expedyent
things in diverse regyons at the last I did stay my self at Mountpllyoure
which is the head university in all Europe for the practes of physycke and
surgery or thyrmig I being there. And having a cotydyal remembrance upon your
bountyfull goodness, d^d consulte with many egregyous Doctors of physycke what
manner that I m^ghte write the which might be acceptable for the conseruacyon
of the health of your body. The said doctors knowing my zele and true
intencyon had to you, did aduertyse me to make a book of dyete not only for
your grace but also for your noble posteryte and for all men living wherefore I
do nomyaate this book The Dyetary of health, the which does pertract how a man
should order him self in all manner of causes partenynge to the health of his
body, if your grace or any man will have forther knowledge for diverse infyrmites
let him look in a book of my making named y^ Breuyary of health. And where I
have dedycated this book to your grace. And have not ornated hit with cloquence
and retorycke terms, the which in all manner of books and wryttynges is used
these modernall days. I do submytte me to your bountefull goodness. And also
diverse times in my wrytynges I do write words of mirth, truly it is for no
other inte^cion, but to make your grace merry for mirth is one of ye chefest
things of physycke the which does advertise every man to be merry, and to
bewere of pentyfulnes, trusting to your affluent goodness to take no
displeasure with any of the co^tentes of this book, but to accept my good will
and dylygent labor. And forthermore I do trust to your super abundaunt
gracyousnes, that you will consider the love and zele, the which I have to your
prosperyte, and that I do it for a common weal, the which I beseech Jesu
christ long to continue to his will and pleasure in this life. And after this
transytory life to remunerate you with celestyall joy and eternal glory

From Mountpyller. The fyft day of May. The year of our Lord Jesu Christ.
M. CCCCC. XLVII.
Here follows the Table of the Chapiters.
THe first Chapyter does show where a man should cytuat or set his mansyon
place or house, for ye belth of his body. The second chapter does show a
man how he should build his house, and that the prospect be good for ye
conseruacyon of health. The third chapyter does show a man to build his
house i a pure and a fresshe air for to lengthen his life. The fourth Chapter
does show under what manner a man should build his house or mansyon in
eschewynge things yt should shorten his life. The. v. Chapter does show how
a man should order his house concerning the implementes to comfort the spyrytes
of man. The. vi. Chapter does show a man how he should order his house and
household, and to live in quyetnes. The. vii. chapter does show how y^ head
of a house, or a householde should excercyse him self for the health of the
soul and body. The. viii. chapter does show how a man should order him
self in slepynge, and watchynge, and in his apparel wearynge. The. ix.
chapter does show ye repleccion or surfetyng does much harm to nature, and
that abstyne^ce is ye chiefest medison of al medyson The. x. charpiter treats
of all manner of drynkes, as of water of wine, of ale, of vere, of cider, of
meade, of metheglyn, and of whay. The* xi. chapter treats of bread. The*
xii. Chapit treteth of potage, of sewe of stew pottes, of grewel, of fyrmente,
of pese potage, of almon milk, of rise potage, of caudels, of culleses, of
alebrues, of honey soppes, and of all other manner of brothes. The. xiii. Chapit
treats of white meat as of eggs, butter, chese, milk, crayme, posettes, of
almon butter, and of bean butter. The. xiiii. chapyter treats of fysshe.
The. xv. chapter treats of wild foul of tame foul, and of birds. The.
xvi. chapter treats of flesh, wild and domestycall. The. xvii. chapyter
treats of pertyculer things of fysshe and flesh. The. xviii. chapit
treats of roste meat of fryde meat, of soden or boiled meat, of bruled
meat and of beaken meat. The. xix. chapter treats of rotes. The. xx.
chapter treats of herbs. The. xxi. chapyter treats of fruytes. The. xxii.
chapter treats of spyces. The. xxiii. chapyter shows a dyete for sanguyne
men. The. xxiiii. chapter shows a dyete for flematyke men. The. xxv.
chapyter shows a dyete for colorycke men. The xxvi. Chapter does show a
dyete for melancoly men. The. xxvii. chapter treats of a dyete and of an
order to be used in the pestyferous time of the pestilence and the swetyng
syckenes. The. xxviii* Chapyter treats of a dyete for them the which be in
an ague or a fever The xxix. chapyter treats of a dyete sor them the which
have the Ilyacke, or the colycke and the stone. The. xxx. Chapter treats of
a dyete for them the which have any of the kinds of the gottes. The. xxxi.
chapyter treats of a dyete for them the which have any kinds of lepored The.
xxxii. chapter treats of a dyete for them the which have any of the kinds
of ye falling syckenes. The. xxxiii. chapter treats of a dyete for them
which have any pain in their head The. xxxiiii. Chapter treats of a dyete
for them the which be in a consumpeyon. The. xxxv. chapter treats of a dyete
for them the which be asmatycke men, being short wynded or lacking breath.
The. xxxvi* Chapyter does show a dyete for them the which has the palsy.
The xxxvii. Chapyter does show an order and a dyete for them that be mad and
out of they^ wit. The. xxxviii. Chapter treats of a dytte for them the
which have any kind of dropsy The. xxxix. Chapyter treats of a general dyete
for all manner of men or women being sick or whole. The. xl. Chapter does
show an order or a fasshyon, how a sick man shall be ordered in his
syckenes. And how a sick man should be used that is lykely to dye.
Here ends the table. And here follows the Dyetary of health.
The first Chapyter does show where a man should cytuate for set his mancyon
place or house for the health of his body.
WHat man of honor or worship, or other estate, the which does prete^de to
build a house or any mansyon place to inhabyte him self. Or else does pretend
to altar his house, or to altar old building in to co^modyous and pleasant
building, not only for his own proper co^modyte, wealth, and health, but also
for other men the which will resort to him: having also a respect to his
posteryte.

First it is necessary and expedyent for him to take heed, what counsel god
did give to Abraham, and after that to take heed what council god did give to
Moses, and to the children of Israel, as it appears in the. xiii. chapyter of
Exodi. and the. xx. chapyter of Numeri, and the. vi. chapyter of Deutro. And
also in the book of Levites, saying first to Abraham. Go thou forth of thy
country and from thy cognacion or kynred. And come thou into the country the
which I will show to the, a country abundynge or plentyfull of milk and
honey. Here is to be noted that where there is plenty of milk, there is is
plenty of pasture and no skarsite of water, and where there is plentye of honey
there is no skarsyte but plentyfulnes of woods, for there be mo bees in
woddes, and so consequently abundaunce of honey, than there be bees, or honey, or
wax in the hyues in gardyns or orchardes, wherefore it appears that whosoever
will build a mansyon place or a house, he must cytuate and set it there where
he must be sure to have both water and wood, except for pleasure he will
build a house in or by some City or great town the which be not destytute
of such co^modytes. But he the which will dwell at pleasure, and for profit.
and health of his body he must dwell at elbowe rome having water and wood
anexed to his place or house, for if he be destituted of any of the pryncipal
les, that is to say first of water for to wasshe and to wrynge, to bake and to
hrewe, and diverse other causes specially for parrel yt which might fall by
fire were a great disco^modyous thing. And better it were to lack wood than
to lack water the premysses co^sydered, although that wood is a necessary
thing, not only for fuel, but also for other urgent causes, specially
concerning building and reparacyons.

The second Chapyter does show a man how he should build his house or
mansyon, that the prospect be fair and good for the con^eruacyon of health.
AFter that a man have chosen a conuenyent soil and place according to his
mind and purpose to build his house or mansyon on, he must have before cast in
his mind that the prospect to and fro the place be pleasant, fair, and good
to the eye, to behold the woods, the waters, the feldes, the ^ales, the
hills, and the plain ground. And that every thing be desent and sayre to the
eye, not only within the precyncte of the place appointed to build a mansyon
or a house to se the co^modites about it, but also it may be placable to the
eyes of all men to se and to behold when they be a good dystaunce of from the
place, that it do stand co^modyously. For the commodyous building of a place
does not only satysfye the mind of the inhabytour, but also it does comfort
and reioyseth a man's heart to se it, specially the pulcruse prospecte. For my
co^sayte is such that I had rather not to build a mansyon or a house, than to
build one without a good prospecte in it, to it, and from it. For and the eye
be not satysfye, the mind can not be contented. And the mind can not be
contented the heart can not be pleased, if the heart and mind be not pleased,
nature does abhor. And if nature do abhor, mortifycacyon of the vytal, and
anymall, and spyrytual powers do consequently follow.

The third chapyter does show a man to build his house in a pure and a
fresshe air to lengthen his life.
THere is no thing except poison that does put ryfye or does corrupt ye
blood of man, and also does mortyfye the spyrytes of man, as does a corrupt
and a co^tagyous air. For Galyen terapentice nono says, whyther we will or
will not we must grant unto every man air, for without the air no man can
live. The air can not be to clean and pure considering it does compass us
round about, and we do receive it in to us, we ca^ not be without it, for we
live by it as the fysshe lives by the water. Good air therefore is to be
praised. For if the air be fryske, pure, and clean about the mansyon or house
it does conserve the life of man, it does comfort the brain. And the powers
natural anymall and spyrytuall ingendrynge and making good blood, in the
which consysteth the life of man. And contraryly evil and corrupt airs does
infe^tc the blood, and does ingendre many corrupt humors, and does putryfye
the brain, and does corrupt the heart, and therefore it does bread many dyse
ases and infyrmytes through the which man's life is abreuyated and shortened.
Many things does infect, putryfye, and corrupts the air, as the influente
of sondrye sterres, and standing waters, stynkynge mystes, and marshes, caryn
lyinge long above the ground, much people in a small rome lying uncleanly, and
being fylthy and sluttesshe, wherefore he that does pretend to build his
mansyon or house, he must provide that he do not cytuat his house nyghe to any
marshe or marysshe ground, that there be not nyghe to the place stynkynge and
putry^yed standing waters, pooles, pondes, nor myres, but at lest wise that
such waters do stand upon a stony or a grauayle ground myxt with claye, and
that some fresshe spring have a recourse to nury she and to refresshe the
said standing waters. Also there must be circumspection had that there be
not about the house or mansyon no stynkynge dyches, gutters, nor canelles, nor
corrupt dunghylles, nor synkes, except they be often and diverse times mu^dyfyed
and made clean. Swepynge of houses and chambers ought not to be done as long as
any honest man is within the precynct of the house for the dust does puttrify
the air making it dence. Also nygh to the place let not her flax nor hemp be
watered, and beware of the snoffe of candelles, and of the savor of apples for
these things be contagyous and infectyue. Also mysty and cloudy days,
impetuous and vehement wind, troublous and vaporous wether is not good to
labor in it to open ye pores to let in infectious air, Furthermore beware of
pyssynge in draughtes, and permit no common pyssynge place be about the house
or mansyon, and let the common house of easement be over some water, or else
elongated from the house. And beware of emptynge of pysse pottes and pyssyng in
chymnes. so that all evil and conragyous airs may be expelled, and clean air
kept vnputrysyed. And of all things let the buttery, the ^eller, the kytchen.
the larder house, with all other houses of offices be kept clean, that there be
no fylth in them, but good and odyferous souours, and to expel and expulse all
corrupt and contagyous air, look in the. xxvii. Chapyter of these book.

The fourth Chapyter does show under what manner and fasshyon a man should
build his house or mansyon, in exchenynge things that shorteneth man's life.
When a man does begin to build his house or mansyon place he must puyde
(says Jesus christ) before that he begin to build for all things necessary
for the performacion of it, lest that when he has made his foundacyon, and
can not fynysshe his work that he has begone, every man will deryde him
saying. This man did begin to build, but he can not fynysshe or make an
end of his purpose, for a man must consider the expense before he do begin
to build, for there gothe to building many a nail, many pynnes, many lathes,
and many tyles or slates or strawes, beside other greater charges, as timber,
bordes, lyme, sand, stones, or brycke, beside the workmanshyp and the
implementes. But a man the which have puruyd or has in store to accomplysshed
his purpose, and has chosen a good soil and place to cytuat his house or
mansyon, and that the prospecte be good, and that the air be pure, fryske and
clean. Then he that will build, let him make his foundacyon upon a graualy
ground myxte with clay, or else let him build upon a roche of stone, or else
upon an hill or a hills side. And order and edyfye the house so that the
pryncypall and chief prospectes may be East and weest, specially North east,
South east, and Southweest, for the merydy all wyndes of all wyndes is the
most worst, for the South wind does corrupt and does make evil vapors. The
East wind is temperate, fryse, and fragrau^t. The weest wind is mutable. The
North wind purges ill vapors, wherefore better it is of ye. ii. worst that the
wyndowes do open plain North than plain South, although that Jeremy says,
from the North depends all evil. And also it is written in Ca^tica
canticorum. Rise up North wind and come thou South wind and parfyat my
gardayne. Make the hall under such a fasshyon, that the parler be anexed to the
head of the hall. And the butterye and pantry be at the lower end of the hal,
the sell ler under the pantry set somewhat abase, the kychen set somewhat a base
from the buttry and pantry, coming with an entry by the wall of the buttry,
the pastry house and the larder house anexed to the kychen. Than deuyde the
lodgings by the cyrcuyte of the quadryuyall court, and let the gate house be
opposyt or against the hall door (not dyrectly) but ye hal door standing a
base, and the gate house in the mydle of the front entering into the place, let
the pryue chamber be ane red to ye chamber of a state, with other chambers
necessary for the building, so that many of the chambers may have a prospecte
into the Chapel. If there be an utter court made, make it quadryuyal with
houses of easementes, and but one stable for horses of pleasure, and se no
fylth nor donge be within the court, nor cast at ye back side, but se the
donge to be carried far from the mansyon. Also the stables and the slaughter
house, a dery if any be kept should be elongated the space of a quarter of a
mile from the place. And also the bake house and brewe house should be a
distaunce from the place and from other building, when all the mansyon is
edyfyed and buylte, if there be a woote made about it, there should some
fresshe spring come to it, and diverse times the moote ought to be s^owered and
kept clean from mudde and wedes. And in no wise let not the fylth of the kychen
descend in to the moote. Forthermore it is a co^modyous and a pleasant thing
to a mansyon to have an orcherd of soundry fruytes, but it is more co^modiouse
to have a fair gardayn repleted with herbs of aromatyck and redole^t savors
In the gardayne may be a poole or two for fysshe if the pooles be clean kept.
Also a park repleted with dear and conyes is a necessary and a pleasant
thing to be anexed to a man syon. A dove house also is a necessary thing
about a mansyon place. And among other things a pair of buttes is a decent
thing about a mansyon, and other while for a great man necessary it is for
to pass his time with bowls in an aly, when all this is fynysshed and the
mansyon replenysshed with Implementes. There must be a fire kept co^tynually
for a space to dry up the contagyous moysters of the walls, and the savor of
the lyme and sand. And after that a man may lie and dwell in the said mansyon
without taking any inconuenyence of syckenes.

The. v. Chapyter does show how a man should order his house concerning the
Implementes to comfort the spyrytes of man.
WHen a man has buylt his mansyon, and has his houses necessary about hes
place, if he have not houshode stuff or impleme^tes the which be nedeful, but
must borowe of his neighbors, he than is put to a shefte and to a great after
deal, for these men the which do brew in a botyl and bake in a walet, it will
belong or he can bye Jacke a salet yet every thing must have a beginning, and
every man must do after his possessions or abylyte, this natwithsta^dinge
better it is not to set up a householde or hospytalyte than to set up
householde lackyng the performacyon of it, as now to ron for malt, and by and
by for salt, now to send for bread, and by and by to send for a shepes
head, and now to send for this, and now to send for that, and by and by be
does send he can not tell for what, such things is no prouysion, but it is a
great abusyon. Thus a man shall lose his thryfte, and be put to a shefe, his
goods shall never increase, and he shall not be in rest nor peace, but ever in
carcke and care, for his porse will ever be bare, wherefore I do counceyll every
man, to provide for himself as soon as he can, for if of implementes he be
destytuted, men will call him light wytted, to set up a great house, and he is
not able to keep man nor mouse, wherefore let every ma^loke or he lepe for many
corns makes a great hepe.

The syxte Chapyter does show how a man should order his house and
householde, and to syue quyetly.
Whosoever ever he be ye will keep an house, he must order ye expenses of his house
according to the rent of his lands. And if he have no lands he must order
his house after his lucre wynuynge or gaynes. For he yt will spe^de more in his
house, than yt re^tes of his lands, or his gaynes does attayn to be shall fall
to pouerte, and necessite will urge cause and co^pel him to sell his land, or
to waste his stock, as it is daily seen by experye^ce of many men, wherefore
they be yt which will exchewe such ^digalyte and inconvenience, musie divide his
re^tes portion and exspe^ces, whereby yt he does live into. iii equal porcio^s
or pertes.

The cyrst part must serve to provide for meare and drink, and all other
necessary things for the sustencyon of the householde.
The second porcyon or part must be reserved for apparel, not only for a
man's own self, but for all his householde, and for his servants wages,
deductynge somewhat of this porcyon in alms deed to pore neygh bours and pore
people, fulfyllynge the. vii. works of mercy. The third porcyon or part
must be reserved for urgent causes in time of need, as in syckenesse.
reparacyon of houses, with many other catydyall exspences, beside rewards and
the charges of a man's last end. If a man do exsyde this order he may soon
fall in det, the which is a dangerous thing many ways beside the bringing a
to man trouble. And he that is ones behind band and in trouble, he can not be
in quietness of mind, the which does perturbe the heart, and so consequently
does shorten a man's life, wherefore there is no wise man but he will exchewe
this inconuenyence, and will cast before what shall follow after. And in no wise
to set up a householde, before he has made prouysyon to keep a house. For if
a man shall bye every thing that belongs to the keeping of his house with his
penny, it will be long or he be rich, and long or that he can keep a good
house. But he is wise in my conceyte that will have or he do set up his
householde. ii. or iii. years rent in his co^er. And if he have no lands than
he must provide for necessary things or that he begin house hold, lest yt he
repent him self after, through the which he do fall into pencifulnes, and
after that in to syckenes and dyseases, living not quyetly, whereby he shall
abreuyate his life.

The. vii. Chapyter does show how the head of a house, or a householder should
exersyce him self, for the health of the soul and body.
AFter that a man has provided al things necessary for his house and for his
householde, expedyent it is for him to know, how he should exercise him self
both bodily and ghostly. For there is no catholycke or christen man living,
but he is bound in conseyence to be more circu^specter about the wealth of his
soul then the health of his bodre. Our savior Jesus Christ says, what shall
it profit unto man if he goat all the world and lose him self, and bring him
self to a detrime^t, wherefore it appears that a man ought to be circumspecte
for the health and wealth of his soul. For he is bound so to live, that night
and day and at all hours he should be ready and when he is called for to de
part out of this world, he should uat fear to dye, saying the words with
saint Ambrose. I fear not to dye, because we have a good god, wha^ a man
has prepared for his soul, and has subdued sensualyte, and that he has
brought him self in a trade, or a usage of a ghostly or a catholyke living in
ob serving the commandments of God, than he must study to rule and to
govern the^ the which be in his householde, or under his custody or domynyon,
to se yt they be not idle, for king Henry the eight said when he was young,
ydlenes is chief masters of vices al. And also the head of a house must
over se that they which be under his tuyssyon serve god the holy days as
dylygently, ye and more dylygentler than to do their work the seryall days,
refraynynge them from vice and sin, compellynge them to observe the
commandments of God, specially to punysshe swerers, for in all the world
there is not such odyble swearynge as is used in Englange, specially among
youth and children, which is a detestable thing to here it, and no man does
go about to punysshe it. Such things reformed than may a householder be
glad not cessynge to instruct them the which be ygnorant, but also he must
continue in showing good example of living, than may he rejoice in God and be
merry, the which mirth and reioysyng does lengthen a man's life, and does expel
syckenes.

The. viii. Chapit does show how a man should order him self in slepynge and
in ^erynge his apparel.
When a man has exercysed himself in the day time as is rehearsed, he may
sleep soundely and surely in god what chance soever do fortune in the night
Moderate sleep is most praised for it does make parfyte digestyon, it does
nurysshe ye blood, and does qualyfye ye heat of ye liver, it does acuate,
quycken and refressheth ye memory, it does restore nature, and does quiet al
ye humors and pulses (...) man, and does anymate, and does comfort all ye
natural and anymall and spyrytual powers of man. And such moderate sleep is
acceptable in the sight of God the premysses in the aforesaid Chapter
observed and kept. And contraryly immoderate sleep and slugglysshenes does
humecte and makes light the brain, it does ingendre rewme and impostumes, it
is evil for the palsy whyther it be universal or partyculer, it is evil for ye
falling syckenes called Epilencia, Analencia, and Cathalencia, Appoplesia,
Soda, with all other infyrmytyes in the head, for it induces and causes
oblyuyousnes, for it does obfuske and does obnebulate the memory and the
quyckenes of wit. And shortly to conclude it does perturbe the natural, and
anymall, and spyrytuall powers of man. And specially it does instigate and
lead a man to sin, and does induce and infer breuyte of life, and detestably
it displeases God. Our lord Jesu Christ did not only bid or command his
dyscyples to watch, but did anymat them and al other so to do saying. I say
not only to you watch, but to all men I say watch. And to Peter he said,
myghtest not thou one hour watch with me, although these holy scryptures
with many other mo the which I might allygated for me, be not greatly referred
to this sense, yet it may stand here with my purpose and matter without
reprehensyon. These matters here need not to be rehearsed, wherefore I do return
to my purpose, and do say that the moderacyon of sleep should be mesured
according to the natural co^plexcion of man, and in any wise to have a respect
to the strength and the debylyte to age and youth and to syckenes and health of
man. First as concerning the natural co^plexcyon of man, as sanguyne and
colorycke men. vii. hours is suffycyent for them. And now consyderyng the
imbecyllyte and wekenes of nature a flematycke man may sleep. ix. hours or
more. Melancoly men may take their pleasure, for they be the receptacle and the
dragges of all the other humors. Secondaryly youth and age would have
temperau^ce in slepynge. Thyrdly strength may suffer a brounte in watch, the
which debilite and wekenes cannat. As I will show by a famylyer example. There
were two me^ set at the dyce together a day and a night and more, the weke man
said to him I can play no longer. The strong man said to him fie on the
benchewhystler wylt thou sterte away now. The weke man to satysfye the
strounge man's mind, appyted and desire, plays with his fellow, throghe the
which he does kill him self. The strong man does him self little pleasure al
things considered, the which I do pass over. whefore I will return to the
sick man, which may sleep at all times when that he may get it, but if he
may sleep at any time, best it is for him to refrayn from sleep in the day,
and to take his natural rest at night when all things is or should be at rest
and peace, but he must do as his infyrmyte will permyt and suffer, whole men of
what age or complexyon soever they be of should take their natural rest and
sleep in the night, and to exchew merydyall sleep. But an need shall compel a
man to sleep after his meat, let him make a pause, and than let him stand and
lean and sleep against a cupborde, or else let him sylte up right in a chair
and sleep. Slepynge after a full stomach does ingendre diverse infyrmyties, it
does hurt the sp^n, it relaxeth the synowes, it does ingendre the dropsyes and
the gout, and does make man look evil colored. Beware of Ueneryous acts
before the first sleep, and specially beware of such things after dinner or
after a full stomach, for it does ingendre the crampe, the gout, and other
displeasures. To bedwarde be you merry, or have merry company about you, so that
to bedwarde no anger nor heaviness, sorrow nor pencyfulnes do trouble or disquyet
you. To ^edwaade and also in the morning use to have a fire in your chamber to
wast and consume the evil vapors within the chamber, for the breath of man
may putryfye the air within the chamber. I do aduertyse you not to stand nor
to sit by the fire, but stand or sit a good way of from the fire taking the
flauour of it, for fire does aryfye and does dry up a man's blood, and does
make sterke the synewes and joints of man. In the night let the wyndowes of
your house, specially of your chamber be closed, when you be in your bed lie a
little while on your left side, and sleep on your right side. And when you do
wake of your first sleep make water if you feel your bladder charged, and than
sleep on the left side, and look as often as you do wake so often turn your
self in the bed from the one side to the other. To sleep grouclynge upon the
stomach and belly is not good, one^es the stomach be slow and tarde of
digestion but better it is to lay your hand or your bed fellows hand over
your stomach, than to lie grouelynge. To sleep on ye back vpryght is utterly
to be abhor^ed, when ye you do sleep let not your neck another your shoulders,
no there your hands nor fete, nor no other place of your body lie bare
vndyscouered. Sleep not with an empty stomach, nor sleep not after that you
have eaten meat one hour or two after. In your bed lie with your head some
what high, lest that ye meat which is in your stomach through eructuacions or
some other cause asce^de to ye oryfice of the stomach let your night cap be of
skarlet, and this I do aduertyse you for to cause to be made a good thycke
quylt of cotton, or else of pure flocks or of clean wool, and let the
covering of it be of white sustyan, and lay it on the fether bed that you do
lie on, and in your bed lie not to hot nor cold, but in a temporaunce. Old
ancient doctors of Physycke says. viii. hours of sleep in so^mer and. ix.
hours of sleep in winter is suffycyent for any man, but I do think that sleep
ought to be taken as the complexcyon of man is, when you do rise in the
morning, rise with mirth and remember god. Let your hosen be brusshed within
and without, and flauour the insyde of them against the fire, use lynen sockes
or lynnen hosen next your legs, when you be out of your bed stretche forth
your legs and arms and your bobye, coughe and spyte and than go to your
stole to make your egestyon, and exoncrate your self at all times that nature
would expel. For if you do make any restryction in keeping your egestion or
your vryne or ventosyte, it may put you to dyspleasure in bredynge diverse
infyrmyties, After you have cuacuated your body, and trussed your points,
kayme your head often, and so do diverse times in the day. And wasshe your
hands and wrestes, your face and eyes and your tethe with cold water, and
after that you be apparelled walk in your gardayne or park a thousand pace
or two, and than great and noble men does use to here mass, and other men than
can not do so but must apply their busynes, does serve God with some prayers
surrendrynge thanks to him for his many fold goodness, with asking mercy for
their offenses, and before you go to your refeccyon moderately exercise your
body with some la (...) meat than accords with nature is named replection,
or a surfete. Replection or a surfeit is taken as well by gurgytacyons or to
much drynkyng, as it is taken by epulacyon of eatig of crude meat, or eating
more meat than does suffyce or can be truly dygested. Or else replection or a
surfyt is wha^ the stomach is farced or stuffed, or repleted with to much drink
and meat, yt the liver which is the fire under the pot is subpressed yt he
ca^ not naturally nor truly decoct, defye, ne dygest the superabundance of
meat and drink the which is in the pot or stomach, wherefore diverse times
these impedymentes does follow, the tongue is depryued of his office to speak,
the wytes or sensys be dull and obnebulated from reason. Sloth and slugy shene
consequently follows, the appetyde is withdrawn. The head is light and does
ache, and full of fantasyes, and diverse times some be so sopyled, yt the malt
worm plays the devil so fast in the head, that all the world ro^neth
round about on wheles then both the pryncipall members and the offycyal
members does fail of their strength, yet the pulsys be full of agylyte. Such
replecyon specially such gurgytacyons does engender diverse infyrmytes through
the which breuite and shortness of life does follow For the wise man says,
that su^fetes do kill many men, and temporaunce does prolonge the life. And
also it is written Eccle. xxxvii. That there does dye many mo by surfette,
than there does by the sword, for as I said, surfetynge ingendereth many
infyrmites, as the Idropses, the gowtes, lepored, sausfleme and pymples in the
face, beheme^t impressyons, vndy gest humors, opylacyons, fevers, and
putryfa^cyons. And also it does perturbate the head, the eyes, the tongue,
and the stomach, with many other infirmyties. For as Galen says, over much
replecyon or surfetinge, causes strangulacyon and soden death, for as I said
the stomach is so inferced, and the liver is so sore oppressed that natural
heat and the poores be extyncted, wherefore abstynence for this matter is the
most best and the parfytest medysone that can be. And in no wise eat no meat
unto the time the stomach be euacuated of all ill humors by vomed or other
convenient ways, for else crude and raw humors vndygested will multiply in
the body to the detryme^t of man. Two meals a day is suffycyent for a rest
man, and a labourer may eat three times a day, and he that does eat after
lives a beestly life. And he that does eat more than ones in a day, I
aduertyse him that the first refeccyon or meal be dygested or that he do cate
the second refeccyon or meal. For there is nothing more hurtful for man's
body than to eat meat upon meat vndygested. For the last refeccyon or meal
whyll let the dygestyon of the first refeccy on or meal. Also sondre meats
of diverse operacyons eaten at one refeccion or meal is not laudable, nor it is
not good to sit long at dinner and supper. An hour is suffycyent to sit at
dinner, and not so long at supper. England has an evil use in sitting
long at dinner and at supper. And English men has an evil use, for at the
beginning at dinner and supper they will feed on gross meats. And ye best
meat which be wholesome and nutrytyue and light of digestion is kept for
servants, for when the good meat does come to the table through fedynge upon
gross meat, the appe tide is extynct, but man's mind is so auydous although
he have eat enough when he seth better meat come before him against his
appetyde he will eat, whereupon does come repleccyon and surfetes.

The. x Chapyter treats of all manner of drink, as of water, of wine, of ale,
of bear of cider, of meade, of metheglyn and of whaye.
WAter is one of the four Elemen tes, of the which diverse licours or drynkes
for man's sustynau^ce be made of, taking their orygynall and sustaunce of it,
as ale, bear, meade, and metheglyn, water is not wholesome sole by it self for
an English man, consyde ring the contrary usage, which is natro^curraunt
with nature, water is cold, slow, and slake of digestyon. The best water is
rain water so be it that it be clean and purely taken Next to it is ro^nynge
water, ye which does swyftly ro^ne from the Eest into the west upon stones or
pybles. The third water to be praised is river or broke water, the which is
clear ro^nynge on pybles and grauayl Standing waters the which be refresshed
with a fresshe spryng is commendable, but standing waters, and well waters, to
the which the son has no reflexcio^, although they be lyghter the^ other
ro^nyng waters be, yet they be not so commendable. And let every man be ware of
all waters the which be standing, and be purryfyed with froth, duckemeat, and
mod^^, for if they bake, or brewe, or dress meat with it, it shall ingendre
many infyrmytes. The water ye which every man ought to dress his meat with
all, or shall use bakynge, or bruyng, let it be ro^nynge, and put it in vessels
yt it may stand there. ii. or. iii. hours or it be occupied, than strain the
upper part thoroughe a thycke lynnen clothe, and cast the inferyall part
away. If any man do use to drink water with wine, let it be purely strayned,
and than seth it and after it be cold let hi^ put it to his wine, but better it
is to dri^ke with wine stylled waters, specially ye water of strawberes or the
water of buglos or the water of endyue, or the water of cycory, or ye water of
southystel, and dandelyon. And if any man be co^bred with the stone or does
burn in the pudybunde places, use to drink with white wine the water of
hawes, and the water of milk, voke for this matter in a book of my making
named the breuyary of health.

Of wine.
All manner of wynes be made of grapes, except respyse the which is made of a
bery. Those your wine after this sort, it must be fine, fair and clear to the
eye, it must be fragraunte and redolent having a good odor and flauour in
the nose, it must spryncle in the cup when it is drawn or put out of the pot
in to the cup, it must be cold and pleasant in the mouth, and it must be
strong and subtle of substance. And than moderatly dronken it does acuate
and does quycken a man's wits, it does comfort the heart, it does scowre ye
liver, specially if it be white wine it does rejoice all the powers of man, and
does nury she them, it does ingendre good blood, it does comfort and does
nurysshe the brain and all the body, and it resolves fleume, it ingendreth
heat, and it is good against heaviness and pencyfulnes, it is full of agylyte,
wherefore it is medsonable, specially white wine, for it does mundyfye and
cleanse wou^des and sores. Forthermore the better the wine is, the better
humors it does inge^dre, wine must not be to new nor to old, but high wynes
as malmyse may be kept long. And because wine is full of fumosyte, it is
good therefore to alay it with water, wynes high and hot of operacyon does
comfort old men and women, but there is no wine good for children and maids,
for in high Almayne there is no maid shall drink no wine, but still she shall
drink water unto she be married the usual drink there and in other high
cou^tres for youth is fountain wattr, for in every town is a fountain or a
shalowe well, to the which all people that be young and servants has a
confluence and a recourse to drink. Mean wynes as wynes of Gascony, French
wynes, and specially raynysshe wine that is fined is good with meat, specially
claret wine. It is not good to drink another wine nor ale before a man does
eat somewhat although there be old fantastycall sayings to the contrary.
Also these hot wynes as malme sye, wine course, wine greek, romanysk, ro^ny,
secke, alygau^t, basterde, tire, osay, muscadel, caprycke, tynt, roberdany,
with other hot wynes be not good to drink with meat, but after meat, and with
oysters, with saledes, with fruit a draught or two may be suffered Old me^ may
drink as I said high wynes at their pleasure. Forthermore al sweet wynes and
gross wynes does make a man fat.

Of ale
Ale is made of malte and water, and they the which do put any other thing to
ale the^ is rehearsed, except yest, barme, or godesgood, does sophistycat their
ale. Ale for an englysh man is a natural drink. Ale must have these
propertyes, it must be fresshe and clear, it must not be ropy nor smoky, nor
it must have no weft nor tail. Ale should not be drunk under v. days old.
New ale is unwholesome for all men. And sour ale and dead a^e the which does
stand a tylt is good for no man. Barley malte makes better ale the^ oten malt
or any other corn does, it does ingendre gross humors, but yet it makes a
man strong.

Of bear.
Bear is made of malte, of hoppes, and water, it is a natural drink for a
dutche man. And now of late days it is much used in England to the
detrime^t of many english me^, specially it kylleth the^ the which be
troubled with the colyke and the stone and the stra^gulyon, for the drink is a
cold drink: yet it does make a man fat, and does inflate the belly, as it does
appear by the dutche men's faces and belyes. If the bear be well brude and fined,
it does qualyfye the heat of the iyuer.

Of cider.
Cider is made of the iuce of peers, or of the iuce of aples, and other while
cider is made of both, but the best cider is made of clean peers the which be
dulcet, but ye best is not praised in physyke, for cider is cold of operacyon,
and is full of bentosyte, wherefore it does ingendre evil humors, and does
swage to much the natural heat of man, and does let dygestyon, and does
hurt the stomach, but they the which be used to it, if it be dronken in
haruyst it does little harm.

Of meade.
Meade is made of honey and water boiled both together, if it be fined and pure
it preserves health, but it is not good for them the which have the Ilyacke or
the colycke.

Of metheglyn.
Metheglyn is made of honey and water, and herbs boiled and sodden together, if
it be fined and stale, it is better in the regymente of health than meade.

Of whay.
Whay if it be well ordered, specially the whay the which does come of butter,
is a te^porate drink and is moist, and it does nurysshe, it does cleanse the
breast, and does purge read color, and good for sausfleme faces.

Of poset ale.
Poset ale is made with hot milk and cold ale, it is a temporate drink, and
is good for a hot liver, and for hot fevers, specially, if cold herbs be
soden in it.

Of coyte.
Coyte is a drink made of water, in the which is laid a sour and a salt
leuyn. iii. or iiii. hours, the^ it is drunk it is a usual drink in Pycardy,
in Flaunders, in Holande, in Brabrant, and in Selande, hit does but quench the
thyrste.

To speak of aptysan, or of oxymell, or of aqua vite, or of Ipocras, I do
pass over at this time, for I do make mensyon of it in the Breuyary of health.

The. xi. Chapyter treats of bread.
AUycen says, that bread made of whete makes a man fat, specially when the
bread is made of new whete and it does set a man in te^porau^ce. Bread made
of fine flower without leuyn is slow of dygestyon, but it does nurysshe much
if it be truly ordered and well baken, when the bread is leuyned it is sone
digested as some old Auctours says, but these days is proved the contrary
by the stomach of men, for leuyn is heavy and ponderous Bread having to much
brande in it is not laudable. In rome and other high countres their loves of
bread be little bygger then a walnot, and many little loves be joined together,
the which does serve for great men, and it is safferonde, I praise it not. I do
love manchet bread, and great loves the which be well molded and through
baken, the brande abstracted and abiected, and that is good for all ages,
Mestlynge bread is made half of whete and half of Rye. And there is also
mestlynge made half of rye and half of berly. And ill people will put whete
and barley together, bread made of these aforesaid grain or corns, thus
proched together may fill the gutte, but it shall never do good to man, no more
than horse bread or bread made of beans and peason shall do, how be it this
matter does go much by ye educacyon or the brynginge up of the people, the
which have been nurysshed or nutryfyde with such bread. I do speak now in
barlyes or ma^ltes part to be eatene and also dronken, I suppose it is to
much for one grain, for barley does ingendre cold humors, and peason and
beans, and the sustaunce coming from them repleteth a man with ventosyte,
but and if a man have a lust or a sensual appetyd to eat and drink of a
grain bysyde malte or barlye, let him eat and drink of it the which may be
made of otes. For haue^ cakes in Scotland is many a good lord and lords
dysshe. And if it will make good hauer cakes consequently it will make good
drink or evil, every thing as it is handled. For it is a common proverb, God
may send a man good meat, but the devil may send evil cokes to dystrue it.
But wives and maids and other bruers, the which does dystrue malte the
which should make good ale. And (...) the which that does not till their pote^
(...) euyn^^ false measure I would they were (...) their, pootes and ta^cardes
at dymynge^dale. A^yll bakers the which ^reade of whete but will ^ith where, or
do not or ^yu^nge good weight I (...) they (...) bo pepe through a (...) for
^de does comfort, co^fyrme, ^o^nes her^* beside the property^^ (...) unwholesome
^any man, ^or it does lie in y^ stomach like a sponge haustyng vndecoct
humors, yet ye smell of new bread is co^fortahle to ye head and to the heart.
Soden bread as symnels and crackenels, and bread baken upon a stone, or ^yon
iron, and bread that saffron is in, is (...) laudable. Burnt bread and hard
crustes, (...) crustes, does ingendre color aduste, and mel^ncoly humors,
wherefore chyp the (...) crust of your bread. And who so does (...) y^ second
crust after meat, it ma^e. And so does wheten bread (...) o^ orande. Bread
y^ whi^ and praised in physyke should (...). First it must be new, (...), nor
it is not good (...). (...) or. ^^ days old, except y^ (...) it must not be
muldy nor ^melt ^ylded, it must be tho^ must be light and not heuye, and it
must be temperatly salted. Old bread or stale bread does dry up the vlode,
or natural moyster of man, and it does engender evil humors, and is evil
and tarde of digestion wherefore there is no surfytte so evil as the surfytte
of eating of evil bread.

The* xii. Chapyter treats of potage, of few of stewpottes, of grewell, of
formentye, of pease potage, of ^lmon milk, of rise votage, of caudels, of
culleses, and of other brothes.
AL manner of lyquyd things as potage sewe, and all other brothes does replete
a man that eats them with be^tosyte. Potage is not so much used in all
christendom as it is used in England. Potage is made of the liqnor in the
which flesh is soden in, with putting to chopped herbs, and otmell and salt
The herbs with the which potage is made withal, if they be pure, good, and
clean, not wanne eaten, nor infected with the corrupt air descendynge upon
them, does comfort many men, the bentosyte natwithstandynge. But for as much
as diverse times, many parts of Englaude is infected with the pestylence,
through the corrupcion of the air the which does infect y^ herbs. In such
times it is not good to make any potage, nor to ^^te no potage. In certain
places beyond see where as I have traueyled in, in y^ pestilence time a general
commandment has been sent from the superyoryte to the co^monalte, yt no man
should eat herbs in such infectuous times.

Of sewe and stewpottes.
Sewe and stewpottes, and grewell made with otmel, in the which no herbs be
put in, can do little displeasure, except yt it does replete a man with
ventosyte, but it relaxeth ye belly

Of fyrmente.
Fyrmente is made of whete and milk, it is hard of dygestyon, but when it is
dygest dit does purysshe, and it does strength a man but flesh soded in
milk is not commendable.

Of pease potage and bean potage.
Pease potage and bean potage does replete a man with ventosyte. Pease potage
is better then bean potage, for it is sooner dygested, and lesser of ventosyte,
they both be abstercyue and do cleanse the body. They be co^pytent of nutriment,
but bean potage does increase gross humors.

Of almon milk and of ryce potage.
Almon milk and ryce potage, Almons be hot and moist, it does comfort the
breast and it does mollyfye the belly, and provoke ^ryne. Ryce potage made with
almon milk does restore and does comfort nature.

Of ale brues, caudelles, and colesses.
Ale brues, caudelles, and co^esses for weke men and feeble stomachs, the
which can not eat solydate meat is suffered. But caudels made with hemp
sede, and collesses made of shrympes does comfort blood and nature.

Of honey soppes and other brothes.
Honey soppes and other brothes of what kind or substance so ever they be made
of, they does ingendre ventosyte, wherefore they be not good nor wholesome for the
colyke nor the Illycke, nor other inflatyue impedymentes or syckenesses,
specially if honey be in it, the sayings of Plyne, Balen, Auycene, with other
Aucthours natwithstandynge, for in these days experyence teaches us contrary
to their saynges and wrytynges, for although the nature of man be not altered,
yet it is weker, and nothing so strong now as when they lived, and did
practes and making ye ^okes.

The. xiii. Chapyt treats of white meat ^o of eggs, butter, chese, milk,
and crayme. etc.
IN euglande there is no eggs used to be eaten but hen eggs: wherefore I
will first write and pertract of hen eggs The yolks of hen eggs be
cordialles, for it is temporatly hot. The white of an egg is viscus and cold
and slack of digestion, and does not inge^der good blood, wherefore whosoever
that will eat an egg, let the egg be new and roste him rear and eat him,
or else potche him for potched eggs be best at night, land new rere roasted
eggs be good in the morning so be it they be tired with a little salt and
sugar tha^ they be nutritive, In Turkey and other b^^he christian lands auexed
to it, they use to seth two or three bushels of eggs together hard, and pull
of the shells, and souse them, and keep the^ to eat at all times, but barde
eggs be slow and slack of digestion, and does nutryfy the body grossly.
Roasted eggs be better than sodden, fried eggs be naught, Ducke eggs and gose
eggs I do not praise, but ^esaunt eggs and partryche eggs Physycke
singulerly does praise.

Of butter
Butter made of crayme is moiste of operacion, it is good to eat in the
morning before other meats, French men will eat it after meat. Bu^ eaten
with other meats it does not only noryshe, but it is good for the breast and
lunges, and also it does relaxe and does mollify the belly, dutche men does
eat it at all times in the day, yt which I did not praise when I did dwell
among the^, co^siderynge that butter is unctious, an^ every thing that is
unctious is noisome to the stomach for as much as it makes lubrifaccion. And
also every thing that is unctious that is to say butteryshe, oil, grease, or
fatdothe swymme above in the brynkes of the stomach, as the fatnes does swymme
abo^e in a boylynge pot, the excess of such naucacion or superfyce will
ascend to the orifice of the stomach, and does make eructuasions, wherefore
eating of much butter at one refection is not commendable, nor it is not good
for them the which be in any ague or fever, for the ventuosyte of it does
auge and augment the heat of the liver, a little portion is good for eueey man
in the morning if it be new made.

Of chese.
Chese is made of milk, there be four sorts of chese: which be to say,
grene chese, soft chese, hard chese, and spermyse, Chese is made of milk,
there be four sorts of chese: which be to say, grene chese, soft chese,
hard chese, and spermyse, Grene chese is not called grene by the reason of the
color, but for the newnes of it for the whey is not half pressed out of it,
and in operacyon it is cold and moist. Soft chese not to new nor to old is
best, for in operacyou it is hot and moist. Hard chese is hot and dry and
evil to dygest. Spermyse is a chese the which is made with curdes and with
the iuce of herbs, to tell the nature of it I can not, considering that every
milk wife may put many iuces of herbs of sundry operacyon and virtue, one
not a greynge with another But and if they did know what they did gomble to
gyther without true compoundynge, and I knowing the herbs, than I could
tell the operacyon of spermyse chese, yet beside these. iiii natures of chese,
there is a chese called a rewene chese, the which if it be well ordered does
pass all other cheses no ne excess taken. But take the best chese of all
these rehearsed, if a little do good and pleasure The overplus does ingendre
gross humors for it is hard of dygestyon, it makes a man constyfe and it is
not good for the stone. Chese that is good ought not to be hard nor to soft,
but betwyxt both, it should not be tough nor brutel, it ought not to be sweet
nor sour, nor tart, nor to salt, nor to fresshe, it must be of good sauoure
and taledge, not full of eyes nor mytes, nor magottes, yet in hyghalmen the
chese the which is full of magottes is called there the best chese, and they
will eat ye great magotes as fast as we do eat comfetes.

Of milk.
Milk of a woman, and the milk of a got is a good restoratyue, wherefore
these mylkes be good for them that be in a consumpcyone, and for the great
temperaunce the which is in them it does nurysshe much.

Cowes milk and ewes milk, so it be yt the beestes be young and do go in good
pasture the milk is nutrytyue and does humect, and moysteth the members, and
does mundyfye and cleanse the entrayles, and does alleuyat and mytygate the ^ne
of the lunges and the breast but it is not good for the^ the which have
gurgulacyons in the belly, nor it is not all the best for sa^guyne me^, but it
is very good for mela^coly men, and for old men and children specially if it
be sodden, adding to it a little sugar.

Of Crayme.
Crayme the which does not stand long on the milk and sodden with a little
sugar is nurysshynge. Clouted crayme and raw crayme put to gyther, is eaten
more for a sensual apetyde, than for any good nurysshemente. Raw crayme
vndeco^ted eaten with strauberyes, or hurtes is a rural man's banquet. I have
known such bankettes has put men in ieoperdy of their lives.

Almon butter.
Almon butter made with fine sugar and good rose water, and eaten with the
flowers of many vyolettes, is a commendable dysshe, specially in lent when the
vyoletes de fragra^t it reioyseth the heart: it does comfort ye brain: and
does qualyfye the heat of the liver.

Been butter.
Been butter, is used much in lent in diverse countres, it is good for plowmen
to fylthe panche, it does ingendre gross humors it does replete a man with
ventosyte.

The. xiiii. Chapyt, treats of fysshe.
OF all nations and countres, Engl^e is best served of Fysshe, not only of al
manner of see fysshe, but also of fresshe water fysshe, and of all manner of
sorts of salt fysshe.

Of See fysshe.
Fysshes of the sea the which have skales or many fynnes, be more wholesome than
ye fresshe water fysshe, the which be in standing waters. The elder a fysshe
is so much he is the better so be it that the fysshe be soft and not solydat,
if the fysshe be fast and solydat the younger the fysshe is, the better it is
to dygeste: but this is to understand that if the fysshe be never so solydat
it must have age, but not over grown: except it be a young porpasse the which
kind of fysshe is no there praised in the old testament nor in physyke.

Fresshe water fysshe.
The fysshe the which is in ryuers and brokes be more holsomer, than they the
which be in pooles, pondes, or mootes, or any other standing water, for they
does labor and does skower them self Fysshe the which lives and does feed on
the moude, or else does feed in ye fen or morysshe ground does sauer of ye
moude which is not so good as the fysshe that fedyth and does skowre the^
self on the stones or gravel or sand.

Of Salt fysshe.
Salt fysshe the which be poudered and salted with salt, be not greatly to
be praised specially if a man do make his hole refeccion with it the qualyte
does not hurt, but the quantyte, specially such salt fysshes as will cleue
to the fyngers when a man does eat it And the skin of fysshes be utterly to
be abhorred, for it does ingendre viscus fleume and color adust. All manner of
fysshe is cold of nature, and does engender fleume, it does little nurysshe,
fysshe and flesh ought not to be eaten together at one meal.

The. xv. Chapyter, treats of wild foul, And tame foul birds.
OF all wild foul, the Fesaunte it most best, Although that a Partreche of
all fowls is sonest dygested. Wherefore it is a restoratyue meat, and does
comfort the brain and the stomach: and does augment carnal list. A wood
cock is a meat of good temperaunce. Quayles and plouers and lapwynges does
nurysshe but little, for they does inge^dre mela^coly humors, young turtyl
doves does ingendre good blood. A crane is hard of dygestyon, and does
inge^der evil blood. A young herensew is lyghter of dygestyon than a crane. A
bustarde well killed and ordered is a nutrytyue meat A byttoure is not so hard
of dygestyon as is an hernesew. A shoueler is lyghter of dygestyon than a
byttoure, all these be noyfull except they be well ordered and dressed A
fesannte hen. A more cock and a more hen except they suit abroad they be
nutrytyue. Al manner of wild foul the which lives by the water they be of
dysco^mendable nurysshemente.

Of tame or domestycall foul.
Of all ^ame ^oule a Capon is most best. For it is nutrytyue and is soon
dygested. A ^enne in winter is good and nutryt^ue. And so is a chyken in somer,
specyallye cockrelles and polettes, the which ^e untrodden. The flesh of a
cock is hard o^ dygestyon: but the broth or gely made of a co^ke is
restoratyue, pygyons be good for coloryke and melancoly men, ^ose flesh and
ducke flesh is not praised except it be a young gren^ goose yo^ge pechyken of
half a year of age be praised, old pecockes be hard of dygestyon.

Of birds.
All manner of small Birds, ^e good and light of dygestyon, except sparowes
which be hard of dygestyon. Tytmoses, colmoses and wrens, the which does cate
spyders and poison be not co^me^dable, of all small birds the lark is best,
then praised y^ black bird and the thursshe. Rasis and Isaac praise the young
staares, but I do think because they be bitter in etyng, they should inge^dre
color

The. xvi. Chapyter, treats of flesh, of wild and tame beestes.
Beef is good meat for and Englyssh man so be it the beast be young, and that
it be not cow flesh. For old befe and cow flesh does inge^dre melancoly
and leprouse bumours: if it be moderatly poudered that the groose blood by
salt may be exaustyd, it does make an English man strong the educacyon of
him with it co^sydered, Martylmas befe which is called ^anged befe in the ^ofe
of the smoky house is not laudable, it may fill the belly and cause a man to
drink, but it is evil for the stone, and evil of dygestyon and makes no good
iuce. If a man have a peace hanging by his side and another in his belly, that
the which does hang by the side shall do him more good if a shower of rain
do chaunse than that the which is in his belly, the appetyde of ma^s sensualyte
natwtstandig.

Of Ueale.
Ueale is nutrytyue meat: and does nurysshe much a man, for it is soon
dygestyd whereupon many men does hold oppinyon that it is the best flesh and
the most nutrytyue meat that can be for man's ^ustenaunce.

Of mutton and lamb.
Mutton of Rasis and Aueroyes, is praised for a good meat, but Balen does not
laud it, and surely I do not love it considering that there it no be that
is so sone infected: nor there does happen so great mur ren and seckenes to any
quadr^ped be as does fall to the sheep. This natwithstanding if the sheep be
brought up in a good pasture and fat and do not flauoure of the wolle it is
good for sick persons, for it does inge^der good blood.

Lambs flesh is moist and flumatyke wherefore it is not all the best for
old men except they be melancolye of co^plexyon nor bit is not good for
flumatyke men to feed to much of it, for the flesh is waterysshe.

Of porke, brawne, bacon, and pygge.
Where as Balen wi^h other ancient and approbat doctors does praise porke I
dare not say the contrary against them, but this I am sure of, I did never
love it. And in holy scripture it is not praised, for a swyne is an unclean
beast and do the lie upon fylthy and stynkynge soyles, and with ster^orus
matter diverse times does ^ede in England, yet in Hyg^almen and other high
countres except (spain and other countres anexed to spain) does keep their
swyne clean, and does cause them ones or twyse a day to swyme in great ryuers,
like the water of Ryne, which is above Coleyne, but Spaynerdes with the other
regions anexed to the^, keep the swyne more fylthyer than english persons
does. Further more the Jeue, the Sarason, the Turks, concerning their
poyltycke wit and learning in physycke, has as much wit, wysdom, reason, and
knowledge for the sauyte of their body, as any christen man has. And many
expert physycyons, I have known among the^: yet they al lacked grace, for
as much as they do not know or knowledge jesus christ as the holy scripture
tells us and the^. They loves not porke nor swines flesh, but does
^ytuperat and a^orr^ it, yet for all this they will eat adders, which is a
kind of, serpents, as well as any other christian ma^dwel lynge in Rome, and
other high cou^tres, for adders flesh there is called fysshe of the
mountain. This natwithstandyng physbke does approbut adders flesh good to
be eaten, saying it does make an alde man young, as it apperethe by an heart
eating an adder makes him young again. But porke does not so, ^or if it be
of an old hog not clean kept it does ingendre gross blood, and does
^ume^^ to much the stomach, yet if the porke be young it is nutrytyue.

Bakon is good for carters and plowmen, the which be ever laboring in the
earth or dung, ebut and if they have the stone and use to eat it they shall
sing woe be the pie, where fore I do say that coloppes and eggs, is as wholesome
for them: as a talowe ca^dell is good for a horse mouth, or a piece of poudred
befe is good for a blereyed mare, yet sensual appetyde must have a swing, all
these things n^twitwstandynge.

Of brawne.
Brawne is an vsual^ meat in winter among English men, it is hard of
dygestyon the brawne of a wild bore, is much more better than the drawn of a
tame bore, if a man eat another of them both it shall never do him harm.

Of Pigs.
Pigs specially sow pigs is nutrytyue and made in a gelye, it is
restoratyue sobe it the pygge be fleed the skyn taken of, and than stewed with
restoratyues, as a cock is stewad to make a gely. A young fat pygge in
physycke is syngulerly praised if it be well ordered in the rostynge, the skyn
not eaten.

Of kydde.
Young Kyddes flesh is praised above all other flesh, as Auycen, Rasis and
Aueroyes says, for it is temporate and nutrityue although it be somewhat dry.
Oloe kydde is not praised.

Of wild beestes flesh.
I have gone round about crystendome and ouertwharte crystendome, and a
thousand or two and more miles out of crystendome, yet there is not so much
pleasure for heart and hynde, bucke, and do: and for ^oo bucke and do, as is
in England, and although the flesh be dispraysed in physycke, I pray god to
send me part of the flesh to eat physycke not withstanding. The opinion of
all olde^phy sycyons was and is that venyson is not good to eat pryncipally
for two causes, the first cause is that the beast does live in fere: for it he
be a good wood man, he shall never se no kind of dear, but at the. x. byt on
the grass, or brosynge on the tree, but he will lift up his head and look
about him, the which comes of tymorysnes and tymorosyte does bring in
melancoly humors, wherefore all Physycyons says that venison which is the
secon de cause does ingendre coloryke humors and of truth it does so:
wherefore let them take y^ skyn and let me have the flesh, I am sure it is a
lords dysshe, and I am sure it is good for an Englysheman, for it does
anymate him to be as he is: which is strong and hardy, but I do aduertyse
every man for all my words not to kill and so to eat of it, except it be
lefull. for it is a meat for great men. And great men do not set so much by
y^ meat as they do by the pastyme of killing of it.

Of Hares flesh.
A hare does no herme nor dyspleasure to man, if the flesh be not eaten, yet
he makes gentylmen good pastyme. And better it is for the bounds or dogs to
eat the hare after they have killed it, than man should eat it: for it is not
praised another in the old testament another in physycke, for the bible says
the hare is an unclean beeste. And physycke says hares flesh is dry and
does ingendre melancoly humors.

Of Conys flesh and Rabettes.
Conyes flesh is good, but rabettes flessh is best of all wild beestes, for
it is temperat and does nurysshe, and syngulerly praised in physycke, for all
things the which does suck is nutrytyue.

The. xvii. Chapyter does treat of pertyculer things, of fysshe and flesh*
THe heddes of fysshe, and the fatnes of fysshe specially of Sam^n and Cunger
is not go^d for them the which be dysposed to have reumaty^ke heddes. And the
beds of lampryes, and lamprons, and the string the which is within them, is
not good to eat refrain from eating of the skynnes of fysshe, and flesh
and borned meat, and brown meat, for it does engender viscus humors, and
color and melancolye. And does make opylacyons. The brains of any best is not
laudable, except the brains of a kydde, for it is evil of dygestyon and
does hurt a man's appetyde and the stomach, for it is cold and moist, and
viscus a hot stomach may eat it, but it does inge^der gross humors. The
brain of a wod coke and of a snype and such like is co^mestyble. The fore
part of al manner of beestes and fowls be more hotter and lyghter of dygesty
on, than the hinder parts be. The mary of all beestes is hot and moist, it
is nutrityue if it be ^ll dygestyd, yet it does mollyfy the stomach, and does
take away a manes appetyde, wherefore let a man ^ate peper with it. The blood of
all beasts and fowls is not praised, for it is hard of digestion. All y^
inward^ of beestes and of fowls, as the heart the liver the longes, and
trypes, and trylybubbes, with all the intrayles is herd of dygestyon, and
does increase gross humors. The^ fatnes of flesh is not so much nutrytyue
as the lenes of flesh, it is best when lene and fat is myxte one with
another. The tounges of beestes be hard of dygestyon and of little
nurysshement. The stones of a co^ke^^ll, and the stones of other beestes that
has not done their kind be nutrytyue.

The. xviii. Chapter, treats of roste meat, of fried meat and of bake
meat.
WIth us at Montpilour, and other vniuersyties is used boiled meat at dner,
and roste meat to supper: why they should do so I can not tell onles it be for
a co^suetude. For boiled meat is lyghter of dygestyon tha^rosted meat is.
Bruled meat is hard of dygestyon, and evil for the stone. Fried meat is
harder of dygestyon than bruled meat is, and it does ingendre color and
melancoly. bake meat which is called flesh that is bered, for it is bured
(...) paste, is not praised in physycke. All manner of flesh the which is
inclyned to humydyte should be roasted. And all flesh the which is inclyned to
drynes should be sodde or boiled Fysshe may be sode, roasted, bruled and baken
every one after their kind, and use a fasshyon of the country, as the coke and
the physician will agree and deuyse. For a good coke is half a physician. For
the chief physic (the council of a phisecion except) does come from the
kytchyn, wherefore the physician and the coke for sick men must consult to
gyther for the preparacion of meat for sick men. For if the physician
without the cook prepare any meat except he be very expert, he will make a
werysshe dysshe of meat, the which the sick can not take.

The. xix. Chapter treats of rotes and first of the rotes of borage and
buglosse.
THe rotes of Borage and Buglosse soden tender and made in a succade does
inge^der good blood, and does set a man in a temporaunce.

The rotes of Alysaunder and Enula campana.
The rotes of Alysaunder soden tender, and made in surcade is good for to
destroy y^ stone in y^ raines of the back and bladder. The rotes of
Enulaca^pana soden tender and made in a luccade is good for the breast, and for
the lunges, and for all the interyall members of man.

The rotes of Percelly, and of Fenel.
The rotes of Percelly soden tender and made in a succade is good for the
stone, and does make a man to pysse. The rotes of Fenell soden tender and made
in a succade is good for the lunges and for the sight.

The rotes of Turnepes and Persnepes.
Turnepes boiled and eaten with flesh, augmenteth the sede of man, if they be
eaten raw moderatly, it does provoke a good apetyde. Persnepes soden and eaten
does increase nature, they be nutrytyue, and does expel vryne

Radysshe rotes, and Caretes.
Radisshe rotes does break wind and does provoke a man to make water, but
they be not good for them the which has the gout. Caretes soden and eaten
does auge and increase nature and does cause a man to make water.

The rotes of Rapes.
Rape rotes if they be well boiled they do nurysshe, if they be moderately
eaten, immoderately eaten they does engender ventosyte and does anoye the
stomach.

Of onyons.
Onyons does provoke a man to veneryous acts, and to sompnolence, and if a
man drink sundry drynkes it does rectyfy and reform the varyete of the
operacyon of them: they makes a man's apetyde good, and puts away
fastydyousnes.

Of Lekes.
Lekes does open the breast, and does provoke a man to make water, but they
does make and increase evil blood.

Of Garlyke.
Garlyke of all rotes is used and most praised in Lomberdy, and other countres
anexed to it, for it does open the breast, and it does kill all manner of worms
in a man's belly, which be to say, lu^brici, ascarides, and cucurbitini which
is to say long worms, small little long worms which will tycle in the
foundement, and square worms, it also hetythe the dody and desolueth gross
wyndes.

The. xx. Chapyter, treats of herbs. And first of Borage, and Buglosse.
BOrage does comfort the heart, and does ingendre good blood, and cause a man to
be merry, and does set a man in temperance. And so does buglosse for he is
taken of more vygor and strength, and effycacye.

Of artochockes, and rokat.
There is nothing used to be eaten of Artochockes but the head of them, when
they be almost ripe they must be soden tender in the broth of befe, and after
eat them at dinner, they does increase nature, and does provoke a man to
veueryons acts. Rokat does increase the sede of man, and does stymulat the
flesh, and does help to dygestyon.

Of Cykory, and Endyue.
Cycory does keep the stomaeke and the heed in temperannce, and does qualyfy
color. Endyue is good for them the which has hot stomachs and dry.

Of white beetes, and purslane.
White beeten be good for the liver, and for the spleen, and be abstersyue,
Purslane does extynct the ardor of lassyuyousnes, and does mytygate great heat
in all the inward parts of man.

Of time, and Parsley.
Time breaks the stone, it does desolue wyndes. And causes a man to make
water. Parsley is good to break the stone, and causes a man to pysse, it is
good for the stomach and does cause a man to have a sweet breath.

Of Lettyse, and Sorell.
Lettyse does extynct veneryous acts, yet it does increase milk in a woman's
breast, it is good for a hot stomach, and does provoke sleep, and does
increase blod, and does set the blood in a temperaunce. Sorell is good for a
hot liver, and good for the stomach.

Of Penyryall, and Isope.
Penyryall does purge mela^coly, and does comfort the stomach and the
spyrites of man. Isope cleanses viscus fleume, and is good for the breast and
for the lunges.

Of Rosmary, and Roses.
Rosmary is good for y^ palsy, and for the falling syckenes, and for the
cowghe, and good against cold, Roses be a cordynall and does comfort the
heart and the brain.

Of Fenell, and Anys.
These berbes be seldom used, but their seeds be greatly occupyde. Fenell
sede is used to break wind, and good against poysone Anys sede is good to
cleanse the bladder, and the raynes of the back: and does provoke vryne and
makes one to have a sweet breath.

Of sauge. and Mandragod.
Sauge is good to help a woman to conceive, and does provoke vr^ne. Mandragod
does help a woman to concepcion, and does provoke a man to sleep.

* Of all Herbs in general.
There is no Herb, nor wede, but god have given virtue to them, to help man.
But for as much as, Plyne, Macer, and Diascorides with many other old
ancient and approbat Doctors has written and pertracted of their virtues, I
therefore now will writ no further of herbs, but will speak of other matters
that shall be more necessary.

The. xxi. Chapyter, treats of Fruytes, and first of Fygges.
AUicen says that Fygges does nurysshe more than any other Fruit, they does
nurysshe meruelously, when they be eaten with blanched Almons. They be also
good roasted, and steued. They do cleanse the breast and the lunges, and they do
open y^ opylacyons of the liver and the spleen. They does stere a mam to
veneryous acts, for they does auge and inerease the sede of generacyon. And
also they do provoke a man to sweat: wherefore they do engender lyce.

Of great Raysyns.
Great raysyns be nutritive specially if the stones be pulled out. And they do
make the stomach firm and stable. And they do provoke a man to have a good
appetite, if a few of the^ be eaten before meat.

Of small raysyns of Corans.
Small raisyns of Corans be good for the raynes of the back, and they do
provoke urine. howbeit they be not al y^ best for y^ spleen, for they make
opilation.

Of Grapes.
Grapes sweet and new, be nutritive, and does stymulat the flesh. And they do
comfort the stomach and the liver, and does avoid opilations. Howbeit they
do replete the stomach with ventositie.

Of peches, of medlers, and ceruices.
Peches does mollify the bealy, and be cold. Medlers taken superfluous does
inge^der mela^coly. and Ceruices be in man of like operation.

Of strawberies, cheries, and burtes.
Strawberies be praised above all beries, for they do qualify the heat of the
liver, and does engender good blood, eaten with sugar. Theries does mollify
the bealie, and be cold. Hurtes be of a groser substance, wherforethey be not
for them the which be of a cleave diet.

Of nuttes great and small.
The walnut and the hanocke be of one opera cyon. They be tarde and slow of
dygestyon, yet they does comfort the brain if the pyth or skyne be pylled of,
and than they be nutrytyue. Fylberdes be better than hasell Nuttes if they be
new and taken from the tree, and the skyn or the pyth pulled of, they be
nutrytyue, and does iucrease fatnes, if they be old they should be eaten with
great raysens. But new nuttes be far better than old nuttes, for old
nuttes be colorycke, and they be evil for the head and evil for old men. And
they does ingendre the palsy to the tongue, yet they be good against venym.
And immoderatly taken or eaten does ingendre corrupcyons, as byles blaynes and
such putryfaccyon.

Of Peason, and Beans.
Peason the which be young be nutrytyue howbeit they does replete a man with
vento syte. Beans be not so much to be praised as Peason, for they be* full
of ventosyte althought the skynnes or husks be ablated or cast away, yet they
be strong meat, and does provoke venerious acts.

Of Pears, and Apples.
Pears the which be melow and doulce, and not stony does increase fatnes
ingenderynge waterysshe blod. And they be full of ventosyte. But wardens roasted
stued, or baken be nutrytyue, and does comfort the stomach specially if they
be eaten with comfettes. Apples be good after a frost have taken them or they
y^ which be of good odor and melowe, they should be eaten with sugar or
co^fettes, or with fenell sede, or anys seeds because of their ventosyte, they
does comfort than the stomach and does make good dygestyon, specially if they
be roasted or baken.

Of Pomegranates, and Quynces.
Pomegranates be nutrytyue, and good for the stomach. Quynces bake^ the gore
pulled out does mollyfy ye belly, and does help dygestyon, and does p^serue a
man from dronkenshyp.

Of Dates, and Mylons.
Dates moderately eaten be nutrytyue but they does cause opylacyo^s of the
liver and of ye splen. Mylons does inge^der evil humors.

Of gourdes, of cocu^bers, and pepones.
Gourdes be evil of nurysshement, cocumbers, restraynethe veneryousnes or
lassyuyousnes, or luxuryousnes. Pepones be in manner of like operacion: but the
pepones tngen derythe evil humors.

Of Almondes, and Chesteyns.
Almondes causes a man to pysse: they do mollyfy the belly, and does purge the
lunges And. vi. or. vii. eat before meat preserves a man from dronkenshyp.
Chesteynes does nurysshe the body strongly, and does make a man fat, if they
be through roasted and the husks abiected, yet they does replete a man with
ve^tosyte or wind.

Of Prunes, and Damysens.
Prunes be not greatly praised, but in the way of medycyne, for they be cold
and moist. And Damysens be of the said nature: for the one is old and dried,
and the other be taken from the tree. vi or vii. damysen eaten before dinner be
good to provoke a man's appetyde, they does mollyfye the belie and be
abstersyue: the skyne and the stones must be ablated and cast owaye and not
used.

* Of Olyues, and capers.
Olyues co^dyted, and eaten at the begynnige of refeccyon does coroborate the
stomach and provoke appetyde. Capers does purge fleme and does make a man to
have an appetyde.

Of Orenges.
Orenges does make a man to have a good appetyde, and so does the ryndes if
they be in succade, and they does comfort the stomach, the iuce is a good
sause and does provoke an apetyde.

The. xxii. Chapyter treats of spyces, and fyts^e of Synger.
GYnger does heat the stomach and helps dygestyon, Grene gynger eaten in
the morning fasting does acuate and quycken the remembrance.

Of Peper.
There be. iii. so^dry kinds of peper, which ve to say white Peper, black
Peper, and long peper. Al kinds of pepers do heat the body and does desolue
fleume and wind and does help digestion, and makethe a man to make water
Black peper does make a man lean

Of Cloves and Maces.
Cloves does comfort the sinews and does desolue, and does consume
superfluous humors, restores nature, Maces is a cordial and does help the
colycke: and is good against the blody flyxe and laxes.

Of Grains and Safferon.
Grains be good for the stomach and the head. And be good for women to drink.
Safferon does comfort the heart and the stomach but he is to hot for the liver.

Of Nutmeges and Cynamon.
Nutmeges be good for the^ yt which have cold in their head, and does comfort
the sight and the brain and the mouth of the stomach, and is good for the
spleen, Cynamone is a cordial, wherefore ye Hebricion does say why does a man
dye and can get cynamone to eat: yet it does stop and is good to restrain
fluxes or laxes

Of lecorice.
Licorice is good to cleanse and to open the lunges and the breast, and does lose
fleume.

* The. xxiii. Chapter shows a diet for Senguine men
SAnguine men be hot and moiste of co^plexc^on, wherefore they must be
circu^specte in eating of their meat, co^siderig that the purer the co^plexyon
is, the sooner it may be corrupted, and the blood may be the sooner infected,
wherefore they must abstain to eat in ordynatly fruytes and herbs and rotes
as garlyke onyons and lykes, they must refrain from eating of old flesh,
and exchewe the usage of eating of ye brains of beestes: and from eating the
vdders of keyne. They must use moderat sleep and moderat diet or else they will
be to fat and gross. Fysshe of muddy waters be not good for them. And if blood
do abou^de cleanse it with stufes, or by fleubothomye.

The. xxiiii. Chapyter shows a dyete for Fleumatyke men.
FLeumatyke men be cold and moist: wherefore they must abstain from meats the
which is cold. And also they must refrain from eating viscus meat, specially
from all meats the which does ingendre fleumatyke humors, as fysshe, fruit,
and white meat. Also to eschew the usage of eating of crude herbs specyal
to refrain from meat the which is hard and slow of dygestyon: as it
appears iu the properties of meats above rehearsed. And to beware not to dwell
nyghe to waterysshe and morysshe ground. These things be good for fleumatyke
persons moderatlye taken, onyons, garlyke, peper, gynger. And all meats the
which be hot and dry. And sauces the which be sour. These things following
does purge fleume Pglypody, netyll, elder, agarycke, yreos, maiden hear, and
stycados.

The. xxv. Chapyter, shows a dyete for Colorycke men.
COlor is hot and dry wherefore Coloryke men must abstain from eating hot
spyces, and to refrain from drinking of wine, and eating of Colorycke
meat: how be it Colorycke men may eat groser meat than any other
complexcyons, except iheyr educacyon have been to ye contrary Colorycke men
should not be long fasting These things following do purge color. Fumytory
Centory, wormewod, wild hoppes vyoletes, Mercury, Manna, Reuberbe, Eupatorye,
Tamaryndes, and the whay of butter.

The. xxvi. Chapyter treats of a dietarye for Melancolye men.
MElancoly is cold and dry, wherefore Melancoly men must refrain from fried
meat, and meat ye which is over salt And from meat the which is sour and
hard of dygestyon, and from all meat the which is burnet and dry. They
must abstain from immoderat thirst, and from drinking of hot wynes, and
gross wine as redewyne And use these things, Cow milk, Almon milk, yolks
of rere eggs. Boiled meat is better for Melancoly men than roasted meat Al
meat the which wylbe sone digested and all meats the which does inge^der good
blood and meats the which be ^emperatly hot be good for melancoly men, and so
be al herbs the which be hot and moist. These things following does purge
Melancoly. Seen, quekbeme, Seen, s^cados, Hearts tongue, maiden here,
pulyall mountane, borage, organum, sugar, and white wine.

The. xxvii. Chapyter treats of a dyete and of an order to be used in the
Pestyferous time of the pestylence and swetynge sycknes.
When the Plages of the Pestyle^ce, or ye swetynge syckenes is in a town or
country, with us at Mou^tpylour and all other high Regyons and countres yt I
have dwelt in, the people does fle from the contagious and infectious air
p^seruatyues with other counsel of Physic natwitstandynge In lower and other
base countres, houses the which be infected in town or city, be closed up
both doors and wyndowes: and ye inhabytours shall not come a broad, another to
church: nor to market, nor to any house or company, for infectyng other the
which be clean without infection. A man can not be to ware: nor ca^ not keep
him self to well from this syckenes, for it is so vehement and so parlouse, yt
the sycknes is taken with the savor of a man's clothes the which has vysyted the
infectious house, for the infeccyon will lie and ha^ge long in clothes And I
have known yt when ye straw and russhes has been cast out of a house infected
the hogs the which did lie in it, dyed of ye pestyle^ce: wherefore in such
infeccyous time it is good for every man yt will not fly from the co^tagyous
air to use daily, specially in ye morning and euenyng to burue Juneper, or
Rosemary, or Rysshes, or Baye leaves, or Maierome or frankensence, or Bengauin
Or else make this powder. Take of storax calamite half an ounce, of franke^sence
an ounce, of the wodde of Aloes, ye weight of vi. d. myxe all these together.
Than cast half a sponeful of this in a chafynge dysshe of coals, and set it to
fume abroad in ye cha^bers, and the hall, and other houses, and you will put to
this powder a little Lapdanum: it is so much ye better. Or else make a
pomemau^der under this manner. Take of Lapdanum. iii. drames, of ye wodde of
Aloes one drame, of Amber of greece. ii. drames, and a half, of nutmegges, of
storax calamite of each a drame and a half, co^fect all these together with Rose
water, and make a bal. And this aforesaid Pomemau^der does not only expel
co^tagious airs, but also it does comfort the brain, as Barthelmew of
Montagnaue says, and other modernall doctors does afferme ye same: who so ever
yt is infected with the pestylence, let him look in my Breuyary of health for a
reme by. But let him use this dyete, let the Chamber be kept close. And keep a
contynual fire in the Chamber of clear burning wodde, or chare cole without
smoke, beware of taking any cold, use temporat meats and drynge. and beware
of wine, bear, and syder, use to eat stued or baken wardens if they can
begotten if not eat stued or baken peers with comfettes, use no gross meats,
but those the which be light of dygestyon.

The. xxviii. Chapyter, shewethe of a dyete the which be in any Fever or ^gue.
I Do aduertyse every man that has a Fever: or an Ague, not to eat no meat.
vi. hours before his course does take him. And in no wise as long as the Ague
does in dure, to put of sherte nor doublet, nor to rise out of the bed, but
when need shall require and in any wise not to go, nor to take any open air.
For such prouysyon may be had yt at vttermoste at the third course he shall be
delivered of the Fever dsynge the medsynes the which be in ye Breuyary of
health. And let every man beware of castyng their hands and arms at any time
out of the bed, in or out of their agony, or to spraule with ye legs out of
ye bed, good it is for ye space of. iii. courses to wear contynually gloves
and not to wasshe the hands. And to use such a dyete in meat and drink as
is rehearsed in the pestylence.

The. xxix. Chapyter, treats of a dyete for them, the which have the Ilyacke,
or the colycke, and the stone.
TJe Iliacke and the Colycke be inge^dred of ventosyte, the which is intrused,
or enclosed in two guts, ye one is called Ilia. And ye other is called Colon.
For these two infyrmytes a man must beware of cold. And good it is not to be
long fasting. And necessary it is to be laxatyue and not in no wise to be
co^stupat. And these things folowinge be not good for the^ yt which have
these before said ifirmites, hot bread, nor new ale. They must abstain also
from drinking of beer, of cider, and red wine, and cynamom. Also refrain
from all meats yt honey is in exchewe eating of cold herbs, use not to eat
beans, peson, nor potage, beware of ye usage of fruytes And of all things yt
which does inge^der wind. For ye stone abstain from drikinge of new ale,
bewarde of beer, and of red wine, and hot wines refrayn from eating of red
heryng, martylmas befe and baken, and saltfysshe, and salt meats. And beware
of going cold about the myddel specially about ye raynes of ye back. And make
no restryctyon, of wind and water: nor egesty on that nature would expelle.

The. xxx. Chapter, treats of a dyete for them the whtch have any kinds of
the gout.
THey the which be infected with the gout, or any kind of it. I do aduertyse
the^ not to sit long bollynge and bybbyng, dysynge and cardyng, in forgetting
the^ self to cronerat the blader and the belly wha^ need shall require, and
also to beware that the legs hang not without some stay nor that the boots
or shoes be not over strayte, who soever has yt gout must refrain from
drynkyng of new ale, and let him abstain from drynkyng of beer and red wine.
Also he must not eat new bread, eages, fresshe samon, eles, fresshe heryng,
pylcherdes, oysters, and all shell fysshe. Also he must exchewe the eating of
fresshe befe, of gose, of ducke, and of pygyo^s. Beware of taking cold in the
legs, or rydyng, or going wetshod. Beware of veneryous acts after refection,
or after or upon a full stomach. And refrain from all things that does
ingendre evil humors and be inflatyue.

The. xxxi. Chapter, treats of a dyete for the^ the which have any of the
kinds of lepored.
HE that is infected, with any of the. iiii kinds of the lepored must
refrain from al manner of wynes, and from new drynkes, and strong ale than let
him beware of riot and surfetyng. And let him abstain from eating of spyces,
and dates, and from trypes and podynges, and all inwardes of beestes. Fysshe
and eggs, and milk is not good for leperous persons: and they must abstain
from eating of fresshe befe, and from eating of gose, ducke and from water
foul and pygions. And in no wise eat no vene^on, nor hare flesh and such
like.

The. xxxii. Chapter, treats of a diete for the^, the which have any of the
kinds of the falling syckenes.
WHo soever he be, that have any of the kinds of ye falling syckenes must
abstain from eati^g of white meat, specially of milk he must refrain from
dri^kyng of wine, new ale, and strong ale. Also they should not eat the fatnes
of fysshe, nor the hedes of fysshe, the which does engender rewme. Shel fysshe,
eles, samon, herynge, and viscus fyfthes be not good for Epilentyeke men. Also
they must refrain from eating of garlyke, onyons, lekes, chybboles, and all
vaperous meats, the which does hurt ye head: beneson, hare flessh, befe,
beans, and peason be not good for Epile^tyke men. And if they know yt they be
infected with this great syckenes, they should not resort where there is great
resort of company which is in church in sessyons and market places on market
days, if they do the syckenes will infeste the^ more there, than in any other
place, or at any other time. They must beware they do not sit to nyghe ye
fire, for the fire will overcome them, and will induce the syckenes. They must
beware of lyeng hoar in their bed, or to labor extremely, for such things
causes the grefe to come the ofter.

The. 34. Chapyter, treats of a dyete for them the whiehe have any pain in
the heed.
MAny syckenes, or infyrmytes and impedyme^tes may be in a man's head, wherefore
whosoever have any impediment in the head must not keep the head to hot, nor to
cold but in a te^porau^^e. And to beware of ingendryng of rewme, which is the
cause of many infyrmytes. There is nothing yt does inge^der rewme so much as
does the fatnes of fyssh and the heddes of fysshe, and surfestes, and taking
cold in the fete: and taking cold in the nape of the nycke or head. Also they
yt which have any infyrmyte in ye head must refrain of immoderat sleep
specially after meat. Also they must abstain from drinking of wine, and use
not to drink ale and bear the which is over strong ^ocyferacyon halowyng,
cryeng, and high syngyng is not good for the head. All things the which is
vaporous or does fume, is not good for the head. And all things the which is
of evil savor as caryn, synkes wynkraughtes pissebolles snoffe of candels,
dunghylles, stynkyng canels, and stynkyng standing waters, and ^ynkyng marshes,
with such contagyous eyes does hurt the head and the brain, and the memory.
All odyferous savors be good for the head and the brain and the memory.

The. xxxiiii. Chapter treats of a dyete for them the which be in a
consumpcyon.
WHo soever he be that is in a co^su^pcion must abstain from al sour and tart
things as veneger and alegar, and such like. And also he must abstain from
eating of gross meats she which be hard and slow of dygestyon. And use
cordialles and restoratyues and nuttytyue meats. All meats and drinks the
which is sweet and that sugar is in be nutrytyue. Wherefore sweet wynes be good
for them the which be in consu^pcyo^s moderately taken And sour wine, sour
ale, sour bread is good for no man. For it does freate away nature, and let
the^ beware that be in a consumpcion of fryde meat, of bruled meat, and
bronte meat the which is over roasted. And in any wise let the^ beware of
anger and pencyfulnes. These things following be good for the^ the which be
inco^su^pcio^s a pygge or a cock stewed and made in a gely, cockrelles stewed,
gotes milk and sugar, almon milk in ye which ryce is sode^, and rabbertes
stewed, and new laid eggs and rere yolks of eggs and ryce sode^ i^almo^
milk.

The. xxxv. chapit treats of a diete for the^ the which be asmatyke men,
being short wynded or lackyng breath.
Shortness of wind comes diverse times of impedyme^tes in the lunges, and
straytnes of the breast opylated through vyseus fleume, and other while wha^ the
heed is stuffed with rewme called the pose lets the breath of his natural
course, wherefore he that has shortness of breath: must abstain from eating
of nuttes specially if they be old: and chese and milk is not good for them,
no more is fysshe and fruit, and raw or crude herbs. Also all manner of
meat, the which is hard of dygestyon is not good for the^. They must
refrain from eating of fysshe specially from eating fysshe the which will
cleue to ye fyngers: and be vyscus and slyme and in any wise beware of the
skyns of fysshe and all manner of meat the which does engender fleume. Also
they must beware of cold. And when any house is a swepynge to go out of the
house for a space into a clear air. The dust also yt ryseth in the street
through the vehemens of the wind or other wise, is not good for the^. And
smoke is evil for them, and so is al thing yt is stoppyng, wherefore necessary
it is for the^ to be laxatyue, and to be in a clean and pure air.

The. xxxvi. Chapit treats of a dyete for them the which have the Palsye.
THey the which have the Palsye, universal, or pertyculer must beware of
anger, hastynes, and testynes, and must beware of fear, for through anger or
fear diverse times the Palsye do come to man. Also they must beware of
dronkenes, and eating of nuttes, which things be evil for the palsye of the
tongue, coldness and contagyous, and uynkyng fylthy eyres be evil for the
palsye. And let every man beware on lyeng upon the bare ground or upon the
bare stones, for it is evil for the Palsye, the savor of Castory, and the
savor of a Fox is good against the palsye.

The. xxxvii. Chapter, does show an order and a dyete for them the which be
mad and out of their wit.
THere is no man the which have any of the kinds of madness, but they ought to
be kept in sauegarde for diverse inco^uenye^ce that may fall, as it apperyd of
late days of a lunatycke man named Michel, the which went many years at
lybertye, and at last he did kill his wife and his wyfes suster, and his own
self, wherefore I do aduertyse every man the which is mad, or lunatycke or
frantycke, or demonyacke to be kept in sauegarde, in some close house or
chamber, where there is little light. And that he have a keeper the which the
mad man do fear. And se that the mad man have no knyfe nor sheres nor
other edge roll, nor that he have no gyrdyll except it be a wekelyste of
cloth, for hureynge or killing him self. Also the chamber or the house that
the mad man is in, le^ there be no painted clothes, nor painted walls, nor
pyotures of man nor woman or foul or be: for such things makes them full
of fantasyes, let the mad persons heed de shouen ones a month, let them
drink no wine nor strong ale, nor strong beer, but moderat drink, and let
them have. iii. times in a day warm suppynges, and little warm meat. And
use few words to them, except it be for reprehensyon, or gentle reformacyon
if they have any wit or perseueraunce to understand what reprehensyon or
reformacyon is.

The. xxxviii. Chapter, treats of a dyete for them the which have any of
the kinds of the Idropyses.
Saint Beede says the more a man does drink that has the Idropyse, the more
he is a thurst, for although the sekenes does come by superabundaunce of
water, yet the liver is dry, whether it be alchytes Ipo sacra.
Len^oflegmancia, or ye tympany. They that has any of these four kinds of
the Idropyses must refrain from all things the which be constupat and
costyue, and use al things the which be laxatyue, nuttes and dry almonnes and
hard chese is poison to them. Aptysane and posset ale made with cold herbs
does comfort them: whosoever he be, the which will have a remedy for any of
these four kinds of the Idropyses, and will know a declaracyon of these
infyrmytes, and all other sycknesses, let him look in a book of my making
named the Breuyary of health. For in this book I do speak but of dyetes, and
how a man should order his mansyon place. And him self and his household, with
such like things: for the co^seruacion of health.

The. xxxix. Chapyter treats of a general dyete for all manner of men and
women, being sick or hole.
THere is no man nor woman, the which have any respect to them self, that can
be a better physyon for their own save guard, than their own self can be to
consider what thing the which does the^ good. And to refrain from such
things that does the^ hurt or harm. And let every man beware of care,
sorrow, though, pencyfulnesse, and of inward anger. Beware of surfettes, and
use not to much veneryouse acts Break not the usual custom of sleep in the
night. A merry heart and mind, the which is in rest and quyetnes, without
aduersyte, causes a man to live long, and to look yongly although he be aged,
care and sorrow brings in age and death, wherefore let every man be merry: and
if he ca^ not let hi^ resort to merry company to break of his perplexatyues.
Forthermore I do aduertyse every man to wasshe their hands often every day.
And diverse times to keyme their head every day. And to plou^ge the eyes in cold
water in the morning. Moreover I do counsel every man to keep the breast and
the stomach warm. And to keep the fere from wet, and other while to wasshe
them, and that they be not kept to hot nor to cold, but indyfferently. Also
to keep the head and the neck in a moderat temporaunce not to hot nor to
cold, and in any wise to beware not to meddle to much with ^eueryous acts:
for that will cause a man to ioke agedly: and also causes a man to have a
brefe or a short life. All other matters pertaining to any pertyculer dyete,
you shall have in the dyetes above in this book reuersed.

The. xl. Chapter, does show an order, or a fasshyon, how a sick man should
be ordered. And how a lycke man should be used (...) is lykely to dye.
WHo so ever that is sore sick, it is uncertain to man, whether he shall live
or dye, wherefore it is necessary for him that is sick to have two or three
good kepers, the which at al times must be dylygent, and not slepysshe sloug
gysshe nor sluttysshe. And not to weep and wayle about a sick man, nor to use
many words, nor that there be no great resort to common and talk. For it is a
busynes a whole man to answer many men, specially women that shall come to
him. They the which comes to any sick person ought to have few words or
non: except certain persons she which be of counsel of the Testament making,
the which wise men be not to seek of such matteers in their syckenes, for
wysdom would that every man should prepare for such things in health And if any
man for charity will byset any person, let him aduertyse the sick to make
every thing even betwyxt god and the world and his conseyence. And to receive
the ryghtes of holy church, like a catholyke man. And to follow the council
of both Physycyons which is to say the physycion of the soul, and the
physycyon of the body, that is to say the spyrituall council of his gostly
father, and the bodily council of his physycyon consernyng the receytes of his
medsons to recover health. For saint Augustyne says he yt does not the
commandment of his physycyon does kyl him self. Forthermore about a sick
person should be redolent sauoures, and the chamber should be replenysshed with
herbs and flowers of odyferouse sauonr, and certain times it is good to use
some perfumes to stand in the mydle of the chamber. And in any wise let not
many men, and specially women be together at one time in the chamber, not only
for bablyng, but specially for their brethes. And the kepers should se at all
times that the sick persons drink be pure, fresshe and stale, and that it be
a little warmed, turned out of the cold. Yt the sick me^ w^ (...) sycker, that
there is little hope (...) ^ndeme^t but signs of death, than no man ought to
move to him any wordely matters or busynes: but to speak of gho^ly and godly
matters. And to read the passion of christ, and to say the psalms of the
passion, and to hold a cross or a pycrour of the passion of christ before
the eyes of the sick person. And let not the kepers forget to give the sick
man in such agony warm drink with a spone, with asponeful of a cau del or a
colesse. And than let every man indeuer him self to prayer, that the sick
person may fynysshe his live Cathol^ely in the faith of Jesu christ. And so
depart out of this miserable world. I do beseehe the Father, and the son,
and the holy ghost throw the merit of Jesu christ's passion, that I and all
creatures iyuynge may do so.

Amen.
Imprynted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the George next to saint
Dunstones church by Wyllyam Powell. In the year of our Lord god. M. CCCCC.
LXVII.


