AN EPITAPH Upon the decease of the worshipful Lady Mary Ramsey, late wife
unto Sir Thomas Ramsey Knight, sometime Lord Mayor and Alderman of the
Honorable City of London. Whereunto is annexed certain short Epigrams,
touching the mortality of man. Published by the consent of the Executors.

Written by N. B.

Beati omnes, qui moriuntur in Domino.

Thrice happy they, and of all other blessed,
Whose days well spent, the Lord calls unto rest.
LONDON Printed by R. R. dwelling in Fleet-lane. 1602.

The Author to the Book.
Go little Book, I leave thee now, unto the Readers view,
Since there is naught in thee containd, but what is inst and true,
And though thy volume little be, or substance very small,
Desire that my goodwill may make contentment to them all.
Firstwish them read, and afterward give censure as they should,
For why thy Author would have writ far better if he could:
What he has done, is for to please, if so it may content:
And to that end amongst them all, the little Book has sent.
Farewell therefore, speak fair, and say, if ought he have offended,
He would be glad by warning given, to have the same amended.
N. B.

The Books answer.
What as of right I ought to do, performed that shall be,
And therefore gentle Readers all, that me shall ouersee,
I do beseech you earnestly, my Master to excuse,
And pardon his invention rude, his meeters and his Muse:
For I dare undertake for him, that thankful he will rest,
If of your kindly courtesy he may be full possessed.
An Epitaphe upon the decease of the Worshipful Lady MARIE RAMSEY.
COme Gentiles all, lend me your listening ears,
Attentive, to the sequel of my verse,
Which mournfullike unto the cause appears,
That at this time I purpose to rehearse.
The tenor tends unto her sweet decease,
Whom while she lived, God blessed with increase.
Whom while she lived, (see here a Looking Glass)
Spending her days with credit and with fame:
Spending her time most godly as it was,
Unto the praise of her continual name.
Unto her praise that to the day of doom,
From age, to age, for evermore shall run.
Dame Ramsey, she it is that I do mean,
A Lady rare, most virtuous, meek, and mild:
Whose harmless life, whose conscience pure and clean,
Showed forth her fruits both unto man and child.
Whose liberal hand was never frozen fast,
From Alines-deeds, so long as breath did last.
Witnesses be, the bounties of her mind,
In Christ his Church, and Hospital like case:
Where her good works regestred you may find,
To all men's sights, that do frequent the place.
To all men's sights, which there may take the view*
Not so much rare as altogether true.
First for relief of childien very poor,
Orphins, and such as deeply be distressed:
She has ripte up the bounty of her store,
By whose good means those infants they be blessed,
Succorde, and well defended as they ought,
Thus much for them sweet Ramsey she has wrough*
Sufficiently for Scholars twelve like case,
In Oxford six, in Cambridgesix likewise:
She has set down to every one their place,
As they proceed in study to arise.
Not for a month, a year, but still for aye,
For to endure until the latter day.
Maintenance great for Preachers next to this,
Gods holy word to stablish and increase:
She ordered has, as right well known it is,
Until the world and age of man shall cease:
That truth thereby might England ouer-spred,
And at no time in blindness to be led.
Fifthly, her care and providence has been,
A Writing School erected for to see:
And there unto has plentious larges given,
That Scholars might therein well nurtered be*
And for to learn Gods word and perfect ground,
That they in time true subjects may be found.
People distressed and Soldiers wounded sore,
To them she has applied her watchful eye:
That they might be well heald for evermore,
And not for want of succor for to dye:
A gracious deed, a deed deserving fame,
A deed that winnes deep credit for the same.
For maintenance of poor other Soldiers ten,
Likewise she has her contribution made*
And only for a comfort unto them,
Unable for to live by any trade:
Pity in her had taken such settled root,
That no good deed was left trodvnderfoote.
And this beside see for ten widows poor,
How she has made provision in like case:
Allowing them henceforth for evermore.
Meat drink and cloth with the abiding place,
So that no want might nip them in the cold,
Nor winters force on them take any hold.
Poor maidens rights and marriages to mend,
Her liberal hand has been supporting still*
In bountious sort their dowries to extend,
A sign of her unfeigned great goodwill.
Wishing to them and others all before,
Partly alike the sweetness of her store.
To Bristow eke one thousand pounds she gave,
Unto the poor there dwelling in that place:
For maintenance and clothing they should have,
A loving gift to heal their woeful case;
To help their deep and pouerished distress,
Which help and gift makes not her praise the less.
To Th'ospitall of Christ's Church thus much more,
Two thousand pounds in ready coin she gave:
To prisoners eke distressed, feeble, and poor,
Five hundred pounds she wild that they should have;
To companies of London eke beside,
One thousand pounds to them she has relyde.
To parishes in Essex county there,
One hundred pounds she rendered for their need*
Wherein her love and bounty did appear,
To satisfy and to content their need.
Because that they each one in their degree,
Should not amiss but well considered be.
Unto her kin as she thought good therefore,
Two hundred pounds to some she seemd to yield*
To other some one hundred and no more,
To others eke fifty as she them wild:
To others less according to that rate,
As she thought good to measure their estate.
What else of goods, of moueables, or lands,
That vnbequeath'd remainderlike remain:
Unto the poor by her excecutors hands,
She wished and wild should be bestowed again:
Let all therefore that hear what she has done,
Think few or none such like there are to come.
Other good deeds a number to recite,
Which tedious were, I pretermit therefore:
Whereby she has lent to the world a light,
To look into the blessing of their store:
And to do good before their latter days.
Which works with hers shall bring them endless praise
But now note here, how that her life was spent,
First voted to serve God both day and hour:
Holding herself most happily content,
With all good gifts proceeding from his power:
And at the last extinct of vital breath,
With patient mind to conquer fearful death.
Wherefore no doubt her portion is enlarged,
Her talent well redoubled ore again.
Her duty done, her conscience well discharged,
Her death a life which ever shall remain:
Her mortal state immortal to be seen,
Her Glorious joys most flourishing fresh and green.
Ossa iacent tumulo, mentis monumenta supersunt,
Optima pars superest: Noniacet haec tumulo.
Vita per acta pie, mortem est sortita beatam,
Exijt ad certum men s reditura diem.
O foelix nimium quae sic sua saecla peregit,
Ter foelix cui dij dant ita posse mori.
A sufficient defense and reasonable excuse concerning the mischaunce that
happened at Leaden Hall after the funeral of the worshipful Lady Mary Ramsey so
solemnized.
Who can withstand mishaps, that daily seem to fall?
Or be against that God does send? Not any man at all.
Things inexpected chance, and chances they have change:
And sudden miseuents do grow, like wonders very strange.
But whatsoever haps, Thereto I do reply:
It falls out but for our sins, A scourge from God on hye.
Then let us not impute, or conster things amiss:
But think (I say) and deem no more, but justly as it is.
The goodwill of the dead, that gave this bounteous doale.
Bequeathed it unto the help of many a Christians Soul,
Bequeathed it for good, of widows in distress,
The halte, the blind, the sickly man, the poor and fatherless.
The executers eke, performed but the will:
Of that sweet Lady dead and gone, and for no further ill,
And as for those that were, in that case put in trust,
To deal the doale it was their mind, to deal it well and just:
If then ^^srulie folk, would not well gouernd be,
The fault was theirs and no man's else, that could not this foresee,
Let us not censure then, to talk that is not true:
But judge and say in every point, as I have said to you,
And let the fault rest there, by whom the fault befell,
And judging so you judge but right, and censure very well:
For they that headlong run, and will not be fore warnd,
Their headless care was that default, which made them to beharmd,
Examples there have been, like unto this before,
(...) let mischaunce excuse mishap: what can be spoken more.
In obitum Dominae Mariae Ramsei Ni* Boormanni Longaeuum et vltimum vale.
Sweet Ramsey, now
my last farewell I take,
Though simple be my verse:
or mournful rhyme,
For what I writ before,
was for thy sake.
So farforth as I respit had by time,
And more then that, the mind I bare to thee,
Was that thou should not clean forgotten be.
But had I writ or spoake few words or none,
Deserved deeds would have obtained their hire:
And therefore though thy earthly corpse be gone,
I trust thy soul does to the heavens aspire,
Where resting thou shall evermore remain,
Amongst Gods flock in Glory for to reign.
Where earthly change shall reap eternal blis,
Where downfall of thy mortal state or stay:
Shall joy enjoy that never vading is,
Where thou shall live for ever and for aye.
Unto which place although thy days be done,
I pray that all thy good friends they may come.
And thus in brief I give thee leave to sleep,
While I take leave for writing as before:
Yet for thy sake reserved thoughts I Will keep,
Within my heart to rest for euermote.
That when by chance I hear some speak of thee,
Though I speak least thou may remembered be.
Nascimur e terra, adterr amque reuertimur omnes,
Terra sumus, nobis maxima terra parens,
Terra tegit quam terra tulit, suamembr a reposcit,
Quae dederat tellus, non aliena petit.
Chara vale, lux clara vale, tuasunera fleui,
Prae lachrymis nequeo scribere plura, vale.
Short Epigrams touching the mortallitie of man.
EArth of the earth, must to the earth,
from whence at first it came,
Such is the earthly natural state,
of every earthly man.
Another.
ADams earthly fall incurde,
displeasure to damnation:
But Christ his death subdued sin,
to bring us to salvation.
Dye then from Adam for to live,
with God thy only maker;
So shall thou in the book of life,
with him be full pertaker.
Another.
Man's earthly state is but a pomp,
which speedy time deuours
Compared to a winters blast,
which nips the fairest flowers.
Another.
NOthing at all can be so swift,
as swiftness of the time,
To day alive, to morrow dead,
and covered in thy shrine.
Think then on earthly time that fleetes,
which no man once can stay*
For I, and thou, thou, I, and he,
have every man his day.
Another.
Tides have their spaciat time, to ebb,
to rise, and for to flow,
Yet never a swelling flood so hye,
but has his fall as low.
Young springs resemble youthfulness,
the flourishing time of man:
Which with the ebb shall have his fall,
let him do what he can.
Another.
THe sturdiest Oak of any Oak,
has but his time to grow,
And yet at last in tract of time,
receives his overthrow.
So, be a man, strong, tall, or stout,
his hold is most unsure:
And cannot longer then his time,
By tract of time endure.
Another.
THe clockes do strike the hours tun on,
the Sun eclipsed stands:
Yet all, let us be sure of this,
rests in our makers han des.
Conclude we then, our certainty,
is brickell and unsure*
And by it self has neither space,
nor warrant to endure.
And say we thus, to day a man,
and not a man to morrow,
For longer life then God does lend,
neither King nor Lord can borrow.
The Lenuoy.
THe highest tree is seldom times most sure,
The swelling floods yield ebbes that drench full low,
Nothing so firm that always can endure,
The tides through time wear out their times we know,
The Sun eclipsed the Moon berest of light,
The day surprised, the night abandond quight.
Hours, days, and years, run out their course at last,
The candell bright has his extinct in time*
None can recall, swift time when time is past,
What boots it then for worldly pomp to clime.
The watch forwarnes when as the clock will strike,
The cock and clock are watches both alike.
The fairest day assures his glowning hour,
The Sunshine bright is covered often with shade
Man's harvest is compared to a flower,
That unawares dothperish, waste, and vade,
And whose pride past bears but a withered hew,
And bendes and biddes the Gardner then adieu.
Our life a lamp, that for a time burns bright,
Our life a spanne when it is at the best:
Our life assured of neither day nor night,
our life a smoke and unassured rest.
Our life, our state, our stay, and vitallbreath,
Subject unto the sudden call of death.
The youngest lamb goes with the eldest sheep,
Which unawares, the slaughterer takes from foalde:
Neither young, nor old, their days of reconing keep,
How long to feed, or how soon to be sold.
Their haps do chance as do the gamsters play,
And so is ours that once must have a day.
Who therefore reads this preamble set down,
Let him bethink what as the meaning is:
And make suppose that if the fates do frown,
Man is recalde soon from his earthly blis.
For health, and wealth, his glory and his ease,
Are at command when as the Lord does please.
FINIS.

