An EXPOSITION OF THE FESTIVAL EPISTLES AND Gospels used in our English
Liturgy.

Together with a reason why the Church did choose the same.

By JOHN BOYS Doctor of Divinity.

The first part from the Feast of S. ANDREW the Apostle, to the Purification
of blessed MARY the Virgin.

Psalm 151.1. Laudate Dominum in Sanctis eius.

LONDON, Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for William Aspley. 1615.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, GEORGE BY the divine providence, Lord
Archbishop of CANTERBVRIE, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, etc. My
very good Lord.
I Find three sundry readings of the first words in the last Psalm; Praise
God in vis Hieron. Augustine. (...)
Saints, praise God in his An^nymus and our old English translat.
sanctity, praise God in his Vatabius, Calvin, English Gene^^bib. and
Gesebr..r^s ex Cl ald^.
Sanctuary. God is to be praised in his Saints, as having out of the riches of
his mercy bestowed on them eminent gifts of grace, the which as their
bequeathed (...). Imi^en. him de S. maxim^.
legacies and only true relics are to be remembered often in Gods Church unto
Gods people, that (as Ser. on C^ristmas day prea^hed at Bexterly.
B. Latimer speaks) we may worship the Saints in following their good
examples. And so these three lines meeting in one center, intimate that the
most holy (being donor of every good and perfect gift) ought to be magnified in
his Sanctuary for his sanctity conferred upon his Saints, whereby they shined
as Philip. 1.1^
lights in this heaven on earth, and now shine like D^^. 12.3.
stars in heaven of heaven. For this end I have begun, and I hope to finish
an exposition of the Festival Epistles and Gospels used in our English
Liturgy. The which (howsoever herein I may seem bold) yet am I bound to
dedicate unto your Grace for many respective considerations, especially for
this one, because your honorable disposition in the midst of a crooked
nation is evermore to be both a patron and a pattern of unfeigned sanctity.
Thus humbly beseeching the Lord to bless, and your Grace to savor these my
labors; I rest

Your Graces servant in all duty, JOHN BOYS.

S. ANDREWS DAY.
The Epistle
ROMANS 10.9. If thou knowledge with thy mouth that Jesus is the Lord, and
believe in thy heart that God raised him up from death, thou shall be safe, etc.


THE Gospel and Epistle chosen for this Fes^iuall, intimate the true reason of
our Church, in celebrating the memories of the blessed Apostles and Evangelists
unto Gods honor, namely, because they were fishers of men, ambassadors of
peace, preachers of good tidings, even the 1. Cor. 4.1.
disposers of the riches of God in Christ indiff^rently to men of all sexes and
sorts, in that their sound went out into all lands, and their words into the
ends of the world; and so by consequent principal instruments of God in the
work of our salvation and eternal happiness. Which our Apostle shows here
by this Martyr. Sar^^rius. Calvin.
Sorites or gradation: Whosoever ^all^th on the name of the Lord shall be saved,
Invocation is by faith,
Faith is by hearing of the word,
Hearing is by the Preachers.


And Preachers are sent of God etc. Erg^, such as have learned Christ, in their
mind believing undoubtedly, with their mouth acknowledging him undauntedly for
their Jesus; ought to praise God in his Apostles, as being after Christ
immediately the first, and under Christ absolutely the chief Trumpetors of the
Gospel, which is the Romans 1.16.
power of God unto salvation.

In the whole text two points are remarkable: Cansa causat^, the means of our
justification, and herein a Proposition: If thou knowledge, etc. verse 9.
Proof: 1. From a sufficient enumeration of the principal heads of Aretius.
Christianity. Faith; for to bel^eue with the heart instifieth. Good works; to
knowledge with the mouth, etc. verse. 10.
2. From the testimony of the Prophets. Cap. 28.16.
Esaias: Whosoever believes on him, etc. verse. 11. Cap. 1.32.
Joel: Whosoever does call, etc. verse. 13.


Causa causae, the Melancth^n. Parae^^.
mean for these means, and that is the preaching of the Gospel, in this
respect aptly termed the word of faith: verse. 8.


If thou knowledge] S. Paul having in the Chapter before, sufficiently
discoursed of the re^ection of the Jews A priore, from Gods absolute decree (
showing Rom 9.18.
mercy on whom he will, and whom he will hardening) he comes in this
present, to demonstrate the same point.^ Areti^s.
post^riore, from their obstinate incredulity, verse. 3.
stablishing their own righteousness, and not submitting themselves unto the
righteousness of God in Christ, apprehended and applied by faith only,
declaring it self in a twofold act; one which is Thomas 22. quaest. 3. ^rt. 1.
outward, to confess with the mouth: another which is inward, to believe with
the heart. D. Wi^e^ in loc.
Some confess, but believe not, as hypocrites: other believe but confess not,
as timorous and Peter-like professors in the days of persecution: other do
neither confess, nor believe on Christ, as Atheists: other both confess and
believe, and they be true Christians. A Ardens. Theophylact.
bare confessing with the mouth is not enough, except thou believe with thine
heart. Esaias 29.13. This people come near to me with their mouth, and honor me
with their lips, but have removed their heart far from me, etc. Neither is it
sufficient unto salvation, only to believe with the heart, unless thou
confess with the mouth; according to that unavoidable sentence, Math. 10.33.
Whosoever shall deny me before men, him also will I deny before my father
which is in heaven.

Now though in nature believing with the heart preceed confessing with the
tongue: yet Paul mentions acknowledging in the first place, Martyr. Heming.
Aretius.
for that we do not know the faith of such as believe, but by their
confession; according to that of Cap. 2.18.
S. James, I will show thee my faith by my works. Here then observe, that to
confess the Lord Jesus is necessary Sarcerius.
both in respect of other and our selves. In respect of other, Occumen.
as being herewith armed in the times of persecution, and instructed in the
days of peace. Christ is the fountain of the waters of life; faith in the
heart is as the pipes and cesterne that receive in and hold the water; and
confession with the mouth as the cock of the Conduit that lets out the water
unto every commer. And therefore Matthew. 6.16.
let your light so shine before men, as that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven. Again to confess, Pareus.
that is, to praise Christ in thy words, and to do whatsoever appertains
unto his worship, is needful in regard of our selves, Church hom. s faith. and
Co^fess. Anglican. art. 12. See Rogers ibid. and Calvin. Instit. ^ib. 2. cap.
16.
in that a true faith is never idle, but always working by love, Galath. 5.6.
For although it justifies alone, yet is it no more alone, Calvin. apud
Bellarmin. de Ius^ificat. lib. 1. ca^. 14.. Johannes.
then the heat of the S^nne which alone warmes the earth is severed from light
^or then Christ is di^^oined from his spirit: Cal^^^ apud (...). de Iustist at
lib. 1 cap. 15.. Caluinus: or men a hand when it alone does apprehend any thing
is separated from the body: Luther apu^^ Sander^m de Iustis^ (...). 4 cap. 4.

This doctrine makes against the (...). 70.
(...) in o'd time, defending this (...); Iura, peruira. secretum (...). And
the Martyr in (...).
(...) in ourage who following the (...). He (...), hold it l^^ full to
distemble their faith (...) the Magistrate. As also the Nicodem^^es ashamed of
Christ, and exp^^^cating (...) forswerring their P^ie^hood, and the Pope their
holy father upon e^e^y pretended occasion of danger. In a word, all weather
^ise professors, adue^tring no more for the glorious Gospel, then one ^^tely
did for his horrible blasphemy, who being bound to the stake, suffered only
the lingeing of his beard This open acknowledging of Christ is necessa^ie^ not
only (...) morris, at the point of de^h, as Lira^us: or in the day, of
persecution, as Lombard; but at all time, and in every place, when occasion is
offered lustly, ^aith (...) 22. (...) ^2.
(...). Forseeing it is an af^^rm^t^ue pr^cept. (...). As Christ in his Mark
8.3^.
Gospel expres^ely. (...)

Whereas (...) ^ (...)
(...) (...), the faith not sufficient unto (...) mouth and other ^od^^ (...),
as efficient cause concure with it in the (...) may be taken out of his old
School(...), and Cardinal (...), (...)
(...) does af(...) confession (...) act of faith, according to that of the
(...)
P^^mi^^. I (...) have I spoken, And in his second (...) this Chapter, he that
is (...) by faith ought to be (...)
filled with the fruit of righteousness. Postquam homo per fide mest
instificatus, oportet quod eius fides per dilectionem operatur ad consequendam
sal^tem. And Cardinal In loc.
Tolet in plain terms: Oris confessio n^s non iustificat a peccato, etc. sed
iustificati tenemur eam palam profiteri, etc. Confession of the mouth does not
justify us; but being justified, we are bound publicly to profess it before
we can attain to salvation. Herein agreeing with our Melancth. Calvin. Heming.
Piscator. Chytreu^. Tileman.
Protestant Interpreters, affirming that good works are consequents and
effects of a true faith, as if Paul should have said here, we are justified by
faith only, but yet this faith is operative, bringing forth lively fruits, as
the confession of the mouth, and the profession of the life; for they be
necessary to salvation, albeit faith alone be sufficient in the act of
justification, as you may see further Epist. Quinquages, and Sund. 2. in Lent.

In the words ( and believe in thine heart that God has raised him up from the
dead) three points are considerable, namely, Faiths Act, Object, Subject.


Faiths act is to believe, and to believe has these degrees (as the Lombard.
3. sent. did. 23. and Aquin. 22. q. 2. art. 2.
School teaches out of Tract. 29. in Joan. and ser. 181. de Temp.
Augustine) Credere Deo, credere Deum, and credere in Deum. A wicked man, and a
wretched devil, may so far proceed in faith as to believe there is a God,
and in gross to believe God: but a true Christian, endued with a saving faith,
ascends higher, and believes in God also. Perkins e^posit. Creed, art. 1.
That is, he knows God as he has revealed himself in his word,
acknowledging him only for his God, and thereupon put his See Church Hom. of
salvation, part. 3.
whole trust in him, applying to himself Gods merciful promise made to father
Abraham and his seed, with the heart unto justification, and confessing the
same with the mouth unto salvation. He disclaimes not his part in Christ as the
devils, Mark. 1.24.
Ab, what have we to do^ with thee thou Jesus of Nazareth? Mat^. 8.29.
art thou come to torment us before the time? but he challenges his portion in
the blood of his Savior, saying with the Church in her Cant. 6.2.
louesong, My well-beloved is mine: and with 1. C^r. 1.30.
Paul, Christ is become to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. H^s body is in heaven, there shall I find it mine: his divinity
is on earth, and here do I feel it mine: his word is in mine ear, to beget
him mine: his Sacrament is in mine eye, to confirm him mine: his spirit is in
mine heart, to assure him mine: Angels are mine: to fight for me: Prince mine,
to rule for me: Church mine, to pray for me: University mine, to study for
me: Pastor mine, to p^each for me: all mine, 1 C^r. 3 ^2.^3.
whether it be Paul, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, whether they
be things present, or things to come, even all are mine, I am Christ's, and
Christ is Gods.

Faiths object is Church Him of faith, part 1.
all holy scripture, the Augustine ser. 115 de Temp and Am^r: sser. 38.
sum whereof is the Creed, and this one point how God raised up Jesus from
the dead, is Mart. in^. ^.
nexus articulorum omnium, as it were the bond or tying knot, on which all
other linkes of our belief depend. Church Hom. of Christ's resurrection.
For if it were not true, that Christ is risen again: then were it neither
true that he did ascend up to heaven, nor that he sits at the right hand
of his father in heaven, nor that he sent down the holy spirit from heaven,
nor that he shall come from thence to judge the quick and the dead. In a
word, the matter of the whole Creed concerns either God, or the Church his
spouse. Now the raising of Christ from ^he dead, is the work of God the
Father, Acts 2.32. of himself being God the Son, John 10 18. of God the holy
Ghost also, Romans 1.4. Christ as Th^^s 3 part. q 53. ar^ 4.
God, only raises and is not raised: as man, he is only raised, and raises
not: as the Pareus.
Son of God or second person in the blessed Trinity, both the Father raises
him, and he raises himself. The Father raises the Son by the Son, and
the Son raises himself by the spirit of holiness, Rom 1 4.
by which he was declared to be the Son of God. As for the Church: our
Apostle shows Romans 4.25.
elsewhere, that Christ died for her sins, and rose again for her
justification; and that Ephesians. 4.8.
ascending up on high he bestowed on her gifts, as to be Catholic, holy, knit
in a communion: and prerogatives in her soul, namely, remission of sins: in
the body, resurrection of the flesh: in both, everlasting life. Wherefore Paul
here mentions only the resurrection of Christ from the dead, not exclusiuely:
but Piscator.
synecd^checally, because this one article Gorran.
presuppose^h all the rest, and takes them as granted; as if he rose from the
grave, then he died, and his death is a consequent of his birth. Or because
this article was, and is most Anselm. Idem Augustine. apud Matyr. in loc.
doubted in the world, for the Jews and Gentiles acknowledge the death of
Jesus; whereas the Christians only confess his resurrection. Or because the
Calvin.
rest (vnlesle Christ had risen again) would have profited us little: for he
triumphed in his resurrection over death, hell, damnation, opening the kingdom
of heaven to all believers.

And so the meaning of our text is plain, If thou confess with thy mouth that
Jesus is the Lord: Melanctbon.
that is, that Lord, 1 Pet. 1.10.
of whom all the Prophets inquired, as being the Haggai 2.8.
desire of all Nations, even the light of the Gentiles, and consolation of
Israel. And if thou believe in thine heart, that this Jesus (whom almighty God
has made Acts 2.36.
both Lord and Christ, offered Ephesians 5.^.
himself a sacrifice to Hib. 9.14.28.
purge thy conscience from dead works, and take away thy sins, Colos. 2 14
putting out and fastening upon the Cross the Laws obligation against us, and
that having overcome death and the devil, he rose again, ^phes. 4.8.
leading captivity captive, that he might hereby deliver thee from the bands
and hands of all thine enemies; I may tell thee from Paul, and Paul here from
God, unto the comfort of thy soul, that thou art now In praesenti inssi^^^m,
in (...) salutim Anse^m in loc.
presently justified, and shall be hereafter eternally saved. For the Scripture
says, whosoever believes in him, shall not be confounded: Melan^thon.
That is, whosoever has a sure trust in God that he will even for his Christ
sake pardon all his sins, and blot out all his offenses: and out of this
assurance calls on the name of the Lord, he shall be safe. For the two
testimonies of the two Prophets Theophylact. Ca^etan.
answer the two clauses of Paul, Esaias speaking of the believing in the heart,
and Joel of acknowledging with the mouth.

And in these texts of the Prophets observe their Lombar^. Martyr. Calvin.
universal note whosoever, for God is Act. 10.34.
no respecter of persons; he puts no difference between the Jew and the
Gentile, but being Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him, Ardeus.
Other Lords cannot reward all their followers as being Poor, many will not as
being illiberall and sordide: but our God is Hyper. apul Marlorat.
able, because Lord of all; and willing, because rich unto all of whatsoever
condition or country. Poor Bartimeus begging, rich Zacheus climing, old
Simeon in the Temple, young John in the womb, covetous Matthew grinding his
neighbor at the receipt of Custom, the loving Centurion Luke. 7.5.
building his nation a Synagogue, the people Mat. 27.54.
watching under the Cross, the Luke 23.42.
thief hanging on the Cross, confessing the Lord Jesus, and walking in the
sonneshine of his Gospel: in differently find refreshing in the conscience,
rest in the soul. For whosoever believes on him shall not be confounded, and
whosoever calls on his name shall be saved.

As for the subject or seat of faith: it is said here, with the heart man
believes: Ergo, faith (as many Calvin. Pareus. D. Wille^ in l^r.
Protestant authors have noted) is not placed in the mind, or understanding
only: but in the will and affections also. H^ming.
For faith, as it is notitia, resides in the mind: but as fiducia, feared in
the will. Perk. expos^^. Creed. art. 1. D. Fulke in 2. Cor. 13.1. disallowes
not this assor. (...) ^n the R^em. Vid* Thim. 22. quest 4. art. 2. and Be^^mia
de Iuc^it. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Other Interpretors ( etiam note purioris, and no way branded with the marks
of Antichrist) hold it no^ greatly to stand with reason, that one particular
and single grace should be placed in diverse parts and faculties of the soul.
It is true, that faith is not a mere prattle of the tongue, nor a floting
Sarce^^^. Biz^.
opinion of the brain: but a certain persuasion of the heart. Yet
notwithstanding this persuasion, or particular knowledge whereby a man is
resolved that the promises of salvation appertain to him, is wrought in the
mind by the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 2.12. A sure trust, and a steadfast hope of all
good things to be received at Gods hand, is Perkins vbi supra.
not happily faith (if we speak properly) but rather a fruit of faith, in
that no man has a^fiance in God, until he be first of all persuaded of his
mercy toward him in Christ Jesus.

For mine own part, I confess with In Gal. ^.5.
Luther ingenuously, that it is exceeding hard to distinguish exactly between
faith and hope, there is so great a^finitie between them, one having respect to
the other, as the two Cherubins on the Mercy-seate, Exodus 25.20. Faith
engenders hope, and from hope proceeds affiance, which is nothing else but
hope strengthened. For whereas an Job 8.14.
hypocrites confidence shall be like the house of a spider: Psalm. 125.1.
he that puts his trust in the Lord, shall be even as the mount Sion, which
may not be removed, but stands f^st for ever.

And for as much as the word heart in my text (as is agreed on all sides) is
put for the wholesoule, without limitation to any part: all that I will observe
from hence shall be, that as we must love God; even so believe in God with all
our heart, and soul, and mind. Caietan.
For hypocrites have forged faith, and devils have forced faith, acknowledging
against their will out of horror unto their condemnation, and not out of love
from their heart to their justification, that Jesus is the Lord. A Recusant may
be brought unto the Church against his will, and compelled in despite of his
teeth also to receive the Sacraments Bread and Wine: Lombard.
but none can believe that Jesus is their Jesus, but with the heart only. See
Gospel Sund. 8. and Epistle Sund. 10. after Trinity.

How shall they call on him on whom they have not believed? A plain text
against the Melancthon.
Gentiles idolatry, praying unto gods Act. 17.23.
unknown. As Hecuba in Euripides; O Jupiter quic quid es, sieve hoc coelum,
sieve men's in coelo, quanquam din iam ignauos opituiatores inuoco. And it is a
pregnant evidence to confute the D. Fulke. Kilius. Paraeu^ in l^^. them Melanc.
A^ol. August. confess. art. 21. and Perkin^re. for. Call. lit. 14.
Papists in their invocation of Saints also; for if they trust in S. Martin or
Mary, S. Catherin or Clare, they rob the Creator to clothe his creature, and 1
I^remys 17.5.
cursed be man that puts his confidence in man, and makes flesh his arm. If
they trust not, how do they call on him in whom they believe not? Our heavenly
Father says in his Psalm. 50.15.
word, Call upon me: Christ our advocate with the Father in like fort, Mat.
11.28.
Come unto me, for I am the way, the truth, and the life, John 14.6. August.
tract. 22. in Joan.
Non est qua eas nist per me, non est quo eas uisi ad me: No way to God but by
me, no light but from me, no life but in me Christ is a mutual help: to
the Father one, to us another. An hand to the Father, by which he reaches us:
an hand to us, by which we reach him. The Fathers mouth, by which he speaks
unto us: our mouth to the Father, by which we speak to him. Our eye to see
by, footway to go by, the Exodus 13.21
pillar of fire by night, and cloud by day gu^ding his Israel in the wilderness
of this world. Wherefore let us call on him in whom alone we believe, which is
our Ier. 16.19.
strength and refuge in the time of trouble, promising in his Matthew. 7.7.
Gospel, ask, and ye shall have: seek and ye shall find: knock, and it
shall be opened unto you. See Gospel on the 5. Sund. after Easter.

How shall they hear without a Preacher?] Here you may behold the Ministers
Melancthon. Martyr. ^ilemon.
Dignity, in respect of their Commission, as being sent of God. Errand, as
being ambassadors of good things, even such as bring tidings of peace. Aquin. ^
between God and man. Man and man. Man and himself. Wherefore Lilius.
desire the Lord to send forth Math. 9.38.
laborers into his harvest, honoring such Elders as rule well, and labor in
the word, even with double honor, 1 Timoth. 5.17. receiving them as Angels,
yea as Christ himself, Galat. 4.14.

Duty; for if faith come by hearing, and hearing by preaching, so that the
word of God unto faith is as Chrysostom.
oil to the lamp: such as will have their feet kissed, ought to bring tidings
of good things. If they will have the 1. Tim. 3.1.
worthy, good reason they should do the work. For assuredly such as crowd
into the Clergy without performance of their office, either through ignorance,
that they cannot: or secular emploiment, that they may not: or negligence, that
they will not: or fear of trouble, that they dare not preach the word of God,
are Regersin Anglican. Confess. art. 23 proposit. ^.
adversaries unto the doctrine of the Church of England, and enemies of the
Cross of Christ, Philip. 3.19. See further in the Gospel ensuing.


The Gospel.
MATTHEW. 4.18. As Jesus walked by the sea of Galile, he saw two brethren, Simon
which was called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea (for
they were fishers) etc.


IN this Gospel is set down the Calling of four Apostles. Coming of four
Apostles.


In their calling these circumstances are cosiderable: Who? Jesus. Where? By
the sea of Galile. When? At the beginning of his preaching. Whom, in Name,
Peter. Andrew. James. John.
Number, two and two. Nature, Brethren. Fishers.

Why? That they might become fishers of men. How? He saw them, and said unto
them, follow me and I will make you, etc.


As Jesus walked.] There be four sorts of Apostles (as Expos. prior. in Gaiat.
cap. 1.
Hierome and Postil. in loc.
Luther observe) some be sent only from God, and not by men: immediately from
God the Father, as the 2. Pet. 1.21.
Prophets under the Law; Job. 20.21.
Jesus Christ, and I^^. 1.6.
John Baptist in the beginning of the Gospel: immediately from God the Son,
in his state mortal, as the Matt. 10.5.
twelve Apostles: in his stare glorious or immortal, as S. Paul, Acts 9.15.
Other are sent by men, and not by God; as they who being unworthy both in
respect of their bad learning, and worse living, crowd notwithstanding into the
Ministry, through alliance, favor, or simonie. Which occasioned one to say
that horses are more miserable then asses, in that horses did post ordinarily
to R^me to get asses preferment.

Yet. p^^mata de corrupto stat. ecclesiae per ^^yricum.
Cum Jesus Judas, cum Simone fur Ananias,
In templo Christ's semper sunt quatuor ists.
Other are neither chosen of God, nor called by men, as the false Prophets, of
whom it is said in holy scripture, that they Ierem. 23.21
run without a warrant; Phili. 3.2.18
evil workers, enemies of Christ's Cross, John 10.1.
thieves climing into the Church at the window, not entering in at the door,
Matthew. 7.15
ravening wolves in sheep clothing. See Gospel on the 2. Sunday after
Easter, and 8. after Trinity.

Other are both elected of God, and ordained by men, as the Bishops of Ephesus,
Acts 20.28. and other Elders in the Primitive Church, Acts 14.23. and all
orthodoxe Preachers of the word in our age. For as the Gospel and Epistle well
accord, how shall they preach unless they be sent? No man ( Luther and Larymer
in loc.
although he were more wise then either Solomon or Daniel) ought to take this
honor unto himself, Heb. 5.4.
except he be called of God. I say called of God, either immediately by
himself, so Christ here called his Apostles: or else mediatly by A^glic.
Confess. art. 23. Rogers ibidem. Luther and Kilim in l^c.
such as have pub-like authority given unto them in the congregation, to call
and send Ministers into the Lords vineyard, and so Christ at this hour calls
Apostles in our Church, in that the conformable Ministers of England are chosen
according to his word, as we teach against the Brownists and Ba^rnists; as also
canonically consecrated, as we prove to the proud pontifician adversary. See
Doctor Fulke and W^^r in Romans 10. Perkins Treatise of Callings: R^g rs ^a
Anglican. Conf^ss. art. 23. proposition. 1. and 5. S^^l^^s is mo^iu^,
obseruant, of pontifician spirits, pa. 17. And surely God has as it were set
his hand and seal to the full approbation of our callings, in that he
blesses our labors in the ministry for the conversion of many souls in
England. For every learned and industrious Pastor may tell his people which he
begets unto God in Christ, as 1. Cor. 9.2.
Paul once told the Corinthians: If I be not an Apostle to other, yet
doubtl^sse I am unto you; for ye are the ^^al of mine Apostleship in the Lord.

By the (...) of Galile.] This (as Ra^anu^ apra T^omam. Are^^us. Iansen in lec.
Interpreters observe) was not the maine se^, but a little creek only, The
lake Gemz^eth* as we read Luke 5.1. but it is called a sea. for tha^ the Genesis
1.10.
Scripture terme^h all gathering together of wa^e^s* ^eas: and the sea of
Galile, for that it bounded upon the borders of the Maldenat.
two Galilees. Consule Plin. hist. lib. 5. cap. 15. Joseph de bello Iudairo,
lib. 3. cap. 18. Strab. (...) lib. 16. (...). 504.

In this lake Peter and Andrew were fishing, James and John mend^^^ their nets.
Here I no^e with Arctius and Ardius in l^c.
other unto your comfort, that almighty God is wont to bless men especially
when they be busied in their proper element, and (...) in their own vocations.
An Angel being a messenger of gladness, appeared unto (...). Luke 1.8.
(...) the Priests office before God and is (...) order. An Angel also
delivered the first (...) of Christ's birth unto Luke 2.8.
shepherds are wha^ (...) night in the field. While Saul ac(...) f^^hers
express commandment, sought for (...) found a kingdom. 1. Sam. 9. so Christ
here se^ing Peter and Andrew not idle, but casting a net into the (...): nor
yet ouer-haste, meddling in other men, trade; but only laboring in their own
calling ( for they were fishers) he says unto them instantly, follow me, and I
will make you to become fishers of men A last person is vn^it for the Clergy,
for none but Matthew. 9.38.
laborers are sent into the Lords harvest. On the contrary, the A^et. in lo^.
curious and over active spirit is unprofitable, for he will have one foot in
the Church, another in the Court, and if God had made him a Tripos, he would
have had a third in the Camp. Miles equi^, (...), etc. an hammer is for the
Smith, an Homer for the School. Let the shoemaker attend his boot, and the
fisher his boat P^rkins treat of (...) l^^g^.
He that comes, to the corn heap, the more he opens his hand to receive,
the less he does hold: so he that in largeth himself to bear the most office,
in a State, these were shall he sufficiently discharge. The worm (...). 29.
cap. 6.
(...) or (...), though it have many feet, is of a very slow pase. (...) 1.
page 203.
So Luther said of Erasmus: Qui^t ^ust in omnibus sapere, sespsum decipit. And
Bi^^n. pref. loc. C^^.
M^lanc^hon of (...) ^^itaries in arts, in omnibus aliqa^^, in (...). The
witty Mar^^^u^ (...) grace. lib. 3.
Poet trimly, Omnia cu^mfacias, miraris cur facias nil?
(Posth^n^:) rem solam qui sacit, ^lle facit.


Again, Christ called his Apostles in the midst of their fishing, Chrysostom. apud
Th^^. (...).
that we might hereby learn to prefer the following of him before the
business of the world: or Jesus happily walked by the sea, for that he did
intend to choose fishers. Arlens. (...).
Hereby teaching us not to shun, but rather to seek those places where ^e
may doegood: As the poor cottage, that we may relieve the needy: the house of
mourning, that we may bind up the broken hearted, and remove the spirit of
heaviness: the dungeon of Joseph and Daniel, preaching liberty to the
captives, and opening of the prison unto them that are bound. Kilius.
Flecte quod est rigidum, fone qu^d est frigudum, rege quod est deuium.

The next circumstance to be considered, is the time when, and that (as our
Evangelist in the 17. verse) was so soon as Jesus began to preach. For (...).
as a King who resolves to make war against an enemy Prince, chaseth his
Captain, and musters his soldiers, and in every point fits himself for the
present action: even so Christ Jesus the King of the Church, intending to John
12.31.
cast out of his hold Satan the Prince of this world, calls his followers,
and out of them electeth his Apostles, as chief Commanders and Coronels in the
very beginning of his preaching, that being trained up in his school, seeing
his wonders, and hearing his wisdom, they might be made fit for that
excellent and eminent calling. Latymers set. upon this G^sp^ll.
They were first (as Cap. 1.39.
S. John reports) acquainted with Christ, For this was a second calling, ^^
Iuhym. and Anselm in l^c.
afterward made Disciples, and last of all Apostles. And Museul. in loc.
therefore Christ here says, I will make you to become fishers of men. He
says not I do now make you: but having instructed them all his life, and
breathing on them the Holy Ghost after his resurrection, he speaks in the
present, John 20.21.
as my father sent me, so send I you, Mat. 28.19.
go teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and the
Son, and the Holy Ghost. And that they might be powerful and profitable
teachers of other, he Acts 2.4.
filled them also with the gift, of the Spirit after such a manner, and in so
great a measure, that they Acts 4.20.
could not but speak^ the things which they had heard and seen of Christ. And
that not in one corner, or in a few countries only, but (as it is in the
selected Epistle for this day) their sound went out into all lands, and their
words into the ends of the world. In the beginning they were rude, Aretius.
Museulus.
first Disciples, afterward Doctors, a great while learners before they were
leaders. Hence fathers of the Church are taught not to have (...), 1 Timothy 5 22.
hasty hands and over easy for admittance into sacred orders without trial
and testimony, 1. Tim. 3. and the children of the Prophets also may learn to
be James 1.19.
swift to hear, slow to speak, never affecting, much less ascending Moses
chair, before God makes them apt and able to teach as well by their holy
conversation as wholesome doctrine. For as the weights and measures of the
Exodus 30.13.
Sanctuary, to wit, the sicle, talent, and cubite, were of a Vatal^^us. (...).
ad l^c. Ex^d ex I^se. (...).
double bigness to those for common use: so should the virtues in the Ministers
of the Sanctuary be of a suitable size. The which as some Divines imagine, is
implied in the sacrifice for their s^n^es, appointed Leuit. 4. where the
Priests offering is commanded to be as much as all the congregations, a young
bullock without any blemish for the Priest alone, ver. 3. and no more for all
the people, verse. 14. See Benedictus in the Liturgy, Gospel on Trinity
Sunday, and 8. after Trinity.

The names of the Disciples here called, are Simon* Andrew, James and John: A
s^mi^ (...), Item (...)
insinuating tha^ a Preacher of the word must be Simon, that is, obedient to
the will of God: Andre^s, a stout man in executing his off^ce^ Iacobus, a
supplanter of vises in h^s a^ditorie: last of all, a John, a^cribing all these
good gifts in him unto the Father of mercies and God of all grace, (...) epist.
1 (...)
vi^a merito magnus, humilitate infimus. (...).
Other assume that the some cardinal virtues are designed by these four
chief Apostles, referring Prudence in Peter, I^stice to Andrew, Fortitude to
James, and Temperance to John.

For their number, it is said he^e, that Jesus called them two and two: first
he saw two, then other two: Aretius.
signif^ing that as the binarie number is the least, even so the Church of
little beginnings increase^h until her number be (...) 7 9
without number: Mat^. ^3.31
as a grain of mustard seed when it is sown is the least of (...), but when
it is grow^n it is the greatest among herb^s and it is a tree so that the k^^ds
of heaven build i^ the (...). O^ two and two, because they were Christ's
instruments in ^^ming together two people, the (...) and the (...), and so (...)
making of ^^th one. Or Christ happily would neither elect nor send his
Apostles one by one, because (...) him that is alone. Ecclesiast. 4.10. but by
two and two and those bre^hren: (...)
hereby teaching that Preachers of the word must accord as brethren, of one
heart and one souls, Act. 4.^2 having one mind in many bodies, (...), in
Psa^m. 132.
inter multacorporano^^ mul^a c^rda. Sa^rimentes in vnu^^^, at (...) hominem
faciant, as Augustine sweetly. For a Pro. 18.19. as the translat. Hen. 8.
brother helping a brother is a very strong castle, and they that hold together
are like the bar of a palace.

For their condition: our blessed Savior ( in Culoss. 2.3.
whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge) did Musculus.
Beauxamu. Pontan.
not choose the disputants of the world, whose wit was great; nor the nobles,
whose petigree was great; nor the Pharisees, whose credit was great; nor the
Priests, whose authority was great: but he called ignorant and ignoble
fishers, of little worth and less learning, to be the trumpetters of his
Gospel, and bel-weathers of his flock; that the 1. Cor. 1.27.28.
foolish things of the world might confound the wise things, and the weak
things overthrow the mighty things, and things that are not, bring to naught
the things that are. Judge. 15.16
Sampson in slaying a thousand Philistines with the iawbone of an ass, was a
type hereof (as Apud Ecauxam. H. r. tom. 1. sol. 140.
Prosper observes) insinuating that Christ by the 1. Cor. 1.21.
foolishness of preaching should confound his enemies, and save such as
believe. Nay Christ chose some notorious sinners for his Apostles, as bloody
Saul, and covetous Matthew; that his abundant grace might be manifested in
their persons, as well as in their preaching; demonstrating that in themselves,
which is the sum of all their sermons, namely, that Jesus Christ Matthew. 9.13
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. This is a true
saying, and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief, 1. Tim. 1.15. The greatest
Apostle whilome was the greatest oppressor of the Church, a blasphemer, a
persecutor, Act. 9.1.
breathing out threatenings, and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord:
and therefore his auditors might well and cedere and credere grant and believe
that Jesus is a savior of his people. But this extraordinary calling, and
singular action of Christ is Calvin. Muscuius.
no pattern for Prelates (as fantastical spirits imagine) to send into the
Ministry lewd and ignorant persons, as if the more faulty were the more fit,
and the more silly the more sufficient: for the same Christ by the pen of his
Apostle Paul in that excellent Epistle to Timothy (which ^pist, ^^O (...) (...).
Hierom: calls speculu^^ Sacerdony, as the whole Scripture is James 1.23.
speculum Christ^^ni^^^) sets down these directions for the choice of a
Pastoar, h^e must be well reported of, even ^f them which are without,
vnreproneable, watching, sober, ^^est, barberous, apt to teach. And albeit at
their first coming (and have showed a little before) these fishermen were
rude, yet afterward they were so furnished with all parts of knowledge and
variety of language, that their heaven exceedingly A^^^ 2.6.
wondered at their wisdom, and A^^ 4 13.
knew that they had been with Jesus.

Lu^ (...).
Other have rendered other reasons, why Christ in the beginning of his preaching
chose fishermen for his Apostles. As namely, to them that God is no respecter
of persons: as also for that he knew the poor would follow him immediately,
whereas Mat^. 19.24.
it is easier for a camel^ ^o goe^ ^orow th^eis of a needle, then for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom^ of God. For being invited to the great Supper,
he says, Lu^e 1^.1^.
I have bought a farm, and I must needs go^ to see it: or I have bought five
yoke of oven, and I go to pro^ise them, etc.

Let us examine now why Jesus called them, and ^ha is that they might be made
(...) of m^n: not hunters but fishers. In old time the Prophets and Apostles
were fishers, (...).
in our time more like hunters, (...).
according to that of the Prophet ^eremy, 16.16. B^hold, (...) the Lord. I will
^end out many fishers, an (...) them, and (...) I will end out many (...) they
s^^ll (...) them etc Here^ofore the Preachers as fishers enclosed many fish in
their net a^ one draught; but in our age ^^e resemble hunters, of er^a great
no^^ long and loud crying. (...) catch either no^h^ng, or else very little.
Io^^^ was but one man, and he preached unto (...) but one sermon, and that a
short se^mon as coaching the number of words; and yet he turned all ^he whole
City, rich and poor, prince and people. (...).
We (God be praised) are many preachers, and we preach many sermons, and such
as have a tall bite, nipping inuec^iues against ^nne; yet England repents not
in sackcloth and ashes. John Baptists sermon was short, Behold the Lamb of
God, which takes away the sin of the world. Vide Ferum and Pontan. in loc.
S. Andrews sermon shorter, We have found the Messiah: and yet (as we read in
the first chapter of Saint John's Gospel) Andrew was caught by the one, and
Peter by the other. The sermon of S. Peter, Acts 2, was exceeding brief, yet
it caught about thre^ thousand souls: in our time scarcely one soul taken in
many sermons. And the fault is partly the fishers, and partly the fishes, as I
have showed at large, Gospel 5 Sund. after Trinity

I will make you fishers of men] Musculus in loc.
Not of money, as if the sharing of the sheep and fish were the white they
should aim at. Antichrist of Rome was not in a pulpit these Trial of truth.
nine hundred years, and so by consequence succeeds not Peter in fishing with
his net: but only in fishing with his hook, Matthew. 17. where it is said, that
Peter cast an angle into the sea, and took a fish in whose mouth he found a
pi^ce of twenty pence. Such a kind of fishing the Roman Peter's use; for Pope
Leo the tenth exacted so much of the laymen, and wasted so much of the
Churches treasure, that whereas other were Popes no longer then they li^ed, he
was G^i^ciardin. Fist. lib. 14.
said to be pope many years after he was dead. Which occasioned a learned
Ac^^s. Sy^ c^^us ^^i. (...). 3.
Poet to write thus of him: Sacra sub extrema si fury requiritis, hora
Cur Leo non ^otuit sumere? vendiderat.


John 22. left behind him (as Petrarcha reports) two hundred and ^^ftie tun
of gold, in so much that an C^^ru. V cem apud (...). ub. ^.d. Cat. (...) s. ^at
4.
odd fe^low made this jest of him, Erat Pontisex maxi (...), si non vi^tute:
pecunia tamen maximus. Pope Sixtus Quintus (called of Englishmen in a byword
for selling ou^ kingdom to Philip of Spain, Six Cinque) through his
into^lerable covetousness ^elat. of re^^g^ (...) the (...).. 37.
left in his exchequer five millions: his successor Gregory the 14. wasted
four of them in ten months and less, beside his ordinary revenues, in
riot and pomp. The pontificians exceedingly condemn the Protestant Preachers,
because being married and having children, they take care to provide for their
family: but their See D. Suths. and rela^. of re^^^o^, ibi sup and sar. An^.
Came. (...) 1520. cum pri^^e^egio parl^^^^in^i.
own Popes and Prelates are more greedy to scrape for their bastards and
minions, then our men have bin to provide for their honest wives and legitimate
issue. Happily some men of corrupt minds among us, as most among them, enter
into the Ministry, as Plu^^r^^.
Stratocles and Dromoclidas into the Magistracy, tanquam ad aure am messem,
and so they be fishers of money, not of men; or if they fish after men, it is
to finger their means. As the Friars in old time professed wilful poverty so
long, (...). prol. before the book of Numbers.
until they robbed the whole world, and became Lords of all. And at this hour
the Jesuits are so covetous, that they malign all other orders, except the
Capu^hi^. And the reason hereof is plain, (...) Qu (...).
because the Capuchin says he would have nothing, and the Jesuit would have
all. S^eld^^m^ (...) concerning de pont^fi^^ (...), page 5.
A wittle Libeller in Spain described the Capuchin Friars shooting from the
purse, the Franciseanes aiming wide of it, and the Jesuits hitting it in the
very midst. I have read of Wilying ^am El^^. 3. ^ann. 1361.
Vrbane the fifth, how that when he was a poor Chaplain in the Court of
Rome, he should upon a time say to a familiar friend, If all the Churches in
the world should fall at once, (...) of them I think verily would light on my
head. After being elected Pope, his old acquaintance told him at his
in^hronization, Once (holy father) you complained that you were Parson of no
Church, and now behold, God has out of the riches of his wisdom and mercy
so disposed, as that all the Churches in the world are committed only to your
charge. Let us be Mat^ 2^.21
faithful in a little, 1. ^et. ^.7.
casting our care on God, who cares for us. If any forsake with these
Disciple^ his nets and ship, and suos and ^u^, to follow Christ, he shall
receive an hundred fold at this present; houses, and brethren, and sisters, and
mothers, and children, and lands with persecutions, and in the world to come
eternal life. Mark. 10.30. avarice is a sin in any man, heresy in a Clergy
man.

Fishers of men, in general (as Com. in loc.
Musculus observes) not of great men and learned men only: for that is Peter's
fault to neglect his cure that he may follow the Court, as if the ^oules of
poor men in the country were not worthy to be fished for. Not of good men and
brethren only, for that is a schismatic trick, such I trow be caught
already; we should therefore rather cast how to cast our net for other. A
scabbie sheep is of the flock so well as the bell-weather, and because
scabbie, wants our helping hand more then the whole.

Fishers of men, not of women only; for that is an heretical trick, 2. Tim.
3.6.
10 lead captive simple women laden with sins, and led with diverse lusts. As
Simon Magu^ the first heretic broched his dangerous opinions by the help of
the strumpet Helena; Nicolas the founder of the filthy Familists had troops
of women ever accompanying him; Apelles had Philomene for his mate; Montanus
had Prisea and Maximilla women of great birth and opulent estate; Donatus had
Lucilla for his mistress; Arius the Princes own daughter for his Patroness,
as T^m. 2. f. 253
S. Hierome notes in his Epistle to Cresiphon against the Pelagians. Ies^ites
Cit. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Postelliu the lesuite had an old beldame called mother Jane, and the rest of
that rank (as the Quod. 3. art. 10.
Quodlibeticall discourse auoweth) have deluded many young gentlewomen, and
devoured many widows houses. And this kind of fishing they learned from Satan
himself, who did first attempt the woman, and then tempt the man, using the
wife as a trap to catch her husband. And the reason why the devil and his
agents are fishers of women rather then of men, is because they be less able
to resist, and more willing to repo^^ a new*fangled opinion: in one word, for
that their ^its are shorter, and their tongues longer

Fishers of men, not of children, as Seruetus absurd^y cauillesh: Ergo, sai^^h
he, P^e^^hers may not baptize little infants. Answer is made by I^s^it. lib. 4.
(...) 1^ 3^.
Calvin and other, that men hee^e signifie^h all mankind of wh^tsoeuer age or
sex. Christ's commandment is express, Matt. 28.19.
reach all nations, baptising them, etc. and Mark. 10.14. suffer the little
children to come unto me. There be young Ioh 21.15.
Lambs in his fold so well as old sheep. Ma^^. 18.14
it is not his Fathers will that one of these little ones should perish, for
Mat. 19.14
of such is the kingdom of heaven. See Melancthon loc. com. tit. baptis.
infant. Calvin. vbi^up. in margin. Master John Philpots letter concerning this
argument apud Fox in his martyrdom. Bucan. loc. com. ^it. baptis quest. 35.

Little children must be caught and brought unto Christ, and after these
minumes are baptized in the sacred font, they must be catechized and further
instructed in the principles of holy religion, that they may know what a
solemn vow they have made by their godfa^hers and godmothers. And forasmuch as
every man is a Priest and a Prince in his own house, you must bring up your
child^en in Ephesians. 6 4.
instruction and information of the Lord, drawing them unto God while they be
young, lest afterward being past correction, they say with the wicked in the
second Psalm: Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast array their cords
from us.

Eur^p^d ^pa^d (...) Cem. de lib. (...).
Ni^ fundamenta stirpis l^cta sint probe,
Misero^ necesse est esse deinceps posteros.
The Matt. 13 47
draw-net of the Church incloseth all kind of fish, and therefore the
Preachers are fishers of all sorts of men. None is too good, or too bad, or too
rich, or too poor, or too young, or too old to be brought unto God. I will
make you fishers of men indefinitely, not of this or that man in particular.
Andrew must fish for all, especially for such as are committed unto his
peculiar charge. Acts 20.28. Take heed to your selves, and to ak't he flock,
whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers. Our principal care must be to
reduce such as are under our proper cure from the link and seas of their sin,
to righteousness and holiness, I^^er. Are^ (...). Musi^^^nus.
by preaching of the word to draw them out of the shadow of death, out of the
pit of ignorance to the marvelous light and sunshine of the Gospel. And
that we may perform this, it is required on our part that we be painful,
either casting our nets into the sea, or else mending them in our ship; and
skillful also, that we may know to cast our nets on the John 21 6.
right side of the ship. Laure^^. Pisan. euangel. paradox.
Omnis ignorantia mala, Sacerdotis autem pessima. The blind leading the blind
draws him not out of the puddle, but rather hurleth him into the ditch, Matthew.
15.14.

Now the fishers of men for the catching of souls ought to preach and press
two points especially, Melanc^h. Comanl c.
repentance and faith. Almighty God himself, the first fisher of men, in his
very G^n. 3.
first draught (when the worlds sea was not so tempestuous as it is now) stood
upon these two principally. First, he rebuked Adam for his sin, that he
might repent: and then he showed how Christ is the propitiation for his sin,
the seed of the woman shall break the serpents head, that he might believe.
The Patriarchs and Prophets urged these points unto the men of their age. John
Baptist, the last of the Prophets, and first of Apostles, a midling as it were
between both, inculcated often these two, Matthew. 3.2. Mark 1.4
repent, and Ioh. 1.29.36
behold the lamb of God All the sermons of Christ (as our Evangelist reports
in the verse before my text) consisted of these two likewise, from that time
Jesus began to preach and say, amend your lives, for the kingdom of heaven is
at hand. If any then desire to know whether the fishers of men have caught him
or no, let him examine his own heart, whether he be repentant and faithful.
If he feel sorrow for his sin, and comfort in his Savior; if he confess his
fault as the Iuke 18.13
Publican, O God be merciful to me a sinner: and confess his faith as John
1.41.
Andrew: We have found the Messiah: if crying with tears he can unfeignedly
say, Lord I believe, help mine unbelief: it is a manifest argument that the
fishers of men have drawn him out of the dead sea into the land of the living,
out of the dark waters into the glorious light of the Sun of righteousness.

Here the Gospel and Epistle meet again: Preachers are fishers of men,
because men are justified by faith, and faith comes by hearing of the word,
and the word is brought unto you by the mouth of the Preachers. And therefore
you must honor their holy function, as Gods ordinance for the Epist. 4.12.
gathering together of the Saints, and edifying of the body of Christ. Abhor
the positions of Me^^ c^^en in Romans 10.
Stenckfeldius, S^e Angers in Ang^^ean. C^nfess. art. 23.
Anabaptists, Familists, holding that the word is not taught by the sermons of
Peter and Andrew, etc. but only by the revelation of the Spirit. As also the
practices of uncharitable Martinists, Barrowists, Brownists, openly breathing
out slander, secretly threatening s^aughter against the Disciples of the Lord,
making it their greatest virtue to meddle with the Preachers vice: so that
whereas Andrew should catch them, it is apparent that they labor principally
to catch Andrew. But the best is, in the mean while they lose themselves among
themselves, having almost as many factions, as there be fractions in their
several inuectiues. Sedul. epist. lect. prefix a^^. loge^. S. Franc^su^.
In is^a Babylons sectae dissectae, their sects are now so diverse and adverse,
that as I. Sc^rarus appa^at. page 14
one said, Luigando res non dir^mitur, sed perimitur.

The last of all the remarkable circumstances in our text is, how Jesus called
his Disciples, and that is, he saw them, and says unto thens follow me, and I
will make you etc. that is, as H^m^in loc.
Ardens in a short gloss pithily, Vidit, per electionem: vocanit, per fidem:
iussit se sequi, per obedientiam: pramium promisit, per ob^dientie
reminerationem. Romans 8.30.
According to that of Paul, whom he did predestinate, them he called: and whom
he called, them also he justified: and whom he justified, he also glorified.
For faith is a consequent of election, obedience of faith, and remuneration of
obedience. He called his Apostles here by word only, follow me. Pin^an.
Go not before me nor beside me, but come after me, for I am the way, the
truth and the life Where note the Ma^^ras.
power of his word, he spoke and it was done, he called and they came
immediately. But we read in the 5. of Luke, that he called these by working a
wonder also; for whereas they labored all night and caught nothing, he
commanded them to let down their net, and they took such a multitude of fish,
that they filled two ships until they did sink. Where Divines observe that
Christ accommodates himself evermore to his present auditors, as he called
the Mattb. 2.
wise men of the East, addicted unto the studies of Astrology, by a star:
and conferring with a woman of John 4.
Samaria, who came to draw water at Jacobs Well, he took occasion to speak
of the water of life, saying, Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give
him, shall never ^e more a thirst: and in the 6. chapter of S. John's Gospel,
he did instruct the Capernaits who followed him only for loaves, by a
similitude taken from bread and meat, willing them to labor for the true bread
of heaven, and for the meat that endures unto everlasting life. By whose
example fishers of men are taught to become 1. Cor. 9.22.
as weak to the weak, that they may win the weak: being all things to all
men, that by all means they may save some.

Hitherto concerning the calling of Simon* Andrew, James and John. Let us now
come to their coming. Simon and Andrew straight way lest their nets, James and
John immediately lest their ship, and their father, and followed him. They came
straight way, without Aresius.
inquisition or Muscuius.
delay, considering only who called, and not disputing why he called. And they
came willingly without any grudging or grief, leaving nets, and ship, and
father, and Matt. 19.27.
all things or the world, to follow Jesus, whose kingdom was not of I^h 18.36.
this world, whose poverty was so great, that he was borne in Luke 2.7.
another man's house, and buried in another man's Matt. 27.60
tomb, as not having Matt. 8.20.
wherein to rest his head. Aug ^p. 89.
They forsook all that little they had, and all the great things they desired
to have. They did not C^i^tan. M^seulu^. Ar^^ius in loc.
abandon utterly their estate (for S. Peter afterward used his ne^s and
followed his trade, John 21.3.) but they so subdued their will unto Gods will,
as that they counted all things, Philip 3. 8.
loss to win Christ. Apostoli (quoth Epist. ad Pam^si. tim. 1 fol. 166.
Hierome) quantum ad d^u^^s nibil, quantum ad voluntatem, totum mundum pari^er
reliquerunt. Jesus every day calls us unto him, either by the good motions of
his spirit, or by his word in the mouth of his Preachers, or else by strange
judgments, or extraordinary mercies. And therefore let us, I beseech you,
forsake the vain pomp of the world, the carnal desires of the flesh, and all
other nets and lets whatsoever hindering our coming, that we may follow him
immediately. For if the Disciples here followed him in his humiliation and
poverty; what a sin, yea what a shame will it be, not to follow him now,
sitting at the right hand of God in the heaven of heavens, a Lord of Lords,
higher then the highest, a King of glory, Rem. 10.12.
rich unto all that call upon him, Ephesians. 3.20.
able to do for his followers exceeding abundantly above all that they can
ask or think.

These followed him Ardens.
in Body, being Act. 1.21.
conversant with him, and witnesses of all he did and said. Mind, for nothing
could Romans 8.35.
separate them from the love of Christ. Life, learning of him to be meek, and
merciful as he was merciful, exhorting their auditors to be 1. Cor. 11.1.
followers of them as they were followers of Christ. Death, for as he suffered
on the Cross to make their peace: so Peter and Andrew were crucified, and
James slain with the sword in his quarrel, and John (as we find in
Ecclesiastical history) was by the commandment of the tyrant Domitian cast
in fervent is olei Hieron. in Mat^ 10. and Mat West ^ad an. 95.
dolium, or as other, Beronius annal com. 1. ad ^^ 92.
solium, into a vessel or bath of hot boiling oil, from which he was
notwithstanding by Gods hand delivered miraculously without any hurt. Though
happily never occasion shall be given us to die for the Lord, yet let us so
follow him in our lives and in our loves, as that we may die in the Lord. Let
us Cel ss. 3.5.
mortify our earthly members, our feet, that we Psalm. 1.1.
stand not in the way of sinners; our eyes, that we may not delight in
vanities, or wantonly Job 31.1. Matthew 5 28.
behold a woman: our hands, that we may Eph^s. 4.28.
labor and work the thing which is good: our mouth, that it be not full of
Psalm. 14 6.
cursing and bitterness: our hearts, that they be not exercised with 2. Pet.
2.14.
avarice: that forsaking our selves to follow him only, which is our salvation:
as we R^m. 8 17.
suffer with him, even so we may be glorified together with him. Amen.


Almighty God, which did give such grace unto thy holy Apostle S. Andrew,
that he readily obeyed the calling of thy son Jesus Christ, and followed him
without delay: grant unto us all, that we being called by thy holy word, may
forthwith give over our selves obediently to follow thy holy commandments,
through the same Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle
EPHESIANS. 2.19. Now are ye not strangers, nor forreiners, but citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God, etc.


THis Epistle sets down the most happy condition of all such as truly believe:
1. Priuatiuely, showing what they are not in the 19. verse. Now are ye not
strangers, nor forreiners. 2. Positiuely, describing in the rest of the text,
what they are, namely, Gods City. House. Temple.



Of which heavenly building the Materials, are 1. Pet. 2.5.
lively stones, all Gods elect, built together to be an habitation of God.
Foundation, is Jesus Christ himself. Builders, Apostles and Prophets.
Properties, are to be built together, etc. answering ye three properties of the
Church in the Creed. Holy, a temple of the Lord, an habitation of God.
Catholic, all the building, etc. knit in a communion, coupled together and
built together.



Now ye are not strangers] As In Psalm. 1.
Augustine said, it is one thing to walk in the law, another thing to live
under the law: so likewise there is difference between being in grace, and
under grace. Many men in our time who receive the Gospel of God in 2. C^t. 6.1.
vain, live under grace but not in grace: many Prophets and holy Fathers in
old time lived in grace but not under grace. For (properly) to live under grace
is opposed unto the state of the law, to live in grace is opposed unto the
state of sin. The men of Ephesus and other Gentiles in time past unbelieving,
were neither in grace, nor under grace: not in grace, for in walking according
to the course of this world, and in fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, and will
of the mind, they became dead in sins: not under grace, for they were
without Christ, aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the
covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, as our
Apostle disputes in the former part of this Chapter. But non (says he) God
which is rich in mercy, through his great love, wherewith he loved us even
when we were dead in trespasses, has so quickened us in Christ Jesus, that we
be both under grace, released from the Romans 8.8.
condemnation of the law; and in grace, delivered from the Romans 6.14.
dominion of sin. We which once were far off, are made near to God and his
people; not any longer strangers or forrainers, but fellow citizens with the
Saints, of Gods household, yea Gods house. Zanchius.
Wherein our Apostle does allude to the goodly buildings of the terrestrial
Jerusalem, in which all the whole City was fair, the Kings house fairer, the
Temple fairest of all. And so by these three, whereof one does excel another,
he describes the blessed estate of Jerusalem which is Galat. 4.26.
above.

The materials of this high and holy building are Gods Aretius.
elect, Zanchius.
as well his servants on earth, as Saints in heaven. His elect in the militant
Church are called by S. Peter, lively stones, or (as Com. in cap. 28. Izechiel.
Hierom reads living stones. A material house consists of blocks, and
stocks, and other senseless stuff: but all the parts of the mystical house,
built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, are moving and free
stones, in that they be Ephesians. 2.5.
quickened by God, and Galat. 2 20.
live by says in his son. And this their faith is not dead, but lively,
working by love, Galat. 5.6. Vide Lorin. in 1. Pet. 2.5.
For as in other buildings one stone lies upon another, and all upon the
foundation: even so in the spiritual house, Christians Galat. 6.2.
bear one another burden, and Christ as the chief stone bears all.
Vnusquisque and portat alterum, and portatur ab altero, quoth Him. 1 3. in
Ez^^hiel.
Gregory. The whole building is so compact, as that every one bears another,
and is borne of another. As for example, the rich and the poor man are thrust
and piled together in Gods house, the poores butthen i^ his begge^ie, he
bur^hen of the rich is his ouergrowen estate. Wherefore the poor lies on the
rich, and ^he rich is content to sustain the poor; the rich h^th hi^ bur^^^n
le^^ened by giving, and the poor his butthen le^^ened by taking, and so says
(...) 22. (...) (...)
Augustine they bear one another* bur^he. A Christian must have L^s er.^^ G^^
6 1.
strong shoulders, and mighty bones, that he may hear flesh, that is, the
weakness of his brethren. It was excellently said of Li^ de (...) pa^tum.
one, when it was told him how his brother had committed a foul fault: He fell
^ sterda^ (quoth he) and I may fall to day. The peble may not envy the marble,
nor the marble despise the peble: the pin in the Temple s^rues for use so
well as the pinn^cle: 1 Cor. 12.21
The cie cann^t s^y to the band, I have no need of thee: no the head to the
feet, I have no need of you. So that every living stone must C^l ss. 3.12.
put on tender mercy, kinda^^e, hum^^tie, me^^ (...), long suffering for
bearing one another, and for giving one another, of one Acts 4.31.
heart* and ^f one seule, of one (...) 1.2.
accord, and of one judgment. Thus all such as a^e truly faithful, (...)
Ans^^m.
tempore s^les, from the beginning of their faith, and first embracing of the
Gospel, are translated out of L^nbar^.
Babylon, and made citizens of I ^er^salem, even walking and working stones in
the building of God house.

The next point to be discussed is the foundation of the Church, and that i^
not Peter alone, nor yet all the Prophets and Apostl^s jointly: b^t Christ
Jesus him^^^f. (...).
Not the Christ of (...), or the Christ of (...) or the Christ of L^gat, or any
false Christ, a^beit there be (...) 14.5
many such in the world: but only the true Christ of the Prophets and Apostle,
I say that Christ only which is (...)
v^l^^m in (...) stamento, re^^latus (...), promised by the mouth of all the
(...) 3.18.
Prophets in the old Testament, and preached of all the blessed Apostles in the
new. So the Doctors expound my text, built upon the foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles, L^mbard. Ans^lm. Cai^ana^e.
that is, upon Christ, a^ being the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
upon the foundation which is laid by their Ca^ in. (...) T^s^rt r.
doctrine, as lalo^. F^em Aqui. and ^ s^l. m^i ri^^e.
S. Ambr^^e plainly, jsper ^o^um and ve^^^ testamentum, upon the co^ents of the
two Testaments, the sum whereofi nothing else but Christ crucified, as being
the head corner stone, Aus^^m. ^r^ius.
lapis summus and imus, even the first and the last stone, the beginning and
ending, Apocal. 1.8. Hierom exp^s^^. 2 in^^^.
by whom the Church is founded and finished. In Aq^ia.
other buildings the foundation i^ lowest in the ground: but the foundation of
Jerusalem above, Galat. 4.26. descending down from God out of heaven, Apocal
21.2. is higher then the highest, Ecclesiast. 5.7. As A^stotle said, a man is
arbertransuersa: so we, that the Church is domus transuersa, an house turned
vp^ide do vne; for that Christ is both a rock on which his Church is founded,
and a chief or head corner stone, in whom all the whole building is coupled
together and gro^^th, etc. 1. Cor. 2.11.
other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ, a Esaias 28.16.
tried stone, a precious stone, a sure stone.

This doctrine confuces the Papist, holding that Peter is the rock on which
the Church is built, for that upon the confession of Mat. 16.16.
P^ter (thou art Christ the son of the ^^a^ God) our blessed Savior said,
thou art Peter, and vpeni^i^ rock will I build my Church. Answer is made, that
Peter in making this confession, thou art Christ, either spoke Ambros. li ^. in
L^^. cap^de ^ ^e^r ga^i^ne ^ su.
^raca^cris, or Au^us^i ser. ^3. ^^^er^. a ^s^eu^d m Ma^^. I^^^m ^ ^ram Mat. 16.
procateris, as prolocutor o^ Christ ^. (...).
mo^^h of the rest. And therefore whatsoever in that place^ as promised unto
Peter, appertained to the whole College of Apostles, a, O^g^n^^m. 1.^ Mat. the
words spoken ^o Peter are common to all. If we confess with Peter, and nobis
d^^tur tu es P^^rus, p^ra cnim quique Christ^^^ cip^lus est. And Com ^^ Am. s.
o.
S. Hi^ren^: Pe^ra Christu st, qui ^^n ^^t em^^us Apost l^^ vt ^^ quique patr^
vo^^^^ar, ^nu^re^rgous (faith ^^ s^pra.
Ambro^e^ ^^ sis petra: so every confessor is a Peter, and every Peter a living
stone in the building of God, house. Touching the words, ( upon this rock will
I build my Church) Vbi supra.
A ^gustine the most accurate Doctor expound, them thus: Super bane Petram quam
c^nfesse^ es, super hano Petram q^im cognonisti, discus, tues Christus fil^s
Deiviui, ^d^f^cabo ecclesiam mean, id est, super m^ipsum ad^sieabo ecclesim
meam: super me edisicabote, non me superte. So the Papists Anselm. Hugo. D^^^.
Carth^. F^rus Suarez in Matthew 16.
own Writers, upon this rock, that is, I will build my Church upon my self
the Son of the living God. See Gospel on S. Peter's day.

Again, this sentence ( Christ is the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles)
overthrows (as Hier. and. Ca^uin Ar^t^us.
Interpreters observe) Marcion and other heretics, affirming that two sundry
disagreeing Gods are Authors of the two Testaments. As if one God were preached
in the Gospel, and another in the Law: whereas one and the same Christ is the
very center of both, at which all the Prophets and Apostles aim principally.

The builders of Gods house, are the Prophets and Apostles, and all their
lawful successors the Ministers and Preachers of the word. Behold, says the
Lord to Jeremy the Prophet, Ierem. 1.9.
I have put my woreis in thy mouth, I have set thee ever the nations, and over
the kingdoms, to pluck up. and to root out, and to destroy, and throw down,
to build, and to plant. Ly^ain 1. le^ m.
That is, to root out vice, to plant virtue, to Zanc^iruin l ^.
destroy the dens of S^tan, and build up Gods remple, to throw down the
kingdom of Antichrist, and to set up the kingdom of Christ. And so 1. C^r. 3.
Paul calls himself a skillful Architect, or a cunning master builder laiing
the foundation, and he faith of other Preachers of the word, that they build
upon his foundation gold, silver, precious stones, etc. Mat^ratin 1 Cor. 3.12.
that is, doctrines and exhortations answerable to the foundation, and worthy
of Christ. In a word, that the Pastors are Gods laborers, and the people God
building, 1. Cor. 3 9. it is true that Christ himself is the chief builder,
as he says in the Matt. 16.18
Gospel ( upon this rock will I build my Church) he builds (as it is in our
text) through his holy spirit, verse. 22. yet he does use Prophets, and
Apostles, and Evangelists, and Pastors, and Teachers, as vnder-workmen for the
gathering together of his saints, and edification of his Church, Ephesians. 4.
11.12.

The tools or instruments which Apostles and Preachers use toward this work,
are the Word and the Sacraments especially. For so the Lord of these laborers
has appointed, Matt. 28.19
Go teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and the
Son, and the holy Ghost. His word i^ his power to bring his elect to the
foundation, and to build them upon the foundation. His Sacraments are
(fastnings as it were) to strengthen and confirm them after they be laid in
the building, that they fall not away, but grow to an holy temple of the Lord.
Our doctrine must be according to the Romans 12.6.
analogy of faith, our exhortation according to the rules of good life: the
Bible (which is our lantern and our guide) furnishes us with both, and
therefore we must ever build upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles.

Beside these tools, a Minister ought to further Gods building with hearty
Zanchius.
prayers and good example. De verb. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 9.
Bellarmine said of Erasmus falsely, that he was but half a Christian: but it
may be said of a lewd Pastor truly, that he is but half a Preacher: he may
peradventure pull down more building in one week with his bad life, then he
can set up again in a whole year with his great learning. De benefic. lib 4.
cap. 37 ex sententia Philip Macedon.
Seneca thought it impossible that any body should at onetime be both a good
man and a good captain: but a Clergy man is not a good Pastor, unless he be
a good pattern. God defend me and mine from a mangie Physician, a ragged
Alchimist, and a dissolute Divine. If thou be a president of godliness to thy
people, pray to the God of all grace that you may so remain: if you sometime
were, and are now fallen, return: if you never were, repent: if you never will
be, perish. Nam a Deo separabitur, qui a diabolo superabitur. Concerning the
properties of the Church; it is built together in such a A^^tius.
due proportion and concinne Calain.
symmetrie, that every part is content to keep his rank, and perform his
function without any faction. It is a body fitly joined together, and compacted
by that which every joint supplieth, etc. Ephesians. 4.16. See Epistle 2. Sund.
after Epiphanie. It is built together, in respect of her Zanc^ius.
union with Christ the head corner stone: and coupled together, in respect of
her communion with the members. See Communion of Saints in the Creed. And being
thus inserted and built on Christ, it lives and grows from grace to grace,
D^m (...) ^^eseit templu^ D^^, f^t; Occ^^en in l^c.
till it become an holy Temple to the Lord. The which Calui^. Marl^^a^.
Interpreters understand of every singular part, so well as of the whole body:
for every Christian is an habitation of God. If thou be then a consecrated
Chapel unto the Lord, how dare thou commit Idolatry which is against the
first table? 2. Cor. 6.16.
What agreement has the temple of God with Idols? Or how dinest thou commit
adultery, which is against the second table, 1. Cor. 6.19.
Know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost, and that God is
to be glorified in your spirit and in your body? will you then take the
members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Every
living stone that is built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles is
holy. Primasius in l^e.
Lapides in templo sancto non possunt esse non sanctificati. The temples of God
are holy, both in regard of their righteousness imputed, in that their
unrighteousness is Psalm. 32.1.
forgiven, and 1. Cor. 3.30
Christ himself made their holiness: and in regard of sanctification and
righteousness in herent, for that being delivered out of the hands of all
their enemies, they serve God in holiness and righteousness all the days of
their life.

The Gospel
JOHN 20.24. Thomas one of the twelve, which is called Didymus, was not with
them when Jesus came, etc.


THis Scripture consists of a Dialogue, Thomas one of the twelve, etc.
Epilogue, Many other signs truly did Jesus, etc.


The Dialogue is between a weak sinner, and a meek Savior. And according to
these two principal persons, it has also two principal parts: one concerning
Thomas, and another touching Christ.

In Thomas observe his Faults, which are two: 1. His absence from the meeting
of the other Apostles. 2. His incredulity, not believing the resurrection of
Christ, occasioned by that absence.
Faith, My Lord and my God.


That other part concerning Christ, is a relation of his second appearing unto
the blessed Apostles after his rising again from the dead.

And herein is set down 1. What he did: After eight days he came again, etc.
2. What he said, 1. To the whole company: Peace be to you. 2. To Thomas in
particular: Bring thy finger hither, etc. 3. In conclusion, to him, and them,
and us, and al; Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed



In that our Evangelist has set down the fall of Cap. 18. verse. 25 27.
Peter, and fault of Thomas, we may learn that even the most holy men are but
imperfectly perfect in this life. The Pontificians are true Donatists, and as
it were the very spawne of the Vi^e A^gustin^eres 33. and Epiph^^. ^eres. 59.
Cathari. For is any man so great a Puritan as the Papist, highly conceiting
that he can observe all the commandments of God, and Be^^armia. de (...) lib.
4 cap. 13. and Altein, (...). ex. (...). perer^gat.
more then ever he commanded, as the precepts of the Church, and Evangelical
counsels, and so do works of supererogation? or is any so great a Puritan as
the Pope, who makes himself a God in greatness, and a God in goodness? a
God in greatness, in that his unlimited authority does dispense with the
laws of God in this world, and alter his judgments in another, having power
terrestrial, in usurping the Harding con^ut. shewel A. (...) cap. 3.
whole world for his Diocese; vsupern^d, extended to heaven in canonizing
Saints: infernal, extended to hell in freeing souls out of Purgatory: a God
in goodness, for he cannot as Pope, Bellarmin de Rom p^n. lib. 4. cap. 3.
quate^us Papa, err in doctrine, and he may not be told of his errors in
manners: his holiness is holy Jacob Gre^ser, respon. ad Theses. Hu^. page 147.
si non sanctit^ate propria. sanctus tamen sanctitate officij. H^^us apu^ Jewel
pr^f. desen. apol. g.
Whether the Pope be Judas, or Peter, or Paul, thereof God never bade us be
careful: only this, that he sits in Peter's Chair, shall be sufficient for
us. 1. John 18.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us.
Even the Pro^. 14.16.
just fa^leth often, and the godly Fathers evermore complained of the
corruptions in their age. Ap^d. Jewel in apud. Il^m. Hieron. (...) Celant. Tom.
1. f. l. 109.
Tertu^^^in said, O not miseros, qui Christiani dicimur loc tempore, gentes
agimus sub nomine Christi. Apud Jewel ^apilog part. 3. cap. 7.
Gregory Nazianz^ne speaks thus of the pitiful estate of his own time: We
that are Christians, are hated of the Heathen for our own vices sake, we are
now become a wonder not only to men and Angels, but even to all the wicked and
ungodly. More lately Gueuara: The Philosophers believed as Paganes, but lived
as Christians: whereas we (quoth he) believe like Christians, but live like
Paganes. Honored Con. ad Cler. Cantabrig.
Whitaker, examining the dissoluteness of al degrees in England, cried out in
exceeding great passion, Aut hoc non est euangelium, aut nos non sumus
euangelici. The reverend Doctor E^des s^r. difference between good and cu^^.
Deane of Worcester, as yet more fully, The fatal misery of these latter
days, has made nothing good but in show, nothing true b^t in opinion; when
for justice between kingdom and kingdom, the longer sword has eaten up the
law of nations; and for justice between subjects under the same government,
laws are lost in the cases of the law; and for the preserver of all both truth
and justice, religion it self is in a manner lost in the questions of
religion. Of all men Christians are the best, of all Christians undoubtedly the
primitive professors, of all the primitive professors Christ's own Disciple, of
all the Disciples his chosen Apostles, and yet these men were but men, subject
to manifold sins, albeit they were Saints, and their infirmities are recorded
in holy Bible, partly for the glory of God, and partly for our good. For
Pontan.
Gods honor, that his Psalm. 67.2.
saving health might be known upon earth, and the riches of his mercy showed
in pardoning offenses: according to that of Psalm. 51.4.
David, Against thee (my God) have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight,
that thou might be justified in thy saying. In what saying, I pray, but in
this, and the like, Romans 5.20.
where sin abounded, there grace superabounded. Again, the sins of the
blessed Apostles are registered in the Gospels history for our good,
Melanc^hon. Culman.
that we might neither presume, nor yet despair: not presume, for we may
fear falls, if these had their slips: not despair, because Christ forgot and
forgave Peter's blasphemy, the proud ambition of the sons of Zebed^us, and
here Thomas his incredulity, speaking so mildly, working so mercifully with
him, as that his sore was made his salve, his unbelieving at the first
occasioning greater faith in him afterward.

P^trarche de remedijs lib. 1. d. aleg. 8.
Memento peccati, vt dole as:
Memento mortis, vt desinas:
Memento diuin^ iustitiae, vt time as:
Memento miscricordiae, ne desperes.
Hitherto concerning the sins of godly men in general. I come now to Thomas
his faults in particular, and they be principally two. First, his absence from
the meeting of the Disciples, according to the tenor of our Text, Thomas one
of the twelve, was not with them when Jesus came. Christ had Mat. 10.17 M^r^
10.32. Luke 18.31.
often foretold his Apostles, that he should be put to death, and that he
should rise again the third day from the dead: and therefore a little before
his passion he made promise to them, Mat. 26.32.
after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galile. Now then according
to this word (as we read in the former part of this Chapter) even the same day
wherein he rose again, he came when the doors were shut into the place
where the Disciples were gath^red together, and stood in the mids, and said
to them, peace be unto you: But Thomas, either upon supine negligence, or
Maldonat.
cowardly fear, being absent from their assembly, lost the sight of his
Savior. Wherefore let us (I beseech you) be diligent in frequenting the
C^l^^n, (...).
congregation of the faithful, especially on the Lords day, Mat. 18.20.
for where two or three are gathered together in Christ's name, there Christ is
in the mids of them, and faith as here, peace be unto you. Exo. 16.27.
They who gathered Manna alone, lost their labor, and found nothing. Falleris
sancte Thoma, falleris, si videre dominum ^peras ab apostolorum Collegio
separatus, non ^mat veritas angulos, sed stat in medi^, etc. says De as^ens.
(...). 6.
Bernard. Thou art deceived Thomas, exceedingly deceived, if thou think to see
Christ out of the Church and College of Apostles. He lurkes not in the dens
of the wicked, but stands in the mids of the godly, appearing in ^ Exodus 3.5.
holy ground, found in the (...) ^.46.
Temple, seen among the Disciples.

The second fault of Thomas arising from the (...).
former, is incredulity, for his absence from the Disciples assembly, was the
cause he saw not Christ, his not seeing of Christ occasioned unbelief, and
then his unbelieving heart breaks forth into malapert words, except I see in
his hands the print of the nails, etc. I find that some Writers have much
excused this fact of Didymus, as Apud Maldonat. in loc.
Cyril, who thought he spoke not thus out of incredulity, but out of a sudden
passion, as being extremely grieved for that he lost the sight of his Savior,
and almost out of hope that he should ever see him again, because Christ had
said, Ioh. 16.16.
a little while and ye shall not see me, for I go to my Father. And Ser. 156.
de temp.
S. Augustine says also, that these words of Thomas argue not a denying, but a
doubting only: Vox inquirentis est, non negantis; dum hoc dicit, docerivoluit,
confirmar^ desiderauit. And Lib. 10. in Luc. cap. 24.
S. Ambrose most expressly, that Thomas doubted not of Christ's resurrection, but
of the manner of his resurrection only: Non de resurrectione Domini, sed de
resurrectionis qualitate videtur dubitasse. This I confess is a charitable
construction of those holy Fathers, extenuating rather then aggravating the
sins of others, especially the godly. But Christ himself, being truth it
self, reprehends in our Text Thomas incredulity, be not faithless, but
faithful: and therefore Ecclesiastes 1.15.
that which is crooked can none make strait. This fact then of Thomas is a
fault, and it is amplified here by three circumstances especially.

1. That he was one of the twelve. Not to believe the resurrection of Christ is
a sin in an ordinary Christian, in a Disciple yet greater, but in an Apostle
Pontan.
so well instructed, and so well beloved, it was greatest of all.

2. For that he gave no credit to the report of his fellow Disciples, although
his Master had often said, Luk 10.16.
he that despises you, despises me. Moreover, they were the Iansen.
greater part of the company, ten against one, and each of those ten had
received before the Holy Ghost, Ver. 22. and concerning the present business,
had heard and seen more then he, Ver. 20.21.

3. For that he did vent his incredulous thought in such a bold and
peremptory style; except I see in his hands the print of the n^il^s, nay that
is not enough, except I feel the print, except I put my finger into the print
of the nails, every one being so big as my finger: except I thrust mine hand
into his side, and search his wound so great as mine hand: except with hand and
finger I Mald. not.
measure both, and find by due proportion that they are the same, I cannot
believe; nay the truth is, I will not believe. From hence then observe, that
the 1 Cor. 2.14
natural man (if Christ once leave him) is not able to discern the things of
God, especially that hard article concerning the resur rection: it seems as a
Luk 24.11.
fained thing to such as with their senses only seek their Savior.

Thus much of the fault. I proceed now to the faith of Thomas. And here the
Doctors have moved a double doubt.

1. Whether Thomas did touch the wounds of Christ or no.

2. Whether his speech, my Lord and my God, were an exclamation, or an
acclamation.

For the first, it is thought by Eub^m. sus^b. Emisen^ (...) in lit.
some, that he did not touch the wounds of Christ, and that for these two
reasons especially: First, because Christ says in the 29, verse, Thom is,
because thou have seen me, thou have believed: and not, because thou have
touched me. Secondly, for that it is probable that Thomas hearing his masters
voice, and seeing his countenance was abundantly satisfied without any further
inquiry. But these objections in the judgment of the most Augustine ser
146.155.161. ^e^em.

Ans. 12, ^a Luc. ^.10 cap 24 (...) gel ^ 16.

B^rmar.(...). 2. ^eheat ^^rg. ^dm Christ^, Ga^de (...). (...) M. ld. ^at. 11
les.


ancient and best learned expositors are very weak, because Christ in the 27.
verse says expressly, put thy finger hither, and see mine hands, etc. What (as
Augustine disputes in 121. tract. in Joan.) had Thomas h^s eyes in his fingers?
if not, then seeing in that text is nothing else but touching, put thy finger
and see. For seeing is attributed to all the senses: Audi and vide qu^m been
sonet: Hear and see how trimly the bells ring. Olfac and vide qu^m been cleat:
Smell and see how sweet the flower is Gusta and vide qu^m been sapiat: Taste
and see the pleasantness of the fruit. And so Tange and vi^e, touch and see,
reach hither thine hand, and christ it into my side.

For the second arguments, albeit happily Thomas at the very sight of his
master instantly became satisfied in himself: yet that every scruple might be
removed out of his and our mind, our blessed Savior suffered his glorious
body to be touched, as S. John in his Ca. 1. ver. 1.
first Epistle, That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which
we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the word of life.

Yea but Christ said in this Chapter at the 17. verse to Mary Magdalene, Touch
me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father: is it likely that Thomas
obtained more favor then Mary so dearly beloved of the Lord? Divines answer
this objection diversely: First, our Savior did not forbid all touching simply,
but Calvin.
immoderate embracing only: for Mary Magdalene and other holy women with her
touched his feet, Matthew 28.9. They took him by the feet, and worshipped him.
It is plain then that Mary was suffered to touch and only forbidden when she
did it too much. Secondly, Mary believed the resurrection of Christ, and
Marlorat.
therefore had no such need to touch him as Thomas had. Thirdly, Christ did
intimate that his body being now glorified, he was not any longer to be
respected carnally, but only to be touched Aretius.
spiritually with the finger of faith; according to that of Coloss. 3.1.
Paul, If ye be risen with Christ, set your affections on things which are
above, not on things which are on the earth. And lastly, there is an evasion in
the text, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father, but go to my
brethren, and say to them, etc. Bectarmin. de sacr^ment. Eucharist. lib. 1.
c^p. 14 addi ^^^st al^a. I^. mannota. M ldor. t. in Mat. ^8.9.
As if Christ should say, you need not be so fond and forward in touching me
nowfor I mean not as yet to depart from you, but go tell my brethren that I
am risen again from the dead, and then both they and you shall further handle
and see me. For so we find, Luke 24.39. Behold mine hands and my feet, for it
is I my self; handle me and see: palpet: and videte, see with your fingers
that it is I. This expos^tion is proper and pertinent and therefore
notwithstanding the former objections, I conclude, if not demonstratiuely, yet
probably, that Thomas did actually touch Christ's wounds according to Christ's
words, bring thy finger hither, and see mine hands, and reach hither thine
hand, and thrust it into my side.

The next q^ere to be discussed, is whether the words of Thomas (my Lord and my
God) are an exclamation, or an acclamation. Arius and his brood, who deny
Christ to be very God of very God, make them an exclamation, as if Thomas
should have said; O Lord God, what is it that I touch and see I not an
acclamation or acknowledgement that Christ is the Lord God. Answer is made:
first, that the text has not any note of exclamation, it is ^, not ^, which is
prefixed to the two Greek words. Secondly, Thomas acknowledged something which
he did not before believe, but he knew before th^^ the Father was God: and
therefore this speech of his concerned God ^he Son. Lastly, Christ commended
his faith in confessing the son to be the Lord, Thomas, because thou have
seen me, thou have believed: he did reprehend Thomas for the manner, but yet
approve him for the matter of hi^ belief. So that the words (my Lord and my
God) are a plain confession of Didymus his faith touching Jesus Christ the
Savior of the world. He says not, thou art my Lord and my God: but, as if he
had not time enough to put in Creed enough, he brake forth into this abrupt
and impe^fect speech, as being of Call.^a. Meld^^at.
greater force, my Lord and my God. And it is so sweet as it is short, v^
(...), sie (...) conf^ssio^, quoth Apud Mer^.r^^ (...). and Jesus.
Bullinger, a very brief, yet a most absolute Creed.

For the further examination whereof, observe first his knowledge, then his
application, the which are the two principal parts, of faith. As for his
knowledge, Thomas confessed here not only that Christ is a Lord and a God, for
there be 1. Cor. 8.5.
many Gods and many Lords in Euthym, in Psalm. 49.
opinion, analogy, title C^^. us and Le^^ti^s apud Mall.^^, i^ (...).
But to distinguish Christ from all these kinds of Lords and Gods, he does
affirm that he is (...), the Lord and the God, that is, the Lord of Lords, and
God of Gods, Psalm. 50.1. Here then is a pregnant text against unbelieving
Jews, and misbeleeuing Arians. If Christ had not been very God of very God,
even one substance with the Father, he would have condemned, and not commended
this confession of Thomas. If any shall ask why Thomas is not content with one
word, but uses two, Lord and God: and why first he calls Christ Lord, and
then God? Ferus ser. 1. in lot.
Answer may be, that he called him Lord, in that he conquered hell and death:
and God, in that he knew the very secrets of his heart. For when Christ had
said, put thy finger hither, and see mine hands, and reach forth thine hand,
and put it into my side; Thomas instantly remembering what he had fondly
thought, and foolishly said, confesses his fault in confessing his faith, my
Lord and my God. The Disciples usually termed him Lord in his life, to signify
therefore that it was the same Christ, he first according to his accustomed
manner calls him Lord, and then after he proceeds further then he was wont,
and calls him also God. In the word Theophylact. in loc.
Lord acknowledging his humanity, in the word God his divinity. Faiths object
is the revealed will and word of God, and the sum of his word is the new
Testament, and the sum of the new Testament is Jesus Christ God and man. In
that therefore Thomas confessed his Lord to be crucified, dead, and buried, as a
man; and that he did again raise himself and loose the bonds of death as God:
he did utter that in two words, which is the contents of the two Testaments,
and sum of all sum of faith and holy belief.

Now for application, he says my Lord, and my God; Bullinger.
Not only God in general, but my God in particular, mine by promise, mine by
stipulation, mine by oath, mine by free gift, mine by purchase, mine by
participation of grace; my Emmanuel, my Shilo, my Jesus. Of this particular
faith Cap. 24.16. Consul^ Vatablum in loc.
Isaiah the Prophet spoke, when he said, Secretum meum mihi, secretum meum
mihi: My secret to my self, my secret to my self. The Papists indeed term
this personal and particular assurance presumption: but the children of God in
all ages have thus applied the medicine to the malady, saying with Psalm. 63.1.
David, O God, thou art my God: and with Mary, my Savior. For as their own
Ferus vbisup.
Friar notes upon my text, it is not sufficient to believe that he is the Lord,
except thou believe likewise that he is thy Lord; as Didymus here not only
once, but twice, my Lord, my God: doubling as it were his faith, as he had
before doubted his fall. O the deepnesse of the riches of Gods mercy! Who
would have thought that Thomas who believed least, and last of all his
fellows, upon so short a conference, should thus equal, if not excel them
all in his abrupt yet absolute confession? And therefore let not any man either
discomfort himself, or Matthew. 7.1.
condemn his brother 1. Cor. 4.5.
before the time: for no man has so weak a faith, or so wicked a life, but
that one day Christ out of his infinite goodness may call him, and heal him,
as he did S. Thomas, making him who did not believe so soon as the rest, to
become notwithstanding in his belief so sound as the rest, apprehending and
applying the merits of his Savior to his soul, my Lord, my God.

After eight days again his Disciples were within, and Thomas with them, then
came Jesus.] He came Calelan.
before he was up sought, and that to seek C^rys^ft, apud Them
one lost sheep only. Teaching us hereby to (...).
recall such as are in errors, and to Romans 15.1.
bear the infirmities of the weak. But he deferred his coming a whole
week, that Thomas in the meanewhile might be better I ^^sen. Concord^ep 147.
Idem Theoph. and Euthym. ^^ loc.
instructed, and induced to believe the resurrection. Or happily for the
greater manifestation of his goodness, in tolerating such incredulity so
long. Or as Aretius.
other, to try the faith of the rest, and to show that humane reason is not
able to persuade this article.

The translation of Gods holy day from the Saturday to the Sunday, is not by
patent in the Bible, but only by pattern, because the blessed Apostles usually
met together Act. 20.7. 1. Cor. 16.2. Ap^cal. 1.10.
on this day. The which assuredly they did by the direction of Gods holy
spirit, and as it may seem here by Christ's Maldonat. in loc.
approbation at the least, if not See Ded, exposit. Com. 4.
institution, again and again manifesting himself to be risen on the eighth
day. So that albeit happily some will grant that the Church assembled in a
general Council, has authority to constitute another day for the Sabbath,
as the second or third of the week; yet I am sure we can never have so good a
pattern, nor yet so great a reason for altering this our day, as was here for
the changing of that other day. The pattern is Christ and his Apostles, and
the reason is the resurrection of Christ, even that exceeding wonderful work
of our redemption. Again, Christ's appearing on the eighth day is not without a
Aretius.
mystery: we labor six days in this life, the seventh is the sabbath of our
death, in which we Apoc. 14.13.
rest from our labors, and then being raised from the dead on the eighth day,
Christ in his own body, the very same body that was crucified, dead, and
buried, shall reward every man Apoc. 20.13.
according to his work.

When the doors were shut.] Rhom. in loc.
Papists urge this place to prove the carnal and gross presence of Christ in
the Sacrament, extremely condemning our incredulity, who will not believe that
Christ's body and blood is under the forms of bread and wine; seeing his whole
body here perfect in all his lineaments, length, breadth, and thicknes,
distinct and diverse from the substance and corpulence of the wood, was in the
same proper place the wood was in, and passed through the same. To this
objection our Divines answer diversely; Beza.
some, that the door opened of it self to let him in: Apud Mar^^rat. in loc.
other, that the door was vnbarred by some of the house within unknown to the
Disciples: Aretius.
other, that to come in the doors being shut, is no more but that he came in
late in the evening, at what time men use to shut their doors: but most
acknowledge that he came in miraculously, not through the wood and iron of the
doors, as the Papists absurdly conceive: but through his C^ril. ^^thym.
Marl^r. in l^c. Idem C^l^in. Iustus. lib. 4. cap. 17..29.
omnipotent and al-commanding power the doo^es were opened to him, a^ they were
to Peter, Acts 12 9. and to some other Apostles, Acts 5.19. Creatur acessit
Creators, Hieron epist. ad Pammac. tom. 1. fol. 178. D. Falke in loc.
Or as Malchus ear was so soon healed, that an incredulous lew would not
believe that Peter's sword ever went between it and his head: so the place
through which his body passed, might be shut and whole before and after he
passed, but not in the instant of his passing, because that is contrary to the
nature of a true body, such as his was. I know God can do whatsoever he will,
but his word is his revealed will, and that tells us expressly, that Christ's
body was like our body in Heb. 1.17.
all things, only Heb. 4.15.
sin excepted. And if it be like our body, then it cannot be without distance
of space and place: for (says Epist. ^7.
Augustine) That is no body, which is no where. Lastly, the plain text is
against them, for it does not say that Christ came through the boords and bars
of the door, but only that he came and stood in the midst, after or when the
door was shut; not determining the manner how he came, but only reporting the
matter that he came, and the time when he came. So that having so many and
those so manifest euasions otherwise, we need not say that Christ came in at
the window: that is a Popish forgerie crept into the Rhemists annotations
through the wicket of our adversaries own mouth.

For the conclusion it self: Anglican. Confess. art 28. and Com. Cat.^it.
Sacrament.
we teach, as the Scriptures and holy Fathers, that the sacrament all bread
and wine are signs and seals of Christ's body and blood, and we receive them
in thankful remembrance he died for us. As for his crucified body, it is now
in heaven a glorified body, Act. 3.21.
where it shall remain till he come in the last day to judge and end this and
all other controversies. In the mean while, we must as Church him. of the
Sacrament and art. ^.
Eagles fly to the place where the dead body lies, ascending upon the wings
of faith unto it, and not expecting that it should locally descend unto us. See
Sursum corda in the Liturgy.

And stood in the midst.] We read in the Gospels history, that Christ was
often in the midst. In the midst of the Luke 2.46.
Doctors, in the midst of his Apostles, in the midst on the Cross between two
Luke 23.33.
thieves, and shall at the last day be likewise in the midst Math. 25.33.
between the sheep and the goats. In his nativity, life, death,
resurrection, and coming to judgment in the midst. Aretius.
Hereby signifiing that he is our Messiah and medius, like Ps. 106.23.
Moses standing in the gap between God and us. He stood in the midst here,
that Euthym
all might the better hear him and see him, as the Vide postil. Pontan. and
Veg. Them. 1. post Paseh.
Sun in the midst of the firmament, and the heart in the midst of the
members, affoording his comfort indifferently to the whole company: for he
came not only for the benefit of Thomas, but for the common good of other. And
this may teach all Pastors and parents, to seek the good of all that are
committed unto their charge.

Christ standing in the midst of his Apostles, openly rebuked Thomas for two
causes especially: first, Musculus. Maldonat.
that as Thomas had offended before them, he might also be reprehended before
them all. A private fault is to be censured privately, but a public scandal
openly: 1. tim. 5.20.
them that sin rebuke publicly, that the rest also may fear. Secondly,
Aretius.
that Thomas his unbelief might strengthen others faith, and that his doubt
might put all other out of doubt. So infinite is God in greatness and goodness,
that he can bring light out of darkness, and use the weakness, yea the wickedness
of other for our good, and his glory. Vnius interrogatio, vniuersitatis
instructio, says Sermon. 156. de tem.
Augustine, Ones ignorance was all others instruction: for except Thomas had
doubted so much, other should never have known so much, and seen so many
demonstrations of Christ his resurrection, as the Church in the Collect:
Almighty God, which for the more confirmation of the faith, did suffer for
the holy Apostle Thomas to be doubtful in thy Sons resurrection, etc.

Peace be unto you.] This salutation was usual among the Jews, and at this
instant of all other undoubtedly most Maldonat.
fit. For ^erus ser. 1. in loc.
hereby Christ did insinuate, that howsoever in the world they had trouble, yet
he had made their Ephesians. 2.14. 15.
peace with God: as also that they need in their troubled estate to pray for
peace of Church, O Psalm. 112.6
pray for the peace of Jerusalem; and peace of conscience, for that is a Prou.
15.15.
continual feast. Or happily, Theophylact. Euthym. Bullinger.
that they might the better know him after his resurrection, heespeakes unto
them as a little before his death, Ioh. 14.27.
I leave peace with you, my peace I give unto you, let not your hearts be
troubled, nor fear. Christ is our peace, preaching peace in his life, making
peace in his death, assuring peace in his resurrection, and consummating our
peace in his coming again to judge the quick and the dead, when he shall say
to the sons of peace, Matt. 25.21
Well done good servants, and faithful, enter into your masters joy. Now the
Lord of 2. These. 3.16.
peace give you peace always by all means.

Bring thy finger hither.] After Christ had saluted the whole College of
Apostles in general, he turns himself to Thomas in particular, repeating
every word Thomas had uttered in his absence. Teaching Aretius.
him hereby, that he was risen again through his omnipotency, for the dead
have no sense, much less reason, and least of all understanding the secrets of
another heart. And teaching Kilius.
us hereby, not to commit any sin though it may be done never so closely, for
he sees all our works, hears all our words, and knows all our thoughts,
Lipsius de Conf^.lib. 2. cap. 16.
and aperta and operta. Remember the speech of God unto David, 2. Sam. 12.12.
Thou did it secretly: but I will do this thing before all Israel, and
before the Sun.

Our Savior did neither reject Thomas finally, nor yet correct him fiercely
for his incredulity: but C^lm. Co^. 1. in loc. and Perkins exposit. Creed,
art. resurrect. of Christ.
accommodating himself to Thomas infirmity, seeks to win him, and to bring
him home to his sheepfold. O Thomas, thou have thy faith at thy fingers end,
seeing, that thou will believe no more then thou feel, I pray thee therefore
bring thy finger hither, and see my hands, etc. Here then is a pattern whereby
Romans 15.1.
Paul might give his precept, We that are strong ought to bear the infirma^es
of the weak, that we may make them, as Christ did Thomas, of faithless
faithful.

And this supporting is Caietanin Romans 14.
by Patience, Coloss. 3.13.
for bearing them. Pity, Romans 12.15.
weeping with them that weep. Piety, relieuing them as well with our counsel
if they want wit, as with our alms if they want wealth.


Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have beleeued] Faith is an Heb. 11.1.
evidence of things not seen; how then did he believe that which he saw? can
you touch God as the wicked Arians object, and feel him with a finger? Answer
is made by the Gregor. hom. 26. in euangel. B^da.

Maxentius apud M^ld ^^tin loc.


Fathers, that Thomas touched one thing, and believed another. Videbat hominem,
confitehatur Deum, as Tract. 121. in loan.
Augustine upon my text. He touched Christ as man, but believed in him as God;
saying, my Lord and my God: acknowledging the divinity which he did not see,
by the wounds he did see. So that Christ here commends the faith of Thomas, in
saying thou have believed: and reprehends only his Ar^tius. Mar^r^at.
slacknesse of faith in adding because thou have seen me. First handling the
wounds of Christ, before he would credit the words of his Apostle^. A^g^stin.
tract 40. in loan
Quid enim est fides nisi credere quod non vides? Mallonat.
eo plus habit merui, quo nanus argumenti. Thomas in believing after he saw
Christ, is a type of the Rupert. in loc.
Jews: and the rest of the Disciples in believing before they saw Christ, a
figure of the Gentiles. Augustine. tract. 121. in Joan circa sin.

Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have beleeued] The^phylact.
Muscu^us. Culman.
He denies not Thomas to be blessed in this sentence, but only prefers
other Apostles, and Aretius. Ferus. Maldonat.
all other Christians before him, in that they have not seen, and yet have
believed. For Romans 10.9.
if thou knowledge with thy mouth that Jesus is the Lord, and believe in thine
heart that God has raised him up from the dead: O Psalm. 128.2.
well is thee, and happy shall thou be. So blessed as John, whose head lay
near his Masters heart: so blessed as Joseph of Arimathea, who buried his
body: so blessed as old Simeon, who lulled his Savior in his arms: yea so
blessed as the Virgin her self, that bare him in her womb: for thee was more
blessed in being the daughter, then in being the mother of Christ. Here the
Gospel and Epistle meet, all they that have not seen, and yet have believed,
are fellow citizens with the Saints, and of Gods house, built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself, being the head
corner stone, in whom they grow to be an holy temple of God, 1 Timothy: 4.8.
having the promises of the life present, and of that which is to come. See
Gospel, Sunday 13. after Trinity.

By this it does appear, that the resurrection of Christ is the chief object
of a blessed faith, as also the maine subject of all this out present Gospel.
And it is exceeding profitable for confutation, and instruction. As first it
does overthrow the wicked error of Epiphan. ^^res. 28.
Corinthus, who taught Christ should not rise again till the general
resurrection; of whom Epiphanius worthily, Stol^dus est, and stolidorum
magister. Secondly, Idem Epiphan. ^aeres. 44.
Apelles heresy, who said Christ rose again, but not in his own flesh, or
(as Haeres. 23. Idem Alp^^n^. decaste^ ^it. de Chris^^^re^ 12.
Augustine reports his opinion) without any flesh. Thirdly, that of Idem
alph^^s^^^d. ^^t. haer^s 2.
Cerdon, and the Passionists, affirming that Christ ascended into heaven in
soul only. Fourthly, that assertion of B^^an^^c. ^^m^ie ^^resurrect Christ q.
(...). 23.
Eutychian heretics, holding that Christ's humane nature was dei^ied after his
resurrection, and made not glorious only, but merely divine also.

Again, the doctrine of Christ's rising again from the dead, serves for
instruction in matters of holy faith and good manners. In articles of be^iefe
concerning Christ, and our se^ues. First touching Christ: whereas he did abide
among the dead at (...). exp (...). 5. of the Creed.
least thirty three, or thirty four hours: as he continued among the living
thirty three, or thirty four years; I say whereas Christ being stark dead,
raised himself to life by his own power: it is a manifest demonstration of
his Godhead, as Paul disputes, Romans 1.4. and God said in the second Psalm,
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. The which text ought to be
construed not so much of Christ's eternal generation before all worlds, as of
the manifestation thereof in time. This day, Calvin, in Psalm 2 and Suares. Tim
2. in 3. Thom. disput. 45 sect. 8.
that is, at the time of thine incarnation, but at the day of thy resurrection
especially, have I begotten thee: that is, I have made known unto the world,
that thou art my son, as Paul expounds it, Acts 13.33. for none ever raised
another from the dead, but by God: none ever raised himself from the dead but
God.

Secondly, this doctrine Perkins on the Creed, art. Christ's resurrection.
proves evidently, that Christ was a perfect Priest, and that his passion was
an omnisufficient sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. For if he had
not fully satisfied for them all, if there had remained one little sin only,
for which he had made no satisfaction, he could not have risen again: for
death and the grave, which came into the world by sin, and are daily
strengthened by sin, would have held him in bondage. To this purpose 1. Cor.
15.17
Paul says, If Christ be not risen again, your faith is vain, and you are
yet in your sins. That is, Christ had not answered fully for your sins, or at
least you could not possibly know that he had made satisfaction for any of
them, if he had not risen again.

As for points of faith appertaining to thy self more nearly, the
resurrection of Christ is a demonstration of our resurrection, according to
that of Paul, If it be preached that Christ is risen again from the dead, how
say some among you, that there is no resurrection of the dead? 1. Cor. 15.12.
Behold, says the Deuteronomy. 32.39
Lord, I kill, and give life: I wound, and I make whole: that is, as Lib de
caruis resurrect.
Tertullian aptly, killing by death, and giving life by resurrection. If a man
be cast into the sea, though all his body sink under the water, yet there is
hope of recoue^ie so long as his head is above the waves: in like manner, if
we believe that Christ our head is the first fruits of those that sleep, let
us not doubt, but unfeignedly believe, that we which are his members, in our due
time shall be raised out of the dust also. Moreover, the resurrection of Christ
is a proof of our justification before God, Romans 4.25.
he was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification. As
in his death he stood in our place, Esaias 53 5.
wounded for our transgressing, and broken for our iniquities, and 1. Pet. 2.25.
bearing our sins in his body on the tree: so likewise in his resurrection,
he is not to be considered as a private, but as a public person representing
the whole Church, making his righteousness a cloak to cover all our
unrighteousness. If death could not keep Christ fettered in his prison, it is
evident that his power was overcome. Now then if death be conquered, it
follows necessarily, that sin the Romans 6.23.
wages of death is also destroyed. If death and sin be vanquished, then the
tyrannous kingdom of Satan is subdued, who had the power of death, and was
author of sin, and ruler of hell. So that every true Christian may rejoice
with Paul; O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? the
sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law: but thanks be to
God, which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. And lastly,
concerning matters of honest and holy conversation; this doctrine teaches us
to Coloss. 3.1.
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits as the right hand of
God, and to rise from dead works unto Romans 6.4.
newness of life. See Epistle on Easter day, and Epistle Sunday 6. after
Trinity. Touching our Evangelists epilogue, see Gospel on S. John's day.

The Epistle
Heb. 1.1. God in times past diversely and many ways, spoke unto the Fathers by
Prophets: but in these last days he has spoken to us by his own son, etc.


THE whole world in old time was distinguished by three principal languages
(as it appears in Pilates inscription or title John 19.20.
written on Christ's Cross) Latin, Greek, Hebrew. The Latin tongue was
famous in regard of the Gorran. proem. 2. in epist. Pauli.
Roman Empire, which ouerspread and ouertopt all other kingdoms on earth;
according to that of Aenead. li. 1.
Virgil: Romanos rerum Dominos, etc. or as Apud I^yricum p^^m. at corrupt.
statu (...).
another Poet wittily: Roma tibi quondam suberant domini dominorum,
Seruorum serut nunc tibi sunt domini.


The Greek tongue was especially regarded, because Greece was the worlds
University, the seat of Wisdom, the mint of Arts, and as it were the common
Nurserie of all humane learning. In which respect Archititremius apud Munster.
cosm.
one commending Paris in France, called it Graeca libris, and Attica
philosophis, rosa mundi Balsamus orbis.



The Hebrew most honored, in that it is Gods own language, wherein his own
law was written, and wherewith it was expounded unto his own people. Now Paul
preached sermons, and penned Epistles in all these languages, as being a Act.
9.15.
chosen vessel of the Lord, to bear his name before the Gentiles, and Kings,
and children of Israel. He preached and wrote to the Romans, and so he did
bear Christ's name before Kings, for they were Lords of the world. He preached
and wrote to the Grecians, as to the Church of Corinth, Ephesus, Philippi,
Thessalonica, etc. and so he did bear the name of Christ before the Gentiles.
He preached and wrote to the faithful Hebrews, as 2 Epist. 3. cap. verse. 15.
S. Peter tells us, and so he did bear the name of Christ before the
children of Israel. I say Paul wrote to the Jews, holding with the most and
best (...) 5. (...)
expositors, that he was author of this excellent Epistle.

Now the reasons are Apud Pri^^s^ (...) Pre^^^ ^pst ad H. b and (...) 1. de ^
^b^ D^i, cap. 17. and (...) 7. (...) 8.
man fold, why Paul did not here set down his name: First, because he was
not an Apostle of the Jews, but of the Gentiles, as he says himself, Galat.
2.7. The Gospel over the vnc^rcumsision was commanded unto me, as the Gospel
over the circumcision was unto Peter. Secondly, for that his name was odious
unto the le^ses (as we read in the 21. and 22. Chapter of the Acts) often
crying out against him, away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not
meet he should live. Thirdly, Paul was an Hebrew, 2. Corinthians. 11.22. They are
Hebrews, so am I. He therefore concealed his name, because a Prophet is not
honored in his Mat. 11.57.
own country. But whether (...) m^^ and ^q^^. (...) Ca^^^ and Ma^r^^ arg^m^^t
^^st. ^^ H^b
Barnabas, or Clem^ns, or Luke wrote it, as many think; or Paul, as most
affirm, De^r^ng lect. 1 Heb.
the matter is not great: for if the name had been here, what had it showed
but that God used the ministry of such a man? and no the name is not known,
it teaches us expressly the doctrine is of God. And for this cause to the
books of holy Scripture names are sometime prefixed, and sometime not, that we
might I^^. 2.1.
not have the faith of our glorious Lord Ie^us Christ in respect of persons.
Whether it be Paul, or Apollos or Cephas all are 1. Cor. 3.22.
yours: happily Paul first planted it in Hebrew, then Luke watered and
Prima^^us. L^mbard. (...).
translated it into Greek, but God give the grace to both. And therefore we
must not attend who, but what. For R^m. 15.4.
whatsoever is written before time, is written for our learning: especially this
Epistle penned of purpose to maintain the chie^e point of holy belief,
namely, that forgiveness of sins is by Christ only. These Hebrewe, had
joined the ceremonies of the Law with the Gospel of Christ, as the Christians
in the kingdoms of M^t. D^^er^.
P^^st^r John at this hour retain Circumcision and Baptism. For albeit Act.
21.10.
many thousands of the Jews believed, yet were they still zealous of the Law,
not enduring to hear of the abrogation of it, in so much that they made this a
point of faith, and it is the Deering lect. 1. Heb.
ninth article of their Creed at this day, God gave his Law to Moses his
faithful servant, and he will never change nor alter it for another.

Now true Christianity reads a contrary lecture, namely, that the ceremonies
of the law were primo mortales, postea mortuae, postremo mortiferae. So that to
leave Christ for them, or to join Christ with them, is the plain way to
destruction. Apud Io. C^mb. Comp^nd. Theolig. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Augustine excellently, Legalia fuerunt ante passionem Domini viua, stati^ post
passionem mortua, hodie sepulta. That is, the Jewish ceremonies before Christ
came were alive; when he suffered on the Cross they were dead, and now they
be buried. And so by consequent they may not rise up again to be put in the
balance with his glory: for the gold, silver, precious stones, and all other
ornaments of the magnificent Temple compared with his rich mercies, are but
beggarly rudiments, as our Apostle speaks, Galat. 4 9. Nothing in earth, or
under earth, or in heaven, or in the heaven of heavens is so glorious as he,
Act. 4.12.
no name else that is named, in which, or by which, we can be saved, but only
the name of Jesus Christ.

The whole tract (...) in Heb. 1. Idem Deering and al^.
is divided in two parts: The first is concerning Christ's excellency, showing
in the ten first Chapters what he is, in (...) ^ez^. Ps^a^^^.
respect of his Nature, Divine, cap. 1. Humane, cap. 2.
Offices, Prophetical, in the third and fourth chapter. Sacerdotall: chap.
5.6.7.8 9.10. Regal, of which our Apostle writes not as of the former two
purposely and copiously, but incidently and briefly: chap. 1. verse. 2, 3, 8,
13. chap. 2. verse. 9. chap. 7. verse. 2. chap. 8. verse. 1.

The second, how salvation is only through him in the residue.


The Law was ordained by glorious Angels, written by Moses, observed by the
Priests, expounded by the Prophets. In the first and second chapter Paul
compares our Savior with Angels and Prophets In the third with Mos^s. In the 4
5.6.7.8.9.10. with the Priests and their ceremonies; intimating in all, that
the Law is deficient, and that Christ in the work of our salvation is only
sufficient and efficient. Our only Prophet, in whole word we must rest: our
only Priest, in whose sacrifice we must rest: our only King* under whose
protection we must rest: who with his blessed Spirit leads us in ways of
eternal life, working in us all in all. (...) Kaymaudum de Saban de Theolog.
natural. Tit. 277.
Quemadmodum enim membrum ipsius corporis recipit ab epate humores, a cord
vitam, a capite sensum and motum: sic homo recipit ab homne carnem, a Deo
animam, a Christo homine and Deo sensum and motum, id est totum been esse and
gratiam: and sicat membrum habet duos motus, vnum de natura sua cadere deorsum,
and alium a capite, s^ilicet motum sursum, and iste motus est supra naturam
membri: conformiter homo quoad amimam habet duos motus, vnum de natura sua, and
Christ motus est cadere deorsum ad nihil, ad non esse, ad preprum voluntatem,
and elongari a Deo; and alium habet a Christo, solicet moueri sursum ad Deum,
etc.

In this text appointed fitly for this time, Christ is first L^nbard. G^rram.
conferred, and then preferred before the Prophets and Angels. In the
comparison between Christ and the Prophets, ob^erue the Aretius.
consent, and dissent between the old Testament and the new. The consent and
agreement is, in that one God spoke in both, in the one by his servants: in the
other by his Son. The same God is author of both, and the same Christ is
subject of both, in so much that each Testament is in other; in the Law there
is an hidden Gospel, and in the Gospel a revealed Law. So like as the two
Exodus 25.20.
Cherubins on the mercy seat, whose faces looked one to another. And like the
Seraphims, Esaias 6.3. one crying to another, holy, holy, holy, both having one
voice says In Psalm. 49.
Augustine. Or resembling each other, as Jesus and James: who were so like that
they were one another Ignatius epist. ad I^b^am. senier^m.
glass. God in times past, and God in these last days has spoken to us. And
whosoever he be to whom this ministry shall be committed, if he will be
numbered with Patriarchs, and Prophets, Apostles and Pastors, and with our
Savior Christ himself: whatsoever he speak, let him speak 1 Pet. 4.11.
as the word of God. For this covenant has God made with his servants, Esaias
59.21. My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of
the mouth of the seed of thy seed from henceforth even for ever. And indeed
whose word else should discern the Heb. 4 12.
thoughts of the soul, but his only who is the Psalm. 7.10.
searcher of the heart? and whose word should kill our carnal affections, but
his only who gives the sword of the spirit?

God spake] The word God here may be taken either essentially for the whole
Kilius.
Trinity; because God the son (being a Isas 40.3.
crier in the wilderness) spoke by the Prophets as well as God the Father, and
God the holy Ghost as well as either of them, according to that of S. 2 Epist.
1 cap. verse. 21. and Act. 1.16.
Peter, Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Or it may be construed in respect
of Christ's office personally. God, Primasius. Anselm. Pisca^er.
that is, God the Father, spoke to the fathers by Prophets, and by his own
son to us.

The dissent and difference between the two Testaments is in regard of the
manner for Time, sundry times. Fashion, many ways.
men Unto whom, unto the fathers in times past, but in these last days unto
us. In whom, or by whom, God spoke by the Prophets in the one, by his own
son in the other.



The Aretius. Deering.
first dissent is in respect of time, the times of the Fathers are old and
past: but the time of Christ's preaching passes not, it is for ever, always
continuing rue; Heb. 13.8.
Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same (...) for ever. The doctrine
taught by the Prophets in old time was revealed multis vicibus, as Beza
translates, at sundry times as our English Bible. But that which Christ
himself delivered, is revealed but once. The which is in^inuated here, but
expressed else where by this author, as in chap. 9. verse. 26. But now in the
end of the world has Christ been once revealed. And in chap. 12. verse. 26.
Yet once will I strike, not the ca^th only, but also heaven. And this it is
which Epist. of Iud. verse. 3.
Jude says of the Christian faith, that it was once given unto the Saints.
Once, Aq^ine. Caistane. Aret. in epist. Jude.
that is, perfectly, so that we need not another Gospel. Almighty God has
spoken last in his son; that is, in the Galat 4.4.
fullness of time so fully, Sa^e^^us. L^mbard. Marlorat.
that we may not expect he should vent in time to come any new doctrine. For
albeit the spirit was given after Christ's ascension; yet the same spirit taught
that only, which Christ had taught before. See Gospel 4. Sunday after Easter.

From hence we may learn boldly to refuse whatsoever is 1. Tim. 13.
(...), that is, an after, or another doctrine sprung up since. A^ the new
Gospel of Anabaptists, and idolatries of Mahomet, and the revelations of S.
Briget, and all superstitious positions and expositions of Papists. In a word,
Deering. lect. 1. Heb.
whatsoever bastard religion is contrary to Christ's once preaching upon earth,
which because it was once, confutes all after it, and abrogates all before it
which had diversity of time, as our Apostle gathers in the 12. chapter of
this Epistle, verse. 27.

The second difference between the two Testaments is, that God in the one
spoke many ways and diversely, either by Angel, or by the Cloud, or between
the Cherubins, or by visions, or by dreams, after sundry kinds of speech, and
diverse kinds of actions: but the doctrine of the other is taught after one
sort, even by preaching of the Gospel; Romans 1.16.
which is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes, and it
works more mightily then all those kinds of revelations, and pierces into he
heart of man more deeply then any manner of persuasion; yea though one should
rise from the dead and seek to us.

The third dissent is, that God in old time spoke only to the Fathers, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, unto some few men, and one nation. Psalm. 147.19
He showed his word unto Jacob his sta^^^es an^ ordinances unto Israel, he
dealt not so with any people, neither had the heathen knowledge of his Laws.
But in these last days he has spoken unto us indefinitely, to Jew, to
Gentile, to bond, to free, to male, to female, being Galat. 3.28.
a^one in Christ Jesus, having all through faith one entrance unto the throne
of grace, Heb. 4 16. So that I need not say now, Lord remember David, or the
covenant made with Abraham: but in time of need I may go boldly to the throne
of grace, saying, Luke 23.42.
Lord remember me, Luke 18.13.
O God be merciful to me, Mark. 10.47.
Jesus have pity on me. For unto those that are nigh, and unto those that are
far off, there is but one covenant in Jesus Christ, Ephesians 2.13.17.

The fourth difference between the two Testam^nts is, that God in the one,
spoke by Prophets his servants: in the other, by Christ his own son, by
mere men in times past unto the fathers: but unto us he has spoken by that
eternal word which is God, whom he has made heir of all things, by whom
also he has made the world, etc. Aretius.
The maine proposition of this chapter is that Christ who revealed the Gospel
is the son of God, yea, God himself. Now the first part, namely, that Christ
is he who brought into the world the Gospel: is concessum and confessum. The
faithless Hebrew complained of it, and the faithful Hebrew believed it. And
therefore taking this as granted, he does insist in the latter part only,
proving at large that Christ is God. And that

In respect of the Glory of his name, being Gods own son, and heir of all
things. Worthiness of his person, as being The brightness of the glory of
God, and the very image of his person. Greatness of his power, upholding all
things by his mighty word. Benefit purchased for us, having by himself
purgedous sins. Dignity procured to himself, in that he sits at the right
hand of the majesty on high.


In all which he does excel Angels, as first having obtained a more excellent
name then they. For albeit Angels are called sons of God in respect of their
creation, and Israel the Exodus 4.22.
first borne of God, and all elect the Romans 8.14.
children of God, in respect of adoption and grace: yet no man or Angel is the
son of God by nature, but Christ alone begotten of the substance of the
Father, as being the brightness of his glory, and express image of his
person. Of whom the Father said in the second Psalm. Thou art my son, this day
have I begotten thee. And in another 2. Sam. 7.14. and 1. Chron. 22. 10.
text, I will be his father, and he shall be my son. And when he brings in
the first begotten son into the world, Psalm. 97.7.
he says, and let all Angels worship him. Insinuating that Christ is not only
greater then Angels, but also God, to be honored of all Angels. Again,
whereas Christ is an eternal King, whose Psalm. 45.7.
scepter is a right scepter, and whose throne is for ever and ever: Angels are
but subjects and servants, according to that of the Psalm. 104.4.
Psalmist, He makes his Angels spirits, and his ministers a flime of fire.

Moreover, Christ in the beginning laid the foundation of the earth, and the
heavens are the works of his hands, and Exodus 10.11.
all that in them is, Coloss. 1.16.
things visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers, all were created by him and for him; and therefore
seeing Christ is Creator, and Angels his creatures; he does excel them, as
far as things infinite can exceed things finite. Lastly, Christ sits at
the right hand of the Majesty on high: hereby signifying that God has given
him all power in heaven and in earth, Mat. 28.18.
and taken him into the f^llowship of his glory, for all things that the
father has are mine, says Ioh. 16.15.
our Savior: whereas Ang^ls, howsoever the, Mat. 18.10.
he hold the face of our heavenly father, and enjoy his presence; yet are they
but m^ss^ngers and mi^^ters, extending about his throne, for the good of such
as are ^eires of salvation, as the Du. Batt^^. 1. day. 1. week. ^ag. 29.
Nightingale of Prince swee^ty: The sacred tutors of the Saints, the guard of
Gods elect, the pursuiuants prepared
To execute the counsels of the highest, Gods glorious Heralds, heavens swift
harbingers,
Twixt heaven and earth the true interpreters.


And here let us according to the present occasion of text and time, magnify
the Father of mercy, for that the Son of God on this day for our sake became
the son of man, yea servant unto men, in that he came into the world not to
be served, but to serve, Matthew. 20.28. For that the brightness of Gods glory
took upon him the vileness of our nature, being made Psalm. 22.6.
a worm and no man, a very scorn of men, and outcast of the people. For that
he who was more excellent then Angels, at this time became less then Angels,
that he might make us so great as Angels. Ans^lm spec. euang. cap. 1.
Vt not equaret Angelis, minoratus est ab Angelis: for that he who laid the
foundation of the earth, and made the world, was himself now made. August ser.
27. de temp.
Factor terra, factus in terra, Creator coeli, creatus sub coelo, Le^ser. 6 de
not. Done.
being the child of Mary, who was the father of Mary. Aug. ser. 16. de temp.
Sine quo pater nunquam fuit, sine quo matter nunquam fuisser: so that whereas
David, Psalm 118.24. This is the day which the Lord has made: Fuseb. Emis.
hem 2. de not. D^m
we may say, This is the day wherein the Lord was made, we will rejoice and be
glad in it. For that he who sits on the right hand of the majesty on high, and
Esa. 40.12.
measures the waters in his fist, and heaven with his spanne, was now lodged
in a stable, crowded in a cratch, and swadled in a few rags. O beloved, if we
were not in this great light of the Gospel, almost so blind as the Bat, we
would wish our selves all eye, to behold the babe Jesus in the manger. If we
were not as deaf as the stubborn Adder, we would wish our selves all ear, to
hear the tidings of great joy to all people; namely, Luke ^.11.
that unto us is borne this day in the city of David a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord. If we were not in some sort possessed with a dumb spirit, we
would wish our selves all tongue, to chaunt that heavenly caroll of the
glorious Angels, Luke 2.14.
Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, and good will toward men.

It is the fashion of many men, at this festival especially, to boast of their
rich attire, great attendance, good fire, large cheer: yet (seeing Christ is
heir of all things in the world) they cannot in their own right enjoy so much
as a Christmas log, or a Christmas pie, till they be first ingraffed in him. I
may have from man, my warrant on earth here, that my land is mine, my benefice
mine, my coat mine, house, horse, hose mine: and he is a very thief that
takes away these from me: But all the men in the world cannot give me my
possession before the living God, but his son Christ only, who is heir of
all; and therefore that our land may be our own, our apparel our own, our
meat our own, our men and money our own: let us be Christ's, that in him we
may have the good assurance of all our substance: that I may pronounce that
unto you, which our 1 Cor. 3.22.
Apostle to the Corinthians: All are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ Gods.

The Gospel.
JOHN 1.1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the
word was God, etc.


SAint Peter was an Apostle, but not an Evangelist: S. Luke an Evangelist, but
not an Apos^le: S. Matthew was both an Evangelist and an Apostle, but not a
Prophet: Hieron. lib. 1. aduers. l^uin.
but our S. John was all these; in his Epistles an Apostle, in his Apocalypse a
Prophet, in compiling his Gospel an Evangelist. In which (as Interpretors have
with one consent observed) he mo^nts as an Fagle, (...).
for wh^r^as his fellow Evangelists specially treat of the conception, birth,
education, and other points of Christ^ incarnation in the world: Saint John
flying higher then these, begins his h^storie with Christ's eternal
generation before the worlds, in the beginning was the word, etc. a^ Tra^t. 1.
in loan.
Augustine upon my text, transcender at om^^ cacumin^ mo^ti^m terrarum,
transcender at omnes ^ampos ^eris, transcender at omnes al^s ^dines syderum,
tran^c^nd^rat omnes choros and legiones Angelorum, nisi enim transcenderet ^sta
omnis que creata s^nt, non pervenires (...) p^r quem facta sunt omnie. For as
an Job 29.30.
Eagle, Rupert. prolog in euangil. loan.
so John remains upon the top of the rock and tower, from thence h^e spieth
his meat, and his eyes behold a far off. He was aptly called the Mark ^.17.
son of thunder, Alcuen^s ap^d Be ^^xam. har. Tom. 1. fol. 3.
for in saying in the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and
the word was God: he seems to speak not words, but wonders, yea thunders, as
Him. v^t. in (...).
Ardens excellently, filius tontruiest qui loquitur, and tenitruum est quod
loquitur, a preamble so strange and stately, that some Christians in old time
(which had happily zeal but not according to knowledge) Hieron. in Mat. 23.
hung it about their neck as an amulet, or as Maldonat. in loc.
other, as a Symbol to distinguish them from Ar^ans. And a certain Pl^tonist
(as Augustine reports in lib. 10. de ciuitate dei cap. 29.) reading this one
line, said it was worthy to be written in letters of gold, and to be
represented in the most eminent places of all Churches in the world.

In the text allotted for this day, two points are remarkable: 1. What Christ
is in himself, God, In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God,
and the word was God, etc. Man, the same word became flesh, and dwelt among us,
etc.
2. What Christ is unto us, openly revealed by the witness of John the
Baptist, and his own dwelling among us in the world. to be 1. Our Creator ad
esse, for all things were made by him. 2. Our Aretius. Marlorat.
preserver in esse, for he is our life, Heb. 1.3.
upholding all things in their being. 3. Our Redeemer in been esse, for he gave
power to them that believe in his name to be the sons of God.



In the beginning.] The word (...) is potestatiuum as well as ordinatiuum, in
which acception higher powers, especially Princes, are called (...), and so
Apud Be^^x^m. ha^. T^m. 1. fol 5.
some take this in principio to be nothing else but in principatu, because
Christ the word has upon his garment and upon his thigh a name written, The
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Apoc. 19.16. Apud Maldonat. in loc.
Origin, Cyril, Augustine, Gregor Nyssen, and many Beda. Ardens. (...).
more construe it thus, in the beginning, that is, in the Father, according to
that of the Thom. 1 p^r. ^^est 3 ^^^ 4.
School, Pater est principium sine principio, silius est principium de
principio. Atlanasius (...).
The Father is of none, the Son is of the Father alone, not made nor created,
but begotten. Believe me (says our blessed Savior) that I am in the Father,
and the Father in me, John 14.11. I am in the Father, Ar^tius ^n (...). 14.
as the river in the fountain: the Father in me, as in his ingraued image,
Heb. 1.3. God the Son then is de principio principium, as Symb. Ni^en.
lumen de lumine, ligh^ of light, and very God of very God. C.^^s.^^. (...).
Mar.^rat.
Other expound in the beginning of eternity, for the word being the true
Melchisedec, is Nonnus par^^^ra me^ angel. lom.
(...), having neither b^ginning of days, nor end of life, Heb. 7.3. Pr^uerb.
8. verse. 22.24. and (...). Vile Ec^atm. ^ib. 1. de Christ ca S.. gita^
^ternitas.
The Lord (says he) has possessed me in the beginning of his way, I was
before his works of old, when there were no depths I was begotten, when he
prepared the heavens I was there, when he gave his decree to the sea, that the
water should not pass his commandment, then was I with him, etc. Insinuating
that he was in the beginning without any beginning, in a time when there was no
measured time.

P^ll^dius lib. 1. de ^^^ne person. d^^^un in Christ ^ator.
Principio rutih cum nondum lumin^ coeli,
Et nondum grauides extarent lumina terris,
I am tum patris er at sanctain and venerabile verbum.
Arenius. Mald^nat. Beza. Idem A. ^^. ract. 1. ^^ I an. and (...). qe^^. 122.
Other understand by beginning* the beginning of the world: as if our
Evangelist had said, in the beginning when all things were made, the word was,
and therefore not made, but all things on the contrary were made by it, and
without it was made nothing that was made. The creatures are from the
beginning, but Christ (who made the world) was in the beginning, before there
was a beginning. This exposition is agreeable to the plain words, as also most
answerable to S. John's intent. For if he penned his Gospel (as the ^ren.^^^.
3. ca. 11. Epip^an. ^^res. 51. Hieron. in ^^^al^ in Evangelist.
Fathers have noted) against E^ion and Corinthus: he confounds them in one
word, and that the very first, in principio: for that had no beginning which
was in the beginning, Ergo, Christ had not his first being from his mother
Mary, nam quod ante omnia erat, semper erat, quoth ^o^ supra.
Augustine, he was always, who was before all works.

Was.] It is probable that Saint John in this exordium B^a.^xamis in l^c.
alludes Maldonat.
per antithesin unto Moses preface, Genes. 1. In the beginning God created
heaven, etc. C^ry^st. The (...). Arb^tens.
hereby showing the difference between the Creator and the creature. For
whereas Moses wrote, in the beginning God made heaven and earth, and all that
in them is: our Evangelist on the contrary says, in the beginning was the
word, not in the beginning God made the word. Khem. in loc.
Insinuating that the word had his being already, when other creatures (of what
sort soever) had but their beginning. And here Basil. Cyril. E^da, Aleui^us
apud Mald^nat. Id m Iansen. Con. cap. 1.
divines have distinguished acutely between fuit and erat, affirming that fuit
imports a thing that once was, and is not now: so Scaliger in his Motto,
Virgil. Aenead. 2.
suimus Troes; whereas erat implies eternity; which was, and which is, and
which is to come, Apocal. 4.8. Saint Lib. 1. de fide ad Granat. cap. 5.
Ambrose notes excellently, that this one verb erat, is repeated here four
times, in the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and that word
was God, the same was in the beginning, etc. Erat, erat, erat, erat, vbi impius
invenit quod non erat?

The word] He says not in the beginning was the son, Theophilact. Euthym.
lest his reader should dream of a carna^ generation: but in the beginning was
the word. Holy Scriptures or speeches of the Prophets and Apostles uttered by
Gods appointment for the revealing of his divine will toward man, are called
Gods word: but to ^eza.
distinguish God the Son from these words, he is termed after a more eminent
sort (...), the word, or that excellent word, Erasmus. Jansen. Beaux^m.
from whom every divine truth issues, and in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, Coloss. 2.3. Christ is not a vocal word, Donatus apud
Rupert, in loc.
verbum eo quod verberato a^re plectroque linguae formetur: for he was in the
beginning before there was any sound or air. But Christ is the mental, and
substantial word of hi^ father, August. ^pist. 112. cap. 12. Consule Maldonat.
Beauxam. ^dib^r. Lud^lph, in loc.
verbum non sonus auribus strepens, sed imago mentibus innotesceus. As our
Epistle for this day does unfold the Gospel, the brightness of his glory, and
express image of his person.

Palladius vbi s^pra vtrum ^ clius ^ ^bum, qu^m sermo. Vide I^^nsen. Concord.
cap. 1. and ^r^s. an. in loc.
(...) ipse paterni
pectoris essigies, lumenque a lumine vero.
And the word was with God] Concerning the diverse significations of the
preposition apud: I refer you to Thomas Beauxamis, and Maldonat in their
commentaries upon this text. It imports here not a local, but a (...). M^a^.^.
Beza.
personal distinction. I and my Father (says Christ) are one, Ioh. 10.30.
v^um of one substance, not v^^^ one person; and therefore he says not in the
singular, I and my father a^ one: A^gus^^^^ retra.^.lib. 1. ^^p 4.
but in the plural, are on^. The Son is A^gus^in. de (...). Des lib. 11 cap
10 and Lomb^rd. sent. 1 (...) 2.
alius then the Father, not uliud, and her person albeit not another essence,
(...) C^n^.
non alius in natura sed alter in persona: for it is written here the word was
so with God, as that it was God, first said to be with God, and then to be God,
L^^^ius. ^pal Mald^^a^ and B (...) C^r^st lib. 1 cap 6 9 antum ad (...).
signifying that the word was the same God with whom it was in the beginning.
Am ros^ub^ (...) sacrament. c. 3
Semper cum patre, semper in patre, semper apud patrem, and semper quoad pater.
Here then observe concerning the word Aqui^.
three points especially.

1 When it was in the beginning. 2 Where it was, with God. 3 What it was, and
the word was God.
The pith of (...).
all is, that God the Son is a distinct person from God the Father, and yet of
the same substance with the Father, equal in glory, coeternall in Majesty.
This one verse then overthrows many blasphemous heretics; [ in the
beginning] confureth Ebimites and Cerinthians. The clause [ was with God] (...)
(...).
Sabellians and other denying a Trinity in vn^^ie, that is, a distinction of
persons in the deity [ was God] confounds Arians, and all such as with
Augu^^in. verse. 44.
(...) affirm that Christ was a mere man [ in the beginning with God] all
(...). ^oncord cap 1.
Ennemians and A^^^s.
such as hold Christ to be but a temporal God by grace, and not an eternal
God by nature.

All things were made ^y it, and without it was m^de no(...) made] As the
epistle does expound the Gospel, he ^^d the (...) of the earth, and the
h^auens are the works of his hands, (...) 16.
all things as well invisible as visible* were created by him and for him, he
made what^^euer was made, and it was exceeding good, Genes. 1.31. But Satan as
he is a devil, and sin which came into the world by the suggestion of the
devil, and and death also which is brought upon man as a curse by sin, are
not his works. And the reason is plain, because that which is evil is a
Augustine. Sololoq. cap 5
nothing, mali nutta natura est, sed amissio boni (quoth Deci it. Dei lib. 11
c. ^.9.
Augustine) mali nomen accepit. And Apud Cu ^aub. not. in epist. Nos^er. al
Iustat.
Gregory Nyssen, Mali essentia in eo posita quod essentiam non habet: every
good and perfect gift is from above, coming down from the father of lights,
and with him is no variableness, neither shadow of running: Ard^^sl^m. 4.
Natal. d^m.
It a confert b^na, quod non infert mala. See S. Augustine, tract. 1. in Joan
Bibliothec. Sixth. Senen. lib. 6. annot. 174. Mclan^. postil. and Eras. c^nnot.
in loc.

The clause more proper to this Festival, and most profitable for us to be
further examined, is, that the word became flesh, and dwelt among us, etc. And
this was Athanasius in symbo^ vide B^^^arm. de incarnat. Clnist. cap 4.
not by conversion of the God head into flesh, but by taking the manhood into
God. August. ep. 120 cap. 36.
Naturam suscipiendo nostram, non mutando suam. A^g^p 3.
Homo quippe Deo accessit, non Deus a se recessit. For in the word made flesh
all the fullness of the Godhead dwells (as the Scripture speaks) bodily, Col.
2.9. that is, Melanc. Com. in Joan. 1.
personally. For albeit he be God and man, yet is he not two, but one Christ:
one, not by confusion of substance, but by unity of person. For as the
reasonable soul and flesh is one man: so God and man one Christ. See Epist.
Sund next before Easter.

The first news of Christ's actual nativity was broached and brought into the
world (as we read in the second lesson appointed for this morning prayer) by
the tongues of Angels, and that with an ecce, Luke 2.10.11
behold, I bring you tidings of great joy, that shall be to all the people:
that is, that unto you is borne this day in the City of David a Savior which
is Christ the Lord. Rejoice grandfather Adam, for on this day, according to the
word of thy gratiou Creator, the Genesis 3 15.
seed of thy wife Eua has bruised the serpenthead: rejoice father Abraham, for
on this day in thy seed all the nations of the earth are blessed, Ge. 22.18
Rejoice King David, for on this day God has Ps. 132.11.
fruit of thy body set a King upon thy throne. Rejoice ye Prophets of the Lord,
for ^ct 3.24. Luk 1.70.
all your prophecies on this day were fulfilled. Rejoice ye that are sick,
for on this day the Physician of the world was borne. Rejoice ye Virgins, for
a Virgin on this day brought forth a son. Rejoice ye children, for on this
day the great God became a little babe. Let all people rejoice, for that he who
was in the beginning, and (as it is in the former lesson appointed for this
morning prayer) Esaias ^.96
an everlasting father, in the fullness of time Gala^. 44.
was made of a women, and Luke 2.7.
wrapped in swaddling clothes. For that he who was the word, became an infant
not able to speak one syllable. For that he who was with God, did vouchsafe
to dwell among us, appearing in the shape of a man, Philip. 2.7. For that he
who was God, and therefore most mighty, became flesh, and so most weak, for
all flesh is grass, and the grace thereof as the flower of the field, Esaias
40.6.

Saint Ser. 1. in nata^. D. m.
Bernard preaching on this day, said the shortness of the time constrained him
to shorten his Sermon: and let none (quoth he) wonder if my words be short,
seeing on this day God the Father has abbreuiated his own word: for whereas
his word was so long, as that it Ier 23.24.
filled heaven and earth; it was on this day so short, that it was laid in a
manger. I wish unfeignedly with the same devout Ser. 3 in natal. D^m.
Bernard, that as the word was made flesh, so my stony heart might be made
flesh also, that it might always meditate on this heavenly Gospel, Unto you is
borne this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord For
all our sound comfort stands in happiness, and all our happiness is in
fellowship with God, and all our fellowship with God is by Christ. For God the
Father (if we consider him in his justice) hears not sinners, John 9.31. He
therefore remembering his mercy, got as it were new ears, and set them on our
head Jesus Christ, who being flesh of our flesh, is such an high Priest, as is
Heb. 4.15.
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, openly professing Man. 9 13.
that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: Come to me
all ye that are laden, and I will ease you* Mat. 11.28. Whatsoever ye shall
ask the Father in my name he will give it you. John 16.23.

If thou were invited to some great wedding, thou would I am sure be very
careful what apparel to put on; but if thou were to be married thy self, thou
would be very curious in thine attire: behold (says Ser. 2. and 4. de temp.
Augustine) all of us are bidden on this day to a marriage, for Christ came out
of the Virgins womb as a bridegroom out of his chamber: the Godhead was
joined unto the flesh, and the flesh unto the Godhead, and these two were
coupled together, and after an ineffable manner in an ineffable marriage made
one. Believe this, and thou shall have power to be Gods own son, as it is in
our text. My (beloved) if thou put on this wedding garment, thy soul shall be
Christ's own spouse, so nere, so dear to him, as that he will say to it Psalm.
35.3.
I am thy salvation: and it may also tell him, I am my Can^. 6.2.
welbeloueds, and my well-beloved is mine. For if Hores last. ad an. 38.
Pilate by wearing Christ's coat without a seame did appease the wrath of angry
Caesar: how much more shall every true believer please God our heavenly King,
if he Romans 13.14.
put on Christ himself. Augus^in. ser. 9. de temp.
O the blessed crying of a blessed babe, by which every faithful servant and
son of God escapes eternal howling in hell. O glorious manger, in which our
souls Manna lay; the John 6 35.
bread of life that came down from heaven, on which if a man feed he shall
not hunger again. O how rich are the rags, which have made plasters for our
sores, for our sins. I conclude with an hymn of P^ristep. him. 10.
Prudentius.

Mortale corpus sumpsit immortalitas,
Vt dum caducum portat aeternus Deus,
Transire nostrum posset ad coelestia.
The Epistle,
Act. 7. 55. And Steven being full of the holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly with
his eyes into heaven, etc.


YEsterday you heard how Christ was borne, to day you shall understand how
Steven died: In Christ's nativity, who was borne in a little village, and in an
Inn of that village, and in a stable of that Inn, and laid in a cratch of
that stable: we may learn humility not to boast of our great birth. In S.
Steuens martyrdom we may behold an excellent pattern how to behave our
selves at our death, having faith in God, and love toward our neighbors, the
which assuredly will breed such a Christian resolution in us, as that we shall
depart this life cheerfully, lying down in our graves as in a bed to sleep;
for so the text here, when he had thus spoken, be fell a sleep. The Church
then in joining these two festiuals, is desirous that we should learn to live
well as Christ: and dye well as Steven. In the words of Ser. 1. de S. Stephane.
Augustine, Celebra^imus hester na die natalem quo rex mar^yrum natus est in
^^^ndo, hodie cel bramus natalem quo primicarius martyr^um migra^^^ ex mundo.
Oportebat enim v^ pri^^um immortalis pro mortalibus susciperet carnem, and sie
mortalis pro immortals contemneret mortem. Et ideo natus est Dominus vt
more^etur pro seruo, ne ser^^^ timeret mori pro domino. Na^^^ est Christus in
terris, vt Stephanu^ nasceretur in c^lis, etc. And I pray with the Ser. 3. de
S. Stephan^.
same Father heartily, donet mihi dominus p^^ca dicere salubriter, qui do^^uit
Stephane tanto dicere fartiter.

In the whole text two points are to be considered especially the bloody
behavior of the Jews in martyring Steven. godly behavior of Steven in his
martyrdom. toward God in general, he steadfastly looked up into heaven, and
called upon God. particular, Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

Men, heartily praying for his enemies on his knees, with a loud voice, Lord,
lay not this sin to their charge. Himself, undergoing his martyrdom so
comfortably, that giving up the ghost he laid down his head upon the hard
stones as upon a soft pillow to sl^epe.


The Jews in their blind zeal were so furious and merciless, that they put
Steven to death, who sought to bring them to eternal life; stoning him as a
Act. 6.11.13.
blasphemer against God and his law, who was a man full of faith, and power,
and the holy Ghost. An harsh and an hard fact of a stony people says Apud
Lori^. in loc.
Augustine, ad lapides currebant, duri ad duros, and Petris (...) qui pro
Petra, qui Christus est moriebatur.

Arat. ^. lib. 1. ^^m.^^^ct.
Lapides Indaearebellis
In Stephanum lymphata rapis, quae crimine duro saxe^ semper eris.
But of their cruelty toward Steven, and other Prophets of God: in the Gospel
appointed for this day more copiously. The most obseruable point in our present
text is the godly behavior of Steven in his martyrdom, 1. to God, he looked
up steadfastly with his eyes into heaven, etc. Para^us ser. de S. Stephans.
As to the place where his Mat. 6.10.
treasure was, his Philip. 3.10.
conversation was, his help was. Aretius.
Hereby teaching us whether we should fly for succor in adversity, not unto
men here below: but unto God in heaven above. so David, Psalm. 120.1.
When I was in trouble, I called upon the Lord, and he heard me, Psalm. 121.2.
my help comes even from the Lord. So Job, my witness is in heaven, and my
record is on high. And so S. James, every good gift is from According to which
our most idustrious Queen Anne gave for her word in the lottery 1612. La mia
Grandezza dal etcelsa.
above.

Calling upon God, and saying Lord.] Thomas Becket a renowned Vide Baron, Mars
R^m annot, in december. 29. and Stapleton in vita Th. m. cantuar.
Martyr and Saint among the Papists, at his death earnestly Reg. Heuenden,
annal. part. poster page 298.
commended himself and his cause to the protection of S. Mary, but our
protomartyr here (knowing that she was Erentius as^^ Marlorat in loc.
neque magistra neque ministra, neither mistress of his soul, nor yet a
ministering spirit to his soul) forgetting our Lady, calls upon our Lord
only, saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, the which is not an invocation of
God the Father, (as Disputat. Alb. na 3.
Fran. David impiously taught, making Jesus the Genitive case, and the meaning
thus, O Father in heaven which art the Lord of thy son Jesus) but (as Lib. 3.
de fide algrat. cap. vit.
Ambrose notes) a prayer unto God the Son, for besides infinite places of
holy Scripture (where Christ is called Lord, and called upon as the Lord.) S.
John Apocalips, 22.20. uses as Steven here Jesus in the vocative Case, etiam
veni Domine Jesus, even so come Lord Jesus. Where (Domine Jesus) cannot be
construed the Lord of Jesus, but the Lord Jesus. See Lorin, in loc. and
Bellarmine de Christo, lib. 1. cap. 8.

If the Lord be considered without Jesus, howsoever in regard of his power he
is able, yet in regard of his justice not willing: the good Angels and blessed
Saints in heaven are willing but not able: wretched uncharitable men on earth
are neither able nor willing: only Christ the Mediator between God and man is
both able and willing to hear us and help us; able, because Lord: willing,
because Jesus. And therefore Steven here does not invoke the Lord, but in the
name of Jesus, neither does he call upon any Jesus but the Lord Jesus: he
looks not for any succor either from men on earth, or blessed spirits in
heaven: only he pours out his soul to the redeemer of his soul, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit.

Receive.] He knew that his life was Coloss. 3.3.
hid with Christ in God, and therefore commends his soul to him alone who
created it, and redeemed it, and justified it, and sanctified it, and will in
his good time glorify it. O Lord Jesus, take thine own into thine own
custody; seeing I am now to leave this life, receive my spirit. Here then
against the Sadduces in Christ's age, and Atheists in our time, we may note the
souls immortality, Mat. 22.32
for God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Again, that al souls
departed are in certain receptacles until the general judgment, they do not
obambulate and wander up and down, but remain in places and states of
happiness or unhappiness, either in the hands of God, or in the Devils
prison: and therefore all the days of our life, but especially at the hour of
our death, it behooves us to say and pray with S. Steven, O Lord Jesus receive
my spirit.

My.] Charity begins with it self, malice with another: in our idle busy
time men are very sollicitous lest God lay this or that sin to their enemies
charge; but we may tell them as Christ did other in another cause, Luke 23.28.
W^epe not for me, but for your selves. If your devotion be so great, and your
prayers so good, pray first for your selves, for you peradventure have more
need; and then wish well and do well unto your enemies, as Steven here, first,
Lord Jesus receive my spirit: and then Lord Jesus forgive their sin.

Spirit.] Most men are all for the body, nothing for their soul: but S.
Stephen is all (as it should seem) for the soul, and nothing for the body.
For what is a man profited if he should gain the whole world, and lose his
own soul, i Mat. 16.26.
says our blessed Savior: by which Apophthegme it does appear, that every
soul in it self is of greater price then a whole world, but thy soul unto
thy self ought to be of greater account then a million of worlds, if (as
Empedoiles and La^t. in visa Dem^crit.
Dem^critus imagined) there were so many: save this, and save all; lose ^his,
and lose all: and therefore let thy whole life be nothing else but a meditation
of death; and that thou may die well as Steven, endeavor to live well as
Steven Howsoever it go with thy goods, or good name, be sure to look well
unto thy soul; that whether thou die for the Lord, or in the Lord, thou may
cheerfully deliver it up unto the Lord, as Steven here, Lord Jesus receive my
spirit.

Unto faith in God he does adioine love to men, without which all his praying,
and kneeling, and crying, yea dying had been but as a 1. Cor. 13. l. 3.
sounding braise and a tinckling Cimball. Of love there be two principal
offices, one to give, another to forgive. S. Steven is an excellent pattern of
both, of the latter especially, praying for his hateful enemies August. ser.
5. de S. Steph.
even at that hour when he could scarce gain time to think on his friends.
It is said, 1. Peter 2.21. That Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example.
Now Christ on the Cross prayed for his persecu^ors earnestly, Luke 23.34
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. Pendebat, and samen
patebat, a, Ser. 4. de S. Stephano.
Augustine sweetly. S. Steven followed his masters example, Lord, lay not this
sin to their charge. The which prayer is clothed with two circumstances, he
kneeled down, showing his reverence to God: and cried with a loud voice,
manifesting his unfeigned affection toward them. Unto the top of which exceeding
great charity there are three degrees.

1. He prayed for enemies. 2. For mortal enemies who stoned him. 3. In hot
blood, at that time when they did wrong him most, as being more sorry for their
riot, then for his own ruin. For Iller: mimpietatem ^. or ^ sequebau. ^
eterna, buius eutem moriem vita perpetua. Aug. ser. 5. de Stephano.
eternal death is the wages of such a sin, but everlasting life, the Crown
of such a suffering.
He kneeled downe] God is the Lord of the body, so well as of the soul, and
therefore challenges as well reverent gesture, as inward devotion: in praying
then either stand as a servant before thy Master, or kneel as a subject to thy
Prince. Dan. 6.10.
Daniel prayed kneeling, Act. 9.40.
Peter prayed kneeling, Act. 20.36.
Paul prayed kneeling, Luk 22.41.
Christ himself kneeling, and the Cont. 2. col. 117.
Magdeburgenses acknowledge this gesture to be most ancient, and most usual
among the children of God in all ages, and therefore not to kneel in the
congregation argues either ignorance, or arrogancei. For seeing all of us are
Gods adopted sons, and not borne to the good we possess: it behooves us when
we come before our Father, especially to crave his blessing, to be dutiful and
humble in our carriage.

Concerning kneeling at the Lords Supper: if the Church have power and
authority to change the time, commanding us to receive the Communion in the
morning, whereas Christ administered it in the 1 Cor. 11.23.
night: to change the place, for whereas Christ ordained his Supper in a Mat.
26.18.
private house, we communicate in a Temple: to change the number and qualities
of the persons, delivering the Sacrament unto more then twelve, and to women as
well as men: I see no reason but it has authority likewise to change the
gesture. The time was altered because for this sacrifice the morning is the
most fit time: the place was altered, because the Church is the most fit place:
The gesture was altered also (being a matter not of the Sacraments essence, but
of outward order only) because kneeling is the most fit gesture, for
Protestants especially, who deny the gross real presence, and hold the Lord,
Supper an Eucharist, or thanksgiving unto God for the redemption of the world
by the death of his Son: giving of thanks is a part of prayer, and in prayer
no gesture so fit as kneeling. Devout Hi. ron. episted Marcel. de la. astus
As^^a
Asella did use geniculation in prayer so much, as that her knee; were made
brawnie like the knees of a Camel. See Step durant de ritibus Eccles. lib. 3.
cap. 24.

It is very remarkable that Steven here stood when he prayed for himself, but
kneeled when he prayed for his enemies: hereby showing the greatness of their
Augustine ser. 2 de S. Stephano.
impiety which easily could not be forgiven, as also the greatness of his
Caseta^s. in ^^c.
piety, Augustine se^. 5. de S. Stephano.
Qui plus illorum dolebat peceasa quam sua vulnera. For this end he cried also
with a loud voice, magnus clamor magnus amor: Or as Iuses.
Caietan, he cried with a loud voice for others instruction and example, that
we might be followers of him as he was a follower of Christ.

Lay not this sin to their charge] The Mat. 5.43.
Scribes in their glosses on the Law said expressly, thou shall love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemy. Lombard. 3. sent. did. 30. Thomas 22. quest.
25 art. 9 gloss in Mat. 5. S. 25. sen. (...). theo. lib 6. a ^^t. 27.
Some Papists also think that the words of our Savior ( resist not evil, and
love your enemies) are not absolute precepts, but only counsels: according to
this doctrine the Castilians (as I have Exhortation to the Princes of Europe by
a pilgrim^ Spaniard page 25.
read) since the battle of Alijabarto would not suffer any to preach upon the
friday in the first week of Lent, because the Church on that day sings
inimicos diligite, love your enemies. And Lanquet. ad an. them. 706.
Justinian being restored again to his Empire, showed extreme cruelty toward
his adversaries and their allies; for as often as he moved his hand to wipe the
filth from his nose which was cut off, he commanded one of his enemies to be
put to death. Wherefore seeing to love our enemies in the judgment of some men
is against Gods law, and of other beside the law: seeing many men in their
precepts, and most men in their practice manifestly show that it is an hard
saying: Saint Steuens charity does appear to be great in blessing such as
cursed him, and in praying for such as did hurt him.

Job renowned in holy Scripture for his patience, said, Job 31.35.
If mine adversary should write a book against me, would I not take it upon
my shoulder, and bind it as a crown unto me? But Steven surpassing Job (as
Orat. de S. Stephano.
Gregory Nyssen observes) esteemed the very ring of his persecutors, wherewith
he was enclosed on every side, his crown, and every stone flung at his head a
precious diamond, Lorin. in lec.
so that it might have been said of him, as it was of David: Psalm. 21.3.
The Lord prevented him with the blessings of goodness, and set a crown of De
lapide preti. so. vulgar. Latin. Consule Acostam. con. de S. Stephano.
precious stones upon his head. Our goods are sweet unto us; and therefore we
can hardly forgive the these: our good name sweeter; and therefore we do
more hardly forgive the slanderer: but our life most sweet, ( Job 2.4.
Skin for skin, and all that ever a man has will he give for it) and
therefore most hardly do we forgive murderers and martyrers: in hot blood
especially while they wring us and wrong us: and yet Steven full of the holy
Ghost, and therefore full of love, Augustine. ser. 5. de S. Steph.
in persecutione positus pro persecutoribus orabat, in the midst of his
persecution heartily prayed for his persecutors, O Lord Jesus, lay not this
sin to their charge. Our sins not forgiven are Psalm. 50.21.
set before us, and as enemies in Lorin. in loc.
battle fighting against us, a pillar of infamy to disgrace the wicked in
this, and the next life: the which (as In Psalm. 33.
Basil thinks) is more grievous to their soul then hell fire. So that the
Aret. in loc.
meaning of S. Steven is in saying ( lay not this sin to their charge) that
God would give them a better mind, and not impute this offense, but rather to
bury this and all other their sins in his death and grave, that they never
rise up again to work desperation in this world, or destruction in the world
to come. Ser. 1. de Stephano.
S. Augustine brings in Steven speaking thus unto God: Ego patior, ego lapidor,
in me sauiunt and in me fremunt; sed ne statuas illis hoc peccatum, quia vt
dicamtibi a te primo audiui. Ego seruus t^us patior, sed muleum interest inter
me and te; tu dominus, ego, eruus; tu verbum, ego auditor verbi; tu magister,
ego discipulus; tu Creator, ego creatus; tu Deus, ego homo; multum interest
inter peccatum istorum qui lapidant me, and illorum qui crucifixerunt te:
quando ergo dixisti, Pater ignosce illis, quia nesciunt quid faciunt, pro magno
peccato petisti, and me pro minimo petere docuisti: domine ne statuas illis hoc
peccatum; ego patior in carne, isti non pereant in mente. Now the Lord heard
his prayer, and granted his request, Calvin. in loc.
in that Saul had not this sin said to his charge, as 1. Tim 1.13.
himself witnesses I was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and an oppressor:
but I was received to mercy, for I did it ignorantly through unbelief. So that
Vbi sup.
Augustine is bold to say, Si Stephanus non sic orasses, ecclesia Paulum non
haberet. And Ser. de S. Stephano.
Fulgentius, Quo pracessis Stephanus trucidatus lapidibus Pauli, illuc sequutus
est Paulus adiutus orationibus Stephani.

When he had thus spoken.] Uttering such excellent words, and with such a
resolute spirit, and in such a reverent fashion: after he had thus spoken for
the matter, and thus for the manner; giving unto God the life of his soul,
forgiving his persecutors the death of his body, he sweetly slept in the
Lord. Christus pro nobis hominem induit. Stephanus pro Christo hominem exuit,
as Orat. de S. Stephano.
Gregory Nyssen elegantly. Christ became man for Steven, and Steven became no
man for Christ, hominem exuit, he so willingly put off his flesh, as a man
would put off his clothes at night, and so death as welcome to him as steep to
the weary: when he had thus spoken, he fell asleep.

To Aret in loc.
mitigate deaths horror, it is called often in holy Scripture sleep. So the
text says of 1 King. 2.10
David, and of 1. Kin. 11.43
Solomon, and of other Kings of Israel and Judah, that they slept with their
fathers. In the new Testament also such as are dead in the Lord, are said to 1.
Cor. 15.18
sleep in Christ. I would not have you (says 1 Thessalonians 4.13
Paul) ignorant concerning them which are asleep, etc. For this cause many are
weak and sick among you, and many sleep, 1. Cor. 11.30. For man in his grave
sleeps, and waketh not again till the heaven be no more, Job 14.12. So great
a resemblance the Gentiles acknowledged between dying and sleeping, that Ovid
calls sleep Lib. 2. de art. amant.
mortis imago, deaths image; Aenead. 6. Idem re^^^at. Aug epist. 120 cap. 33.
Virgil consanguineus lathi, the kinsman of death: Her furen. act. 4. in Chore.
Idem Homer. and O^pleus.
Seneca the brother of death, and Hesiode the sister of death. Among infinite
comparisons I find that death is principally likened unto sleep,

In Caiet in loc.
respect of the Rest of the dead. Resurrection of the dead.


Concerning the first: it is said by the Apec. 14.13
spirit, Blessed are the dead in the Lord, for they rest from their labor, and
so God Psalm. 127.3.
gives his beloved sleep. The coffin is a couch, Ambros. ser. 28.
in que mollius ille dormit, quisquis durius in vit a se gesserit. I find in
the records of antiquity, that a Sepulcher is called Vide Lorin. in loc.
requietorium, a bed of Tul. lib. 2. de legibus. Cambriitem v^cant sepulchrum,
B^^.
sacred rest and security, which Valerius Probus expressed in these letters,
H.R.I.P. Hic requiescet in pace, and Pet. Diaconus in other, D.M.S. Dormiunt
mortus securi.

G^ienardin. de Jacob. Triul. milite.
Hic mortuius requiescit semel,
Qui viuus requieuit nunquam.
But here we must observe, Calvin. Arolius.
that our soul sleeps not in the dust, as our body till our last dome: For
the souls of the reprobate at their death are Luke 12 20.
fetched away from them, and carried into Luke 16.23.
hell. But the souls of such as die in the Lord, instantly live with the Lord,
conveyed by the glorious Angels into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22. So Christ
Luke 23.43.
expressly to the these on the Cross, Verily I say to thee, this day shall
thou be with me in Paradise. Ambros. de bono matu, cap. 8.
Anima absoluitur, corpus resoluitur: quae absoluitur, gaudet; quod resoluitur
in terram suam, nihil sentit. And so the Saints departed are dead in their
worst part only, but living in their best: even in that wherein they desire to
live most, as an Heathen Marti^. Epigram. lib. 6. Epigram. 18.
Poet divinely: Sed lugere nefas, nam quite (Prisce) reliquit,
V^^^t qua volnit viuere partemagis.


And therefore though the Psalm. 79.2.
dead bodies of Gods servants have been given as meat to the sowles of the
air, and their flesh unto the beasts of the land; yet Psalm. 116 13
right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. And these
things (as Lib. de ^. ra (...), cap. 2.
Augustine note,) are spoken in the Psalm not to show the Martyrs infelicitie,
but in amplification of the murderers inhumanitie. For the Apos. 20.13.
sea shall give up the dead in it, and the glorious Angels in the last day
shall Mat. 24 31.
gather together all Gods elect from the four winds, and from the one end of
the heaven to the other, and then this 1. Cor. 15 53
corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality; then our
body which has a long time slept in the grave, shall be roused up again by
the sound of the 1. These. 4.16
trumpet, and raised up again by the power of our blessed Savior, who died
for our sins, and rose again for our justification. And then he shall change
our Philip. 3.21.
vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body. Then he
which is the John 11.25.
resurrection and the life, shall give us our perfect consummation in body and
soul in his eternal glory. Job 19.25.
Job in his greatest extremity said, I am sure that my Redeemer lives, and
though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my
flesh. Possidonius in vita Aug. cap. 17.
Ambrose being ready to depart out of this world, told his acquaintance, Non
sic vixi vt me pudeat inter vos viuere: sed nec mori timeo, quia bonum dominum
habemus: I have not so lived among you, that I am ashamed to live: neither do
I fear to die, because we serve a good Lord. Perkins tract. of dying well.
Idem referi Simon Grinaeus de cius vita and obitu.
Oecolampadius to his friend visiting him at the point of death, What shall I
say to you, news, I shall be shortly with Christ my Lord. The renowned Martyr
Babilas (when Baron. annal. Tom 1 ad an. 253 and martyreleg Romans January 24.
Decius the cruel Emperor had commanded his head to be chopped off)
Magdeburg. cent. 3. col. 305.
used the words of the Psalm. 116.7.
Psalmist, O my soul return to thy rest. And Steven here stoned to death, is
said Terminis terminantibus, to sleep in the Lord. Pet. Damian. ser. de S.
Steph.
Felix somnus cum requie, requies cum voluptate, volupt as cum aternitate.

The Gospel
MATTHEW. 23.34. I send unto you Prophets, and wise men, and Scribes, etc.


IT is a good observation in the Churches history, that these three commonly
succeed each other. Magdeburg. epist. prefix. cent. 5.
Ingentia beneficia, ingentia peccata, ingentes pocnae. The present Gospel is
an example hereof, in which all the same points are very remarkable.

1 Ingentia beneficia, Christ's exceeding great mercy toward the Jews in
seeking their conversion as well by himself, as his messengers. And those
Prophets, and wisemen, and Scribes, and that not once but often: how often
would I have gathered? and that not cursorily, but Theophylact. Euthym. Aquin.
earnestly; Jerusalem, Jerusalem, not coldly, but affectionately, like as the
benne gathers her chickens under her wings.

2 Ingentia peccata, the Jews exceeding great malice toward Christ, abusing
his means, ye would not. ministers of all sorts Prophets. Wisemen. Scribes.
with all kind of injury, Killing. Crucifying. Stoning. Scourging. Persecuting.
in all places, not sparing so much as the Sanctuary, whom ye show between
the temple and the altar. At all times, for it is not here, thou that have
killed in time past, or thou that wilt kill in time to come: but in the
present, thou that killest and stonest. (...).
Intimating their continual habit in killing the Prophets, and stoning such as
were sent unto them. As if he should have said, Math. at.
qua occidissi, and occides, and occisara es.



3. Ingentes paere, both in respect of the Guilt, that upon you may come all
the righteous blood, etc. Punishment, behold, your house is left unto you
desolate.


Or as (...) 3. in loc.
other, their punishment is threefold, Temporal, your house is left unto you
desolate. Spiritual, ye shall not see me henceforth. Eternal, that upon you
may come all the righteous blood.


Wherefore behold] This Maldorat.
Idea renders not there son why Christ did send Prophets unto this people; but
imports the true cause why they persecuted such as were sent: namely, because
they were serpents, and a generation of ^^pers, as it is in the words
immediately going before. (...) ^^^ 10. cap. 62.
Vipers are conceived by biting off the males head, and borne by renting the
females belly: so they killed their spiritual Fathers the Prophets, a (...)
M^r. 3.7.
and rent in sander the compassionate bowels of their dear mother the Church.

I send] (...) 10.15.
How shall they preach except they be sent, no man ought to take that honor
unto himself but he that is called of God. Heb. 5.4. (...) (...)
Here then observe that Christ is very God, taking upon him as the master of
the Math. 10.8.
vineyard, and Lord of the Math. 9.32.
harvest, to thrust forth laborers into the Church. (...).
It is a token of his mercy to send Prophets, and Wisemen, and Scribes unto any
nation, and an infassible demonstration of his severe judgment not to send:
according to that of the Prophet Amos in his 8. chapter at the 11. verse:
Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will send a famine in the land,
not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the word of the
Lord.

Prophets, and Wisemen, and Scribes.] Howsoever all these may be Acost. in loc.
ex Hilar. and Chrys^st.
confounded, and meet in one, yet I think with Coman loc.
Hierome, and Soarez. Musculus. Marlot. in loc.
other expositors, that Christ used so many terms to show the riches and 1.
Cor. 12.4.
diversities of his grace, ordaining some to be Apostles, and some Pastor, and
teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. As if he should have said, I will omit no means for
your conversion, I will send unto you messengers endued with all variety of
gifts, administrations, and operations. Some distinguish Prophets, and Wisemen,
and Scribes after this sort: Perus ser. 3. de S Stephano.
Prophetae sunt, quifutura praenunciant; Sapientes, qui recte praesentibus
vtuntur; Scribae, qui praeterita nobis in memoriam, reuocant.

God has dealt with England as with Iewrie, speaking unto us Ier. 7.13.
early and late by his Wickliffes and Whit gifts, Bilwys and Bradfords: giving
us his Latymors and Ridleys, and other Jewels of all sorts: using all kinds of
messengers, adorned with all kinds of gifts; sending zealous Preachers endowed
with the spirit of prophecy, politic Prelates endued with the spirit of
wisdom, judicious and accurate writers endued with the spirit of knowledge,
who like learned Scribes Mat. 13.52.
taught unto the kingdom of heaven, are able to bring forth out of their
treasure things both new and old. Jerusalem had many Prophets, and great is the
number of our Preachers. England affoords an Eli for an Eliah, and a Matthew
for a Matthew, etc. In the first obseruable point of our text concerning
Ingentia beneficia, Gods own people, the Jews and we parallel.

And some of them shall ye kill and crucify.] Some they killed, as Act. 12.2.
James the brother of John, with the sword. Some they crucified, as Peter, and
Christ himself the Lord of life, Act. 3.15. Some they scourged, as Paul, for
thus he p.c. writes of himself: Of the Jews five times received I forty
stripes save one; I was twice beaten with rods. Some they persecuted from City
to City. as Barnabas. Act. 13.50 Some they vexed with all these kinds of
cruelties, as S. Steven on this day. They gnashed at him with their teeth, Act.
7.54. and scourged him with their tongues, suborning men which said, we have
heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and God, Act. 6.11. They
brought him to the Act. 6.12.
Council, and Act. 7 58.
cast him out of the City. They persecuted him in words, disputing against
him; and in deed, despighting him, until in fine they stoned this holy Prophet
sent unto them. In a word, they made such Act. 8.3.
havoc of the Church, as that the messengers of God complained out of the
bitterness of their spirit; Psalm. 44.22. R^m. 8.36.
For thy sake are we killed all the day long, and are counted as sheep
appointed to be slain.

Sanguine fundata est ecclesia sanguine creuit,
Sanguine decres^it, sanguine finis erit.
Yet for all this let no Preacher or professor discourage himself, for S.
Steven in the midst of his afflictions (as it is recorded in this days
Epistle) saw the heavens open, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. It
is said in the Creed, that Christ sits at the right hand of God: but when
his faithful servant Steu^n was martyred, he was standing. Now then if Christ
stand with us, who can withstand us? happily we may weep for a time, but all
tears shall be wiped away from our eyes: Apoc. 21.
the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort shall assist us in our
tribulation so graciously, that a^ the sufferings of Christ abound in us, even
so our consolation shall abound through Christ. 2 Cor. ^.3.5.

(...).
Mystically heretic scourge Catholics with their venomous tongues, and by
laboring to thrust them out of their holds (...) 2.10.
built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostle, into new found
habitations, raised upon the Man. 7 26.
sands of humane C^los. 2.8.
philosophy; what do they but persecute them (as it were) from City to
City? The Pagans first, and the Papists afterward did actually kill, and
crucify and scourge, and persecute the Saints of God in this Island, as well
Abel as Zachary, Ardens. Anselm. Caietan. in loc.
that is, the laymen and the Clergy, the lowest of the people, so well as the
highest of the Priests. And albeit in our time we need not happily fear their
murdering; yet we still feel their murmuring against us. And with them are
joined another generation of Vipers, I mean the schismatic brood, whipping
us in their words, and scourging us in their writings, according to their will
and wit hourly killing the Prophets, and stoning such as are sent unto them.
For whereas there be two kinds of death, one natural, another civil. If any
discredit the good life, or discountenance the sound doctrine of his Pastor, by
raising false tales, and suborning false witnesses against him, as the Jews
against Steven: what does he but ciuilly, or rather indeed uncivilly like a
Jew murder his Preacher. And such a Minister as patiently bears these wrongs,
and suffers these dilapidations in his credit, is a very Steven, a mere
Martyr. For (as Apud discipul^m ser. 13. de S. Stephano.
Gregory notes) there be three kinds of martyrdom without any shedding of
blood. 1. To be patient in our own misery. 2. To be compassionate in another
adversity. 3. To love our enemies heartily. Thus in the second part of our text
also touching ingentia peccatae, the Jews and English are parallels.

That upon you may come all the righteous blood, which has been shed upon
earth, from the blood of the righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias.] Here
two questions are moved: First, who was this Zacharias. Secondly, how all the
righteous blood shed upon earth is required of this generation. Concerning the
first: it is thought by Apud Hier. and Euthym. in loc.
some that this Zacharias is that Zachary numbered among the twelve lesser
Prophets, in that his Zach. 1.1.
fathers name well agrees with this history. But that opinion is censured as
improbable, because the Scripture says not any where that this Prophet was
slain between the Temple and the altar. (...)
Other affirm that this Zacharias is the father of John the Baptist, mentioned
Luke ^.5. of whom it is reported by tradition, that the Jews ^lew him between
the Temple and the Altar, for that as he was a Priest, he did rank Mary the
mother of Christ, after she had conceived and brought forth her son, with
unspotted Virgins in the Temple. But says In (...).
Hierom^, (...) de scripturis non habet (...) ^o^itatem, eadem facilitate
c^^temnitur qu^ probatur. (...).
Other hold that this Zacharias is that zealou Zacharias the son of Ieho^ada,
who (for that he did openly rebuke the Jews for their abominable Idolatry)
was stoned by them in the court of the house of the Lord 2. Chro. 24.21.
Neither is their any contradiction between the son of Barach^as, and the
son of (...): seeing Ieho^^^a might have two names, or else called Bar^chi^^
(in the Hebrew signifying blessed of the Lord) because (...) the Priest 12 C^ro
24.16.
had done good in Israel, and toward God and his house. For mine own part, I
conjecture that this Zacharias is he, who was martyred at the beginning of the
siege of Jerusalem in the days of Vespasian the Roman Emperor. For the (...)
lib. 5. cap. 1.
story says expressly, that he was the son of Baruch or ^arachias, and that
he was slain by the Jews in the mi^^est of the Temple. The clause ( whom ye
(...) serue^ to cross this exposition a little, but it is avoided easily,
(...).
because Christ here speaking prophetically, reports that to be done, which was
yet to come. This interpretation of all the rest, amplifieth most as well the
sin, as the punishment of the Jews; in that all the righteous blood from the
first Martyr among them unto the last, even from (...) unto (...) while the^
City was (...) is laid unto their change.

Touching the second doubt: we read in holy Bible that there be two
generations, one good, another bad: a (...).
blessed generation of the faithful, even of such as Psalm. 24.6.
fear God; and a generation of (...), as Christ in thi^ present chapter. As
then the generation of such as Heb 13.17.
obey their overseers, and kiss the R^m. 10 15.
feet of such as bring glad tidings of peace, shall receive the Mat. 10.41.
reward of a Prophet: even so the generation of such as kill the Prophets, and
^one such as are sent unto them, if they fulfill the Mat. 23.32.
measure of their fathers sin, they shall have their portion and proportion
in their fathers punishment also. For albeit Ez^ch. 18.20.
the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the
father bear the iniquity of the son: Hieron. Calvin. Musculus in l^c.
yet if the sonne^ are partners with their parents, in imitation the Mat 23 31.
children of such as murdered the Prophets, as the Jews were the sons of
Cain, in slaying the righteous Abels. If Cain and all the bloody Jews a^ well
after as under the Law, make the same generation, united in fact and faction,
it is in God very good justice that all the righteous blood shed from the Luke
11.50.
foundation of the world should be required of this generation. Euthym. in loc.
For he who reads often, and sees almost daily the severe judgments of God
upon sinners, and yet himself continues in the same sin, deserves worthily
to be punished with as many stripes as he neglected examples. He that knows
how Cain was a runagate on earth, and how the clamor of his brother Abels
blood entered into the ears of God in heaven, and how this cry was a voice; vox
sanguinum, a voice of bloods in the plural, namely, the voice of the blood
shed, and of all the blood which might have come of that blood, if it had not
been shed. Again, he that hea^e of the lamentable destruction of Jerusalem,
how her magnificent Temple was made d^selate, and the glorious Towers of her
City were laid Luke 19.44.
even with the ground; and all this for that she killed the Prophets, and
stoned such as were sent unto her. He that reads and believes the^e things,
and yet is an obstinate despiser of prophecy, killing, crucifying, secur^^^,
persecuting the m^ssengers of the Lord from City to City: shall receive greater
damnation then either Cain or Jerusalem, as having negle^^ed greater m^^nes of
salvation. For Romans 15.4
all things are written for our learning, but these things (I mean Gods
extraordinary judgments upon notorious sinners) are written more principally 1
C^r. 10.11.
for our examples upon whom the ends of the world are come. See Epist 9 Sund.
after Trinity.

How often would I have gathered thy children] How often by the mouth of my
Origin. B^llinger. P^scat^r.
Prophets, how often by mine Apostles, how often by mine own self: C^nsule
Aug. quaest. euangel. lib. 1. cap. 36. and Marlorat. in loc.
as the loving Hen is always caring for her chickins, always clucking and calling
them if they wander out of her ^ight never so little, that she may gather them
under her wings, and so guarde them from the mischief of the Kite: even so
Jerusalem, I would have gathered thy Children under the wings of my protection,
I would have kept thee and thine from the jaws of thy ravenous enemy Satan,
and from the hands of all such as hate you, but ye would not. Hos. 13.9.
O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help: now this
ought to be construed either of Christ's humane will as he was man, or else of
his conditional and revealed will as he was God; otherwise Gods absolute will
is effected always, Psalm. 135.6
both in heaven, and earth and hell: it was the conditional will of God the
Jews resisted, according to that of Saint Steven in the second Lesson allotted
for euensong this day. Act. 7.51.
Ye stiffenecked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye have alw^y resisted
the holy Ghost, a^ your Fathers did so do you: this (I would) of Christ is
voluntae signi, not voluntas beneplaciti. See Melanct. C^ietan, P^scator,
Marlorat, in loc. Ians^n, Concord. cap 41. and 90. didac, Aluarez de anxilys
diuinae gratiae lib. 5. d^^putat. 33.34.

O Father of mercies, increase our faith, and grant unto us in this thy day of
our visitation, unfeigned repentance* that howsoever England has equalled
Jerusalem in being dissolute, yet she may not parallel Jerusalem in being
desolate.

The Epistle
1. JOHN 1.1. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we
have seen with our eyes, etc.


SAint John ever like himself, Aquin. in loc.
that his Gospel and general Epistle might be suitable, August. tract. 1. in
hanc epist.
confirming each other in the maine scope: makes ( in the beginning was the
word) the beginning of words unto both: omitting here an ordinary salutation,
that he might at the very first entrance treat of Vide Lorin. cap. 5. prolog
in 1. epist. Joan.
more necessary points of salvation: and yet this exordium a re ipsa, preamble
raised from the matter it self, is agreeable to the rules of art, Aretius.
Zenchius in loc.
wherewith he makes his readers attentive, docile, beneuolous: attentive, for
that he writes not of a trifle, but of Christ Jesus, the word of life who
cleanses us from all sin: docile, for that the subject of his doctrine is
Marlor. in loc.
neither new, nor uncertain: not new, for we show unto you that which was from
the beginning; not uncertain, for we preach unto you that which we have heard,
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands
have handled. Beneuolus, for that he penned this Epistle for their good,
namely, that they might have fellowship with the Saints, and that their joy
might be full. I Pet. Aureolus apud Lorin. vbi ^up. cap. 6.
find the whole tract divided into three parts, answerable to the three chief
christian virtues, Faith, Hope, Charity: but for as much as our Apostle writes
of these Piscator.
promiseuously without distinction and order, I rather amit of Aquines plain
partition.

Into a Commendation of the Gospel, Chap. 1. Exhortation ^o the fruitful and
faithful observing of the same, Chap. 2.3. Disswasion from the contrary
Doctrine, Chap. 4.5.


In the present text there be two descriptions: One of Christ, in respect of
his Natures, As God, that which was from the beginning. As man, which we have
heard and seen, etc.
Office, being our light and life, cleansing us from all sin.
Another of a Christian, having fellowship with God, his Saints, and his Son,
in whom are Two remarkable properties: 1. A studiousnesse to do good, Ergo,
not a carnal Epicure: For if we say we have fellowship with God who is light,
and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. 2. A sorrowfulness when
he does ill, Ergo, not a spiritual Puritan: For if we say w^ have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.



I have spoken enough of the first description in my notes upon the Gospel on
Christmas day: the pith of it is, that Christ Jesus eternally God, in the
fullness of time made man, is our only mediator and advocate with God the
Father; insomuch as our fellowship with God in this world, and fullness of joy
in the next, is attained by faith alone first apprehending, and after applying
his merits. Here then our Apostle commends the doctrine of the Gospel in three
respects especially.

First, in regard of the subject, as being most ancient and excellent, even
that which was in the beginning God^ own son, the word of life, yea that
eternal life which was with the father before all worlds.

Secondly, in regard of the certainty, that which we have heard, which we have
seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled:
declare we unto you. For Christ who was in the beginning that eternal word
with the Father, in these H^b. 1.2.
last days appeared unto us. And as S. 1 Timothy 3.16.
Paul expounds S. John, he was manifested in the flesh: Or as S. John in his
Cap. 1. ver. 14.
Gospel expounds himself, he became flesh, and dwelt among us. And Aretius.
so we have seen and heard him Aquin.
immediately speaking in the world, as well as mediately, speaking in his word.
For he spoke to the Fathers by the mouth of all his Prophets ever since the
beginning: but in our days he has spoken with his own mouth unto us: our
ears have heard him in his Sermons, our eyes have seen him in acting of his
miracles, our hands have touched his precious body both before his death, and
after his resurrection; and so that which we so Erasmus.
many ways assuredly know to be true, declare we unto you. For albeit the word
of life being very God of very God, is neither visible nor palpable: yet in
respect of the Marlorat. Piscator.
personal union of the two natures in him, it may be safely said again and
again that which we have seen and heard. And we saw the glory of it as the
glory of the only begotten son of the Father full of grace and truth. John
1.14. And in this sense the word of life, yea the Lord of life is said Act. 3
15. 1 Cor. 1.8.
elsewhere to be killed and crucified.

Thirdly, in regard of the profit, because Christ is the word of life, not
only formaliter, in respect of himself: but in respect of us effectiue, being
author of our natural life, for in him we live, and move, and have our
being. A^t. 17.28. Of our spiritual life, Thus I live, yet not I now, (...)
Christ lives in me says Paul, Galath. 2.20. Of our eternal life, for he is
the way, the truth, and the life, John 14.6. The resurrection and the life,
John 11.25. yea that eternal life, (...) it is in our present text. So that if
we^ will embrace the Gospel, and receive these glad tidings of peace, we shall
have fellowship with the blessed Apostles, and in conclusion it will bring us
unto fulness of joy. Caietan. Zanchius
The which is not in this life, for here many sorrows are mixed with a few
joys. He was a blessed man who said, O ^^m. 7.24.
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Our
rejoicing is in part, as our 1 Cor. 13.5.
knowing is in part, and our prophesying in part. Here God gives his children
sometimes a good measure of joy* shaken together and pressed down* but
hereafter in his kingdom of glory, when all tears shall be wiped from our
eyes, and all cares from our heart: then only our joy shall be full, and (as
Luke 6.38.
Christ speaks elsewhere) running over. Let all Doctors of Divinity learn by
this Divine, to shun new, dubious, unprofitable quirkes of learning; and to
deliver unto Gods people that which was from the beginning, a true Gospel and
a certain, procuring an happy communion with God, and a fullness of joy.

God is light] Almighty God is compared unto light in many respects. As first
for that Heb. 4.13. Prou. 15.3.
all things are naked and open unto his eyes as to the light. Secondly, as we
cannot see things earthly without ligh^: so we cannot 1 Cor 2.14.
discern things heavenly, unless the father of Iam 1.17.
lights illuminate our mind, and give us an 1 King. 3.9.
understanding heart. Thirdly, for that as the light of the sun dasseth our
eyes if they gaze too much upon it: even so the Divine Majesty 1 Timothy 6 16.
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto, confounds all such as
curiously pry too much into it, according to that of Pro^. 25.17.
Solomon in the vulgar latin, qu^ serutator est maiestatis epprimetur a
gloria. But God is called Calvin. Aretius. Zanchius.
here light* as expelling ^ll darkness of sin and ignorance, being in himself
pure, sincere, Psalm. 145.17.
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works Our Apostle then argues
against hypocrites and tale-gospellers often and openly boasting of their
Communion with God, a natura Dei, from the properties of God after this sort.
God is light, Ergo, none can have fellowship with him except they walk in the
light. If we say we have communion with him, and walk in darkness, we lie,
and do not the truth Our wilful ignorance and sins unrepented are called in
Romans 13.12 Ephesians. 5.11.
holy Scripture darkness, as having their beginning from Satan the Prince of
darkness, and their end in hell, which is the pit of darkness: and therefore
though hypocrites out-mouth (as it were) true Christians in bragging of their
familiarity with God and his Son; yet the truth is, as long as they walk in
darkness, it is impossible they should be children of God; for in him is no
darkness, nor so much as a shadow, Iam. 1.17. 2 Cor. 6.14.
What communion has light with darkness? or what concord has Christ with
Belial? or what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? God is
Deuteronomy. 32.4.
without wickedness himself, and hates all manner of wickedness in other,
according to that of the Prophet in the fifth Psalm: thou art the God that
has no pleasure in wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell with thee. Such
as be foolish shall not stand in thy sight, for thou hat^st all them that work
vanity. Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor
both the bloudthirstie and deceitful man. I conclude this point in the words
of our 1. epist. cap. 3. verse. 7.
Apostle: Little children, let no man deceive you: he that does righteousness,
is righteous. It is not sufficient to say that he is righteous: for if we say
we have fellowship with God, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the
truth, Lorin.
that is, we lie to our selves, and do not the truth unto other, because they
be misled through our example, mentimur commissione, ve^itatem nor facimus
omissione.

If we walk in the light.] An Zanchius.
argument from the effect to the cause: for our studiousnesse to walk in the
light, and to do good in our callings, is not the cause of our fellowship with
God, and of the remission of our sin by the blood of Jesus Christ his son;
but an effect or consequent. It is a sign that we are the sons of God, if
we be Ephesians. 5.1.
followers of God as dear children, if we will embrace the Gospel, and
receive these glad ridings of peace, we shall have fellowship with the blessed
Apostles, and in conclusion it will bring us unto fulness of joy. Cai^an.
Zanctius
The which is not in this life, for here many sorrows are mixed with a few
joys. He was a blessed man who said, O R^m. 7.^4.
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Our
rejoicing is in part, as our 1. Cor. 13.9.
knowing is in part, and our prophesying in part. Here God gives his children
sometimes a good measure of joy, shaken together and pressed down: but
thereafter in his kingdom of glory, when all tears shall be wiped from our
eyes, and all cares from our heart: then only our joy shall be full, and (as
Luke 6.38.
Christ speaks elsewhere) running over. Let all Doctors of Divinity learn by
this Divine, to shun new, dubious, unprofitable quirke; of learning; and to
deliver unto Gods people that which was from the beginning, a true Gospel and
a certain, procuring an happy communion with God, and a fullness of joy.

God is light] Almighty God is compared unto light in many respects. As first
for that Heb. 4.13. Prou. 15.3.
all things are naked and open unto his eyes to the light. Secondly, as we
cannot see things earthly without light: so we cannot 1. Cor 2.14.
discern things heavenly, unless the father of Iam 1.17.
lights illuminate our mind, and give us an 1. King. 3.9.
understanding heart. Thirdly, for that as the light of the sun dasleth our
eyes if they gaze too much upon it: even so the Divine Majesty 1. Tim. 6.16.
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto, confounds all such as
curiously pry too much into it, according to that of 1 Prom 25.27.
Solomon in the vulgar latin, qus serutator est maiestatis epprsmetur a
gloria. But God is called Calvin. Aretivis. Zandius.
here light, as expelling all darkness of sin and ignorance, being in himself
pure, since^e, 1 Psalm. 45.17.
righteous in all his ways. and holy in all his works Our Apostle then argues
against hypocrites and tale gospellers often and openly boasting of their
Communion with God, a natura Des, from the properties of God after this sort.
God is light, Ergo, none can have fellowship with him except they walk in the
light. If we say we have communion with him, and walk in darkness, we lie,
and do not the truth Our wilful ignorance and sins unrepented are called in
Romans 13.12. Ephis. 5.11.
holy Scripture darkness, as having their beginning from Satan the Prince of
darkness, and their end in hell, which is the pit of darkness: and therefore
though hypocrites out-mouth (as it were) true Christians in bragging of their
familiarity with God and his Son; yet the truth is, as long as they walk in
darkness, it is impossible they should be children of God; for in him is no
darkness, nor so much as a shadow, Iam. 1.17. 2. Cor. 6.14.
What communion has light with darkness* or what concord has Christ with
Belial? or what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? God is
Deuteronomy. 32.4.
without wickedness himself, and hates all manner of wickedness in other,
according to that of the Prophet in the fifth Psalm: Thou art the God that
has no pleasure in wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell with thee. Such
as be foolish shall not stand in thy sight. for thou hate all them that work
vanity. Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor
both the bloudthirstie and deceitful man. I conclude this point in the words
of our 1. epist. cap. 3. verse. 7.
Apostle: Little children, let no man deceive you: he that does righteousness,
is righteous. It is not sufficient to say that he is righteous: for if we say
we have fellowship with God, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the
truth, Lorin.
that is, we lie to our selves, and do not the truth unto other, because they
be missed through our example, mentimur commissione, ver itatem non facimus
omissione.

If we walk in the light.] An Zanchius.
argument from the effect to the cause: for our studiousnesse to walk in the
light, and to do good in our caliings, is not the cause of our fellowship with
God, and of the remission of our sin by the blood of Jesus Christ his son;
but an effect or consequent. It is a sign that we are the sons of God, if
we be Ephesians. 5.1.
followers of God as dear children, if we walk in the light even as he is
light. It is a seal to my soul that the blood of Christ has purged me from
all sin, if I do but Matt^. 5.6.
hunger and thirst after righteousness, if I feel but an unsained desire to
put off the works of darkness, and to put on Gods armor of light. I know
that I shall sin still as long as I carry this flesh about me; for if we say
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: but I am
sure so long as I walk in the light, that I shall not commit any sin which
is impardonable: so long as I have communion with God, I cannot commit the
sin against the holy Ghost; as long as I am in Christ, his blood el^^ (...)
me from all sin: from Bu^ing. (...). Latin.
all sin, original and actual, a culp. 1 and pun. 1, from the fault, and
from the pain due to the same From all sin, Bi^^
not only committed before baptism, but also from all sin committed of
frailty, since baptism. For as Cardinal (...)
Ca^etan notes, impiu^^ est d^m^ learn. ^ Deo per are veniam: and therefore
(...).
Po^ish satisfactions either by works done, or pains suffered in this life,
or in purgatory after this life, to purgemen of their sins, have no firm
ground in Gods holy word, they be works of supererogation, or if you will,
happily works of superarrogation. It is not said here, the blood of Christ
has cleansed in time past, or w^^ cleanse in time to come: but in the present,
it cleanses. (...) Ma^^^at.
Hereby signifying that it daily purges all the sins of all such as truly
believe, who walk in the light, and have fellowship with God.

If we say we have no sin.] Some say, let us Romans 61.
continue still in sin, that grace may abound, seeing the blood of Christ
cleanses us from all sin, let us walk in darkness. Ephesians. 4.19.
working all uncleanness even with greediness. Other on the contrary side
say, we have no sin, whose puritan pride S. John opposes here, showing
plainly that the (...) 38. and (...) ^^ate. 59.
Ca^hari both injury God, and deceive themselves, in a^firming that they he
without any sin: they wrong God, because (so much as in them is) they make
God a lier. and his truth a lie; for his word expressly concludes all under
sin, Romans 3.9. Galath. 3.22. reporting that all men have gone astray like
lost sheep, Esaias 53.6. And that there is none that does good, no not one,
Psalm. 14.2. Iam. 3.2.
In many things all offend, and who can say mine heart is clean, Prou. 20.9.
It is true that our Apostle says in the third chapter of this Epistle, verse.
9. Whosoever is borne of God, sins not: that is, the regenerate man as he
is regenerate, sins not obstinately with a plenarie consent, he suffers not
sin to Rom 6.12. and 7.19.
reign in him, as it is in our text, he walks not in darkness: Zanchius.
yet he may stumble, yea sometime fall through infirmity while he walks in
the light; and therefore such as auow that they have no sin, give the lie to
God, and the truth is not in them: Hugo. Aquin. Gloss. interlin.
that is, God who is John 14.6.
truth is not in them: and the reason hereof is evident, because God resists
the proud, Iam. 4.6. and so neither God, nor his word is in them, as Aquine
pithily, neither Christ his eternal word, nor the Scripture his created word
dwells in them.

Again, Puritans who say we have no sin, deceive themselves; according to
that of Galath. 6.3.
Paul, If any man seem to himself that he is somewhat, when he is nothing, he
deceives himself in his imagination; or they deceive themselves, because
Christ Matt. 11.28.
eases only such as feel their heavy load, and groan under the burden of
their sins; and therefore the true Christian, as our Apostle teaches here,
first makes a confession, and then he seeks for an absolution.

In confession observe these circumstances: 1. Who, we. 2. What, sins, and
our sins. 3. To whom, to God, If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful,
etc. 4. How, acknowledge and say.


In absolution: 1. Of whom an absolution is to be got, of God for his Christ's
sake, whose blood cleanses us from all sin. 2. Why? because God is faithful
and just so forgive us our sins. 3. What? a plenarie, not a partial
absolution, a pardon for all unrighteousness. 4. When? in this present life,
while we walk in the light.


Our selves must acknowledge for our selves, and not another: we must indeed
confess Iam. 5.16.
one to another, but not one for another: we must also confess A^^^n.
sins, and not virtues, as the proud Pharisie, Luke 18. I fast twice in their
(...), I pay tithes of all that e^^r I possess: and our own sins, not our
neighbors offenses, as the same Pharisie, who did accuse the Publican, and in
comparison of his faults excuse himself. This confession is to be made to God,
as being the searcher of our hearts, understanding all our secret sin so
well, yea better then our selves. O Lord, Psalm. 19.12.
who can tell how of^ he offends? O cleanse me from my secret faules: and to
God, as being very willing, and mostable to purge us from all unrighteousness.
It is true, that we must acknowledge our faults one to another, as having
trespassed one another; and in some cases it is expedient also that we resort
to devour, learned, discreet pastors for the relief of our distressed
conscience: yet by Lib. 1. de panis. cap. 13. have. m^d^^. and lib. 3. ^^.4. ga
(...) li(...) quent. ad fi^. cap
Bellamines leave, this our text is not a pregnant Scripture for popish
auricular confession used in the Church of Rome. For the Ministers of the word
may both openly pronounce absolution unto true penitents, and in secret also
when occasion is offered justly. Though annual and auricular confession of
every singular and single sin were thrust out of the Church, as it was for
twelve hundred years after Christ, See Gospel 3. Sund. after Epiphanie.

We must acknowledge, (...)
that is, say with our mouth, and acknowledge in our heart, that we have
sinned in Adam, and do sin for the present, and may sin hereafter as long
as we live. For faith Confess. lib. 5. cap. 10.
Augustine, Iderat peccatum insanabilius, quo me peccatorem esse non
arbitrabar, it is our duty to feel sin, to fear sin, to fly sin so
far as we can, in one word, soundly and seriously to repent us of all
unrighteousness. Augustine, de vera and falsa paenitent. cap. 13.
Non fit satis quod doleamus, sed ex side doleamus, and non semper doluisse
doleamus, and de dolor gaudeamus: We must heartily griue for our offenses, and
grieve for that we grieve no more, and joy for that we grieve so much.

After such a confession a penitent ought to seek for an absolution of God, as
being faithful and just to forgive us our sins. Happily some will object,
God (if we consider him as just) is more ready to punish then to pardon, for
the Romans 6.23.
wages of sin is death, and the Church has taught us every day to pray with
the Psalmist, Psalm. 143.2.
enter not into judgment with thy servants O Lord, for no flesh is righteous
in thy sight. For answer to this objection, I find the word just, expounded
diversely. Em. Sa.
Somesay God is just, as being able to justify sinners. Caietan.
Other think that God is called just in forgiving our sin, because Christ
has paid a just and sufficient price for the sins of the whole, world. Lorin.
Other construe just, here to be nothing else but a comely thing, or a
property besitting the goodness of God; according to that of In pros^log.
cap. 9. vbi suauiss. me hac de re multa.
Anselme, Iustum est o^ Deus, vt parcas malis. And so Aritius.
some read, God is faithful and facile, ready to forgive. But I follow Calvin.
B^za Zanchius.
their Gloss, who think that faithful and just in this place signify the
same. God is faithful in his promise, just in his word to forgive. Now God
says in his word, (...) 1.18.
though their sins were as crimson, they shall be made white as snow: though
they be red like scarlet, they shall be as wool. Mat 9.13.
I am not come to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance: Wherefore
come to me all ye that labor, and are laden, and I will ease you: yea that
which is more then his word (if any thing can be greater) his oath is, Ezech.
33.11.
As I live says the Lord God, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that
the wicked turn from his way and live. Now God ever deals with his servants
according to his word, and having bound his word with an oath it is due debt,
and then it is Lorin.
justice to pay debts: he is faithful, and therefore can no more deny his
promise then himself, who says, at what time soever a sinner does repent him
of his sin from the bottom of his heart. I will put all his wickedness out
of my remembrance. Wherefore let us Heb. 4.16.
boldly come to the throne of grace, let us Mat. 5.25.
agree with our adversary quickly while we are in the way, while we walk in
the light, while it is called Heb. 3.13.
to day, for after this life there is no purgatory for sin in another. And
let us ask not only some parcel of a pardon, but an absolute absolution, and
a plenarie discharge from all unrighteousness.

Larga Dei piet as veniam non dimidiabit. aut (...), ant totum (se lachrymante)
dabit.

The Gospel.
JOHN 21.19. Jesus said unto Peter, Follow thou me, etc.


THis Scripture contains a Correction of Peter's curiosity, What is that to
thee? Follow thou me. The disciples error touching the death of John, yet
Jesus said not unto him, he shall not die, etc.
Commendation of John in respect of his Grace with Christ, the Disciple whom
Jesus loved, which also learned on his breast at supper, etc. Place in the
Church, as being an Apostle that testified of these things, and an Evangelist
who wrote these things.
Conclusion of the Gospel, intimating that so much is written as is necessary
to salvation, and other things omitted, and those many: for that if they should
be written every one, the world could not contain the books that should be
written.


Our blessed Savior in the words immediately going before, showed Peter in what
vocation he should live, Feed my sheep: as also by what death he should die,
When thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thine hands, and another shall
gend thee, and lead the^ whither thou would not: And when he had spoken
thus, alluding to Theoph^lact^ (...).
both, especially to the A^^ sir^. L^^^m. Calvin.
latter, he said unto Peter, follow me: that is, be thou such a Pastor in
feeding my sheep, and such a Pastor in suffering for my sheep, as I have
given example, Christ said unto Peter in the 13. chapter of this Gospel, at
the 36. verse, Whither I go thou caust not follow me now: but thou shall
follow me afterward. Unto whom Peter answered, Lord, why can I not follow thee
now? I will lay down my life for thy sake. Jesus replied, will thou lay down
thy life for mysake? Verily, v^rily I say unto thee, the Cock shall out crow^^
thou have deared me thrice.

Now Jesus remembering this conflict and conference with his Disciple, said unto
him in the words a little before our tex. W^^^ thou wast rou^^ thou girdeast
thy self, and walk li^ who here (...) and. P^^p^^t and M^^nat. (...)
That is, when thou wast a y^ angling in faith, and did gird thy self with
thine own strength, it was thy folly to think that thou could (...) me
whither I went: and therefore by denying me thrice, thou did prove my words
to be true, We^ther I ^e thou can not sodow me now: but when thou shall be
old, thou shall stretch forth thine hands, and another shall gird thee, etc.
that is, when thou shall feel thine own weakness, and grow strong in the
Lord, my other saying also shall be found true: Thou shall follow ^^ce
afterward. I therefore now command thee Peter again and again, follow me
whither I ^^^.

But Peter (as it may seen) neglecting this charge concerning himself. but of
a curious humor enquites after the doing and dying of other, saying unto
Jesus, Lord, what shall we here ^^^? to whom his matter answered. And ^^^ have
him to (...) I come, what is that to (...). (...).
Teaching us hereby to follow him in the same calling, and in the same way that
he does appoint. (...).
It is not said, examine others imploiment: but ^. Cor. 1.2^.
see your own calling, (...) 1. Cor. 7.20.
let every man abide in the some calling wherein he was called, Ephesians. 4.1.
walking in his vocation worthily, studying to be quiet and to meddle with his
own business, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. The which apostolical apophthegme being a
parallel unto the words of Christ here ( what is that to thee. follow thou me)
may serve to direct us in all matters of this life.

Whether they be Theological, Concerning God. Whether they be Ecclesiastical,
Concerning The Church. Whether they be Political, Concerning Commonweal.
Whether they be Moral, Concerning Our neighbors and friends. Whether they be
Occonomicall, Concerning Our private family. Whether they be Monastical,
Concerning Our single selves.
In matters appertayning to God, it teaches us not be curious inquisitors
after the secrets of his will unknown, for what is that to thee? but to keep
the words of his Law, doing his will which is known, for of this only Christ
speaks here, follow thou me. The Deuteronomy. 29.29
secret things belong to the Lord our God; but the things revealed belong to us
and to our children for ever.

In affairs of the Church, it shows, how the John 10.11
good shepherd should spend his life for the benefit of the flock committed
unto his charge, Peter follow me, forbidding 2. Sam. 6.7.
Vzzab to put his hand to the ark of God, recalling the Lack not only from
incroaching upon the Clergy man's benefice; but also from intruding into the
Clergy man's office; for what is that to thee?

In business of the Commonwealth, it corrects o^ercurious Euesdroppers of
State for what is that to thee? Teaching us to give the things of Mat. 22.21.
Casar unto Caesar, Rom 137.
honor, to whom honor: custom, to whom custom: tribute, to whom tribute:
though (as Christ Mat. 17.27.) we fish for money; for in performing this
office like wise Jesus, said unto Peter, follow thou me. The soole (says
P^^^. 20.3.
Solomon) will ever be meddling, but he that iwise will not walk Psalm. 131.2.
in magris and mirabilibus, in great affairs and such as are too high and huge
for him: he plots not how to dispose of the Scepter, but possessing his soul
in patience, desires the Scepter should rightly dispose of him, as being
assured that Princes are the Romans 13.4.
ministers of God, even fingers of that great hand that gouerns all the world.

In moral offices or duties of charity between neighbor and neighbor, it
inhibits thee to be a busy body, or (as 1 Pet. 4.^5.
Peter speaks) a busy Bishop in another man's diocese, for what is that to
thee? aduising on the contrary to Gal^^ 6.10.
do good unto all, unto such as are of the household of faith especially. For
in this respect Christ Jesus our great patron and pattern speaks unto all,
as to Peter here, follow me. Mat. 11 29.
Learn of me to be humble and meek, Ephesians. 5 2.
walking in love even as I have loved you, giving my self for you to bean
offering, and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God: in all other
business appertayning either to the private house, or single self, the
counsel is wholesome, res (...) age, plough in thine own ground, fish in
thine own boat, look to thy self, ouerlooke not other: unless they be such
as are committed unto thy proper charge. For in this exempt case Christ expects
not of Pete^ a^tendance to the former clause, what is that to thee? but
obedience to the latter only, follow thou me.

Then went this saying among the brethren, that that Disciple should not (...)]
H^^ing.
Hence we may lea^ne to take good heed how ^ereid and hear holy Scripture.
For by misconthing the words of our Savior many false rumors are spread among
the brethren. A^^us P^^^^n.
If the Disciples easily were deceived, how much more we? Let us embrace
therefore those things which are clear, and such things as are spoken darkly,
let us confer with p^ainer places, always calling upon God to give us the key
of true knowledge, that we may d^scerne the things of his spirit. The
Disciples here made that an absolute affirmative, which indeed is but a A^^^^us.
conditional proposition. If I will have him to tarry, etc. not I will have
him to tarry. For we may not read (as the vulgar Latin Iansen. cencord. cap.
148 Id^m Erasnius and Mald not. in loc. quippe m^^la similitud^ inter iar and
(...).
corruptly) sic cum volo manner: but si cum volo manner. Again, Jesus said
not, he shall not die: but if I will that he tarry till I come, what is that
to thee? In this correction of the Disciples error, observe, first S. John's
Aretius.
ingenuitie, who would not suffer a false report to be spread among the
brethren though it were for his honor. Secondly, that it is not always safe to
follow the most in all things, one John here is opposite to the rest of his
company; one Lot opposite to the rest of his City; one Luther opposite to the
rest of his country; one Noah opposite to the whole world. Thirdly, we may
learn by this example to be diligent and patient in reuoking all such things
as have been mistaken either in our words or writings. Augustine has his
retractations, Parimpar.
Bellarmine his recognitions, Annal. Tom. 9. fol. 863. Tom. 10. fol. 939. Tom.
11. fol. 723.
Baronius his Emendanda, the Disciples here their Errata, sic corrige. This
saying went among the brethren, etc. yet Jesus said not, he shall not die, etc.

The Disciple whom Jesus loued] The word, John 1.3.
by whom all things were made, Wisd 11.21.
loves all that he made. Aug. ^10. in l^an.
Yet men more then unreasonable creatures, and his Saints more then other men,
and his chosen Apostle more then other Saints, and John more then other of his
Apostle. He loved all his Disciple, as the Father has loved me. (...) have I
loved you: continue in my love. John 15.9 But h^ love to John, (as the T^^m
part 1. ^ua^i 20 art. 3
school speaks) was greater ^xtensiue, though not intensiue: showing more
signs of familiarity to John then to the rest of his company. For whereas
Mat. 3.11.
John the Baptist held himself not worthy to bear the shoes of Christ, and
John 12.3.
Mary thought herself blessed in annoynting the feet of Christ, and John 20.25.
Thomas only desired to touch the side of Christ: o^r Apostle John is said here
to have leaned on his breast at supper, as being best acquainted with the
secrets of his Savior. For when John 13.24. ^d. Pet. a^ palu. l. s^r. in loc.
Peter and all other his fellows were silent* only he d^rst ask, Lord, which
is he that betrayeth thee? When the Eagle broodes (as A^ (...) n. in^^.
Plutarch reports) the chicke that comes of the egg lying nearest her heart is
best beloved of her: and so S. John leaning on that breast (in which are (...)
2.3.
h^d all the treasures of wi^edome and knowledge) is the beloved Disciple, so
much honored, that Christ his Savior which had not in the world Mat. 8.10.
whereon to re^t his head; did notwithstanding Ep^^^^ 3.17
dwell in his heart by faith, and lean (says Ser. 18.
Ambrose) in his bosom, Si^^^ in quo Christ (...) equi sei^, erat tripl^ (...)
in E^an^^lista leanne sides, i^ pair (...), in Maria matre virginitas.

It is said Ephesians. 4 11 that Christ ascending up on high, gave some to ^^e
Apostl^s, and some Prophets, and ^ome Euangel^^^, and some Pastors and Doctors,
1 Cor. 12.11.
according to his will distributing to every man a several gift. D^^z C^n. 2.
in (...) Eua^g.
Peter was an Apostle, but not an Evangelist: Mark an Evangelist, but not an
Apostle: Matthew both an Evangelist and Apostle, yet not a Prophet: Augustine a
Doctor, but not a Martyr: L^urence a Martyr, but not a Doctor. But behold the
beloved Disciple was T^ria ^. and De^ de ^a^^de. (...) supra.
all these: In his Epistles an Apostle, in his Apocalypse a Prophet, in his
Gospel an Evangelist, in his faith a Confessor, in his preaching a Doctor, in
his chasli^ie a Virgin, in his readiness to suffer for the truth a very
Martyr, yea the I^an. Os^^^^ in (...).
protomartyr suffering for Christ under the cross, when he saw Christ suffer
on the cross; a^ ^ns quippe plus (...) amato quam in seip^^ patitur: all which
are so many reasons why we should praise God in this holy Saint. but
especially because the same Di^ciple is he that testifies of these things,
and wrote these things. I say for that he penned this heavenly Gospel, I^^.
20.31.
that we might believe that (...) Christ is the son of God, and that in
believing, we might have life through his name. For as Me^a. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Aristotle said, it timotheus had not been, we had not had so much sweet
music: but it (...) ( timotheus his master) had not been, we had not had
timotheus. Even so (beloved) if S. John had not been, we might have wanted
happily such an Evangelical harmony: but if Jesus the master of John had not
been gracious unto the Church, it should not have had such a John.

It is an argument of S. John's Marl^rat.
humility, that he terms himself not a master in Israel, or a Doctor; but
a Disciple, and that five times in this one Gospel, as cap. 13.23. cap. 19.26.
cap. 20.2. cap. 21.7. and 20. Cyril.
yet it winnes honor to his history, for that the beloved Disciple penned it,
even he who leaned on his masters bosom restifi^th of these thn^gs. Diez. vbi
supra.
Among all his honorable titles he mentions in the first place that he was
beloved of Jesus, acknowledging it only to be the fountain from which all
other his grace, originally were derived. For he was not beloved of Jesus for
that he leaned on his breast. or for that he durst ask himany question, or
for that he was the penman of this history: but on the contrary, he therefore
leaned on his masters bosom, and was acquainted with his secrets, and
testifies of these things, for that he was the Disciple whom Jesus loved. It
is Christ's grace, by which alone we are whatsoever we are, 1. Cor. 15.20.

There are also many other things which Jesus did.] Every thing that Jesus did
is not recorded in the Gospels history, but only so much as is necessary for
us to know; namely, that we might believe that Jesus Christ is the son of
God, and that (in believing) we might have life through his name: for so S.
John expounds himself, chap. 20. at the last verse. The Scripture then is
written principally for this end, that we might understand the mystery of our
salvation consisting in Vide Caiet. Marlorat. Aret. in I^an. 20.31.
two points especially. First, in believing that Jesus is the Christ, that is,
the Messia* promised unto the Father^ ever since the world began. Secondly,
that this Messiah albeit he were the seed of David, is not a mere Terence
Jesus, but the son of God: and so being both God and man, he is our only
Mediator, through whose name we must be saved. The Gospel has abundantly both
affirmed and confirmed these points, and therefore we need not any Piscat^^.
further revelations of the spirit in the business of our salvation. Men talk
much of the Philosophers stone, that it turns copper into gold; of
Cornu-copia, that it had all things necessary for food in it; of Panaces the
herb, that it was good for all diseases; of Catholicon the drug, that it is
instead of all purges; of Vulcans armor, that it was an armor of proof
against all thrusts and blows, etc. Seepref^te to the render before the
translation of our new English Bible.
Well, that which they did attribute vainly to these things for bodily good, we
may with full measure ascribe justly to the Scripture for spiritual. It is not
an armor only, but an whole armorie of weapons as well offensive as
defensive, whereby we may save our selves, and put the enemy to flight. It is
not an herb, but a tree, or rather a complete paradise of trees of life,
which bring forth fruit Apocal. 22.2
every month, and the fruit thereof is for meat, and the leaves for medicine.
In a word, it is a panarie of wholesome food, against fenowed traditions; a
physicians shop of preservatives, against poisoned heresies; a pandect of
profitable laws, against rebellious spirits; a treasury of most costly
jewels, against beggarly rudiments. Every thing indeed that Jesus did is not
set down, yet so much is written as is sufficient for our learning, so much as
may serve for a Psa 19.105.
lantern to our feet, and a light unto our paths, able to teach, improve,
correct, instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2. Tim. 3.16. I will end this
observation in the words of Ser 139. de Te^^.
Augustine: Tanta facta sunt, quantatun^ furs deb^erunt: tanta scripta sunt,
quanta nune legi debuerunt. A^g^sti^. epist. ^^bi^.
His salubriter* and pra^^ corriguntur, and parua nutriuntur, and magna ob^^ct
intur in ^^ni^. Nay (says he) the Scriptures are so fit and full. V^ ^^eis
quotidie proficerem, sicas solas abincunte pue^^tia ^^ que ad d^repitam
s^necturem maximo otio, summo studi^ m^^^reingeni^ co^arer ad discere.

The which if they should be written every one, I suppose that the world could
not contain the books that should be written] I find three diverse
constructions of this one verse. The first is metaphorical, the second
hyperbolicall, and the third literal. Tract. 124. in I^an.
Augustine, In loc.
Theophylact, Beda, Rupert metaphorically, or metonymically; understanding by
the world men of the world. Mundus non capit, idest, non intel^git, the world
cannot comprehend, that is, apprehend the books that should be written. A very
lanke conceit, for the world in this sense cannot understand so much as one
line of the Gospel; according to that of 1 Cor. 2.14.
Paul, The natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God.

Euthym. Calvin. Ar^^. Pis^ater.
Other take these words as spoken hyperbolically, for the spirit of God
(accommodating it self to the rudeness of men) uses elsewhere this kind of
figure. Deuteronomy. 1.28. The Cities of the Canaanites are said to have been walled
up to heaven, Exodus 3.17. The land of the same Canaanites is termed a soil
flowing with milk and honey. Psalm. 107. The men who go down into the sea in
ships, and occupy their business in great waters; are so tossed in the deep
by the stormy winds and waves, as that David says in the 26 verse. They mount
up to the heaven, and are carried down again to the depths. And so S. John in
auowing the world could not contain, etc. does intimate, that if all the
things which Jesus did should be written every one, the number of the books
in folio would be without number. As high walls, and huge waves are said to
reach heaven: even so these books hyperbolically to be greater then all the
world.

Is^dot. Pelus. lib. 2 epist. 99. Di^n^s. Alex. epist pr^^ri aduers. Here Is.
Samosaten. E^ron. annal. Tom. ^. ad an. 34. fol. 214.
Other construe this verse literally, Jesus is that eternal word in the
beginning, by whom all things were made, John 1.3. and by whose mighty word all
things are sustained. Heb. 1.3. working from the foundation of the world
hitherto. John 5.17. So that if every thing which Jesus did as God, both before
the world, and in the world should be registered: all this huge universe (though
it be Gods fair library) could not contain the books that should be written.
And thus (as you see) the conclusion of this Gospel is answerable to the
beginning, both intimating Christ's incomprehensible divinity. He made the
whole world at the first, and he gouernes all things in the world ever
lithens; and therefore most impossible that all his words, and works, and
wonders should be recorded in books: albeit every plant were a pen, every
drop of water ink, every foot of land paper, and every living creature a ready
writer. The Disciplethen who wrote these things (as Horace said of Homer) has
so fitly disposed of his whole story,

The Epistle
APOCAL. 14.1. I looked and lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, etc.


THis text is nothing else but a description of

Christ, a Lamb sitting on mount Sion. The Church, in quantity, an hundredth
forty and four thousand. qualitative, for Faith in that her confession, is
Open, having his name and his fathers name written in their foreheads, and a
voice like the sound of many waters, and great thunder. Harmonicall, singing a
new song of diverse parts, and yet all agreeing as the voice of harpers harping
with their harps.
Good works, in that her children are not defiled with women, and in their
mouths is no guile, for they follow the Lamb whithersoeuer he goes: and the
reason of all is, because they were redeemed from the earth, and from men, that
they might be the first fruits unto God and to the Lamb.


A Lamb stood on the mount Sion.] Christ the Son of God is the John 1.29.
Lamb of God, even the Lamb Rupert. Bullinger. A^etius.
here mentioned, as it is apparent by his correlatiue father. For so the text,
having his name and his fathers: a Ardens.
Lamb in figure, and a Lamb in fact. In figure, for Christ Jesus is our
Pascall Lamb, 1. Cor. 5.7. slain from the beginning of the world, Apocal.
13.8. prefigured in the sacrifices of the Law, so well as now presented in the
Sacraments of the Gospel. As one pithily, Prius profuit quam fuit: A Lamb
indeed, so meek as a Lamb, Act. 8.32.
Like a Lamb d^^^be before his shearer. A Lamb, for that he feeds all his
with his Job. 6.54.55
flesh, and clotheth all his with his Apoc. 7.9.
white robe of 2. Cor. 5.21.
righteousness, whereby we stand (as it is in our text) without spot before
the throne of God. And this Lamb sits not idle, nor lies asleep: but
stands, always in a Ardens. Bu^inger. Aretius.
readiness to protect his followers. He that keeps Israel, shall neither
slumber nor sleep, Psalm. 121.4. He stands not as the beast in fickle sand
or Apoc. 13.1.
sea; but on mount Sion, which cannot be removed, Psalm. 125 1. In the midst
of his inheritance the Napier.
Church, against which Matt. 16.18
hell gates shall not prevail: For Sion is a type of Christ's Kingdom, called
often in Galat. 4.26.
holy Scripture, Jerusalem above, Isay 2.2.
prepared in the top of the mountains, and exalted above the hills. He stands
on a mount, Marl^rat.
higher then either earth or sea, from whence the two beasts his opposites
arise So that he is willing to defend his followers, as standing; and able, for
that he stands on a mount. and left any should doubt of this, our Apostle
says, I looked, and lo. Two words of Aretius.
attention, assuring us hereby that the woman persecuted in the wilderness,
that is, the Church afflicted in the world, shall at the last have the
victory, though all the red Dragons on earth, and all the black devils in hell
furiously rage together against the Lord, and against his anointed. And here
give me leave to remember an Apud Io^n. Ra^^in ^er. 1. in (...) Joan.
^u^ngelist.
obseruable note touching the writings of S. John, how that in his Gospel he
teaches especially faith: in his Epistles, especially love: in his Apocalypse,
especially hope. This book being (as reverend In Apoc. con. 61.
Bellinger censure h) Euangeli^^ssine^ss liber, of all holy Scripture the
fullest of consolation.

And with him an hundred forty and four thousand.] This affoords Bullinger.
comfort, that the Lamb stands not alone, but has on his side Matt. 8.11.
many from East and West, as well Gentiles as Jews, having his fathers name
written in their foreheads. It is thought by Ardens. Rupert. Marl^rat.
some that this number is mystical, insinuating the perfection of Gods elect,
because both the duodenarie number and millinarie are numbers of perfection. It
is a Ar^tius.
certain number because the Lord knows who are his, 2. Tim 2.19. as having
their Luke 10.10. Apocal. 3.5.
names written in his book: yet a definite for an infinite (as almost all have
noted) in that the number of such as are with the Lamb is a multitude which no
man is able to number, Apocalypse 7.9. it is in it self a very great number,
but in comparison of the company favoring lies and following Antichrist, it is
a Luke 12.32.
little flock, a Matt. 7.14.
few people which are redeemed from the earth, selected out of those
innumerable troops of small and great, rich and poor, bond and free, whose
names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb, Apoc. 13.8 16.

Having his name and his fathers name written in their foreheads.] The vulgar
Latin, Aretas, Ardens, and Deusius and Brightman in loc.
other read (as the translation of Hen. 8 and our Communion book) His name,
and his fathers name: the which is more significant then that in other copies,
having only his fathers name. And the Ardens.
meaning is, that they profess themselves openly to be Christians,
acknowledging aperto front, that God is their father in his son lesu^, in
their Marl^rat.
deeds and doctrine appearing outwardly to the world, what they are inwardly to
themselves, according to that of 2 Cor. 4.13.
Paul, We believe, and therefore speak. Bu^inger.
Faith in the soul breaking forth into R^m. 10.9.
confession with the mouth, is the note whereby the friends of Christ are
distinguished from the followers of Antichrist. He that depends upon Saints
as much as upon his Savior, and trusleth in the pardon of the Pope more then
in the merits of Christ, has in his forehead the Apoc 13 16.
mark of the beast, and not the Apoc. 7.2.
seal of God. If Christ once dwell in our hearts by faith, his name will
instantly be written in our forehead.

And I heard a voice from heaven.] The militant Church on earth is called often
in holy writ, Mat. 22.2. See Gospel 20. Sund. after Trinit.
heaven, as being the way to the kingdom of heaven, and as having her Phil.
3.20.
conversation in heaven, and her affections set on things Coloss. 3.2.
above. This heaven has a voice, Bullinger.
for the Church is not mute, but vocal, openly professing her faith, and
praising God before the seat, and the four beasts, and the elders. Having a
voice like the sound of many waters, and of great thunder, and of harpers
harping with their harpes. Brightman. in loc.
Some by these three kinds of voices understand three degrees of the Churches
progress persecuted by the Dragon in the wilderness. First in the days of
Athenasu^s, Basile, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, etc. Her voice
(say they, but how truly judge ye) was indistinct and confused. For albeit the
learned writings of these most accurate Doctors in their age made a great noise
in the world, like the sound of many waters, yet many points of doctrine were
not so well explicated unto the common people then, as afterward they were.
Secondly, in the days of Wickliffe and Husse, and other Bo^^^ges, her voice
resembled the voice of great thunder. But now since her deliverance from the
wilderness, and her coming out of Babylon; her voice in the harmony of
confessions is like the consent of harpers harping with their h^rpes.

Rupert in loc.
Other say that the Scriptures voice speaking by the Church, is like to waters,
in that it refreshes all such as hunger and ^s.^. 55.1. Mat. 5.6.
th^rst after righteousness: and like to great thunder, in being B^^^g^r.
A^^us. M^r^r^^.
terrible to the ^icked: and like to the m^^i^ke of h^rpers, in being
d^le^table to the godly. The Preachers of the word are unto God the s^reet
sau^ur of Christ, is the n^ that are s^^ed, and in them that perish: to the ou^
the savor of death unto death, and to the other the savor of lif^ unto life,
2. Cor. 2 15 16.

X^pier.
Other think that many ^^sers are many nations, as in the 17. chapter of this
b^oke, verse. 15. The (...) which thou ^^w^st are people, and mu^^udes, and
nations, and tongues. And the great thunder is nothing else, but the thundering
voices of zealous and holy Preacher^. And the harpers h^m^^^ does intimate
spiritual reioicing together in the Lord. The Church then h^th a voice which
is much a being of many: yet mu^icall, in that those many concord in the maine,
lik^ h^rpers h^r^ing with their ^^r^^s. It is Ardens.
M^^^av^xex p^all^ntium mul^^tudine, sed del^ct^b^l^^ exco^son ^^^^su^^it^te.

And they sung as it were a new song] In regard of the matter a new song:
Brigh. man.
it was Adams old song before his fall, to praise God for his creation in
holiness and righteousness; but meeting a new song to the Lord for our
redemption and regeneration, whereby Gods image lo^t by sin is restored in us
again. O^ in regard of the manner, a new song: R^^^r^. N^^ier.
for whereas the lewe^ in ^he old Testament H^gg i^ S L^^ 1 25. 1. P^^ 1.10.
exp^cting the consolation of Israel, sung praises unto God ^or that their
Messiah and Savior should come: Christians in the new Testament magnife the
Lo^d for that Christ i^ come: Bl^ssed ^^e the Lord God of I^ra^l, for he has
v^^^ed and r^de^m^d h^^ people; for that the^r I^^ ^ 30.
eyes have seen his salvation, and their 1. ^^h. 1.1.
hands have h^ndled the word of life. Or in regard of the men, a n^w song,
(...). 18 in A^ al.
being sung by such as have put off the old man, and are new creatures in
Christ, 2. Cor. 5.17 a new song A (...)
for that it makes the party who sings it a new man. Or a new song, A^^ ^s.
Bu^^^ger in^^^.
in that it seems unto the world new; for Christ crucified the chief subject
of their new song seems unto the worldly wise mere foolishness, g 1 Cor.
1.23.
as it follows in our text. No man could learue the song, but the hundred
forty four thousand which were redeemed from the earth. As our Popish
adversaries having the Apoc. 13.16.
beasts mark both in their forehead, and in their right hand, impudently call
our most ancient and apostolic faith a new Gospel, and our divines
Iurgiuiciu^.
Euangelij quinti professores. But as learned Scaliger answered them acutely,
Nos nouatores non sumus, Responsad Serar.
sed vos estie veteratores: A Monk devoted to his superstitious order, and
trusting in his own merits is never able to learn how faith only justifies.
A carnal man addicted only to natural reason, is not able to discern the
things of God. A lew relying altogether upon his Circumcision, is not able to
sing another note. No marvel then if the song of Sion seems new to them all.

These ar^ they which were not defiled with women] Areta^.
This clause makes not any thing against honorable marriage, for how can that
be truly called a defiling, when as the bed is undefiled. Hebr. 13.4. and
therefore Hist. Tripart lib. 2. cap. 14.
Paphnutius openly pronounced in the Council of Nice, Cast^tatem esse cum
vxore propria concubitum: And Hom. de invent. crucis.
Chrysostom (though a great admirour of Virginity) says also primus graaus
castitatis, est syncera virgimt as: secundus, fidele coniugium. And D' Fulk. in
l^c.
so married couples are virgins as well as single persons, and ordinarily more
chaste in having Gods appointed remedy for 1 Cor. 7.2.
avoiding fornication. Before the Law the Patriarchs had wives: under the Law
the Priest^ had wives: after the Law, to wit, in the days of the Gospel (as
In 2 Cor. 11.
Ambrose peremptorily writes) all the twelve Apostles (except Saint John) had
wives. Baleus in vita N^c. 1.
And it was ever thought commendable for the Preachers of the word to marry at
their own discretion, as they did judge the same to serve better unto
godliness, until Pope Nicholas the first, Idem iu vita ^rig 7.
Hildebrand alias Hel-^rand and Innocentius the third forbad Priests marriage.
When upon a Ap^d ^^de^m in v^ta ^^noc^nt. 3.
witty fellow made this od old time: Pri ci^nire gula penu^^s cassatur,
Sac^rdos per hic and hec ol^n decli^atur:
Sed perhi^ solu^^^m^do (...) articulatur,
Cum per nostrum ^ra^^^lens (...) amo ^eat^r,
Non est In^^censius i^o^oc^rs (...)
Qui q^od f^cto doc^^, verbo (...):
E^ quo ^ o^m iu^^e^is ^^l^t habere,
Mo^^ ^^tus po^^fex stu^ ^prohibere.


What kind of Virgins Popes and popish Priests have been, you may read enough
Epistle ^. Sand^y in ^ent. Happily more than enough in ^^l^^ his
Treatiseconcern^ng English votaries. A profession of virginity wi^h. out true
chastity, is no be^ter than an apple growing in the lake of Sodom. (...) ^^e
De^.
N^^^m est prorsus religionis ge^^, lic^ta n^n facunt, and (...), ^^^qu am^is
nec he fac^^^^ m^alu^^ and n^n temperant a ra^in^. If the notation p^^a ^u^^^
(...) be good: and the r^le true Her n
V^nter ^era^^ ^^ro tac^^^ (...): I would not with many Popes to b^^^t of their
purity.

Paphia (...) ^'e^^, Veneris pr^l^s qusque Papaest.

We^l, Ne^^^r.
such as follow the Lamb, are neither def^led carnally with ^o^en (...) 1
Te^^. 4.4
^o(...) no^ yet spiritually with idols. In which respect the Church i^ called
a 2 C^r. 11.2
p^re (...), for that she run^ no^ a P^^l 1.^.33
who^ing with he^ own in^^ntions, committing (...) 6.36.
fornica^ion with ^ her lovers: but i, prepared for ^^^us^^ad ^ach w^^ch is
Christ. F^^^^e. (...). ^a^i^^s.
In this sense to worship idols and to serve strange Gods is to be defiled ^ith
wom^n, a^ our Apostle does insin^^^e in the 17. th^^er of th^s book, verse. 4.
And therefore the Papists (^^beit un married) de^^nding upon many Sain^s, ^re
not so good vi^gins a^ mar^^d Pro^est^nes wholly trusting in one Savior, and
(...) he (...) obeying his w^^^, and in their best en^eauo^rs ever ready to
ke^^e ^he word^ of h^^ ^aw, never fo^sak^ng him or his in w^nt, in^^^on, in
sickness in de^^h. And this he will acknowledge at the last day; saying to
them openly, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared
for you, for ye have followed me whithersoeuer I went. I was an hungered, and
ye gave me meat: I thirsted, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye
lodged me: I was naked, and ye clothed me: sick, and ye visited me: in prison,
and ye came unto me: whithersoeuer I went I had your company.

In their mouths was found no guile.] As they were chaste in mind, 1. Ioh.
5.21.
keeping themselves from idols; and chaste in body, not defiled with women: so
likewise chaste in Ardens.
tongue; for they did not 2. Cor. 4.2. adulterantes verbum, vti vulgar. Latin.
adulterate the word, or profess the faith in Marlorat.
hypocrisy; but having their Eccles. 21.26.
mouth in their heart, they Psalm 116.10
spoke because they believed, embracing the Gospel in simplicity, being also
studious of truth in their carriage toward men; Loving without dissimulation,
Romans 12.9. Casting off lying, Ephesians. 4.25. and all guile, 1. Pet. 2.1. Just in
their promise, not disappointing a neighbor though it were to their own
hinderance, Psalm. 15.5. Before men in respect of any scandalous offenses or
open crimes Luke 1.6.
unblameable, saying with the Lamb whom they follow, Ich. 8.46. See Gospe^ 5.
Sund. in Lent.
which of you can rebuke me of sin? Indeed their secret faults only known
to God are many, while they be clogged with flesh and blood, who can tell how
often he offends? and yet in the world to come they shall appear without spot
before the throne of God, as having all their spots covered with long white
robes of the Lamb, yea 1. John 1.7.
cleansed and made no spots by the blood of the Lamb, redeemed from earth and
from men, to be the first fruits unto God.

The blessed Innocents on this day murdered by cruel H^rod, were witnesses to
the Lamb, non loquendo, sed m^riendo, (says Ser. 11. de sanc^is.
Augustine) not by speaking, but by suffering for Christ, and so both his name
and his Fathers name were written in their fort heads, and their voice was li^e
the sound of many waters, and as the voice of great thunder, as it is in the
Gospel allotted for this Festival, In Rama was there a voice heard,
lamentation, weeping, and great mourning: and their crying was a song, a
doleful dittie to their parents ear, Rachel weeping for her children, and
would not be comforted, etc. yet Psa 116.13.
precious in Gods eye, so sweet as the voice of harpers harping with their
harpes. And this their sighing was a new singing, because they were A^gust.
(...) supra.
Primitie ma^tyrum, even the first fruits of martyrs unto God. And they
followed the Lamb whithersoeuer he went: the Lamb was white and ruddie, Cant.
5.10. that is (as Rup^rtus upon the place) candidus sanct^tate, rubisunius
passions: 1 ^ephon gir^^. c^n. 1. in fest S. In^^cent.
So they were white in their innocence being virgins in their chastity,
without any guile in their mouth, or guilt in their life; but in respect of
their blood shed for the Lamb, ruddie. So that (as David sings in the Psalm
8.2. Mat. 21.16.
Psalm) out of the mouths of very babes and sucklings he has made perfect
his praise. Christ assuredly got great praise by that hymn which Angels sung,
Glory be to God on high, and great praise by S. Steven his protomartyr, and by
S. John the Disciple whom he loved, as you have heard in their several holy
days: but his praise was made perfect by the mouths of babes and Innocents,
of whom he says in the Gospel, Mat. 19.14.
Suffer the little children, and forbid them not to come to me, for of such is
the kingdom of heaven. O blessed babe^, O^orius^on in sent. I^nocent.
who came to the wished haven without any tempest, Vide did^s. de ^e^gu^^. c^n.
d^ ^uga Christ.
enioiing the comforts of another life, before ye knew the miseries of this
life: Gir^n ^b^ s^p.
Qui prius in ^apitibus caronas, qu^m capistos accepisti^, having your heads
crowned with happiness, before they were covered with hair. Hero^ could never
have pleasured you so much in his kindness, as he did in his cruelty; for
where his impiety did abound, there Christ's pity did superabound, translating
you from your earthly mothers arms in this Psalm 84.6.
valley of te^res, unto your heavenly fathers bosom in his kingdom of glory.

P^u^e^^ius ^y^^. i^ Le^ph.
Saluete flores martyrum,
Quos lucis ^pso i^ lumine
Christi insecutor sustulit,
Seu turbo nascentes rosas.
Vos prima Christi victima,
Grex immolatorum tener,
Aram ante cuius simplices
Palma and coronis luditis.
The Gospel
MATTHEW. 2.13. The Angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a sleep, saying,
arise, and take the child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, etc.


THe Priests in the law were commanded that the Leuit. 6.13.
fire should ever burn upon the Altar, and never go out. And Ferus ser. 1. de
5. Joan. Euang.
so that the fire of our devotion (at this holy time) kindled upon the altar of
our heart might not be quenched by the water (which usually the cold serpent
casts out of his mouth, Apoc. 12.15.) The Church adioyneth unto the
celebratio^ of Christ's birth, other three festiuals in one week. Wherein her
meaning is not to withdraw our love from the Creator to the creature (for all
the twelve days are called Christmas, dedicated only to Christ's honor) but
that we might hereby praise this our Jesus incessantly both in himself and in
his Saints. And the reason (as Joan. R^ulin. ser. 2. de beatis Inn^cent.
some conjecture) why S. Steven, and S. John, and the blessed Innocents are
named above the rest, is happily to show that Christ came into the world to
save all sorts of men, of whatsoever degree. The Chiualdrie represented by S.
Steven, a resolute Knight and warrior in the Lords battle: the Clergy
represented by S. John, styled the Divine: the Commonaltie or Infantrie
represented by the silly children H^rod slew; or intimating that Christ was
borne for men of every several age, for men of perfect strength, as Steven: for
old men on their crouches, as S. Who lived after (...) on 63 (...), ^^ H^^ro^
i^ ^us ^ (...) By(...) I^m. (...) in 99. (...) 49
John: for Infants in their cradles, a* the blessed Innocents. Or it may be
that these Saints are mentioned at (...) ^up^a
Christmas rather then other, because Christ faith in the Gospel, If any man
will follow me, let him forsake himself, and t^ke up his cross. Mat. 16.24
the servant is not greater th^n his Master, if they have persecuted me, they
will persecute you also, Ioh. 15.20. Now there be Br^ rd sr. ^. Jon cert. ^em
^^r^n. J^n ^^ and (...) ^ ^ i.e.
three kinds of suffering or martyrdom in Christ's cause. The first, Volunta^is
and operis, in will and in act, as that of S. Steu^n. The second, Voluntatis
sed n^n operis, in will but not in act, as that of S. John. The third, Operis
sed non voluntatis, in act but not in will, as on this day the death of the
Bethlemitills Innocents. And for as much as S Steuens martyrdom come^ nee est
unto the suffe^ings of Christ, his festiual is next to Christ's in the first
place, S. John's in the second, the blessed Innocents in the third. And so
Christ (as it is Cant. 5.10.) is white and ruddie, the chiefest among ten
thousand. L ^ part. 10 13.
Cand^d^^ in Io^nne, rub^^undus in Stephano, electus ex mi^^^us in
Innocentibus. In the Gospel allotted for this ^ay, Two points are more
principally remarkable: 1. Christ's humanity, for that he was a child, and did
Ar^eus. (...).
si^e. 2. Herod's inhumanitie m^rthering T^^ (...), etc. (...).
Innocent babes who neither would nor could hurt him. Ha^^us, All the children
that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, f^u^ two ^ee^es o^d and
under, according to the ^^me which he had ^^^gently known of the Wiseme^. All
in every place nere the place where Christ was borne, not sparing his own ^
child, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; which occasioned ^sa (...)
(...) 2 c.^. 4.
Augustus Caesar tauntingly to say, ^^ hi^ este ^e H^rod^s p^rcum qu^m puerum.
It is better to be H^rod, ^o^ then his son.



The A^gell of the Lord appeared unto Joseph in a sleepe] Lut^er, Culman,
Bea^xamis.
Hence we may learn what a tender care God has over his children in their
greatest affliction, Psalm. 3.47.
his Angel ^arrieth round about them that fear him, and delivers them; and
therefore let us 1 Pet. 5 7. Psalm. 55.23.
cast all our care upon him, for he cares for us: Psalm. 103.13.
as a father pitieth his own children; even so the Lord is merciful to them
who fear him. It may besaid of our heavenly Father, as the Virgil.
Poet of an earthly parent,

Omnism Ascanio chari stat cura parentis.

Take the child and his mother] He who was in the beginning that eternal word
and Esaias 9.6.
everlasting Father, about this time for our sake came down from heaven, and
became an infant and a child. Nobis puer natus, Esaias 9.6. Unto v^ a child is
borne, and unto us a son is given: a child, not in meekness only (for so
the greatest man ought to be as a little child. 1 Cor. 14 20. Concerning
ma^^tiousnesse be children, and Mat^h. 18.3.
except ye become as little children, ^^e shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven) bat a child in weakness also, Luk 2.7.
wrapped in swaddling clothes, and lai^d in a cratch. It is not said take thy
child and thy wife: but the child and his mother: Hieron. in l^c. Sec
Gospel, d^m. 1. p. i^ pip^an.
hereby signif^ing, that Joseph was not the natural, but only the nursing
father of Jesus. It is true that this Angel appea^ing to Io^ph at another time
before Marite was delivered of her child, said unto him expressly (for avoiding
suspicion of incon^inencie) Mat. 1.20.
fear not to take Mary for thy wife; but after the birth of Christ (as the
H^lariu^, The p^ylact. I^^sen.
Doctors ^bser^e) ^o show that he was borne of a Virgin, M^i^s ^^le is the
mother of Jesus, not the wife of Io^ep^. Again, it is not take the mother and
her child, but the ch^^^e and his m^th^r: Chrys^st.
insinuating that his grea^e^ care ^hou^d be to p^ou^de for the babe, both in
re^^e^ of d^^ger (for Herod sought to destroy him) and in respe^^ of d^rie,
because the child is greater then hi me^he^, ^^b^ing her Luke 1.47.
Savior so well as her son.

And (...)] Christ's hand ente^ta^nment at (...) into the world, ^^ewes that h^^
^ingdome was not of John 18.36.
this world: he had (as Ser. i^ f^r. 4. beb^.
Bernard sweetly) while he lived pass^uam a^tionem, and when he died actiuam
passionem. It is observed by S. Luke, Acts 1.1. that Christ always first did and
then taught, he that would have us to Mat. 10.13.
flee from City to City, flees himself from Country to Country: before he
grants the patent, he gives the Ardens. Anselm.
pattern, fleeing, and that in the night Asusculus.
warily; or he did flee now for that his hour was not yet come; he had not
as yet John 17.4
done the work, and the will of his Father, for which he came into the world,
Beauxami^
Christus enim ^otam causam nostra salutis occiderat, s^ se paruulum
permisisset occidi. But whether does he flee? into Egypt: as being out of
Herod's Aretius. Mald^nst.
jurisdiction; or into Egypt, to Jansen.
signify that Gods kingdom should be translated from the Jews unto the
Gentiles: and so Joseph in carrying Jesus and his mother into Egypt, Anselm.
represents lively the blessed Apostles and Preachers, in conueying the Gospel
unto nations in time past, Ephesians. 2.11.
alians from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of
promise, without Christ, and so without God in the world. O the deepnesse of
the riches of Gods mercy! Babylon and Egypt whilome were T^^^phylact. in loc.
malorum officine, the very shops of all villainy: but now behold the Wisemen
come from the one, and Christ here flees into the other. Chrys^st.
V^ populus qui ante fu^rat persecutor populi primogeniti fire et custos fi^^
vnigeniti: but what need we such a quare, seeing heavens messenger in the text
has uttered a quare, namely, that is might be fulfilled which was spoken of
the Lord by the Prophet, saying, out of Egypt have I called my Son. How that
word, Numb. 23.22. or Hosea 11.1. originally spoken of Israel his Exodus 4.22.
adopted son, is well applied upon this occasion unto Christ his natural
son; See Rupert, Ribera, Calvin in Hosea 11.1. Ia^sen. Concord cap 11.
Bea^xamis harmon. Tom. 1. fol. 73. Caietan, Arboreus, Maldonat. in loc.

Rupert.
Mystically] God calls his children out of the worlds Egypt, delivering us
from the power of Colos. 1.13.
darkness, and calling us into marvelous light, 1. Pet 2.9 Maldonat.
or out of Egypt, for that his children grow best in grace when they be taught
in the school of affliction: or (as Rupert observes) it may be that Jerusalem
is called here, as it is Apoc. 11.8.
elsewhere, Egypt spiritually, for that her Prince and people were so cruel as
Egypt, in seeking to destroy the child Jesus.

Then Herod when he saw that be was mocked of the Wisemen.] It is usual with
God to Job 5.13.
take the wily in their own craftiness; and therefore seeing Herod mocked
the Wisemen, it pleased the Lord to direct the Wisemen in such a course, that
they likewise mocked Herod. The crafty Fox deluded the Wisemen in telling them
he would (if after their diligent search he should understand where he was)
Matthew. 2.8.
adore the babe, for his intent was Raulin. ser. 3. de B. Innocent.
sauire, non seruire, to woorie, not to worship, that innocent Lamb. And the
Wisemen deluded Herod in returning to their Country not by Jerusalem as they
went, but another way. Then Herod seeing he was mocked of the Wisemen, was
exceedingly wroth, and sent forth men of war, etc. Culman.
for when once tyrants cannot prevail with craft, they come to cruelty: when
Politicians Rhetoric fails, Carters Logic must do the feat.

Joan. Osorius.
Great bodies are discerned easily with a little light, but small things are not
found in the dark without a great light. God the Father in the Creation of the
world is so glorious and so great, that the little light of nature shows his
handie work, Psalm. 19.1. but God the Son in our Redemption is so little,
that we need a great star to direct us unto the babe Jesus lying in a manger,
a large measure of faith and grace to find the great God made a little child.
No marvel then if Herod could not find, seeing he did seek not in Deus enim
non crudelitate sed cred^litate quare^dus. I^seb. I ^^s. ^om. 1 de Epiphania.
faith, as hoping to be saved by Christ; but in fury, meaning to destroy
Christ. And the reason hereof is rendr^d in this present Chapter at the 3.
verse, When Herod heard of Christ's birth at Bethlehem, he was troubled, and
all Herusalem with him, as fearing that this babe being lineally descended from
the seed of King David, should in time, challenging the Scepter of Judea,
thrust him out of his kingdom.

Pr^dentius (...).
Successor instat, pellimur,
Satelles i, f^rrum rape,
Perfunde C^nas s^nguine.
Mas om^is infans occ^de^,
Scrutare nutricum ^inus,
Inter^ materna ^ber^.
Ensem cruenter pusi^,
O foolish Herod, will thou not suffer the King of heaven and earth, and the
whole world, to reign in ^u^ie? will thou be so barbarous, as fearing thy
successor, to kill thy Savior? Well may thou M(...).
seek, but thou thalt not see the destruction of his Kingdom: Heb. 1.8.
for his Scepter is a right Scepter, and his Trone is for ever and ever. Well
may thou destroy the bodies of poor children, but their lives are C^l ^^.
3.3.
h^d with the babe Jesus in God: and ^o thy mischief shall turn to mercy.
Leo set. 1. ^^ epipha^.
Quo^ Rex impius eximit ma^do, Christus inserit Carlo: for they died for him
who was to die for them, and so death had no conquest over them: Lu^^er (...).
in loc.
Moriuntur propter Christum, qui(...) facit vt ips^ mi^^ morte teneri possent.

Herod R^^^^, Os^tiui, G^^^ in l^^ and Leos^^. 6 de e^^p^^n.
represents the devil, who Ap^. 12.4.
stands before the woman in the wilderness great with child, ready to
devour her babe. He knew that the G^^. 3.1^.
seed which should break his head, was to be borne of the Jews; and therefore
caused Pharao to murder all the Hebrew males, Exodus 1. and stirred ^p Haman to
destroy the whole Nation of the Jews, Ester 3. and Athalia to kill all the
sons of David, 2. Kings 1^. and here so soon as the noise was of Christ's
birth, he did cut the throats of all the children in Bethlehem, and in all the
co^sts thereof from two years old and under. Mystically, Satan as soon as he
sees in an^^ any good motion, he stands (as Herod here) ready to kill it
although it be never so little a babe.

In R^man as there a voice heard] That is, Hieron. Muses (...). I^nsen.
in excelso, for the voice of blood is loud, and Genesis 4.10.
c^ieth even from earth unto heaven: every murder is sacrilege, for that our
body are the temples of the holy Ghost 1 Cor. 6.19. Herod then at once
committed many fo^le sacriledges, in slaying so many both in town and
country, who were so great innocents, in being so little children, that as
Him, in ep^p^an.
Prudentius excellently,

Locum minutis a^rubus
Vix interemptor invenit
Que plagade seendat patens,
Iugloque mayor p^gio e^t.
This barbarous outrage caused lamentation, weeping, and mourning: Chrysostom.
that is, lamentation of the mothers, weer^^^ of the children, and such a
mourning on all sides, as that the cry penetrating the clouds, and knocking at
heaven, gate did James 5.4.
enter into the cares of the Lord of hosts.

Iuutnous.
Horrendis grauiter Coelum pulsasse querelis.

The Epistle
Romans 4.8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin, etc.


Our Apostle M^larct. ^il man. P^^^.^ in loc.
con^^mes in this Chapter that do(...) which he delivered in the former,
namely, (...) of the Law, but freely (...): and this he proves in our text by
(...) ^^pecially,

1. From Psalm. 32.1.
(...) money, (...) is the man, etc.

2. From (...) example, We say that faith was imputed unto Abraham for
righteousness, etc.

Now Paul mentions Abraham and David in this controversy, Partus, Pes^^can,
Grymus (...) D^ctor Wilet ^n loc.
because their works were most glorious among the Jews, in so much as they
called Abraham John 8.53.
father, and David is styled a man Act^ 13.22.
according to Gods own heart. The pattern then of Abraham accounted righteous
before God by faith, and the precept of David, affirming that our blessedness
consists in the remission of our sins, and not in the perfection of our
virtues; are both exceeding fit, and well accommodated unto the present purpose.

Blessed is the man] By blessed in the Psalm, Paul understands here
justified: Martyr, ^^ loc.
for justification is blessedness begun, glorification blessedness perfited. In
this life blessedness is but begun; and therefore David faith in the cited
Psalm, For this shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee in a
time when thou may be found. And Christinioyneth us daily to pray, for give
us our trespasses: in the world to come blessedness is consummated, for when
we shall have no more sin, then we shall have no more sorrow.

Whose unrighteousness is forgiuen] Some Apud Prim as. and O^cumen is loc.
id^m Hieron and Genebra^^us recitant in Psalm. 31.
distinguish thus; iniquities are forgiven in Baptism, covered in repentance,
not imputed in martyrdom A^selm. in loc.
Other thus, (...), are transgressions against the word written, according to
that, 1 John 3.4. and so the Jews having Gods Law did offend: (...), are
trespasses against the rule of nature, not engraven in stone, nor written with
ink; but imprinted in the conscience: and so the Romans 2.14.
Gentiles having not the law were sinners. G^^an in loc.
Other thus, original iniquities are forgiven in Baptism quoad Culpam and
actual transgressions are covered in love, quoad p^nam: or iniquit^t^t, are
faults of infidelity, called in holy Scripture sin Catex^chen, John 16.8. He
will repro^^: the world of sin, that ^, as Christ expounds himself of
unbelief, peccata, are faults in manners. Caitla^^^^^.
as other, our sins are forgiven, in respect of the wrong done to God, and
covered in respect of the shame due to us; Hieron. in Psalm 31.
vt sic velentur, n^ in indicio reuclentur. For in sin three things are to be
considered especially: 1. An injury done to God, Aquin. in loc.
and that is for given. 2. An inordinate act, the which once being done, cannot
be undone, but is a blot or stain whereby the soul is defiled, and that is
laid here to be covered, and elsewhere to be 1 John. 17.
washed away. 3. The guilt of eternal death, and that is not imputed.


Whosoever then is in Christ, has all his sin and every thing in all his
sin for given. covered, not imputed: for these three signify the Ambro^ and
Lombar. in loc.
same, because that which is covered, is not seen; and that which is not
seen, is not imputed; and that which is not imputed, is forgiven. All his sin
is put out of Gods Ier. 31.34.
remembrance, cast as it were behind his Esa. 38.17.
back, so covered with Christ's grace, so buried in Christ's grave, that not so
much as the print of one little fault appears in the words of In Psalm. 31.
Augustine; Sitexit peccat a Deus, noluit aduertire: si noluit aduertere,
noluit animaduertere: sinoluit animaduertere, noluit punire, neli^t agnoscere,
malutt ignoscere: so that the saying of the Prophet ( Blessed is the man whose
unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered) contains a M^lanct.
definition of justification It is Gods free pardon in remitting our
iniquities; Marl^rat. and Piscater. in loc
for the Publican is said expressly to be instified, in that God was merciful
to him a sinner, Luke 18.13.14.

^m^n. and M^^ ^ct in loc.
This makes against Osianders deified righteousness, as also the Popi^h
inherent justice; for God is our Psalm. 4.1.
righteousness, and Christ our holiness, 1. Cor. 1.30. Being justified Romans
3.24.
freely by grace, through Romans 4.5.
faith in him who justifies the ungodly. O^^ m^n. in loc.
Imputat 'D^us homini iustiti^m vt compati^ns. vt dissensans, vt beneu^lens:
Dimissio etenim ad compassion ^, obiectio ad dispersion^m, non imputar^ ad
bene^^lentt^m pertinet. See Epistle 25 Sund. after Trinity.

Whereas it is objected that the blessed man is iustised by works in part,
because in his spirit there is no guile, as the text runs in David, how
soever omitted here by Paul; Vtis^pra. Idem Martyr. in loc.
Augustine answers aptly, that the blessed man has in his heart no guile,
for that he does not disse^nble his sin, but humbly confess his faults. I
said I will acknowledge my sins unto the Lord, and so thou for gave the
wickedness of my sins. Every Christian may ^^y with our 1. Cor. 11.10.
Apostle, When I am weak, then am I strong. And God also says unto such as
feel their infirmities, as he did unto Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee,
for my power is made perfect through weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. And therefore the
true penitent bragges not or his vertue^ as the Pharisie, but of his
infirmities as Paul, acknowledging ingeniously that his happiness consists in
the remission of his sins. Hieron. epist. ad ^res^phen.
He^ omnibus sol^ perfectio, si se mueriur imperfectos. And whereas some
further object how David says elsewhere, Psalm. 1.1.
Blessed is the man that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, etc.
And blessed is he that Psalm. 41.1.
considers the poor, etc. And blessed are they that are Psalm. 119.1.
undefiled, etc. Melinct. Calvin. Martyr.
Our Divines answer, that those place; and the like presuppose faith a ways,
according to that Apostolical axio^e, Romans 14.23.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Faith is the Ho^. of god works, part. 1.
ne^t of (...): albeit our birds be never so fair, yet they will be lost,
except they be brought forth in true b^l^efe. The sparrow has (...) an house,
and the swallow a rest where ^he may lay her young, even thine Altar, O Lord,
etc. Psalm. 84.3. Such as are faithful, having their (...) for given, and
their sin covered, are blessed men, and all their worker as being laid upon
Christ's Altar, are most acceptable to God. But faith In P^. 83 and I^mbard, ^.
(...) 41
Augustine, Heretics and ^^^^dels in doing glorious acts and honorable
deeds, have not where to lay their young; and therefore they must of necessity
come to naught, as the Fathers of our Common Law speak, Meritur act^ cum
person^, their a lions are damnable with their persons. See Gospel on all
Saints day.

Came this blessedness then upon the Circumcision? It is fit in urging
Abraham's example, to reconcile S. James, affirming in his Epistle, cap. 2.
verse. 21. that Abraham was instified through works: and S. Paul auowing here
that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness. Calvin. Beza Mar^rat in
2. Jacob.
Our Divines answer, that S. Paul speaks of the causes of his justifying
before God: but S. James of the signs of his justifying before men. S. Paul of
Abraham's justification, exprior^: S. James of Abraham's justification, ex Ar^^^^
in 2. l^c ^.
posteriori. S. Paul of the justifying of Abraham's (...)^d D. W^^^^ in loc.
person: Saint James of the justifying of a particular act in offering Isaac be
son.

Now Paul proves Abraham to be justified by faith, M^a^ct. Martyr. Ar^t.
ex ordine can^arum, in the 9.10.11.12. verses. And then ex causa promissionis,
in the 13.14. The cause preceeds, or at the least is always conioined with his
effect; but Abraham was justified when he was yet uncircumcised, Ergo,
Circumcision was not the meritorious cause of his justification. Abraham (as
Melan^thon observes out of the Scriptures evidence) was called out of Haran,
and justified when he was seventy five years old, Gen 12.4. But circumcised
in the ninety ninth year of his age, Genesis 17.24. Abraham then was
justified 24. year before Circumcision was instituted, and (as our Apostle
Galat. 3.17.
theweth elsewhere) four hundred and thirty years before the Law was given:
Ergo, father Abraham had the pardon of his sin not by Circumcision, or any
other work of the Law; but only by faith, apprehending and applying Gods holy
promise concerning the blessed seed. See Epistle 13. Sunday after Trinity.

Wherefore then served Circumcision? It was unto him a sign and a seal of the
righteousness of faith, verse 11.

Pere^^^. Idem ^^re L^mb^rd^n I^ and Hem^^g ^^r de C^^^em. D. m.
Signum, Memoratiuum, a sign of commemoration of the Covenant between God and
Abraham, and of the promise which he received: to wit, 1. Of the multiplying of
his seed. 2. Of inheriting the land of Canaan. 3. of the Messiah which should
be borne of his seed. And for this cause the sign was placed in the Th^mas
part. 3. q^est 70. art. 3.
generatiue part. Representatinum, a sign representing Abraham's excellent
faith, as it is afterward called a seal of the righteousness of faith.
Distinctinum, a sign whereby the Jews were distinguished from all other
people. Demonstratinum, a sign showing the natural disease of man, even
original ^inne, and the cure thereof by Christ. Prafiguratinum, a sign
prefiguring Baptism, and the spiritual circumci^ion of the heart.


A Seal: For that it is a Chry ^^ The^hyl^ct.
witness of faith received. As being an Aq^^^.
express sign of the thing signified: Abraham believed his seed should be
multiplied, and ideo congrueuter accep it signum in membro generationis. As
Ger^an, Lombard, Aquin.
sealing up secretly this mystery, that the Savior of the world should be
borne of the seed of Abraham. Because it was a Calvin, ^eza, Piscat^r.
confirmation of Gods promise to father Abraham, as the Letters Patent of Kings
are sealed for better assurance. Vt obsignaret iustitiam fidei, to seal the
righteousness of faith in his heart.


And Melanct. in loc.
here we may learn the true doctrine of the Sacraments against Anabaptists,
ascribing too little to them, and Papists attributing too much. Anabaptists
affirm that Sacraments are bare badges of Christianity, distinguishing a
Christian from an Infidel, as a gown did a Roman from a Grecian. But
Anglican. Co^sess. art. 25. signa n^n m^re significati^^: sed exhibitius
Musculus in Matthew. 26.
we teach out of our Apostle, that the Sacraments are not only signa, but also
signacula, certain sure witnesses and seals of grace, whereby God inuisibly
works in us, and does not only quicken, but also strengthen our faith in him.
And against our adversaries of Rome we conclude from hence, that the
Sacraments justify not, ex opere operato; for if they be the seals of the
righteousness of faith, how can they save by the bare work done without
faith? Hugo cited by Hooker, Eccles. pol. lib. 5. 60.
Ista non tribuunt quod per ista tribuitur, in the words of reverend V^i
supra. 57.
Hooker, they be not physical instruments of our salvation as having in
themselves any vital efficacy: but only moral instruments of Gods grace, the
use whereof is in our hands, the effect in his; according to that of Tract. 27.
in Joan.
Augustine, Multi nobiscum manducant and bibunt temporaliter sacramenta, qui
bababunt in fine aeterna tormenta. Touching Circumcision see further in the
Gospel ensuing, and concerning the second argument used here, taken from Gods
promise made to father Abraham. Epistle 13. Sund. after Trinity.

The Gospel
Lvke 2.15. And it fortuned, as soon as the Angels were gone away from the
shepeards into heaven, etc.


AL^eit this text commend unto your consideration a great many of remarkable
virtues of the glorious Angels in preaching Christ, of the good sheepheards in
seeking Christ, of blessed Mary the Virgin in keeping Christ, as his mother in
her loving arms, as his handmaid in her lowly heart; yet the more proper and
proportionable parts accommodated unto the present feast are principally two: 1
The C^c^^ci^ion of Christ. 2 The imposition of his name Jesus.


Of these first I purpose to speak jointly, then severally. These two were
joined together, (...).
to thevv that Christ our Mediator between God and man, was both a man in
being circu^^^d, and God in being Iesius (...).
that is, a Sau^^r of his people from th^^ (...): (...)
or Christ happily was called Jesus, and (...) at the ^a^^^me to ^^gnitie that
there is no remission of sin (...) it (...) of blood. Heb. 9.^1. He could
not therefore become Jesus, until he had given us a taste of his blood; for
we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins
according to his rich grace ^^phe^. 1.7. or the dolorous Circumcision and
saving Jesus are coupled together, insinuating that there should be persecution
and bloodshed in the world for the preeching of this name. So Christ in the
M^^. 10.^^.
Gospel assured his Apostles expressly, Ye shall ^^ ^^ted of ^^men ^^ my name.
And (...) 1^.9.
Paul says of himself while he was an oppressor of the Church, I ^^r^ly
thought in my self that I ought to doem (...): or these two were conjoined, to
put vsin mind ho^ God does exalt the humble and mecke. Christ humbled P^^.
2.5.9.
himself (quoth Paul) and became obedient, W^^efore Go I has also highly
exalted him, and g^uen him a n^me ^houe every name, that at the name of Ie^us
every ^nee should bow, both of things in ^^^^en, and things in earth, and
things under earth. Or it may be that these were both at once, to witness that
Christ is the true L^^ 5.31.
Physician of the world. For when all mankind was exceeding sick in head, and
heavy in heart, when from the sole of the foot unto the head, there wa^ nothing
whole but wounds, and swellings, and sores full of corruption, as it is in the
Esaias 1.5.6.
Prophet; then our blessed Savior came to Lu^^. 1.68.
visit his people, Luk 10.34.
binding up their wounds on this day, Pelaculae carnis, and pouring in oil and
wine, washing them even with the wine of his blood, and mollifying them also
with the sweet oil of his saving name Jesus. For V^de Case^^on, not ^n epist.
^issen. ad ^u^at.
some derive (...) of the Greek (...). Or (as almost all Interpreters observe)
these two went together, (...) Cal^in. Ar^t^i^l^e.
for that it was usual among God people the Jews to give names unto children
in their circumcision, as it is among us in Baptism. So we read in the first
lesson appointed to be read this morning prayer, that God altered Abrams name
when he did institute Circumcision. Thy name shall not any more be called
Abram, but Abraham: for a father of many nations have I made thee. Now the
reason hereof is plain, F^^ming. p^s^^la.
that as often as we hear our selves named, we might instantly call to mind
the Covenant between God and us in holy Baptism: to wit, how God on his part
promised to be our God, and we vowed on our part by Godfathers and Godmothers,
that we would forsake the devil and all his works, the vain pomp of the
world, the carnal desires of the flesh, and continue Christ's faithful
soldiers and servants until our lives end. Hitherto concerning Circumcision,
and the name Jesus jointly: let us now treat of these parts apart, and first
of Circumcision which is Ardens ^em. d^ Circum. Them.
Threefold, Carnal, under the Law. Threefold, spiritual, under grace.
Threefold, Celestial, in the kingdom of glory.


The first is, S^cram^ntum ^acr^res: the second, sacra (...): the third, res
sacramenti. The first, in it due time was good: the second, at all time^ is
better: the third, in eternity best of all. The first is ^a^lin. se^. 1. i^
^u^cum. Them.
nascen(...), every manchild of eight d^ies old among you shall ^he
circumcised, Gene^. 17.12. The second is renascenti^^, a circumcision of the
heart in the spirit, Romans 229. when as the regenerate by the sword of the
spirit (which is sharper then the (...).
sharp knives used in circumcision, yea sharper then any Heb. 4.12.
two edged sword as being a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart)
do not only circumcise the fore, kin: but (...)
all the power of the soul, and all the parts of the body. Circumcising their
eye, (...) they look upon a lib 31.1.
damse^^, or behold vanity. Circumcising their ears and their lips, hedging
their possessions ^rit ^ t^ornes, and making doors and bars for their mouth,
Ecclesiast, 28.24. Hedging their ears again't heresy, backbiting, ^ttery:
barring their mouth against E^^^. 4.2^.
lying, (...) 20.7.
blasphemy, Eph^^. ^.4.
foolish ^^lking. Circumcising their hands that they steal no more, but work
the thing that is good, Ephesians 4.28. Circumcising their feet that they be not
P^^^. ^4.6.
swift to shed blood. Circumcising their very thoughts, Esaias 1.16 Wash you make
you clean put away your ^^^^tents out of my sight, as our old English
translation according to the vulgar Latin. In a word, cutting of all A^^^.
superfluous lusts of the flesh, and all superfluous cares of the world,
casting off all the old man which is corrupt, and putting on the new man which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness Ephesians. 4.22. The
third kind of circumcision is resurgentium, in the world to come, when all
superfluity shall be cut off utterly, when as we shall appear before Gods
throne without any A^^. 14.^.
spot in our soul, or 1 C^^. 15.53.
corruption in our body.

Now the circumcision of Christ here mentioned is that of the flesh: Hem^^g.
^^t. ^^^.
for Almighty God before man's fall, and after is fall; before the Law, under
the Law, and after the Law, certified his will unto man, especially by two
things, an understanding mind, and a perceiving sense. When God had created
A^^m he put him in Paradise, giving him his Ge^. 2.
lord as a witness of hi^ will, and unto the word he did add a twofold
outward sign namely, the tree of life, and the tree of knowledge of good and
evil. After Ad^^ous fall, he gave him a promise touching the blessed seed,
Genesis 3.15. and added thereunto sacrifices as outward signs of his word. When
the flood was ouerpast, he made a promise never to destroy the world again
with water, and he made the Genesis 9.13.
Rainbow a sign of the same. He promised deliverance from the bondage of
Egypt, which he performed also: but he sealed the promise with the Paschal
Lamb. Exodus 12. To father Abraham he gave his promise that his seed should be
multiplied, and in perpetual remembrance thereof he did institute
Circumcision. Gen 17. At the length in the fullness of time he gives his own
Son, and by him he promises John 3.16.
everlasting life to such as believe, the which he confirms with two
Sacraments, as seals of his grace; Baptism, and the Lords supper. Thus the
father of mercies in all ages evermore provided for our weakness, that we
might ( Aug H^ming. and T^rrecrem. ex ponunt third de sacramento c^rporis
Chrisii.
as it is in the Psalm 34.8.
Psalm) taste and see how gracious the Lord is; and therefore such as are so
spiritual as that they cannot endure significant ceremonies and outward rites
in the Church: have run a violent course quite contrary to the goodness of
God and meekness of his holy spirit, who does instruct the conceiving mind by
the perceiving sense. For the Sacraments (as Apud Marty. ^^m in Romans 4.
Augustine speaks) are visible words, and Circumcision (in the judgment of In
Romans 4.
Chrysostom) was a Preacher of the righteousness of faith. I confess that
the Jewish ceremonies are now no more necessary ndal prolog. in L^uit.
then a token left in remembrance of a bargain is necessary when the bargain
is fulfilled: but christian rites ordained by lawful authority for outward
comeliness in the Church ought to be retained, as having Hooker Eccl. p^lit.
lib. 5.. 65.
more in weight then in sight.

In the C^r^^^^ti^^on of ^h^^^t ob^^e^ue these ^ po^n^s.
1 The^i^e when, the e^ghth day. 2 The^ ^^e ^he^e, employed here for that C^^^i:
but exp^essed in the first Lesson a^^o^^e^ for this a^^ nin ^^rayer. (^en
17.11. to be the (...) 3 The e^^se ^hy, (...) that is (^ in the wo^d^ fo^^o
(...) ^^^r the L^^^.
When the eighth (...)] Ch^^e en were circume^sed on the e^ghth day, fo^th^^ in
this tender age they co^^d more e^stly b^^re the g^^ese of circumcision, or
e^re^meised on the e^^gh^h d^y, (...)
h^^^use tha^ is the day ^h^rein our ble^sed Savior ^^ofe ^^^m the dead. Seven
day signify the time o^ this ^^efe^e world and the ^^gh^h d^y the
re^^^e^^ion, when al^co^uption of the ^eth shall he e^^o^^, accord^^g to that
o^ Paul ^ C^r 15.5^. T^^s (...) (...) For th^s end ^he circumci^^on kni^e (...)
m^de of (...) Exodus 4.25. I^ ^a 5.2. To si^niti^ ^h^ ^^^ece^e (...) C^^cumc^^on
is by Christ the ^ocke and ^h^ad co^e^ ^^en^.

C^^cumci^^on ^^s placed in the generatiue p^^t for th^eere^^on e^^^^^ally.
First, for that it ^as a se^^e of G^^^^^ ^^e th^^ C^^^^t h^^^d ^e ^o^ne of
Ab^^^^m^ (...). Se^^nd ^^^ee^^e the prop^^^tion of original^ ^^nne (...).
Thi^dly, Q^^^^^^ (...) co^ci^i^^^^ (...) O^ (...) o^he^ ^o^ tha^ i^ (...) ^^^ne
of G^^ (...) the ^^ent and h^^ ^e^^ (...). Genesis 17.7. (...)

The ^^^^^ns^ h^ C^^^ (...) ^ecei^ed and b^rne (...), are ^^ni^^^^^.

1 To show that he was of the seed of Abraham^. Heb. ^.16. 2 To declare
himself a member of the Jewish. Church, in which every man child was
circumcised. 3 To ^ (...) an. (...). 30.
demonstrate that he had true flesh, against (...): and such a flesh as was
not of the same substance with his deity, Co^ (...) corpus, against
Apol^naris: or fetched from heaven, as Val^ntinus imagined; he was, I say
circumcised, to show that he was made of the seed of (...) accor^^^^ to the
(...). Romans 12. 4 For that he was the truth, of which Circumcision was a type,
Ca^^^^^ c^n. ^ (...). d^^.
V^ ^^^rami^^ ^^ritas ^^ir^^.
But the principal reason i^ in^^nuated in the text, for that their required
that eue^y man child should be cir^^^^s s^d. He therefore was circumcised to
^^e ^hi^ obedi^nce to the l^w; Ca^a^h. 4.4
W^^^ the ^al^es of ume wa^ come, God (...) ^^th his (...) m^^e o^ a ^oman,
make under the Law, that ^e ^^i^^ re^^ m^t^^m that were v^der the Law. As then
he ^a^ borne for ^s, Esaias 9.6. Puer natus ^st ne^ is; And Luk 2.11. V^^^s
n^tu^^, Unto you is borne, that i^, unto yo^ a men a^ an Ange^l expounds the
Prophet: even f^^ ^^ he ^^^^^m^sed for y^, Ki^ius con. de Circ^m. Christ.
h^reby giving a public ^y ^^no^i^ ^h^^ he would fu^fill all the whole Law for
us, for Galat^. 52.
eue^y (...) i^ circumc^s^d ^s b^^^d to keep the whole L^w.

Ho^ the cons^la^orie name Ie^^us, invented by God, (...) p^^ed b^ the Ang^^l,
invocated by men, is proper to Ch^i^t (...): S^e Gospel on the Sunday next
after (...). And how his named above all name Epist. (...) will end here with a
divine (...) ^ccurate Poet.

(...);
(...) of content,
(...) rent.
(...) p^^ne.
O take thy cross, and nai^es, and therewith strain
My hearts desire to his full extent,
That thy ^ea^e love therein may not be ^ent.
But thoughts man have free scope thy love t'explaine.
Ah new my heart more p^uneth then before,
Because it can receive, and has no more.
O fil^ this emptiness, or (...) ^^^e:
Now stretch my heart again, and now supply.
Now I want ^pace now grace to end a^ smart,
Since my heart (...) not thee, hold thou my heart.
Almighty God, which made thy blessed son to he circumcised and obedient to
the Law for man: gran^ us the true circumcision of the spirit, that our hearts
and all our members being mortified from all worldly and carnal lusts, may in
all things obey thy blessed will through the same thy son Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

The Epistle
EPHESIANS. 3.1. For this cause I Paul am a prisoner of Jesus Christ for you
heathen, etc.


THE maine drift of all this exceeding Consul proem. Hieron. in epist. ad Ephesians.
profound Epistle written unto the Saints of the Church of Ephesus, is to
Aquin. Aretius, Maricrat. argum. ^p^^. ad Ephesians.
confirm their in the Ephesians. 1.13.
word of truth, even the Gospel of their salvation and faith in the Lord
Jesus. And this our Apostle does in the present text by two reasons especially;
1. From his own ministry, in Quant^m ad ^r^bulation^s q^^s pertulit, ^t d^na
qua Deus ^b^ c^^^^, Aquin in l^c.
respect of the Bonds or disgrace he suffered of men, I Paul am a prisoner,
etc. Boon or grace he received of God, If ye have heard of the ministration of
the grace of God which is given me to youward.
2. Fom the Gospels mystery, which he shows to be most excellent in regard
of Himself, Unto me the least of all Saints is this grace given. Other, God,
Unsearchable riches of Christ ^idde in God, etc. Angels, Unto rulers and powers
in heavenly things etc. Men, to make all mensee what the fellow ship of the
mystery is, and that by Christ we might have boldness etc.




The sum of all which is, seeing I have received so, much good, and endured
so much evil for your sake: seeing the great mystery concerning the common
salvation (as S. Jude speaks in his Epistle) was not in times past opened unto
the ionnes of men on earth, or to the blessed Angels in heaven as it is now
declared by the spirit: seeing I say, ye may see what is the fellowshippe of
the mystery which even from the beginning has (...) hid in God: I desire you
not to faint in your course, but to continue steadfast in the profession of this
holy faith unto your lives end.

For this cause] Apud Hieren. ^t Zanch. in loc.
Some Divines have troubled themselves and other in examining the context
here, but it is among words as among men, affinnity which is nearest ought to
be dearest: and therefore seeing the first words of this chapter agree very
well with the last of the former: I take the coherence to b^ (...)
(...) ^^uer preached that you Gentile in (...) (...) are no^ citizens with the
Saints, (...) together in Christ the ch^^^ corner stone, to be the (...). And
for the (...), namely, for that I have together that you Gentiles are (...), I
(...) hated of my countrymen, accused in their Synagogue, (...) ^^ their
councels, injured by their off^cer^, (...) appeal to Casar, I was sent to
(...), where I am ap^^^^er, as you may read at large in the fast eight chap^^
of the Acts of the Apostles.

A pri^^ner of Jesus C^r^^) He was the prisoner of Ca^ar, but Caes^ had his
authority from I^^ 19.11.
above, for there is (...) 1.
no power but of God Who^oeuer then is in prison is ^^^t^s Ie^u Christ's, though
otherwise lib^^^^ ^e^u Christ's, suffering by Gods A^^^m^^
power and permittance, ^ho can when he w^ll, and will as shall make most for
^^, glory, ^say 61.1.
proclaim lib^rtie to the captues, and o^^ni^g ^^ the prison unto them that are
^^^^d. Or he was ^^e pri^o^e^ Ch^^^^. as enduring his ^ond for Christ's faith
and service, G^r^^^, (...) D^^sius.
V^^^^s no^^ Chrs to, ^e^pro Christo. Namely, for preaching among the Gentiles
the e^searchable ^^hes of Christ, as it is in the S. verse. So that whereas A^
^^n^^.
two thing especially commend a Ma^tyr, says in Christ, and love to the
Church; both are me^ in the Apostle. He suffe^ed for the true faith, a
p^i^on^r of Ie^^s Christ; and out of unfeigned love to God^ people. F^r ^^u
Gentiles, as it i^ in the hitteen^h verse, ^or your sake^, even for your An^^^
good and (...)
example, tha^ ye likewise may con^^nue con^tant in the sincere p^^fe^^ion of
Christianity. F^^^ ^^^, (...) is your glory, that ye h^^e such ^n in^tru^tor
as is the pri^^ner ^ Ie^us Christ ^n bo^d no^ for any faction of your^ or fault
of his o^ne; but ^^r 1 Pe^ ^ 1^.
confe^ence to^^^d God, even for the ^^^ir^^^n ^f the gr^^e wh^^h ^s ^^^en ^ee
to youward. See Epistle S^nday 16. after Trinity.

Hitherto concerning the grief which our Apostle suffered in Christ's cause for
the Gentiles, I come now to treat of the grace which he received.

In Aquin in loc.
respect of his knowledge being Certain, By revelation showed he the mystery
to me. Full, even so perfectly revealed that in a few words you may read and
understand ^y knowledge in the mystery of Christ. Excellent, which in other
ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is now declared, etc.
Practice, whereof I am made a Minister according to the gift of the grace of
God which is given unto me, etc.


If you have heard of the ministration of the grace] The calling of 'aul to be
the Doctor of the Gentiles, as it was known unto himself by revelation: so to
them by report. If ye have heard etc. Aretius.
As if he should have said, if ye doubt not of my calling, ye may be well
assured of my doctrine. But ye cannot doubt of my calling, as having often
heard how Act. 9.
Christ in a vision appeared to me, saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? And when I had answered, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Jesus told
Anani^^s in another vision, He is a chosen vessel unto me to bear my name
before the Gentiles, and Kings and the children of Israel. And so God Galat.
1.15.
separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace to reveal his
son among the Gentiles: Gal 2.7.
as the Gospel over the circumcision was committed to Peter, so the Gospel
over the uncircumcision was committed unto me being an Apostle (not of men, or
by man, Galat. 1.1. Or after man, Gal. 1.11.) but the ministration of Gods
grace was given unto me by the revelation of Jesus Christ.

The word mimstration or dispensation, may be construed either passiuely,
being a grace given, and O^^ m^^. A ^^^m. Ares.
dispensed to Paul: or (...)
actiuely, for that Paul was dispenser of it unto other, 1. Cor 4.1. Let a man
so think of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and disposers if the secrets of
God. His office then is called a dispensation. (...). (...)
For that it consists in the dispensing of Christ's unsearchable riches And
the Gospel is called here (...) (...) (...).
Gods grace, for that it is faithfully delivered and fruitfully received nor by
man's merit; but only through Gods free grace. 1 Cor. 5.10
Preaching in the teacher, and (...). 2.8. Mat^h. 13.11.
believing in the hearer are both the fair gifts of God. Or the Gospel is
called Gods grace, (...).
because the sum thereof is nothing else but the preaching of Gods exceeding
rich mercies in Christ, intimating that our justification is not by the works
of the Law, but Romans 3.24.
freely by grace through faith.

As I wrote before in few words] I find that A^ad Mariorat (...).
some construe this of that which is written in other Epistles, unto other men,
as to Philemon: and other Churches, as to that of Colossus, and Philippi.
Marlorat is of opinion that our Apostle wrote another Epistle (though it be
not extant) unto the Church of Ephesus. Calet^n.
Other refer this clause to that which is delivered in this present Epistle;
to wit, unto that which is said in the (...)
two former chapters, A^^h^s.
Or to that in chap. 1. verse. 9. (...) (...).
or chap. 2. verse. 14. He is our peace, which has made of both one, and has
broken the step of the partition wall. In this little brief is contained all
that great mystery which in times past was not opened unto the sons of men,
as it is now declared by the spirit, that the Gentiles should be fellow
heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of the same promise in Christ by
the Gospel.

Which mystery in times past was not opened unto the sons of men] This verse
cannot easily be digested (as (...).
one said) without a grain of salt; for if we shall understand this of the
whole mystery of Christ 1. Tim. 3.16.
manifested in the flesh, it is certain that Abraham with faiths eye John 8.56.
saw Christ and was glad, and the Prophets 1. Pet. 1.10.
enquired and searched when or what time the spirit which was in them should
declare the sufferings that should come to Christ, and the glory that should
follow. Nay the very common people did expect the consolation of Israel, as it
is apparent by that of the John 4.25.
Samaritane woman, I know well that Messiah shall come which is called Christ.
Or if we construe this of that part of the mystery which only concerns the
vocation of the Gentiles, it is as plain that Abraham believed Gen 12.3 and
22.18.
all the families of the earth should be blessed in his seed. And the Prophet
C. p. 2. verse. 8
Haggai cal^ the Messiah expressly the desire of all nations. And in the first
lesson allotted for evening prayer on this day, Thus says the Lord, Esa. 49.22.
Behold, I will lift up mine hands to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to
the people, etc. Kings shall be their nursing fathers, and Queens their
nursing mothers, etc.

Hi. ron. exposit 1. in loc.
Answer then is made, that this mystery was opened in times past unto the
sons of God, but not (as it is in the text here) to the sons of men. It was
known unto the spiritual lew, but not unto the carnal. For the Prophers
spoke not Trimasius in loc.
as the sons of men, but as they were moved by the spirit of God, 1. Pet.
2.21. Occumen.
Other think this mystery was opened unto the jews, as having the Law and
the Prophets testifying of Christ: and that it was hidden only to the
Gentiles, as wanting the light of Gods word to direct them in their night of
ignorance. Other say that the Prophets in old time knew that the Gentiles
should be partakers of Gods promise concerning the blessed seed, Ambros.
Lanchius.
but they did not understand how this could be without circumcision, because
Genesis 17.14.
God said, Every person which is not circumcised should be cut off from his
people. Yea the knowledge in this mystery was hidden unto the chief Apostle
till it was in a vision revealed unto him, as we read Act. 10.

Hieron, Theophyla. Anselm.
Other find a direct answer couched in the words of Paul here, which mystery
was not in times past opened unto the s^aues of (...), as it is now declared
unto his holy Apotles and Prophets by the spirit. It was opened before, but not
as now: not so fully manifested unto the Pa^^iarkes and Prophets in the old
Testament, as in the light of the Gospel unto blessed Apostles and Preachers:
in which respect John the Baptist is said to be (...) ^.16.
greater then a Prophet. For wherea^ they shadowed out Christ in figures
obscurely, he showed our Christ with his finger openly,

(...) 1.19.
(...) of God, which takes away the sin of the world. So Christ himself to
his Disciples; (...) 10.23
Blessed (...) the (...) that (...) you that many Prophets and Kings have
desired to see those things which ye see, in (...) not (...) them, and to hear
those things which ye hear, and have not heard them. The blessed Apostles are
called in the fifth verse Prophets, (...) ^.
as propheeying in their Creed of things to come, to wit, of the resurrection
of the (...) and everlasting life or Prophets, as being (...) 21.12 (...) Romans
Idem. (...). (...) (...).
expounders of the Prophets, as the word is used elsewhere, Romans 12.6. Ephesians.
4.11. 1. Cor. 14.1. See Epistle second Sunday after the Epiphanie.

That the G^nt^les should be follow-heires, and of the same body, and partakers
of the same promise.] The Gentiles are said to be follow-heires in respect of
future glory, (...) ^^.
repectulum futuri, because they shall be Heb. 1.14.
heirs of salvation, and inhe^itors of the kingdom of heaven so well as the
Jews, even heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. Of the same
body, in respect of present grace, respectu boni praesentis, as being built
together in Christ, and made one Church and habitation of God, Ephesians. 2.14.22.
Partakers of the same promise, in respect of mercy (...) die, respectu boni
praeriti: forasmuch a, Gods Covenant made to father Abraham, apparently
concerned all the nations of the world, Genes. 12.3.18. 18 22.18. Here the
Gospel and Epistle meet, and both are well accommodated unto Christ's
Epiphanie: for the Wisemen showed that in deed which our Apostle here says in
word.

Unto the rulers and powers in heavenly things.] Whether this ought to be
construed of damned devils, or blessed Angels, I refer you to Com. in loc.
S. Ambrose, P^rap^ras. in loc.
Erasmus, I^xp^sit in loc.
Marlorat. Or if spoken of the good Angels only, whether it concerns all at
all times, or in times past only such as were not employed in the publishing of
Christ's incarnation: I desire you to read the Commentaries of Hierome, and
Haymo upon this text, Lombard sent lib 2. distinct. 11. Alussiodorensis, Aur.
sum. lib. 2. Tracti. 5. quaesi. ^. and 6. Sixtus senensis bibliothec. lib. 6.
annot. 165.182.29^. And whether this knowledge be revealed or experimental
only, Thomas part. 1. quast 117. art. 2. Lexicon Theolog. Astenstanc. verb.
Angelus. Perkins exposit. Creed art. 1. Tit. Creation of Angels, Aretius,
Marlorat, Zanch. in loc. For mine own part, where I see not my self, I love
not to lead other. If these cited Authors afford your understanding good
payment, I shall be so well pleased as when I borrow ready coin of one friend
to lend it unto another. If not, I say with Epist. ad^er Vigilant, T^m. 2.
(...) 313.
Hierome, Non parum est scire quid nes^as: and with Epist. ^0.
Augustine, Non videtur mihi quisquam errare, cum aliquid nescire se scit, sed
cum putat scire quod nescit.

The Gospel
MATTHEW. 2.1. When Jesus was borne in Bethlehem a City in Jury, in the time of
Herod the King, behold, there came Wisemen from the East to Jerusalem, saying,
who is he that is borne King of the Jews, etc.


AFter the celebration of Christ's birth and circumcision, it seemed good unto
the Church to constitute a Feast in honor of his Epiphanie, August. ser. 30
de^t^m^. Eus^b. I mis^n. lom. 1. de Epiplan. Heming. post. in loc.
that his glory might be manifested in the flesh, so well as his infirmity.
Now this Feast is called by three sundry ^udolph. de rua Caristi. part. 1. cap.
11. and Pet. de Palua. Enar. 1 de Epiphan.
names, according to the Diez con. 1. Giron con 3. le^u^ con. 6. de Epiphan
Id^m Augustine. and (...) and (...). Mart. not. in lan. 6.
three principal appearings of our Lord in this kind on this day: 1.
Epiphania, because Christ as this day did appear to the Wisemen that sought
him by the leading of a star. v^s.
2. Theophania, for that as upon this day 29. years after his birth his glory
appeared in his Mat. 3.16. 17.
baptism by the witness of the Father speaking from heaven, this is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, and by the descending of the holy
Ghost upon him in a visible shape like a done. 3. Bethphania, for that on the
same day twelve month after his baptism, his glory appeared at the marriage
in Cana by turning water into wine, John 2.11. We must according to the present
text only treat of his appearing to the Wisemen, in whom I note These 7.
circumstances:
1. At what time they came to seek Christ, in the time of Herod the King. 2.
From what part of the world, from the East. 3. To what City, to Jerusalem. 4.
By what guide, by the leading of a star. 5. For what end, to worship him. 6.
What gifts they presented unto him, gold, frankincense, myrrh. 7. What way
they returned home, after they were warned of God in a sleep, that they should
not go again to Herod, they returned into their own country another way.


In the time of Herod the King.] The Patriarch Jacob prophesied of the Messiah,
Genesis 49 10.
that the kingdom should not depart from Judah, not a langiner from his fe^t,
until S^^lo come. Now Herod was not a branch of the Kings of Judah, but an
alien from their Commonwealth, a stranger and a tyrant, crept in by the favor
of the Roman Emperor: and therefore the Wisemen enquiring after the birth of
Christ in the days of Herod the King, observed their right Le^ser. 3. de
Epiphan. The^^hylact. (...). (...).
quando, because now the scepter had departed from Judah. Heming.
The which as it confutes the Jews, expecting as yet that Christ should come:
so it confirms the faith of Christians, assuring us undoubtedly that this same
whom the Wisemen sought, is the very Savior of the world: and as the Wisemen
in seeking, even Diez. con. 1. de Epiphan.
so Christ in coming kept his right quando. For when Herod was King, and sin
most abounded, Jesus was borne in Bethlehem a City of Jury: when his Israel
sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, then he visited and redeemed his
people, Luke 1.68.79. according to that of Psalm. 102.13.
David, Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Sion, for it is time that thou
have mercy upon her, yea the time is come, and why? Thy servants think upon
her stones, and it pittieth them to see her in the dust.

Eusebius. in Chron. and Epiphan. haeres. 30 and 51.
Some think these Wisemen came to Jerusalem about two years after Christ's
birth, and the ground of this assertion is in the 16 verse of this present
chapter, Herod seeing that he was mocked of the Wisemen, was exceeding
wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the male-children that were in Bethlehem,
and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the
time which he had diligently searched out of the Magi. But the Wisemen had
proved themselves none of the wisest men, if they should at that time have
sought for Christ in Jury, when he was in Egypt. For so the Mat. 2.14.15.
text plainly, Joseph according to the direction of an Angel appearing to him
in a dream, took the babe Jesus and his mother by night, and departed into
Egypt, and was there unto the death of Herod, and that was in Lib. 1. cap. 14.
Nicephorus account 3 years, as C^^c^rd. cap. 11.
Iansenius 5 years, as Apud Musculum in Mat. 2.15.
Sabell^c^^ 7 years. I think therefore that the Wisemen came to Jerusalem
according to the Churches institution of this feast upon tht twelfth day after
the birth of Christ. If any desire to be satisfied how they could perform in
so short a time so great a journey, let them at their leisure peruse the
Commentaries of Maldonat upon this text, and Cardinal Baron, annal. Tom. ad
an. 1. fol. 53.54.

From the East] The first sin committed by man in the world was eastward for
(...) 3.6.
Adam and Eua did eat of the forbidden fruit in Paradise planted Eastward,
Genesis 2.8 (...) her Abel was an inhabitant of the East. Gen 4.^^. The builders
of the Tower of Babel also came from the (...) Genesis 11.2. And (...)
there(...) Christ ((...) that he might (...) and take away the sin of the
world called at his (...) appearing Wisemen from the East: and he was
crucified (...) toward the (...), as having put all our sins behind his
b^cke: E^a, ^^.17. And for this (...) happily (...) with (...)
other, whereas the (...) toward the South, and secta^^^, to the West: (...)
(and tha^ from the very time of the^ Apostles) use to pray toward the (...).
And it (...) that such as were to be baptized should in their renunciation of
the devil and all his works, ever turn their face toward the W^^l, and on
the contrary when they made their con(...) of the faith of Christ (...) the
East, as (...) and Cyr^l. apud Baron. (...) 58 fol. 564.

Our Savior said Matthew. 8.11. that mary shall (...) from (...) and (...). and
shall sit down with (...), Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. These
(...) came from the East, and (...) from the West and (...)knowledged Christ to
be King of the Jews. (...)
Magi ab (...) hoc est nas^ents the autem occidenti, hoc est (...) regi
Iudeorum. That these Magi came from Persia most accord; but whether they were
Kings, or Philosophers, or both, it is uncertain. It was a received opinion
among the Popish Friars heretofore that these Magi were Kings, and that Matthew
in terming them Wisemen, (...)
gave them a title more honorable then that of Kings. (...), A scepter may be
put into the hands of a fool. The name then of Magus in (...).
that age when Philosophers did reign, was of greater account then that of
Magnus. Other Papists of better note for their learning confess that they were
not reges, but (...) in ^^, and Mantu (...).
reguli, not puissant Princes of a whole Country, but petty Lord of some
little Town, Ear^^. an^l. (...) 1. ad an. 1. fol. 52.
a^ Genesis 14. Bera King of Sodom, Birsha King of Gom^rrah, Sh^^ab King of
Adm^th. But that these were crowned Kings, and but three, whose names are (...).
Melchior, Gaspar, Balthazar: Constable. (...) Giron (...) 1. in (...).
pictura, (...). ser. 1. in (...).
sed no^ ex scriptura, is a tale painted on a wall not written in the word.
That I say these were but three, (...) and Gir^n. (...).
whereof one was an old man, another a young man, and the third of middle age;
whose dead bodies have been P^^d. Pal^d, ^^ar 1. Epiphan. D^^.
translated, first from India to Constantinople. Secondly, from Constantinople
to Millane. Thirdly, from Millane to Colon, and thereupon commonly called the
three Kings of Colon: is thought by Protestant Divines a ridiculous fable,
better fitting the sign of a Tavern then the wall or window of a Temple.

That they were Wisemen is said in this text and proved also; for in seeking
the Lord, when and where he was to be found: they Diez cen. 1. in Epiphian.
showed themselves wisemen indeed, according to that of the Ierem. 9.23.
Prophet, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, but let him that glo^uth,
glory in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord which
exercise loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth: for in
these things I de^^^ says the Lord. It is likewise consonant to the text that
these Magi were aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, as the shepherd, were
the first fruits of the Jews: so these Wisemen the F^^^^tius (...) an. (...)
L:, Lu(...).
first fruits of the Gentile. They were near, these came from far, both met
in Christ the chief corner stone, who made of both I^p^es. 2.14.
one: that is, of two walls one house; for the Jews and Gentiles are all one
in Christ, Galat. 3.28 A mystery which in times past (as you have heard in
this day, Epistle) was not opened unto the son; of men, as it is now
declared by the spirit. Read ser. 2.4.6 7 of Augustine de Epiphania Dom. And
herein appears the goodness and unsearchable riches of Christ, in that he
manifested himself to the shepherds albeit ignorant, and to the Wisemen
(...) impious. (...).
In rus^^citate pastorum imperitia praeualet, in sacril^g^ imagorum impietas,
and yet he who (...)
chose the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and came not to
call the righteous, Man. ^ 13.
but sinners to repentance: appeared upon Christmas day to shepherds, and on
this day to wise, but wicked Astrologers. Vt nullus magnus (...), nullu,
infirm^u desperaret, as (...).
Augustine and Cate^^^^.
Aquine sweetly.

To Ierusalem] See Heming and Ar^^ (...)
As to the City of God acquainted with the divine oracles, having Moses and
the Prophets which (...). 5.39.
witness of the Messiah. And here they did learn^ that Christ should be borne
at Bethlehem in Jury, for (...) it is written by the Prophet, and thou
Bethlehem in the land of Jury are not the least among the Princes of Judah: for
out of thee shall come unto me the Captain that shall govern my people
Israel. And so having the light of Gods holy word added to the star, they
went on their journey with cheerfulness, until they came to the place where
the child was.

Di^as de Yangu^^^ 2. de (...).
Or to the Scribes and Pharisees at Jerusalem to condemn their ^^^ggishnesse
and carnalitie, who standing hard by, saw not so much as they who came from
far. Le^^^ 3. de (...) an. (...)
Ver^^s ill minat magus, insi^^litas ob^^^at magistros. Carnales (...), quod
(...) ve^. 1. quod oftendet: v^^tur paginis, quarum non ere dis eloqu^^. In
which respect S^r. 6. de Epipha^
Augustine compared the Jewish Doctors unto stenes erected in common passages,
that teach other how to walk in the right way, but themselves stand still. And
he (...) us upon bowed knees entreat the Father of mercies and God of all grace
so to lighten our dark vnde^^ ^^^ng with his heavenly star^e, that we may
(...) and spiritually disc^^ne the things of the Scriptures (...) the Lord (as
(...)
Augustine prophesied a great while (...)) four our (...) and carnalitie take
his word from us Christians, as he did his kingdom from the Jews, and give
it to such as we think to be most alien from God and his Gospel. Examine
the cited passages and passions of that holy Father again and again, Decies
repetita placebunt: and then in thy serious meditations apply them unto the
present Romish Synagogue, and thou shall easily find that the Protestants
estate in respect of the Papists, is very like to this of the Wise men in
respect of the Jews. For as the Jews ever boasted of the Temple: so the
Papists of the Church, as the Jews and only the Jews in times past had Gods
Law: so the Papists in latter ages (and if you will believe themselves) only
the Papists embrace the Catholic faith. As the Jews were magnificent in their
Ceremonies: even so the Papists exceeding glorious in their ornaments, orders,
outsides of the Church. And yet such as are Wisemen, and have Ap^^. 12.18.
wit to count the number of the Beast, know that Antichrists seat is the
Roman sea. He whose pencill is not inferior to many, standing in so fit a
place as any to take Romes picture, portrayeth her thus; Roma, in Hebrew,
Signifies Height. Roma, in Greek, Signifies Strength. Roma, in Latin,
Signifies Love, if it be read backward. Roma, in English, Signifies Room,
or place.


Four tongues like trumpets Rome do sound thy name.
In Hebrew thou art Height, in Greek a power,
And Love in Latin speech-and Place in our,
Four squares of hundred years do sit the same.
The first in Height exalted Christ his name,
The next in Strength augmented worldly power.
The third Gods love cast Backward on thy flower,
The fourth in empty place has showed thy shame.
And now four ways thou would fall conceal,
With Scriptures upper Height and strength of schools.
And form of Zeal, and Rome the head of fools:
The Height mants, ground, to reason truth, to zeal.
S^^ente and Room cone. cyueth (...) no grace,
Thy height of strength is backward love of place.

We have seen his s^arre! Cardinal Ia Genesis Prost 30.
Abacus and (...)
Albertus have written that these Wise men endowed with extraordinary skill in
Astrology, might foreknow the time when our blessed Savior should be borne by
the position of stars and constitution of the planets. But this assertion is
utterly condemned by S. Corin^ Pa^and mab. 2. cap. 5. and de (...). D^ lib. 5.
Augustine and other holy Fathers of the Church, as you may find in Beauxanis
Har. Tom. 1. fol. 60.61. Sixth. sinen. bibliothec. lib. 6. annot. 10.

It is apparent that this star was not ordinary, but in The ^ first. quest.
26. art 7. Christ. (...). La^^s^^ and in lec
many properties, especially Her. ing. p^^. in lec.
three, differing from all other in the sky, to wit In Place, for it could not
have showed the direct way to such as traveled by it, unless it had been in
the lowest region of the air. Moving, for it moved not circle wise, but went
right forward as a guide of the way, none otherwise then the cloud and pillar
of fire went before the people of Israel at their going out of Egypt.
Brightness, for whereas other stars appear to shine by night only, this
gave light even in the broad day.


Psalm (...) ^^m a^ Kyeth
Hac stella quae solis votam Vinest decore ac lmiue.
^^a^ act^ cta Cta^^ 4.
Gregory Nissen and (...)
Aquine think that it was a new hure created only for this purpose. (...)
Theophylact and Ial^^.
^uthymiue, that it was an Angel or foam other heavenly power, appearing not in
the nature, but in the figure of a star. S. Augustine says it was manifica
liagaacali the stately tongue of heaven. Other conjecture that it was the holy
ghost, Ser. 3. in Epiphan.
appearing in the likeness of a star at Christ's birth, A^lar de mi^^^^.
(...) 3. cap 4. inter Augustine. pra^^m. 3. ^^ 536. ^pan^
as in the likeness of a Dove at Christ's baptism. For (as A^nal Tam ^ adan.
1. f^l 5^
Baronius out of the great opinion of his own reading is bold to write) all
the Fathers agree that these Magi were lead to Christ here by an inward light
of the spirit, so well as with an outward light in the skies. L^^ser. 3. d^
(...) in cap. 2.
Agente hoe sine dubio in little cordibus inspinui we dr^ina, vt costantae
v^sionis mysterium non laterei, and quod oculic estendebatur insolitum, animis
non set obscerom^. And therefore when they found the babe Jesus in a seely
cottage, they were not any whit discouraged at his contemptible poverty, but
instantly they saw ( August ser. 7. (...) an.
non terra portante sed caelo narrante; magnum aliquid in parne latere, that
this little child was a great King, yet a great God, and a great King above
all Gods. And hereapon a^ follows in our text, They fell do^^ slat, and
worshipped him, and opened their treasures, and offered unto him gifts, gold,
frankincense, myrrh: That is (as Ser. 1. in E^^pian.
Augustine glosseth) A dorant corporious, honorant mu neribus, venerantur
officijs, oculis hominem vident, and deum abseguijs consiuentur.

Christ (as being the word in the beginning by whom all things were made)
bestowed on these Wisemen every good and perfect gift, corporal, spiritual,
temporal. And therefore they did honor him (as L^d I^I. us and I^usen. in lec.
interpretors observe) with all these kinds of goods. In falling down sl^t,
they did honor him with the good, of the body: in adoring him, with the goods
of the mind: in offering to him gold, frankincense, mirrhe, with the goods of
the world. They did offer Bernard. ser. 3. Paratus and Raulin. ser. 2. de
Ep^^han.
gold to relieve. Mary's necessity: frankincense, to sweeten the stable:
myrrh, to comfort the swadled babe. Pulgentius ser de Epipb. ^dan b^a ka^^.
In offering frankincense, they confounded Arius holding that sacrifices are
only due to God the Father. In offering myrrh, they confounded Manichaeus,
who denied that Christ truly died for our sins. In offering gold, they
confounded them both, as denying that Christ is our King. In offering all
these, they confounded Nestorius dividing Christ into two persons, one divine,
another humane; for the Magi gave not here some gifts unto God, and other unto
man: but all unto one Christ. Ergo, non diuidatur in personis qui non invenitur
diuisus in donis. as Pulgentius excellently.

Or as Euthym. Anselm. Caletan in lec.
other, they did offer gold to Christ, as being a King: Frankincense, as being
God: myrrh, as being man: according to that of the Christian Fune^^us.
Poet.

Auruen. Thus, Myrrhem, regique deo, hominique
Dona ferunt.
It is an idle conceit that one did offer gold, another myrrh, and the third
frankincense: for seeing each of them acknowledged Christ to be a King, and
God, and a passible man; it is more probable that all of them offered all these
gifts every one three, Rendgius. Leo. Ansolm.
singuliaria.

They returned into their own country another way

Tat. 1.11.
The grace of God appearing teaches us that we should deny ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in
this present world. Leo ser. 3. de Epiphan.
Wherefore the Wisemen having found Christ, and being taught of God not to
return again to Herod, that is, any longer to serve the devil: they renounce
their own wills and their old ways, and walk according to Gods will in new
ways. Immutatio via emendatio vitae, quoth Hom. 1. de Epiphan.
Eusebius. Emisen: Heretofore they walked in error, but now they walk in truth.
Heretofore they went a whoring after their own inventions, but now they follow
the word and warning of God.

The sum then of Homing. post. in lec.
all this Gospel is, that we must seek Christ by the guiding of a star,
that is, by the light of his word: and when we have found Christ, it is our
duty to Luther, Culma^. in lec. Idem Leo, ser. 7. de Epiphan.
manifest our faith by good works, in presenting unto Christ our King gold,
that is, a pure confession of a true belief: frankincense, that is, humble
prayer and invocation: myrrh, that is, a chaste and a mortified life. We must
also give to Mary, that is, to the Church, unto the Preachers of the word, and
all other members of Christ in want, a part of our temporal estate. And all
this ought to be done cheerfully; for the Wisemen opened their treasures, and
our heart is our treasure, Matthew. 12.35. Rupert. in lec. and didac. de Yangnas.
con. 3. de Epiphan.
So that we must even with exceeding gladness, from our heart offer gold,
frankincense, myrrh: Iansen. con. cap. 9.
That is, alms, prayer, fasting: Prayer respects God, alms our neighbors,
fasting our selves. And Pulgentius ser. de Epiphan. in fine.
thus having changed the whole course of our inordinate conversation in time
past, and walking in another way which is the path of Paradise: we shall in
fine return to our own Country, which is Heaven in Heaven, and there we
shall enjoy Christ our King, God and man in eternal happiness evermore.

There be many points in this text as yet untouched, and I might as Ruth 2.3.
Ruth, happily gleane after such as have reaped before me: but I am so devoted
to brevity, that I rather choose to wonder a little with another, then to write
any more my self upon this Gospel.

O strangest thing that God does now begin,
In being which, he has no godheads grace:
O strangest Room, this subject takes his place
In want of Room, for none was in his Inn.
O strangest color to be viewed in,
For humane darkness veiled has his face.
O strangest middle of respective space,
Where as a star more then the sun could win.
O strangest star that must reveal this sight,
That by disorder from the rest gives light.
O strangest eyes that saw him by this star,
Who when bystanders saw not, saw so far.
And since such wonders were in seeing him,
No wonder if my wondering thought grow dim.
O God, which by the leading of a star did manifest thine only begotten
Son to the Gentiles: mercifully grant, that we which know thee now by faith,
may after this life have the fruition of thy glorious Godhead, through Christ
our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
THE PVRIFICATION OF SAINT MARIE THE VIRGIN.
The Epistle being the same which is appointed for the Sunday, is expounded
among the Dominicals in due place.
The Gospel is written, LVK. 2.22. When the time of their purification after
the Law of Moses was come, etc.


IT is the saying of S. Bartholmew, reported by Mist. Theolog. cap. 1.
Dionysius Areopagita, that the Gospel is little, yet large: If we consider
only the syllables, it is a very small book; but if we examine the profound
sense, John 21.25.
mundus non capit, it is so great, that (as S. John speaks) the world cannot
contain it. Example hereof is found in this present Chapter, abounding with as
many wonders almost as words. Here you may read, that Marie was at once both a
wife and a maid, at once both a wife and a midwife, bringing forth a son who
was her father, by whom all things were made, swaddling him in cloutes, and
laying him in a cratch, who Ierem. 23.24.
filled heaven and earth. Here you may read how the Word in the beginning
infinite and incomprehensible. was not only circumscribed, but also
circumcised. Here you may read, Ardens hom. in Euangel. purify.
that the pure was purified, God offered, and the Redeemer redeemed. Here you
may read, that a glorious Angel attended silly shepherds, and that a child
of twelve years old confounded the Doctors in his disputations, and that a
dying man uttered songs in stead of sobs. In the words allotted for our text,
3. points are to be considered especially, the Purification of Marie: When the
time of her purification was come. Christ: They brought him to Jerusalem to
present him to the Lord, etc. Simeon: Behold, there was a man in Heirusalem
whose name was Simeon, and the same was just and godly, etc.
Presentation of Marie: When the time of her purification was come. Christ:
They brought him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord, etc. Simeon: Behold,
there was a man in Heirusalem whose name was Simeon, and the same was just and
godly, etc.
Comme^ndation of Marie: When the time of her purification was come. Christ:
They brought him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord, etc. Simeon: Behold,
there was a man in Heirusalem whose name was Simeon, and the same was just and
godly, etc.




And this feast has accordingly three names, as the Baronius natationan Romans
Marry^. Pobr. 2.
Masters of ceremonies observe. 1. The purification of Marie. 2. The
presentation and induction of Christ into the Temple. 3. Saint Simeons holy day.

When the time of their purification.] Apud, Eras. and Ma^de. at in lec.
Some read, ^^, his purification, our latter English Bibles and old Latin,
(...), her purification; Origin, Theophilact, Enthymius and many T^ar^let.
Hen. 8. Castahe. Ra, Stephan. Mat. at.
more, (...), as the text of our Communion book here, their purification. And
the reason hereof is plain, Calvin (...)
because Christ is presented in the Temple, so well as Marie purified, both
undergo the Law, though in equity neither of them are bound to the rites of
the Law concerning purification.

After the Law of Moses.] The Law, says Mat. Com. Tit. Meos. spiritual. ^egos,
see Epist. 13. (...).
Luther, is not adius orium sed monitorium it takes not away sin, but only
brings us to the knowledge of sin, and to the remedy for sin; unto the
knowledge and true feeling of sin, Romans 3.20. Gallath^. 19. (...). Tem. 1.
(...) 1.
because God wrote the Law not so much to forbid offenses to come, as to make
us acknowledge our sins already past, and now present: that considering our
own misery we might fly to his mercy. By the Law we know sin, by sin
we learn to know our selves, and in knowing our selves, we renounce our
selves, and come unto Christ the salve for sin, being the Ioh. 1.29.
lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the World, refreshing all such as
groan under the burden of their offenses, Mat. 11.28. and thus (as Galat. 324.
Paul speaks) the Law is our schoolmaster unto Christ, and Christ is the Romans
10.4.
end of the Law: Finis perficiens non interficiens, quoth Contra ad^. ers.
legis and prophet. lib. 3. cap. 7.
Augustine, not the destruction of the Law, but the consummation, as being the
very mark, at which all the ceremonies of Moses aimed: as in this Melancthon.
Mart. Mollerus post in loc..
rite concerning the purifying of women, almighty God insinuated to the Jews
his people their original corruption, how they were Psalm. 51.5.
conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity, prius damnati quam nati, being the
sons of Ephesians. 2.3.
wrath before they were seen in the world, unclean in their conception,
unclean in their birth, unclean in their life, and so consequently that they
need the blood of Christ, prefigured in their daily sacrifice, to cleanse them
from all sin both original and actual. 1. John 1.7.

The children of Israel had continued among the superstitious Egiptians a long
time without any Law of God written, and therefore being now delivered from
them, and yet inclined to their idolatry, God out of his admirable wisdom (as
most interpretours auow) did so charge them with a multitude of sacrifices and
ceremonies in his written word, Tindal. prolog. in Exodus Dr. Whitgift. def of
his answer to the admo. fol. 305.
as that they should neither have leisure to make new of their own, not yet
lust to to follow the fashions of other. And in this almost infinite number of
Judicials and Ceremonials, every one (though in appearance never so little)
has a moral: as, thou shall not take the dam with the young. Deuteronomy. 22.6. thou
shall not sees a kid in his mothers m^lke, Exodus 23. 19. moves us to
compassion and pity. Thou shall not muzel the mouth of the ox that treads
out the corn, Deuteronomy. 25.4. teaches in 1. Tim. 5.18.
Paul's exposition this lesson, that the labourer is worthy of his wages,
especially the Preachers of the Word, for that law was not written out of Gods
care for oxen, but altogether for C^. 9.12.
our sakes, insinuating. That he which eareth should care in hope, and that
the who the thre^^e^h in hope, so (...) be partaker of his hope: if we have
down and you (...) things, is it a great thing if ^^e escape your (...) thing^^
So likewise in the ceremony touching purification, Leuil. 12. there is
something moral as namely, that the workers (...)
w^^^nes of women after their childbirth might be reliued, and the lust of
intemperate husbands a while restrained. Now that which is ceremonial is
abrogated v^erly, but the moral is perpetual, and ought to continue still in
the Church until the worlds end: and therefore howseeuer women in our age be
not tied either by the law Common or ^^^. 5. cap. he qu^.
Cannon, (much less by the Gospel is self) to the precise number of days,
and particular oblations of the Jews: yet it is meet (I might say, more
necessary) that they should keep in a convenient time for the recovering of
their strength, and when they come to the Church in ^^ea^ of the Jewish
offering, to present unto the Lord Christian sacrifices of prayer and praise,
for preserving them in the great danger of childbirth, (...)
as also for their deliverance by Christ from that sin, where of Genesis 2.1^.
that infinnitie is an everlasting ^^^linonie: and assuredly whoseouer shall
our of insolent contempt neglect this duty sins against the rules of
nature, yea the God of grace. For it is a conclusion orthodoxall in Divinity
that the political and ceremonial laws of the Jews are abrogated in the
particular only, not in the general: in the circumstance, not in the
substance: Me^^^^^ (...).
quo^d and spe^^em, non quod geneus: as in observing the sabbath, in paying of
tiches, in purifying of women and the like. Or as Sec^^s^^^r(...).
other abolished as concerning the letter, but in force concerning the spirit.

Whereas it is (...).
objected, If there should be solemn and expre^^ giving of thanks in the
congregation for every benefit either equal or greater then this which any
singular person in the Church does receive, we should not only ^^^ise no
preaching of the word, nor ministering of the Sacraments, but we should not have
so much leisure as to do any corporal or bodily work, but should be like
the Messalian heretics who did nothing else but pray; answer is made, that
these schismatic oppos^rs are to themselves opposite. Elsewhere they mislike
the book of Common Prayer for want of thanksgiving for benefits received, and
here they condemn it for appointing thanks to be given for deliverance from
sink, from manifold perils and dangers, and for the increase of Gods people;
the which are public blessings though a private person more particularly give
the thanks. Again, it would trouble their heads exceedingly to find out so
many benefits greater or equivalent to the goodness of God toward women in
childbed; for as Postil. in loc.
Mela^^hon is bold to write, Childbearing is magnum miraculum, a miracle so
great, that the Psalm. 139.13.
Prophet faith in consideration hereof, I will give thanks unto thee, for I am
surefully and wonderfully made. But howsoever it be this one thing is certain,
that it is better to be like su^^ heretics as do nothing else but pray, then
to be such schismatikes as do nothing else but prat^.

Concerning the wearing of the veil, we say Dr. Whitgift. ^^^sap. fol. 537.
that it is not an ecclesiastical Canon, but a civil custom: not an
iniunction of the Church, but the fashion of our country, as wearing of new
gloves at marriages, and blackes at funerals. An attire for such a time not
only decent and grave, but also most viefull and convenient. As for the name
of offering, applied to the Curates accustomed duty: we say that as the life
of the Clergy is spent in the service of God, so it is sustained with his
reuenew. Hocker. ^^^ supra.
Nothing therefore more proper then to give the name of oblations unto such
payments, in token that we offer unto God whatsoever his Ministers receive. In
a word, the thanksgiving of women after childbirth according to the doctrine
and discipline of the Church of England, performed not out of custom, but out
of conscience: not to make the act of honorable marriage unclean, but to
bless God for deliverance from so manifold perils; is not a Jewish ceremony,
but a Christian duty: the which (I think) distasteth only such as have
either an over flowing of their gall, or an out^weening of their wit.

The Law says in the 12. of Leuiticus, If a woman by the seed of man shall
conceive and bear a child, she shall be reputed unclean. A sus^^pto semine
p^perere^, etc. but the power of the most high (...).
over shadowed Mary, Christ was conceived in her womb not by the polluted seed
of man: but by the virtue of the holy Ghost: and so by consequence (...)
not tied unto the law, for (as the lawyers say) where the reason of a statute.
does cease, there the statute has his end. But the reason of the law
concerning purification had no place in Mary, being a pure Virgin, both in her
conception and in her childbirth also. See S Ambros epist. 81. Augu^^in^,
contra Julian. lib. 1. cap. 2. de cum lib. 22. cap. 8. Thomas part ^ quaes^.
28. ^rt. 2. Erasmus. (...) de sur^^m. Euchari^^. 1. b. ^ cap. 6. That Christ
might appear to be man, he was b^^^^ of a woman: and yet that he might
appear to be God, he was borne of a (...)
Virgin (...)
(...). See Creed, born of the Virgin, and Epist. allotted for the Annunciation.

Mary then observed the (...) of purification (as (...)
Bernard excellent ^ not for her self, but for our example. Christ was
circumcised for us, and Mary purified for us, he needed no Circumcision who was
the end of Circumcision; and she needed no purification as having conceived by
the holy Ghost: yet he did undergo the one, and she perform the other.
Lather, Melarct. (...).
Hereby teaching us to submit our selves unto the present government of the
Church under which we live; teaching us I say so far to seek the peace of
Jerusalem, as that we should be content to depart even from our own private
right, rather then in any sort Arb^^^^ in l^c.
scandalously prejudice the common good of the Church, enduring rather a
mischief in our selves then an inconvenience in the state.

Mary (knowing 1. Sam. 15.22.
obedience to be better than sacrifice) performed the rites of purifying,
albeit she was not bound to the same. But schismatikes in our days enjoined
to keep the ceremonies of the Church even by that law which says expressly,
Let every soul be subsed unto superior authority; hold dissoluteness a
resolutenesse, and breaking of ecclesiastical orders a point of devotion and
piety, shedding (as it is said of 1. King 2.5.
Ioab) the blood of war in peace. But if their zeal were such unto the
Gospel, as Mary's was to the Law; they would rather wring themselves in the
particular, then wrong the Church in the general. I read in Not. hist. lib. 8.
cap. 50.
Plin^* how two Goats meeting on a narrow bridge, non vim sed viam fecere,
they did not make a way each other, but make way one for the other: as Mutianus
an eye witness tells the tale, the one lying down on his belly suffered the
other to pass over his back, and so both escaped the danger of the ditch. In
the time of the Go^^^ wa^s I find also, that a Roman souldior and a Barbarian
casually falling into the same pit as they marched along the country, were so
far from contending one with another, as that they both agreed mutually to
relieve each other, and so necessity making them friends (as De bello Gothor^^.
lib. 2. ^^ca pr^.
Procopius reports) they were drawn out of that hell, and safely delivered
again to their Captains and Companies. I would to God the separatist ^^ case
had so much good wit as the Goat, or else^ much good will as the Go^h.

They brought him to Jerusalem to present him unto the Lord, as it is written
in the Law of the Lord, every man-child that first opens the matrix shall be
called holy is the Lord Almighty God in delivering his Israel out of Egypts
bondage Exodus 12.29.
sinate all the first borne in the land of Egypt, from the first borne of
Pharaoh that sat on his throne, unto the first borne of the captive that was in
prison. And therefore (...)
that his people might always remember this benefit, he commanded in his law
that they should consecrate all their first borne to him. Exodus 13.2. For this
reason is rendered by God himself, Numb. 8.17. All the first borne of the
children of Israel are mine both of man and of beasts: since the day I smote
every and horn in the land of Egypt, I sanctified them for myself. Now Christ
is the (...) borne in (...)
many respects, first, in his Divinity, being Gods (...)
only begotten son. Secondly in his humanity, being Mary's (...)
first borne son, for she bare none before him or after him. Thirdly, the
first borne in grace, for he was the first man borne which being (...)
offered unto God was accepted of himself. Fourthly in power, being the first
borne of the (...)
dead. Fifthly the first borne, for that all of us are (...)
newborn through him. And therefore though he were not tied unto the rites of
the law, yet he suffered himself to be presented in the Temple for these
reasons especially.

First, to show that the (...)
same God is author both of the Gospel and of the Law.

Secondly, in that the Law giver himself obeyed the law, he (...)
reaches all Princes to give good example in observing their own statutes.
For an Emperor faith (...)
Euagrius is not to be counted thereafter as he governs other, but as he
rules and guides himself making his life a light for his subjects to follow.
For (...)
this cause the chief Magistrates among the Romans had burning lamps carried
before them.

Publica minurum rectum, ibi con^t^t and aquum
Imperium, cumrex quod suber, ipse facit.
Thirdly, he submitted himself unto the law, that he might Galat. 4.5.
redeem those that were under the law. God became man, that men hereby might
be made Gods. He who was free, became servant unto all to make all free.

Fourthly, because the first borne presented in the Temple was a Thom. part. 3.
quae^^. 37. a^t. 3.
figure of Christ, the first borne among many brethren. Romans 8.29.

Fifthly, that he might Idem ibidem, a^t. 4.
avoid occasion of scandal among the Jews, and exhibit a pattern of
meekness unto all.

Sixthly, that being presented in the public Temple, many good people might
bear witness to him, as here you see Simeon and Anna did.

Seventhly that the world might be put in Rau^in. ser. 1. in purific.
possession and sesin of the Savior. He was offered twice: first in the Temple,
which is called his morning sacrifice: then on the Cross, which is termed his
evening sacrifice. In the one he was redeemed, in the other he did redeem,
giving himself for us an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor
to God, Ephesians. 5.2.

By this precept of Moses, and practice of Mary, Heming.
parents ought to learn that they beget children unto God, and not to
themselves or Satan; and therefore they must be Mollerus in declar. ^uang.
purific.
forward in bringing their children to holy Baptism: as Joseph and Mary were
in presenting Christ: consecrating them in their infancy to God, that
afterward they may serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of
their life: that the ground may bring forth fruit in due time, you must have
both a good feedsman and good seed: Plutarch. com. de liberis ^ducandis.
in education of children a good instructor is the seedsman, and good
discipline the seed. For as base sluggishnes corrupts the best nature, so
liberal instruction is able to correct ^he worst.

Horat. epist. lib. 1.
Inuidus, iracundus, iners, vinosius, amator,
Nemo adeo ferus est. vt non (...),
Si modo cultar^ patientem co^modit aurem.
It is reported of (...)
Sulpho Megareus, a great Philosopher in his age, that he was exceedingly
given by nature to women and wine; but he so ^amed his unbridled affections by
good discipline, vinemo vnquam (...). Now for as much as children are taught
more by (...)
pattern then by precept, by that they see men do, rather then by that they
hear men say; parents ought in their private families especially, to be lights
and ensamples in all holiness and honesty. For (as it is in the proverb)
(...) the colt will not amble. You desire that your children may have strength
and beauty, yet both are suddenly consumed, either through ache or age. You
purchase titles of honor for your posterity, yet (...)
blood corrupted by treason or felony cannot be restored again by the Kings
bare grant without authority of Parliament. You rise up early and go to bed
late, that you may leave wealth enough unto your babes, and yet one spark of
fire may devour all their houses; and one quirke of law carry from them all
their lands at a trice. Manners only makes a man; if thou shall afford thy
son religious and ingenuous education, it will ever stick by him among all
the changes and chances of this mortal life. no sickness can blast this
beauty, no malice blot out this honor, no fire consume this tenement, no law
wrest this inheritance from him. It will be his comfort until he die that you
brought him up (...) ^.4. Literae si bonafide (...) traverint aninum, nunquam
amplius (...)
in instruction and information of the Lord.

(...) his age, because they performed only that kind of devotion which is
without cost, as to pray for fashion, and to sa^t out of misery; but they
would not afford one halfpenie to the poor. So many men in our days are
content to hear Gods holy word read and preached with their elbowes on a
cushion, and hats on their heads, and if need be they will also make bitter
inuectiues against Atheism and Popery: but if the parish impose but an
ordinary charge toward the repairing of the Church, or the Pastor require but
accu^^omed offerings for his necessary maintenance; you shall have them as the
(...). 20.
bulrush in a wet place so dry, that an oblation is as hardly got from them as
a sword from a soldier, or a new coat from a child. Mary did offer according
to her estate; for whereas the Leuit. 12.8.
law requires of the rich a lamb, but of the po^re two turtles, or two young
pigeons: it is said here that she brought the poores offering. And therefore
the Papists usually painting her in exceeding rich attire, and in making her a
great Lady of stately port: feed the peoples eyes with bables, and their ears
with fables: for (to make themselves in this case Judges of themselves) it is
not our observation only, but also their Pet. de pa^^d. Di^z. Dormisecure.
Raulin. Didat de Yan g^as, Gi^on and al^.
own collection in their postils and sermons upon this scripture. Nay their
famous Jesuit Com. in loc.
Maldonate does affirm that all expositors have this gloss, further adding
out of his own conjecture that Marie did not offer two Turtles, but two young
pigeons, and quia sa^lius reperiri, and quia minore pretio (...) potucrum:
because young Pigeons are provided more easily both in respect of pains and
price. Here then is matter of comfort for the Heming.
poor, of fear for the rich, of instruction for all. Of comfort against
poverty, because the Lord of Lords having all things at his command vouchsafed
to be borne of a poor Virgin, according to that of 2. Cor. 8.9.
Paul, he being rich for ^^r sakes became poor, that we through his poverty
might be made rich. Of scare for the wealthy, because Mary descending of a
noble line yea from princely loins, is said here to be so beggarly, that
she was not able to buy a lamb for her offering. It is the fashion of great
men (as the (...) ^ 8.
Prophet complained in his time) to lay field to field, and to join house to
house, Psalm. 49.11.
calling their lands after their own names, entailing their estate to
childrens children, and making ^t (as the lawyers speak) a perpetuity But
(...) 1.4.
one generation passes, and another generation succeeds; he that is higher
then the highest, often Luke 1.52.
pulls down the mighty from his ^eat^, and exalts the poor man out of the
Psalm. 113.6.
mi^e, that he may set him even with the Princes of his people. For in one age
you may behold the gentleman's heir serve his own farmours, issue. Lastly,
this affords instruction for all, intimating that we must offer unto God the
sacrifice due to God. If we cannot give much, he will accept of a little, of
the Virgins two pigeons, of the widows one Mark. 12.42.
fasthing. We may not spend all in our house, much less in the top-house;
some thing is to be laid out upon Gods house, for his service, for his honor,
if not a lamb, yet a pair of Turtle doves, or two young pigeons.

(...).
Mystically, the blessed Virgin did offer a lamb, but it was her own son
the Lamb of God, (...)
Agnus que praesiguratus est ab origin (...) bl^tusest in fine mund^: and she
did offer a young pigeon, but it was her own son conceived of the holy
Ghost, appearing in the likeness of a dove, Matthew. 3.16. And she did offer a
Turtle, but it was her own son, of whom ^^ is said, (...). 2 12.
the voice of the Turtle is heard in our land. Our blessed Savior being (...)
and sacerdos and sacrific^^^* and victor and victims, the sacrificer and the
sacrifice for the sins of the whole world (...)
was offered, first by God his father; secondly, by the Virgin his mother,
thirdly, by his (...). God sent him into the world, the Virgin present, and the
legal sacrifice represent him in the Temple, but himself did offer himself
actually for our sins on the Cross.

And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon Two things are
requisite in a sufficient witness, understanding to know the truth, and
honestly to speak what he knows. Old Simeon] in testifying of Christ had
both, a good understanding, as having a revelation given him of the holy Ghost
that he should not see death until he first saw the Lord Christ: and a great
honesty, being just and godly, or devout, Arctius.
outwardly to the world just, inwardly to himself godly. Heming.
For his works, he was just (...) dealing with men: for his faith, he was
dexout in the service of God. These C^duin. Beza.
two devotion and justice, comprehend all the whole law: devotion all the
duties of the first table; justice all the duties of the second. Devotion is
the mother, Justice the daughter, Calman.
because the true fear of God brings forth always upright carriage toward
men. It is not reported here that he was so righteous as that he needed not
another righteousness, for he looked for the consolation of Israel,
acknowledging in his song, Christ for his savior; Heming.
but that he lived (as it is said of Zacharias and Elizabeth in the former
Chapter) unblameable before men. The word (...) is translated Erasmus.
pius, Castalis.
religiosius, Vulgar latin.
rimoratus, one who Geneua bib.
feared God: and this fear was not servile, but siliall. He did not fear God
as a bad servant fearing the stripes of his great master: but as a loving
son, fearing to displease his good father. Ardens.
^^im^bat cumdilectione, and diligebat cum timore. He was in his course so
careful to do the will of our heavenly father, as that he feared with a pious
love, and loved with a reverent fear. Aretius.
Solicit pius and omnia timens ne non satis pius sit, Pet. de pa^ad. ser. de
purify.
in doing good a just man, in eschewing evil one that feared God.

And looked for the consolation of Israel] He was a Just man in deed, giving
every one his right, unto God, as being devout: unto himself, as expecting the
consolation of Israel: unto other, in preaching Christ openly to be both a
light to the Gentiles, and a glory to the Jews. all the chief Christian
virtues appeared in him eminently. Faith, hope, love: faith, as fearing God:
hope, as looking for the Messiah of the world: love, as being Just,
communicating his gifts of (...).
prophecy to the benefit of the the Church in singing his nunc dimittis, and
in saying mine eyes have seen thy salvation. My corporal eyes thy manhood, my
spiritual eyes thy Godhead; the Ardens.
conjunction of which is Salutare titum, thy salvation, as giving it; and
Salutare ^rism, our salvation, as receiving it. And this Salutare is not
singular, but as Saint Jude terms it a Common salvation, and as old Simeon
in his Hymn, prepared before the face of all people.

The Epistle
ACTS 1.15. In those days Peter stood up in the middlest of the Disciples and
said, etc.


THis Epistle contains a short yet a sweet narration, how Matthews a
Disciple, was elected into the traitor Judas Apostleship and Bishopric.
Wherein three things are more principally remarkable.

1. His Conge de le^re, delivered in an eloquent speech, in which observe the
Time, In whose days. Orator, Peter stood up. Auditorie, Disciples and brethren
about an hundred and twenty. Oration. partly hortatorie, persuading that one
must be chosen, verse 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. doctrinall, intimating what an one
must be chosen, verse. 21, 22.

2. H selection, and in it the process, by nomination. verse. 23. prayer. verse.
24.25. lots. verse. 26.
success, the lot fell on Matthias.
3. His installation, he was counted with the eleven Apostles.
In those daies] To wit, in the space between Christ's assension and his
sending of the holy Ghost, at that time the Disciples being gathered together
at Jerusalem in an upper parlour, they continued with one accord not in
supplication only, but in consultation also for the Gospels advancement.
Arctius in loc.
Hereby teaching all men, especially preachers of the word, to spend their
hours profitably for the benefit of the Church, in supplanting her foes, and
in supplying the number of her friends.

Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciple and said Here the Bellarin. de
Rom pon. lib. 1. cap. 22 in prin. Eck^^s loc. com. tit. de primat. sed. apost.
Lorinus Khem. and aly in loc.
Papists observe Peter's supreme power over the rest of the Disciples and
Apostles, and so by consequence though inconsequent the Popes absolute command
over all other Bishops in the whole world. But if we will exactly consider and
examine his behavior in this assembly, we shall understand that he carried
himself not as a Pope, but as a peer toward them. I. in calling them
brethren, and frater is fere alter, as Lorinus upon the place. 2. for that he
stands up in the middlest of the Disciples, equally referring all things unto
their Chrysostom. Dr. Fulke. Marlorat.
common consent and free choice, terming himself a fellow pastor, 1. Pet.
5.1. Whereas every Bishop assembled in the Tridentine Conuenticle took a
corporal Dr. Humphred. aduers. Campian. and Orraeum cat. 4.
oath that he would not dispute any point to prejudice the Roman sea, nay
there was nothing determined in that irregular meeting, except it was first
handled and hammered at Rome by the Pope, for then it was ordinarily said in a
byword, that the holy Ghost in a bull, or Popes breue was sent from Rome to
Trent, as Praesat. in 1. part. exam ^^^. T^ident.
Chemnitius plainly told Andradius, In illo concilio idem actor re^^est (...).
Our Divines therefore say that Peter was elected prolocutor of this connocation
either by Beza.
secret revelation of the holy Ghost, or else by express judgment of the
Calvin.
congregation; or for that he was usually more seruent then the rest in such a
business, (...).
and ardentior and rebus agendes aptior reliquis extiterat. (...).
For it became ^im of all the Col^edge best, as having de^ied Christ heretofore
most. He ^tood up and spoke, as the mouth of the company, but he played not
the Pope, but only the perswader, exercising not a supremacy of authority,
but a primacie of order, as Chrysostom and other note. See Gospel 1. Sund.
after Easter.

The number of names that were together were about an hundred and twenty.] The
vulgar Latin reading turba hominum, answers not the Greek so well as our
text, turba nominum, the number of names. (...).
For in exquisite numbering usually men are mustred by their several names, in
(...).
Councels especially the names of such as give voices are full enrolled in a
bill or registers table. But by names, our Evangelist understands men, as the
holy Ghost Apocal. 3.4.
elsewhere, ^hou have a few names yet in Sardi which had not defiled their
garments. A few names, that is (as ^ullinger and Are^a^. Ma^^. (...).
other upon the place) a few persons. And (...) and (...) in Apocala^^. 16.
it may be that the sacred spirit in using this phrase does insinuate that
they were men of eminent note, as Genesis 6.4. The Giants are called men of
renoune, that is (as Munster translates according to the Hebrew) viri nominate,
men of name. Well, howsoever their names were great, their number was but
small, being about an hundred and twenty. By which it does appear that the
kingdom of heaven is like unto a Mat. 13.31.
grain of mustard seed, the which in sowing is indeed the least of all seeds,
but in growing it is the g^eatest among herbs, even a tree, so that the birds
of heaven come and build in the branches thereof. Unto these 1^0. (...). 2.47.
The Lord added daily such as should be saved, at one Sermon of Saint Peter,
Act. 2. The number of brethren was increased about 3000. souls. A (...).
ship does a^ thy resemble the Church of Christ; for as a ship is small in the
foredecke, broad in the middle, little in the stern: so the Church in her
beginning (as you see) was exceeding little, in her middle age flourishing, but
in her old age her company will be so small, and her belief so weak, that
when the Son of God shall come to judge the sons of men, he shall scarce
find any faith on earth.

This Scripture must needs have been fulfilled] S. Peter in his oration here
first shows how Judas Apostleship became void. Secondly, that it is needful
another should be chosen into his place. Judas Bishopric was lost by treason,
as being guide to them who took Jesus. Whereupon (as we read in the Mat. 27.
Gospel) he did first accuse himself, I have sinned in betraying innocent
blood: secondly, arraigning himself, he repented, and brought again the
thirty plates of silver to the chief Priest, and cast them down in the
Temple: thirdly, executed himself, he departed, and went, and hanged himself.
Now to take away thy Calvin. Beza.
scandal of this horrible sact, our Evangelist intimates that nothing in Judas
treachery came to pass casually, but it was foreseen of God, and foretold in
his word, This Scripture must needs have been fulfilled. And Aretius. Kilius.
yet the fall of Judas is not excused hereby, no more then the fault of Herod
and Pilate, who did whatsoever Gods own hand and counsel had determined
before to be done, Act. 4.28. For Judas committed not this outrageous crime by
the compulsion of prophecy, but through his own motion and malice. Psalm.
109.16.
His delight was in cursing, and it did happen unto him: he loved not blessing,
therefore was it far from him. It is true that Peter says, he was numbered
with us, and had obtained fellowship in this ministration: but he received the
grace of God in 2. Cor. 6.1.
vain, abusing it to covetousness and worldly lusts, he did open a door to Luke
22.3.
Satan, and gave him as it were possession of his heart.

This necessity then is not necessitas absoluta, sed Aretius.
consequentis and Lorin. in loc. and in act. 4.12. idem Thom. part. 1. quaest.
19. act. 3.
suppositionis, a necessity hypotheticall and by consequent, not an absolute or
a simple necessity. So the holy Ghost elsewhere, 1. Cor. 11.19.
There must be heresies, Mat. ^8.7.
it must needs be that offenses shall come, Mat. 24.6.
ye shall hear of wars, and of rumors of wars, for all these things must
come to pass. That is, supposing the malice of Satan and wickedness of man,
it is impossible but that there should be wars and offenses, and heresies in
the world. Kilia^ cole^^^. (...).
An Astrologer expert in his art foretells an ecclips of the Sun, yet his
prediction is not any cause why the Sun is ecclipsed: even so God foreseeth
all the works of darkness, and ecclipses (as it were) in the reprobate, but
his prescience compels not any to commit any sin. It is the prince of
darkness who E^hes. ^^.
works in the children of disobedience, taking them in his snares at his
will, 2. Tim. 2.26. All our ways are known unto the Lord, our going out, and
our coming in, Esaias 37.28. being of every good pace bonus author, but of every
bad passage ^ustus vltor. I will end this argument in the words of (...). 5.
ca^. 16.
Augustine, Viuit (O Domine Deus) apud te semper bonum nostrum, and quia inde
auersi sumus peruersi sumus. For says (...). 8. cap. 5.
he ligatus eram non ferro alieno, sed mea ferrea voluntate, velle meum tenebat
inimicus, and inde mihi catenam fecerat and constrinxerat me, quippe ex
voluntate peruersa facta est libido, and dum seruitur libudini facta est
consuetudo, and dum consuetudine, non resititur facta est necessitas. How the
fall of traterous Iscariot may serve to terrify the pastor, and teach also
the people: See Gospel 6. Sund. in Lent.

Wherefore of these men which have companied with vs] Christ in his life chose
Mat. 10.^. (...) 3.14.
twelve Apostles, one therefore must be ordained and elected into Judas ^oome,
to fill up the number again, (...).
answerable to the twelve tribes of Israel, of which (as our Savior Mat. 19.28.
promised) they shall be Judges, and to the twelve Ap^cal. 1^.12.
gates of heavenly Jerusalem, of which also the twelve Apostles were builders,
according to that of Paul, Ephesians. 2.20. built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. See
Epistle on S. ^homas day. There be many more resemblances (...) the twelve
Apostles, as you may read in my (...) upon the Gospel, Sund. 6. in Lent; and
in (...) part. 3. considerat. 29.

One must be chosen, and one of these men, ergo not a Pope Io^ne, ^or a woman
must be 1. Cor. 14.34.
silent and not a 1. (...) 2.^2.
teacher in the Temple, one of these men, ergo, not a boy Bishop, not a A^lers.
yonker in years, or 1. m 3.6.
scholle^ship, for pastors are called elders, and Christ himself preached not
until he was thirty years old: one o^ these (...) c^mpa^^ed with us, ergo,
S^r^e^us. (...).
not a stranger, but a domestical, one that is known, a man of note living
among us all the time that the Lord Jesus was conversant among us, (...).
ergo, not a leaud or ignorant person, but a proficient in Christ's own
school, brought up even from his 2. Tim. 3.15.
youth in E^h^^. ^.4.
instruction and information of the Lord. See Gospel on S. Andrew, and 8.
Sund. after Trinity.

But why should one being such an one chosen into Judas room? to witness with
us of the resurrection of Christ. A Prelate then Caluia. Marlorat.
ought to be predicant, not an Idle or an Idol Apostle, like the dumb
Doctors, and Abbey-lubbers, and lasie lay Bishops under the government of the
Pope. Right prelating (as old Father Sermon of the plough.
Latimer said) is laboring* and l^rding or loytering, it is L^^^wer. ser. 4.
before K. Ed.
horror rather then honor, for an Apostle to leave the text* and only to
follow the tithe. A witne^^e he must be, Aretius.
yet not a witness alone, broaching insolent novelties and 1. Tim. 1.3.
other doctrines of his own brain: but a witness with us, of one Act. 4.32.
heart and of one Philip. 2 2.
mind with us, Ephesians. 4.3.
endeavoring to keep the v^itie of the spirit in the bond of peace. For he
who se^kes in the troublesome sea of this world to schismatic Apostles
affecting singularity. Non portum sed plan^tam inueniet, as Tract. 1. in loan.
Augustine pithily.

Well the new chosen ought to record and accord, to witness and to witness
with us, agreeing with the rest of his College and company. But whereof is
he to be a witness, of the resurrection of Christ, (...).
in all his words, and in all his works: in his preaching and in his life so
behauing himself as one that believes the resurrection of Christ, and hops
also for his own redemption, ever (...). ^ 20.
looking for his Savior, even the Lord Jesus, who shall change our vile body
that it may be like to his gloriou^ (...). Or a witness of the resurrection of
Christ, because this one point is, (...).
primarium Euangeli caput, as it were (...).
the predominant article, (...). 10.
presupposing all the rest as being the (...). 10.
tying knot, on which all other linkes of holy belief, depend, as I have
showed often elsewhere; but especially Gosp. on S. Thomas, and Epist. on S.
Andrews day.

And they appointed two] They nominated more then one, Dionys. ^^eo. page and
^^(...). 34. (...). lib. 4.
that the Lord who knew the hearts of all men, might choose the party that
should take the room of the mini^tration and Apostleship from which Judas by
transgression fell. And that Matthias might acknowledge that he received it (as
Paul speaks) not of man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, Galath. 1.12.
(...).. 13. and (...) er. 1. in (...). Mat. (...). 5. and (...). 6.
The world is a circle, God is as it were the center of this circle, the ways
of men are lines deduced from this center. (...).
If then event of the Lotterie he not expected of devils, nor of the stars,
nor of any force of fortune: but looked and prayed for to be directed by God,
it is lawful to use lots in temporal things; as in division of lands and
inheritance, Prou. 18.18. The lot causes contentions to cease, and makes a
partition among the mighty. And in spiritual affairs also; for it is reported
of Zacharias the Priest, that his lot was to burn Incense, Luke 1.9. And
though ordinary choosing of Prelates and Preachers ought not to be by lots, as
both Dio^ys. H^^^cap. Romans (...). ^.
Heathens and Cap. Eccles. (...).
Christians in this agree: yet in some cases extraordinary; to wit, (if two or
three shall happen to stand in election of such equal holiness and other
sufficiency, that humane wisdom cannot any ways discern and so decide which
is most fit) it is Iustus Jonas in loc. Ambros. in 1. Luc. Bellarm. vbisup.
lawful according to the president in our text to cast lots, and so commit the
disposition of the choice to God. In the lawful using of a Lottery then
observe these remarkable See Kilius. collect. in loc. Sixth. senen. bib. sanct.
lib. 5. annot. 166.
caueats.

1. We must expect the lots event from God only: Prou. 16.33. The lot is cast
into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord. 2. We may not
use lots in affairs ordinary, but in cases of necessity, when as the
business cannot otherwise be transacted. 3. We must abandon all uncharitable
conceits, and all dishonorable deceits: Psalm. 5.6. The Lord will abhor the
deceitful man, and destroy such as speak leasing. 4. We must before we cast
lots (as the blessed Apostle here) call upon God in hearty prayer for a
blessing on our endeauours.
I could add easily more, but I remember Epist. 7.
Augustines rule, Secundas habeat parts modestiae, quae primas non potuit
habere sapientiae. If any know less then I, they may be bold to peruse this,
and such as understand more then I, may read, Augustine. epist. 180. and de
doct. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 28. and con 2. in Psalm. 30. Thomas 22ae. quaest.
95. art. 8. Bellarmin. lib. de clericis cap. 5. Sixth. senen. vbi supra in marg.
Aretius, Marlorat, Kilius in loc.

And the lot fell on Matthias. In the Tabernacle the Exodus 26.
curtains of fine twined linen, and blew silk and purple were covered with
curtains of Goats hair. Some men are great ornaments in the Church, and yet
unfit to govern the Church. Gregor. Moral. lib. 25. cap. 22.
Ornent Ecclesiam qui solis rebus spiritualibus vacant, regant Ecclesiam quos
and labor rerum corporalium non grauat, etc. Didac. de Yanguas con. 1. in sest.
Mat.
It may be Joseph as being just was a fine curtain in Gods Tabernacle, but
Matthias a covering: as being apt and active for government. Alia ratio
boniciuis and boni viri, quoth A^th^^. lib. 5. ca^ 2
Aristotle, every good man is not a good magistrate. 1. Cor. 12.^9.
Are all Apo^^les, are all Prophets, are all teachers? There be di^^rsities of
gifts, and diversities of administrations, and diversities of operations.
Happily Joseph excelled in one kind, and Matthias in another. He who k^ew to
judge best of the best for this ministration, in his ^ecret wisdom cast the
lot on Matthias. Or in electing Matthias, he did insinuate that his (...) 55 8.
ways are not as our ways, and that he judges according to the hea^ts of
all men, and not (...) 8 1^.
after the flesh, or titles, or ^u^side, Joseph is called (...).
Barsabas, that is, the son of rest and innocence, surnamed also for his
singular honesty ^u^tus. And yet Matthias is chosen of God, howsoever not
adorned with such commendations before men. (...). 1. (...). Mat.
Here the Gospel and Epistle meet. I thank thee Father Lord of heaven and
earth, because thou ha^ h^d these things from the wise and prudent, and have
showed them unto babes even so was ^t thy good pleasure. The lot falls on the
son of labor, afflicted with the load of sin, not on the just, or on the
son of rest, on Matthias, and not on Barsabas.

The Gospel
MATTHEW. 11.25. In that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee (O Father)
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have had these things from the wise and
prudent, and have showed them unto babes, etc.


Christ's exceeding rich mercy toward us is manifested in this Scripture by two
things especially: to wit, his invocation of God. I thank thee O father etc.
And his inuitation of men, Come unto me all ye that labor, etc. In both
joined together, he that has an eye to see may behold the chief Areti^^ in
loc.
causes of our effectual vocation Efficient, the good pleasure of God the
father, Lord of heaven and earth, etc. Material, babe^, and all such as labor
and are heavy laden. Isntrumental, Jesus, unto whom all things are given.
Final, refreshing and rest in soul.


I thank thee] Melanct in loc.
Prayer and thanksgiving unto God for benefits obtained in prayer ought
always to concur. Christ had often heretofore prayed for the gathering
together of the Church, as it was prophesied of him in the second Psalm;
Desire of me and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. And now his prayer being
heard, he renders unto God his praise, Father, I thank thee Lord of heaven
and earth. In which one line Pet. de pal^d. in loc.
three wicked errors are consuted: first, the words, I thank thee) consound
the Jews assuming that Christ was a Mat^h. 26.
blas (...) Secondly, father, overthrows Arrians, an (...) ^ch as deny Christ
to be Gods eternal son. Thirdly, heaven, crosses the Manicheans opinion*
holding God to be Creator of visible things only, but not of invisible.

Because thou have hid those things from the wise] He did not absolutely
thank his father for hiding the mysteries of his saving grace from the wise:
Illephons. Gi^^^. fragment. in ^^^sens euangel. idem Pet. de palud. ex Chrysostom.
but for that be revealed them unto babes. You may read the like phrase, Romans
6.17* God be thanked that ye have been the seru^nts of inn, but ye have
obtained from the heart unto be form of the doctrine which was delivered unto
you. Calvin and Caietan in Romans 6.
(...) blessed Apostle did not give thanks unto God for that the Romans had
made their members as weapons of iniquity: but because they who sometime were
the servants of sin, through his grace were now the servants of
righteousness, as Primasius upon the place, Gratias Deo quia fuist is, sed
ipso liberatore iam non estis. Even so Christ here thanks his father
primarily, not for hiding these things from the wise (that is, wise in their
Prou. 3.7.
own eyes, or wise men after the 1. Co. 1.26.
flesh, endued with a wisdom which is earthly, sensual, and devilish,
James. 3.15.) but because though he suffer the prince of darkness to 1. Cor.
4.4.
blind the minds of the worldly wise: yet he does openly show the glorious
light of the Gospel unto babes* that is, unto such as became 1. Cor. 3.18.
fools that they may be wise, wholly renouncing their own wit, and solely
submitting themselves unto Gods will. If Jesus Luk 10 21.
rejoiced in the spirit, and magnified the Lord of heaven and earth for us;
(...). Mat.
O what thanks ought our selves to present unto God for our selves. Praise the
Lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name. For mine eyes
have seen thy salvation, and mine heart has often endited a good matter, and
my pen sometimes is the pen of a ready writer. O father of mercy, whereas
these things are yet hid from the Jews, and from the Turks, and from the
superstitious Heathen, and from carnal Christians; I have, to the great
refreshing of my soul, through thy grace (sweet Jesus) both heard by the
Gospel, and embraced the Gospel, and preached the Gospel, and in some
measure practiced also the Gospel. Psalm. 103.2.
O my soul praise the Lord, and forget not all his benefits. I will sing unto
the Lord as long as I live, I will praise my God while I have any being, Psalm.
104.33.

The sweetest of honey lies in the bottom; I pass therefore from Christ's
invocation, to the latter part of his Gospel his inuitation. In which observe
the mouer, Jesus. moved, all that labor and are laden. motion, Come take my
yoke upon you, learn of me. motives, I will ease you, ye shall find rest
unto your souls, for my yoke is easy, and my burden light.


The person inuiting is Jesus, he says here come, not to mine, Vide respon.
Eliensis ad apolog. B^llar. cap. 8.
but to me: not to my Saints, or Angels, or Martyrs, or Mother: but to my
self. Send not other, it is my pleasure that ye come: seek not for help from
other, I will ease you. Come unto me, Job. 14.6.
for I am the way, the truth, and the life. The way by which, and the truth in
which, and the life for which all of you come. None can come but by me, none
find ease but in me, none rest in ease but with me. Come therefore, for I am
the way: learn of me, for I am the truth: and ye shall find rest unto your
souls, for I am the life. Come to me, Musculus in loc.
for I am (as you see) willing, in saying come, and able to relieve you: for
that all things are given unto me. So that Mat. 7.7.
ask, and ye shall have: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be
opened unto you. Ioh. 16.23.
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you.

None can come to the Father except it be by the Son; for no man knows the
Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will open him. In saying
save the Son, he does not exclude the holy spirit being the third person in
Trinity, for it is a good conclusion in Divinity, Caietan. Ludolphus.
Beauxamis in loc.
dictio exclusiua sieve exceptiua addita termino personali in essentialibus non
excludit ab altera persona diuina. God the Father, and God the holy Ghost, as
being all one with the Son, are in the words ( nisi filius) included, and
only the Creator excluded. For none know the Father by Hieron. in loc.
nature, but by the revelation of the Son. We speak the wisdom of God in
a mystery (says 1. Cor. 2.7.
Paul) which none of the Princes of this world knew, hunc magnus Plato
nesciuit, eloquens Demosthenes ignorauit. It is true that we may know by the
light of humane discourse that there is a God, for the Romans 1.20.
Godhead is seen by the creation of the world: The heavens declare the glory
of God, and the firmament shows his handie wo^ke, Psalm. 19.1. Yet none know
the Father, Caietan.
that is, a distinction of the persons in sacred Trinity, but by the spirit of
him in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Coloss. 2.3.
And (...) our revealed knowledge is but 1. Cor. 13.12.
imperfect in this life. They who saw most of God obtained only the sight of
his hinder parts. And in the kingdom of glory, when as we shall enjoy the
beholding of his foreparts also, seeing him even face to face; our knowledge
shall not be Pet. (...). i. (...) 12. (...) 8 (...).
comprehensionis cognitio, sed apprehensionis, an apprehending rather then a
comprehending of his infinite Majesty. We shall not even in that day know so
much of the Father, as the Father knows of himself, (...) gal. (...) 10.
Sola quippe trinitas in vn^atis diuinitate seipsam nouit. In this life we
shall attain by Christ's grace to such an understanding (...) God as is fit,
and in the world to come we shall ^a^e so much as is full even so much as any
created vessel is able to contain* yet none shall ever (...) comprehend that
incomprehensible Trinity, none can as it self know it self.

H^^herto concerning the party calling: I am now to speak of the persons
invited All ye that labor and are lader. He does ex^^^^ (...).
^one, who came to bring 1. (...). ^.4. (...).
all unto the knowledge of the truth, ^ ^al that l^^our, then all that live.
For man borne of a woman is full of troub^e, Job 14.1 Come therefore all ye
that labor in your (...).
actions and are laden in your passions. All ye (...).
Jews who labor under the yoke of the law, and all ye Gentiles opp^essed with
the burden of your sins. All ye that labor where (...), and whenever,
and howso^^er afflicted or aff^^^^d (...) misery. For these two lab^ur and
l^d^^, (...). cap. 47.
(...) ((...) ^one conceive) simply the ^^me, sign^f^ing all kind ^f ^^efe,
s^res, and sorrow ^hatsoeuer. As in the 6. and 9 Psalms, (...) weary of my
gream^g, I am weary of my (...). etc. To speak more distinctly, there is a
(...).
threefold burden, namely, the burden of ^^ffliction. the law. (...).


Christ eases all such as come to him of all these. Concerning the sir^, great
trau^ile (says the son of Eccles 40.1.
Sirach) is created for all men, and a hea^ie yoke upon the sons of Adam,
even from the day that they go out of the mothers womb, till the day that
they return to the mother of all things. But Christ, a Psalm 9 9.
refuge in due time of trouble, yea a Psalm. 46.1.
present help, does either take away this burden from our shoulders, or else
gives unto such as come to him abundant strength and patience to bear it. Art
thou crossed in thy goods? it is Job 1.21.
the Lord who gives, and the Lord who takes away. 1. Pet. 5.7.
Cast all your care upon him, and he will so care for you, that this burden
shall be made light, and this yoke easy. Art thou wronged in thy good name?
say with 2. Sam. 16.12.
David, it may be the Lord will look upon mine affliction, and do me good,
for Shemi his cursing me this day. Come to Christ, and he will bring it to
pass, that thy greatest enemy shall (if he have any spark of grace) confess
ingeniously to thee (as 1. Sam. 24.18.
Saul once to David) thou art more righteous then I, for thou have rendered me
good, and ^ have rendered thee evil. He shall make thy righteousness as
clear as the light, and thy just dealing as the noone day, Psalm. 37.6. Art
thou much afflicted with sickness? Deuteronomy. 32.39.
I (says the Lord) am he who kill, and give life, wound, and make whole, 1.
Sam. 2.6.
bring down to the grave, and raise up again. I am the resurrection and the
life, he that believes in me, though he were dead yet shall he live, Ioh.
11.25.

The 2 burden is that ^f the law, a yoke which neither our fathers nor we were
able to bear* says S. Peter, Act. 15.10. a yo^e of Galath. 5.1.
bondage* a Matthew. 23.4.
heavy burden, and grievous to be borne. Now Christ eases us of this burden
also, being Galath. 4.4.
made under the law to redeem them under the law. He Coloss 2.14.
blotted out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us which was
contrary to us, and took it out of the way nailing it to hi^ cr^ss^. So that
if Satan, that informer and common accuser of us all, object the laws
obligation against us our answer may be that the debt is paid, and the bond
cancelled. If his evidence be good, let him if he can show it in the court.
Christ is the end of the law, Romans 10.4. For the law was added because of the
transgression, until the blessed seed came, to the which, the promise was
made, Galath. 3.19. The Prophets and the law did endure till John, but since
Mat. 11.12.
the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.
The blessed seed is come when once Christ Ephesians. 3.17.
dwells in our hearts by faith, and then it is time for the law to be
pa^king out of the conscience, then her kingdom is at an end Come therefore to
Christ all ye that labor under the yoke of the law written, and all ye which
are laden with the burden of pharisaicall traditions unwritten, and ye shall
find rest unto your souls.

The third burden is of sin, the which is so weighty, that Zechar. 5.7.
Zecharias calls it a talent of lead, and Psalm. 30.3.
David who felt the load himself says of it expressly, there is no health in
my flesh because of thy displeasure, neither is there any rest in my bones by
reason of my sin, for my wickednesses are gone over my head, and are like a
sore burden too heavy for me to bear. And here let us observe with In loc.
Euthymius that sin is first a labor in accomplishing, and then a load when
it is accomplished. The covetous, incontinent, ambitious, exceedingly labor to
compass their unlawful desires, and yet when all is done, they remain still
as men undone. For no man is more beggerlike, then a covetous wretch in an
opulent fortune, nor more base, then a proud man in the midst of his honor.
There is a labor in geering these things, and when once they be got, a load.
Ecclesiast. 1.14.
All is but ^^nity and vexation of spirit. They who truly repent them of their
sin feel this burden in this world, and they who being irrepentant, are in a
^am. 1.^8.
reprobate sense, shall at the last day notwithstanding confess to their
endless shame, Wis^. 5.7.
We have wearied our selves in the ways of wickedness and destruction. Now
Christ says unto such as grieve and groan under the burden of their sins,
Mat. 9.13.
I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Luke 4.18.
the spirit of the Lord is upon me that I should preach the Gospel unto the
poor, he has sent me that I should heal the broken hearted, that I should
preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind.

He calls all that labor Ludolph. de vita Christ. part. 1, cap. 58.
sieve secundum naturam in qua nascimur; sieve secundum culpaem qua
transgredimur; sieve poenam in qua morimur. All men, as you have heard
sufficiently, Masculus. Calain. Giron.
yet only such as labor and are laden with the burden of their sins
efficiently. The carnal and careless have Mat. 13 14.
eyes and see not, ears and hear not, hearts and understand not. Mat. 23.37.
How often would I (says he who calls all) have gathered you together as
the hen gathers her chickins under her wings, and ye would not. And in this
present chapter at the seventeenth verse. We have piped unto you, and ye have
not danced, we have mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented. That is, (as
Ser. 80.
Ambrose construeth it) we have preached unto you the sweet comforts of the
Gospel, and ye have not rejoiced in spirit: we have denounced unto you the
terrible judgments of God contained in the law, and ye have not trembled at
our words. O think on this all ye that forget God, all ye that stop your
ears and harden your hearts at his voice; repent and exhort one another Heb.
3.^3.
while it is to day, seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him,
and come unto him while he is near, Esaias 55.6.

Yea but where shall we find thee sweet Jesus? I am (says he) found in my
works, and in my words, and in my Sacraments. In my works. Ioh. 10.25.
for they bear witness of me, they show that by me the blind receive sight,
and halt go, and the leapers are cleansed, and the dead are raised up, Matthew.
11.5. In my word, for the Ioh. 5.39.
Scriptures are they which testify of me. There you shall read how God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whose ever believes
in him should not perish but have everlasting life, John 2.16. in my
sac^ar^^is, (...) 6.^6.
he that ear (...) blood dwells in me, and (...) ye come to my table ye
shall be refreshed (...) my blood (...)
ref^^teris (...) necesseris de(...).

(...) to the coming or motion, and that is by (...) and not by feet, moribus
non pedibus by love not by legs: come to me then in says, (...)
and (...) yoke (...) to hope and learn ^f me meek^es and lowliness in ^one:
(...)
he that comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
such as seek him: he must in h^pe bear Christ's yoke, the which in respect of
the present labor is heaven but in respect of the ^ f^ture retribution hope
(...)
(...): to says he must adioyne love, whereof there be two principal objects,
and two principal offices: the principal objects of our love are God and our
neighbors, (...)
lowliness in heart disposes aright of our love toward God, and meeknes
shows how we should demean our selves in our carriage toward our neighbors:
the two principal offices of our love are to give and to forgive; lowliness
is ready to give every man his due, meekness to forg^ue every man his debt: or
we must be (...)
mites (...) humiles mentibus, in our outward behavior toward other meek, in
our inward conceit of our selves humble: lowly not in complement or habit only,
but in heart: for as the Eccles. 19 25.
wiseman tells us there be some that being about wicked purposes do bow
down themselves and are sad, whose inward parts burn altogether with deceit ^
he looks down with (...) face, and fameth himself deaf: yet before thou
perce^^^ (...) upon thee to hurt thee.

(...)
Christ wou^d not have us imitate him in his mi(...), as ^n walking upon the
waters, in raising the dead, ^n making a new world: but in his morale, in his
meeknes and lowlines especially, for these virtues are the lessons he ^eacheth,
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom 2nd knowledge: it is so great a
thing in our own eyes to be little, that no man is able to learn it of any
but of him only, who being in the Philip 26.
form of God took upon him the form of a servant and became man, yea a
Psalm. 22.6.
worm and no man, a very scorn of men and outcast of the people, termed
Apocalyp. 1.8. the first and the last: in majesty the first, in Gloss.
meeknes as the last, his whole life being nothing else but an open book, or
rather an open shop of humility: descend then if thou will ascend, if thou
desire to build high and to seek the things above, lay thy foundation low,
humblenes of mind is Bonauent. diet salat. cap. 36
schola and scala coeli, the school teaching and the scale reaching heaven.

Hildebert. in epitap. Berengary apud Malmes. in vita. Will. 1.
Quo minor est quisquis maximus est hominum.

I will ease you Bernard.
the world cries, ego deficiam, I will leave you: the flesh cries, ego
inficiam, I will corrupt you: the devil cries, ego interficiam, I will
destroy you: but he (which is August. de verb. apost. ser. 22.
verax verus veritas, ever speaking the truth as ever being the truth) opposes
himself against all these mortal enemies and says ego reficiam, I will ease
you: this one clause then is the very close, yea the very Culman. in loc.
sum of the whole gospel in as much as all our learning and laboring is for
this end, that we may find refreshing and rest unto our souls in the end, the
latin ref^ciam has Vide Giron. con. 2. in ^est. Mat.
three significations.

1 Reficere is to repair or renew, Mat. 4.21. reficienres retia, James and
John were mending their nets etc, and so Christ as being H^b. 1.3.
the brightness of Gods glory, and express character of his person, restores
again Gods Image defaced in us through Adams fall, vt recreatio creationi
responderet says Part. 1. quaest. 3. a^^. 8.
Aquine, that the redemption of the world might answer the creation: he who
first made, now mendeth us, all of us being the Ephesians. 2.10.
workmanship of God in Christ as creatures and as new creatures: as Creatures,
for in the beginning was the word, all things were made by it, and without it
was made nothing that was made: as 2. Cor. 5.17.
new creatures, for Christ Jesus is the new man we must Romans 12.14.
put on, of whom we must learn meeknes and lowlines that we may walk in
newnes of life, Romans 6.4. 2. Reficere, does signify to strengthen with meat,
in which acception a common hall in a college where the society meet and eat
together, is called a refectorie; now Christ has a twofold refectorie for all
such as come unto him, one in his kingdom of grace, when he Psalm. 23.5.
prepares a table for us in despite of our foe, refreshing us with the food of
his word of his supper, of his examples until we are made fat, Proverb. 28.25.
even so full and fair, that the Church in admiration hereof asks her best
beloved, Cant. 1.6.
show me where thou feedest? another refectorie, Christ has in his kingdom of
glory, Luke 22.30. Ye shall eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, there
God has prepared for those that love him a banquet of such delicates as eye
has not seen, neither ear has heard, neither heart of man able to conceive.
1. Cor. 2.9. R^pe^t. in Mat. 11.
Sentiri potest, dici non potest. Come then unto me all ye Mat. 5.6.
that hunger and thirst after righteousness, and I will feed you, feast you,
fill you, feed you with the 1. Pet. 2.^.
sincere milk of my doctrine, feast you with a cheerefulnes of conscience
which is a Proverb. 15.15.
continual feast, fill you with an ouerflowing cup in the state of glory: come
to me, nay if ye will open the wicket of your heart when I knock and desire to
come to you, I will sup with you, and you shall also sup with me, Apocalip.
3.20. 3. Reficere, signifies as our text runs here, to refresh and to ease
such as labor and are laden, and this ^ansenius. Marlorat.
expresses the word (...) best, and is most agreeable to the clause going
before labor and laden; and the words following after, rest, easy, light, as
if he should have said, Sua^e contra laborem, (...) contraonus. Ca^etanin loc.
I will ease such as labor, and give rest unto such as are laden, I will make
their heavy burden light, and their hard yoke easy, so that they shall count
it exceeding joy to fall into diverse temptations, James 1.2. as sorrowing and
yet always rejoicing, 2. Cor. 6.10. Psalm. 128.2.
blessed in eating the labors of their hands: as men of the world are
Augustine. in Psalm. 127.
infeliciter felices, unhappy in being so much happy: so the children of God
are feliciter infelices, happy in feeling their load, and understanding their
unhappiness, for 1. Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful, and will not suffer his children to be tempted above their
ability, but will even with the temptation make away to escape, that they may
be able to bear it. This ease Paul found unto the rest of his soul, 2. Cor.
4.8. We are troubled on every side, yet are we not in distress: perplexed, but
not in despair: persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down, but yet not cast
away. A Musculus in loc.
Physician (albeit he be never so skillful in his art) cannot absolutely
promise that he will ease you: his comforts are I will endeavor to give you
rest, if I can I will help you, neither invention of wit, nor intention of
will, I assure you shall be wanting: but Christ here says I will, I can, as
having all things given unto me of my father, and I will as being Esaias 61.1.
sent into the world to comfort such as mourn in Sion.
Ye shall find rest unto your soules] Pet. de palud.
some find rest in their body, but not in their soul, as the glutton
mentioned, Luke 16. his body was richly clothed, and deliciously pampered every
day, but his soul (so full of sores as Lazarus at his gate) found no rest:
Luther loc. com. tit. de furijs malae conscien.
one drop of a bad conscience did drink up as it were the whole sea of his
worldly delights, some find rest in their soul, but not in their body, so the
servants of God are said to Romans 5.3.
rejoice in tribulations, as the blessed Apostles Act. 5. afflicted in body,
rejoiced in spirit, because they were counted worthy to suffer for Christ's
name: some neither in body nor soul, as the damned in hell, having Bonauent.
diet. salut. cap. 49.
poenarum and diuersitatem and vniuersitatem, a fire to torment the body, a
worm to torture the soul Esaias 66.24. some both in body and in soul, as Gods
elect in heaven, who rest from their labor, Apocalyp. 14.13. and from their
grief, for Apocalyp. 21.4.
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
dying or crying: and from their fear, Job. 11.19. when thou take thy rest
none shall affright thee: come then unto me all ye that labor and are laden,
and ye shall find rest here begun, hereafter accomplished fully: ye shall find,
Musculus.
not by your own industry: but through my grace, first I will ease you, then
ye shall find rest unto your souls: unless I give you means to seek, ye can
not find, if you will have it, I pray come to me for it.

For my yoke is easy and my burden light] Theophyla^t. Euthym.
Some construe this of Christ's humility, because meek and lowly persons have
more rest and ease then the proud and ambitious, ever laboring for higher
place; per quot pericula peruenitur ad grandius periculum? as Confess. lib. 8.
cap. 6.
Augustine sweetly. The Courtier is in deed restie, yet restless: See resolved
gentleman. page 14.
if he turn gallant, he shall be condemned as vain: if otherwise, disgraced
with the titles of baseness: if he follow his studies, he shall be thought
dangerous: if not, argued of ignorance: it he have traueiled, his service will
be questioned: if not, he shall be reputed incapable of employment. So
miserable is his estate, that his imperfections are hated, his virtues
suspected, and either of them both alike able to bar him from preferment.
(...).
He must ever study not so much to have friends, as to beware of his enemies:
in a word, there is less travel in serving of God, then the King: for the King
has only some few hours of audience, whereas God says, at what time soever a
sinner does repent of his sin from the bottom of his heart, I will put all
his wickedness out of my remembrance.

But Augustine. Hieron. ^ansen. Musculus. Maldonat. etc.
most interpretors understand this of Christ's Gospel and doctrine, D^ Falk. in
loc.
for his burden is light unto such as he refreshes and eases from the
burden of sin, his commandments are not heavy to them whose faith
overcomes the world, 1. John 5.3. A Gueu^ra. epist.
yoke when it is green is heavy, but when it is somewhat worn, easy. Now
Christ himself did first wear this yoke, that it might be seasoned and made
light for us. If he commanded other to fast, himself fasted: if he commanded
other to pray, himself prayed: if he commanded other to forgive, himself
pardoned: if he commanded other to die, himself also died, etc. And therefore
says he, learn of me. Calvin.
For this yoke will appear to be sweet, if once you be well acquainted with
it as I am. It Didac. Yanguas con. 2. de S. Matthew.
is my yoke, not yours. I put my shoulder unto the burden and bear more then
you, factus est principatus super humerum eius, Esa. 9.6. Christ does as 2.
Cor. 11.29.
Paul says, Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn
not? I bear the yoke when ye suffer, Act. 9.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? To this purpose Epist. lib. 4. epista.
Paulinus excellently, Christus and patiens and triumphans in sanct is suis: in
Abel, occisus a fratre: in Noe, irrisus a filio: in Abraham peregrinatus, In
Isaac oblatus, in Joseph venditus, in Moyse fugatus, in Prophetis lapidatus, in
Apostolis terra marique iactatus. When as then ye labor and are laden heavily,
learn of me, yea lean on me: Psalm. 55.23. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and
he shall nourish thee, Come to me and I will ease you. So S. De verbis dom.
secund. Mat. ser. 9.
Augustine does expound this clause, Christ's burden in it self (says he) is
exceeding troublesome, for 2. Tim. 3.12.
all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer perscution: but his
spirit Romans 8.20.
helps our infirmities, and sweetneth affliction for us; he makes us
willing, and so by consequent able to bear his burden, and undergo his yoke.
For Bernard. ser. 85. in Cant.
vbi amor est, non est labor sed sapor, unto the willing all things are
welcome. The way to heaven is August. vbi supra.
angusta paucis eligentibus, facilis tamen omnibus diligentibus. O come then
unto Christ, and take up his yoke. Ambros. de Elia cap. 22.
Fear it not as being a yoke, but bea^e it as being easy. Respect not the
present pain, but expect the future pleasure. For our light affliction which
is but for a moment, causes unto us a far more excellent and eternal weight
of glory, 2. Cor. 4.17.

It is very remarkable that Christ says in the Gueuara epist.
singular yoke, for he does not command us to plough with many yokes. The
devil enticeth us to many vices which are contrary, the world has many
troubles which are contrary, the flesh also many desires which are contrary:
but God has upon the point but one commandment, namely, that 1. ^ob. 3 23.
we believe in his Son Jesus Christ, and express this faith in loving one
another. All that Christ on our part requires is, that we come to him, and
learn of him. Romans 10.9. Si credis lu^us ^s. Luther.
If thou shall acknowledge with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thine heart that God has raised him up from the dead, thou shall be saved.
The Gospel is called a burden and a yoke, E^thym.
lest we presume: yet light and easy, lest we despair. Marlorat.
By this one sentence two sorts of men are confuted especially: the carnal
Gospellers on the right hand, who because justification is by faith only, hold
themselves free from all burdens; and the superstitious Monks and
merit-mongers on the left hand, loading the consciences of men with too many
burdens. O sweet Jesus, so guide me with thy holy spirit, that I may walk
between these two rocks in thy mid way. Thou ( ^o whom all things are given)
give me thy grace, that I may come to thee, learn of thee, rest in thee. That
I may so bear thy cross on earth, as that I may wear thy crown in heaven,
Amen.

The Epistle
ESAIAS 7.10 God spoke once again to Ahaz, saying, require a token of the Lord
thy God, etc.


IN this Scripture two things are more chiefly considerable; namely, the
goodness of God particularly toward Ahaz King of Judah, God spoke again to
Ahaz, saying, ask a sign, etc. generally toward all the house of David, even
the whole Church, a Virgin shall conceine, etc.
wickedness of Ahaz Open Calvin. in loc.
unthankfulness and Hieron. in loc.
insolent Hyperius. Vatablas.
impiety, then said Ahaz, Vatablas.
will ask none. Secret Musculus. Hen. Mollerus.
hypocrisy, covering his contempt and Atheism with a cloak of devotion and
duty, neither will I tempt the Lord.



God spoke again to Ahaz] In the days of Ahaz the son of Iotham, the son
of Vzziah King of Judah (as we read in the beginning of this present chapter)
Rezm the King of Aram, and Pe^ath the son of Remaliah King of Israel came up
and fought against Jerusalem. Now God (as being a Psalm. 46.1.
present help in troub^e) sent his Prophet Esaias to comfort King Ahaz in this
extremity, saying verse. 4. Fear not, neither be faint hear^ed for the two
tails of those smo^ing firebrands, for the furious wrath of Rezin, and of
Remaliahs son. For albeit they determine to depose thee, and to dispose of
thy Kingdom, purposing to set up in thy throne the son of ^abeal. verse 6:
Yet thus says the Lord God, their counsel shall not stand, neither shall it
be: for the head of Aramis Damascus: and the head of Damascus is Rezin, and
within threescore and five years Ephraim shall be broken from being a people.
Cal^in.
As if he should say, these two kingdoms shall have their limits, and their
two Kings must be content with their own greatness, they both aspire to the
Crown, but I have set them their bounds which they shall not pass. Believe my
words and it shall go well with you, but if ye will not believe, surely ye
shall not be established, verse. 9. And therefore that Ahaz and his people
might give credit to this promise, the Lord (says our text) spoke once more to
Ahaz.

(...)
Where note Gods long suffering and patience toward an Idolatious and a wicked
King, (...)
who did not uprightly in the sight of the Lord his God (...) David his father
^ but made his son go through the fire after the abominations of the Heathen,
whom the Lord had cast out before the children of Israel, and offered, and
burnt incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green
tree. The Lord Ez^b. 33.11.
desired not the death of a sinner but that he may turn from his evil ways
and live, speaking to him as here to Ahaz, again and again; turn you, turn
you, for why will ye die O ye house of Israel? He does inuit to mercy, not
only such as are godly men, according to the prayer of Psalm. 125.4.
David, Do well O Lord unto those that be good and true of heart. But he makes
his Sun to rise on the evil, and sends his rain on the just and on the
unjust, Matthew. 5.45. He is not slack faith 2. Pet. 3 9.
Peter in coming to judgment (as some men count s^^icknesse) but is patient
toward us, and would have no man to perish, but would all men to come to
repentance. Wherefore thou, whosoever thou be which art in the Act. 8.2^.
gall of bitterness, 1. King 21.25.
selling thy self to work wickedness, nay (...). 4.19.
giving thy self to wantonness to commit all uncleanness, even with
greediness. Romans 2.3.
How do thou thin^e thou shall escape the judgment of God? or despisest thou
the riches of his bountifulness, and patience, and long sufferance, not
knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? The Lord spoke to
Ahaz again, yet not only for his sake, nor for the wicked alone: Calvin.
but rather to provide for the weak which had some seeds of Godliness. For
albeit they did offend the Lord very much in their distrust and Idolatry: yet
God as being the father of 2. Cor. 1.3.
mercies, in wrath remembers mercy. Habac. 3.2. Compassion and forgiveness is
in the Lord our God, albeit we have rebelled against him. Dan. 9.9.

Require a token of the Lord thy God] Musculus.
As if Esaias should have said. I perceive you give credit to my report,
entertaining my speech as the words of a mere man, and not as the word of God.
Wherefore to demonstrate that I come not in mine own name, but from the Lord of
Hosts, Ask a sign, Hierome.
not of Idols, or of strange gods unable to help thee: but of thy God Ask a
sign not of me, but of the Lord Psalm. 72.18.
which only does wondrous things. Ask of him, Ahaz, and thou shall understand
that it is the Lord who speaks unto thee. God for the confirmation of our
faith Mollerus. Calvin.
adds unto his promises as proppes of our infirmity, signs and tokens,
which Tract. 80. in Joan.
Augustine calls aptly visible words. And these signs are of two sorts,
extraordinary, whereof the Prophet in our present text, and that which was
given to Hezekiah in the 38. chapter of this prophecy, verse. 7. Ordinary, in
daily use, as Baptism and the Lords Supper, the which are signs and seals of
Gods holy covenant with us. And we must so join faith unto the word, that we
despise not the Sacraments which Almighty God offers as helps for the
strengthening of of our faith. 1. Tim. 1.15.
It is a true saying that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. And
this saying ought by all means to be received and one chief mean is the
ministration of the Sacraments: and therefore the frantic spirits in our time
who make no reckoning of Baptism, nor of the blessed Eucharist, but esteem
them abces only for little children, are worthily censured by reverend (...)
Calvin to separate those things which God has joined together.

Whether it be toward the depth beneath, or toward the height aboue] The
Prophet prescribes not what token Ahaz should ask, (...).
lest happily the truth of the miracle might be suspected: but he leaves it
to the Kings own free choice, whether he will have it toward the depth or
height, (...).
that is in earth or heaven. Or it may be the word depth is of some deeper
signification; Hieron. Calvin.
as if Esaias should say, God will openly show thee that his dominion is far
above all the world; yea that it reaches even from the heaven of heavens, to
the very depth of depthes, insomuch as he can at his good pleasure fetch
Angels out of heaven, and also ra^e the very dead out of their graves, (...).
Here then observe Gods omnipotency, who can do whatsoever he will in heaven
and in earth, and in the sea, and in all deep places, Psalm. 135.6. (...).
32.17.
O God the great and mighty, great in Counsel, and mighty in wor^e. Behold
thou have made the heaven, and the earth, by thy great power and stretched out
arm, and there is nothing hard unto thee. This doctrine is comfortable to the
godly, who Psalm. 91.1.
dwell under the defense of the most high, and abide under the shadow of his
wings, having his spirit for their guide, and his Angels for their guard. But
it is very terrible to the wicked, in that all the creatures in heaven, in
earth, and under earth attend the Lord of Hosts, euenmore ready to fight
against such as fight against him.

I will require none^ This argues his Hieron.
pride, rather then humbleness. Or as (...).
other, his trust in the strength of the King of 2. King 16.
Ashor, rather then his affiance in the King of Kings. And yet he colors his
foul contempt (...).
hypocritically with a fair pretense, saying* I will not tempt the Lord,
alluding doubtless to the text, Deuteronomy. 6.16. ye shall not tempt the Lord your
God. He forgate the words in the some chapter a little before, ye shall not
walk after other gods, etc. and only wrested that clause which he thought
would fit his turn, wrest I say, for to require a sign when God inuiteth and
inioyneth us, is not to tempt the Lord; but to trust and obey, which is 1. Sam.
15.22.
better then sacrifice. Gedeon is commended for asking signs of the Lord,
Judges 6. the Pharities on the contrary condemned even by Mat. 16.4.
Christ himself, the wicked generation and adulterous seeks a sign: now the
reason hereof is exceeding plain, their actions differed in their Mollerus.
Musculus.
ends: for whereas Gedeon asks a sign to be confirmed in Gods promise; the
Pharisees required miracles of Christ out of curiosity to betray, rather then
to be taught of him: in this acceptable time of grace we need not ask for new
miracles, it is sufficient to believe those which are recorded in holy Bible.
The blessed Sacraments are Gods ordinary signs appointed in his word for the
strengthening of our faith* he that refuses them as a superfluous help
commits the sin of Ahaz, he that uses them according to Christ's ordinance,
spiritually receives Christ himself, as Apud Elien. respon. id apol^g.
Bellarmin^ page 11.
Durand^ss pithily, verbum andimus, motum sentimus, modum nescimus, praesentiam
credimus.

Hear ye now O house of Dauid] For as much as it was an intolerable wickedness
to shut the gates against the might and mercies of God under color of honesty
and modesty; the Prophet is justly displeased, and sharply rebukes these
painted Mat. 23.27.
sepulchers* and says, hear ye now O house of David, etc. for albeit it was
an honor for them to be held the race of David (if they had walked in the
steps of David) Ca^^in.
yet notwithstanding he now calls them house of David rather by way of reproach
then otherwise. And in very deed the contempt and unthankfulness in refusing a
sign was so much the more heinous, because this favor was rejected by that
house, out of which the salvation of the whole world should come. Note then
here the Prophets order and exquisite method in teaching: first he begins with
doctrine, take heed, be still, and fear not, etc. then he proceeds to the
confirmation of his doctrine, (...) a token of the Lord thy God, etc. (...)
when he saw (...) both his offered sayings and signs unto King Ahaz were
fruitless, he comes to reproof, grievously ^^ding this obstinate man; and ^o
him ^lone, but also all the royal house defiled with this impiety: we must in
our ministry take the l^ke course: first beginning with doctrine, then
proceeding to confirmation, and when these two fail, we must (as our Prophet
speaks Esaias 58.1.
elsewhere) lift our voice like a trumpet, s^ewing Gods people their
transgressions, and to the house of Jacob their sins, after proof we must
(as Esaias here) come to reproofe^ (...) lachrimae lauds tuae sint, as (...).
Tom. 1. fol. 14.
Hierome does advise Nepotian, for says he, melius est ex duobus imperfectis
rusticitatem sanitam habere, quam eloquentiam peccatricem, and Loc. com. tit.
de of^^. minist. in tavan. vit^.
Martin Luther that son of thunder was wont to say, cortes meus esse potest
durior, sed nucleus mollis and dulcis est.

Is it not enough for you that ye be grievous unto men, but ye must grieve my
God also?] Calvin.
He does use comparisons between God and men, not as if the Prophets could in
deed be separated from God, for they be nothing else but his instruments,
having one common cause with him as long as they discharge their duties,
according to that of Christ, Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me: and
he that despises you despises me: the Prophet then shapes his speech
according to the wicked opinion of Ahaz. and his followers, imagining that they
had to do with men only, as if he should say, though I am a mortal man as
you conceive, yet in rejecting the sign which is offered unto you, ye greiue
God himself, for as much as the Lord speaks in me: (...) (...).
Luther is our comfort and credit, that in de(...) Gods errand, our tongue is
Gods tongue, and our (...) Gods voice, (...)
he therefore that despises our preaching, despises not men* but God; as the
Lord said to 1. Sam. 8 ^.
(...), they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should
not reign over them: and this ought to move the Prophets and preachers of the
word, Musc^^.
that a wrong done to them in executing their holy sunction is an injury done
to God himself, and they must grieve not so much in respect of their own
^ishonour, as for that God is grieved, according to that of Psalm 119.136.
David, mine eyes gush ou^ with water, because men keep not thy law: it is
well observed, that whereas Esaias said before whilst Ahaz rebellion and
ingratitude was hidden, ask a sign of the Lord thy God: he now takes this
honor to himself, saying my God, not thy God, insinuating that God is on his
side, and not with these wicked hypocrites; and so testifies with what a
confidence and conscience he promised deliverance to the King, as if he should
have said, I came not of my self but I was sent of the Lord, and have told
thee nothing but out of the mouth of my God, all preachers of the word should
have the same boldness, not in appearance only: but effectually rooted in their
hearts: as Vbi supra.
Luther excellently, Summa summarum haec est inestimabilis gloria conscientiae
nostrae contra omnem contemptum in mundo, quod Christus nos praedicatores plane
deos creat, dicendo qui vos recipit, me patremque meum recipit.

Therefore the Lord shall give you a sign, behold a virgin All orthodoxal
interpretours as well ancient as modern construe this of Christ's admirable
nativity, herein being taught by the spirit of truth, in the 1. Chapter of
Saint Matthews Gospel at the 22. verse, all this was done that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying, behold a virgin
shall conceive, etc. I know the Jews have many cauils against this exposition
he that desires to know them, as also the Christians answer to them: at his
opportune leisure may read the Commentaries of Hierom and Calvin upon this
text, of Aretius, Marlorat, M^ldonat, in Mat. 1.22. Pet. Galatinus de arcanis
cat. verit lib. 3. cap. 18. and lib. 7 cap. 15. Suarez in 3. Thomae disput. 5.
sect. 2.

^That which here troubles interpretours most, is how this token is a
confirmation of Gods promise to King Ahaz: examine the circumstances of the
place say the Jews, Jerusalem is besieged, and the Prophet is to give them a
sign of their deliverance; to what end then is the Messiah of the world
promised now, who should be borne five hundred years after? answer is is made
by (...).
some that the coherence may be thus, O Ahaz, thou art exceedingly deceived in
thinking that God is not able to deliver thee from the furious wrath of Rezin,
and of Remaliahs son; for he will in time to come show greater arguments of
his power unto thy succeeding posterity, for behold a virgin shall conceive
and bear a son, who shall deliver his people from more dangerous enemies
then the two tails of these smoking firebrands; he will in the fulness of time
send a Savior to deliver us Luke 1.71.
from all that hate us, even our spiritual enemies, as sin, death and the
devil: he shall be called Emmanuel, ^ Mat. 1.23.
which is by interpretation God with us, not God against us, but with us and
for us, as Musculus upon the words of Saint Matthew, non sieve nobis, non contra
nos, sed nobiscum and pro nobis.

Mollerus. Calvin.
Other observe that it is the custom of the Prophets in confirming the
particular promises of God, euermor^ to lay this foundation that he will send
his son the redeemer. By this general prop the Lord every where ratifies
that which he specially promises unto his children, according to that of 2.
Cor. 1.10.
Paul, an Christ all the promises of God are yea and amen: that is, Aretius.
categoricall and true, Lombard. Anselm. Cal^^^^.
complete and implete, and assuredly whosoever expects help and succor from
God, must also be persuaded of his fatherly love: but how should he be
favorable without Christ, in Ephesians. 1.4.
whom he has adopted us his sons, and Romans 8.17.
heirs before the foundation of the world? so loving us that he has given
his only begotten son to (...).
dewell among us, and to be God with us, and when his hour was come to (...).
4 25.
dye for our sins, and to rise again for our justification: so that upon
these premises we need not at any time doubt of Gods holy promises, but
infalliblely conclude with the blessed Apostle Romans 8.32. If God spared not his
own son, but gave him for us all to death, how shall he not with him give us
all things also?

Hyperius in loc.
Other hold this sign most agreeable to the present occasion of Iudahs
promised deliverance, because the Patriarch Genesis 49.10.
Jacob had prophesied, that the scepter should not depart from Judah, nor a law
giver from between his feet until Shilo come: as if Esaias should thus argue
with Ahaz, the Messiah of the world is to be borne of the tribe of Judah, and
of the lineage of David, it is impossible therefore that either Rezin or Pekah,
or any other prince whatsoever should rent thy Kingdom from the successors of
David, until a virgin conceive and bear a son, who shall be called
Emmanuel. It is reported Mat. 2. that the wise men enquired after the birth of
Christ, in the days of Herod the King, wherein they showed themselves to be
wisemen in deed, observing their right Leo ser. 3 de epiphan. The^phylact.
Euthym. Anselm. in Mat. 2.
quando, because now the scepter had departed from Judah, and was in the hands
of Herod an alien and a tyrant crept in by the Roman Emperor: this then is a
fit and a full sign to confirm Gods promise touching Iudahs deliverance from
the furious wrath of Rezin and of Remaliahs son. For there be two kinds of
signs, vnum prognosticum, alterum remoratiuum, as De arcanis cat. verit. lib.
7. cap. 15.
Petrus Galatinus in his examination of this text aptly distinguishes: one
which is a prognostication of an event to come, so Judges 6.37.
Gedeons fleece was a sign to him of a future victory, another which is a
memorial of a thing past, so the Lord said unto Moses Exodus 3.12. This shall
be a token unto thee, that I have sent thee, after thou have brought the people
out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain: now the sign mentioned
here was a rememoratiue, not a prognosticke. Ahaz saw not this token, but his
posterity might say with Psalm. 48.7.
David, as we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the Lord of Hosts,
in the city of our God: God vpholdeth it for ever. And here the fathers
Ire^aus. lib. 3. cap. 27. (...) in P^. 18. (...). 8 Epithan. heus. 30. Basil.
in loc. (...)
observe that Christ's admirable nativity was a sign both in the depth beneath,
and in the height above. For in being a man, eating butter and honis, nourished
after the same manner that other children are, he was a sign on earth: and in
being Emmanuel, conceived of a Virgin without the seed of man, he was a sign
from heaven. Thus as you see this token is accommodum, aptly fitted to the
present occasion of the Prophet, I proceed now to show that it is also
commodum, as profitable for us as it is pertinent for Jerusalem.

A Virgin shall conceiue] That is, (...). Maldo^t. in Mat. 1.23. Hiabna. (...)
etc.
the Virgin, or that Virgin, for the Hebrew particle ^ added in the text
original, and the Greek article - prefixed by the Septuagint interpretors are
both emphaticall, and import so much as this excellent Virgin. So the fathers
uses to speak, Ephyhas. (...) 78.
Quis vnquam, aut quo seculo ausus est proferre nomen S. Maria, and
interrogatus non siatim intulit virginis vocem? In what age did any man name
the blessed Mary without adding her surname Virgin. Nay the blessed Apostles in
their Creed have taught us so to believe, borne of the Virgin Marie. For she
was a See C^^^d art. borne of the Virgin.
perpetual Virgin: Aretiu^ (...). 1.17.
ante partum in part^. post partum. All which is concluded, at the least
included in our present text. A Virgin before she conceived, and when she
conceived her son our Savior, as we defend against unbelieving Jews and
Gentiles; and against misbeleeuing hererickes also; namely, the Cerinthians,
Ebionites, Carpocratians, holding that Christ was the natural son of Joseph,
and verus and mer us home, contrary to the words of our Prophet here, behold a
Virgin shall conceive. Psalm. 132.^1.
The Lord has made a faithful oath unto David, and he shall not shrink from
it, Of the fruit of thy belly shall I set upon thy seat. Where the ^word.^ in
(...) 131. and (...). 3. cap. 27.
Doctors note, that he says according to the Hebrew, de fruitu ventris, and
not de fructu femoris, aut renum, because the promised seed is the seed of the
woman, Genesis 3.15. made of a woman, Gal. 4.4. having the materials of his body
from Mary, but his formale principium, of the holy Ghost agent in his admirable
conception, as it is in the Gospel allotted for this day, the holy Ghost shall
come upon thee, and the power of the most high shall ouershadow thee. See
Gospel on the Sunday after Christmas.

2. We say that Mary was a Virgin in her childbirth, against Iouinian, and
Durandus, according to the tenor of our text, A Virgin shall conceive and bear
a son. The which is not to be construed, in Suarezan 3. Thom. disp. 5. sect.
2. idem Ardens intuan gel. annunti.
sensu diuiso, sed in sensu composito: to wit, a Virgin shall conceive, and
continuing a Virgin shall bring forth her child, Bernard. hom. 3. super missas
est angelus.
granida sed non granata. So runs our Creed, borne of the Virgin. For
otherwise what wonder had it been that one who sometime was a Virgin, should
afterward knowing a man, have a son. Consule S. Irenae. lib. 3. cap.
18.21.24. Epiphan. haeres. 30. Circa sinem. Neque virginit is partum prohibuit,
neque partus virginitatem soluit.
Grego. Nyssen. orat. de sanct. Christi natiuitat. Basil. and Hierom. in loc.

Partus and integritas discordes tempore longo. virginis in gremio foedera
pacis habent.

3. Mary was a Virgin after the birth of Christ, as the Church has ever taught
against Hieron. aduers. beluid. and August. here is. 84.
Heluidians, and Epiphan. here is. 78.
Antidicomarianites. And some probable reason hereof also may be gathered out
of this Scripture, thou shall call his name, etc. that is (as our Communion
book) thou his Ita Munsterus, tu matter.
mother. Or as our new translation has it, A Virgin shall conceive and bear a
son, and shall call his name, etc. For (as In loc.
Calvin notes) the verb is of the feminine gender among the Hebrews, which
occasioned happily the translators of Geneua to read, she shall call his name.
Now the naming of children is an office properly belonging to fathers, and not
to mothers. In that therefore this charge was wholly referred and transferred
to Mary: we may note that Christ was so conceived of his mother, as that he
had no father on earth; as also that Joseph affianced to Mary, was rather an
help then an absolute head, a wedded, but not a bedded husband. I say not a
bedded husband after the birth of Christ, as Hierome notably proves in a tract
of this argument, against Heluidius. And for the strengthening of this reverent
opinion, I find a tradition entertained by the most ancient Doctors, Tract.
16. in Mat.
Origin, Them. de human. Christi generat.
Basile, In Mat. 23.
Theophylast, and Greg. Nyss. de sacta Christi natiuit.
other, that whereas the married women had one several in the Temple for their
devotions, and the Virgins another: Mary not only before, but after the birth
of her son also did usually troop with the maidens, and not with the
married, Perkins reform. cat. tit. tradit.
living and dying a Virgin. This Epistle then is all one with the Gospel, Esaias
and Gabriel are messengers of the same errand; for that which Esaias speaks of
Mary, Gabriel speaks unto Mary; Thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear a
son, and shall call his name Jesus. And they both are so fit for the present
feast, that he who runs and reads, may see the reason why the Church allotted
them for this day.

The Gospel.
Lvk. 1.26. And in the sixth month, the Angel Gabriel was sent from God, unto
a City of Galilee, named Nazareth, to a Virgin, etc.


ALmighty God in the twelfth chapter of Exodus, enjoined his people to eat the
pascall lambs head and feet and purtenance. Christ is our Pascal lamb, 1. Cor.
5.7. Wherefore we must as Mary did, anoint Christ's Mat. 26.7.
head and Job. 12.3.
feet, that is, meditate on his birth and death, on his ingresse into the
world, and egresse out of the world. This scripture principally speaks of his
birth, and of the purtenance thereof, an evangelical and angelical
annunciation of his admirable conception.

In which observe these 4. circumstances especially.

When, In the sixth month. Where, In a City of Galilee, named Nazareth. Who,
saluting, Gabriel an Angel sent from God. Who, saluted, A Virgin espoused, etc.
What, Hail full of grace, etc.
In the sixth moneth] That is (as Gabriel expounds himself, verse. 36.) in the
sixth month, Theophylact. Euthym. in loc.
from the conception of Elizabeth. And it is an Luther. Melanct. ^ ost. in loc.
argument to persuade Mary that she may have a son, for that her consin
Elizabeth had conceived a child in her old age, by her old husband. John the
Baptist Aretius.
(as it is thought) was conceived about the latter end of September, and Christ
according to the Churches account, about the latter end of March. In the very
same month (as Vide Io. Thom. friegium lib de cosmopaeia.
some conjecture) the world was created, and so the second Adam was conceived,
about the time the first Adam was deceived. For 1 Cor. 15.22.
as in Adam all die: even so in Christ shall all be made alive. The Quid lib.
1. sasti.
Poet says of the spring which always begins in this month, Omnia tune
florent, tune est noua temporis atas, and noua de grauido palmite gemma tumet.



And so Christ incarnate making a Esa. 65.17.
new heaven and a new earth, ecce ego facio noua, Behold says the Lord, I make
new things, Esaias 43.19. See Tho. Caten. and m. Moller in loc. Ludolph. de vita
Christi part. 1. cap. 5. Giron. ser. 1. Raulin. ser. 3. Ferus ser. 5. in annun.

The Tremellius in Exodus 12.
Jews for religious uses, and festival times counted Nisan the first month,
( ^atahlus in Exodus 12.
which for the most part answers our March) and so forward; but for civil
they counted the seventh the first. It is worth observing therefore that the
Annunciation unto Zachary was in the beginning of the Civil, and this
Annunciation unto Mary in the beginning of the religious or ecclesiastical
year, Teaching us hereby that our whole life is only civil, and not truly
religious, until Christ be conceived and Galat 4.19.
formed in us, until he Ephel 3.17.
dwells in our heart who Psalm. 51.10.
renews a right spirit within us.

The Angel Gabriel was sent from God Gabriel in Hebrew signifies the power of
God, a fit ambassador for such an errand, because the conception of Christ,
and through it the redemption of the world is called expressly the strength of
Gods arm, Luke 1.51. Luther past. in loc.
Every Preacher of the Gospel ought to follow this example, for his
commission, he must be sent from God: and in execution of it, he must be
Gabriel that is, a man of good courage, powerful in doctrine and exhortation.
An Angel was sent about this business, and not a man for sundry reasons,
especially thice.

1. Thom. pert. 3. (...). 3. (...). 2.
That our humane nature might be repaired after the manner it was ruinated, as
a serpent was sent by the devil unto Eua to work our woe: so Gabriel an Angel
was sent from God unto Mary, to bring glad tidings of our weal. Pulgeatius de
(...). Christ.
Ad Euam angelus malus accessit vt per eam homo separaretur ^ Deo, ad Asariam
angelus banus venit vt in ea Deus vmretur homini.

2. An Angel sent unto a Virgin, (...)
because Virgins are as Angels, according to that of (...) 10.
(...). C^elibatus qua i c^lobeatus. And Mat. 22.30.
Christ also says, in the resurrection when there shall be no more marrying,
that we shall be then as the Angels of God in heaven.

3. To Giron con. 1. (...).
show that Angels are ministering spirits sent forth to minister for their sakes
who shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.14: and therefore seeing we have such
a guard attending us on every side. we (...). Angels.
should do whatsoever we do, in a reverent and seemly fashion, always
remembering that we are made a spectacle to men and Angels, 1. Cor. 4.9.

Unto acity of Galilee, named Nazaret] The Jews held this country and city so
(...).
contemptible, that the Job. 7.51.
Pharisees said of the one, out of Galilee arises no Prophet. And Ioh. 1.46.
Nathaniel of the other, Can there any good thing come out of Nazaret? Here
then observe that even Pharisees and learned men may be deceived, as also that
God is not tied unto any place, but his spirit Ioh. 3.8.
blows where it lists. And therefore we may not judge of men either by then
country or county; Joseph and Mary lived in Nazaret a city of Galilee: good
people though they dwell in bad parishes and places, are the same. Mytically
Nazaret is by interpretation a Ludolphus de vita Christ. part. 1 cap. 5. and
Beauxam^s har. full 22.
flower; it was fit therefore that he (which is the Cant. 2.1.
lilie of the valleys, and the rose of the wild) should be conceived in flore.
i. in Nazaret: de flore. i. de beata virgin: cum floribus, i. tempore florum,
in the spring or flower time. Galilee was the marches of the Jews, abutting
and adjoining near to the country of the Gentiles, and so Bonauent.
Beauixamis.
Christ's conception in Galilee does insinuate, that in him all the nations of
the world shall be blessed, Genesis 22.18. And that he should break down the
stop of the partition wall, and to make the Jews and the Gentiles both one,
Ephesians. 2.14: or Galilee signifies an end or confine; so Christ a Galilean is
the end of the law, Romans 10.4. See this and many more like this, apud pont. in
sed. annun.

To a Virgin espoused to a man whose name was Ioseph] Mary though a Virgin was
affianced to Joseph of the house of David for sundry causes: ^ left her self
should be judged an Hieron. aduers. Helind. and Aret. in loc.
adulteress, and so stoned to death according to Moses law.

2. Left her son should be reputed a Ambros lib 2. in Luc. cap. 1.
bastard, and so consequently not admitted for the Messiah. He who came into
the world not to Mat. 5.17.
destroy the law, but to fulfill all righteousness, Matthew. 3.15: would not
himself be borne unlawfully.

3. Basil. hom. de (...) Christi (...).
That Christ hereby might honor both estates, of maiden head, and marriage;
of maiden head, in that she was a Virgin; of marriage, because she was
espoused.

4. That Joseph might be to her self and her son a Theophylact. Eathym.
curator and a guardian in the time of trouble; for so we read in the second
chapter of S. Matthew, that the Angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a
dream, saying, Arise, and take the babe and his mother, and flee into Egypt,
etc. Again, arise, and take the babe and his mother, and go into the land of
Israel, etc.

5. That her husband might Basil. (...) Cap.
witness her virginity. Bernard, Romans 2. (...) Angelus.
Sicut Thomas dubitando, palpando, constantissimus factus est Dominicae
confessor resurrectionis: Ita and Joseph Mariam sibi desponsando, eiusi^
conuersationem in temp^re cuiodie sindiosius comprebando. factus est pudicitiae
fidelissimus testos. Pulchra viriusque rei conuenientut and dubitatio Thomae,
and desponsa^ia Mariae. See Bernard vbi in marg. Beauxam. har. Tom. 1. fol. 22.
Maldonat. in Mat. 1. Sixth. seven. Bib. lib. 6. annot 64.

Of the house of David S. Luke sets down the names of so many places and
persons exactly, that we might attend his relation more diligently. (...).
Noluit nos negligenter audire, quod tam diligenter sinduit enarrare. Because
Christ is the promised seed and son of David, Mary was espoused to Joseph of
the house of David. Hieron (...). and Aret. (...).
Hereby showing her own petegree by her husbands genealogy; for the Jews
according to (...). 36.
Gods law were to take wives out of their own tribes. David is ^iled a man
according to Gods own heart, Act. 13.22. And so Joseph, a man of David's house
was a man according to Gods own heart, to whom he did reveal (...). and (...).
Secret^ (...) atque sacratisimum sui cordis arcanum, a mystery which 1. Cor.
2.7.
none of the Princes of this world understood. And Mary being thus affianced to
Joseph she prove in good housewife, being in this respect like the Snaile which
this (...). She was not of the tribe of (...) (...). 5.13.
busy gossip ^^ing about from house to house, pro^ing and speaking things which
are not comely: (...); (as almost all (...) upon the words of our text, (...)
thee was within, either at her holy devotion, or at her daily work.

I come now to the salutation it self. Hail Mary, etc. the which (as Luther
said of the Pater noster) is made by the Papists a very great Martyr. I purpose
therefore to demonstrate these two points especially: First, their foul abuse:
secondly, the true use of Aue Maria. The Papists injury this angelical
salutation in Groce, by misconstruing the whole sentence jointly. in Parcel,
abusing every particular word severally.


For the first they patch it up together by fetching in other stitches out of
other places, as Luk 1.42.
blessed is the fruit of thy womb, and adding the name, Maria, Jesus, amen.
And all this that it may be repeated often upon their beads, as a maine point
of holy devotion, and why so? Rhom. in loc.
because forsooth it was used by the Greek Church in their Mass daily, for so
they find it recorded in the Liturgies of S. James, and Chrysostom. Dr. Fulke
in loc. and Mornaeus de sac. Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Our answer is, that those Liturgies are counterfeit, the one being a
sufficient consutation of the other. For if the Greek Church had a Liturgy
written by S. James the blessed Apostle, who would imagine that Chrysostom
would have made a new; and if Chrysostom had penned a Liturgy, he would not
have made a prayer for Pope Nicholas, who lived almost five hundred years
after him, and for the Emperor Alexius, who lived seven hundred years after
him. It were very much (as B. Art. private Mass diuis. 5.
Jewel objected against D. Harding) to say Chrysostom prayed for men by name
so many hundred years before they were borne.

But to trace the Papists a little nearer even from step to step, if Aue Maria
be a prayer, it must either be a prayer for Mary, or to Mary. It cannot be a
prayer for Mary, whether we consider the words as uttered by Gabriel while
she lived: or as babled by them now she is dead. If in her life she was full
of grace, and (...).
free from all sin as they teach impiously; then assuredly she did not need
any prayer of man or Angel, as abounding with all mercy, and abandoning all
misery, much less now being a Saint in heaven, and (as they would have us to
believe) a queen of heaven, ouerruling and commanding Christ himself to show
mercy on such as she will have mercy.

As Aue maria could not be a prayer for Mary, so it should not be a prayer to
Mary, because praying to Saints has in Gods holy bible (...)
neither precept, nor praise, nor pattern. Not to dispute this point, Eckius a
^ancke pay^st acknowledges in his (...)
Enchiridon that innocation of Saints is not enjoined in the Scriptures
expressly, not in the old Testament, because the Patriarchs and the Prophets
before the coming of Christ (as the Church of Rome believes) were not in heaven
but in limbo. Not in the new testament, least happily the Gentiles lately
converted unto the faith of one God, should instantly return to the
worshipping of many Gods; as the men of Lycaonia would have sacrificed unto
Paul and Barrabas, Acts 14 (...) 190
Petrus Asoto likewise, and other Romanists of most eminent note for learning
confess, that praying unto Saints is not taught in Gods book plainly, but
insinuated only. So that (as Apol^ consist. Aug. l. 1 con ^. sol. 102.
Melancthon observes) the Papists are saine to ride post unto the Court for an
example. We cannot come to the Princes presence, but by the mediation of some
favorite: in like sort (say they) we must exhibit our petitions unto Peter,
or Paul, especially to Mary; that she may commend them unto Christ her son:
God himself has answered this idle conceit for us, Osea 11.9 I am God, and
not man, the holy one in the mids of thee: and Esaias 55.8. My ways are not as
your ways, etc. Earthly princes out of necessity must employ many mediators
and officers about them, as tongues and ears and eyes unto them: but the King
of heaven is all eye, and all ear, seeing, hearing, understanding all things,
even the very secrets of our hearts before we speak: your heavenly father
(says our Mat. 6.8.
Savior) knows whereof ye have need, before ye ask of him. Again Melanct.
and Clementius vli ^.p.
if a King appoint a master of Requests, he will not ordinarily receive
petitions from other: and therefore seeing the King of Kings is pleased to make
Christ our only 1 Timothy 2.5.
mediator and 1. Ioh. 2.1.
advocate, the sole master of the requests in heaven Heb. 7.25.
ever living to make intercession for us; it cannot be but dishonorable to
Gods choice, and Christ's office, to substitute any other half mediators
either of redemption or intercession, as Saint Ambrose, com. in Romans 1. Misera
vtantur excusatione, dicentes per istos posse ire ad Deum, sicut per comites
peruenitur adregem. Yea but although Aue Maria be not a supplication, it may
be taken as a thanksgiving, and that is a kind of prayer, according to that of
1. Tim. 2.1.
Paul, I exhort that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of
thanks be made for all men, etc. Answer is made that it is not a
thanksgiving and if it were, yet should it not be babled unto Mary, but
uttered unto God, as Luther post. in loc.
containing his praise to whom all honor is due, king dome, power and glory.
Well, Aue Maria notwithstanding all this may be used as a salutation: our
answer is noe for that a salutation is civil, whereas the Papists appoint this
to be said as a religious office. 2. Salutations are to persons present, but
the vergine is absent, and therefore the Papists may not, nay the Papists
indeed cannot use these words in the same sense they were delivered by Gabriel
and Elizabet; that there should be ten Anemaries to one Pater noster, and that
150. Auemaries with fifteen Pater nosters make a Ladies psalter, and that
after the Pater noster which Christ himself taught us by his own mouth,
Bellermin. ^at. exposit. Aue Maria.
Aue Maria is the most excellent prayer, and that in Iedesina. cat. cap. ^.
it we speak with the mother of God as the Queen of heaven and our advocate;
is now known in the world to be such intolerable soppery, that (as Epist. ad
^usepho. aduersai Pelagianos.
Hierome said of (...) heresies) a repetition of it is a sufficient refutation.

I know that reverend Fox in his Calender of Saints annexed to his Martyrology
calls the blessed Virgin our Lady, and the Church of England also tenneth
usually this present feast our Ladies day: but herein we do not (as the
Papists) ascribe to the Virgin ^^. Fulk. in Mat. 1.
any divine honor, making her our Lady as God is our Lord. It is a civil use
not a religious office, for in a holy seufe to speak properly there is but one
Lord, and never a Lady, (...) 4.5.
one Lord, one faith, one baptism: or the Virgin is styled our Lady, because
she was (as Elizabet calls her) the mother of our Lord, Luke 1.43.

Hitherto concerning the wrong done by the Papists in gross to the hail Mary,
let us examine now their iniuting of every word in particular, the first is
(...), which they transtate Aue, turning vpside down the letters of Eua, the
woman who did occasion the worlds woe, was named Eua, Augustine de (...) ^er.
4. (...).
therefore it was fit that Mary who bare Christ, the worlds joy, should be
saluted with Aue; being opposite in name so well as in nature, this playing
upon the word is pretty, but not pithie, because Aue is latin, whereas Eua is
Hebrew, and (...) greek, so that the Friars wit has out run the holy
spirits wisdom in this exposition and transposition of Eua and Aue. The
Greek predicant Cor. 2. insesio. (...) vide and ride.
Illephonso Giron observes in the three letters of Aue the three persons in
holy Trinity. A, altitudo patris: V, veritas filty: E, aeternitas spiritus
sancti. Dicz. Pet. de (...)
Some Friars have profoundly derived Aue of (A) priuatiuely taken, and ve,
quasi sine va, that is without woe: now there is a threefold woe denounced.
Apocalips 8.13. Vae, vae, vae ix colis terrae, woe, woe, woe to the inhabitants
of the earth, and this woe is for sin in the world, as the 1. John. 12.16.
lust of the flesh, the lust of the e^es, and pride of life. Woe to the
covetous, woe to the luxurious, woe to the proud: all which Esaias sets down in
his 5. Chapter expressly. Woe to them that join house to house, and field to
field, till there be no more place for other in the mids of the land, etc. that
is a woe to the covetous: Woe to them that rise up early to follow
drunkenness, etc. that is a woe to the luxurious: woe to them that are wise in
their own eyes, etc. that is a woe to the proud, Raulin. ser. 1^ in annun. do^.
now the Virgin as being poor, chaste, and humble, was exempted from all these
woes; and therefore worthily saluted by Gabriel with an Aue: or as Augustine. de
1. conissa. ser 2. de Aue Maria.
other popish expositors, inhabitants of the earth have deserved a woe for
their original sin, and that is the woe which is in Limbus: a woe for their
venial sin, and that is the woe which is in Purgatory: a woe for their mortal
sin, and that is the woe which is in hell: but Mary the Virgin (say they)
was free from all these kinds of sin, and so consequently free from all
these kinds of woe; the which assertion is contradictory to the text of holy
scripture concluding all under sin, Romans 3.9. Galat. 3.22. Yea but say Tom.
2. in 3. Thom. disp. 2. sect. 4.
Suarez and De amiss. great. and stat. per. l. b. 4. cap. 15.
Bellarmine, Mary was exempted ex speciali Dei priuilegio: let them if they can
show her patent, and we will instantly believe it, otherwise, Gods word is a
lantern to our feet, and a guide to our paths: if either man or Angel preach
a new Gospel, let him be Galat. 1.8.
accursed. That Mary was a blessed Virgin, and the mother of the worlds
Savior; we believe, because we read so: but that she was impeccabilis,
conceived without sin, borne without sin, living without sin, dying
without sin, we do not believe, because we do not read it in the Bible, nay
we read the contrary, for Mary says in her hymn, my spirit rejoices in God
my Savior, etc. If she needed a Savior, undoubtedly she was a sinner, for the
whole need not a physitia^, Mat. 9.12. and therefore the popish annotation of
Aue thus applied unto the virgin is both unlearned and untrue.

The next word is Maria, the which is so magnified and extolled by the
Romanists as that King Diez. con. 1. in incarnat.
Alphonso the sixth would not have his wife called by that high and venerable
name. Dom. ser. de annun. B. Maria.
Petrus de Palude (whose wit as it should seem dwelt in a sen) has this muddy
conceit the five letters of Maria, design the five singular privileges
almighty God granted unto the Virgin (M) matter omnia sanctorum, (A) aduocata
omnium peccatorum, (R) regula omnium morum and virtutuos, (I) interfectrix
omnium vitiorum, (A) harmonia spiritus sancti donorum. The Portugal Friar and
flower Philip Diez, approved by Didacus Caro, Dominicus Bannes, and other great
Clearkes of Spain for an exquisite preacher, ^word.^
affirms that Maria is compounded of the first letters in the names of five
most illustrious and holy women in all the Scripture, Michel, Abigail, Rachel,
Judith, Abishag. Having all their eminent qualities in her nature, and all
their prime letters in her name, taking (M) from Michol, (A) from Abigail, (R)
from Rachel, (I) from Judith, (A) from Abishag. I must here quit Philip Diez
with an old time which undoes his name with a great deal more wit.

Phi not a fetoris, Lippus malus omnibus horis,
Phi malus and Lippus, t^tus malus ergo Philippus.
Saint (...) 1^.
Ambrose faith of the Devil, that he is nox, and (...) 66. in ^word.^
Bernard of bad divines that they be tenebrae munde, I am unwilling to lay the
nox upon Diez, but his obscure foppery deserves I think verily Bernards
tenebrae.

Well, as the Friars have taught us how to spell Maria, so let them inform
likewise what it signifies, Ser. 5. de Aue Maria.
A^g^ ^in. de Leoni ^a faith acutely, Maria quasi Maria, for as in the sea
there is a Ge^. 1.10.
gathering together of all waters: even so in the Vergine a congregation of all
virtues. Again, as Declessiaster 1.7.
all rivers come from the seas and return to the seas again: so likewise all
grace is derived from Mary, and ought to be returned again to Mary, for she
for sooth (if you will believe the Church of Rome in our public devotions) is
(...)
matter grat^e and wisericor^ the mother of mercies, and goddess of all grace,
Christ is the head, but Mary (says (...) 4. (...)
Ozorius the Jesuit) is the neck. Now whatsoever descends into the whole
body from the head is conueled by the neck, so whatsoever blessing or favor
is conserred upon other is conveyed through the hands of the Virgin. Aitemstair.
(...). Theolog. in verb. Maria.
Vi si quid gratiae, si quid spei, si quid salut is in alias redundauerit, non
nisiper mamus Mariae transierit, etc. And therefore most of their scholars
usually begin their sermons and writings with an Aue Maria, and end them with
Iaus Virgini. Their voluminous Historiographer Cardinal Baronius, concludes
his 1. Tom. of Annals imprinted at Antwerp, an. 1597. Sanctissimae Virgini
Mariae vt hae omnia accepta fecimus, it a pariter and osserimus: That is, as I
have received al from the most holy Virgin Mary, so likewise I return all to
her again. Cardinal Bellarmine also does annex this postscript unto the 1.
Tom. of his Controversies imprinted Lugdun. an. 1587. and unto Tom. 2.
Ingol^tad. 1591. laus deo, virginique matri Mariae. And Apud Dr. Morton Apolog.
cat. part. 1. page 321.
other setting the cart before the horse, laus beatae Virgini and Jesus Christo.
It is well if Christ have the second place, if any place, when his mother Mary
comes in place. These are the positions, in some respects as blasphemous as
the worst in the Turks Alcoran. And these their practices, as idolatrous as any
we find in the Pagans school.

The third word is, (...), which they translate gratia plena, full of grace.
And hence Augustine. de leonissa ser. 8. de Aue Maria.
they collect a threefold plenitude of grace in Mary, to wit, a fullness in
regard of Multitude, abounding with all kinds of grace. Magnitude, as having
the greatest in the greatest measure. Latitude, exercising them in earth,
heaven, hell.


All which is to show, that whereas other holy Saints and servants of God had
grace by measure: Mary like to Christ was endued with grace beyond measure,
being medium and causa gratiae, as Apud Chemnit. part. 3. examine. Tit. de
sanct. inuocat. page 147.
Antoninus and Albertus impiously teach.

Yet some ^aictan. Iansen. Giron.
popish interpretors as well as Protestants observe that (...), signifies
gratificata, Bezagratis ditect. 1.
freely beloved as the Geneua translation. Or as our new, highly favored, or
much graced, one which has Munster. Calvin.
obtained, and is A^etias.
adorned with grace. Cul^n. con. 1. in ^word.^ annun.
Not one that gives grace, but receives; Theophylact.
as Gabriel in the 30. verse construeth himself, thou have found favor with
God. And so Saint Paul expounds this word, Ephesians. 1.6. God has predestined
us to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, (...), wherewith
he has made us accepted in his beloved. And gratiosus in Latin does import a
favorite which is graced out of his friends abundant love, rather then one who
merits favor out of his own worth, as Calvin and Erasmus in their annotations
upon this text accurately.

But suppose the translation be good, and that we may read as indeed our
Malegit. Ambros. ^word.^ and Augustine ^^chirid. cap. 36. and ser. 13.14.15. de
tempore.
Communion book does here, full of grace. Yet the popish annotation is false;
for it is recorded in this present chapter, that John the Baptist, Elizabeth
and Zachary were full of the holy Ghost, and Act. 6.8.
elsewhere that S. Stephen was full of faith and of power, and the seven
Deacons full of wisdom, Act. 6.3. and that the blessed Apostles were filled
with the holy Ghost, Act. 2.4. All these were full of grace, yet they received
it by measure. So that as their own Ma^^on^t. in (...) idem Ianst ^^. con.
cap. 3.
Jesuit observes truly, Maria suit gratia plena in se, non a se, Mary was full
of grace in her self, but not of her self. Fountains are full of water, and
rivers are full of water, and brooks are full of water: Christ is full of
grace as the fountain, but Mary full of grace as a river issuing from the
fountain of grace. She was a virtuous woman, yet a woman; a sinner, not a
savior; one that was endued with excellent grace, not by her own merit, but
by Gods especial mercy. Marlorat. in. loc. Cul^an. ^word.^ 2. isset. annun.
Therefore full of grace, because the Lord is with thee.

The (...).
Papists abuse likewise dominus tecum, in making it an extraordinary salutation
unheard in the world before. Whereas Boaz used the same to the reapers, the
Lord be with you, Ruth. 2.4. And a glorious Angel to Gedeon. Judge. 6.12. The
Lord is with thee thou valiant man. And the Psalmographer insinuates the
commonnesse of this phrase among Gods people, Psalm. 129.8. They which go bye,
say not so much as the Lord prosper you. But why should I fish any longer in
the popish puddle; you may see by that which I have delivered already, that the
Friars and Jesuits have made 2. Cor. 2.17.
merchandise of Aue Maria, both in parcel, and in groce. Let us now come out
of Babell into Gods city, from their foul abusing of this Scripture to the
true construction of the same. Note then in Gabriels saluting of Mary two
things especially, to wit, his Forms, Hale, the Lord with thee. Titles, full
of grace, blessed among women.


And because both are double, we may learn that these Christian complements
are not to be neglected or omitted. A glorious Angel saluted a poor Virgin;
superiors ought to salute inferiors, and inferiors to reverence superiors,
and all out of love to respect one another. See Gosp. Sund. 6. after Trinity.

2. This angelical Aue teaches us to use good forms in saluting, not such as
are idle, profane, unsavory. Not a pox, instead of hail: nor the devil
take you, for the Lord be with you; not a curse, but a blessing; Hail, full of
grace, blessed art thou among women.

3. We must use salutations as sent from God, and not according to the worlds
fashion only. For some Psalm. 38.3.
speak friendly to their neighbors, but imagine mischief in their hearts.
Mat. 16.49.
Judas had an hade master, as well as Gabriel an hail Mary. Christians in
their complements ought to be hearty, not hollow. See Gospel Sund. 4. after
Trinity.

Hail, the Greek, (...) signifies (as Annot. in loc.
Erasmus observes) gaudere, saluere, valere. If we take it in the first
acception, it is Gabriels giving of the joy to Mary. Teaching us to wish much
joy to the good, and to labor for true joys in our selves, always rejoicing in
the Lord, Philip. 4.4. If in the two latter, health is a good blessing of the
Lord, to be desired in our own selves, and for our other selves in this
world, without which all our whole life is but a lingering death. O Lord grant
thy servant health and heaven. It was good for Psalm. 19.71.
David that he was in trouble: so likewise it is good for the health of our
soul that our body be sometime sick. (...)
Affliction is the true purgatory of the flesh; (...)
infirmit as carnus vigoremmentis exacuit. Upon this ground ^word.^ de legenias
lib. ^word.^
Plato scared his Academie at Athens in an unhealthy place. We must especially
wish hail to the soul, praying always, Vi sit men's s^na in corpore sano.

The Lord with thee] ^span.^
Some construe this clause by way of enunciation affirmatively, the Lord is
with thee. ^span.^
Other imprecator^e, by way of a good wish or salutation, the Lord be with
thee. They who take this affirmatively, make it a reason of Mary's hail,
rejoice Mary, because full of grace, because the Lord is with thee, because
blessed among women. God is Beau^amis in loc.
in beat is per gloriam in electis per gratiam, in assumpta carne per vnionem,
in omnibus per prouidentiam: sed in virgin per supereminentem quandam
op^ratiouem. As if Gabriel should have said, I am sent from God, and so the
Lord is with me: but he is with thee much more. The Lord is in me, because he
made me: but with thee, because within thee, because he shall be borne by
thee. 4. ^word.^ sec. 18. de temp^e.
Is a domenies est secum ^t is in cord tuo, sit in vtero tuo, adempleat mentem
tuam, adempleat car^^m (...). God the son is with thee, for thou shall conceive
him in thy womb: God the holy Ghost is with thee, for the holy Ghost shall
come upon thee, and the power of the most highest all ouershadow thee. God the
father is with thee, making his son thy son. ^span.^
Demmus silim tecum, quem c^t ne tua indu^^ dominus spiritus sanctus, de quo
concipis: and dominus pater, qui genuit quem concipis. But I follow their
judgment which understand this imprecatorie, because the blessed Virgin her
self took it so, verse. 29. She cast in her mind what manner of salutation
that should be, ergo, all the words spoken by Gabriel unto her hitherto were
Caietan.
salutatorie.

Blessed art thou among women] In comparison, or Aretius.
above other women happy. The like phrase is used, Judge. 5.24. Iael the wife
of Heber the Kenite shall be blessed above other women. It does insinuate that
Mary was highly favored of God, as also that she shall be praised of men
throughout all generations. Elizabeth expounds Gabriel in this present chapter,
at the 4^. verse, Blessed art thou among women, because the fruit of thy womb
is blessed: and Wbisupra.
Bernard expounds Elizabeth, Non quia tu benedicta, ideo benedictus fructus
ventris ^^i: sed^y^tia ille te praeuenit in benedictionibus dulcedinis, ideo
^ubened^cta. Mary was blessed of God, in that she was chosen to be the mother
of God. Other women have bin and are the daughters of God, but Mary was both a
daughter and a mother. The one is a special favor, the other a singular
honor, and Mary was blessed in respect of both. Albeit we do not bear Christ
bodily, yet if we spiritually bear him in our heart by faith, it is a great
mercy, which we must acknowledge both in our selves and others. Mat. 12.50.
For he that does the will of God is a brother, and a sister, and a mother unto
Christ. As Mary was highly graced of God, so she was, and is, and shall be
magnified of men. And from hence we may learn that there is a time to commend,
so well as to condemn, namely, 1. when the party praised needs
encouragement: 2. when his gifts extolled are most excellent and eminent, as in
Mary fullness of grace. 3. When he that is commended has the grace to give the
glory to God, acknowledging himself to be freely beloved, and therefore
blessed. 4. When the party praising does it as Gabriel here, not to flatter
men, but to magnify God.

I have spoken of three remarkable persons in this Gospel, of the party
sending, God: of the party sent, Gabriel and Angel of the party to whom he was
sent, A Virgin whose name was Mary, full of grace, blessed among women. It
remains I should now treat of the party to whom all this annunciation was,
and that is man. For all this was said, and all that follows in our text was
done for us men and our salvation. I will here briefly gloss this Gospel in
the words of Apud Do^misec. ser. de annun. B. Maria
Bernard, Felix est qui mittiter, felix a quo mittitur, felix ad quam mittitur,
vt home fiat felix pro quo mittitur.

We beseech thee Lord, power thy grace into our hearts, that as we have known
Christ thy sons incarnation by the message of an Angel; so by his Cross and
passion we may be brought unto the glory of his resurrection through the same
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle
ACTS. 10.34. Peter opened his mouth, and said, of a truth I perceive that
there is no respect of persons with God, etc.


THe Aretius.
summarie pith in this accurate speech of saint Peter unto Cornelius is, that
all men indifferently, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, have remission of
their sins by faith in Christ, which is Lord over all things, and ordained of
God to be the judge of all men quick and dead. The whole sermon is divided
into three parts. A Proeme, verse. 34.35. wherein observe what is said for the
matter, there is no respect of persons with God, etc. how it is said for the
manner, Peter opened his mouth, and said, of a truth I perceive.
Narration, ye know the preaching, etc. Wherein S. Peter Tertul. de Corona
militis cap. 11.
catechizeth his auditour Cornelius in the chief points of holy belief
concerning the doctrine, verse, 36.37. of Jesus Christ. miracles, verse. 38. of
Jesus Christ. life, verse. 39. of Jesus Christ. death, ibid. of Jesus Christ.
resurrection, verse. 40.41. of Jesus Christ. coming to judgment, v. 42. of
Jesus Christ.
Confirmation, by production of witnesses, new, the blessed Apostles, v. 39.
We are witnesses of all things which he did, etc. and such witnesses as were
chosen before of God. verse. 41. old, the holy Prophets, v. 43. to him give all the Prophets witness.



Peter opened his mouth^ This phrase does intimate a Calvin in loc.
weighty seriousness in the speech, and a Vide Lo^it. in act. cap. 8. verse. 35.
free liberty in the speaker. In the speech, a weight and gravity; so Christ
(in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge) when he made that
excellent sermon upon the mount, is said to have Mat. 5.2.
opened his mouth. And Psalm. 78.2.
David in the person of Christ, I will open my mouth in parables, I will
declare hard sentences of old. In the speaker, a liberty to deliver his mind
freely; so the Lord promised Ezechiel, Ezech. 29.21.
I will give thee an open mouth in the midst of them. And 2. Cor. 6.11.
Paul says, O Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you. So that to speak ore
rotundo, with an open mouth, is nothing else but after silence to speak out of
mature deliberation and freedom of spirit ponderously, fully, cheerfully. So
S. Peter having scene a vision, and heard a voice from heaven instructing and
assuring him in the truth of the doctrine he was now to preach: opened his
mouth, and said of a truth I perceive. That every successor of Peter may do
the like, he must often pray with (...) 51.15. (...) 6.19.
David, O Lord open thou my lips: and entreat his people likewise to pray for
him, as ^ Paul did his Ephesians, that ^tterance may be given unto him, and
that he may open his mouth boldly to publish the secret of the Gospel.

Of a truth I perceive Peter assuredly knew before that there is no respect of
persons with God; but by this experiment he did understand it better, (...)
Id nunc sciri dicitur quod scitur magis. As Almighty God knew that Abraham was
a good man before he would have sacrificed his son, yet upon that occasion
he did express it more, saying, (...).
now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy son,
thine only son from me. Truth is more clearly perceived in a particular
experience, then in a general notion, in which respect the new testament is
called truth, in comparison of the old, John 1.17. The Law was given by Moses,
but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. The law prefiguring Christ was a
truth conceived, but the Gospel exhibiting Christ, a truth perceived. The law
was truth in the theorie, but the Gospel a truth in experience, veritas facta
says the beloved Disciple, because Christ only shadowed in the law, was
actually showed in the Gospel. And so Peter's (of a truth I perceive that there
is no respect of persons with God) is like to that of Galath. 3.28. and 5.6.
Paul, In Christ Jesus there is neither Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond
nor free, there is neither male nor female, neither circumcision avails any
thing, neither uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. Or we may take
the clause (of a truth I perceive) for an earnest asseueration, answerable to
that of Job. 16.7.
Christ, I tell you the truth, and to that of 1. Tim. 2.7.
Paul, I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not. As if S. Peter should have
said, I deliver nothing unto you but that which I certainly know to be true,
by manifold reasons, and infallible signs, as having read it in the Prophets,
verse. 43. and seen it in a vision, verse. 11.12. and heard by voice from
heaven, verse. 13.15. By this example Preachers of the word are taught, first
exactly to know the truth, and then earnestly to deliver it unto Gods people.
The sermons of the Prophet Nahum are termed Nahum. 1.1.
the book of the vision of Nahum, because says Proaem. in Nahum.
Hierome, he well understood and saw whatsoever he said. A Pastor in like
sort must see with Nahum, and say with Peter, of a truth I perceive. For it is
a shame that any should be doctors of the law (but a greater offense that any
should be Preachers of the Gospel) and understand not what they speak,
neither whereof they affirm. 1. Tim. 1.7. Imitate this pattern of Peter, and
eschew Tit. 1.10.
vain talkers, teaching otherwise for filthy lucres sake. It may be said
better of a Minister then of a Monk: Laurent. Pisan. in Euang. paradox.
Versus ecclesiastes non videt nisi aliena bona, and sua mala: illa amuletur,
haec v^emendet.

There is no respect of persons with God] That we may well understand and learn
this lesson once, the spirit repeats it often. As Deuteronomy. 10.17. 2. Chro. 19.7.
Job 34.19 Romans 2.11. Ephesians. 6.9. Coloss. 3.25. 1. Pet. 1.17. Acetius C^l^in.
(...) Iex as in l^^.
By person is meant not the substance but the quality, to wit, whatsoever is
about or without a man: as his birth, education, honor, wealth and the like;
God respects not any because they be Jews or gentiles, high or low, rich or
poor: but in every nation he whosoever he be, that fears him and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. He that is the Jeremy 17.10.
searcher of the heart, judges not after outward appearance: Whereas Pelagius
objected that God is a respecter of persons in giving grace to some, and in
denying it unto other; answer is made, that this comes to pass, non ex
dignitate humana, sed ex dignatione diuina, it is a (...).
donation of bounty, not a dotation according to the rules of justice. Now God
says in the (...). 10 ^^.
Gospel, is it not lawful for me to do as I (...) with mine own? man's
merit works not this mercy, (...).
by grace ye are saved thorough says, and that not ^f your selue^, it is the
gift of God. And so God in giving savors, and forgiving faults unto this man
and not unto that, is not an accepter of persons: for herein he (...). 34 19.
regards not the rich more then the poor, nor the Jew more then the Gentile,
nor a man of peace more then a man of war; as here you see Cornelius a
captain, Cornelius a man of Caesarea, Cornelius an alien from the
commonwealth of Israel, is accepted with him as well as Peter borne among Gods
own people, and brought vp^^ Christ's own school: See S. Augustine contra duas
epitolas pelagianorum lib. 2. cap. 7. Thom. vbi sup. in margin. and part. 1. qu
est. 23^. art. 5. ad. 3. Pet. Martyr. and Pareus (...) Romans 2.11. Zanchius in
Ephesians. 6.9. Calvin. and Loria in loc.

Princes and Magistrates are styled Psalm. ^ 2.6.
Gods, as being the deputy liueftenants of God on earth, and (as it were) the
fingers of that hand which rules all the world: and therefore they must be
Ephesians. ^.^.
followers of God as dear children, (...).
merciful as our father in heaven is merciful, (...). 11.44.
holy for that he is holy, no respecter of persons, as there is no respect of
persons with him: as they stand in Gods place, so they should walk in Gods
path: ye shall hear the sin all as well as the great, Deuteronomy. 1.17. wrest not
the law, nor respect any person, neither take reward, Deuteronomy. 16 9. Thou shall
not favor the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but
thou shall judge thy neighbor uprightly, Leuit. 19.15. for it is not good to
have respect of any person in judgment, Proverbs 24.23. The Reusner. in symbol.
Thebans hereupon usually pourtraied their Prince blind, with ears, and the
Judges assisting him in Justice without hands. Blind, l^st he should have
respect of persons: with ears, that he might hear both parties
indifferently: the Judges without hands, lest otherwise they might be corrupted
with bribes, Exodus 23.8.
for the gift blinds the wise, and peruerteth the words of the righteous: and
for this end our forefathers ordained wisely that every Judge should ride his
circuit in a County far distant from his own home, whereby he might
administer justice freely without any favor or fear. It was an old complaint
of Laertius in vitae Diog. cynic.
Diogenes, that the greater thieves of the state did ordinarily punish the
lesser: and another after him, that secret pillars of the Commonweal sit on
the bench to condemn open robbers standing at the bar. Magistrates in our
days have their houses seated so near to Saint Bribes, as that few can say
with Job. 29.14.
Job, I put on justice, and it covered me, my judgment was a robe and a
crown, I was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame: fever with 1. Sam. 12.3.
Samuel, whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or to whom have I
done wrong? or whom have I hurt? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to
blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you. None I fear with
Xi^hilinus in vita Nerua.
Nerua, who was so good a Prince that he did auow boldly* se nihil fecisse,
quo minus possit imperio depostio priuatus iuto viuere. Some Magistrates use
the laws as cobwebs, only to catch little flies: other as fox-nets, only to
take great ones in a trap: and so the statutes of our kingdom (as a (...)
reverend father of our Church once said) have a good, prologue, but bad
epilogue: their invention is wise, their intention honorable, but we sail in
execution; and a (...)
law without execution is as a bell without a clapper. A Judge must have two
kinds of salt in him as (...)
Baldus truly, the salt of science to know the law, and the salt of conscience
to determine according to the same; neither respecting the person, nor
expecting the gifts of any.

He that fears him and works righteousness is accepted with him^ To fear
God and to keep his commandments is the whole duty of man, Ecclesiast. 12.13.
and therefore these two the fearing of God, and working ^f righteousness (...).
comprehend our whole duty. The first all religious offices of piety toward
God, the second all righteous offices of charity toward our neighbor.
Cornelius fear was not servile, but filial: he feared God as an obedient child
fears a kind father, and God is not our father after this sort but in Christ,
in whom he is Mat. 3.17.
well pleased, and in whom he does (...) 1 5.
adopt us his children, giving us his spirit (...). 8.15.
whereby we cry Abba father: in a word, Cornelius fear was (...)
^aith, and by this faith he was accepted with God, and this faith openly
showed it self in working righteousness toward men. And therefore such a^
build upon this exam, ^e free will and justification by works are (...)
deceived exceedingly, (...).
for Cornelius is said here first to fear God, and then afterward to work
righteousness. He had heard among the Jews of Gods holy promise concerning the
sending of his son our Savior, the which he believed as the Patriarchs and
the Prophets, and other of Gods people who lived before Christ's coming into
the world; and this faith (as Paul speaks) wrought by love. Galat. 5.6.

It is worth observing that this commendation of Cornelius is remembered often
in holy Scriptures as a special infallible mark of Gods children* Job. 1 1.
Job a just man and one that feared God, Luke 2.25.
Simeon was a just man and feared God, but evermore the fearing of God as being
the Proverb. 1 7.
beginning of wisdom is mentioned as the chief note. Father Abraham a man
who feared God, Genesis 22.12. Joseph a man who feared God, Genesis 42.18. The
Midwiues in Egypt feared God, Exodus 1.17. If the fearing of God once go
before, working of righteousness will instantly follow after, according to
that of the wiseman, Ecclesiasti^us 15 1.
he that fears the Lord will do good. If thou see a man in a desperate
course selling himself (as it is said of 1. Kings 2^.25.
Ahab) to work wickedness, Esaias 5.11.18
rising up early to follow drunkenness and continuing at the ^auerne till it be
night, drawing iniquity with cords of va^ity, and sin as it were with
cartropes* it is a sure sign that the true fear of God is not rooted in his
soul, for whosoever has a ca^^ to live religiously toward God, will also (so
far as humane frailty will suffer) live soberly toward himself, and
righteously toward his neighbor.

Ye know the preaching] The narration and confirmation ensuing are a little
creed containing the chief articles of holy belief, but the point urged by
the blessed Apostle most, is the resurrection of Christ expressly setting down.
1. The author of his resurrection, him God raised up. 2. The time when, the
third day. 3. Before what witnesses, openly showing him unto us witnesses
chosen before of God. 4. What he did after he rose from death, he did eat and
drink with as. 5. What he said, he commanded us to preach unto the people, and
to testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the judge of the
quick and the dead. In this argument of Christ's resurrection the Gospel and
Epistle meet, and both are full and fit for the present feast of Easter. In
that S. Peter makes Apostles and Prophets joint witnesses of all these things,
he does insinuate that Christ is the beginning and end of the whole Scripture,
Paulinus epist. lib. 4. Epist: 1.
qui in lege velatur and in euang^ (...). See Gospel 1. Sun. in aduent.

The Gospel
LVK. 24.13. Behold, two of the Disciples w^nt that same day to a town called
Emmaus, etc.


THis Scripture contains a sweet conference between Christ and two
Disciples, as they iourneyed in the way from Jerusalem to a town^ called
Emmaus. The Culman. ce^. 1. in. lo^.
sum whereof is, that Christ Jesus is truly risen ag^^ine from the dead as
having (...) all things which Moses an^ the Prophets have spoken of him. The
whole may be divided into three parts: A Prologue which occasioned the
conference, verse, 13.14 wherein these circumstances are considerable: Who, two
of the Disciples. When, that same day. Where, in the way between Jerusalem
and Emmaus. What, they talked together of all the things that had happened.
Dialogue, or the conference it self wherein Christ shows his tender care
toward his Disciples, in drawing near to them, verse. 15. walking and talking
with the^, v. 17.19. correcting them for their error, v. 25 directing them in
the truth, and that by words arguing Ardens.
from reason, v. 26. authority, v. ^7
deeds, he s^t at table with them, he took bread* etc verse. 30.

Epilogue, declaring what ensued upon the conference, to wit, an ingenuous
confession of the faith in the two Disciples, did not our hearts burn within
us? etc. earnest desire to confirm the same truth in other, and they rose up
the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered
together, and them that were with them, and they told, etc. verse, 33.34.35.



Behold two of the Disciples went the same day] Ecclesiast. 4.9.
Two are better then one, for if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow.
And therefore the Disciples here went not alone, but in company, two, that they
might by their mutual help and conference mittigate one another grief. And
for this end they went to Emmaus, which is Bernard. hom. deduobus Disc.
euntibus in Emaus.
interpreted, a thirsting after good advice; signifying hereby, that their
afflicted soul desired earnestly to be relieved with healthful and heavenly
counsel in this extremity. Two they were, and two of the Disciples: not of the
twelve, (for Mat. 27.5.
Judas had hanged himself before this; and it is said in our present text, at
the 33. verse, that these two found the other eleven gathered together) but of
the Luke 10.1.
seventy Disciples, as almost all interpretors observe. Yet (as Maldonat. in
loc.
one notes) it may be that these were Disciples of Christ in secret, as Joseph
of Arimathea was. Ioh. ^9.^8. One of the two Disciples is named here Cleophas,
and he was (as In epitap Paulae ad Eustoc. other, apud Maldonat. in loc
conjecture that he was brother to Io^^^^ husband to Mary.
Hierome writes) a Citizen of Emmaus, in whose house Christ was entertained at
table, and so known by breaking of bread. That other Disciple not named is
thought by Praes^t. in ^^b. lib.
Gregory the great, In loc.
Theophylact and (...) ^^rus lib. ^. cap. 34.
other, to be S. Luke conce^^ing his own name out of modesty. But it is
apparent in the proem of this evangelical history, that Saint Luke received
his relations from other, and therefore not ^robable that he was one of these
two. See Iansen. conco d. cap 146. and Maldonat. in Luc. 1*1.

(...). 23.
Epiphantus says expressly that this disciple was Nathaniel, (...)
Origene conjectures it was one Simeon, (...) 12. (...).
Ambrose calls him Am^on, (...)
in this dissension of opinions observe two things especially. 1. That it is
fruitless to search after this name curiously seeing the spirit of truth and
wisdom concealeth it. 2. That traditions are uncertain though ancient, and
therefore we must build our faith upon the word written, and not upon tales
unwritten. These two disciples went the same day Christ arose from the dead out
of their College, but they went not out in Aposta^^^ like to them of whom
Saint John 1. Epist. 2. cap. 19. verse. They went out from us, but they were not
of us: for if they had bin of us they would have continued with us. Neither
went they forth in curiosity like to Genesis 34.1.
Din^ who went out to see the daughters of the land; but they went out from the
rest of their company like Arde^^.
bees out of their ^iue, that they might return home laden with honey: for
their communication is answerable to the present doctrine and grief of their
College, they gather sweet from the flowers of Christ's speech, hearing him
expounding the law and the Prophets attentively, compelling him importunately
to stay with them, and never leaving him until in breaking of bread they knew
him. And then as being filled with heavenly food (which is Psalm. 19.10.
sweeter then honey and the honey comb) they returned home to the blessed
Apostles and other disciples at Jerusalem, and (...) things were done in the
way.

To a town called Emmaus] Hist. lib. 5. cap. 14.
Pl^nie reckons Emmaus among the Toparchies of Judea, called afterward (...)
(...) upon the (...)
victory which Augusthus Caesar (...) Antonius and Cleopatra. This (...) was
(...) famous as I find in the records of (...)
antiqui^^, but our Evangelist ^^eth it here not for the (...) of the town,
(...)
but for the certaincie of the truth.

And (...) of all the things that had happened Augustine. ser. 144 de temp.
of the death of Christ, and of the Jews inhumane cruelty who put him to
death, of the ^ women's going to his sepulcher, and of their report unto the
brethren: their heart was fixed on Christ, and out of their hearts abundance
their mouth spoke.

Quicquid agit Cleophas, nihil est Cleophae nisi Christus,
Si gaudet, si stet, si tacet ^unc loquitur.
The news at Jerusalem how Christ was crucified, dead, buried, and risen
again, are called things that happened and chanced A^^tius.
in respect of the disciples ignorance, not in respect of Gods knowledge: for
as concerning the passion of Christ, it is said expressly by Saint Peter Acts
3.23. that he was delivered, and crucified, and slain by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God, and so nothing happened casually, seeing
every thing was aforetime Luke 24.44.
written of him in the law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms.
And as for the Suarez Tom. 2. in 3. Thom. disp. 45 sect. 1.
resurrection of Christ, himself says in this present Chapter at the 25.
verse, O fools and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken,
ought not Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his glory? and
he began at Moses and all the Prophets and interpreted unto them in all
Scriptures which were written of him. Bernard hom. de duobus discipeuntibus in
Emaus.
Mistically these two disciples are prayer and meditation, the which are two so
nearly coupled together as that they talk together often. In prayer our
meditation is illuminated, and by meditation our devotion in praying in flamed.
Meditatio ruminat liuores vulnerum fixuras clauorumdanceam ^ acetum,
persecutorum sauitiam, Apostolorum (...) and ^oortem turpissimam, corporis
sepulturam: oration ^undit suspiria, piae deuotionis stillat aromata tota
resoluitur in l^menta.

And it chanced while they communed together and reasoned, jesus himself drew
near Psalus. 34.17.
the Lord is nie to such as are of a contrite heart, and in the Mat. 18.20.
mids of such as are gathered together to praise him. In the tap-house where
the communication is idle profane, scandalous, and in every respect unsavory:
there the devil is in the drunkards heart, and ears and tongue: Beda Bernard.
Calman.
but in Gods house when we meet together to magnify his name, nay in our own
house when as we meditate on Christ's precious death and burial and other
mysteries of holy belief, Jesus himself Ca^^. ^.9.
stands behind our wall, looking forth of the windows, showing himself
through the grates, and Cant. 5.4.
putting in his hand at the hole of the ^^ore to help us, he draws near to
us, and walks along with us as he did with the two disciples here, never
leaving us until he perceive that we be thoroughly confirmed and comforted in
the truth. August ser. 140. de temp.
Ambulat cum illis in via and non dum illi ambulabant in via, inuenit enim eos
exorbitasse de via: he which is the way seeing his disciples out of the way,
shows them his Psalm. 25.3.
paths, and Psalm. 23.2.
leads them forth beside the waters of comfort: and for this end he does ask
what manner of communications are these? Calain. L^dolphus.
not as doubting himself, but only to put them out of doubt: Augustine. ser.
144. de temp.
quaerit ab eis quid inter se loquerentur, us quod ipse sciebat idi faterentur.
He does ask them and urge them again and again, Aretius.
that he might have fit occasion and ample matter of discourse: and when he
found them upon conference to be dullards in his school, he chides them, O
fools, and slow of heart, etc. fools in understanding* slow in affecting the
truth. Caietan.
Arguit eos amentiae in part cognoscitiua, and tarditatis in part affecti^a.
But yet in calling them fools he brake not his own law Mat. 5.2^.
( whosoever shall say fool to his brother is worthy to be punished with hell
fire) because this rebuke proceeds out of a Marlorat.
spiritual zeal for their good, and not out of any carnal hatred for their
hurt. And such a reproof is not a reproach, it is officium, and not conuitium,
a work of charity, and not a mark of malice. So Gala^. ^.1.
Paul called his Galathians foolish, and he gave this precept unto ^. Tim. 4.^.
Timothy, improve, rebuke, but with all long suffering and doctr^ne, for
Christ here did not only correct his di^ciples ^^^our, but also direct them in
the truth, and that by words and deeds. By words, urging the truth of his death
and resurrection. First, by reason; ought not Christ to have suffered these
things and to enter into his glory? 2. From authority, he began at Moses and
all the Prophets, and interpreted unto them in all Scriptures which were
written of him. Here first note the sweet harmony between the two Testaments,
in that both agree together, and meet together in Christ, as being alpha and
omega, the beginning of the Gospel, and the end of the Law. 2. That the
grounds of all our sermons are to be taken out of holy writ; the 1. Cor. 4.1.
Ministers and messengers of God ought o deliver the 1. Pet. 4.11.
words of God. 3. That in our preaching we should use such scriptures as are
most apt and fit for our present occasion, as Christ here cited not all the
Scriptures in all the law, but only such as were written of him, even those
which evidently proved his death and resurrection. He did interpret unto them
in all Scriptures, and yet named none, Aretius.
that he might incite us hereby to the diligent searching and examination of
them.

Secondly, Christ instructed his Disciples in this present controue^sie with
his actions; for as it is said at the 19. verse, he was a Prophet mighty in
deed, and word. C^^^^.
That is, in soundness of doc^rine, and sanctity of life. First (as In loc.
idem ^ansen. and al^.
Theophyla^t observes) powerful in deed, and then powerful in word. For he
persuades unto virtue most, who lives best. As in this place Christ himself
was known by breaking of bread, Ardens.
sooner then by preaching of the word. Or as Euth^m. ^^do^ph. A^^t.
other, powerful in his miracles, and powerful in his teaching. His actions
here mentioned concerning the bread, are four; He took it, and blessed it,
and brake it, and gave to them. Among all which, he was only known in
breaking of bread, C^^^tan.
for that he did miraculously break bread with his hands, as other cut it
with a knife. The which he did often in his life, and so by this easily known
after his rising from death.

Cuba^. con. 4. in loc.
By this dialogue you may see that Christ is especially known in the
Scriptures, and yet not in the Scriptures, except he first open our eyes, and
break and give to each one the bread of life. And in the conclusion or
epilogue following, you may see likewise the fruit of interpreting Scriptures,
how the Marlorat.
ministry of the word makes the fire of Gods spirit to burn, first in our
selves, and then ofterwards to shine toward other. As the two Disciples here,
so soon as their eyes were opened to see Christ, instantly the same hour they
rose up, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together,
and they told what things were done in the way, and how they knew him in
brea^ing of bread, the circumstance of the time, and distance of the place
manifestly show; their ^ealous affection in relating these news unto the
brethren. Emmaus (as our Evangelist in the 13. verse) was about threescore
furlongs from Jerusalem, ^ide Maldo^at. in loc.
eight furlongs make an ordinary mile, and so threescore furlongs are about
seven miles and an half. Some Divines affirm that it was a journey of (...).
three or Ar^^^^^.
four hours on foot. If then it were toward night when Christ upon their
importunity sat at table with them, as we read at the 29. verse; then it was
(as we may conjecture probably) midnight before they could come to Jerusalem;
and yet (says our text) they went the same hour, neither deferring the time,
nor preferring their private business before the public good. Howsoever they
were (doubtless) after travel weary, and after meat in the night sleepie:
yet they P^^^. 132.4.
would not suffer their eyes to sleep, nor their eye lids to slumber, nor the
temples of (...) head to take any rest, until they had published unto the
brethren how Christ was risen again from the dead, and how they knew him in
breaking of bread. That we may perform the like diligence toward Gods people,
as occassion is offered in our several esta^es and callings, let us pray with
our mother the Church: Almighty God, which through thy only begotten son
Jesus Christ, have overcome death, and opened unto us the gate of everlasting
life: we humbly beseech thee that as by thy special grace preventing us, thou
do put in our minds good desires: so by thy continual help, we may bring
the same to good effect, through Jesus Christ our Lord, etc.



The Epistle
ACTS 13.26. Ye men and brethren, children of the generation of Abraham, etc.


THis text is part of that excellent sermon made by the blessed Apostle S. Paul
at Antioch, a City of Pisidia, to the Jews assembled together in their
Synagogue, on the Sabbath day. The maine scope whereof is, that Jesus Christ is
the Savior of Israel, and Messiah of the world, promised unto the fathers, and
exhibited in the fullness of time to their children, even unto us, as being by
faith a generation of Abraham, and that through him all that fear God and
believe, receive forgiveness of their sins, and are justified from all things,
from which they could not be justified by the law of Moses. The whole sermon
has especially two parts: Explication, from the 16. verse, to the 26.
intimating that Jesus Christ is the blessed seed promised in old time by the
Prophets, and preached in these last days by John the Baptist, who was Mat.
11.9.
more then a Prophet. Application, in the words allotted for our present text,
wherein three points are principally regardable, to wit, an insinuation, ye men
and brethren, etc. preoccupation, for the inhabitors of Jerusalem, etc.
commination, beware therefore lest that fall upon you, etc.



The Gospel of Christ is a proclamation in writing common to all, and the
Preacher is the (...) 1.23.
voice of a crier, even the mouth of God to give notice to the people, that the
contents of the proclamation concern them and every one of them. As Act. 2.39.
The promise is made to you, and to your children, and to all that are a far
off even as many as the Lord our God shall call. And Act. 3.26. Unto you has
God raised up his son Jesus, and him he has sent to bless you, in turning
every one of you from your iniquities. And here, Ye men and brethren, children
of the generation of Abraham, and whosoever among you fears God, to you is
the word of this salvation sent. And verse. 38. Be it known unto you, that
thorough the man Jesus is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins. Now that
our Apostle might the better (...).
insinuate himself into the minds of his hearers, and thereby more powerfully
persuade the truth of his doctrine: he calls them brethren, children of the
generation of Abraham, and such as fear God. (...).
The first title was among the Jews held gracious; the second and third
glorious, esteeming it ever the greatest honor to be the servants of God and
sons of Abraham. And whereas Christ crucified is unto the Jews a 1. Cor.
1.23.
stumbling block (for what Jew will out of his own judgment admit him for
the Savior of Gods people, who was condemned by the chief Priests, and
rulers, and inhabitors of Gods own City Jerusalem: of which it is said Esaias 2
3.
the law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem) our
Apostle remoues the scandal of Christ's cross, retorting and answering this
objection in his ensuing discourse. First he retorteth it, and makes it
advantage in his present business. Calvin.
As if he should say, ye men of Antioch, children of the generation of
Abraham, especially such as fear God among you; I say ye should the rather
embrace the word of salvation sent unto you, because the men of Jerusalem and
their rulers killed the Act. 3.15.
Lord of life, condemning him in whom they found no cause of death. Jerusalem
Luke 19.42.
understood not the things appertaining to her peace, but Mat. 23.37.
murdered the Prophets, and stoned such as were sent to her. Take heed
therefore ye men of Antioch, that ye commit not the like sin and ingratitude,
lest that fall on you which is spoken of in the Prophets; behold ye despisers,
and wonder, and perish.

Secondly, S. Paul here gives answer to this objection. It is true that the
men of Jerusalem and their rulers have crucified the Lord of 1. Cor. 2.8.
glory; but it was out of their ignorance, because they knew him not, nor yet
the voices of the Prophets which are read every Sabbath day. They killed him
indeed, but herein they fulfilled all the Scriptures that were written of him,
especially that Scripture, Psalm. 118.22.
the same stone which the builders refused, is become the head stone of the
corner. And lastly, though it be granted unto you that the Savior Jesus (
through whom is preached unto you forgiveness of sins) had a death full of
ignominy, for that he was hanged on a tree: yet his rising again from the
dead the third day was exceeding glorious, in that he Ephesians. 4.8.
lead captivity captive, triumphing over death, hell, and the grave. Now that
Christ is risen again from death he proves by the witness Of Apostles
himself, we declare, etc. For Christ after his resurrection was seen of Paul,
1. Cor. 15.8. Other, who went with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, of whom he
was seen many days, as being witnesses chosen of God for the same purpose,
Act. 10.41.
Prophets, Esaias, chap. 55.3. David, Psalm. 2.7. and 16.11.



The first testimony cited by Paul is in the second Psalm, thou art my son,
etc. Calvin. i^ Psalm. ^.
the which I find expounded of David and of Christ. If we take this spoken of
David, he may be called the son of God, as A King, for Princes have their
Job. 19.11. Romans 13.1.
power from God, and so styled the children of the most high. Psalm. 82.6. Man,
for we are the Act. 17 18.
generation of God, it is he who made us, and not our selves, Psalm. 100.2. and
is not he thy father that made thee, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Regenerate man, for every one
that is newborn is 1. (...). 3 9.
borne of God, adopted his son, and made his heir. Romans 8.15.17.


Thus it may be said by God unto David in type, this day have I begotten thee,
but only to Christ in truth. And therefore (...) (...). lib. 3. cap. 7.
Rabbi Solomon, and other Doctors among the Jews understand this of the
Messiah, and assuredly Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 1. verse. 5
did the rather cite this text to prove that Christ is God, for that he knew
their Rabbines usually const^ued it of Isreal's Savior. The maine proposition
of the second Psalm. is, the the Messiah is the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, even Gods only begotten son, very God of very God. The which is
concluded in this Vide Bellarm. de Cor. ^. lib. 1. cap. 5. in principio.
argument. He that is to be worshipped and kissed of all Princes on earth is
doubtless the King of Kings: but the Messiah ought to be worshipped of all
other Kings and Rulers and Judges of the earth, ergo, the Messiah seated upon
Gods holy hill of Sion, is the King of Kings, even the Lord who dwells in
heaven. If the Princes of the world stand up and take counsel together against
the Lord, and against his anointed, it is but in vain. For if his wrath be
kindled (yea but a little) they shall instantly perish, he shall bruise them
with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a potters vessel. On the
contrary, blessed are they who kiss the son, and put their trust in him;
happy men, and wise Kings are they, who serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice
before him in reverence. 1. Sam. 2.6.
God only kills, and makes alive; brings down to the grave, and raises
up. Ergo, the Messiah having his absolute power of life and death, is
undoubtedly Gods only begotten son, whom he has made Heb. 1.2.
heir of all things, and Act. 10.42.
judge of all men. And therefore Divines interpret the cited words as properly
spoken of Christ, and that in respect of his generation, temporal. eternal.
Resurrection.


Euthym. Genebrard. in Psalm. 2. Chrysostom. Cyril. Alex. Greg. Nyssen. apud
Suarez. Tom. 2. disp. 45. sect. 1.
Some construe this of his temporary birth, in saying thou art my son, God
shows his divine generation: and in saying this day have I begotten thee, his
human nativity. For hodie, signifies in holy Scripture the present life,
Heb. 3.7. Psalm. 95.8. to day if ye will hear his voice. So that I have
begotten thee this day; as if he should have said, I have Heb. 1.6.
brought my first begotten son into the world; I have caused thee to become
Ioh. 1.14.
flesh, and in the fullness of time to be borne of a Galath. 4.4.
woman.

August. in Psalm. 2. and Enchirid. cap. 49. Athanas. ser. 3. contra Arianos
Ruffinus apud Lorin. in loc.
Other understand this of Christ's eternal generation. Suarez. Tom. 1. disput.
2. sect. 3.
As if God should have said, other are my sons improperly, but thou art my
son properly; (...). de (...) in Psalm. ^.2.
filius meus naturalis, singularis, substantialis: A son not by creation as
the whole world, nor through adoption as the whole Church: but a son by
nature, my begotten, and only begotten son, John 3.16. The very brightness,
and express character of my person, Hebr. 1.3. Whereas Arrians and other
object against this interpretation the word hodie; Saint Orat. de (...). 4.
(...). 6. (...). ^6.
Augustine answers appositly, that with God (unto whom all things are
present) there is neither yesterday, nor to morrow, but only today, Apud Deum
nunquam erastinus, nunquam he lernus dies est, sed semper body. And in his
Enchiridion cap. 49. Vbi dies nec he^ternis^^e inchoatur, nec initio era
^^terminatur, semper bodieraus est.

(...)
Hilary, (...)
Eusebius, (...)
Ambrose, with (...)
other expound this of Christ's resurrection, as Paul here. We declare to (...)
the promise made to the fathers, God has fulfill(...) unto their children, even
unto us, in that her (...) up Jesus again, even as it is written in the second
Psalm, thou art my son, this (...) have I begotten thee. For to (...) up
again from death unto life everlasting is a new begetting; and in this sense
Christ is called elsewhere the (...) (...)
begotten, and the (...) borne of the de^^. Again, the circumstances of the
place lead the Reader to this construction, Why do the heathen so furiou^^
rage together, and why do the people imagine a vain (...) that is, as Peter
and John have well applied it, Act. 4.27. Her^d and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles, and people of Israel gathered themselves together against the Lord
and against his Christ, even his holy son Jesus: and when they had filled all
things that were written of him (as Paul in our text) they took him down from
the tree, and put him in a sepulcher, Mat. 27.60 66.
rolling a great stone to the door thereof, and sealed it, and making it sure
with the watch. In all which (as the Prophet speaks) their imaginations and
actions were vain; for he that dwells in heaven did laugh them to scorn,
the Lord had them in derasion: he raised his Christ again the third day,
making him a King over his holy (...) of Sion, (...) Augustine. Genebrardus in
Psalm. ^.
that is, absolute head o^ his Church, giving him all the heathen for his
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession. And so
God in raising Christ up again from the dead, evidently showed that he was his
only begotten son. As if he should have said, thou were ever my son before
to day, before there was any day: Vide Calvin. ^ Psalm. 2. and Suarez Tom 2. in
3. Tom. ^^p. 45. sect. 1.
but yet in this day of thy resurrection, I have most especially manifested
unto the world that thou art my son whom I have begotten. It is then an Apud
Sixth. ^^nen bib. sanct. lib. 7. he^as. 8. object. 11.
idle conceit to think that Paul is not author of that Epistle written to the
Hebrews, because the words of David urged here to prove Christ's resurrection,
are cited here, chap. 1. verse. 5. to show Christ's eternal generation. For (as
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, chap. 1. verse. 4.) Christ is declared
mightily to be the son of God by rising again from the dead. His
resurrection is an infallible demonstration of his divinity, seeing none ever
raised another from the dead but by God; none ever raised himself from the dead
but God. I conclude this observation in the words of Lib. 3. de sa^^am. cap. 1.
^mbrose, Pulchre pater dicit ad filium, ego (...) genui te, hoc est, quando
redemisti populum, quando ad ca^ere^^um vocasti, quando implesti volunta^em
meam, prob^. 1 meum te esse filium.

The next Scripture quoted here by Paul is, Esaias 55.3. The (...) of God made
to David concerning the sending of Isreal's Savior are, sure mercies, and
faithful wo^^: he must of necessity therefore fulfill them in every respect,
Aretius.
the which he could not have done but in raising up Jesus again, for the
resurrection of Christ is the ^orin.
complement, and (as it were) Amen of all his promises; according to that of
Romans 4.25.
Paul he died for our sins, and is risen again for our justification. See
conclusion of the Gospel on S. Thomas day.

The last authority cited in this place to prove Christ's resurrection, is taken
out of the 16. Psalm, verse 11. thou shall not suffer thine holy one to see
corruption. The Jews understood this of David, but (says our Apostle) David
albeit he was a King, and a Prophet, and a Act. 2.29.
Partriarke, a man according to Gods own heart, as it is recorded of him in
this present chapter, at the 22. verse; yet ( after he had in his time
fulfilled the will of God) he fell on 1. King. 2.10.
sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption. Earth he was, and
to earth he returned again. But Christ Jesus although he was hanged on a
tree, and put in a sepulcher* yet he saw no corruption. He rose again the
third day, triumphing over all his enemies Colos 2 15.
openly, saying, O Hosea 13.14.
death, I will be thy death, O grave I will be thy destruction. And therefore
this Jesus is he through whom is preached unto you forgiveness of sins, and
by whom all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not
be justified by the law of Moses.

Mors mortis morti mortem nisi morte dedisset, a nobis vitae Ianua clausa foret.

Beware therefore, lest that fall on you which is spoken of in the Prophets]
This text is taken out of the first of Habakuk, verse. 5: Calvin. in loc.
but for as much as all the prophesies were collected together into one volume,
he says in the Prophets. Ri^era in Ha^acu^ 1. Number. 5.
Or according to the Hebrew phrase, in the Prophets, is as if he should have
said, in one of the Prophets, as Genes. 23.6. In the chiefest of our sepulchers
bury thy dead, that is, in one of the chief. He does alter the words of the
Prophet according to the sound, but not according to the sense. Haba^u^ says,
behold among the heathen, Paul here, behold ye despisers. In which our Apostle
does expound and not confound the Prophet: for whereas the Jews despised the
word of God, he sent them to be taught by the Caldeans; Calvin. in Habacu^. ^.
as if Habakuk had said, ye will not obey Gods voice, ye will not learn any
thing in his school: wherefore ye shall ere it beelong b^ made to know his
judgments among the heathen: ^ee (says the Lord) I will raise up the Caldeans
that better and hasty nation, which shall march through the breadth of the land,
to possess the dwelling places which are not theirs. And Ribera. vbi sup. Number.
7.
this their overthrow was a type of their future reprobation and spiritual
vastity for the contempt of the Gospel.

These things are 1. Cor. 10.6.11.
ensamples, and are written to admonish us upon whom the ends of the world are
come. Let us therefore beware, that these heavy judgments fall not upon us as
they did upon the Jews. Videte and aspicite, admiramini, admiramini, take
heed, and again I say take heed, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
quench not the spirit, despise not prophesying, receive not the grace of God
in vain. Saluianus lib. 5. de Gubernat dei.
Nemo malus nisi stultus, he that is a despiser of the saving word is an arrant
fool; for if he were wiser he would kiss the son, and beware lest that
fall on his head which is spoken of in the Prophets, behold, ye despisers, and
wonder, and perish.

The Gospel
LVKE 24.36. Jesus stood in the midst of his Disciples, etc.


COncerning the chief parts and passages of this Scripture: See Gospel 1.
Sund after Easter: and Gospel on Saint Thomas day. Here pause, and pray.

Almighty father, which have given thine only son to die for our sins, and
to rise again for our justification: grant us so to put away the leaven of
malice and wickedness, that we may always serve thee in pureness of living and
truth, through Jesus Christ our Lord: Amen.

The Epistle
E^HES. 4.7. Unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of
the gift of Christ, etc.


SAint Paul does especially (...)
two things in all his Epistles. 1. treat, 2. entreat. Having sufficiently
treated in the former Chapters of doctrinals, he comes in this present to
morals; entreating his Ephesians in general, to walk worthy of the vocation
whereunto they were called: in more particular, to support one another thorough
love, keeping the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: pressing this one
point with arguments of (...).
two sorts.

The first (of which epist. 17. Sund. after, Trin.) is taken from such things
as are common unto the whole Church, as being in all the faithful one and the
same, there is one body, and one spirit, and one hope, one Lord, one faith, one
baptism, one God and father of all, which is above all, and through a^, and in
you all. As if he should argue thus, if the Church your mother be but one, God
your father but one, Christ your Lord but one, the holy spirit your comforter
but one, if ye have but one hope, one faith, one baptism: I see no cause why
ye should not live together and love together as all one, laboring to keep
the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

The second, (contained in our present text.) is taken from such graces as are
in every one diverse, Aretius. Marlorat.
showing that this inequality of gifts is not an hindrance, but rather a
furtherance to unity: for as much as all of them are given by the same author
for the same end. Unto every one of us is given some gift, unto none all, he
that has most has but a measure. As then in the natural body, 1. Cor.
12.2^.^^.
the eye can not say to the hand, I have no need of thee: nor the hand again
to the feet, I have no need of you: but every part seeks another and not his
own good. Even so in the Church (which is Christ's mystical body) God made not
all Apostles, or all Prophets, or Evangelists, etc. but some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, etc. There be diversities of gifts, and diversities
of administrations, and diversities of operations, 1. Cor. 12. every one
stands in need of another gift, and thereupon is occasioned to support one
another in love, preserving the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. See
epist. 2. Sun. after Epiphan. and 10. after Trinity.

In the whole 4. points are to be considered especially.

1. Who, Christ, and that is proved out of the 68. Psalm. verse 18. he led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. 2. When, when he ascended up on
high, even above all heavens to fulfill all things. 3. What, he made some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, etc. 4 Why, for the perfiting of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.
Concerning the first: in that our Apostle does auowe here that the diversity
of grace bestowed on the Church is the gift of Christ, whereas he says
elsewhere that God the father ordained Apostles, and Prophets, and teachers,
and that the spirit works ad these things, unto every one severally
distributing as he will: we may learn two conclusions in divinity. 1. Occ^^en.
in loc.
That all the works of the sacred Trinity quoad extra without it self* are
common and communicable to every person of the three. 2. That God the son is
Primasi^et in loc.
equal in might and mercy to God the father, he being ascended above all
heavens is the giver of gifts unto men: and here we must accord the Prophet and
our Apostle. The one says, he received gifts for men, the other, he gave gifts
unto men: and these two seem to contradict each other. Hierom. expos. 1. in
loc.
Answer is made that David speaks of this devotion in time to come, but Paul
of thi^ donation already past and accomplished; David of the promise, Paul of
the performance. Aquin. in loc.
Or Christ as he was God gave gifts in he^^^n and as man he re^^^ed gifts on
earth: or he received Augustine Psalm. 67.
in that his members received: according to his own saying, Mat. 25.40. ^n as
much as ye have done it unto one of the least^ these my brethren, ye have done
it unto me: or he received Hieron. in (...). 67.
to give, as Exodus 25.2. Speak to the children ^f ^srael that they receive an
offering for me, that is (according to the translation of our Sermon. Ca^^alion.
and 3.6. (...). 8.
present Church bible) ^^at they bring^ where rejoicing (as Apud Genebra^d. A
Psalm. 67.
Abb^n Ez^a notes) is giving, and so Paul alluding rather to the (...).
Marlorat. in loc.
sense then to the words of David says he (...).

Touching the second point: it is demanded how Christ is said here to have made
some Apostles and some Prophets etc. When he went (...) and led captivity
^aptiue, seeing we read in the Gospels history, that he chose his Mat. 10.1.
Apostles and Luke 10.1.
Disciples, and gave them a commission to preach in his life time; and that
after his resurrection he confirmed them in his office by John 20 21.
breathing on them, and giving the holy Ghost, and saying, as my father sent
me: even so send ^y ^^, Mat. 18 19.
go teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the father, and the
son, (...) the holy ghost. Answer may be, that Christ is reported in this
Scripture to have given Apostles unto the Church after he went up on high, in
respect of their gifts, extension, and (...).

Extension, as having after Christ's ascens^ou received the gifts of the holy
ghost after a more glorious manner, and in a far greater measure. So the John
7 39.
text the ^^ly ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified, and ^^hn. 16.7.
If I go not away, the comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart I
will send him unto you. And Christ at his ascension also charged them to wait
for this promised power of the holy ghost. See gosp. Sun. after ascension day.

O^tension, and that 1. in respect of the Zaenchius.
solemn inauguration into their Apostleship, on the feast of Acts. 2.
Pentecost in the sight of Gods people gathered together at Jerusalem out of
every nation under heaven. It is reported of David that he was first anointed
King of Israel in the midst of his brethren, 1 Samuel 1.10. and afterward in
Hebron 2. Sam. 2. But he was not called King until he was anointed solemly
before all the tribes of Israel. 2. Sam. 5. Even so, though it be granted that
the Apostles were nominated and elected to their office before Christ's death,
and confirmed in their calling after Christ's resurrection; yet they were not
apparently known unto Gods people to be so, till he went up on high and gave
the gifts of the holy Ghost unto them in the visible forms of cloven and
fiery tongues, Acts 2.3. see. epist. on Whi^sunday.

2. Ostension, in regard of execution of their office, for albeit they had a
commission before to preach first unto the Mat. 10.6.
lost sheep of Israel, and then unto all nations in the world, Mat. 28.19. yet
they did not execute this commission in gathering together a Church out of both
unto God, Mark 16.20.
until Christ had ascended far above all heavens to fulfill all things: and
the reason hereof is rendered in our text, because David had so prophesied of
him in the 68. Psalm, when he went up on high he led captivity captive and
gave gifts unto men. And in deed it was at this time most fit for him, and best
also for his, to give gifts, it was exceeding fit for himself, because
glorious conquerours in their solemn triumphs usually lead their chief
enemies settered either in iron chains, as Liuius Decad. 5. lib. 5.
Paulus Aemilius triumphed over Persius: or in iron cages, as Knoles in the
life of Batazet.
Tamberlane the great, used proud Batazet king of the Turks. And so leading
captivity captive, they divided the spoil to their friends and followers as it
is in the Psalm. 68.12.
Psalm, Christ ascending on high led captivity captive, Hierom. Primasius.
Ap^ine.
that is, the devil and all his accomplices, hell, death, and the grave,
triumphing over them openly. Giving also gifts unto the Church, as Apostles,
and Prophets, and Evangelists, and Pastors and Teachers, who might Mat. 18 19.
loose such as Satan Luke 13 16.
binds: and it was at this time (...) for his followers, as not depending any
longer upon his bodily presence. See Gospel 4. Sun. after Easter.

The 3. remarkable point in this Scripture is what he gave to men, unto every
one is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ, etc. He
does understand by grace not living grace, for that (as he showed in the former
^art of this Chapter) is in all the members of the Church one and the same: one
faith, one hope, one baptism, etc. (...)
But (...) is taken here for (...) namely for the diverse gifts of the holy
Ghost, as interpretation of tongues, and discerning of spirits, and the gifts
of healing, prophe^ie, the word of knowledge, and the like, of which he
disputes at large, 1. Cor. 12. and so Paul (...).
expounds himself in our present text at the 11. verse, the same made some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, etc.

Apostles were such as he called himself (either in his state mo^^all, as the
12. disciples: or in his state glorious, as Paul Acts 9.15. and Matthias Acts
1.16.) to preach his Gospel, and to plant his Church in every nation of the
world. Prophets were such as (...)
interpret the scripture of the Prophets. 1. Cor. 14.4. He that propheseth,
(...) the Church* and Mat. 23.34. I ^hold. I send unto, (...)
Prophets, that is preachers. (...)
Or Prophets were such as had marue^lous wisdom, and could foretell things to
come, as Agabus Acts 11.28. signified by the spirit that there should be great
famine thorough o^ all the world^ which also came to pass under Claudus
Caesar. Eu^ngeli^ts are so called either of preaching the Gospel, and so (...)
Paul exhorted Timothy to do the work of an Evangelists or else of (...)
writing the Gospel, and so there ^ee but 4. Evangelists only, Matthew, Mark,
Luke, John. And here we may note the reason why the Church appointed this
scripture to be read at this time, namely, because Saint Mark was an
Evangelist. Pastors are such as are placed over a Calvin. Zanchius.
certain cure, whereas Apostles had the whole Church for their charge, So Acts
20.21.
Paul speaks unto the Elders of the Church at Ephesus, take heed to your
selves, and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost has made you over seer^.
And so (...). Lombard.
Bishops in their dioces, and A^^^lm.
Priests in their parishes are Pastors. Or as In loc.
Theophylact, Pastors and Doctors are Presbyters and Deacons. Or (as some
Aretius. Zanchius.
late Divines observe, Pastors are rectors of the whole congregation, Doctors
are catechists, and teachers of the youth and other new comes into Christ's
school. Pastors are such Anselm.
as feed Christ's sheep, and Doctors are such as feed Christ's lambs: or (as
Annot. in loc.
Beza) Pastors are they who govern the Church* and Doctors are they who
govern the schools. But I rather embrace their opinion Augustine. Ch^^^^s^^m.
Musculus apud ^^whitgift d^fense of his answer to the adm^nition. fol 234.
(...) Bullinger. and Piscator in loc.
who think Pastor^ and Doctors are diverse names of one office, See (...) of
pretended hodiscipli^e. cap. 9.
even as feeding and teaching are all one: for otherwise Paul (as Hierome,
Lombard, Anselmo have noted upon the place) would have distinguished them as he
did the rest, and have said, he gave some Pastors, some Teachers: as well as
some Apostles, some Prophets; some Evangelists, etc. but he joins them
together Pastors and Teachers, Anselm. Lombard.
insinuating that Pastors should teach, and that (as our Church speaks) both
by their preaching and living, ensamples in word, in conversation, in love, in
spirit, in faith and pureness, 1. Tim. 4 12.

Beza. Z^nch^us.
Some Divines observe that these functions are partly temporal and
extraordinary, as Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists: and partly continual and
ordinary, as Pastors, and Teachers: but herein I tread in the steps of that
holy father my most honored and honorable master Archbishop Whitgift, who
Defense of his answer to the admonition. fol. 229.
writing against the schismatickes of his age says, and proves out of this
our present text also, that all these degrees of ministers remain still in
some sort until the worlds end. For first (as Nouelists acknowledge) Paul in
this place makes a perfect platform of a Church, and a full rehearsal of all
offices therein contained, and he says expressly that Christ ascending up on
high gave them for the gathering together of the Saints, and for the work of
the ministry, etc. tell we all come to the unity of the faith, and knowledge of
the son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the full age of
Christ. That is, as Calvin, Zanchius, and Aretius. Beza.
other, until we meet in that other world to come.

I know there were certain things in the blessed Apostles which were proper
unto themselves, as their immediate calling from God, the power of working
miracles and their commission to go into the whole world, etc. but to preach
the Gospel of Christ in places where need requires (although it be not
peculiarly committed to them) or to govern the Churches already planted: I see
no cause why it should not be perpetual among the Ministers of the word.

Likewise the function of an Evangelist, if it be taken for the writing of the
Gospel, it was temporal and has his end. But if it be taken for preaching to
the people plainly and simply, as In loc.
Bullinger thinks: or generally for preaching the Gospel: as Loc. com. tit.
de verbi ministris.
Musculus supposes, in which sense Paul said unto Timothy, do the work of an
Evangelist: or for preaching more zealously then other, as In loc.
Bucer imagines; I make no doubt but that it still remains in the Church.

Moreover, Prophets if they be taken for such as our Apostle means in his
Romans 12.6. 1. Cor. 11.4. and 1. Cor. 14.1.
Epistles often, I say for such as have an especial gift in interpreting the
Scripture, whether in unfolding the deep mysteries thereof unto the learned,
or in expounding the plain sense thereof unto the people: then it must of
necessity be granted that they be perpetual officers in the Church as Pastors
and Doctors.

Saint Com. in loc.
Ambrose therefore construeth our text thus, Apostles are Bishops, Prophets are
Interpretours of the Scriptures, Evangelists are Deacons. And In verbi Pauli 2.
Cor. 3.2. inter opuscula Hyperij page 671.
Hyperius says that God will always have these degrees in the Church, and
Peter Martyr in his Commentaries upon the 12. to the Romans is of opinion,
that our Apostle describes in that place such gifts as are necessary for the
Church at all times, among which he mentions (as a chief one) prophesying.
To be short, Bullinger upon this text observes that the words Apostle, Prophet,
Evangelist, are confounded: and the Pastors of Zurich, in the latter confession
of See harmon. consess. sect. 11. page 336.
Heluetia chap. 18. write thus, the m^nisters of the new testament are termed
by diverse names, for they be called Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Bishops,
Elders, Pastors and Doctors.

And here Zanchius. Marlorat.
Protestant Divines have well observed against the Church of Rome, that Paul
among all these degrees of the ministry, names not the Popes office, the which
he would not have forgotten, if it had bin so necessary for the deciding of
controversies, and preservation of unity in truth, as our adversaries pretend.
And whereas the Rhemists reply that Bishops, Elders, and Deacons are not
mentioned in this catalogue: D^. Pulk. in loc.
Answer is made that the functions of Bishops and Priests, (as they respect
the external government and policy of the Church) are named elsewhere
generally and particularly: but in respect of teaching (which is intended here
more principally) they are contained under Pastors and Doctors. If the Pope
will be reputed an Apostle, then (as Cardinal In loc.
Caietane notes) he must also be both a Prophet, and an Evangelist, and a
Pastor, and a Teacher, for (as he says) an Apostleship eminently comprehends
all these graces: it may be granted (as I conceive, which Anselme collecteth
here) that Archbishops and Primates have the rooms of Apostles in the Church,
but yet I see not how the Pope can be crowded into the text: for if this
absolute supremacy were necessary, then assuredly Paul would not have said
Christ made some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, etc. But rather
Christ gave to the Church One at one time which at universal Bishop of the
Church should have the whole world for his Dioces.
one Apostle, some Prophets, and many teachers.

The fourth and last obserueable point in our text is, for what end Christ
ascending up on high gave gifts unto men, and that is threefold. Namely, the
Perfecting of the Saints. the Work of the Ministry. the Edifying of the body
of Christ.


Caietan.
The first concerns such as are called already, Saints. The second, such as
are to call, exercising the work of the ministry to wit, Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, etc. The third, such as are yet to be called, and to be built
upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. Zanchius.
Or the first concerns the people, the second the Pastor, and the third both.

For the edifying of the Saints] I find diverse readings of this clause. Some
read ad Calvin.
constitutionem, or ad Castalion.
condendos sanctos, agreeable to the present text of our Communion book here.
The Saints are of Gods Ephesians. 2.19.
household, and the Church is Gods house, Hebr. 3.6. The chief builders where
of under Christ are Apostles, Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, as I have showed
Epist. on Saint Thomas day.

Erasmus. Marlorat. Vatablus.
Other read ad instaurationem, for the repairing of such as are decayed in
Gods building. Prou. 24.16.
The just man falls seven times, Iam. 3.2.
in many things we sin all, August. epist. 54.
eum dicimus optimum qui peccat minimum. And therefore that we may not fall
from grace finally, we need daily to be Ca^tan.
repaired and underpropped in Gods house by the powerful exhortations of Pastors
and teachers.

Our new translation (herein agreeing with the Syriae and vulgar Latin) reads
for the perfecting of the Saints. And it may be so construed in two respects:
first in regard of their daily growing from Psalm. 84.7.
strength to strength, until they be perfect men in Christ: for the word is
2. Tim. 3.16.
profitable to teach, improve, correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that
the man of God may be perfected, and thoroughly furnished unto all good works.
2. Vt little numerus impleati^r. Hierome. Vatablas.
For that their number is fully perfected and accomplished by the preaching of
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers. According to this
exposition the Geneua bible has it, for the gathering together of the Saints.
All of us are by nature like Esaias 53.6.
sheep which have gone astray; wherefore Christ as being the 1. Pet. 5.4.
chief shepherd, gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists to
gather us together from Mat. 8.11.
East and West, and to bring us unto his flock, that there may be but Ioh.
10.16.
one sheepfold and one shepherd. His sheep hear his voice, Pastors and
teachers uttering his words, are his John 1.23. See Gosp. Sun. 4. in A^ue^^.
voice; he made therefore for the gathering together of his elect some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, etc.

Aretius. Beza. Zanchius.
Other read ad coagmentationem sanctorum, for the joining and ioynting of the
Saints. He speaks of the Church as of a body consisting of Gods elect as of
many members, a body coupled and knit together by every joint, verse. 16. And
therefore whereas the Saints through Adams original transgression, and their
own actual offenses are many times out of joint, disunited from their head
Christ, and divided also from his members; it pleased the Lord, out of his
infinite wisdom and goodness to give some Apostles, and Prophets, and
Evangelists, etc. As Chirurgions and Physicians of the soul, who might by the
preaching of faith unite them again to their head, and by the preaching of
good works knit them together among themselves in the bond of peace. And here
you may note the true cause why the worst men and members of a parish, evermore
regard a good Pastor least. It is because they be feet, and legs, and thighs,
and hands out of joint, and so cannot endure the touch of the Chirurgions hand,
whose chief care is to work their cure. He that is sick of a lethargy,
desires to sleep although he die for it; and he that is lulled asleep in
sin, cannot away with the Ezech. 3.17.
watchman of God. If a Minister shall either out of weakness suffer his
drowsy people to snore still in their uncleanness, or out of wickedness
sleep with them a little himself; then he may peradventure for a while be
reputed a good shepherd among those scabbie sheep: but if he shall once rouse
them, and raise them out of their security, saying with Ephesians. 5.14.
Paul, awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead; then instantly the
wit-foundred drunkard cries out, Act. 22.22.
^way with such a fellow from the earth, it is not meet he should live, for
he Act. 17.6.
subuerts the state of the world, and Act 16.20.
troubles our city. Then the covetous oppressor is ready to tell the Prophet,
as 1. King. 21.20.
Ahab did Eliah. Have thou found me O mine enemy? Then the whole rabble
furiously raging together against the Lord, and against his anointed conclude
peremptorily, that apeece of a pulpit is enough, and half a benefice too much
for such an unquiet spirit. S. Epist 48.
Augustine sweetly, Quiphreneticum ligat, and lethargicum excitat, ambobus
molestus, ambos amat.

For the work of the ministry] The gifts of Christ here mentioned are not
theoricall, but Aretius.
practical, given unto Pastors for the work of the ministry, Ziachius.
the word work forbids loytering, and the word ministry lording. I pray
misconstrue not this gloss, seeing I mean as 2. Cor. 1.24.
Paul, and speak as B. Latimer did almost in every sermon. Domabis lupos, sed
non dominaberis ouibus, as De considerat. ^^^. 2.
Bernard told Eugenius.

For the edifying of the body of Christ] 1. Cor. 12.7.
The gift of the spirit is given to every man to edify withal; he therefore
that is a non edificant, is unworthy to be called an Apostle, or Prophet, or
Evangelist. Bernard. l^b. ^. de considerat.
Positiestis dispensatores, sed in edificationem, non in destructionem: aliter
non fidelis dispensatio, sed crudelis dissip^tio. The Doctors office is to
teach, and the Pastors calling to feed. Our great Lord repeated this iniunction
unto John 21.
Peter thrice, feed my lambs, feed my sheep, feed my flock, that is, as Ser.
2. de resut. dom.
Bernard excellently, pasce mente, pasce ore, pasce opere: pasce animi
oratione, verbi exhortatione, exempli exhibitione. And here the people likewise
may learn to reverence their Pastors and teachers, as the Ministers of Christ
sent from above to Heb. 13.17.
watch for their souls. If they must Paulinus epist. lib. 1. epist. 1.
honorare bonum dominum etiam in malo seruo, respect every Prophet, and
Evangelist, and Pastor for his works sake, 1. Thessal. 5.13. then unto such as
rule well, and labor in the word and doctrine, they must (as our 1. Tim. 5.17.
Apostle speaks) give double honor.

The Gospel
JOHN 15.1. I am the true vine, and my Father is an Husbandman, etc.


AS a kind friend loath to depart with his familiars, in giving a farwell often
breaks off his speech and begins a new discourse: Iansen. concord. cap. 135.
so Christ here being now to leave the world, after he had ended one sermon
unto his Disciples in the chapter going before, falls into another of the
like argument in this present, wherein he does especially two things, exhort
and comfort.

He does exhort all his followers, 1. To continue steadfast in the faith, and
that under the parable of the vine, intimating that as the branch cannot bear
fruit of it self except it abide in the Vine: so they can do nothing unless
they abide in him. Urging this one point by diverse reasons; all which may be
reduced unto the punishment of such as abide not Poena damni, they bear no
fruit, verse. 4. Poenasensus, they be taken away, verse 2. withered, gathered,
cast into the fire, burnt, v. 6.
blessedness of such as abide, being Purged by God the father, v. 2. Cleansed
by God the son, v. 3. Comforted by God the holy Ghost, abide in me, and I
will abide in you by my Calvin.
spirit, verse. 4. Relieved in whatsoever they shall ask, verse. 7.

2. To make demonstration hereof in works of piety, glorifying God, and loving
one another.


He comforts them against the worlds hatred: 1. From his own example, verse.
18.20. 2. From the cause of this hatred, ver. 19. 3. From the cause of the
cause, verse. 21.22.24. 4. For that God and Christ suffer with them, verse. 23.
5. From the prediction of holy Scripture, verse. 25. 6. By promising to send the
comforter, verse. 26.


I am the true Vine] Christ is called here a Vine, as else where a Apoc. 5.5.
Lion, a Act. 8.32.
Sheep, a Ich. 1.29.
Lamb, a Ephesians. 2.20.
corner Stone, a Ioh. 10.9.
Door. A true Vine by Caietan. Aretius.
way of difference from the wild vine; or (as Rupertus upon the place) to
distinguish it from the Vines of Sodom and Gomorrah, Whose grapes (as Deuteronomy.
32.32.
Moses speaks in his song) are grapes of gall, and their clusters are bitter,
their wine is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel gall of Aspes. A true Vine,
not simply, but in a simile: not truly a Vine, but like a true Vine. Vera
(faith Tract. 80. in Joan.
Augustine) per similitudinem, non per proprietatem: a true Vine, Maldonat. in
loc.
as in the first chapter of this Gospel, at the ninth verse, the true light.
Now the resemblances between Christ and a true Vine are See Bernard. tract. de
passion. dom. cap. 1.2.3.4. and Paratus ser. de 5. Marco.
manifold.

1. A Vine is not sown in the ground, but planted a young slip of an old tree:
so Christ is a natural branch of God the Father, even very God of very God;
but for us men and our salvation he was translated from heaven, and planted on
earth, that is, borne of the Virgin Mary; of whom it is said, Esaias 45.8. Let
the earth open, and let salvation and justice grow forth, let it bring them
forth together, I the Lord have created him. A blessed earth, in whole Luke
1.42.
blessed fruit Genesis 12.18.
all the nations of the world are blessed.

2. The Vine that it may bear the more fruit, is cut and pruned: and so
Christ, although he were conceived of the holy Ghost, and borne without all
sin; yet for our sakes he was circumcised on the eight day, Esaias 53.4.
wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities. Again, Christ
albeit he were Act. 10.36.
Lord over all things, and Heb. 1.2.
heir of the whole world: yet for our salvation he suffered his glory to be
pruned by the knife of ignominy; for whereas he was the Psalm. 24.7.
King of glory, he made himself of no reputation, Philip. 2.7. He took on
him the form of a servant, and was made man, (as David speaks of him) a worm
and no man, a very scorn of men, and outcast of the people, Psalm. 22.6. His
wealth was pruned by the knife of poverty, Bernard. tract. de (...) dom. cap. 2.
Pauper in natiuitate, pauperior in vita, pauperimus in cruce: So poor in his
birth, that he was borne in another man's stable; so poor in his life, that he
said of himself, Mat. 8.20.
the Foxes have holes, and the birds of the heaven have nests: but the son of
man has not whereon to rest his head. So poor when he was dead, that he was
buried in another man's tomb, Matthew. 27 60. His pleasure was pruned by the
knife of sorrow, Lament. 1.12. Behold, and see, if there be any sorrow like
unto my sorrow. His familiar acquaintance was also cut away from him, by the
knife of fear; Iuda^ betrayed him, Peter denied him, other forsook him, all
were dispersed. He did tread the wine press alone, and of all people there was
none to help him, as In loc. Es^ae.
Hierome and Veisapra.
Bernard apply that of the Prophet Esaias, chap. 63.3.

3. The Vine is dugged, and dug, as we read in the fifth chapter of Esaias.
So Christ was Paratus.
dugged when the soule-mouthed Mat. 27.30.
Jews spit upon him; and he was dug on every side, when as his adversaries
by propounding captious questions had cast a trench round about him; as in
asking, Mat. ^^.17.
Is it lawful that tribute be given to Caesar or no? If he should have
disputed against the tribute, he had offended the Prince: if for the tribute,
displeased the people who did bear this heavy burden against their wills. See
Gospel, Sund. 2^. after Trinity. Again, they dug a pit round about him in
bringing the Ioh. 8.3.
woman taken in adultery before him, and demanding what say thou? for if he
should have condemned her he might seem to contradict his own sayings, Mat.
9.13.
I will have mercy not sacrifice, Mat. 11.29.
learn of me for I am humble and meek. If acquit her, he should contrary
Moses law, Leuiticus 20.10. The adulterer and adulteress shall die the death.
See Bernard, de passione domin. cap. 3. Moreover Christ on the cross was
dug, his side with a John. 19.34.
spear, his Foderunt manus Psalm. 22.17.
hands and feet with nails, and those so big that (as Lib. 1. cap. 13. see
S. Ambros. orat. de mort. Theodo. in sine. and Baron. Romans 1. ^ol. 307.
Socrates reports in his ecclesiastical history) Constantine made thereof an
helmet and a bridle for his own use in war.

4. The Vine is bound unto the wood, and fastened unto the wall on which it
grows: even so Christ was led away Mat. 27.2.
bound unto Pontius Pilate, and nailed unto the wood of the cross, so fettered
and fastened with bonds (as that the Church says of him in the Cap. 1.12.
Canticles) my well beloved is as a bundle of myrrh unto me. Myrrh being
bitter and sharp, does insinuate the grieuousnes of his passion, and a bundle
the multitude of his sorrows. And Bernard. de passione dom. cap. 4.
so Christ is unto the Church a bundle of myrrh, when as she meditateth on
his death and passion; how he was bound, that she might be made free: how he
was beaten, that she might escape punishment: how he was broken, that she
might be healed with his stripes, Esaias 53.5.

5. The Vine being thus planted, pruned, cut, bound, dug, dunged, spreades
her branches far and wide. So Christ (as calling his followers from Mat. 8.11.
East and West, having the Psalm. 2.8.
heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his
possession) extends and Psalm. 80.11.
stretches out his branches unto the sea, and this boughs unto the river:
Christ is the Vine, and all Christians are his branches. Calvin. beza.
All of us are by nature dry, and fit for nothing but the fire: therefore that
we may be fruitful and live, we must first be grafted into Christ as into a
Vine by the fathers hand: without his grace we can do nothing, and thorough his
help able to do all things, Philip 4.13. now the divine union is (...) i^
se^i. B. Marci.
threefold. Essential and so God the father is all one with God the son, and
God the holy Ghost: personal, and so God the son being made flesh is united
to the human nature: spiritual, and so such as abide in Christ and are joined
in spirit to the Lord are one with Christ the Lord, 1. Cor. 6.17.

My father is an husbandman] The blasphemous Apud Ambros. de (...) lib. 4. cap.
7.
Arians object here that Christ and God as the vine and husbandman are of
diverse natures, and that Christ as the vine must of necessity be subject and
inferior to God which is an hunsbandman. Answer is made that a similitude
runs not on four feet, but that it stands upon one leg principally: now
the maine drift of this comparison is not to show what care this husbandman
has over the root of the vine, Theophylact. Euthyin.
but what he does unto the branches. Every branch that bears not fruit he
will take away, and every branch that bears fruit will he purge, etc. Christ
uttered this parable August. tract. 80. in soa^.
as our mediator and head of the Church, and he could not have bin the
Churches head, Maldonat. in loc.
except he had bin God and man. Christ then Athenasius. insy^bol.
as touching his manhood was inferior to the father, John. 14.28. My father is
greater then I: yet equal as touching his Godhead. Ioh. 10.13. I and my father
are one, coequal in might and mercy. So the text here, God the father as an
husbandman purges every branch that bears fruit, verse. 2. and God the son
likewise does the same, verse. 3. now are ye clean thorough the words which I
have spoken unto you. Ambros and Augustine. vbi supra.
So that Christ as God, is an husbandman so well as his father, he purges and
pruneth the boughs of the vine so well as he, Chrysostom. Theophylact. Euthym.
vna enim operatio patris and filij, Ioh. 5.19. Whatsoever the father does, the
same things does the son also.

Every branch that bears not fruit in me he takes away] Christ exhorting his
followers to continue steadfast in the faith, argues a paena and praemio, from
the punishment of such as abide not in him, and from the reward of such as
abide, the punishments of hypocrites and false Christians which abide not in
him are Seven Seven
1. They bear no fruit. 2. Bearing no fruit they be cut away from the Vine.
3. Being cut away from the Vine, they be cast out of the Vineyard. 4. Being
cast out of the Vineyard they wither. 5. Being withered men gather and faggot
them. 6. Being made fagots they be cast into the sire. 7. Being cast into the
fire they burn in that unquenchable flame, Mark 9.48.
where the worm dies not, and the fire never goes out.


First, they bear no fruit, for says our Savior, as the branch cannot bear
fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine: no more can ye except ye
abide in me, for without me can you do nothing. The Pelaegian heretics
affirmed August. tract. 81. in loan.
a Deo habemus quod homines sumus, a nobis ipsis autem quod iusti sumus, that
we are men, we receive from God: that we are good men, comes from our selves,
but truth it self here contradicit and dicit, a branch cannot bear fruit of
it self, etc. This one clause Vbi supra.
(says Augustine) corda instruit humilium, ora obstruit superborum, it
comforts a poor publicane, but it confounds a proud Pelagian. And that other
sentence, ( without me can ye do nothing,) confuteth also the Semipelagian, I
mean the Papist, auowing that a man has a power of free will in his own
nature which once being stirred and helped can and does of it own self
cooperate with grace. The word nothing makes very much against this opinion, as
Augustine notes upon the place. For Christ said not sine me parum potestus
facere, sed sine menihil: now that we may the better understand this
controversy, man is to be considered in a fourfold estate, to wit Instatu In
statu Confectionis, as he was created. In statu Infectionis, as he was
corrupted. In statu Refectionis, as he was renewed. In statu Perfectionis, as
he shall be glorified.


In the first estate we give to the will of man a liberty of nature, Adamus
enim August. de correp. and great. cap. ^1.
acceperat posse si veller, sed non habuit velle quod posset. In the third we
grant a liberty of grace, for if the son make you free, ye shall be free
indeed, John 8.36. The spirit of Christ which is free, Psalm. 51.12. gives
liberty to the captives, and opens the prison to them that are bound, Esaias
61.1. and delivers us from the power of darkness, Coloss. 1.13. In the fourth
estate we confess a liberty of glory. All the doubt between us and the
Papists, is of the second estate, how man corrupted as renewed, how he comes
unto regeneration after degeneration. And yet herein we consent that the will
of man in turning unto God and in doing good is not a Melanct. in loc.
stock or a stone, in Perkies resumed Cat. Tit. freewill, and Dr. Abbot.
ibidem.
all and every respect passive, for every man is willingly converted, and by
Gods grace at the very time of his conversion he wills his own conversion,
and so the will of man is in some sort a coworker with grace. For this end 2.
Cor. 6.1.
Paul exhorts us not to receive the grace of God in vain, but to work out
our salvation in fear and trembling, Philip. 2.12. To this purpose the saying
of Augustine is very remarkable, Ser. 15. de verbis Apostoli.
qui fecit te sine te, non iustificabit te sine te. Fecit nescientem,
iustificat volentem. He who made thee without thee, will not justify thee
without thee. What the^ is the maine difference between the Papists and us in
this question? it is in one word this, they write that our will is a coworker
with grace by the (...) of nature: we say that it works with grace by grace.
They teach that grace does enable the will of it self to do good works if it
please: but we further add that grace works in the will of man to please,
to do such offices as God requires at our hands. He does not hang his work
upon the suspended if, of our will, but he works in us to will, and Ezechiel.
36.27.
causes us to do the things that he commands us to do. We will in deed
(says Lib. de bano perseuerant. cap. 13.
Augustine) but God works in us to will: we work, but God works in us to
work: August. cont. deas epist. Pelagian. l.b. 4. cap 6.
we walk, but he causes us to walk: we keep his commandments, but he
works in us to keep his commandments. In the words of Paul, it is God that
works in you both the will, and the work, even of his good pleasure, Philip.
2.13.

If God only made thee a man, and thou thy self have made thy self a good
man, thy work of necessity must be greater then Gods work. August. de verbis
Apostoli ser. 15.
Melius est enim iustum esse, quam te hominem esse, our bare being is not so
good as our better being: wherefore to stop thy presumptuous mouth, and to
beat the lie down thy throat, Christ here says expressly, ye can bear no
fruit except ye abide in me, without me can ye do nothing. In natural and
humane actions it is true that your will is free, yet see that your will is
always subordinate to my will: Acts 17.28.
in whom ye live, and move, and haxe your being; but in spiritual things
appertaining to the kingdom of heaven: your selves are not sufficient as of
your selves to 2. Cor. 3.5.
think, much less to speak, least of all to do that which is good.

Qui vires in folijs venit a raditibus humor.
The juice which is in the branch comes originally from the root, and so qui
viret in folijs, etc. The graces eminent in the sons of God are from above,
proceeding from the father of mercies and fountain of all grace; qui a seipso
se fructum existimat far, in vite non est: quiin vite non est, in Christo non
est: qui in Christo non est, Christianus non est. August. tract. 81. in Euang.
Johan. Ser epist. Sun. 11. and 12. after Trinity.

The rest of the punishments here mentioned are very grievous, as to be cut
away from the Vi^e, to be cast out of the vineyard, to wither, etc. but the
last of all is the greatest of all, I mean the burning of fruitless branches
in hell fire which is unquenchable. This of all terribles in the Scriptures is
most terrible, whether we consider in it the pain of the loss, or the pain
of sense; the reprobate which abide not in Christ have pain of loss, for the
Vine says unto such branches at the last day, Mat. 25.40.
depart from me, from me that am your first beginning and last end, from me
that am your redeemer, from me that made my self man for your sakes, and
received these wounds for your remedy, from me that invited you with pardon,
and ye would not accept it. Wherefore depart for ever from my friendship, from
any protection, from my kingdom, from my paradise, from my sight. And because
whatsoever is separated from Christ, is also separated from those who go with
Christ; in saying, depart from me, he says likewise depart from mine, from the
quiers of my glorious Angels, from the sweet company of my blessed mother, and
from all my most happy Martyrs, Apostles, Prophets, Confessors, in a word from
all the holy Saints and host of heaven, into everlasting fire prepared for the
diuest and his Angels. For as in Dion. Carthos. de 4. ^word.^ 3. part. ^ ^art.
11.
sin there is an auersion from the creator, and a conversion unto the
creatures, according to that of the Jeremy 2.11.
Prophet, they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and have
diggedpits, even broken pits that hold no water, so i^ the punishment of
sinners (as Thom 114. (...).
divines observe) there is not only paena damiti, which is answerable to their
auersion from the creator, but also paena sensiu, which is answerable to their
conversion unto the creatures, and therefore such branches as bear no fruit
are not only cast out of the sight of the Vine, and the whole vineyard: but
also gathered together, and made the fagots and fuel of hell fire: the which
in many respects is exceeding dreadful, especially because the torments of
this Aetna never dying ever frying, are both universal and eternal. Hell
pain is universal, afflicting every power of the soul, every part of the
body. Concerning the soul, the imaginatiue faculty shall be tortured with
horrid imaginations, more terrible then those which a deep melancholy man
suffers in his dreams, or then those the cruel Egyptians saw, which (as the
Wisa 17.4.
Wiseman speaks) were fearful visions, and sorrowful sights, affrighting
visages of wild beasts, and hissing of Serpents, etc. Thy will, as having in
nothing it own will, is an hell of it self to it self. The memory shall be
continually troubled with a fixed recordation of things passed, that it once
possessed, and of the present which it now suffers, and of those which are to
come in eternity. So that it cannot think upon any thing, which in any sort
should administer comfort; for if it calls to mind the pleasures it had in the
world, it is for its greater torment; In add^t. ad. 3. part. sam. q^kest. 98
art. 7.
Materia tristitiae non delectationis causa, says Aquine. The understanding
shall be so darkened, as that it shall be full of errors and illusions, even
as a tumultuous sea, with innumerable waves of imaginations, more bitter then
gall, some going, other coming, all restless.

As for the body, the damned are to be Mat. 22.13.
bound hand and foot, crowded together in the prison of utter darkness, like
brickes in a fiery furnace, that they shall not be able to wrinch, having not
so much as a chinke where any wind may enter to refresh them in this Apoc.
19.20.
lake of fire burning with brimstone. Their sight is affrighted with ugly
devils and darkness, their hearing with odious and hideous outcries, their
smelling with noisome stinkes, and insupportable sweat reaking from the filthy
bodies under torture; their cast with a raging Luke 16.24.
thirst, and a ravening hunger, tasting such things as are more bitter then
Ier. 23.15.
gall or wormwood; the feeling afflicted in every part with intolerable
flames, in comparison whereof our earthly fire is no more then as if it were
but painted. The least of these torments named, and infinite more not named, is
more grievous then the greatest, either sickness or sorrow they suffered on
earth; and yet all these shall eternally continue, without either ease or end.
See Gospel 1. Sund. after Trinity. Lombard, sent. lib. 4. distalt. and
sententiarios ibidem. A quin in additionibus adtertiam suae summae partem
quaest. 97.98.99. Io. de combis compend. Theolog. lib. 7. cap. 21.22. Dion.
carthusian de quatuor nouissimis part. 3. The meditations of Luys de la puente
Jesuit, translated out of Spanish into English, by Ric. Gibbons, of the same
society, meditat. 15.16.

Every branch that bears fruit will he purge] We collect here, first that
our Purgatory is in this life, while we go from strength to strength, and
grow from fruit to fruit in the vineyard, that is, in the Church planted in
this world. 2. That the 10. Frith preface before his answer to Rastals
dialogue.
word and affliction are this our Purgatory. The word, verse. 3. Ye are clean
through the word which I have spoken unto you. Clean, not by the water in
Baptism, but by the word. For says Tract. 80. in dom.
Augustine, Detrahe verbu^ and quid est aquae nisi aqua, sed ascedit verbum
adelementum and fit sacramentum. Clear by the word, non quia dicitur, sed quia
creditur. The Pharifies and other hypocrites heard the word of Christ, but they
were not hereby purged, because they did not believe the word of Christ. Our
fruit then arises from faith; it is faith (as S. Act. 15.9.
Peter tells us expressly) that purifieth our hearts. And so In loc.
Rupertus expounds the words of Christ here, you are clean, because you
believe that which I have said unto you concerning my death and resurrection,
how I must die for your sins, and rise again for your justification, and go
away to provide a place for you. But because the flesh is so frail that we
cannot do that Romans 7.19.
good we would, but the evil we would not; Almighty God has appointed for us
another Tyndal. prolog. upon Genesis
Purgatory; to wit, affliction, and the Cross, the which is Gods rod where
with he Heb. 12.6.
scourges every son he receives, and purges every branch that bears
fruit, that it may bring forth more fruit. Aretius in loc.
The branch of the Vine that is cut until it bleed and weep, bears the
greater grapes, and so the good man is best under the cross; Romans 5.3.
tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope, etc. Paulin. epist. lib. 2. epist. 2.
tanta summi patris est pietas, vt etiam ira eius ex misericordiasit: Our
heavenly father is so good to us his children, that even his anger is out of
mercy, destroying the flesh to save the spirit, 1. Cor. 5.5.

3. We note from hence, that no man in this world is thoroughly perfect, even
the best of the Saints have need to be purged, that they may bring forth more
fruit. They be says Tract. 80. in loan.
Augustine, Mundi and mundandi, not so pure, but that they must 1 Thessalonians. 4.1.
increase more and more: Mundat it aque mundos, hoc est fructuosos vt tanto
sint fructuosiores quant to fuerint mundiores. See Epist. 2. Sund. in Lent.

The Epistle
JAMES 1.1. James the servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, etc.


THis Epistle consists of 3. parts; a Subscription, James the servant of God,
and of the Lord Jesus Christ. Inscription, to the twelve tribes that are
scattered abroad greeting. Prescription, My brethren, count it exceeding joy
when ye fall into diverse tentations.


Iames] Here two questions are moved ordinarily. The first concerning this
Epistles authority. The second concerning this Epistles author. As for the
first, I refer you to S. Hierom. Catalog. script. eccles. in vita Iacobi Iusti.
Sixth. senen. bibliothec. lib. 1. page 25. Bellarm. de verbo dei. lib. 1. cap.
18. Dr. Whitaker, respon. ad Campian. rat. 1. Tyndal Prologue upon S. James.
Doctor Hanmer observations upon Eusebius. Eccles. hist. in English. lib. 2. cap.
23. Rogers explanat. of the confession of England, art. 6. Aretius, Calvin,
Marlorat. argument. and prolegom. in epist. Jacob.

As for the second quare there were two blessed Apostles of this name, Mat. 10.
Mark. 3.
James the son of Zebedeus, and James the son of Alpheus. Now this Epistle
was not penned as herein the Authors the sap. in text.
most and best Divines accord) by James the son of Zebedeus, so he was
slain by cruel Herod, about the beginning of the preaching of the Gospel,
Act. 12. But by James the son of Alpheus, called else where James the Mark.
15.40.
lesser, and James the Gal. 1.19.
Lords brother: this James was the Sea Ba^^^. Tom. 1. ad. in. 63.
first Bishop of Jerusalem, of such upright carriage toward men, as that he
was surnamed E^seb (...). lib. 2. cap. 23. Hierom. in cius vita. Aquitius loc.
Iustus, and of such indesatigable devotion in his prayers unto God, that (as
Apud. Eusebius. vbis^^.
Hegesippus reports) his knees were like a Cammels knee, benumbed and made
hard by reason of his continual kneeling. And S. Hom. (...). Mat.
Chrysostom further adds, that his forehead also became brawnie, through his
daily prostrating himself upon the pauement in the Temple. The which I note,
to condemn the proud and irreuerent behavior of many, who coming into the
Temple to pray, neither cast down themselves as the Publican, not yet stand up
as the Pharisee; but they sit on their cushions (I fear in the feate of the
scornful) as if they were to bless God, and not God to bless them.

Servant of God] He that serves himself, serves a fool; he that serves
the Sea the (...) of Simon.
devil, serves his enemy; he that serves the world, serves his servant: the
perfect and only true freedom is to serve the Lord. Wherefore this style is
no way base, but exceeding honorable, desired even of the best, ambitiously.
Samuel was Gods servant, speak Lord says he, (...) 10. (...).
for thy servant hears thee. Job the greatest of all the men of the East was
Gods servant, ha^^ thus not considered my servant Job? said the Lord to Satan,
Job 1.8. David styled in holy Scripture for his excellency Mat. 1.6.
the King, boasted notwithstanding of this title. Behold O Lord, how that I am
thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thine handmaid, Psalm. 116.14.
All the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Apostles have gloried in this service.
For if it be reputed honorable to serve the King, it is assuredly greater
preserment to serve the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. It is more credit to
be a Psalm. 84.11.
doorekeeper in the house of God, then to command in the Courts of other
Princes. Now God (as earthly Kings) has some servants in ordinary, and other
extraordinary. All Christians are his sworn servants extraordinary, for they
vowed in holy Baptism to fight under Christ's banner, against the world, the
flesh, and the devil, and to continue his faithful soldiers and servants
until their lives end. The true profession of the true says is Christ's
liuerie, and love is the cognizance of his livery; for Galath. 5.6.
faith working by love, is the Mat. 22.12.
wedding garment with Christ's badge; by this (says Job. 13.35.
he) shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.

Princes and Prophets are the servants of God in ordinary, so near to God in
ordinary, so near to God in office, that they are called Gods. A Magistrate is
a singer (as it were) of Gods own hand; a Preacher is a 1. Cor. 4.1.
steward in Gods own Heb. 3.5.
house. So Saint James (as being an Apostle) was in this sense the servant of
Jesus Christ; and Aret. in loc.
therefore such are deceived greatly, who think that this author was not an
Apostle, because he calls not himself an Apostle; for first Jude being an
Apostle, does use the same subscription in this Epistle, Judas the servant of
Jesus Christ. 2. Servant in his acception is nothing else but an Apostle;
wherefore many Greek copies, and the Syriac, and the vulgar Latin make this
title to this Epistle, the general Epistle of S. James the Apostle. Here the^
observe that to be called a Minister of Jesus Christ, is not (as the Papists
object against our reformed Churches) any contemptible style, seeing Saint
James here does afford us a pattern, and S. Paul. 1. Cor. 4.1. a patent, sic
nos aestimat homo vt ministros Christi; so the Romish translation in Latin,
and the Rhemish in English, lei a man esteem us as the Ministers of Christ.

Of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ] These words are to be construed Aret.
and Mar(...).
copulatinely, James a servant of Jesus Christ, which is God and Lord, as Tit.
2.13. looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. For the (...)
mediator between God and man, is perfect God, and perfect man, and yet not
two, but one Christ; one not by confusion of substance, but by unity of person,
as Athanasius in his Creed.

To the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad] The Jews were led captive to
Babylon, and other countries, out of which it is apparent, that some never
returned into Jury: for Paul (as we read in the story of the (...).
Acts) found almost every where both in Europe, and in Asia, Synagogues of the
Jews. Now this dispersion of Gods own people for their ingratitude toward
him, is a manifest argument of his wrathful indignation against sin, and it
is written for our (...) 10.11.
instruction, upon whom the ends of the world are come; for if God spared not
his natural branches, his peculiar enclosed (...) 5.7.
plant; (...) 11.21.
take heed left he also spare not thee, which art but a wild Olive by nature.
Remember the words of Azariah unto King Asa, 2. (...). 15.2.
the Lord is with you, while ye are with him and if ye seek him, he will be
found of you, but if ye for sake him, he will for sake you. Yet God in his
wrath (...). 3.2.
remembers mercy; for among these scattered people some were gathered to the
Church, and truly converted unto Christ, unto whom our Apostle wrote this
excellent letter, Aq^^^. in loc.
Vt qui dispersicrant corpore, congregarentur mente. S. James, I say, sent not
this instruction unto Jews unconverted, Aretius.
for then he would have proved that Jesus was the son of Mary, the Messiah
of the world, promised to the fathers. If he had written unto the Jews in
general, he would (as S. Matthew did) have penned a book of the generation
of Jesus Christ the son of David, the son of Abraham, etc. But his greeting
is unto such Jews as were turned Christians, exhorting them to make
demonstration of their faith out of their works, leading a life answerable to
their profession; for the light of the Gospel appearing, Tit. 2.12.
teaches us that we should deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and that we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. To convert
Jews he wrote principally, but that which is said unto them, is said unto us,
and all; Occumen. Aretius.
in which respect this letter is entitled, the general or Catholic Epistle
of S James.

Greeting] This kind of salutation has occasioned Caietan. in loc.
some to doubt of this Epistles authority; Saint Peter and S. Paul, in their
inscriptions have grace and peace. Saint Jude, mercy, and peace and love be
multiplied unto you. But this (as they think) is profane, taken rather out of
Platoes Academie, (...) out of Christ's school. For Epist. ad (...).
Plato reports that in Greece the Physicians salutation is, (...), the
Philosophers (...), and the vulgars (...). Realm. de verb. dei. l. b. 1. cap.
18.
Answer is made that this form of saluting, although it were common among the
Heathens, is notwithstanding apostolical, and that a pattern hereof is found,
Act. 15.23. The Apostles and the Elders, and the brethren, unto the brethren of
the Gentiles in Antiochia, and in ^^ria, and in Cicilia, (...) greeting. 2.
Saint James being a Marlorat.
spiritual Physician wishes here perfect health of the Salutemin presenti,
gratiae: in saturo. gloriae. Aquin. in loc.
soul so well as the body. 3. (...) signifying to rejoice (considering he
wrote to people dispersed, and distressed under the Cross) is both as sit, and
as full as the salutation of peace; for there is no true joy in the spirit,
without peace of conscience, Romans 14.7. The kingdom of God is not meat nor
drink, but righteousness and peace, and ^oy in the holy Ghost, an (...) Romans
14.17.
upright life breeds in the justified peace of conscience, and peace of
conscience makes a joyful heart.

My brethren count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations^ We
read Acts 8. that there was a great persecution against the Church at
Jerusalem, and that all the converted Jews were scattered abroad through the
regions of Judea and of Samaria. Now for the comfort of these distressed
professors (as A^ain. in loc.
some conjecture) S. James wrote this instruction and because their condition
under the cross was unto flesh and blood exceeding grievous, he begins
(...).
ire ips^, with this exhortation Beza.
aptly. count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations. He that suffers
as a 1. Pet. 4.15.
murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer has hereby grief of heart,
but blessed is the man that endures temptation in Christ's cause. To cast our
selves into temptation affordes matter of sorrow, but if we for righteousness
sake by Gods appointment fall into sundry temptations our sorrow shall be
turned into joy, John 16.20. Here the Gospel and Epistle meet our Apostle (
count it for exceeding joy when ye fall into diverse temptations) is answerable
to Christ ( let not your heart be troubled) and both are fitly read on this
day, which is solemnized to the praise of God in comme notation of the joyous
Martyrdom of two blessed Apostles, Saint Philip, who for the constant
profession of the Christian faith (as (...)
Hyppositus reported) was under Domitian the cruel Emperor crucified with his
head downward, and S. (...)
James even for the same cause being Bishop of Jerusalem was cast down
headlong by the Scribes and Pharisees from the pinnacle of the temple, and
afterward stoned, and finally brained with a Fullers club.

This exhortation to constant cheerefulnes under the cross for the Gospel is
pressed here by diverse and sundry reasons (as A (...) Poseator.
expositions have well observed) all which in breife may be reduced either to
the fruit, or else to the root of this Christian virtue. The fruit in this
world, knowing this that the trying of your faith gendreth patience, and let
patience have her persit work, etc. There is a twofold temptation (as Epis.
146.
Augustine told Consentius) un a deceptionis, alter a probat. onis: a
temptation to deceive, which is from the devil and our own concupiscence,
verse 13.14. of this present Chapter. Again, there is a temptation to prove
and improve, the Sea Drusias. (...) in loc.
which is from God, and so suffering for the Gospel is termed here
^temptation, and a trial of our faith. The fruit in the world to come is
eternal happiness, verse. 12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for
when he is tried he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has
promised to them that love him. See Gospel appointed for this day.

As for the root, if any lack wisdom, Aquin. A^ctius. Calvin.
that is true judgment how to bear the cross, let him ask it of God: he is
a giving God, from him is every good and perfect gift, verse 17. Ergo, he
gives also this: he gives unto all indifferently without any respect of
person: exclude not thy self from an universal number, he liberally gives,
and vpbraideth not after he has given, he gives for the measure fully, for
the manner cheerfully. Wherefore come to him, and ask of him in says, and it
shall be given unto you. See Gospel Sun. 5. after Easter.

The Gospel
John 14.1. Jesus said to his disciples, let not your hearts be troubled, etc.


THe Prophet Psalm. 51.17.
David says, a troubled spirit is an acceptable sacrifice to God, and it
Psalm. 119.71.
was good for me that I was in trouble. How then is it true which is here said
by the son of David, let not your hearts be troubled? answer is made that
the passions of the mind as anger, fear, delight, and the like, are in their
own nature, (...). lib. 1. cap. 5.
neither simply commendable, nor yet absolutely vituperable, but either good
or bad as their objects and ends are good and bad. To be troubled for sin
is a 2. Cor. 7.10.
godly sorrow, causing repentance to salvation, not to be repented of, and
therefore grieve for offending God, and (...) 4.10.
grieuing his spirit, yea grieve much because thou can grieve no more. (...)
Jacob.
But an inordinate trouble for the things of this world, arising either out of
envy, sluggishnes, or impatience, is forbidden in this sentence, let not your
hearts be troubled. The disciples as yet ambitiously sought after worldly
honor, conceiving that Christ ere it were long would (...) 1.6.
restore the kingdom of Israel, and so prefer them in his kingdom on earth
(...). 10.21.
at his right hand and at his left, as yet they did expect a crown not a
cross. Wherefore Christ understanding that they were dismayed at his words, in
the former Chapter at the 43. verse ( little children yet a little while am I
with you, ye shall seek me, but whether I go can ye not follow me now) he
comes in this present unto that which is (...).
Euangeli^ caput and summa the chief part in the whole body of his Gospel,
namely, to (...) 6^.1.
bind up the broken hearted, and to comfort such as mourn in Sio^. Isaac the
sign of Christ is interpreted laughter, (...) cap. 5.
insinuating that Christ should be the consolation of Israel, and great joy to
all his people. Luke 2.10.25. scare not (as Mar^^, (...)
one notes) is the first word in the first annunciation of his (...) Jacob.
conception, and the first word in the first annunciation of his (...). 1.10.
birth, and the first word in the first annunciation of his (...) ^18.5.
resurrection, and almost the last words in his last exhortation a little
before his death, are, let not your hearts be troubled, and (...) 6.33.
be of good comfort, strengthening his followers, and sweetening his cross by
diverse forcible reasons, in our text by two more principally.

The 1. Is taken from the buckler of faith, ye believe in God believe also in
me. 2. From the hold of hope, in my fathers house are many mansions, etc.


Ye believe in God beeleue also in me^ Concerning the fourefold reading of
these words examine, Iansen. concord: cap. 134. Erasmus annot. and Maldonat.
com. in loc. I take them as I find them here, ye believe in God, etc. the
Saints in old time Heb. 11.33.
thorough faith have subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained the
promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped
the edge of the sword, of weak were made strong, waxed valiant in battle, and
turned to flight the armies of Aliants. In a word faith is a shield where with
ye may quench all the fiery darts of the devil, Ephesians. 6.16. If ye believe
them in God, and cast all your care on him, he that is 2 Cor. 1.3.
the father of mercies and God of all comfort, will assuredly so 1. Pet. 5.7.
care for you, that ire shall not any longer be troubled in your hearts, a
little faith even so small as a grain of mustard seed is able to remove
mountains of distrust out of your soul. faith is a buckler, and a buckler
guarde th especially the head and the heart, Diez. com. 1. in s^st. Philip. and
Jacob.
that is the understanding and the will, Ferus (...) lot.
vt non turbetur intellectus non formidet affectus. Here humane weakness does
object (as Philip at the 8. verse) Lord, show us the father and it suffices
us. It is true that we believe God, and believe in God also, but yet our hearts
are troubled thirsting after his sight and sensible knowledge, we would feign
see that we believe, so Moses in the 33. Chapter of Exodus, I beseech thee show
me thy glory, to whom answer was made by the Lord, thou cannot not see my face,
for there shall no man see my face and live: yet behold, there is a place by
me, and thou shall stand and upon the ro^ke, and while my glory passes by I
will put thee in a cleft of the rock, and will cover thee with mine band
whiles I pass by, then I will take away mine hand, and thou shall see my back
parts, but my face shall not be seen.

(...).
This rock, is Christ as Paul in another case, 1. Cor. 10.4. and the Church is
a d^ue in the holes of the rock, Ca^t. 2.14. Whosoever then is placed in
Christ's Church, and has faiths eye, may see God in his (...) 1. 19.
hinder parts as in the world he passes by, that is, in his works of
creation, and redemption, and preservation of his people though he may not read
Gods priora, yet he may know Gods po^teriora, beholding him in his wonders, in
his words, in his sacraments, in his son principally being (...). 3.
the brightness of his glory and express character of his person as Christ in
our text, he that has seen me, has seen also my father, I am in the
father, and the father in me. (...).
Hereby proving himself to be God. 1. For that we must only believe in the
Creator, and not in any creature. 2. (...).
Because God only knows the secret perturbation of the heart, and (...).
if ye believe that I am God, ye must also confess that I am a (...). 46.
present help in trouble, willing and able to relieve you, for if (...). 8.31.
God be with you who can stand against you. Why then are your hearts troubled,
as if he should have said; (...).
albeit I am to suffer death as man, yet I will on the third day raise my self
again from the dead as God: it is expe^hent for you that I dye for your
sins, and rise again for your justification, and so prepare a place for you
in my fathers house, that where I am there you may be also.

In m^ fathers house are many mansions^ Saint Paul having at large disputed of
the resurrection in his first Epistle to the Corinthians 15. Chapter, proving
that the dead shall rise again by manifest and manifold arguments taken out of
the books as well of nature as of Scripture; concludes in fire, therefore my
beloved brethren, (...): sumoutable, (...) always in the (...) of the Lord,
for as much as we know that your labor is not in vain. So Christ in the
Gospel unto his ^ollowers, (...). 16.33.
In the (...) and all the wicked of the world ^all Mat. 10.22.
hate you for my names sake, they shall scourge you in their Synagogues, and
persecute you from City to City, not affording to much as an Mat. 8.20.
hole Wherein to rest your head in peace, yet let not your hearts be troubled
as long as in my fathers house there be mansions, and I go to prepare a place
for you. The Church militant on earth is often called in holy 1. Tim. 3.15.
Heb. 3.2.
Scripture Gods house, (...).
wherein he has a great many mansions as Ephesians. 3.17.
dwelling in our hearts by faith, and we likewise have many places of
preferment some being Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors, and Teachers, Ephesians 4.11. It is true that God and we too dwell
here, but it is (says Job. 4.19.
Job) in houses of clay whose foundation is in the dust, or (as Paul speaks)
in earthly tabernacles set up to day and pulled down to morrow: Heb. 13.14.
non habemus hic manentem ciuitatem, in this world we have no continuing City.
For our kingdom which cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28. Our habitation which is
everlasting, Luke 16.9. Our inheritance that fades not away, 1. Pet. 1.4. Our
dwelling place mentioned in our text by Christ is not made with hands, but
eternal in the heavens, 2. Cor. 5.1. Our best houses on earth albeit never so
gorgeous, and never so glorious, having (if it be possible) walls of gold, and
windows of Sapphire, are not withstanding no better then Innes for strangers
and pilgrims, 1. Pet. 2.11. Our Vide Maldonat. in loc.
mansions and places of abode for ever are in Jerusalem above, which is
without either death or danger, Apocalyp. 21.4. Wherefore seeing we believe in
God, and Tit. 2.13.
look for the blessed hope and glorious appearing of our Savior Christ ( who
when he comes again shall reciue us unto himself, that where he is in his
fathers house, there we may be also) let us say with Psalm. 43.5.
David, ^^ by art thou so heavy O my soul? and why art thou so disquieted
within me? O put thy trust in God and he shall one day Psalm. 36.8.
satisfy thee with the plenteousnes of his house, Erasmus. Marlorat. Iansen.
for there is not only room for Christ in Gods house, but also place for all
his followers: the mansions of heaven are many the least of all his soldiers,
if they 1. Tim. 47.
fight a good fight, and continue 1. Apoc. 2.10.
faithful unto death, is rewarded with an 1. Pet. 5.4.
incorruptible crown of glory, having for his inheritance, no less then a
whole kingdom. Again, these mansions are many, Augustine, Aresius, ^Maldonat.
because the Saints in heaven have diverse degrees of glory. So Paul, 1. Cor.
15.41. There is another glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon, and
another glory of the Stars, for one Star differs from another in glory:
See Luther, Anselme. Lombard. in loc. Pauli.
so likewise in the resurrection of the dead A Paludensis.
great vessel and a little, dipped in the same well, hold notwithstanding
diverse measures, according to their capacity: so in Gods house, every chosen
vessel of honor is filled up to the brim with the water of life, but the
better has undoubtedly the bigger mansion, he that held more charity here,
shall have more clarity hereafter. Yet (as Au gustine notes upon our text) Non
erit aliqua inuidra imparis claritatis, quoniem regnab it in omnibus unit as
charitatis.

I go to prepare a place for you] It is said, Matthew. 25. 34. That the mansions
in Gods house were prepared before the foundation of the world; how then is it
true that Christ at this time goes to prepare a place? Lather. Ra^ert.
Answer is made, that the mansions indeed are prepared from all eternity, but
the men who shall inhabit them, as yet were unprepared. It was expedient
therefore that the redeemer of the world should die for their sins, and rise
again for their justification, and ascend into heaven to take possession of
this kingdom, and to set open the doors of these prepared mansions unto his
followers, as also to send unto them a conforter, and a conductor, even the
spirit of truth, who might lead them in the right way to this place. So Saint
(...). 68.
Augustine acurely, Parat quodammando mansiones, mansionibus parands mansores
He prepares a place, by making men sit for the place. See (...) in loc.
For election is in Christ, and through Christ, and so consequently, none come
to the Father but by the Son, we pass by the kingdom of grace, to the
kingdom of glory, for without Heb. 12.14.
holiness it is impossible to see God. Touching other readings, I refer you
to lansen. concord. cap. 134. and Erasmus annot. in loc.

Lord we know not whether thou goest] S. Thomas and S. Philip were so good
proficients in Christ's school, that their master in the former chapter at the
10. verse, said of them and of the res^ of their fellows (excepting Judas the
traitor) ye are clean; and Saint Job. 6.68.
Peter as the Bullinger in loc. cital.
mouth of the company professed openly, to whom shall we go, thou have the
words of eternal life, and we believe and know that thou art the Christ, the
son of the living God: And yet their faith in the hour of tentation (as you
see) was so weak, that Saint Thomas said, Lord we know not whither thou go.
And Saint Philip, Lord show us thy Father, and it suffices us. Now these
things are written for our Luther. post in loc.
comfort; for if these great pillars of the Church had such a shake, let us not
despair, though happily sometime many mountains of distrust arise in our
troubled hearts. Assure thy self thou have a good measure of faith, if thou
feel want of faith. Taffin marks of Gods children.
As a woman that seeleth the moving of the child in her body, though very
weak, assures her self that she has conceived and goes with child: so if
we have these good affections, and unfeigned desires of faith in our soul; if
hungring and thirsting after righteousness we say with the man in the Mark.
9.24.
Gospel, I believe, Lord help mine unbelief: let us not in any case doubt,
but that we have the holy spirit (who is the giver of these godly motions)
dwelling in us, and so consequently that we have true faith. It is said,
Psalm. 10.19. that the Lord hears the desire of the poor, yea that he
fulfilleth the desires of all such as fear him, Psalm. 145.19. It is
sufficient then (in the midst of any grievous tentation) if thou truly desire
to repent and believe. For God ( 2. Cor. 8.12.
accepting the will for the deed) (...) epist. is careless.
takes a heart desirous to repent and believe, for a penitent and a believing
heart indeed. It is recorded in the 20. chapter of S. John's Gospel, that Mary
Magdalene seeking Christ at his sepulcher, found before the felt him. He talked
with her, and stood high her, and comforted her; and yet the text says at the
14 verse she knew not that it was Jesus. In like fort the spirit of Christ is
sometime present with us, and within us, Romans 8.26.
helping our infirmities, albeit we have little sight or sense thereof; he is a
secret friend, and does us often most good when we least perceive it. Saint
Thomas here said, we know not the way nor whither thou go, and yet truth it
self anowed the contrary, whither I go ye know, and the way ye know. They
knew the way, but they did not know that they knew, says Tra^t. 69. in lo^n.
Augustine, Sciebant (...), sed se scire nesciebant. See the long of S. Simeon,
and the grace of our Lord, etc. in the Liturgy,

I am the way, the truth, and the life] That is (as Cor. in loc. (...) calui^
and Mul^rat.
Ferus) Exorduins salutis, ergo via: medium salutis, ergo veritas: finis salut
is ergo v^a. The beginning of heavenly happiness, and therefore the way: the
mean, and therefore the truth: the end, and therefore the life. Ferat vbi s. p.
(...) incipientium, veritas ^ oficientium, vita perfectoruus Or as In loc.
(...). and The (...).
Euthymius, if I am the way, then I am able to bring you to the man ie^s in my
fathers house: if the truth. I he not in s^ying, I go to prepare a place for
your if the life, then neither Romans 3.38.
Angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor death it self, shall separate you from me; but I will
receive you to my self that where I am, there ye may be also. Or as (...).
Leo the great. The conuersations sancte, veritas doctrine, divine, vita
beati^udinis sempiterne. The which is expressed by S. Ser. 2. (...) dom.
Bernard, in these words elegantly, Via in example, verita promise, vita in
premio: The (...), in my works, and the truth in my words, and the life in my
rewards, (...).
Via ducens, veritas listens, vita pascens. Bernard. tarct. de gradibus
bamilit. in prim.
With such as wa^der in a bie way, I am the high way: to such as are doubting
in the way, I am the truth: unto such as are wearied unto. heir heavy burden
in their courses, I am the life. Or as Cyril upon the place, for as much as we
shall ascend to the mansions in Gods house by faith, hope, charity, (of all
which only Christ is the donor) he may be termed the way, for giving us an
Job. 13.15.34.
example yt we should love one another, as he has loved us: yt truth, in
delivering such infallible rules of faith: and the life, by co^forting us with
an assured hope that we shall one day reign with him in his fathers house for
evermore. Thus Christ is Vide Iansen. concord. cap. 134 and stapleiud de vita
Thomae. Apost. page 5.6.
via, in qua per charitatem ambulare: veritas, cui per sidem adhaerere: vita,
ad qua^ per spe^ attolli de bemus: Tract. 69. ^ John.
or as Aug. Christ is the truth, and the way, qua itur; and the life, quo itur.
And in De doct. Christ. lib. 1. cap 34.
another place, Permi, v: nitur ad me, prouenitur in me permanetur in me.

Maldonat. in loc.
Other taking this phrase for an hebraisme, construe it thus, I am the true way
leading to life which is everlasting. Or, I am the way to truth and life,
making truth and life but Epitheta to way. Or I am the way, and the true light
going before you in the way to life, as he does Aretius. Cal^in.
expound himself in the words immediately following, No man comes to the
father but by me, called Job. 1.4.5.
else where the light, as well as here the life; which occasioned Ser. 2. de
ascens. dom.
Bernard to say, Nos populus ^uas, and oues pascus tue sequamur te, per te, ad
te. I will end this observation with a meditation of S. Lib. de bono mort. 5.
cap. 12.
Ambrose, Ingrediamur banc viam, reneamus veritatem, vitam sequamur. Via est
que perducit, veritas est que confirmat, vita qua per se redditur. Suscipe nos
domine quasi via, confirma quasi veritas, vinifica quasi vita, nam in te sumus,
vinimus mouemur; mouemur quasi in via, sumiu quasi in veritate, viuimus quasi
in vita eterna.

This one sentence does afford many comforts unto troubled hearts; if Christ
be the way to life, there is Act. 4.12.
none other name whereby we must be saved, Bernard. ser. 2. in ascens. dom.
Aliter qui vadit, cadit. If the truth, all other religions opposite to the
Christian faith are ^ither ignorant fantasies, or else arrogant heresies. It
the life, let us nor despair in death, ^ur Job 19 25.
redeemer hueth, he which is the John 11.25.
resurrection and the life, shall at the last day raise our vile body, making
it like Philip. 3.21.
his glorious body, receiving us to himself, that where he ^ in his fathers
house, there we may be also.

The Epistle
Acts. 1.1. In the former treatise (O Theophilus) we have spoken of all that
Jesus began to ^ive and teach.


IN this History of S. Lu^e, two points are more principally remarkable,
namely, Ardens. Cal^m. Iustus, Fo^as in loc.
the Context, or connection of this treatise with his Gospel, verse. 1.2. Text,
or narration it self throughout the rest of the whole book, divided into two
Aretius.
portions, 1. General, as setting down the acts of all the blessed Apostles,
in the twelve former chapters. 2. Particular, as containing more specially the
acts of S. Paul in the sixteen latter chapters.



In the former treatise] Saint Luke having already penned a tract of all that
Jesus did and taught: He comes in this present history to show what his
Apostles did and taught, Dr. Fulke. argument, in act.
declaring at large that their doings and doctrine were conformable to the
works and words of their master. These two treatises howsoever dedicated unto
one man, are notwithstanding parted into two volumes, Vt Chrysest apud Lorin.
r^fat. in act.
distinctio perspicuitatem afferret, breuit as taedium eximeret, varietas
voluptate afficeret. They be parted indeed, yet so nearly linked together,
that the first words of our text are nothing else but a Ardens. Beza.
transition, or (as it were) a bridge between both. In this context or
preamble, three persons are to be considered especially: By whom the former
treatise was written. To whom the former treatise was written. Of whom the
former treatise was written.


The party writing the Gospel of all that Jesus did and taught was Luke, by
birth (as Hist. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Eusebius, and Catalog. script. in vita Luc. Idem Theopby. lact. and Euthym.
pro^m. euang. Luc.
Hierome report) of Antiochia: by profession (as Paul writes, Coloss. 4.14.) a
Physician, Luke the beloved Physician greets you: by calling (as Epiphanius
^eres. 51.
some think) one of those seventy Disciples our blessed Savior appointed,
Luke 10.1. the which is gathered by Cap. 1. praesat. in Job.
Gregory the great, and Theophylact. in Luc. 24. See Gosp. Easter Monday.
other out of the 24. chapter of S. Luke, verse. 13. but Lib. 3. cap. 11.
Irenaeus, Lib 3. contra Marcian.
Tertullian, and the most Eusebius. Hierom. vbi sup. Beda Nice^horus, and al^.
ancient Doctors affirm, that he was not Christ's immediate Disciple, but
only, sectator and Discipulus Apostolorum: a follower and a Disciple of his
Apostles. And this Saint Luke testifies of himself in the first chapter of
his Gospel, at the second verse, sicut tradiderunt nobis, etc. as they have
delivered them unto us, which from the beginning saw them themselves.
Insinuating that he wrote his Gospel according to that which he heard of
other; but this tract of the acts of the Apostles, according to that which he
had seen himself.

This man is made by Gods appointment an Evangelist before Peter and James, who
were counted to be Galath. 2.9.
pillars of the Church, and seemed to be great, nay ten Apostles being passed
by, this poor Physician a companion of persecuted Paul, and at the best but a
Disciple, was preferred to set down the Gospels history, for so he says, I
have made the former treatise of all that Jesus began to do and teach. Here
then observe that God is tied to no man, he calls whomsoever he will unto
whatsoever office pleases him: he made seely fishermen, fishers of men: and
of Galat. 1.22.
Paul who was sometime a ravenous wolf, first a mild sheep, and then a
diligent shepherd: of Amos 1.1.
Amos an heardman, a Prophet: of Peter a water man, a chief Apostle: of Luke
the physi^ian, a great Evangelist. And therefore let us not ascribe to much
unto secondarie causes, but rather attribute all to God, who does often
greatest acts by weakest agents. And let us be so much the more ready to
believe this, because Luke wrote this, I have made etc. He was not principal
author, but isntrumental actor in composing this Treatise: for the Gospel is
Gods-pel, or the ghosts-spell, even the word of the spirit, as Saint 2. Epist.
1.21.
Peter teaches us holy men of God in old time spoke not according to the will
of men, but as they were moved by the holy Ghost, Gregor. cap. 1. praefa^. in
Job.
ipse haec scripsit, quihaec scribenda dictauit.

The party to whom our Evangelist inscribed his Gospel is Theophilus, and here
the Epishan. hares. 51.
Doctors doubt whether this name be common or proper. Cardinal Annal. tom. 1.
ad an. 58.
Baronius has undergone some pains in discussing this point, but (like
himself leaves it as he found it) uncertain. If we take it for a common
appellatiue, then understand that the Gospel is written unto such as are
Theopbils, that is lovers of God. The word is a peerless Mat 13.46.
pearl, and may not be cast unto Mat. 7.6.
swine who despise it, but opened unto the lovers of God which are ready to
sell all that they have to buy it: every true Christian is a Theophilus, and
every Theophilus has a Gospel dedicated to him, as Saint Explanat. (...).
Euing. Luc.
Ambrose sweetly, Si Deum diligis, ad te scriptum est: si adte scriptum est,
suscipe munus Euangelistae, pignus amici, in penetralibus animi diligenter
asserna. Seeing this inestimable Jewel is sent unto thee, 1. m ^.10.
keep that which is committed to thy care, lay it up in the treasure house of
your heart, Mat. 6.20.
where neither the moath and canker corrupt, and where thieves neither dig
thorough nor steal. Ambros. vbi sup.
Consumit tinea, si quod been legeris, male credas. Arrius is a moath and
Photinus a moath, every heretic is a moath, as it were fretting the garment
of our blessed Savior. But two reasons induce me to think that Theophilus is
a proper name. 1. Saint Luke says, It seemed good to me, to write unto thee
from point to point, that thou might acknowledge the certainty of those
things where of thou halt been instructed. By which he does Maldonat. in Luc. ^.
insinuate, that he wrote to some one particular person whom he had heretofore
catechized by Theophylast. in Luc. ^.
word of mouth. 2. The title given unto Theophilus, Luke 1.3: makes
Interpretors conceive that he was a certain man of eminent quality: Lyranus
and Nicephorus lib. 3. cap. 25.
some therefore say that he was a Bishop of Antiochia* but Theophylact.
argument. in Luc. Oecumen. in Acts 1. Baronius vb^ sup. sol. 534.
other that he was some chief governor in his common wealth, because the word
(...), used by Saint Luke (which we traslate most excellent, or most noble) is
the same which is ascribed elsewhere to men of great command: So Paul to
Festus, Acts 26.25. I am not mad O noble Festus, (...) So Tertullus an Orator
and a great master of words unto Felix, Acts ^43. We acknowledge it wholly and
in all places, (...), most noble Felix) with ^all thanks. So Claudius in his
subscription to the same Felix, Acts 23.26. Claudius Lysias (...), to the most
noble governor Felix greeting: and the title optimus of all other, was most
acceptable to Traian the great Emperor as Xiphilinus out of Dio reports in his
life.

Hence then observe. 1. That rich men and great men are not excluded from Gods
kingdom, S. 1. Cor. 1.26.
Paul says in deed not many mighty, not many noble are called; yet some
mighty, some noble, as the noble Mark 15.42.
Joseph of Arimathea, the noble Chamberlain and Treasurour of Acts 8.27.
Candaces Queen of Ethiopia, the noble men of Acts 17.11.
Berea, and here noble Theophilus of Antiochia.

2. Note by this example, that Christians ought to speak and write
courteously, giving titles of due respect unto men of worth and worship, fear,
to whom fear: honor, to whom honor belongs, Romans 13.7.

3. Learn from hence, that godly men ought to be religiously politic, so
wise (says our Mat. 10.16.
Savior) as serpents in enlarging Gods kingdom. It is likely Saint L^ke
dedicated this present and that former history to noble Theophilus* not so much
out of any private consideration, as for the public good of the whole Church:
for if a great man in authority receive the word, other instantly will embrace
the same. This undoubtedly was our Evangelists policy, and till it be our
practice the walls of Jericho will never be thoroughly pulled down, for so
long as the Chaplains are of the closer, flattering and fostering Nobles in
their sin: no marvel if the 1. John 5.19.
whole world lies in wickedness, (...).
Citharaedo principe, minus est nobilis, when princes are fiddlers, the people
turn dancers.

The third person is of whom, and that is Jesus: in the former treatise we have
spoken of all that Jesus began to do and teach, etc. Of all; how then is it
true which is delivered by Saint John in the conclusion of his Gospel? there
are many other things which Jesus did, the which if they should be written
every one, I suppose the world could not contain the books that should be
written. Again, Saint Luke himself after he had reported the birth of Christ
and the purtenances thereof, adds no more of him until he was twelve year
old disputing with the Doctors in the temple, and then he relates not of any
thing what he did for the space of eighteen year, from twelve year to
thirty. By which it does appear that all which Jesus did and taught neither
is, nor can be written. Answer is made by Chrysostom and Erasmus. Calvin.
Aretius in loc.
other, that Saint Luke said not. I have written all, but of all unsinuating
that he wrote all that Jesus did and taught as necessary to the work of our
redemption. He did not i^ his former treatise mention every thing Jesus did and
said, but only so much, or the chief heads of so much as was expedient to be
said and done for the full accomplishment of our salvation, all is to be
referred Ardens in loc.
ad genera singulorum, and not ad singula generum. Marlo^atia loc.
Here then is a pregnant text against the Papists, Ecllar. de verb. de^ lib. 4.
cap. 3. Melchior canu^ loc co^ l^b. 3. cap. 3. (...) de siad (...). 2.
holding that beside the word written there be certain traditions unwritten,
which ought to be believed as necessary to salvation. See Gospel 1. Sun. in
Lent.

It is not said of all that Jesus did, but of all that Jesus began to do and
teach: Caictan. in loc.
by which our Evangelist intimates that his Gospel is a story not of such acts
as Christ did in the beginning as God, but of that only which he did after he
was in the sulnes of time made man, and dwelt among us, and became our Jesus.
And this history Saint Luke Arctius.
diuides into the doings and doctrines of Christ, and by doings he does
understand not his morals only, but his miracles also, yea whatsoever Jesus
either did or suffered for us men and our salvation, recording his death as
well as his life, his passions as well as his actions, and indeed they must go
together, because Christ's righteousness consists in both, in doing and in
suffering, for in suffering he obeyed, and in obeying he suffered, and the very
shedding of his blood (to which our redemption is ascribed more particularly)
must not only be considered as it is passive, that is a suffering: but also as
it is active, that is an obedience, in which he showed his e^^eeding love both
to God and us in fulfilling the law for us. In this sense then all the
sufferings of Christ are comprehended under the word doing, his resurrection
also from the dead, and whatsoever else he wrought for our sake.

Th^s was Christ's honor that he was a Luke 24.19.
Prophet, mighty indeed and in word before God and all the people. First, he
began to do, then to teach, saying to his followers, I have given an Io^.
13.15.
example to you, Mat. 11.29.
learn of me. Aretius. Cal^m.
Every Doctor in like sort, must adorn the soundnes of his lea^ning with
holiness of life. Lorin. ^ap. 1. praesat. in act.
The present inscription of this book does admonish us of action, that a good
Apostles duty consi^^s in doi^g, as much as in teaching. I will here confess
ingeniously with (...) epist. (...).
Ardens, In hoc mea, and mei simili^m confunditur prisumptio, qui multa vobis
praedico, quae tamen non facio. Sed vtinam (fratres) per^e^ras orationes, ipsa
confusio generet in me pudnem, pudor correctionem, correctio emendationem, vt
quod prius non feci, post quam praedicanerim facer^ incip^am.

In the text following, two points are chiefly considerable, namely Christ's
holy conversation with his Apostles after his resurrection for the space of 40.
days, verse, 3.4.5.6.7.8. glorious ascen^ion ensuing that his conversation,
verse 9.10.11.


I have spoken of the former often elsewhere, the latter is only proper to this
our present feast, in which observe three circumstances especially. The place
of Christ's ascension. time of Christ's ascension. manner of Christ's ascension.


The place from whence Christ ascended (as we may collect out of this Chapter
at the 12. verse) was the me^nt of Olives near Luke 24.50.
Bethanie, containing a Sabbath days to ^o^r^ry from Jerusalem. He did ascend
from a mount; an open, high, eminent place, (...).
that he might as sure the certain truth of his ascension. If he should have
withdrawn himself in secret, happily the disciples would have doubted of his
ascension, as they did a while of his resurrection: but now beholding him
openly, publicly mounting from a mount they could not but affirm it
themselves, and confirm it unto other.

2. Christ ascended from a mount, rather then from a valley, from an high place
rather then from a low: for that it was one step unto his iournies end, (...).
L^rin.
hereby teaching us not to look for extraordinary miracles, so long as
ordinary means will serve: he went so far to heaven as he could on earth,
and then being on a mount, and so not able by natural help to go higher, a
cloud received him out of their sight.

3. It may be Christ ascended from a mount, for that he desired to stay so
long, and to spend so many hours as he conveniently could in instructing his
followers before he departed. Hereby demonstrating his exceeding great love to
the disciples in particular, as also to the whole Church in general, as you
shall hear ^urther in the discussing of the circumstances of time when Christ
ascended.

The mount from whence he did ascend was the mount of Olives, and it was the
Luke 24.39.
same place from whence he went to be crucified. One place served to be a
passage both to his cross and to his crown, Perkins expos. Creed. art. ascen.
signifying hereby that the way to heaven is by the gates of hell, as Paul and
Barnabas preach, Acts 14.22. thorough many tribulations we must enter into the
kingdom of God. A wicked man in prosperity walks as in the day, the Sun is
before, but the shadow behind him: a good man on the contrary walks as in the
night, his shadow goes before, but great light and joy comes afterward. Dives
and Lazarus exemplify this in the 16. of Saint Luke, Dives in his life was
furnished with rich apparel, and filled every day with delicate fare, there
was his Sunshine: but he died and was buried, and was exceedingly tormented
in hell, there was his shadow, nay that which is called in the Mat. 8.12. and
22.13.
Scriptures utter darkness. Lazarus on the contrary was an obscure base
creature, full of sorrows in his soul, and sores in his body, there was his
shadow: but when he died he was conveyed by glorious Angels into the bosom of
blessed Abraham, there was his light and glory. It is an hard and almost
impossible thing (says Consolat. ad lulian. tom. 1. sol. 208.
Hierome) that any should pass from great pleasures in this world to the
greatest pleasures in the next, vt quis hic ventrem, and ibi mentem impleat, vt
de delicys transeat ad delicias. And as the same Epist. ^^ He^ol de vita
Eremetica.
father told Heliodore, Delicatus es si and his vis gaudere cum seculo, and
postea regnare cum Christo. Here then is comfort for the disconsolate, many
through lingering diseases as the dead palsy, the gout, and the like, l^e
bedrid, and as it were buried long before their death, insomuch as their beds
which heretofore were places of rest and ease to them, are now couches of
tears and misery. Yet these men hence have great comfort if they make good use
of Gods visitation, for their bed in their sickness on which they suffer so
much heaviness, shall on their dying day be to them a Bethanie, from which
they shall ascend to the kingdom of eternal happiness.

Or Paluden. ser. de ascen. (...) See Ferus ser. 3. in (...).
Bethanie signifies the house of obedience, wherefore seeing Christ was obedient
unto God his father in all things unto the death, even the death of the Cross;
therefore God has exalted him highly, Phil. 2.8. Through disobedience we were
cast our of Paradise, and through obedience we shall enter in again, (...)
pilat. tbi sap.
sola obedientis accepit palmam, and inobedienti^ p^nam.

I pass from the circumstances of place, to the circumstances of time. When is
had spoken these things, etc. that is as you may read, verse. 3. all those
things which appertain to the kingdom of God. After he had (...) 24.50.
blessed them, and (as it is the Gospel allotted for this day) given them a
large commission to preach, adorned with many singular privileges and
promises, assuring them and their posterity, that he would be present in
spirit with them alwaie Mat. 28.10.
till the end of the world; when he had spo^en all these things, he was taken
up on high, etc. This shows evidently, that he is a most indu^trious and
vigilant Pastor of his Church, affecting and effecting also the good thereof.
As the Es^y 9.6.
government is on his shoulder, so was he more faithful in Gods house then
Moses was, Heb. 3.5.6. He did not ascend and (as it were break up school)
till he had instructed his Disciples in all points appertaining to their
calling and his kingdom. Now look what care Christ at his ascension had over
his Church, the same must every Master have over his household, and every
Minister over his cure, when it shall please God to take them out of this
world. A Prophet is sent to King Esaias 38.1.
Hezechia to bid him put his house in order for he must die: signifying hereby
that it is the duty of a good Master of a family to have care not only for
the government of his house whilst he is alive but also that it may be well
ordered when he is dead. The same care must in like sort be practiced of
Ministers, according to the pattern of S. Act. 20.27.
Paul, I have kept nothing back, but have showed all the council of God unto
you; take heed therefore, etc. for I know this, that after my departing shall
grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. So likewise S. 2.
Pet 1.14.
Peter, I know that the time is at hand that I must lay down this my
tabernacle, I will endeavor therefore always that ye may be able to have
remembrance of these things after my departure. If it be part of thy fidelity
that Gods people, committed unto thy particular charge, may be well instructed
after thy death? O how careful ought thou to be for their good in thy life?
Rapite (says In Psalm. 33. con. 2.
Augustine) quos potestis hortando, portando, rogando, disputando, etc. that
is, in the words of 1. Tim. 4.2.
Paul, Preach the word, be instant in season and out of season, improve,
rebuke, ex^ort with all long suffering and doctrine.

The second circumstance of time is, while his Apostles beheld, etc. If any
demand why he would not have the whole nation of the Jews see him ascend, that
so they might assuredly know that he was risen again from the dead, and so
believe in him. Perkins exposit. creed. art. ascen.
Answer is made that it is Gods good pleasure that the mysteries of holy
belief whereof Christ's ascension is one, should rather be learned by Romans
10.17.
hearing then by seeing, according to that of Stromat. 5.
Clemens Alexandrinus, ^aith is the souls ear. Christ's own Disciples, indeed
were taught his ascension by sight, that they might the better teach other who
did not see, they were witnesses of these things chosen before of God for the
same purpose, Act. 10.39. 41. Whereas therefore 1. C^^ 12.2.
Paul had no witness of his being taken up into the third heaven: and 2. King.
2.11.
Eliah one spectator only who saw him as he went up in a chariot of fieri^
horses and a whirle wind into heaven; Christ had many beholders of his
ascension, he was taken up on high, uidentibus illis, in the sight of all his
Apostles assembled together. He did ascend, paulatim (as Ser. 178. l^ temp.
Augustine speaks) he was neither suddenly snatched away, nor yet secretly
stolen away: but while they beheld he was taken up on high, as it follows in
the manner of his ascending to be considered, A cloud received him out of their
sight.

Now whereas he caused a cloud to come between himself and their sight, it
Cal^in. in loc.
signified unto them that hereafter they must be content with that which they
had seen, and not curiously to seek to know further what became of him. And
the same thing is taught us also, we must content our selves with that
Almighty God has in his holy word revealed, and enquire no further in things
appertaining to God. His word is a sufficient lantern to our feet, and a guide
to, our paths; a perfect gloss, yea I^^, 1.23.
glass of his known will, in which every true believer may see so much as he
need to search in this life. For the like end in giving the Law on mount Sinai
God appeared in a E^o^. 19 9.
thick cloud; and when he did manifest his glory in Salomons Temple, a dark
cloud 1. ^ing. 8.10.
filled the same.

Happily some will object how Christ elsewhere promised he would never leave
his Church, I am always with you till the end of the world, Matthew. 28.10.
Answer is made, that these words are to be construed of the presence of his
Godhead or spirit, not of the presence of his manhood: and therefore two
glorious Angels at the 11. verse chide the Disciples hanging on his bodily
presence, Why stand ye gazing into heaven? It is true that Christ is to be
found in heaven, Marlorat. in Matthew. 28.20.
yet not with the gazing eyes of flesh, but only with the spiritual eyes of
faith. It may be further alleged if the Godhead be present on earth, then the
manhood must of necessity be present there, because both are united together.
Our See Perkins vbi sup. and 11. Bilson against the Jesuits, sol. 786.787. etc.
Divines answer this argument yt follows not, Christ's manhood subsists in
that person which is every where, ergo, his manhood is every where. The reason
is plain, says Contra gentes lib. 4. cap. 49.
Aquine, because the son of God does not only subsist in his divine nature,
but also by his divine nature: whereas he does not subsist at all by the
manhood, but in the manhood only; for the word was in the beginning, when the
manhood was not; God of the sub^tance of his Father, begotten before the
worlds, man of the substance of his mother borne in the world, as Athanasius in
his Creed. And therefore Christ always was, is, and ever will be with us in his
spirit, though absent in his body; for a cloud on this day took him upon high
out of our sight, Act. 3.21.
whom the heavens must contain till the time that all things be restored,
which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world
began. I conclude this argument in S. In Psalm 46.
Augustines gloss, Videte ascendentem, credit in absentem, sperate venientem,
sed tamen per misericordiam occultam etiam sentite praesentem.

The Gospel
MARK. 16.14. Jesus appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, etc.


Confess. Heluel. post cap. 24.
ALbeit religion be not tied unto time, yet can it not be planted or exercised,
without a due dividing and allotting out of time for it. Every Church therefore
chooses unto it self a certain time for public prayers, and for the
preaching of the Gospel, and for the celebration of the Sacraments. And for as
much as it is kindly to consider every great blessing of God in the day wherein
it was wrought: it is well ordered by the true Churches, as well Vide August.
epist. 118 cap. 1. and lib co^t. Adi^a it cap. 16
ancient, as modern, to solemnize the memorial of Christ's nativity,
circumcision, passion, resurrection, assension, and sending of the holy Ghost
on certain set holy days every year, ne volumine temporum ingrata subrepat
obliuio, says Deci^it. ^ci. lib. 10. cap. 4.
Augustine, lest happily the marvelous works of our gracious Lord, should be
forgotten in a while, which ought to be had in a perpetual Psalm. 111.4.
remembrance.

Now Ch^ists assension is the consummation of all that which he did, and
taught, whilst he dwelt among us, aptly termed by Ser.^ in (...) dom.
Bernard, F^lix clausula totius lienerar^ sily Dei, the very ^aulin ser. 2. in
ascens. dom.
Sabbath of all his labor in the working of our redemption. He labored six
days, and then he rested on the seventh. His nativity was the first; his
circumcision was the second; his presentation in the Temple the third; his
baptism the fourth; his passion the fifth; his resurrection the sixth; and
then followed his ascension, in which he was received into heaven, and now
sits at the right hand of God, as having finished the whole work for which
he came into the world. David says of the natural Sun, it rejoices as a
Grant to run his course, Psalm. 19 6.
it goes forth from the utter most parts of the heaven, and runs about unto
the end of it again, and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof. The
which (as Lib. 2. contra. lit. (...). c^^. ^2.
Augustine and (...) de (...) 1. de a (...)
other have noted) may be well applied unto the supernatural Sun Jesus
Christ the son of Maloc 4.2.
righteousness. As a G^ant he did run his course, there you have his
incarnation, and peregrination in the flesh: his circuit was from the uttermost
part of heaven unto the end of it again. There you have his resurrection and
ascension: nothing is hid from his beat, there you have his sending of the
holy Ghost in the form of fiery tongues, Act.2.3. As a Giant he ran his race,
for he first descended into the lowest parts of the earth, and then ascended
from above all heavens, that he might fulfill all things, Ephesians. 4.9.10.
Wherefore seeing Christ's ascension is the complement of all his doings, and of
all his doctrines, our Church is worthy to be honored, in making this
festival one of the chief holidaies in the whole year.

In the Gospel allotted for this holy Thursday, two points are most
obseruable: namely, Christ's goodness toward his Apostles, in his Apparition,
Jesus appeared unto the eleven. Correction, and cast in their teeth, etc.
Commission, Go ye into all the world etc. Consolation, These tokens shall
follow, etc. Ascension, So when the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received
into heaven, etc.
The Apostles obedience toward Christ, and they went forth, and preached every
where, etc.


Jesus appeared unto the eleuen] He had often appeared unto his followers
after his resurrection, and now he manifested himself, to the eleven Apostles
as they sat at meat. Wherein he did appear like himself, full of meekness
and mercy, giving us assurance that he will be present with us, Bernard. ser.
1. in ascen. dom.
orationi incumbentibus, at our meetings in the Temple, Quando nec
recumbentibus quidem dedignatur adesse, seeing he vouchsafed his company to
his Apostles in their meats at the table. It is reported, Luke 24.43. that he
did eat with them also; now this comestion (as the Vide Suarez. in 3. Thom.
disput. 47. sect. 5.
Schoolmen out of the Fathers have disputed) was not egestatis, but
potestatis. He did eat to feed our souls, and not to fill his own body,
being after his resurrection immortal and impassible. That which he did eat
was not (as Durandus imagined) turned into the substance of his body, for as
Moral. lib. 14. cap. 31.
Gregory the great, disputes out of S. Paul, Romans 6.9. Christ being raised
from the dead dreth no more, death has no dominion over him, his glorified
body needed no sustenance to preserve life. Neither was this eating (as Ayud
Suarez. vbisup.
other think) a seeming only to take bread, and fish, and honey: but it was a
true comestion, albeit assuredly there followed no digestion, or ordinary
eiection. And so by consequence he did not eat to nourish his own flesh,
Gregor^n euang. hom. 29.
but only to cherish our faith, in that great article concerning the truth of
his resurrection. Ardens hom. in loc.
Or he did in this appearing eat with his Apostles at the table familiarly,
that he might hereby the better imprint in their hearts a memorial of his
sweet love toward them. Or he did appear to his Apostles at meat, Raulin.
ser. 4. i^ ascen. dom.
to signify that he gives our food in due season, and that he fills all
things with his plenteousnesse. Psalm. 145.15.

And cast in their teeth their vnbeleefe] The Patriarks, and Prophets, and
Apostles instruct us, not only by their virtues, but also by their infirmities.
As there the Disciples unbelief turned in fine to the confirmation of our
Creed. Les ser. 1. de ascen. dom.
Dubitatum est ab illis, ne dubitaretur a nobis, undoubtedly some did doubt
(the divine providence sweetly so disposing) that all other might be put out
of doubt. And therefore Gregor. vbisup.
Thomas in believing Christ's resurrection so flackly, did us hereby more good
then Mary Magdalene in believing so quickly, because Christ's correction of his
fault occasioned further direction for our faith, August. ser. 156. de temp.
Infidelit as bona quae seculorum fidei militauit. See Gospel on Saint Thomas
day.

The world does exalt first, and then humble, Prou. 14.13. The end of the
worlds mirth is heaviness. Diez. con. 1. in ascen. dom.
But God on the contrary first humbles, and then exalts. As Christ here
first humbled his Apostles in rebuking their unbelief, and hardness of heart,
and then he does exalt them, in making the whole world their Dioces, Euntes in
mundum, oniner sum praedicate, etc. He being the true Luk 10.34
Samaritane, powered into their wounds oil and wine; first Rausin. vbi sup.
vinum tribulationis, and then ^leum consolationis, he Heb. 12.6.
chasteneth all such as he loves, and he scourges every son that he
receives.

In Christ's commission or grant to his Apostles observe two things especially,
1. Their warrant, go and preach; for Romans 10.15.
how shall they preach except they be sent; he that runs of his own
accord, without a calling, is a false Prophet, Ier. 23.21. See Gospel 1. Sund.
after Easter, and 8. after Trinity. 2. The^^ work, in respect of their Dioces
where they must preach, in the whole world to every creature. Doctrine what
they must preach, and that is said expressly, to be the Gospel.



Concerning their Dioces, Grego^. Beda. Arden^.
it is not the meaning of our blessed Savior that his Apostles should preach
unto liuelesse stones, or senseless plants, or witless beasts; but he does
understand by ( all creatures) only men, as being an abridgement of all the
creatures. Stones have a being, but not a life; plants have both a being and a
life, but not sense: beasts have being, life, sense, but they want
understanding: Angels have being, life, sense, understanding. Now man as being
a little world, and as it were the compendious Index of Gods great book in
folio, participates a being with stones; life, with plants; sense, with beasts;
understanding, with Angels: and therefore fitly called every creature, as
having the chief perfections of every creature. Ar^tius. Ranlin.
Or man may be called all creatures, as being that excellent c^eature for whom
all other creatures were made, Psalm 8.6. Thou make^t him to have dominion over
the works of thine hands, and thou have put all things in subjection under his
feet. Or preach the Gospel unto all creatures, understanding only such as are
capable to receive the Gospel. So Christ John 15.15.
elsewhere said, all things that I have heard of my father have I made known
unto you, that is, all things which are necessary for your salvation, and are
fit for you to know. And Ioh. 12.17. If I were lif^ up from the earth, I will
draw all men unto me, that is, all which are to be drawn. So 1. Cor. 13.7.
Paul, Love suffers all things, believes all things, hops all things; that
is, all which are to be suffered, and believed, and hoped* Iansen. Piscator.
Maldonat.
Or preach the Gospel unto all creatures, that is, all nations, for so Saint
Mark may be well expounded by S. Matthew, who relating this commission says,
Euntes ergo docete omnes gentes, go and teach all Nations. Hereby repealing a
former edict, Matthew. 10.5. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into the
Cities of the Samaritans enter ye not. That commission is determined; now
therefore go into all the world, and preach the Gospel unto all creatures, to
men of all countries and conditions whatsoever. This unlimited extraordinary
commission is expired and has his end; for now the successors of the Apostles,
as Bishops and Pastors have their peculiar provinces, and proper Pa^ishes
assigned for their cure; Dr. (...) to the (...) at f^l. 21^.
yet so, that they may preach the Gospel of Christ in other places also where
need requires, albeit the same be not particularly committed unto them. And
therefore the Church of England (...). 15.
enioyneth every learned P^stor sometime to preach in Chapels and Chu^c^es
r^ioyning near to his benefice.

A^ for their w^^ke, A^dens.
they must employ their time (...) in secular actions of the world, nor yet in
idle specula^ions of the S. hoole: but apply themselves unto pre^^hing* go ye
into the world and preach. And they (...) not their own wisdom but the
Gospel, it (...) man speak, let him deliver 1. (...). 4.1^.
oracles of God, 1. Tim. 63.
consenting to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
doctrine which is according to godliness. And for as much as the the Law, the
Psalms, and the Prophets are nothing else but as it were a preface to the
book of the generation of Jesus Christ; I say for as much as Christ is the
supplement of the Prophets, and end of the Law: they must especially preach
unto the world the glad tidings of salvation, making this sentence the period
of all their Sermons, Esaias 9.6.
unto us a child is borne, unto us a son is given: or that of Christ himself,
John 3.16.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. To the preaching
of the Gospel, administration of the Sacraments is adjoined, and enjoined
also, Matthew. 29.19. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost. The which our Evangelist implies
here, when he says, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he
that believes not shall be damned. Concerning Baptismes necessity, see
Gospel on Trinity Sunday.

And these tokens shall follow them that beleeue] These words are to be
digested with a little salt, to be construed with a great deal of caution,
otherwise the simple soul will object, how shall I know that I believe, seeing
I work no miracles. If we take them (as many learned and ancient Gregor. hom.
29. in Euangel. Bernard. ser. 1. in ascen. dom. Ardens. bom. in loc. Iansen.
concord. cap. 149.
Divines have done) mystically, then every true believer in Christ's name
casts out of his heart devils, that is, evils; for every foul sin is a
foul fiend to man: and then his soul being sound, his mouth Mat 12 34.
ex abund. intia cordis, out of the hearts abundance speaks with new tongues.
His communication heretofore was im ^ious toward God, and uncharitable toward
his neighbor, his Psalm. 14 5.6.
throat an open sepulcher, his tongue d e ceiuing, his lips Psalm. 12.2.
flattering, his mouth full of cursing and bitterness. But now having put on
the new man, he speaks in a new language words of truth and sobernes, Acts
16.25. Words of meekness and courtesy, Titus 3.2. Words agreeable to the
wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ and to the doctrine which is according
to godliness, 1. Tim. 6.3. After this compunction in his heart, and confession
of his mouth, if any venomous temptation be suggested he shall have power to
dri^e away serpents and if he drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurts him,
although he taste of it a little, yet he shall not in any case swallow it down
to his utter destruction. And lastly, he shall impose his hands upon the sick,
and they shall recover, that is, he shall out of his love bear the Romans 14.1
infirmities of his weak brethren, and (...) 15.20.
hide a multitude of their sins, his exhortation and doctrine ( the Lord
wor^ing with them, as it is in the last words of our text) shall heal the
sick, yea raise the very dead in sin to newnes of life.

If we take Christ's promise ( these signs shall follow them that believe)
literally, then it must of necessity be construed with a few limitations and
exceptions. As first in respect of the time, Gregor. Ardens lansen. vbi sup.
Idem August. de ^tilitate credendi cont. Manichaeos cap. 16.
miracles are not necessary for a Church already planted, but only for a
Church in planting. So Paul 1 Cor. 14.22. Strange tongues are for a sign not
to them that believe, but to them that believe not: a young plant must often be
watered at the first setting; but after it is once thoroughly rooted in the
ground it will easily sprout and spring without irrigation; even so the Church
primitive was a while watered by signs and tokens in those who did believe:
but being now perfitly grounded in Christ, it may nor say thy wonders O Lord,
but thy Psalm. 119.105.
word O Lord is a lantern unto my sect and a guide to my paths.

The second limitation is in respect of the persons, Aretius in loc. and
Marlorat. in Mat. 28.19.
all believers in the primitive time were not workers of wonders, but only some
few, whereof every one had a several gift, as S. Paul teaches expressly, 1.
Cor. 12. ^0. Are all doers of miracles? have all the gifts of healing? do. ^ll
speak with tongues? it is said indefinitly ( them that believe) because these
tokens were wrought at the first preaching of the Gospel unto every creature
for the common good of such as believe; but every true believer was not endued
with a gift actually to work these signs himself. John the Baptist albeit he
was Mat. 11.9.
more then a Prophet, yet he did no miracle, John, 10.41. He had as Maldonat.
one distinguishes upon this text potestatem faciendi miracula, sed non actum,
a power to have done many wonders if need had bin, but he did act none. The
meaning then of these comfortable words uttered by Christ unto his Apostles are
plain, though I go now to my father, and so leave you, yet in executing your
ministry ye shall have power to work signs and tokens, your preaching of my
Gospel unto the world shall every where be confirmed with miracles. I have
done many strange things among you, yet John 14.12.
I say unto you verily, verily, he that believes in me, the works that I do
he shall do also, yea greater then these shall he do. And he did perform so
much as he did promise, for we read that his Apostles in his name did cast out
devils, Acts 16.18. And spoke with new tongues, Acts 2.4. And drive away
serpents, as Paul, Act. 28.5. shook off a viper from his hand into the fire
and felt no harm: and heal the sick, as Peter Acts 9.34. There was a
certain man at Lydda named Aeneas, which had kept his bed eight years, and
was sick of the palsy, to whom Peter said, Aeneas, Jesus Christ makes thee
whole; arise, and make up thy bed, and he arose immediately. Yea they did
greater signs in Christ's name then Christ himself, greater in Aretius.
Arboreus in Joan. 14.
number, for whereas Christ wrought all his works either about the borders, or
else within the bounds of Judea: his Apostles preached unto all the world, and
had the word confirmed every where with miracles. Augustine. Beda. Rupert. ^in
Joan. 14.
Other think that they did greater works in nature, maius est enim vt sanet
vmbra, quam fimbria says Tract. 71. and 72. in loan.
Augusti^e, it was a greater miracle that the very shadow of Saint Peter as he
walked in the street should heal many sick, Acts 5.15. Then that the hem of
Christ's vesture should heal one woman, who having an issue of blood, Mat.
9.22. But here you must observe Theophys^st. (...). Maldanat. in Joan. 14.
that Christ said not he that believes in me shall do greater works then I
can, or then I will do; but only greater then these which I have done. Hereby
signifying that they should not do greater works out of their own power, but
only thorough his help. Hoc (says Euthymius) est demonsiratio potentiae eius
qui signa dedit, non eius qui signa edit. And Augustine. tract. 72. in Joan.
Maiora quam ipse fecit dicit eosesse facturos. sed in eis, vel per eos se
faciente, non ipsis tanquam ex seipsis. He says John. 15.5.
elsewhere without me can ye do nothing, but in my name they shall cast out
devils, and speak with new tonques, etc. Mat. 10.24.
The servant is not greater then his Lord, nor the disciple greater then his
master, nor man greater then his maker. In the beginning he made John. 1.3.
Heb. 1.2
the world without them, and he made Psalm. 100.2
them also without them, and in vouchsafing to be man he made himself without
them, Augustine. tract. 71. in loan.
ipse sine ipsis fecit hunc mundum, ipse sine ipsis fecit eos, ipse sine ipsis
fecit and seipsum: but alas what have they without him, excepting sin. Christ
then in saying ( he that believes in me shall do greater works then I do)
Vide Marlorat. and Hil^donat. ^ loct. 14.
means undoubtedly this, if our heart be so troubled, that ye can not now
believe that I am in the father, and the father in me: yet when I am gone to
the father, and shall in his kingdom sit at his right hand, ye shall evidently
see that I am God, and that John 10.30
I and my father are one, for I will in my corporal absence from you, do
greater works in you, and by you, then ever I did hitherto before you. So
himself does interpret himself in the words immediately following, whatsoever
ye ask in my name, that will I do, that the father may be glorified in the
son: and again, if ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it. The
which is agreeable to the tenor of our text, verse 17. In my name they shall
cast out devils, etc. and verse. 20. The Lord wrought with them, and confirmed
the word with miracles following.

He was received into heauen] Saint Scr. 157. de temp.
Augustine, Hom. 4. in Ezechiel.
Gregory the great, and Rupert. Aretius. Meyer. in Apocalyp. 4.
other Divines observe, that the four beasts mentioned Ezechiel 1. and
Apocalypse 4. mystically represent the 4. chiese actions of Christ in his
working of our redemption. The 1. beast had a face like a man, the 2. like a
bullocks, the 3. like a lion, the 4. like a flying Eagle. So Christ in his
incarnation was found as a man, in his passion as a sacrificed Bullock, in his
resurrection like a lion, in his ascension as a flying Vide didat. de yanguas
con. 2 in ascen. dom.
Eagle mounting above the clouds, and sitting at the right hand of God in the
highest heavens. And therefore S. Mark relating here the glorious ascension of
Christ, adds to the name Jesus, the title Dominus: so when the Lord had spoken
unto them, he was received into heaven, Ferus ser. 2. in ascen. dom. and
Aretius. in Act. 1.
hereby showing that he was Lord of all things, able to command the clouds in
heaven, as well as the cloddes on earth. He manifested himself to be Lord of
the seas, in Mat. 14.25.
walking on the water without a ship, and in Mat. 8.26.
calming the stormy waves when he was in a ship. He manifested himself to be
Lord of the land, in commanding the grave to give forth her prisoner John 11.44.
Lazarus which had bin dead four days. He manifested himself to be commander
of hell, in casting out Mat. 8.32.
Devils, and when he did overcome Satan in his temptations, and Luke 11.22.
take from him all his armor wherein he trusted, and divided his spoils,
openly triumphing over him and his, on the cross, Coloss. 2.15. And now to
show that he was Lord of heaven, and Philip. 2.6.
equal with God, he did ascend Ephesians. 4.10.
far above all heavens, and is (says our text) on the right hand of God. To
sit (as Ardens upon the place pithily) quiscentis, regnantis, and Iudicantis
est, ergo been redemptor noster post passionem ascensionemg, suam sedere
describitur; quia post laborem requiescit, post pralium regnat, and postquam
indicatus est iudicat.

Is Christ ascended on high? then let us Coloss. 3.1. See August. ser. 174. de
temp. and Greg. hom. 29 in Euang.
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God. Albeit our bodies be tied with the fetters of flesh on earth, yet let our
souls ascend with the wings of faith into heaven, even to the place from
whence comes al our help and hope. Saluator noster ascendit in coelu^, non
ergo turlemur in terra: ibi sit men's, and hic erit requies, as Ser. 175. de
temp.
Augustine sweetly. The way to make a ladder up to heaven (as the same father
teaches in his 3. sermon preached on this day) is to trample sin under our
feet, de viti^s nostris scalum nobis facimus, si vitia calcamus, tread pride
under thy feet, and thou shall instantly pass one step, Luke 18.14.
he that humbles himself shall be exalted: tread covetousness under thy feet,
and it will prove another step, Mat. 10.24.
how hard is it for them who trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God:
tread maliciousnes under thy feet, and thou shall approach as yet nearer unto
heaven, for 1. John 4.6.
God is love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him.

Grant we beseech thee almighty God, that like as we do believe thine only
begotten son our Lord to have ascended into the heaven: so we may also in
heart and mind thither ascend, and with him continually dwell. Amen.

The Epistle,
ACTS 10.34. Then Peter opened his mouth, etc.


THe former part of this text is expounded on Easter M^nday, the contents of
the latter on Whitsunday.

The Gospel,
John 3.16. So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life, etc.


IT is reported of a noble Lantgraue, Manlius loc. com. tit. de calamitat.
Frederick by name, that the very gingling of his spur was a terror to his
foes. And so the very repeating of this sweet text, is able to make Satan our
greatest enemy to quake, for it is (as Martin. Mollerus in loc.
one calls it) a common armory for the Christian, as it were the tower of
Cant. 4.4.
David, a thousand shields hang therein, and all the targets of the strong
(...). Apply this one sentence to thy soul, and thou shall in thy most
grievous agony, Ephesians. 6.16.
quench all the fiery dar^s of the devil. It brancheth it self into 3.
considerations especially. who, God loved. what, the world. how, so that he
gave his only begotten son, etc.


Ambitious men in the court, loose their time, their liberty, their estate, yea
sometime with Iscariot they sell under hand their own soul, their own
Savior, to gain the Princes respect, or else some favor of his chief
Favorite. But behold a greater then Solomon in all his royalty, higher then
the highest, immortal, almighty, without beginning or end loved us, and Diez.
Cont. 1. in loc.
his love must of necessity be greater then others love, for that himself is
the greatest of all.

God loved, and herein he^ neither expected any correspondence of love, for
(says our text) he loved the world. That he should love the glorious Angels
is not strange, because they be his Hib. 1.7.
messengers and ministers, executing his P^al. 103.2^.11.
pleasure. That he should love good men is not strange, because they love him,
O thou who^ my soul loves, Cant. 1.6. That he should love both his witless
and his senseless creatures is not strange, because Ps^. 148.5.
fire and hail, snow and vapors, wind and storm fulfill his word. Aretius.
But herein appears the greatness of his love* that he loved the world mundum
immundism, the worthless world (...) in (...)
lying in wickedness, casting out its malice (says the I^^ 5.19.
Prophet) as the fountain casts out her waters. A world (as (...)
Augustine describes) impuris v^lupratibus illerebosies, nefandis c
udelitatibus furiosus, (...):bus and terroribus inimieus. A bad world, a mad
world, a deceiving world, a blind world that knew him not Ioh 1.10. A bloody
world, that (...)
hated him and all his. Herein God sets out his love toward us for that he
reconciled us to himself, even while we were his enemies, Romans 5.10. he loved
(...)
us first, even before we would, yea before we could love him. (...)
He that is most high and most holy, debtor unto no man, and wenting no thing,
loved us which are but (...)
dust and ashes, (...). 27.
conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity, (...). 51. ^ (...)
corrupt in ou^ conversation, and abominable, doing no good, and in^ected with
every kind of evil, even from the sole of the foot unto the head, there was in
us nothing whole, but wounds and swelling, and sores full of put^if^tion, Esaias
1.6.

But how did he love? so loved. that is, so fatherly, so freely, so fully,
that he gave. He did not sell, or let, or lend: but give. See (...) lact. ^pan^
Not in Angel, or a Prophet, or any servant: but a son. And that not
another, but his: and his son not adoptiue, but natural, his begotten
son: and further, not one among many, but his only begotten son. If a man
had 32. sons as Kiliuns in loc.
Babo, or seventy sons as Gideon, Judge 8.30. Or 80. sons as Scilurus, or if
a man had as many sons as a woman in Paris, called Restitut. of
decayedintelligence, page 3. and it is written on her tomb in Saint Innocents
Churchyard Paris
Yoland Baillie, from whose body while she lived (as we read) issued 295.
children; yet he would hardly part with any to his friend, much less to his
foe. When the Patriarch Jacob had conceived that Joseph his son was devoured
of some wild beast, Genesis 37.34.
he rent his clothes, and put sakcloath about his loins, and sorrowed for him
a long season. And when his other sons and his daughters rose up to comfort
him, he would not be comforted, but said, I will surely go down into the
grave unto my son mourning. How bitterly did David lament the death of a
rebellious son, 2. Sam. 18.33
O my son Absalon. my son, my son Absalon: would God I had died for thee,
O Absalon, my son, my son! How did an harlot pity the fruit of her womb
before King Solomon, 1. King. 3. Oh my Lord, give her the living child, and
slay him not. Almighty God then manifested the riches of his mercy toward us,
in giving his only son, not only to be borne, but also to die for us, and
that upon the Cross most ignominiously. So Christ in the words immediately
going before this our present text, as Moses lift up the Serpent in the
wilderness, so must the son of man be lift up, probatio dilectionis
exhibitio operis, his exceeding great gift is a demonstration of his exceeding
great love. Thus in brief you see the fact, let us examine now the fruit, for
what end God gave his only begotten son.

That whosoever believes in him] In which observe Aretius. Iansen.
two things especially: The Felicity gained by this gift, a deliverance from
damnation, he shall not perish. a possession of salvation, he shall have life
everlasting.
Facility how to get it, whosoever believes, Almighty God requires not at thy
hands.



An exact observation of his law, but only that thou believe in his son whom
he gave to die for thy sins, and to rise again for thy justification. He
did abundantly satisfy the law for thee, making thy sins his sins; and on
the contrary, making his righteousness, thy righteousness, 1. Job 2.2
covering all thine iniquities, and (...). 103.3.
healing all thine infirmities.

This one sentence does afford many profitable lessons appertaining to doctrine
and exhortation. 1. It shows our dignity, though a man be dust and dung,
fading like grass, fickle like glass, like a thing of naught, Psalm. 1.44. 4.
Yet God so much honored him, as that he gave his only begotten son, to be
life up, as Moses life up the Serpent in the wilderness; that is, to be
crucified for him. Psalm. 4. and 144 3.
O Lord, what is man that thou have such respect unto him; or the son of man
that thou so regardest him?

2. It does administer comfort in temptation, if the devil object against thy
sin Gods severe justice, thou may answer that God is also (...). 3.4
rich in mercy, (...). 16.27.
loving us in Ephis. 1.5.
his best beloved, and that with an everlasting love, Ierem. 13.3. If thy
cunning adversary make reply, that these sweet texts only concern the just
and godly, thou have here Christ on thy side, saying, God loved the world,
reconciling sinners his enemies unto himself by the death of his son, Romans
5.10.

3. It proves evidently that Christ is very God of very God, against (...).
Arrius, as being not only Gods son, but his only begotten, for a son
begotten, is a natural and a true son.

4. It confutes the Ambro^e (...) iti. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Nouatian heresy, denying repentance to such as after Baptism fall into
grievous sins. If we must be so merciful as our father in heaven is
merciful, how shall we deny repentance to those whom God so loved as that he
gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life.

5. This confounds all Melanct. Cabn^m. Mulorat.
merit-mongers ascribing justification and salvation unto their own good
works. He that believes shall not perish, but have everlasting life. We are
saved by grace Ephesians. 2.8.
thorough faith, apprehending and applying the mercies of God the father and
the merits of Christ his son. He that believes in him shall not be
condemned, but he that believes not is already condemned, as it follows in
our text. August. tract. 12. in Joan.
Quare saluator dictus est mundi, nisivi saluet mundum, non vt iudicet mundum,
saluari non vis ab ipso, exte ipso iudicaberis.

As for exhortation, 1. John. 4.11.
i^ God so loved us, let us also love one another: if he Romans 8.32.
spared not his own and only son but gave him for us: Eut^ym. in loc.
it is meet that we should expend our substance for the good of his Church and
children in need. It is an old proverb, love me, love my friend. Let us then
manifest our love to Christ in loving his members, and in cherishing such as
mourn in Sion. his first coming (as it follows in our text) was not to
condemn; but save the world. He came to call Mat. 9.13.
sinners unto repentance, to seek the Luke 15.6.
lost sheep, to bind up the Esaias 61.1.
broken hearted, to Mat. 11.28.
refresh the weary, to give rest unto the laden soul. His second coming shall
be to judge the world, and then there shall be James 2.13.
judgment merciless to him that showed no mercy, but unto those which have
bin merciful as his father in heaven is merciful, he shall say, come ye
blessed, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the
world, for I was hungry, and ye gave me meat: I thirsted, and ye gave me
drink, etc.

If any shall ask why this text is allotted for a Whitsun holy day which is a
memorial of the Gospel, and of Christ's sending down the holy Ghost; Martin.
Mollerus in. ot.
answer may be that the spirit of truth teaches us 1. John 2 27.
all things according to Christ's own doctrine preached in the world, the sum
whereof is this one little line, so God loved the world, etc.

The Epistle
Acts. 8.14. When the Apostles which were at Jerusalem, had hear a say that
Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John, etc.


THe blessed Apostles enjoined by Christ at his last appearing to Mark. 16.15.
go into the whole world, and to teach Mat. 28.19.
all nations, hearing now that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent
unto them Peter and John, to build up the Churches of Samaria whose foundation
had bin laid before by Philip: in this embassage two points are more chiefly
regardable, namely The vigilant care of the whole College in sending, verse
14. The diligent faithfulness of Peter and John, that were sent executing their
charge By prayer, verse 15. By imposition of hands, verse 17.



When the Apostles of Jerusalem heard] They show their sollicitous care for
the Churches in Arctius.
hearking after their good, and in Calui^.
affording their helping hand of their own accord readily when any fit
occasion was offered. For we read not hear that the brethren of Samaria wrote
to the College to send them an Apostle, yet they did send two, and those two
which of all their company were of the most Galat. 2.69.
eminent note Peter and John. Every Bishop (as more properly succeeding
Apostles in office) is taught from hence to be (...)
non tam celer ad cathedram, quam vigil ad curam. If any congregation in his
Dioces need confirmation, he must either send those Suffraganes which are fit
like to Peter and John, or else come himself to pray for them, and to lay his
hands on them.

B. Jewel answer to Harding art. suprem. diuis. 20. Calvin, Insin. lib. 4.
cap. 6. 7. Dr. Sutlif. de Romans ^ont. lib. 2. cap. 1. Aretius. Beza. Marlorat.
in loc.
Protestant Divines urge this example to prove that Saint Peter was not head of
the Apostle or absolute sovereign, because the text is plain, John 13.16. The
messenger is not greater then he that sent him. I know the four great
Cardinals of Rome, Lib. 2. sum. cap. 14.
Turrecremata, Inloc.
Caietan, Anual. tom. 1. ad an. 35. sol. 253.
Baronius, De Romans ton. lib. 1. cap. 16 ad illud anlom.
Bellarmine which upon the point are the four chief supporters of Saint
Peter's chair of estate) have found out many shifts how to decl ine the heavy
blow of this weighty reason, and Rhemist. and Lorin. in loc.
they who gath^ ^itickes under these Cardinals hedge, report and repeat their
distinctions as unanswerable. But examine them, and you shall instantly see
that they be like Hercules tragical club in show massy, but in substance
nothing else but shreds and straw (as the Poet speaks) an affrighting vanity.

To their first example, God the son is sent into the world by God the
father, and yet in the Trinity none is greater or less then another. Augustine.
de trinit. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Answer is made, that Christ was sent into the world as he was in the form of
a servant, according to that of Paul, Galat. 4.4. God sent forth his son made
of a woman; and Christ as man acknowledges himself to be less then his
father, John 14.18. my father is greater then I: But Christ (if you consider
him in the form of Philip. 2.8.
God) Jeremy 23.24.
filled heaven and earth, and so he may be said to send himself, as Ephesians.
5.2.
elsewhere to give himself for us. See Saint Augustine vbi sup. in margin.
Lombard sent. lib. 1. did. 15. Thomas part. 1. quast. 43. art. 8.

Touching that eternal sending of the holy spirit from the father and the
son: Dr. Fulke in loc.
we say that the mysteries of the sacred Trinity being ineffable, the words are
almost all borrowed that are used to show the distinct operations of the same.
Saint Contra Maximinum. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Augustine speaking of the generation of the son and proceeding of the holy
Ghost, ingeniously confessed his want of wit and words, Inter illam
generationem, and hanc processionem distinguere nescio, non valeo, non
sufficio: quid and illis and ^sta est inefabilis. But here the Apostles in
proper phrase of speaking sent Peter and John, ergo they were subject to their
authority.

Thirdly, whereas they say that there is a twofold sending, one, which is
amoris, and another, which is impery: for an equal or an inferior, may
persuade his friend to do his business for him, a body politic may send their
head to the Parliament, and a common weal ^ their Prince to the wars; our
answer is ready that an inferior entreating his friend can not truly say
that he sent his peer, much less his superior, neither can a corporation
that is under a sovereign head (such as the Church of Rome would have Peter to
be) choose him to be their foot to go for them, he may peradventure go by his
own consent or desire, but he can not be sent: neither can a common weal
thrust their absolute King into the danger of war, Dr. Sutlif. vbi sup.
Sponte hoc ille faciendums indicat, sed ab illis ad bellum gerendum extrudi
non potest. Lastly, Aretius. Calvin.
we say that Peter here was sent not as a Prince, but as a peer, for John was
joined with him in the mission and commission as a Sibiso^ium vt Arator. l^b.
1. Carm^in Act.
copartner in his office; so the text, they sent Peter and John. And Peter
being sent into Samaria by his brethren B Jewel vbi sup.
repined not as holding himself their governor, but went his way as their
messenger, and Act. 11.3.
elsewhere being questioned by the Apostles for going to Cornelius, and eating
with uncircumcised heathens, he forthwith excused himself and came to his
answer.

Fourthly, whereas they be driven here to confess, that the College of
Apostles comprising Peter, was greater then Peter their head alone: Dr. Ful^e
in loc.
We say (this being granted) that Peter's Popedom was not the ^oueraigne power
of Christ, neither was Peter head of the Apostles as Christ's Vicar, for the
whole Church comprising Christ the head thereof is not of greater authority
then Christ himself. Again, it is a received opinion among modern Iesuited
Papists, See B. Bilson against the Jesuits. part. 3. fol. 367.
that the Church is nothing else but the Pope; so that the Successor of Peter,
is now far greater then Peter himself, for he will be tied neither to
Council, nor Canon, nor custom, more then himself likes.

Who when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the
holy Ghost] It is probable that Peter and John did preach as well as pray,
Calvin in loc.
but S. Luke reports only what new thing happened to Samaria by their
coming, namely, the receiving of the holy Ghost through imposition of hands
and prayer. Here S. De trinit. lib. 15. cap. 26.
Augustine, Lib. 1. sent. did. 14. cap. hic. queritur.
Lombard, and Lorin.
other observe that Christ is God in giving the holy spirit, quantus deus est
qui dat deum. His Apostles did not give the holy Ghost at Samaria, they prayed
for them, that they might receive the holy Ghost, and they laid their hands on
them, and they received the holy Ghost: every good gift is from above, Samaria
then had extraordinary gifts of the spirit. By Peter and John, not from Peter
and John; and Simon Magus insinuates so much in his offer of money to to them,
at the 19. verse, give me this power, that on whomsoever I lay the hands, he
may receive the holy Ghost. He did not say, that I might give; but only that
he may receive. Happily some will object, that Paul gave the spirit to the
Galathians, as it may seem where he says, Galat. 3.5.
he that ministers unto you the spirit, and works miracles among you, does
he it through the works of the law or by the hearing of faith preached? Our
answer may be gathered out of the text, Lombard. vbi (...) sed huic videtur.
Idem August. Ambros. Aquin. in Gal. 3.
that he gave not the spirit by his proper power, but only that they received
the spirit through his preaching and ministry.

They were baptized only in the name of Christ Iesus] You must here refer
the word Lyran. and Lorin. in loc
only, to baptized, and not to the clause following, in the name of Christ
Jesus. It is not the meaning of S. Luke, that they were baptized in the name of
God the Son only: for it is Christ's own Canon, Matthew. 28.29. That all the
three persons of the blessed Trinity must expressly be named in Baptism, Go
teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and the Son, and
the holy Ghost. See Bellarm. de Baptismo. lib. 1. cap. 3. Suarez in Thom. 3.
part. tom. 3. disput. 21. Calvin and Lorin. in act. 2.38. So that to be
baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, in this and other like place of this
book, Bela^m. de baptismo, lib. 1. cap. 3.
is to be baptized in the faith of Jesus Christ, or in the power of Jesus
Christ, or according to the prescript of Jesus Christ. Here then a question is
moved, how the faithful in Samaria were baptized, and yet the holy Ghost was
come on none of them. He that is baptized, must acknowledge that Christ is the
Lord, and no man (as 1. Cor. 12.3.
Paul tells us) can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. All
that are Galath. 3.27.
baptized into Christ have put on Christ, and are Romans 6.4.
buried with him in his death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead
by the glory of the Father, so they likewise should walk in newness of life.
Calvin. in ^le. lib. 4. cap. 19.. 8. Idem Aretius. Iu^tus to ^ai. Marlorat.
Lorin. in loc.
Answer is made, that the Samaritans had already received invisible graces of
the sanctifying spirit, which are common unto all such as truly believe: but as
yet Samaria had not any singular and extraordinary miraculous gifts, as in
Christ's name to cast out devils, and to speak with new tongues, and to heal
the sick, etc. the which in the Primative time was conferred upon certain
persons, according to the will of the spirit, for the confirmation of the
Gospel. It is apparent that the Apostles had the sanctifying and illuminating
spirit for their guide from the very beginning of their preaching, Matthew.
10.20. It is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your father which speaks
in you. Yet we read, John 7.38. that the holy Ghost was not yet given,
because Jesus was not yet glorified. For they received not those miraculous
gifts of healing and speaking with strange tongues, according to the
comfortable promises of Christ at his Mark. 16.17.
farewell, until the holy Ghost on the feast of Pentecost, came down to them,
appearing in cloven and fiery tongues, Acts 2.

Gloss.interlin. and ordinar. Beda. Hugo. Caietan in loc. Hooker eccles. polit.
lib. 5. 66. and Dr. Fulke disalloweth it not in Act. 8. and his testimony is
cited sum. conference page 32.
Other think that the Churches of Samaria by these prayers and imposition of
hands received a greater measure of sanctification, and so they cite this text
to prove confirmation after Baptism. As also that Bishops only must
administer this confirmation, and hereupon we call it in our country,
Bishopping. Philip, as a Deacon, did his part in baptizing and in preaching the
word, but imposition of hands appertained not to his order and office. See
Chrysostom. in loc. Cyprian epist. 73. ad Iubaian. August. de trinit. lib. 15.
cap. 26. Ambros. and Haymo in Hebr. 6.2. Thom. 3. part. quaest. 72. art. 11.
Hooker vbi sup. in marg. Dr. Hakewill tract. of conformation, cap. 3.

The Gospel.
JOHN 10.1. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that enters not in by the door
into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a
murderer, etc.


THe text following in this chapter ( I am the good shepherd) appointed for
the Gospel, 2. Sund. after Easter, is both an Aretius. Bullinger. Piscator in
Joan. 10. Idem Pontan. con. fer. 3. Pentecost. See S. August. tract. 45.46.47.
in ^ Joan.
explication, and an application of this our present parable. Thither I send
the courteous Reader, and so my love be with him in the Lord, to whom only
wise, be glory through Jesus Christ evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Words mistaken, Page 1. line 8. a fin. wife, for mother. 56. lin. 14. a fin.
Greek, for great. 59. lin. 10. fecimus, for ferimus. 64. lin. 8.10 for for.
90. lin. 6. in marg. sermon. for idem. 95. lin. 6. in marg. 336. for 339. 103. in
marg. Romans 1. for Tom. 3. 107. lin. 9. a fin. ^olijs, for filijs. 125. lin. 1.
with, for unto.
Words left out, Page 29. lin. 10. secundum. 39. lin. 11. little. 67. lin. 5.^
fin. vt. 12^. lin. 15. man. 150. lin. 4. not yet respected.


